A Warning-Piece TO THE Sloathful, Idle, Careless, Drunken, and Secure Ones, of
these last and worst of Times. WHEREIN The danger that attends every one that
delights in any of these Vices may be avoided: and the Reward of those that
have their Conversation in Holiness, may be attained.

Pro. 24.30, 31. I passed by the field of the sloathful and by the Vineyard of
the man destitute of understanding; and lo, it was all grown over with Thorns,
and Nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone-wall thereof was broken
down.

Prove. 23.29, 30. Who has Woe? who has sorrow? who has contentions? who has
wounds without cause? who has redness of Eyes? even they that tarry long at
the Wine, they that go to seek mixed Wine.

LONDON, Printed for William Thackery in Duck-Lane. 1678.

A WARNING TO THE Sloathful, Idle, Careless, and Secure Ones, etc.
WHerein can a friend more unfold his love, than in preventing dangers before
their birth, or in reducing one to safety which is tra^velling in the way to
ruin? T^^ be plain, argues honesty.

Croesus counseled Cyrus, that if he mean to hold the Lydians in slavery, that
he should teach them to sing, and play, and drink, and dance, and daily; for
(says he) that will do i^^ without your endeavor.

The Devil with pleasure pipes men into security, then steals away their souls,
and leave^ them to the wrath of God. Vice is of such (...) toady complexion
that it cannot choose but reach the soul to hate. It Is true, men learn to do
evil, by doing that is next it (nothing.)

Idleness is the most corrupting fly that can blow in any humane mind: Tell me
if there be any life more irksome than idless; it is the sink which receives
all the filthy channel of vice, and with that poisonous air it poisoneth and
infecteth the soul. Man being idle has his mind apt to all uncleanness, and
when then wind is void of exercise, the man is void of honesty; prosperity
engenders sloth, it turns the edge of wit.

Aristotle says, That which is most noble by nature, is made most vile by
negligence; idleness is the only nurse, and nourisher of sensual appetites.

Hierom advises us, ever to be doing something that the Devil find us not
idle; for it is his cushion wherewith he lulls the soul asleep in sin. Says
O^ige^, It teaches much wickedness. Cicero says, They that do nothing learn
to do ill. Idleness is the more that sorest and soonest infecteth the mind with
many mischiefs. It'^ against nature (says Cicero) yea the sloathful man
sleeps in his own want: it is hard for him that will not labor to excel in
any Art: Idleness is the enemy of Virtue, and the very train of all wickednese.

Galen says, Sloth loses time, dulleth th^^ understanding, nourishes
humors, choaketh the brain, and displeases God.

Seneca says, It Is the mother of poverty, it is the ready way to Atheism.

Homer says, Idleness makes of men, women: of women, beasts: and of beasts,
monsters.

Pythagoras gave his Disciples this precept, Take good heed that thou sit not
upon a bushel, meaning that Idleness ought especially to be eschewed. Lust is
quenched through labor; and kindled through idleness.

The idle heart is moved with no Prayers. The rich man, if he wax idle, will
quickly be poor. It Is the stepmother of Wisdom and Science. Men are born to
good works, whereof our souls may serve for an invincible proof, seeing it is
never still, but in continual motion and action: it decays the health of the
body. The Bees can abide no drones among them, but as soon as they begin to be
idle, they kill them, says Plutarch. The wise man's idleness in his continual
labor, Carthage was overcome; Rome by idleness came to ruin, (says
Augustine.)

Solomon says, Prove. 12.11. he that follows the idle is destitute of
understanding. The Egytians to vanish idleness, made a Law that every one
monthly should give account how he spent his time, and had their names
registered in a Book for the same purpose. Idleness does cause in man dishonest
thoughts, and opens the gate unto all vice: but the good exercises of virtue do
shut the may of the temptation that the Devil cannot get in. Solomon says, Go
to the Pismire, O sluggard, and behold her ways, and be wise; for she having no
guide, governor, nor ruler, prepares her meat in the Summer, and gathers
her food in the harvest, Prove. 6.6, 7, 8, 9, etc. If the word of God cannot
instruct thee, yet learn of the little Pismire to labor for thy self, and not
to burden others. How long will thou sleep. O sluggard, when will thou arise
out of thy sleep, Prove. 24.33, 34. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a
little ^olding of thy hands to sleep. Therefore thy poverty comes as one that
travelleth by the way: (That is, suddenly, and when thou look not for it)
and thy necessity like an armed man: It shall come in such sort, that thou
shall not be able to resist it. Solomon expresses lively the nature of the
sluggards, who though thy sleep never so ^ong, yet have never enough but seek
occassions thereunto Idleness, one of the sing of Sodom, it is said, that
abundance of Idleness was in her, and in her daughters. Ezekiel. 16.49.

David through idleness committed Adultery, is we may see, 2 Samuel 11.2.

Syrach says, That Idleness brings much evil, Ecclus. 33.26. St Paul
commanded, that he that would not work should not eat, for says he, We hear
that there are some that work not at all, but are busy bodies; therefore them
that are such, we command and exhort you by our Lord Jesus Christ, that they
work with quietness, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10, 11. for says he, being idle, they go
about from house to house; yea, they are not only idle, but also pratlers, and
busybodies, speaking things that are not comely, 1 Timothy 5.13. Go to the Crane
thou babbler, read her story, and let her inform thee, who flying out of Sicily,
puts little stones in^ver mouth, lest by her gagling she might betray her self
a^ a prey to the Eagles of the Mountain Taurus; which with this policy she
slyes over in safety. Silence is every where safe-guarded, while an unruly
tongue may procure ruin, and prove as a sword to cut the thread of life in
two. Where there is a flood in the tongue, there the heart is empty; in many
words there is error often committed, for truth does consist in few words.
Better it is to make a small scarre by speaking little, than a deep wound by
much babbling. Silence is a gift without peril, and a treasure without enemies,
says Phocion.

Our Savior says, That for every idle word that man shall speak they shall
give an account at the day of Judgment; for by thy words thou shall be
justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned, Mat. 12 36, 37. Therefore
it does highly concern every one to be every careful what they speak.

About all things fly from idleness, for it is the mother of vice, and the
stepmother of all virtue; it is nothing indeed but a very death, and the
Sepulcher of a man that is yet living. God would that man (which was endued
with so many good gifts of perfection) should not live idly. Thou that live
here so compassed about with so many enemies, how much cause have thou to avoid
idleness, and to fly away from it? God places Adam in Paradise, to the end
that he should labor and work there, Genesis 2.15. and yet he for all his labor,
sustained great loss and harm, and thikest thou to gain, by living at thy own
will and pleasure? Job says, Job 5.7. That man is born to trouble, as the
sparks fly upwards: and therefore God has given thee two hands to work
withal, as he has given the Birds two wings to fly withal. He that goes about
to shoot at any Bird, will not shoot at him as he flies, but will tarry and
expect until he stand still: so the devil will not seek to shoot at thee, or
hurt thee when thou art well occupied in any good work, but waits the time
until that be may find thee idle, that he may then strike thee with his
temptations, and take from thee the lift of thy soul: therefore thou must
always be occupied, that he Divil may never find thee idle. The Wessel that is
occupied, and full already, can contain no more in it, and the mind that is
fully occupied about good things cannot admit of evil thoughts into it; but if
the Devil finds it unocuppied, he will put evil cogitations into it: The
water which continues running, brings forth good fish, but the standing
waters, or marshes, and lakes, do bring forth Frogs and Serpents, and that
Fish that is in them, is unsavory and dangerous to eat of; and what can thou
bring forth if thou be idle, but soul and dishoness thoughts: drive away from
thee all idleness, for if thou flyest not away from thy pleasure, thou can
not choose but he taken prisoner by a number of vices, 1 Samuel 19. When David was
occupied with the continual persecution of Saul, he falls not into sin, as he
did afterward when he was idle at home in his own Palace, 2 Samuel 11. And when
Solomon was occupied about his building, he did not offend God; but when his
work was at an end, and that he gave himself unto idleness; he committed very
great offenses, 1 Kings 11. The Tribe of Dan searching out an inheritance to
dwell in, they sent five men out of their Coast, and they came to Laish, and
they saw the people which were therein, which dwelt cereless, and when they
returned back unto their Brethren, the first motive that they used to encourage
them for to go, was this, said they, If you will go you shall come unto a
careless people: so they went up and smote the people with the edge of the
Sword, and burnt the city, Judges 18. You that are given unto idleness,
sloathfulness, and careleness, behold and consider the end of these people,
even the men of Laish, it cause their destruction; therefore be ye diligent:
the men that went to view the Country of Laish, they said to their Brethren do
you sit still, be not sloathful (as it they should have said) will you lose
this good occasion through your sloathfulness, v. 10. Then they used another
motive to draw them from Idleness, saying, The Country is a place that does
lack nothing that is good in the world. Here you see that the Tribe of Dan
through their diligence obtained this fruitful and plentiful Country which did
lack nothing in the world: And those idle people of Laish through their
carelessness did not only lose their City and their Country but it also caused
the destruction of themselves too: therefore fly from idleness and
carelessness, for fear the like judgment befall you.

While the Trojans were watchful, their City they kept,
But lost it was when they securely slept.
And when their City (through their carelessness) was all of slame, they cried,
Troja suit here was a Troy, or we had a Troy! have thou some thoughts of acting
some bonourable enterprire, and does idleness, sloathfulness, or carelessness
put as it were a blot in the way, saying it is too difficult or impossible for
thee; I pray thee be not deluded by this flattering Syrian, for Nihil est ram
difficile, sed ex labor facicile vincatur, that is, there is nothing so hard
but by labor is easily overcome, The Heathen Poet could say: By industry the
Tigers gentle grow,
And the wild Lions may be tamed so:
And the ficice Bull, whose ire does provoke,
By industry is brought to bear the yoke. Ovid.


Love overcomes all things, and diligence does the like.

Idleness is the nourisher of all carnal vice; if thou will flee from idleness
thou shall soon make all sin and vice to famish in thee, for thereby thou
take away all the sustenance that maintains it. Solomon says, Prove. 10.16.
The labor of the righteous tends to life. The way to Heaven is full of
travel and continual occupations of holiness and virtuous exercises: If thou
did but remember seriously all the time which thou do lose, that thou must
render a st^^ct account, or reckoning to the Almighty God, thou would not
lose one jot thereof. The Spirit of God does show it self where it is, for it
will suffer no idleness to rest or harvour where it is, or where it remains.
When thou art idle, thou bost lose the best thing which thou have, which is
Time.

By ever learning Solon waxed old,
For time he knew was better far than Gold;
Nature might give him Gold which would decay
But nature could not give him yesterday.
Gather thy Manna in the eve of the Sabbath, that thou may rest when the
Sabbath day comes, Exodus 16. that is, take pains, and labor whilst thou art
in this life, that thou may rest and take thine case when that great feast of
eternal Bliss comes. The Land that lies idle, and is not tilled, brings
forth nothing but briars, th^rns, and unprofitable woeds, and if thou do not
fly from idleness, thou can not choose but thy heart will be full of evil
thoughts. S. Psul says, Gal. 5.15. Take heed therefore that you walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise; occupy therefore the land of thy
heart, in good and holy exercises, to the intent that thou may ever be doing
of good works, and bring forth the fruits thereof. Christ teaches by a
similitude, that he always casts man to labor: A certain house-holder went
for to hire laborers into his vineyard, Mat. 20. He went about the sixth hour,
and about the eleventh hour, and always found some standing idle, and he began
to reprove them, seying, Why stand ye here all the day idle? and he said, Go
into my vincyard. This similitude does plainly demonstrate unto us, that God
would not have us be idle at no time of the day. Solomon says; Prove. 10.4. A
sloathful hand makes poor, but the hand of the diligent makes rich. Chap. 13.
4. The sluggard lusts; but his soul has naught, but the soul of the diligent
shall have plency. Chap. 18.9. He also that is soathful in his work is even the
Brother of him that is a waster. Chap. 19.15. Sloathfulness causes to fall a
sleep. Chap. 20.13. Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty, open thine eyes,
and thou shall be satisfied with bread: Fly from stoath lest thou fall a sleep,
and love not sleep lest thou come to poverty: but open thine eyes to be
obligent and thou shall be satisfied with all things necessary for thee. verse
4. The sloathful will not plow, because of Winter, therefore shall he beg in
the Summer but have nothing, Chap. 21.25, 26. The desire of the sloathful
slays him, for his hands refuse to labor: he thinks to live by withing and
destring all things, but will take no pains to get it; for says the wife man,
He coveteth evermore greedily, Chap. 22.13. The sloathful man says a Lion is
without. I shall be slain in the street. Solomon derideth them that invent vain
excuses because they would not do their duty, Prove. 26.13, 14, 15. As the door
turns upon the hinges, so does the sloathful man upon his bed. Chap. 19.24.
The sloathful hides his hand in his bosom, and it grieveth him to put it
again to his mouth. Chap. 15.19. The way of the sloathful man is an hedge of
thorns, be ever finds some let or stay, and will not go forwards. By
sloathfulness the roof of the house goes to decay, and by the idleness of the
hands the house droppeth through, Eccles. 10.18. I passed by the field of the
sloathful, and by the vineyard of the man destitute of understanding, and lo
it was all grown over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof,
and the stone wall thereof was broken down; then I beheld and considered it
well, I looked upon it, and received instruction Prove. 24.30, 31, 32. Herein
appears one chief point of Solomon's wisdom: that is to consider, and look
upon the errors of other men, and thereby learn to eschew them; for to see the
great loss and detriment that comes of idleness and sloathfulness, and
considering of it to become diligent, and laborious, is surely a great sign of
a wise and prudent man; he is happy that by other men's faults does learn to
beware.

That servant which had one Talent delivered unto him, Mat. 25.26, 28, 30. he
through sloathfulness hid it, and did not occupy it: his Master said unto him;
Thou evil servant, and sloathful, for so he called him, and he said, Take the
Talent from him, (moreover he said) Cast therefore that unprofitable servant
into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: there is
nothing but mere darkness out of the Kingdom of Heaven. Here we see that
sloathfulness does not only lose all things in the world (as the men of Laish
did) but also eternal happiness hereafter, for said the Master, Cast that
unprofitable servant into utter darkness. Now since it is so, who is it that
will or dare give themselves unto idleness, or sloathfulness, seeing by it, we
do not only lose all things that are good here, but also hereafter.

Syrach speaking of the sluggard, says, Eccluf. 22.1, 2. A sloathful man is
like a filthy stone, which every man mocketh at for his shame. A sloathful man
is to be compared to the dung of oxen, and every man that takes it up will
shake it out of his hand. Like as the idle stone gathers moss and filth, so
does the sloathful both sickness of body, and corruption of mind.

Thus in brief you have heard what idleness is, and the fruits of it, for first
it reaches men to do evil, and it is the sink which receives all the filty
channel of vice, and with that poisoneth and infecteth the soul, it is an enemy
to hertue, and the very train to all wickedness, it loses time, it dulls the
understanding, it nourishes humors, It displeases God, it is the mother of
poverty, it is the stepmother of wisdom, and the ready way to Atheism, and it
kindles lust. Carthage was overcome, and Rome came to ruin through it. It
causes evil and dishonest thoughts, it opens the gate to all wickedness, it is
one of the sitis of Sodom, and by it David committed Adultery, it brings much
evil and it causes them be meddling where it does not concern them, and so are
called prattlers, and buste-bodies, speaking things that are not comely: we
must give account for every idle word: through idleness we are in danger to
lose all t^ings in this world: Solomon through idleness committed great
offenses, yea, it caused the people of Laish to lose their City and their
Country and the destruction of themselves too. It caused the City of Troy to be
all on a flame; therefore fly from idleness, and thou shall soon make all sin
to famish in thee; for it is the sustenance that maintains it. That land that
lies idle, brings forth nothing but briars, thorns, and thistles: by
idleness the roof of the house droppeth through. And besides all this, thou art
in danger thereby to be cast into utter darkness. The Prophet Jeremiah says,
Jer. 48.10, 11. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently; and in
the next verse he says, Moab has been at rest from his youth, and he has
settled on his lees: Zeph. 1.12. But the Lord will search Jerusalem with lights,
and visit the men that are frozen in their dregs, and say in their heart, The
Lord will neither do good nor evil: Thus you see what a dangerous condition the
idle, sloathful, careless, and secure ones are in. First they are careless of
Grace, and the means of it, as the Word, Repentance, Faith, prayer, etc.
Secondly, they are fearless of Gods Judgments. Thirdly, they are seelingless
of the beavy burden of their sins; so that the spirit of slumber is a binding
up of their faculties and depriving them of the exercise of grace: To them
grace is no care, judgment is no fear, sin is no sorrow, their ignorance does
grow, and they are negligent in matters of salbatton, they are careless in Gods
service, like unto that careless servant, that began to eat and drink, and to
be drunken, Matthew 24. They delay repentance; security sounds it is not yet
time, they ever dream of felicity, boasting of their own bearts desire: With
the Dolphin they swim in delights, when destruction is nearest, till at last
securitles maid woefully cried the hour is past.

Joleness and careless is the forerunner, either of gross sins, great crossed,
or most terrible judgments, it emptteth the heart of Grace, and it sweepeth
and garnisheth it for Satan: God will hide his face and trouble shall follow.
The rich man that had much goods laid up for many years, said to his soul, Luke
12. 20, 16. Live at case; And God said unto him, O fool, this night will I
fetch away thy sold from thee. I Thef. 5.3. When they shall say peace and
safety, then shall sudden destruction come upon them, as the travel upon a
woman with child, and they shall not escape, it shall be felt before it be seen
like a Thief in the night. Woe to them that are at case in Sion, Amos 6.1.
Gideon smote the careless boast: secuity was the overthrow of Laish, Judge.
8.11. and 18.7, 10, 27.

The good man of the house awaketh to save his goods from the Thief, the
Husbandman for his Harvest, the Merchant for his Wares, the Soldier for his
spoil: shall me lose and eternal crown with sleeping? He that has the key of
David has opened the may: the way is opened but yet narrow. Awake and strive
to enter in: Matthew 25. When the Juilvee is past, the foolish cry open, open;
some awake a little and begin a little to enter in; but finding the way stract;
first with Lots wife they look back, 2 Pet 2.5. then with Demas they turn back,
and with the dog they run back to their vomit. When thou think upon that
crown, think therewithal upon this word Few, few enter in, few are chosen; in
the great deluge, ver. 8. few souls were saved; in the overthrow of Sodom, but
Lot was saved. Amongst the sirty three thousand five hundred and fifty of the
people of Israel, only Joshua and Caleb entered into the Land: Therefore
uncessantly importune that holy one of Israel like the urgent widow]. be not
fool, or sloathful, but diligent and bigilant. Leave him not till with Jacob
thou get a blessing.

A word or two of the Definition of Drunkenness.
The drink to the betrayer of the mind, and does disapparel the Sold, yea the
thoughts of the heart (which God has secluded from the very devils) by
drunkenness do suffer a seach: the Devil could never find a cunninger bait, to
angle both for the acts and meanings of men, than drunkenness is. You shall
scarcely find a man that is much addicted to drink that is not ruined. What a
monster is man in drunkenness, he has a swimming eye, a face both roast and
sod, and a tongue clammed to the roof and gums a drumming ear, a feavered body,
a bolling stomach, a mouth nasty with offensive sumes till it sicken the brain,
a passed head, and legs tottering up and down their mictuned burden; be has
no memory at all, for the abundance of drink has drowned up that noble
recorder; and while Bacchus is his chief God, Apollo never keeps him company,
friends and soes, familiars and strangers, are then of equal esteem.

Drunkenness is the funeral of all intelligible men; A drunken mind, and a
drunken stomach are both alike, neither can retain what they receive: I will
loath to admit of familiar to infectious as this. The wise man advise to us to
the contrary, saying, Prove. 23.20.21. Keep not company with drunkards, nor
gluttons; for the drunkard and the glutton shall be poot. And St. Paul says, 1
Cor. 5.11. If any man that is called a Brother be a forcinator, or covetous, or
an idolater, or railer, or a drunkard, or an ^xtortiore, with such a one eat
nor. St. Paul asks a question and answers it himself, saying, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
Know ye that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not
deceived, neither fornicators, nor Idolators, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor
buggerers, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor railers, nor
excortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5 19, 20, 21. The works of
the flash are manisest, which are adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
wantonness idolatry, witchcrast, hatred, debate, emulation, wrath, contention
sedition, heresies, envies, murders, drunkenness, gluttony, and such like,
whereof I tell you as I have told you before, that they which do such things,
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. The Apostle in these two places reckons
more than twenty damnable sins, and the drunkard, the glutton, and the railer,
do as it were bring up the rear of this wicked and ungodly Kegiment. I beseech
you cast your eyes back, if seriosty consider, whether thou art at league with
any of these soul-destraying sotdiers, for if thou be, thy state is dangerous:
Therefore seeing that we hand so many strange enemtes to encounter withal, we
have great cause to take St. Paul's counsel, Ephesians. 6.11. etc. for to be strong
in the Lord, and to put on the whole armor of God: That we amy be abse for to
wrattle, and to overcome those potent enemies. Whatsoever friend I make choice
of, I hope for to have them endowed with these two virtues (that is) mildness
and temperance: An excellent Caveat. Luke 21.54. Take heed to your selves lest
at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, etc.
Drunkenness of the Hebrews is called wine-viving; then S. Paul's counselde not
to be despised; Ephesians. 5.15, 16, 17, 18. Take heed therefore that ye walk
circumspectly not as fools, but as wise redeeming the time, for the days are
evil: wherefore be ye not unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord is,
and be not drunken with wine, wherein do excess. Paul does not forhid the use
of wine but the abuse of it: for to Timothy he said thus, 1 Timothy 5.23. Drink no
longer water. but use a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and thine of ten
infirmities. Solomon says, Prove. 31.6, 7, Give ye strong drink unto him that
is ready to perish, and wine unto them that have grief of heart. Let him drink
that he may forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more. Psalm. 104, 15.
Wine makes glad the heart of man. Strong drink is the good creature of God,
pure to the pure; Which serves, I Naturally for the bodies nourishing and
strength, and to be used with sobriety. 2. Physically for the corroboration of
the body, and refreshing of the mind. Wine (says Austin) moderately drunken is
medicinable, but drunken more than need requires, it consumes, it is poison.

Drunkenness is not only when wine has banished wit, which may soon overtake a
weak brain, but also when one does sit long at drink. albeit their brain were
strong enought to hear it, which is called, Prove. 23.30. Once that tarrieth
long at wine, that goes and seeks mixtwine. Such kinds of drinking, are as
well condemned, as staggering ebriety; such like drunkenness is called a
boiling, chasing, or waring too bot with wine. Some delight to be drunk alone,
some provoke others to do the same, some drink by measure, out of measure: the
drunkard says, do me reason, while as both his ormand, and the others grant is
altogether reasonless. All these sorts are affected with this malady and with
this bilect vice diseased: custom makes this disease contagious to mang; use
alters nature, and custom brings Idle superfluity to urgent necessity: First.
the drunkard drinks for thirst, then for delight, at last for wantonness, and
then without measure, by an unsattate holuptuousness, When I name wine, it is
to be taken (Synecdochically) for all for is of strong drink: one drunkard is
the cause of another, taping, Isa. 50.12. Come I will bring wine, and we will
sill out selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day etc much
more abundant, as the challenged drunkard both allenge, Prove. 23.20. that
company causes him, who forced him with, either drink or get thoe gone, 1 Cor.
5.11. wiilst, they are expcessy forbidden to keep company with drunkards and
gluttons, Ephesians. 5.11. and that thou should babe no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness. But a graceless heart, turning the grace of Bod
into wanton, ness, and having the mind feeble and meak, suffers sensuality to
reign ober reason, and grace, St. Jude says, Jude 12. These are spots in your
seasts of charity, when they feast with you without all fear, etc. v. 12. these
are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own Lusts, whose mouths speak
proud things, etc. 2 Per. 2.10, 12, 13. These are makers of sects, ^eship,
having not the spirit (of regeneration) they shall receive the wages of
unrighteousness. 1 These. 5.6, 7, 8. Therefore let us not sleep as do others,
but let us watch and be sober: here sleep is taken for contempt of salvation:
when men continue in fins, and will not awake to godliness: for they that
sleep, sleep in the night, and they that be drunken, are drunken in the night;
but let us which are of the day sober, putting on the breast plate of says,
and love, and the hope of salvation for an helmet. Ephesians. 6.17. The wise man
says, Eccles. 10.17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King or Governors,
eat in time for strengh and not for drunkenness. They that drink for drinks
sake are too usual at drinkings (who as Demosthenes said, to King Philip)
Spunges, who want but a wide womb to their wanton will. Some think that drink
is given of God not only for necessity, but also for delectation; thinking
thereby they may exceed as they please; they consider not that strong drink was
given to men, to thear the beart, and not to oppress it, and to praise God for
it, and not too offend him with it of by it. Some think that drunkeneess is
physical, wherein they foolishly err, esteeming the poison of the soul to be
good phystek for the body: when the medicine is so filthy, the healing of
curing is thought to be as filthy,

A drunkard is like a L^^ch that still sucketh and cannot be satisfied. When
necessity is satisfied, insolency salts his appetite, he backs his drunkenness
with Tobacco, that by all the four elements, earth, wanter, air, and fire, he
map be intoxicated. Drunkenness as it harkeneth the wit, and petherteth the
imagination: so beyond all the affections it stirs up choler, by a
convenience of the sulphurous heat that is both in drink and in the bilious
humor concurring to make the greater flame, to kindle up the heart for the
smaltest injury. Cambys^s, the King of Persia in his drunkenness was incensed
at the gentle reproof of his minion Praxaspes, and kilted his son. Alexander at
the wine killed in his foolish fury his most lobing Clitus, for the which whin
be was sober again, be attempted to kill himself. Anger is a madness short and
voluntary, and an insatiable evit.

Philoxenus wished a Cranes crag, and Melanth^us a Swans neck of three cubits
long, that they might by the longer space enjoy the pleasure of their drink:
his life is vita Ranarum, a Frogs life, says Erasmus. Frogs love to live in
moorish places, be in his pots, like aflye (suctuvivit) be lives by sucking.
Wine is the mirror of the mind; be is like Bonosus, who was born not in like,
but to drink, faith Aurelianus. Be drinks for delight. for company, for
brabery, for contention, and for inflamed charity, to absent friends, his belly
is his God, Phil. 3.19. and is unfit for the service of that high God, I. These.
5.17. He abuses his creatures, shameth himself, and is enabled to sin: when he
should mourn, be is merry, saping to morrow we shall dye, and he drinks wine in
bowls when he should be sorry for the affliction of Joseph, Amos 6.6. like the
Epicure, which says, let us eat, drink, sure, The Lord God of hosts callo unto
weeping and mourning, and behold joy, and gladness, flaying oxen and killing,
sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine, Isa. 22.12, 13. instead of repentance,
they contemned the admonition of their teachers, saying, Let us eat and drink
for our Prophets say, we shall dye to morrow. But consider immediately after
what if Prophet says, Chapter 24.7, 9. The wine saileth, the wine has no might,
all that were of merry heart do mourn. They shall not drink wine with mirth,
strong drink shall be bitter to them that drink it. The Loro pronounces woe
upon woe to drunkards, Chap. 5.11, 22. Woe unto them that rise up early to
follow drunkenness, and to them that continue until night, till the wine do
inflame them. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and to them that are
strong to pour in strong drink. Four several times does the Prophet pronounce
woes to drunkards in one chapter. The wife man says, Prove. 23.29, 30.32. To
whom in woe, to whom is sorrow, to whom is strife, to whom is murmuring, to
whom are wounds without cause, and to whom is redness of ^y ^even to them that
tarry long at the wine etc. In the end thereof it will bite a serpent, and
sting like an adder.

Now seeing that there is such a strong chain that is linked together with so
many woes, which reaches as far as betwixt the drunkard and destruction
(except repentance break this chain) it will assuredly draw down vengance upon
thy body, or soul, or both: Now therefore seeing it is so, Christ's Caveat is
not to be rejected, Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your
hearts be oppressed with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life,
and l^st that day come on you at unaweres.

Bing Belsh^zzar made a great feast to a thousand of his Princes, and they
drank wine in the golden vessels, which his father had brought from the Temple
in J^ru^ ^^m, D^n. 5. At the same hour appeated the singers of a man's hand
which wrote, etc. Then the Kings countenance was changed, and his thoughts
troubled him: to the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one
against another; and the same night was B^lshazzar the King slain: here we see
how near drunkenness and destruction was lir^ked: the same hour his thoughts
troubled him, and the same night he was slain. The vine brings forth three
Grapes, the first of pleasure, the second of drunkenness, the third of sorrow.
It is folly to rebuke a drunken man: example we have of Abig^il, a woman of
singular wisdom, 1 Samuel 25.36, etc. For she came to Nabal her husband, and
behold he made a feast in his house, like the feast of King and N^bals heart
was merry within him, for he was very drunken; wherefore she told him neither
less nor more, until the morning arose; then in the morning when the wine was
gone out of Nabal, his wife told him (that David had bowed to destroy both him
and all his house for denying of his servants that small request which they
desired: and the text says) when she had told him those words, his heart died
within him, and he was like a stone, and about ten days after the Lord smote
N^bal that he died. From hence we may gather how close drunkenness and
destruction are linked together* Wine has as much force as fire, for as soon
as it overtaketh one, it dispatcheth him, it discloseth the secrets of his
soul, and troubles the whole mind. Wine is the blood of the earth, and the
shame of such as abuse it. Mark the end of Drunkards, and abhor their
wickedness, Isa. 28.1. Woe to the Crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim,
whose glorious beauty is a fading flower, which are on the head of the fat
valleys of them that are overcome with wine. ver. 7, 8. They have erred because
of wine, and are out of the way by strong drink,; the Priests and the Prophets
have erred by strong drink they are swallowed up with wine, they have gone
astray through strong drink, they fail in vision, they stumble in judgment: for
all their tables are full of filthy vomiting, no place is clean. From hence we
may gather this threefold observation: First there is pronounced woe to the
Drunkards, their glorious beginning shall have a fading or steril conclusion.
Secondly, the drunkards they err, they are out of the way, They fail in vision,
they stumble in judgment. Syrach, says, Eccles. 19.1, 2. Wine and women lead
wise men out of the way, and put men of understanding to reproof. A laboring
man that is given to drunkenness, shall never be rich, says Syrach. Lots
Daughters made their Father drink Wine, and then lay with him, Genesis 19.33. But
he perceived not neither when they lay down, neither when they rose up. Wine
had so obscured his judgment, and so darkened his understanding, and so be
fell into that sin of incest with his own Daughters. Lastly, the loathsomness
of drunkenness, All their tables are full of sil^y vomitings, no place is
clean; what can be more filthy? Ambrose says, the first evil of drunkenness,
is the danger of chastity. Nothing makes drunkenness to be more abhored than
the filthy and beastly behavior of those men, whose stomachs are overcharged
with excess. The Lace demonians would often show their Children such as were
drunk, to the end they should learn to loath that vice: it is a monster with
many heads, as filthy ta^k fornication, wrath, murder, swearing, cursing and
such like. The Spartans caused their children to behold their slaves when they
were drunken; to move them to the detest^ation of that vice. Wine inflameth the
liver, rotteth the lungs, dulleth the memory, and breeds all diseases:
Therefore flee from drunkenness, for it is the Author of a thousand evils, it
makes wise men fools, and it brings diseases to the body, and destruction to
the soul: it is that vice with stirs up lust, anger, grief, and extremity of
love: it distempers the wit, weakeneth the feet, and overcomes the vital
spirits, says Aristotle. It burns up beauty, and basteneth age, it is a he
witching Devil, a pleasant poison, and a sweet sin, says Augustine.
Drunkenness makes of a man a Beast, a strong man weak and of a wise man a
fool, says Origin. Where drunkenness is mistress, there secrecy bears no
mastery. Steal is the glass of beauty, end wine is the glass of the mind, it is
a root prover to every disease, says the heathen man Plato. It has drowned
more than the Sea has drowned: Drunkenness makes a man more brutish than
Balaams Ass, be could walk and talk; but many times a drunkard can do neither.
An^charsis says, the first draught that a man drinks is for thirst, the second
for nourishment, the third for pleasure, and the fourth for madness. O what a
voluntary madness do drunkards run into when four draughts will not satisfy
their unsatiable desires! no, notten times four. Surely, surely, they are more
frantic than those in Bedlam. Drunkenness darkens the wit, it perverts the
Imagination, and it stirs up choler. Plato bade drunken and angry men to behold
themselves in a glass, and if they will do so, here is one wherein they may
behold themselves most clearly. Drunkenness is nothing else but a voluntary
madness. What is more vile and loathsome than is the drunkard, whose mouth is
the lodge of poisonous savoure-whose body through excess does tremble and
shake; whose promises are large, whose tongue bewrays secrets, whose mind is
spon changed, whose countenance is transformed; for commonly when the head is
full of wine the tongue is set at liberty; neither is be content with many
sorts of wine, but he drowneth himself or his senses in variety of liquor,
making himself the monste of excess, it is the nursery to all contention, it
kindles the coals of wrath, and is the root of all mischief, and the ready road
to ruin. Genesis 9. Drunkenness did discover the privy parts of Noah, and caused
Lot to commit incest, 2 Samuel 13.28. Drunkenness slew Amnon, King David's Son,
and murdered Holosernes, chief Captain of the Army, for it is said that he
drank more wine that day, than he had in any day ever since he was born, Judith
12.20. and 13.2. be was filled with wine, and Judith slew him in his
drunkenness. The Leopard cannot so soon be taken by any thing as by wine, for
being drunk be falls into the topis. Be not drunken with wine, for wine
turns a man's understanding away from the truth, and kindles in him the fire
of lust, leading his eyes into error: it is a servant to lust, and it turns
the mind to filthy thoughts, and sin is wrought without shame: a drunken man is
ashamed of nothing: therefore he that drinks wine had need of discretion,
that be do not over-drink himself, for drunkenness causes him to talk
filthily, and to do wickedly, and not to be ashamed, but to boast of his
lewdness, thinking it to be very good. Wine is a cause of War and sedition, but
being soberly drunken, it is profitable for the life of man, Eccles. 31.27, 28,
29, 30. What is his life that is overcome with wine: wine was made from the
beginning to make men glad, not for drunkenness. Wine drunken with excess
makes bitterness of mind, with brawlings and scoloings. Drunkenness increases
the rage of a fool, till he offend, it diminishes strength and makes wounds.
St. James says, James 3.16. Where envying and strife is, there is sedition,
and all evil works. Thus you see that all manner of evil that is under the Sun,
is caused, or comes by drunkenness. Of all vices drunkenness is the worst, and
of all sinners, the drunkard is the most heinous, it being a compendium, an
epitome of all other offenses, and the sinner by it is made fit for any, for
all enormities. Man, when he is at y best is good for little, but when he is
drunk, he is good for nothing: he is then made such light stuff, that the Devil
may carry him whither he lisleth at a every blast, which we may plainly see, if
we do but consider how every breath he draws in drives him from one side of the
street to another.

The Lacedaemonians to make this vice odious to their children. Would show them
their servants when they were drunk: Though I commend not their act, yet I
cannot dislike their and. Though to make their Servants drunk, were a fault in
the act, yet by it to make their children shun that Swinish vice, was virtue in
the end: but we are otherwise taught; not to do evil that good may come there
of. Since then God has created me with a reasonable soul, that I might follow,
observe, and embrace virtue and goodness, I will never so much degenerate from
the end of my creation, as to make my body which was created a vessel of
purity, to be a sink of iniquity, and turn a vessel of virtuous things into a
tun to hold drink.

The drunkard can neither rule himself nor others, he is a disturber of peace,
a devourer of good creatures, a corrupter of manners, his wit, foot and hand,
goes palste like, his belly buryeth his drink, and his drink burieth his wit,
his least enemy may overtake him, he is like a drunken Trojan, he disgraceth
his profession, and disableth his calling; be stumbleth in judgment, nothing
is left of a man but a shape, he is proud, furious, passionate, vain, foolish,
quarrellous, offensive, a railer, a revealer of secrets; he will scoff, and
scold, he will play the tyrant, or the fool, the Lion or the ape: he has an
inflamed face, and reeling eyes, stinking breath, staggering legs, and
stammering tongue: It goes like the sails of a wind-will. Drunkenness makes
shameless, but truly soberness makes them be a shamed of their beastly
behavior. The drunkard is hardly cured, be finds his disease so pleasant, and
suffers his malady to become come habitual: he regards not the work of the
Lord, neither considers the works of his hands, he contemns all correction.
Prove. 23.35. They have stricken me, shall thou say, but I was not sick they
have beaten me, but I knew it not; when I^ wake therefore will I seek it still.
Drunkenness is the mother of all vices, says Augustine. It is a flaming fiend,
a sweet poison, a pleasant sin, who does it, does not st^^, but is altegether
si^ Ovid says, I will never esteem a drunken man chaste; for says Hierom, It
bringth forth vener by, it does beget the mind rolt, Genesis 19.32. Examples
hereof are the Sodomites, and as David thought to have done with Uria^, Sam.
11.13. Drunkenness is the neurishment of lust. St. Austine says, he is to be
punished for that he serves the ^ evil willingly. By Pictacus law he that does
evil in drunkenness, should be twice punished. By Solons law a drunken Pr.
should dye. The Indians allowed a woman to kill a drunken King, and for ber
reward, to have his successor to her bushand. The' drut kard, by Moses law was
lo be stoned to death, Deuteronomy. 21.20 The Drunkard defaceth himself, it besotteth
the wit, as young Cyrus gave his answer to his Grand father Astyage', why be
resused to drink wine; because, said he, I to^ kit to be poison; for I have
seen it spoil bath men of wi^ and sense: as Origin said of Lot, Drunkenness
deceived him whom whole Sodom could not deceive. And Augustine said, Wine is a
wild wrestler. A ex^^ ander the victor of all was overcome with wine. It
turns strength to weakneso, and health to sickness. Drunkenness (says
Seneca) does recompense the merry madness of one hour with the wearisomness of
long time. Gal. 5.21. Oftimes drunkaros grow soon old; and besides all this, he
depriveth himself of regeneration, and of Christ, Romans 6.16. The spirit is
quenched, the flesh and body of sin is strengthued, and the soul is made like a
City broken down, and without malls, Ephesians. 5.18. He incurreth shame, the
examples whereof in Lot, Noah, and Nabal; 1 Pet. 2.11. and poverty, and famine,
Prove. 21. 17. and 25.18. Wine in youth, turns to water in age. The Prophet
Jocl says, Joel. 1.5. Awake ye^ drunkards, and weep, and howl all ye drinkers
of Wine, because of the new wine, for it shall be pulled away from your mouth.
The Prophet Habakkuk pronounces woe to drunk. ards, Hab. 2.151, 6. Thou art
filled with shame, and shameful spewing shall be for thy glory. The Drunkard is
exposed to all danger, and has no skill to prevent any, nor feel them, Prove.
23.34, 35. For he is as o^e that sleeps in the midst of the Sea, and as he
that sleeps on the to of the mast. It brings on sisdden death, it so weath
the seeds of deadly and veritable sicknesses; more perish by surfeit than the
sword. Ehiah ^. of Israel, as he was in Terzah drinking till be was drunken, 1
Kings 19.9, 10. his servant Zimiri Captain of his chariots, came and smote him,
and killed him, etc. Thus you see what dangerous effects drunkenness does
produce: Belshazzar was stain in his drunkenness Amnon King David's Son was
stain in his drunkenness. Holofernes was murdered in his drunkenness, and
Elijah was killed in his drunkenness. Cambyses in his drunkenness killed his
own Son, and Alexander in his drunkenness killed his most loving friend Ch^us;
and besides all this, as Esau sold bis birthright for a mess of pottage; so
the Drunkard his grace and glories right, for a belly full of drink, for the
which he is excluded out of Heaven, Gal. 5.21. so that, when that shall be so
fearfully accomplished, he may miserably say thus, O God, for how short a
pleasure have I given over so great a felicity! when with the rich glutton in
his stery torments, he shall not be piried with one drop of water to quench his
endless and unquenchable thirst. What will the drunkards say, when that
handwriting shall appear against them, which appeared against Belsh^zzar in
his drunkenness, Dan. 5. and shy Mean, Mean, Tekel upharsin; God has numbered
thy Kingdom, and finished it, and thou art weighed in the balance and found too
light, etc. What will thou say if God should call thee to an account for thy
^^e wardship, Luke 16. (even in the midst of thy drunkenness) and say, thou
shall he no longer steward, because thou have wasted thy Masters goods, yet for
all this, it is hard to cure a man that is given to drunkenness; it is
difficult to speak to the belly, which has no ears, it is folly to rebuke a
drunken man, 1 Samuel 25.36. Lycurgus to cure drunkenness, caused all the vines
to be cut down. Diogenes when he was urged to drink beyond measure, did cast
the drink on the ground saying, If I do drink all this, not then the liquor,
but my self would be destroyed: therefore it is good to eschew the company of
drunkards; one diseased sheep infe^s the whole flock. The consideration of the
filthy manners of drunkards is a great preservative to an honest heart. This
was the remedy that Anacharsis used, having ever before his eye the most filthy
and unseemly manners of the intemperate. Call also frequently to mind when thou
art sober, those filthy things that thou have used, said, or done, when thou
wast drunken. Plato willed did disciples when they were drunk to behold
themselves in a mirror, that they might the more detest their own manners. If
thou could fall into spiritual thriety, wherein there is a wonderful thirst
for the fountain of life, and would replenish thy heart with the rivers of
the water of life, and could say with David, Psalm. 42.1, 2. Like as the heart
p^nt^^h afte^ the water brooks, so long^th my soul after thee, O God; my sold
is a-thirst for God, yea^ even for the living God, when shall I come to appear
before the presence of God. In that case thou would easily bridle thy self
from that hodily, and more than beastly drunkenness. This spiritual ebriety,
albeit it he scorned by the profane, as may he seen in the example of Hanna
the mother of, Samuel, I Sam and in the Apostles Acts 2.4, 13. when they were
all filled with the Holy Ghost, some mocked, and some said. they are full of
new wine; yet let us sand ^ste our spiritual thirst, Ephesians. 5.18. And be filled
with the spirit. Join herewithal prayer, hearing of the word, meditation of
Gods love, of Christ's drath and union with us, and how that our bodies are the
temples of the holy spirit, and that God beholds us as a jud^^e whose wrath
is ^rong, remembering always the last day of our life, and the world, and look
to thy particular calling, that by no means thou disgrace it by brunkenness,
nor hinder it, but rather dignifie it by temperance. Lo this purpose it is
said, Prove. 31.4, 5. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to
drink wine, nor for Princes strong drink, lest he drink and forget the decree,
and change the judgment of the Children of affliction. Consider also thy
Christian calling, that thou art a child of the light, that thou should walk
In the light, and not a child of darkness, that thy intention may be to walk
always honesly, Romans 13.13. as in the day, and not in drunkenness, Ti^. 2.12.
For the grace of God, that brings solvation unto all men, has appeared, and
teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live righteously,
godly, and temperately in this present world.

Civil laws well set down, but better executed, would he great helps against
this malady to correct it. At least, the Persim law authorized by king
Ahashuetus, Es^h. 1.8. was excreeding good to restrain some degrees of this
implety which was, that none should compel another to dringk; for so the King
had appointed; that they should do according to every man's pleasures that drink
is most pleasant, that suf^^^ r^th a man's self. Plato's law was, not to drink
to another. As drunkenness grows by cu stome, so it does fade by abstinence.
As did the Rechabi^^s in their constant abstinence from wine, at the
commandment of one Jonad^^^. Jer. 35.5, 6, 19. Jeremiah set before them po^s
full of wine, and cups, and said unto them, drink wine. But they said, we will
drink no wine, for Jonadab said, You shall drink no wine, neither you nor your
Sons for ever, etc. We obey his voice, we drink ^o wine all our days, neither
we, our wives, our sons nor our daughters, so the Rechabites kept this command.
Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Jonadad the son of
Rechab, shall not want a man, to stand before me for ever, his posterity shall
continue, and be in my favor for ever, because thou have obeyed thy fathers
command. Surely this is one sufficient motive for to induce every one unto
^ob^tery. When the drink is in the cup it is in thy power; when it is in the
body thou art in the power of it; when thou drinkest thou u^est the wine as
thou please, but after thou bast drunken, it will handle thee as it pleases;
it is an east entry, pea, a most ^^ppery step to drunkenness. Consider also
that God and nature has given thee the narrowest womb, and the straitest
throat above all living creatures, that thou may learn thereby to be most
sober, a These. 5.5.6. be instructed in the grace of God, Tit. 2.11, 12. watch
for Christ's second coming, Luke 21.24. Drink as thou were to drink no more. Be
careful to fill thy heart with grace, Ephesians. 5.18. Heb. 13.9. Put on the Lard
Jesus, Romans 13.14. Gol. 5.24. Be strong in the inner man, Ephesians. 3.16. Let not
thy table be a snare to thee, Psalm. 69.23. Replenish thy heart with the spirit,
before thou fill it with drink, with spiritual gladness, and a thankful heart
begin thy drinking, Ephesians. 5.18, 19. J^el 2.26. and all thy actions respect Gods
glory. 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do
all to the glory of God. And then thou shall call upon the name of the Lord,
and he will heart the, and he will be with thee in trouble; and be will deliver
thee, Psalm. 91.15.

A persuasion to Temperance, and some motives for to induce us thereunto;
showing the dangerous effects that come of drunkenness, etc.
Do in a morning savor drink that is strong? Then do not drink thy mornings
draught too long: However let me crave and beg this boon
You do not drink your mornings draught till noon:
But you undo your solid senses quite
If that you drink your mornings draught till night
For many men in their excessive bowls,
With their own bodies overthrow their souls:
And therefore never let thine own right hand
Ruin thy self, by breaking this command:
Grant me but this, and truly though l'm poor,
I Will never beg of you or yours more:
To keep from want, spend prodigally never,
To keep from spending, think thou want ever:
That want thou may not, save what thou have, got
That save thou may, think that thou have it not.
The best way not to want, is to be sparing,
The way to spare, to be for want still caring:
If thou can get, but not keep what is got,
Beggary, when all is done, will be thy lot.
When thou have dig'd a well that water gives,
What good will it do if poured into Sives:
As one hand brings in, the other must lay up,
Else thou may have to dine but not to sup;
Hold fast thy state, why should thou look for more,
And could not keep that which thou had before.
It Is and old saying, spend and God will send,
But what? beggary and bareness in the end.
Be sparing in expense excessive spending
Brings what was long a getting to quick ending.
Abuse not thy estate with riotous dealing,
For riot wounds with want, want c^res with stealing.
Use thy estate, but fool it not away,
Turned out of all, men ^rn to birds of prey.
Use but with temper that which thou have got,
No leech like one that had, and has it nor.
Use thy estate, but give it not the slip,
Want makes the old wife trot, the young wife, trip.
Drink not too much, if thou thy health intend,
Every excess has some defect in the end.
Drink not extremely, if thou love thine case,
Every extraem breeds some extreme disease;
Drink moderatly, if health thou will maintain,
Excess of pleasure breeds excess of pain;
Drink serves the bodies moisture to maintain,
When that turn's served, the rest but drowns the brain
Do we not daily see that drunknness
And lust provoking meats, eat with excess,
Makes men more wanton, and more seeble grow,
More prone to vice, to pious deeds more slow?
And what is the pleasure we can here obtain
More than an itching humor mixed with pain:
For in the midst of mirth for ought we know,
We to the pit of hell may headlong go:
When overcome with drink we lie a sleep,
We may fall down into the dungeon deep:
When we are singing filthy Alehouse songs,
God justly may deprive us of our tongues:
When we are piping, peeping in the cup
Too see our fellow drunkards drink all up,
God may in Justice take away our sight,
Because we knew not how to use it right:
Before the hand can get the cup to the head
For ought we know we may be stricken dead.
When we are merry drinking of some health,
Sickness may come into the room by stealth;
And one arrest in great Jehovahs name,
On pain of death to go from whence he came:
The party struck, grows ill and sick at heart,
Yet with good fellows he is full loath to part:
Some wishes him to stay, some not to shrink,
Some tells him he was hanged that left his drink.
But what says he? alas I know his mind,
He with his meats had rather stay behind:
I cannot blame him, for the truth is this,
Without repentance there is small hopes of bliss.
The way is narrow, how then shall the blind
And sta^ing, staggering Drunkard it ere find,
Or having found it, keep in it since he
Has all his life been used to Heuf and Ree?
Beware then drunkards and grow wise in time,
Hate and forsake this soul-condemning crime;
Watch and be sober, and both fast and pray,
That thou may feast with Christ another day.
His throat that once did swalow down strong Drink
Is now more full of filth than any sink:
He that did once drink wine and water strong,
A drop of water craves to cool his tongue.
As J^cob ^o his household, so speak I.
Unto cach Ci^y, Country, Family:
Away with those strange Gods that are among you,
And change your garments, for these things will wrong you.
Away with whoredom, drunkenness and pride,
Gods purity cannot such sins abide:
Wrestle with God, let not thy courage sail,
By earnest suits thou may at length prevail.
Tell such as shall thy person laugh to scorn
Unwisely, they but spurn against a thorn:
And tell them that revile what I have writ,
I doubt not but they have more hair than wit:
More wit than wisdom, for if they were wise
To know themselves, they would not me despise.
Inquire not what I am, Gods gifts are free,
With able parts mean men adorned may be;
Sound brains may be within a rugged Felt,
An honest heart within a leathern Pelt:
Always fair Birds have not the sweetest notes,
Arts are not always decked in Velvet coats:
On highest trees are croaking Ravens born,
When the sweet Nightingale sits on a thorn,


FINIS.

