CORNU COPIA. A Miscellanium of lucriferous and most fructiferous Experiments,
Observations, and Discoveries, immethodically distributed; to be really
demonstrated and communicated in all sincerity.
Imprim' TO discover a Certainty to raise 2000l per annum de claro, with less
then 200l stock, unhazarded, and beyond contradiction, without the least
aspersion of Usury, Extortion, oppresion, engrossing, or any Monopolizing,
unconscionable or dishonorable way whatsoever. This design may be advanced to
a far greater proportion, and exceedingly to the good of the public, and may
be fortified with firm and convincible reasons, to any that shall waver in
their belief.

Item, A certainty another way, with 500 lib. stock unhazarded, to raise de
claro, 2000 lib. per annum and upwards, without aspersion, as above, and
without the least imaginary inconvenience or prejudice whatsoever, but to the
general good, especially to the poor, with the free allowance of all the
country; which has been found true by the unquestionable testimony of
experience, and will sound consonant to reason, and be undeniably satisfactory
as the other.

Item, A certainty, with less then 500l stock unhazarded to raise de claro
1000l per annum and upwards, and so with less or greater sums proportionably,
by even, honest and generous courses as above. Which may be made conspicuous,
valid, and most complete.

Item, To discover a credible way without charge, more then ordinary expenses,
whereby an industrious man but of a reasonable capacity and fortune, may
contrive to himself 500l per annum and upward* without prejudice to any, or
dishonor in the least kind unto him self. Which may be made easy and
familiar to our reason by evidence strong enough to silence doubt, and procure
credency.

The like, but with small charge more then convenience of livelihood, whereby a
man of an ingenuous and generous condition, may by compendious, facill and
conscionable ways, gain a 1000l per annum and upwards, with as much freedom,
sincerity and regularity, as with the particulars above written, being a
meridian truth, too clear to be eclipsed by contradiction.

Item, With less then 50l stock constantly visible, and no way endangered, to
advance de claro 1000l per annum, with all claritude and uprightness. This may
be confirmed to the observation of any whose curiosity shall incline him to the
easy trouble of experience.

Item. To make in all probability with 200l stock in three years 400 lib, and
in three years more to make the 400 lib. 800l, and in three years more to make
the 800l 1600l, without adventure by sea; and so with less or greater sums
proportionably, by even, honest and charitable ways: this will result a serene
and an unrefutable truth to the nicest observation, and may be made indubitable
by arguments of Reason and experience.

Item, Diverse other feasible and confirmable transparances and expedients of
very great consequence and transcendency, to be peracted by active and public
spirits, without any stock adventured, but secured as before, and to be enjoyed
by those that will use the means.

These following relate to the exceeding great advantage of Husbandry.
Imprim' A Seed to be sown without manuring in the coursest, barren, sandy, and
heathy Grounds, which will be very much improved thereby, that will afford
three crops a year, and will cause Kine to give milk three times a day
constantly, with full vessels, and to become fat withal, and to feed all other
Cattle fat suddenly, together with Calves, Lambs, and Swine, without either
hay, grass or corn, or any thing in relation to corn; and likewise to preserve
and feed all sorts of poultry and foul fat in a very short time, as Geese,
Turkies, Phesants, etc. and to make them lay and breed extraordinarily, and to
continue all sort of Cattle and Foul exceedingly healthful, and all without
any considerable charge, one Acre of wheat being most commonly worth but five
or six lib with the charge, and an Acre of this but one crop in three worth 12l
and upwards, and in a manner without any charge. This (besides what is
specified before) may be so disposed of, that it might advantage every
housekeeper throughout England, Scotland, and Ireland, 8d per week constantly,
and the better sort, a double, treble, and a quadruple proportion, and upwards.

Item. Another kind of seed to be had, which will likewise afford three crops a
year, and two loads and half in one Acre, one load thereof being worth two
loads of ordinary Hay, besides an excellent winter pasture, till March, it will
cause Kine to give milk as before, and will feed and preserve all sorts of four
footed beasts, and cause them to become fat in a very short time, without any
other Grass or pasture, and the seeds thereof will feed all sort of poultry
fat, and make them lay as before, and this may be performed in barren, sandy,
and heathy grounds, and must be sown but once, and will continue so four or
five years, and then this Grass will so improve the ground, for four or five
years more, without manuring, that it will afford excellent crops of wheat and
barley, and after you may sow the ground with the same seed again, which will
hold on that course both for Grass and Corn constantly, and an Acre of this
Grass will keep three Cowes winter and summer, in the highest condition, and
the seed of one Acre may be justifiably worth about 70 lib. besides the winter
pasture, and about seven loads and half of hay, which no man will part with
under 5 lib. the load, that rightly understands the benefit thereof: You may
keep your swine constantly in a yard, or in an orchard, which will mightily
advantage the fruit trees, and by giving them only a liqour to drink made of
what is before specified, with a little of this hay, they will become fat in a
very short time, and with this liquor only you may keep as many swine as you
please: and as for your Kine, you need not turn them into any Grass at all,
but keep them in a yard or some little parcel of ground, so you may save all
your Muck, and they will thrive the better, being kept from the flies, which
causes them to waste themselves and their Milk, and in some grounds to spoil
as much grass as they eat, by running about. I know a Gent' that keeps them
tied up all summer as they do in winter, and finds greater benefit thereby, and
in that manner likewise, he keeps his feeding cattle all the summer, and feeds
them off presently, without any considerable trouble and with very little
charge.

Item, A most excellent discovery with one slight plowing and harrowing, or but
raising the ground in the least kind, to enjoy six crops in one year,
proportionable to the fruitfullest grass, and so constantly every year,
without any further trouble or charge at all, which is so wonderfully fruitful
for milch kine, that besides the double increase of milk, and better by far
then any other milk, it will afford two skimmings of excellent cream, such and
so good, that the like was never heard of, this exceeds all other food for
cheese; and when all the cream is taken off, the milk will be as good again as
any other in that kind, this seed will cost nothing, and will sow it self,
after the first year, and will afford in seed above 1000 for one.

Item, Another seed, that when grounds are laid down, and quite out of heart,
the grass thereon will maintain the greatest sheep very lusty, and fit for
slaughter, and yet there hardly appears any thing they can eat: This seed
being provided and sown upon meadows and pasture, would mightily advantage
the grass to very great perfection, with the application of the way for
growthsomenesse, but newly devised.

Item, Another seed to be had, the grass thereof causes cattle to give milk
in abundance: you may sow your dry, heathy and barren grounds therewith; and
such land as you intend to let lie, being out of heart, and not in a place
convenient for muck, and sowing but once with this seed, it will last good
seven years, without any further trouble. The ordinary burden is a load and a
half per acre, and after seven years, you may break it up, and sow it with
corn, without manuring, till it be out of heart, and then sow it with the same
seed as formerly; for it does very much fatten the ground, and enrich it, and
will thrive extraordinary well upon dry land, where nothing else will grow, and
when the grass and plants are destroyed with the parching heat of the Sun,
this flourishes very much, and after seven years (if not with corn) you may
sow the land again with the same seed, and all with little charge. The truth
is, it will last 10, or 15 years. Sir Richard Weston says, it will be cut
seven or eight times in a Summer, but then the rich and fat grounds are best,
and those that are high and dry.

Another seed to be sown without manuring upon good land, but somewhat loose
and light, not very dry, nor over moist, one bushel to six corn will serve, its
to be cut twice a year, and affords excellent winter pasture till March, and it
is exceeding good for all kind of cattle, as well young as old, and exceedingly
fatneth all sorts of cattle, and lean beasts especially, and horses will grow
fat therewith in eight or ten days, and to milch kine it procures exceeding
great store of milk; after once sown, it will last near fifteen years, and the
hay will continue good three years.

To discover a grass growing here in England, in its natural soil, that
being orderly husbanded, will transcend glover grass, Saint Foine, Lucerne, or
any other outlandish grasses whatsoever.

Item, A root ordinarily to be had, which will increase wonderfully with little
charge or trouble, it will feed all kind of cattle, horses and swine
especially, very fat, as those formerly, without either grass or corn; and
will feed poultrey likewise, as before; it will make very good bread, cakes,
paste, pies, and both crust without and food with in, and will hardly be
destroyed once planted, but will constantly increase of themselves, they will
likewise grow, being cut in flices, and so put into the earth.

Item, A seed which may likewise be disposed of without ploughing, upon very
poor ground, deemed incapable of any fertility at all, which will advantage the
ground very much, and afford at least 30l an acre per annum, or perform what
was professed before, for all sorts of cattle, poultrey, etc.

Item, Another seed, the fruit thereof upon the same sort of ground, though
very mean, will feed all kind of cattle, especially milch kine; increasing
their milk exceedingly, as before, and will afford two crops a year.

Item, Another seed that being tilled but once, will last without any further
labor, trouble, or charge four years, and will mightily enrich improve and
fatten the ground for goodly corn four years after, without manuring, and is
excellent for horses, hunting-dogs, poultry and swine, and may be very well
rated at a 100lib. per annum, and upwards, the benefit and great increase
thereof truly considered.

Item, Another great experiment in ordinary grounds, without muck, which (by a
new invention) five acres thereof have this last year afforded above 200lib.
benefit in one acre, rent and all charges defraied, and being still ordered
(according to directions) will continue no less advantageous, and enrich the
ground very much.

Item, Trees to be had here in England, but in one place, which being rightly
planted (though in ordinary grounds) one tree will (in a short time) afford out
of the Root thirty plants, and every one of those thirty will in a short time
afford thirty more, and these trees are at their full growth in twenty years;
and after seven years, every tree improveth yearly worth 1. s. a tree until
its time be up. For pleasantness and use, this tree hardly has its parallel,
they need be planted but ten foot distant, and they much advantage the grass:
besides, there is another seed to be sown amongst them, that will (in some
places) far exceed the benefit of the grass, the trees being very tall and
strait, useful for timber, carts, traies, boles, etc. being very white and
tough. By 30lib. deposited in a way concerning these trees, may be returned at
20 years end 10000lib. benefit.

Item, To raise wood more in twenty years, by new ways lately discovered, then
in forty years naturally.

Item, Experienced ways lately in practice by diverse Gent', and a long time
continued by some of them, to preserve and feed horses for labor and travel
in the best condition, without Hay or Corn, several ways, and neither of them
instanced before.

There is a Knight in the country that has advanced his estate above 1000 lib.
per annum by planting of one ordinary commodity in the country on the coursest
sort of ground, which may be performed in some places by others.

A Gent' by planting an Acre and half of ground received lately near 200lib.
profit in one year without tillage, these two not hinted before, and to be
peracted by others, and the last with an additional benefit.

Item, By two sorts of Creatures ordinarily to be had, may be gained de claro,
above 500lib. per annum; and by another, there has been and may be got above
500lib. per annum; and either of them with very little trouble, and the charges
of all three not considerable, and all to be acted within doors.

A Gent' in Northfolk made lately 10000lib. of a piece of ground, not forty
yards square, and yet neither Mineral nor Metal; and as beneficial places
may be discovered elsewhere in England.

To advance Ground from 5. s. an Acre to 50lib. an Acre per annum, by ways
apparently maintaineable, and not by tillage.

Item, After seven years to make 20lib. an Acre per annum constantly, without
tillage as the other, with very little charge, and with the ordinary sort of
ground not hinted before.

Item, A ground in Kent of 30 Acres did lately produce in one year, 1000lib.
benefit without tillage.

To make Grapes grow upon Oaks, more plentifully, as pleasantly, and as full of
juice as any other Grapes whatsoever.

Item, To make Grapes ripe as soon as Cheries.

Item, Perfect directions for a vineyard, there having been many planted here
in England, till most abusively put down, for the benefit of Custom, the
increase of a vineyard being by computation four tuns per Acre, an old vine
lately in Kent producing near a hogshead of pure wine.

Item, There is a Root ordinarily to be had, that will grow as plentifully as
Carrets, that has been formerly sold for 1. s. the pound, and will now sell for
at least 7d the pound, not instanced before, being a staple commodity.

Item, Seven several sorts of seeds, that will yield either of them constantly
above 20lib. an Acre per annum, not hinted before.

Item, another seed that will afford 20lib. and upwards an Acre per annum,
nothing thereunto belonging being edible or appliable for health.

Item, 50lib. an Acre offered this year, in Glocester-shiere, and so for many
Acres, these nine being neither of the five sorts following viz. Oade, Osiars,
Rape seed, Fennel seed, or Safforn.

Diverse excellent and new discovered experiments to avoid the smuttinesse of
Corn, and Mildewes.

Out of Land worn out of heart and naturally poor, to have a crop of Oats, and
a full crop of excellent fruitful Hay after it, the same year, and to
advantage the ground for crops of grass afterward exceedingly.

Item, To enrich Meadows in a very high nature without Muck, or any course of
watering, and to make them yield five times more Grass then formerly.

Item, To make rushie ground to bear very good grass, and to destroy rushes,
fearn, etc.

Item, Another way to make an acre of meadow, every year, as good as two acres,
only by casting a seed amongst it: which may be ordinarily provided for other
meadows.

Item, A seed that afforded (being sown in York shire) out of two pecks and
half, as much as was sold for near 40lib. which may be performed elsewhere.

Item, By laying out 5. s. per acre, to reap it in the pounds.

Item, When lands are tilled till they will bear no corn, and mowed till they
yield no grass, to restore them both to good heart and strength, and to far
greater fruitfulness then ever they yielded before, without laying so much as
a load of muck thereon, or without any considerable charge or trouble. And by a
way likewise newly experimented, to make a barren field quite out of heart, or
being the last year of a lease, to yield an extraordinary good crop of corn,
without muck, and with no charge, and but little trouble.

Item, A late experiment, no way repugnant to the dictates of common reason, to
cause lands (by Gods permission) they being capable of improvement, to return
20. happily 100 for one, either in wheat or barley, and to make it most apparent
by luculent demonstrations, that there has, and may be made a greater return
by far of either.

Item, After a man has tilled and sowed a parcel of ground, at the full hight
and charge, according to his uttermost skill and experience in husbandry, to
undertake to dispose of the one half part of the same parcel, so that (with
the blessing of God) it may happily quadruple the benefit of the other part,
and to make the same advantage of any other field of corn, and much more, if I
may have the total dispose thereof.

Item, Directions concerning the great variety of compost for the several
conditions and capacities of grounds, with diverse new discoveries relating
thereunto: The true understanding and practice thereof will (under God) enrich
any industrious man whatsoever.

Item, A clear demonstration (by ways consonant to reason, and not formerly
known or thought on) to make exceeding rich muck in abundance, 1000 loads and
upwards, if you please, for all sorts of grounds, according to the capacities
they lie under, several ways, with little charge; wherewith any man may be
sufficiently furnished, and so good, that the world cannot afford better,
without the use of sheep.

Item, A very late, but a most certain and infallible experiment, to be
confirmed by principles of sound reason, visible to any dubious and unbeleeving
mind whatsoever, to draw forth the earth to her uttermost fruitfulness, and to
moisten, fatten, and fertilize sandy, dry and hilly grounds, and to water them
sufficiently in times of drought, and to make them capable of vast advantages
both for grass and corn, and to continue them in the highest condition,
without carrying a load of muck thereunto; which way may be enjoyed in a
plentiful manner, the charge not considerable: this will likewise produce much
fertility to all manner of quicksets, all sorts of plants, all kind of trees,
and to gardens likewise, being seasonably applied; which may be made out clear,
easy and no ways obstructive to ordinary apprehensions. And these two last
may be performed accordingly throughout England.

Item, To make the tenth part of seed corn to serve with far greater advantage
then with the usual proportion.

Item, A late rare invention, to make five loads of dung more effectual then
twenty loads of the usual compost, and one acre of ground generally to extend
as far, and to be as beneficial for corn as three acres, and to last so
constantly.

Item, Whereas there has been a very great destruction of beans and pease
these late years, by worms and other creeping things, men being ignorant of any
remedy therefore, to discover a rational and an experimented easy way,
generally to destroy them, both in cornfieldsd, gardens, and at the roots of
trees, and very much to advantage and fertilize the grounds and trees thereby.

To make grounds free from rotting of cattle, and to prescribe remedies to cure
the rot if not too far gone, and to prevent the same.

Item, An excellent experiment to make trees bear much and exceeding good fruit.

That I know where there is now to be had, 500. acres of ground entire at 8. s.
the acre, within 15. miles of London, whereby there may be justifiably raised
8000 lib. per annum, and so proportionably with less parcells, which may be
performed in other places accordingly.

Item, To make cattle, swine, and poultry fat with water only, mingled with
earth.

Item, Several excellent experiments to help maturation.

Item, A sort of ducks to be now had, that will lay two eggs a day constantly.

Item, A sort of Rabbets to be now had (not mingled, which have been in request
formerly) but such as their skins are, now are worth 2. s. and 3. s. the skin,
which begin nearly to come in estimation equal to beaver: And another breed
thereof, that are as big again as the ordinary Rabbets.

Item, Directions how a cart may be made to draw with one horse as much as five
horses; this King James beheld with his full approbation, and for the putting
the same in practice throughout England, I had a patent from hm in my dispose.

To make clay burn like other fire, and to be equally useful upon all occasions.

Item, A way to conveigh water under the ground, up a steep hill to the
uppermost part of a very high house, and to be useful at all times, in all
offices about the house, and near the house, etc.

Item, To empty and cleanse rivers and moats of all mud, without going into the
water, use of boats, diverting the stream, or letting out the water by ditches,
sluices, etc. and with great facility and little charge.

Item, To make perfect iron with sea-cole, or pit-cole, and to charcole
pit-cole to dry malt, and for diverse other necessary conveniences, and to make
char-cole last long.

Item, To keep cabbage, artichoacks, and all sorts of roots in the house all
the winter.

Item, Most certain directions to discover salt springs, with the degrees of
the brine, and how to order the liquor, and to divide it from the fresh springs
according to experience.

An approved way to make old cattle fat in a very short time, and to make their
flesh eat as tender as the youngest.

Item, To make Heifers larger, fairer, and more proportionable then their
ordinary breed.

Item, To make starch without the use and abuse of corn.

Item, To make a composition without charge, which will perform all things
equal to soap.

To make flax like silk.

To bring all the fishes in a pond together, etc. and to increase store, and
preserve fish ponds several excellent ways.

To store a pidgeon-house, and to cause them to stay, and not to stray to other
houses, and to make them breed most part, if not all the year: the charge of
food not considerable.

To take red or fallow Deer, especially the best and fattest in a forest,
park, or straggling abroad, as easily as you may take fish with a bait; or to
make them fall down as if they were dead, and yet no harm, so that you may
approach and dispose of them at pleasure.

Several excellent new inventions to take both Foxes, Pole-cats, and other
vermin.

Item, To avoid Crows, Rooks, and Dawes from corn in the sowing, or in the ear.

Item, To cause all the Moles in a field to resort to one place, and to take
them very easily.

To preserve timber from rotting.

To make glue for the joining of Bords, whether green or dry, that shall hold
faster then the boards themselves.

That by traveling several years for the discovery of rare experiments, etc.
amongst many admirable collections for several infirmities happening upon four
easy ways for the perfect curing of the Kings Evil, and neither of them with
the seventh child, which are so excellent and (by the blessing of God) so
exceedingly successful, that I desire to impart them to such as shall have
occasion thereof.

Item, An infallible experiment for the Gout and Scurvy, which has perfectly
cured above 100.

Item, For the Stone and Strangury, which has saved many men's lives.

Cum multis aliis, etc.

HAving many other Rarieties of most admirable consequence, which would grow so
voluminous, that I am resolved to reserve them for an aditionall Impression: In
the mean time, I shall willingly demonstrate some part of them, by way of
exchange, or otherwise, to any that shall be desirous thereof.

General. ACCOMMODATIONS.
WHosoever shall have moneys to let forth upon interest, may have sufficient
security to his desire, and such present and positive directions for the more
secure disposing of his moneys, so far transcending all manner of Adventure,
that the result thereof may, (by many degrees) be more satisfactory and may more
advantagiously extend and conduce to his content.

Whosoever shall be provided for a purchase, of what proportion soever, either
of lands in the country, or houses here in the city, may have several
particulars presented to his consideration, and full satisfaction to his desire.

Whosoever has occasion to sell lands, houses upon lease, etc. or to borrow
moneys upon lands, houses, leases, rents, etc. may be timously supplied to his
desire from 50l. to 5000l.

Whosoever shall desire to increase the talent Divine Justice has put into his
hands, and will deposite moneys upon present Annuities, or for estates in
reversion, that shall appear to the eye of judgment exceeding advantageous, may
have satisfactory compliancy to the full accomplishment of his expectation; or
whosoever will give reasonable satisfaction for moneys during life, may have
considerable sums seasonably parted with, upon honest and conscionable terms.

Whosoever has occasion for a necessary house, or shall desire to be provided
with convenient lodgings, furnished or otherwise, or shall be minded to be
dieted, either wholly or at meals as an Ordinary, of what condition or degree
soever, they may have full information and satisfaction, with as much content as
may be expected or desired; Or whosoever shall desire to take a convenient
Mansion near London, or within twenty miles thereof, or part of an house, or
lodgings, with their diet or otherwise, they may have such information and
intelligence, as cannot but abundantly correspond with their expectations: Or
whosoever shall have an inclination to take a convenient House or Farm in the
country, by lease for years or lives, whereby they might continue to themselves
a convenient competency for their support and livelihood; they may (in
pursuance of their desires) have plenary intelligence from most part of England
or Ireland, and may further (according to their capacities) be directed and
furthered to more fructiferous employments under some eminent neighboring
Gent', that may (by virtue of their relation and recourse) happily become their
Landlord, etc. or whosoever shall be willing to part with such habitation or
place of residence, of what proportion soever, or in what part of England or
Ireland soever, by hinting their pleasures, all industry will not be wanting,
at least so much as may occasion them inheritors of their desires.

Whosoever shall be minded to buy any goods that London does afford, either for
apparel or otherwise, may be furnished at the first and best hand, at equitable
rates, with all clarity and serenity, and with forbearance of their monys for
the present or otherwise, or shall desire to have their wants supplied with any
kind of household stuff, at the first or second hand, as linen, pewter, brass,
all sorts of hangings, or other requisite is appertaining to household affairs,
they may have their choice either by parcels as they have need, or the full
furniture of an house from executors, or from such as have occasion to give up
housekeeping, etc. and constant information where, with whom, and upon what
conditions they may be had. Or whosoever shall have commodities to sell, or what
vendible commodities soever shall come from beyond the Seas, or out of the
country, either in great parcels or otherwise, upon informatiwn thereof at my
Lodings, they may have diverse make address unto them, and may instantly vend
whatsoever they shall have remaining by them.

Whosoever shall lose any Papers, Books of Account, or any other con, siderable
thing, whereas the finder may desire restitution to the ownerl by leaving
notice thereof at my Lodgings, there may happen a reciproca, accommodation
between them. Or whosoever shall have goods stollenas horses, or any other
cattle, may by describing the marks, etc. with other necessary explanatory
observations, have such an expeditious course taken, by posting of bills
throughout the City, the Market towns and Fairs, within a considerable
distance, and by other scrutinies for suspicious persons about the City,
together with such other probable and imaginable expedients, effectually
prosecuted and pursued, as may consequently render responsible inferences of
discovery, how to recover their goods again.

Whosoever shall desire to be entertained as a Gentleman's Chaplain, Tutor,
Secretary, Steward, etc. or shall be capable of preferment, especially, youth of
what degree soever, may have such directions and furtherance as may very much
tend to their advancement; Or whosoever shall need any such servant, of what
quality or condition soever, or any that would be set a work in their
faculties, etc. they may be sufficiently accommodated to their desires: Or if
they need any that are expert and excellent in teaching Music, Short writing,
etc. or any Artist whatsoever, or Masters of bodily exercise, as Dancing,
Fencing, etc. they may have such that will (according to the dispensations God
has conferred upon them) endeavor to ingratiate themselves to their esteems,
and some of the same qualifications that will occasionally evidence theit
willingness by their industrious observancy to conform themselves as
domestic, that are men of known trust, government and integrity.

Whosoever shall have suits in Law to commence, or shall happen into any kind
of litigious controversies, discordances and competitions, of what nature
soever, or shall be prisoners, etc. they may have their doubts explained,
matter of fact stated, substantially proposed, and methodically digested with
seasonable directions upon easy terms, without Retardings or Remoraes, and
with the contribution of the concurrent opinions and free advice of the most
candid and ingenuous judgments, that will stand by them in their just rights,
and may happily address them unto some that shall (without partiality) resume
the pursuit of the business for them by right, or else as Referendaries, etc.
make an amiable and an amicable composition and transaction of the matter for
their best advantage with their Adversary in their behalf.

Whosoever shall have debtors that skulk and are latent in any part of England,
Ireland, etc. they may have such real and pertinent courses observed and
peracted for their discovery, and for recovery of their debts, whereby they may
be made willing (if able) for all conscionable performances.

Whosoever shall need an Agent or Solicitor, and shall desire the common
intelligence of public State Affairs, and other communicable occurrences, may
have all honest and faithful services performed, with what respective
credentials and considerable obligements, shall be necessarily required in
reference and order to such employments.

Whosoever shall be minded to undertake an office, or place of present benefit,
and shall desire to be negotiated in any such condition, may be severally
advertised very much tending to their future content and satisfaction. And such
that will part with an office or place of benefit for present profit, they may
find (by address) how to compass their desires; and those that shall be able to
give intelligence of any such office, etc. which may happen by the sickness or
death of any officer, or by misdemeanors, being themselves not capable to
execute the same, upon their discovery, they may be sufficiently considered and
rewarded therefore. Or if any man living remote, shall be able to discover any
material thing obvious to his observation, which may be advantageous to the
public, or to himself, not being able to repair to London, to advance his
design, upon intimation thereof, by letters or otherwise, he may have all
prevalent advantages effectually pursued to promote the execution thereof,
without putting himself to the charge of a great journey at adventure, and a
condign recompense procured out of the benefit which thence may accrue to the
public, or otherwise, with as much reality, and sincerity, as if he himself
were present, and able to prosecute the same.

Whosoever shall be so instrumental to their own happiness and future content,
to avoid the pernicious effects of ignorance in their children, and season
their tender years by endeavoring the right framing of their studies to the
ready attainment of virtue and knowledge during their flexibility (according to
the order of duty, and the talent committed to them, whereof they must be
accountable) may (in cases of such Importance and concernment) have such
excellent designs illustrated unto them, and such observable inferences for
their educations, that those parents that are truly generous and careful of
their childrens good, cannot but exceedingly approve thereof, and very much
incline thereunto. See

Whosoever shall be inclinable to travel into any part beyond the Seas, may
happily (by address) enjoy the blessings of such unanimous consocration, as may
most nearly be consistent with his diposition, so that by a candid and
symphatical participation and complacency in all occurrences, and by the
intercourse of mutual friendship and correspondency, their affections may be so
firmly tied together in the bonds of unity, and so entirely woven within one
another, that they may rationate, consult and cooperate jointly in their
travels, and the one may by their amicable coherency and combination,
meliorate, improve and be helpful unto the other in their abilities; and may
further by men of worth, knowledge and experience, be respectively
intelligenced, instructed and advertised of the manner and condition of
traveling into what part soever, how to steer his course with cautelousness
and circumspection, and to order and deport himself in his Peregrinations for
matter of expenses, and to discover and decline all false representations, and
how likewise to regulate and associate himself with such sort of people as he
shall obviate and be conversant with, and may be furnished with Gold for Silver
upon all occasions, and be recruited and supplied with all conveniences,
wheresoever he shall come.

Whosoever shall be desirous to travel unto Ireland, Scotland, or any place of
England, may by entering their names, and the time they intend to take their
Journey, consort themselves with company suitable to their minds, and so pass
in a Coach together part of the way at an easy charge: or may be directed how
to convenient themselves with horses to their desire, either by such as are to
be returned by the Carriers, or otherwise; or may know where to have horses at
reasonable rates; or if they will buy horses for their present occasion, they
may have notice where to fit themselves, either from Gentlemen or Merchants
here in the City, with such warrantie and content as may be fully
satisfactorie to their Expectation.

Whosoever shall have relation to Virginia, the Barbados, New England, or any
other Country inhabited with English, or shall have cause to send into any of
those places, or would inhabit, or transplant himself into those parts, he may
have all intelligence and expedients, with as much convenience as may be: And
such here in England that shall have means fall unto them in any of these
Countries, or any there that shall have the like in any part of England, and
would have commodities transported from the one unto the other, or any other
reciprocal negotiation, or intercourse of friendship, of what importance
soever: and so likewise into any other Country, as France, Spain, the Low
Countries, etc. by their address and application, according to their particular
ends and concernments, they may have all accommodation that may possibly be
afforded, and matters of conscientious concernments completely expedited; and
what equitable offices Christianity and Humanity may afford, they may
assuredly enjoy with all fathfulness and serenitie. Cum multis aliis.

TO THE GENEROUS READER.
Sir, If any thing in my Discoveries, etc. happen to be destructive to your
credency, I crave the candor of your mild and gentle censure, and so much
favor, that I may by your fair leave illustrate all Dubiums; the clouds of
which obstruction I shall (by your admission) most apparently dispel, both by
rational confirmations, and experimental Attestations. Et quod tibi non vis
fieri, alteri ne facias.


