

The School of GRACE, Or, A Book of Good Nurture, for the Admonition and
Instruction of Youth and Age in the fear of the Lord. With Godly Instructions,
Graces, and Pray^rs describing the whole Duty of a Christian.

By I. Heart, B. B.

The 19th. Edition.

Fear God, Honor the King.



Printed for W. Thackeray and I. Par singer.



Come ye Children, hearken unto me and I will teach you the fear o^ the Lord,

Psalm 34.11: Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. ^hildren obey your Parents in the
Lord, for this is right.

honor thy Father and Mother (Which is the first Commandment with promise.) ^t
it is may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the Earth.

^l ye Fathers provoke not your Children to wrath; but bring them up in the
Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.


THe Blessed Apostle, in the former Chapter; having laid down several Chistian
duties in the general, comes here to assert and lay down the several Duties.

1. Of Husbands and Wives. 2. Of Children and Parents. 3. Of Masters and
Servants.
These words contain the particular Duties of Children and Parents; Children
obey your Parent; here is the Childrens Duty.

Secondly, here is the manner of performance of this Duty, in the Lord;
Children obey, your Parents in the Lord.

In the next place the Apostle does lay down several Reasons and motives to
encourage Christian Children to this Chistian Duty.

1. It is GODS Commandment so to do: Honor thy Father and Mother.

2. It is very beneficial for Children so to do; for first it shall be well
with them if they do so, and secondly, their days shall be long upon the Earth:
In the second place, we have here the duty of Parents; First, Negatively, what
Parents should not by. And then secondly, Affirmatively, what they should do.

1. Negatively, they should not provoke their Children to Wrath.

And 2. Affirmatively, They must bring them up in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord.

From the words thus opened, I gather these two Observations.

1. That it is the duty of Children to obey their Parents in the Lord. 2. That
it is, the duty of Parents to Educate, instruct, and bring up their Children in
the fear of the Lord.
Hearken to thy Father that begat thee, with Solomon, and despise not thy
Mother when she is old, Prove. 23.22.

Train up a Child in his Youth, says Solomon, in the way he should go, and he
will not depart from it, Prove. 22.6.

Now that I may the better enforce this Duty, I shall a little open the
particular duties of both. For one main reason why Children do so much neglect
their Duty, is because Parents are so negligent of their own Duties: for it
Parents did take more care (as their Duty is) to bring up their Children in the
fear of God, surely Children would make more Conscience of performing their
duty to their Parents. And that Children and Parents for the time to come may
the better perform their Duties, I shall say down sundry Christian and Bodly
Directions, suitable to all persons upon all occasions, and so conclude with
some few patierns of Prayers and Graces, for the better benesit and Instruction
of Children in the seat of God.

The first Duty of Parents is, That they give their Children Christian Baptism,
and thereby to Dedicate them unto the Lord.

Secondly, Give unto your Children good Examples, for Children are prone by
nature to follow the had Example of any, more especially their Parents.

Thirdly, Pray unto God for a Blessing upon thy Children, that God would make
them his Children, by enriching their Souls with Grace.

Fourthly, Learn to instruct them be times by some good Catechisms, in the
Principles of Christian Religion: and to Instruction, wisely and Correction:
For he that spares the Rod, says Solomon, hates his Child, but he that
loves him Chastneth him.

Fifthly, Keep a constant and awful Authority over them, not suffeting them to
be irrevetent: for this end, according to ancient and laudible custom, teech
them reverently to ask thee blessing on their Knees.

Sixthly, Labor to suppress all Sin, and wickedness in thy Children: and to
this end suffer them not to lie, swear, curse, or profane the Lords day, else
will thy Children have cause to curse thee to all Eternity. We find it recorded
in Scripture of Goodly Parents, Educating their Children in the fear of the
Lord: Abraham commanded his Children and Servants, Genesis 8.16. So likewise
Joshua, and holy David, Job, and others. The Godly Life of the Child discovers
the Godliness of the Parents: and thus if thou labourest to bring up thy
Children in the fear of God, that thy Children may be Gods Children, how
Gloriously then have you provided for them? God is their Father, and they that
have God for their Father shall never want: for as the Apostle says, Godliness
is profitable, having the promise of the Life that now is and the Life to come.
Though thou leavess but a little of this World, yet remember God has provided
a Kingdom for them that serve him.

Lastly, Cause thy Children friquently to frequent the Ordinances of Christ,
both public and private; do not only pray with them and for them, but cause
them to pray for themselves, and one for another; bring them constantly to hear
the public Preaching of the word of God, and be assured by the blessing of
God, your Children may be enriched with Grace here, and filled with glory
hereafter; and in so doing thou may have joy and comfort; God may have Glory
and honor, and thy Children Everlasting life, through Jesus Christ.

Now the Duty of Children to their Parents, in the first place you see, is
Obedience; Children obey your Parents in the Lord; And this obedience of
Children to their Parents, you see it must be in the Lord, and only in the
Lord: for if Parents command their Children to do any thing contrary to the
Word of God, then hey are not to obey them, they sin in so doing, for remember
we must obey God rather than Man.

Children are to learn good Instructions from their Parents; My Son, says
Solomon, hear the Instruction of thy Father, and forfake not the law of thy
Mother, Prove. 1.1. etc.

3. Children are to honor and reverence their Parents; Honor thy Father and
thy M^her, (says the Lord) Honor thy Parents, by thy modest, silent, humble
and respective carriage toward them.

Fourthly, Children ought to be thankful to their Parents, endeavouting if need
be, to requite them for their Fatherly love and care toward them: honoring,
relieving, and supplying them in all their several needs and necessities. And
thus much briefly of the Duries of Parents and Children.

I come now in the next place to give you some directions and instructions for
the better performance of those several Duties: And my first advice to Children
is, that they make daily Prayers to God. How precious a thing is it to hear
Children praying, and low dreadful a thing to hear them Swearing and Cursing as
soon as they can speak: God loves to hear his Children Praying; our Savior
received little Children in his arms, and unto little Children the Kingdom of
Heaven belongs: And as a good Man says; I had rather have my House filled with
my Childrens Prayers, than with Diamonds and Pearls.

Secondly, Take heed of telling Lies: Lie not one to another, says the
Apostle, Let your Communion be year, yea, and nay, nay, says our Savior.
Remember Liars shall have their part in Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 22.4.

Thirdly, Delight thy self in Reading good Books, read not foolish and wanton
Books and Ballads, which tend only to the nourishment of Vice.

Fourthly, Let not thy Children scoff and jeer at the Ancient, be they never so
poor; Remember the dreadful Judgment of God upon those wicked Children, in 2
Kin. 2.23, 24. who mocked and scoffed at the Propher, they in derision called
they Propher Bald pate, and God in judgment for this wickedness, caused two
Bears to devour two and forty of them. Love the Poor and plead their cause:
remember what God says, Blessed is he that considers the Poor and Needy.

Fifthly frequent the Word of God, sleep not at Churth, or at prayer, for
remember, whosoever sleeps at Church, or at Prayer, the Devil rocks the Cradle.

Sixthly, Let thy Apparel be decent and comely; take heed of Pride in thy
Apparel; Remember Jezabel her wicked end, how sadly Gone met with her in her
Painting; those Persons who are so curious in Painting and dressing themselves,
surely the Devil holds them the Looking Glass.

Seventhly, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it Holy; for surely those Children
that Sweat and Lie, and break the Sabbath are the Devils Children, and they
that spend the Sabbath in Playing and Caming, have the Devil for their
Play-fellow. Take heed then, I say, that you make not the Lords day, a day of
Sports and Pastime: (as the Children of the Devil do.) Remember God has
allowed thee six days, do not then be so wicked as to rob him of the seventh:
but God did not appoint the Sabbath for a day of sporting and pleasure, but for
a day of Worshipping and serving God, a Day for Preaching and Prayer: Remember
the Sabbath day to keep it Holy.

Eighthly. See that you reverence and esteem the Ministers of Gods Holy Word,
account of them as they are indeed the Ministers of Christ. Remember what our
Savior says; He that despises you, says be to his Apostles, despises me,
and he that despises me, shall be for ever despised of God.

Ninthly, If thou be a Child of God, avoid then the Company of the Devils
Children, that is, such as Swear and Curse, and Lie, and Steal, and use all
manner of filthy talk. Keep not company with such least thou for thy pains
learnest their Vices, and so partake of their punishment: that so when others
shall answer for their idle words, thou may be rewarded.

Tenthly, Love, honor and obey your Parents in the Lord: Consider how God has
commanded you so to do; and God will severely punish those that despise their
Parents: see that dreadful place, Prove. 30.17. The eye that mocketh his Father
and dispiseth to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out,
and the young Eagle shall eat it.

Eleventhly, Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth: Labor to serve God
with the strength and best of thy days: Live to God whilst thou live, and
thou shall be sure to live with God when thou Dyelt: Remember Samuel, how he
was dedicated to God from his Birth, and Timothy, how he rejoyed, that of a
Child he had known the Holy Scriptures.

Lastly, Walk constantly in the fear of the Lord, all the day long, in the
Morning when thou risest, bless God for his merciful preservation of thee the
night past, give him thanks for that he has given thee to see the light of
another day, and when thou preparest thy self for thy Bed, prepare thy self as
for thy Grave, remembrings that many go to Bed and never rise again: and
therefore do not sleep till thou haft committed thy self by Prayer to God;
forsurely they that go to Bed without Praying, the Devil is their Bedfellow.

Now that thou may carefully perform those things, in the first place seek
to God by Prayer, for God loves Praying Children; be sure to pray unto God both
morning and thening, and when thou prayest say;

Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy
Will be done in Earth as it in Heaven: Give us this day our daily Bread: And
sorgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them they Trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation. But deliver us from evil, for thine is the
Kingdom, the power and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

This is the Prayer which Christ himself commands us to use, and therefore it
is called, The Lords Prayer, the best pattern for Prayer in the whole world.
Therefore it were to be wished, that all Parents would he careful to reach
their Children the Lords Prayer, as soon as they can be fit to learn it, and
having learned this by heart, then let them use some other, and so use both
together.

A short form of Prayer, very necessary for Children and Youth, to be used in
the Morning.
O Lord our God, thou art the Father of Heaven, and the Father of mercis, by
whom alone we live, and move and have our being: who tookest us out of our
Mothers Womb, and have ever since preserved us to this day, blessed be thy
name, We bless thee that thou have safely desended us this night past, that
thou have brought us safe to the beginning of another day; We pray thee defend
us in the same by thu mighty power, and grant that this day we fall into no
sin; keep us safe from the tamptation of Satan: Deliver us, we pray thee, from
all evil; and grant O Lord, that we may live this day, and all the rest of our
days, as becomes thy Children, in Holiness and true Righteousness: bless out
Parents, O lord, give them Grace that they may bring us up in thy Commandments;
as thou have made us their Children by nature, good Lord make us thy Children
by Grace, that so we may obey our Parents, and serve thee our God all our days;
that so it may be well with us here and here after: Bless, O Lord, all the rest
of our friend; O Lord, let our friends by thy friends; give us Grace to serve
thee here with all our strength, and with all our might, that so when this
mortal Life shall be ended, we may live and reign with thee for ever in Glory
Amen.

The Lord bless us, and make his Fare to shine upon us, and the Lord be with
us, both in our going forth and in our coming in, this day, and all our days,
for ever and ever, Amen.

An Evening Prayer for Children.
O Most holy, most gracious, and most Glorious Lord God, we thy poor Children
do here again prostrate our selves before thy Majesty this Ovening, humly
beseeching thee for Jesus Chirst his sake, to pardon and forgive us all our
Sins, and to blot out our Transgressions our of thy Remembrance; we confess
Lord, we are by nature Children of Wrath, but we pray thee make us thy
Children, O Lord, by Grace and Adoption: and as we grow in yeace, so Lord, we
pray thee, let us grow in Grace; let us not be children in malice and
witkedness but Chrildren in Love and Unity; as thou have loved us, O Lord, so
we pray thee let us love thee our God, and love one another. Bless our parents
in their Godles, especially bless them in their Souls, bless them in their
Baskets and in their Store: instruct them, O Lord, that they may instruct us,
he with us all this Night in our down-lying, O Lord, let us sleep in thy fear,
let is lie down in the love, and rise again in thy lavour, and grant, we
beseeth the, most merciful Father, that whether sleeping of waking, living or
dying, we may be always thine: watch over us this Night, and defend us in the
same by the mighty power, and preserve us from sin, defend us from Satan.
continue thy love to us, and he with us and all ours: Bless, Guide, Peserve,
defend and keep us, both in Soul and in Body, this night and evermore; Amen.

And then if thou would be a Child of God, always after Prayer in the
morning, see that you Read some Lesson of Chapter out of the Bible, and be
always Reading of good Books, as The Practice of Piety; the Plain-mans Pathway
to Heaven; Mrs. Baxter's Call to the Unconverted; The Great Assize, the Silver
Watch-Bell, and others: and be sure thou never look upon any idle foolish
jesting Book, which tend only to the noutishment of Vice, and spending of
precious time, but delight thy self in reading the Holy Bible, and other Godly
Books, that so the Lord may bless thee here, and thou may be blessed
hereafter, for Godliness has not only the promise of this life, but of the
life to come, that thou may give account at the great and Terrible Day of
Judgment, as well for every idle hour thou spendest, as for thery idle word
thou speak: when thou are disposed to be merry, laying assde all ungodly
Songs and Ballads, which tend only to the nourishment of Vice and Wickedness,
and the corruption of Youth, If any be merry let him sing Psalms; the Apostle
does not say, If any be merry, let him any merry Songs and merry Ballads; but
if any be merry let him sing Psalms. And be sure always that you sing with
Grace in your heart, making melody to the Lord.

PSALM CXXVIII.
BLessed art thou that fear God, and walkeft in his way,
For of thy Labor thou shall eat, Happy art thou I say,
Like fruitful Vine on the House side, so does thy Wife spring out,
The Children stand like Olive Plants, thy Table round about.
Thus art thou blessed that fear God, and he shall let thee see,
The promised Jerusalem, and her felicity.
Thou shall thy Childrens Children see, to thy great joys increase,
And likewise Grace to Israel, prosperity and peace.
Then in the next place be sure to get and learn some good Catechism, that so
thou may be instructed in the Principles of Religion; as that excellent
Catechism of Mr. Perkins, called, The six Principles of Religion, Mr. Balls
Catechism, etc.

A Short but Necessary Catechism for Children.
Q. WHo made you?

A. God.

Q. For what did God make you?

A. God made me that I might serve him and for his glory.

Q. Who Redeemed you?

A. Jesus Christ.

Q. From what did Christ Jesus Redeem you?

A. Jesus Christ redeemed me by his blood from Sin and Hell.

Q. Who sanctified and preserved you?

A. God the Holy Ghost.

Q. What is God?

A. God is a Spirit.

Q. How many Gods are there?

A. One only true God, divided into three persons, God the Father, God the Son
and God the Holy Ghost.

Q. In what state did God make man at first?

A. God made man at first after his own Image, in Righteousness and True
Holiness.

Q. Did man continue in this state?

A. No.

Q. How did he fall?

A. By disobeying the Commandments of God, in eating the forbidden Fruit.

Q. What followed thereupon?

A. Hereupon followed Sin, Death, and Hell.

Q. Did God leave man in this fallen estate?

A. No, God provided for fallen Man, a Savior and Redeemer, our Lord Jesus
Christ the Righteous.

Q. How many Commandments are there?

A. Ten.

Q. Which be they? let me hear you rehearse them,

Moses with two tablets

I. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.

II. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is in
the water under the Earth: thou shall not bow down to them, nor serve them; for
I the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon
the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me, and
show mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my Commandments.

III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

IV. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy, six days shall thou labor and
do all thy work, but the seventh day is the Sabath of the Lord thy God: in it
thou shall not do any work; thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy
Manservant, nor thy Maid Servant, nor thy Cattle, nor the Stranger that is
within thy gates, for in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and
all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath Day, and hallowed it.

V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

VI. Thou shall not kill.

VII. Thou shall not commit Adultery:

VIII. Thou shall not steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

X. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors Wife, nor his Man Servant, nor his Maidservant, nor his Ox, nor his
Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neighbors.

Q. What do thou chiefly learn by these Commandment.

A. I learn by these Commandments, that it is my duty to serve God according to
his Word, and love my Neighbor as my self.

Q. Art thou able to keep the Commandments?

A. No.

Q. How then shall thou expect to be saved?

A. Only by Faith in Jesus Christ.

Q. What is Faith?

A. Faith is the Gift of God, whereby we lay hold on Jesus Christ for Eternal
Salvation. Rehearse the Articles of the Christian Faith.

I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the
Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead and Buried, he
descended into Hell, the third day he arose again from the Dead, he ascended
into Heaven, and sirteth at the Right hand of God the Father Almighty; from
thence he shall come to judge both the quick and the Dead. I believe in the
Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, the forgiveness
of sins, the Resurrection of the Body, and the life Everlasting: Amen.

Certain Graces, fit to be learned of every Child that desires to be a Child of
God.
Grace before Meat.
Whether ye eat or drink, says St. Paul, do all to the Glory of God; Amen.

BLessed Lord, in whom we live, move, and have our being, we do most humbly
beseech thee to bless these thy Creatures, to the use of our Bodies, sanctify
them to us, and sanctify us to thy self, forgive us our sins, and make us
partakers of thy heavenly Table; Amen.

God save his Church, our King, Queen, and Realm, and send peace and Truth, in
Christ our Lord: Amen.

Grace after Meat.
CHrist, which at his Last Supper, gave himself unto us, promising his Body to
he Crucified, and his blood to be shed for our sins, bless us and our Meat;
Amen.

Grace before Meat.
O Father of mercy and God of all consolation, which have Created us for thy
Glory, and these thy good Creatures for our use; bless and sanctify them we
beseech thee, that by the moderate receiving thereof, our Bodies may be
nourished, and thy name thermore be praised, through Jesus Christ our only Lord
and blessed Savior, Amen.

Grace before Meat.
O Merciful Lord Jesus Christ, which did take the five Loaves and two Fishes,
and lifting up thine Eyes unto Heaven did distribute them unto the People,
and they all did eat and were satisfied, being above the thousand Men beside
Women and Children; we beseech thee both to bless these Gifts which we are
about to receive at thy hands, and us also, that they may be to the comfort and
health of our Bodies, and we may (for them and other thy benefits) be evermore
thankful unto thee; To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor
and Glory for ever; Amen.

Grace after Meat.
O Lord God, Almighty and most dear Father, thou have not only given unto us
meat and drink to sustain our mortal bodies, but thou have likewise given unto
us thy blessed Word, which is the only food of our immortal Souls, through our
blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom therefore with thee and the Holy
Ghost, be all honor, praise and thanks for ever: Amen.

Grace after Meat.
O Lord, which art the Creator of all Creatures, and have prepared Food for
them according to the nature of their Creation: We most heartily thank thee for
these thy Creatures, which at this time we have received in thy Name,
beseeching thee O Father, that as our Bodies are now by these Gifts refreshed,
our Souls may be also nourished with the Food of Everlastings Life, in the most
Holy Testament, confirmed with the blood and death of Jesus Christ, thy Son our
Savior: to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor, Glory and praise
for ever. Amen.

Grace after Meat.
BLessed be thy name, O Lord our God, for all thy mercies and favors
continually bestowed upon us, thou that have at this time fed our weak Bodies
with thy good creatures, we pray thee likewise to feed our Souls with the
Heavenly food of thy word; that we receiving at thy Merciful Hands, food both
for our Bodies and Souls, may live and grow in all Godliness, through Jesus
Christ our only Lord and Savior; Amen.

Another after Meat.
THe King of Eternal Glory, who has at this time fed our Corporal Bodies, make
us partakers of thy Heavenly Table; Amen.

Grace after Meat.
Whatsoever you do in word or deed, do all in the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ; give thanks unto God the Father by him, to whom all blessing, glory,
wisdom, thanks, honor, power, and might, be tendered for evermore: Amen.

Certain QVESTIONS with their ANSWERS, Necessary for Parents to ask and teach
their children for their instruction in the Holy Scriptures.
Q Who was the first man?

A. Adam.

Q. Who was the first Woman?

A. Eve.

Q. Of what did God make man?

A. God made man of the dust of the earth.

Q. Of what did God make the Woman?

A. Of one of the Man's Ribs.

Q. Where did Adam and Eve dwell?

A. In Paradise.

Q. What cast Adam out of Paradise?

A. Sin.

Q. Who was the best man?

A. The Man Christ Jesus.

Q. Who slew his Brother?

A. Tain.

Q. Who was the first Martyr?

A. Abel.

Q. Who was the Oldest Man?

A. Methusaleth.

Q. Who was the man that God saved when he drowned the World?

A. Noah.

Q. Who wrestled with God;

A. Jacob.

Q. What was his name called after he had wrestled with God?

A. Israel.

Q. How many Sons had Jacob?

A. Twelve, of whom came the twelve Trives of Israel.

Q. What were their names?

A. Reuben and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Isachar, and Zebulun, and
Joseph, and Benjamin, Dan, and Napthali, Gad and Ashur. These were the twelve
Patriarchs.

Q. Who was the Faithfulest Man that ever lived?

A. Abraham, who is called the Father of the faithful.

Q. Who was the meekest Man?

A. Moses.

Q. Who was the hard-heartedst man?

A. Pharaoh.

Q. Who was the patientest man?

A. Job.

Q. Who was the man after Gods own heart?

A. David.

Q. Who was the Wisest man?

A. Solomon.

Q. Who was the strongest man?

A. Sampson.

Q. Who wrote the Scriptures?

A. Holy Men of God, inspired by the Holy Ghost.

Q. Who was it that came before Jesus Christ?

A. John the Baptist.

Q. Who was the first Martyr after Christ?

A. Stephen.

Q. What death did he dye?

A. He was Stoned?

Q. Where was Christ born?

A. In Bethelem.

Q. Who was the Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ?

A. The Uirgin Mary.

Q. Who was the reputed Father of our Lord Jesus Christ?

A. Joseph a Carpenter.

Q. Who betrayed his Lord and Master?

A. Judas.

Q. What did he betray him for?

A. For the love of Money, which is the root of all evil.

Q. For how much money did Judas sell his master?

A. For thirty pieces of Silver.

Q. What became of Judas after he had betrayed Christ?

A. He went and Hanged himself.

Q. Who denied Christ?

A. Peter.

Q. What became of Peter after he had denied Christ?

A. He went out and wept bitterly.

Q. Who Condemned Christ?

A. Pontius Pilate.

Q. Who Crucified Jesus Christ?

A. The Bloddy Jews.

Q. Out of whom did Christ cast seven Devils

A. Mary Magdalen.

Q. Which was the beloved Disciple of Jesus Christ?

A. John.

Q. Who forsook Christ for the love of the World?

A. Demas.

Q. Who are the best Children?

A. They that fear God and keep his Commandments, and obey their Parents.

Q. Who are the worst Children?

A. They that Lie and Swear, Steal, and break the Sabbath, and despise God, and
break his Holy and Righteous Commandments.

Q. What become of the Wicked when they dye?

A. They are cast into Hell, there to be tormented with the Devil and his
Angels.

Application.
ANd so I now come in the last place to wind up all in a word of Application,
both to Parents and Children; and then in the first place, if it be the duty of
Parents to instruct their Children in the fear of God, then you may observe
from hence the great wickedness of such wicked Parents, who instead of
instructing their Children in the fear of God, bring them up in all manner of
sin and wickedness: How many such wicked Parents are there in the World, who
forbid their Children to hear Sermons, and to read good Books, but on the
contrary, teach their Children to despise Holiness, and encourage them in all
manner of wickedness. Oh wretcked Sinner, had thou rather have thy Child the
Devils Child, then Gods Child? will you neither be Holy your selves, nor suffer
your Children to be Holy? Will it not one day he miserable enough, think you,
to damn your own Soul, but must you also drive your Children to Hell before
you? The Lord awaken all such Parents. Is it not enough that you have made your
Children the Children of Wrath, as all Men, Women, and Children are by nature,
for as holy David said, so may we all, We are conceived in sin, and in Iniquity
were we brought forth, But will ye also hinder them from being made Children of
Grace? are not your Children prone enought to sin of themselves, but must you
also help on their Damnation? are there not Devils enough to tempt them to sin,
but must you also prove Devils incarnate to them your selves? are not your
Children always near enough, even at the brink of Hell, and will ye also seek
to tumble them into the Lake of Fire? do you think the way to Heaven is to
despise Preaching, and to mock at Holiness? ought not you to be nursing
Fathers, and nursing Mothers to your Children, and will you nurse them up for
the Devil? Let wicked Parents consider and tremble.

Secondly, Here is also a use of comfort for all Gods Children, they that fear
God, and spend their time in Reading and Praying, they shall for ever be
Singing Praises and Hallelujahs to God in Heaven, where thou shall be with God
and Christ, Saints and Angels to all Eternity, when those Wicked Children who
delight in nothing but Swearing and Lying, who despise Holiness, and would not
walk in thy ways of God, shall be sent to Hell with a, Go ye Cursed into
Everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: Ah! poor Creatures,
they delighted in Cursing, and now they are Cursed: they despised Holiness, but
now they are despised themselves: this shall he the portion of all the wicked,
they shall be tumbled into Hell, when Gods Children shall be received into
Heaven. I beseith you then as you love your own precious Souls, if you would
escape this Hell. if you would enjoy this Heaven, then for the Lords sake,
Children, be Holy, pray Morning and Evening, obey your Parents, love God, serve
him with all your Souls. if ye do thus, and he thus, then blessed shall ye be:
for Christ shall say unto you. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: unto which Kingdom
the Lord bring us all, Amen.

Now for the fuctlerance of Holiness, I have here thought fit to insert a very
Godly Morning and Evening Prayer, to be used in Families.

A Morning Prayer for a Family.
ALmighty God, most merciful Father, we do not present our selves here before
thy Majesty, trusting in our own meries, or Worthiness, but in thy manifold
mercies, which have promised to hear our Prayers, and grant our requests which
we shall make to thee in the Name of thy beloved Son, Jesus Christ our Lord;
who has also commanded us to assemble our selves together in his Name, with
full assurance that he will not only be amongst us, but also be our Mediator
and Advocate toward thy Majesty, that he may obtain all things which shall
seem expedient to thy blessed will for our Necessities: Therefore we beseech
thee most merciful Father, to turn thy loving Countenance toward us, and
impute not to us our manifold sins and Offenses, where we may justly deserve
the wrath and sharp punishment; but rather receive us to thy mercy for Jesus
Christ's sake, accepting his Death and Passion as a just recompense for all our
Offenses, in whom only thou art pleased, and through whom thou can not be
offended with us, and seeing of thy great Mercies, we have quietly passed this
night: grant, O Heavenly Father, that we may bestow this day wholly in thy
service, so that our thoughts, words, and deeds, may redound to the glory of
thy name, and good example of all Men, who seeing our good works, may glorify
thee our Heavenly Father. And forasmuch as of thy mere favor and love,
thouhast not only treated us in thy own similitude and likeness, but also have
chosen us to be Heirs with thy dear Son Jesus Christ, of that immortal Kingdom
which thou preparedst for us before the beginning of the world: we beseech thee
to increase our faith and knowledge, and to enlighten our hearts with thy holy
Spirit: that we may in the mean time live in Godly Conversation and integrity
of life, knowing that Idolators Adulterers, covetous men, contentious persons,
Drunkards, Gluttons, and such like, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And
because thou have commanded us to Pray one for another, we do not only make
request, O Lord, for our selves, and for them that thou have already called to
the true understanding of thy Heavenly Will, but for all people and nations of
the world, who as they know by the wonderful works, thou art God over all, so
they may be instituted by thy Holy Spirit, to believe in thee their only
Savior and Redeemer But forasmuch as they cannot believe except they hear, nor
cannot hear but by Preaching, and none can Preach except they be sent,
therefore, O Lord, raise up faithful distributers of thy Mysteries, who setting
apart all worldly respects, may both in their life and Doctrine only seek thy
Glory. Contrarily confound Satan, Antichrist, with all Hirelings, who thou have
already cast off into a Reprobate sense, that they may not by Seas and Schisms,
Heresies, and Errors, disquiet thy little flock. O Lord, thy people Israel,
many times by their Sins, provoked thine anger, and thou punishedst them by thy
just Judgment, yet though their Sins were never so grievous, if they once
returned from their iniquity, thou recervedst them to Mercy We therefore most
wretched Sinners, bewail our manifold sins; and earnestly Repent us of our
former wickedness and ngodly behavior toward thee: and whereas we cannot of
our seves purchase us our Pardon, yet we humbly beseech thee for Jesus Christ's
sake, to show thy mercy upon us, and receive us again to thy favor. Grant us,
dear Father, these our requests, and all other things which are necessary for
us, and thy whole Church, according to thy promise in Jesus Christ our Lord; In
whose name we beseech thee, as he has taught us, saying, Our Father, etc.

An Evening Prayer for a Family.
O Lord God, Father everlasting and full of pity, we acknowledge and confess
that we be not worthy to lift up our eyes to Heaven, much less to present our
selves before thy Majesty, with Confidence that thou will hear our Prayers, and
grant our Requests, if we consider our own deservings: For our Consciences do
accuse us, and our Sins witness against us, and we know that thou art an
upright Judge, which do not justify the sinners and wicked men, but
punishest the faults of all such as transgress thy Commandments. Yet most
merciful Father, since it has pleased thee to command us to cast on thee in
all our troubles and adversities, promising even then to help us, when we feel
our selves as it were, swallowed up of Death and desparation, we utterly
Renounce all Worldly confidence, and flee to thy Sovereign bounty; as our only
stay and refuge: beseeching thee not to call to remembrance our manifold sins
and wickedness, whereby we continually provoke thy wrath and indignation
against us: Neither our Negligence and unkindness, which have neither worthily
esteemed, nor in our lives sufficiently expressed the sweet comfort of thy holy
Gospel revealed unto us; but rather to accept the obedience, and death of thy
Son Jesus Christ, who by offering up his body in Sacrifice once for all, has
made a sufficient recompense once for all our Sins. Have Mercy therefore upon
us (O Lord) and forgive us our offenses; teach us by thy holy Spirit, that we
may rightly weigh them, and earnestly repent for the same: And so much the
rather. O Lord, because that the Reprobate, and such as thou have forsaken,
cannot please thee, nor call upon thy Name; but the repenting heart, the
sorrowful mind, the Consience oppressed, hung ring and thirsting for thy Grace,
shall ever set forth thy proise and Glory. And albeit we are but worms and
dust, yet thou art our Creator, and we the works of thy hands; yea, thou art
our Father, and we thy children, thou art our Shepherd, and we thy stock, thou
art our Redeemer, and we thy people whom thou have bought: thou art our God,
and we thine Inheritance, correct us not therefore in thine anger, O Lord,
neither according to out deserts, punish us, but mercifully Chastise us with a
Fatherly affection. Finally, forasmuch as it has pleased thee to make the
Night for Man to rest in, as thou haft ordained him the Day to Travel in:
Grant, O dear father, that we may so take our bodily rest that our Souls may
continually watch for the time that our Lord Jesus Christ shall appear for our
deliverance out of this Mortal life, and in the mean season, that we, not
overcome by any fantasies, dreams, or other temptations, may fully set our
minds upon thee, love thee, feat thee, and rest in thee: furthermore that out
sleep be not excessive or overmuch, after the insatiable desires of our flesh,
but only sufficient to content our weak natures, that we may be better disposed
to live in all Godly Conversation, to the Glory of thy Holy Name, and profit of
our Brethren; Amen.

FINIS.
Courteous READER,
THere is lately published an Excellent and profitable Sermon, called, The
Christians blessed choice. Likewise Christ's first Sermon; also Christ's last
Sermon, and the Christians best Garment. Also Heavens Glory, and Hells Horror.
And a Warning: piece to the sloathful, idle, careless, drunken, and secure ones
of these last and worst of times. Very Godly Books, and are but threepence a
piece.

Likewise: 1. Englands Faithful Physician. 2. The dreadful Character of a
Drunkard. 3. Doomsday at hand. 4. The Father's last Blessing to his Children.
5. The Black Book of Conscience. 6. The sin of Pride Arraigned and Condemned.
7. The Plain-man's plain Pathway to Heaven. 8. Death Triumphant. 9. The
Charitable Christian.


All these Books written by John Heart, Dr. of Divinity, and are to be Sold by
W. Thackeray, and T. Passinger.

All very necessary for these Licentious Times.



The Royal Oak






