THE LORD INCHIQVINS Queries to the Protestant Clergy of the Province of
Munster, with their Answer to the said Queeres. AS ALSO SIR RICHARD BLAGUES
Speech Chaireman to the Assembly of the Confederate Catholics at KILLKENNY,
made to his Excellence the Lord MARQVIS of ORMOND upon signing of the ARTICLES
of PEACE. AND HIS EXELLENCIES Answer to SR. Richard Blagues Speech. PUBLISHED
By His Majesty's Special Command.

HAGE: Printed by SAMUEL BROUN English Bookeseller, Dwelling in the Achter-om
at the Sign of the English Printing house. Anno M.DC.XLIX.

THE LORD INCHIQVINS Queries to the Protestant Clergy of the Province of
Munster.
MR. Dean Boil I desire you to propose these several Queries to the Clergy,
and return me their Clear and Conscientious Answer to them.

I.
Whether the Clergy, living under the protection of His Majesty in this
Province, do conceive themselves obliged by Conscience to give obedience to his
Commands, and the Authority placed under Him, for the preservation of the
English Protestant Party here, and the Army under their Command? And whether
there be not the same Engagement upon them to use their utmost Endeavors
possible to confirm, and settle all fluctuating persons to the like obedience?
And whether all contrary practices be not blameable?

II.
Whether their Endeavors thereunto ought not to be showed by them in their
public Ministry; videlicet their Prayers and Sermons, which they shall
exercize themselves in, at their public Meetings, and Assemblyes of the
People, and in their other Devotions, and Discourses also?

III.
Whether Prayers uttered in these Assemblyes, though with pretenses to perform
that duty before mentioned, may include in them suppositions scandalous against
either the Person, Right Government, or pious Affections of the King, or his
Ministers? And whether any that do so, may not be rather said to accuse them
before God, and men, then any way to assist them in the preservation of the
People, or Army under their Commands, in amity and obedience?

IV.
Can it be lawful, or approved in Conscience, That the Ministers should
present to the People the Mysteries of State (if they came to their Knowledge)
or to manifest unto them their own apprehensions (if not sufficiently
understood?) And if so by what authority? to what intent? or end? If not, ought
they not to keep themselves within their own Line, preaching faith, and good
manners, with obedience to the Civil Magistrate?

Inchiquin.

THE PROTESTANT CLERGY of Munsters Answer to the Lord Inchiquins Queres.
IN obedience to your Honors Commands we have taken the Queres into our
Consideration, and unanimously return this Answer.

To the first Quere.
First. We acknowledge, that we, who live under the protection of His Majesty
in this Province, are bound, by our duty toward God, and our oaths of
Allegiance, and supremacy, to give obedience to Him, as to our Liege Lord, and
supreme Governor in all Causes, and over all persons, as well Ecclesiastical,
as Civil.

Secondly. We acknowledge, that by the same tie of Conscience toward God, and
duty toward our sovereign, we are bound to obey all lawful authority placed
under Him, and over us, and in particular, that which is now established in the
hands of the most honorable the Lord Marquis of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant
General of this Kingdom: Together with that in your Lordships management, as
Lord President of this Province, and General of the Protestant forces in these
parts, And we freely profess our selves, not only bound to obey your Honor
but likewise to glorify God on your behalf, as the happy Instrument of the
preservation of the Remnant of Protestants that remain in these parts, And
more especially of our selves, as (under God, and our Sovereign) the principle
Patron, and Protector of us in this Church; for which, as we promise our free
and cheerful obedience, so we desire to pay our willing Devotions to God for
you that he would allwaies remember you for good concerning this, and wipe not
out the good deeds you have done for the House of God, and for the Officers
thereof.

Thirdly. We confess it our duty, and shall endeavor the performance of it,
to the utmost of our power, to labor, by all means possible, to fix, and
confirm all wavering persons in their due obedience to this Authority
established, as the most probable means to preserve the Protestant party, and
the Army under your Honors Command.

Fourthly. We cannot but acknowledge, that all contrary practices are justly
blameable before God and Man, and we utterly disclayme, and disavowe all
Dictates, and Discourses whether by word, or writing, which in any ways tend
to raise up the Peoples Jealousy of the piety, and good inclination of our
Governors toward us.

To the Second Quere
We acknowledge it a part of our Ministerial Duty, in our public Exercises,
to endeavor, from the word of God, to instill the Doctrine of obedience to
Civil Magistrates into the breasts of the People, and having planted that
Doctrine, to water it with our Prayers, and weed up contrary opinions by our
Discourses public, and private, and this we conceive the means to prevent
intestine broils amongst us, and to stop the effusion of blood, and settle us
in a quiet and peaceable life, in all godly conversation and honesty.

To the third Quere.
We acknowledge we owe the Magistrate the duty of our hearts, and knees;
supplications, and Prayers, and Intercessions, and giving of thanks is to be
made for all men, especially for Kings, and all that are in authority; But as
for any scandalous suppositions against their persons or Government, we
esteem them contrary to the method of Christian Prayers, which teaches us to
lift up holy hands without wrath, and therefore to be avoided as Libells, and
railing Accusations, rather then humble supplications and such as are faulty
here in (if any such be amongst us) we desire them to rectify their Devotions
in this particular.

To the fourth Quere.
We acknowledge that the chief and principal subject of Ministers in their
sermons should be in instructing of the People in the right faith of the
Gospel, good life and manners, and that their Discourses should noe way
entrench upon the Civil Government, or Transactions of State businesses, to
detract from them, by possessing the People with any scandalous suppositions,
which may alienate their affections, and obedience to them, and that they
should not communicate any Mysteryes of State (which may be thought fit to be
imparted unto them) without the special Command of those which have immediate
Authority reposed in them.

Kobert Nayler. Hilke Hussy. Bern. Packington. Edward Singe. David Bovild.
Andrew Chaplin. Rob. Shawe. Rich. Germine. Phil. Fitz Symons. Hen. Copley. John
Goddard. John Hall. Tho. Blackwell. John Godfrey. Sirach Gilsland. Tho. Bennet.
Rich. Burgh. Mich. Boyles. John Snary. James Dyer. Morgan Mundyn. John Stawell
Richard Boil. James Cox. Edward Fenner. Tho. Roberts. Rue Wight. Charles
Coldwell. Beniam Hearne Lewis Frix. Edward John. Anthony Procter. Tho. Hacket.
Nept. Blood. Israel Tailor. Henr. Rugge. Tho. Frith. Rob. Brown. Phil. Holmes.
Florence Corty. Rob. Baily. Edward Eyres. Edmund Grain.


SIR RICHARD BLAGVES Speech Chaireman to the Assembly of the Confederate
Catholics at Killkenny, made to his Excellence the Lord Lieutenant, upon
signing of the Articles of Peace.
May it please your Excellence.
I Am Commanded by the Prelacie, Nobility, and Gentry of the Roman Catholics
of Ireland, now assembled in this City of Kilkenny, to present unto your
Excellency their ardent zeal (naturally engrafted in their hearts) to
their sacred Sovereign King Charles his service, unto whom they ever have
bin, are, and will be, most faithful, and loyal subjects; and in the next
place, their great affection to your Excellency, and the never dying memory
they entertain, and will retain of your most noble and succesfull Endeavors
in the joynting, and setting together of the much disordered frame of this
Kingdom. Former Cessations, Accommodations, and Capitulations did but skin
over the deep, and wide wounds that were, and are in the body of it. They
received no life or perfection, they abortively perished in the Embryo, and
vanished into the air: But the Peace (that by the great mercy of God, by the
influence of His Majestye's graces, and by the Ministry, and cooperation of
your Excellency, is now to be Established) will prove, (as with joy and
confidence we expect) a firm, stable, and lasting Peace, a Peace that will
cure these bleeding wounds, search to the very root, and pluck out all the
splinters that remain of them: A Peace that will (as we hope, and is the
height of our desires, as it shall be of our endeavors) reinvest His Majesty
in his just, due, and Royal Rights, and Prerogatives, and will restore this
Nation to its former luster, plenty, and tranquillity: such a Peace as already
ends all our doubts, fears, and Jealousies in a mutual confidence and
rejoicing, and will make all the Members of this General Assembly (an
Assembly, unto which the present and future ages will justly give the glorious
name of the Peacemaking Assembly) after their many distractions, and long
continued sufferings, to return unto their several respective Countries, and
dwellings, with olive branches (the Emblems of Peace) in their hands, and the
words in their mouths that were said of our savior, when upon his entrance
into the City of Naim, he met with the funerals of a dead young man, the
only son of his following weeping Mother, whom (graciously compassionating
her tears) he restored from death to life, the words were, and not unaptly to
be applied to our present Condition, Ecce Propheta magnus surrexit in nobis,
and quiae Deus visitavit plebem suam.

Most Excellent Lord, (whom God allmighty has preserved, and lead, as it were,
by the hand, through a sea of troubles and dangers, to be the happy, and
essential Instrument, to mediate, actuate, and now consummate this great
work, and to make Ireland (like the heavenly Jerusalem) to be a City at unity
with in it self, I cannot sufficiently express the sense, and joyous
exultancie of these most venerable Prelates, most honorable Lords, most
juditious, and gallant Gentry, the representative body of the Roman Catholics
of this Kingdom, nor with what fervor and ardor they expect to reap the
blessed fruits (which they have so long sighed for, and did sow in their
blood and tears) of this Peace, and of your Excellencie's Government of this
Kingdom, unto which, being derived from His Majesty (who is the spring from
which these Graces and favors flow upon them) they will humbly and heartely
pay all due obedience. Your Excellencie's fast, and tried fidelity to his
Majesty, your own great interest in the Kingdom, and the many great parts
and talents that God and nature have plentifully endowed you with, giving them
assurance, that your Government will produce effects suitable to their
expectation, and that will answer their desires.

It much transcends my weak abilityes to represent them, their affections,
apprehensions, and hopes, in their right and lively colors, and therefore I
humbly beg, that your Excellency will vouchsafe to give a benign and
favorable interpretation to what, by their Commands, I have endeavored
humbly to offer unto your grave judgment, and consideration, and that your
Excellency will be pleased to sign this Instrument, the Everlasting Record,
and Monument of this blessed Peace, as by their Commands (it having bin
solemnly and unanimously by them so voted) I have had the honor, (a greater
honor then my low, and humble thoughts ever aspired to) in their chair to
sign this Counterpart thereof, and, in all their names, most humbly to present
it to your Excellency.

HIS EXELLENCIES Answer to S R. Richard Blagues speech.
My Lords and Gentlemen.
I Shall not speak to those expressions of duty and Loyalty, so eloquently
digested into a Discourse, by the Gentleman appointed by you to deliver your
sense, you will presently have in your hands greater and more solid Arguments
of His Majestyes gracious acceptance of them, then I can enumerate, or then
perhaps, you your selves discern, for, besides the provision made against your
remotest fears of the severity of certain Laws, and besides many other
freedoms, and bountyes conveyed to you, and your posterity, by these
Articles. There is a door, and that a large one, not left, but set open to
give you entrance, by your future meritts, to whatsoever of honor, or other
advantage, you can resonably wish, so that you have in present fruition what
may abundantly satisfye, and yet there are no bounds set to your hopes, but you
are rather invited, or, (according to a new Phrase, but to an old and better
purpose) You seem to have a Call from Heaven, to exercise your Arms and
uttermost fortitude, in the noblest, and justest Cause the world has known;
for let all the Circumstances, incident to a great and good Cause of war, be
examined, and they will be found Comprehended in that which you are now called
warrantably to defend, Religion; not in the narrow circumscribed definition of
it, by this, or that late found out means, but Christian Religion, is our
Quarrel, which certainly is as much, as fatally struck at (I may say more) by
the blasphemous License of this Age, then ever it was by the rudest Incursions
of the most barbarous and most avowed Enemies to Christianity. The venerable
Laws, and fundamental Constitutions are trodden under impious, and, for the
most, Mechanique feet. The sacred person of the King (the life of those Laws)
under an ignominious imprisonment, and his life threatened to be taken away by
the Sacrilegious hands of the basest of the People that owe Him obedience; And,
to endeare the Quarrel to you, the fountain of all the benefitts you have but
now acknowledged, and of what you may further hope for by this Peace, and your
own meritts, is now in danger to be obstructed by the execrable murder of the
worthjest Prince that ever ruld these Islands. In short, Hell can add nothing
to the desperate Mischeife now openly projected.

And now judge, if a greater, a more glorious field was ever set open to
action; and then prepare yourselves to enter into it, And receive these few
Advices from one thoroughly embarked with you in the Adventure.

First. Let me recommend unto you, that to this, as to all other holy Actions,
you would prepare yourselves with perfect Charity, a Charity that may
obliterate whatsoever of Rancours a long continued Civil war may have
contracted in you agamist any that shall now cooperate with you in so blessed a
work, and let his engagement with you, (who ever he is) be, as it ought to
be, a Bond of unity, of Love, of Concord, stronger then the nearest tie of
nature.

In the next place, mark, and beware of those that shall go about to renew,
or create Jealousies in you, under what pretense soever, and account such as
infernal Ministers, employed to promote the black Design on foot, to subvert
Monarchy, and to make us all slaves to those that are so to their own
avaritious Lusts.

A way as soon, and as much as possibly may be, with those distinctions of
Nations, and of Parties, which are the feilds where in the seeds of those
Ranker weeds are sown by the great Enemy of our Peace

In the last place, Let us all divest ourselves of that preposterous, that
ridicilous Ambition, and self Interest, which rather leads to our threatened
general Ruin, then to the enjoyment of Advantages unseasonably desired.

And if at any time you shall think yourselves pincht too near the bone by
those Taxes, and Leavyes that may be imposed for your defense, Consider then,
how vain, how foolish a thing it will be, to starve a Righteous Cause for want
of necessary support; to preserve yourselves fatt and gilded sacrifices to the
rapine of a merciless Enemy.

And if we come thus well prepared to a Contention, so just, on our part, God
will bless our Endeavors with success and victory, and will Crown our
sufferings with honor, and patience; for what honor will it not be, (if God
have so determined of us) to perish with a long glorious Monarchy? And who can
want patience to suffer with oppressed Princes? But as our Endeavors, so let
our prayer be, vigorous, that they may be delivered from a more unnatural
Rebellion then is mentioned by any now raised to the highest pitch of success
against them.

I should now say some thing to you for my self, in return to the
advantageous mention made of me, and my Endeavors to bring this settlement to
pass: but I confess my thoughts were wholly taken up with those much greater
Concernements; Let it suffice, that as I wish to be continued in your good
esteem and affection, so I shall freely adventure upon any hazard, and esteem
no trouble a difficulty too great to encounter, if I may manifest my zeal to
this Cause, and discharge some part of the obligations that are upon me to
serve this Kingdom.

FINIS.

