A Discourse CONCERNING REPENTANCE.

By N. INGELO D. D.

(...).

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Richard Marriott, and sold by William Bromwich at
the Sign of the Three Bibles in Ludgate Street. 1677.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING REPENTANCE. PART I.
LUKE 24. 47. That Repentance and Remission of Sins should be preached in his
Name among all Nations.
WHen man came out of his Creators hands, he was happy, and so long as he kept
the state of his Nature he continued such; for he enjoyed his Makers favor, he
walked with God, had a friendly Converse with him; and as he continually made a
thankful acknowledgment of his dependence upon his Goodness, and performed due
Obedience to his Will, so he was always under the care of his Providence, and
the Influences of his Grace, which was so great a felicity, that his condition
might well be signified by the name of the place in which he dwelt, The
Paradise of Eden, i. e. The Garden of Delight.

But see the frailty of created Beings when they are a little trusted with
themselves. Man soon fell from his happiness. He was not content with his
Makers allowance; he would provide better for himself some other way. But so
disregarding his Creators Laws, he threw himself out of the Divine favor, and
with himself, his Posterity, treading in the same steps of Disobedience, though
they knew how dear it cost their Forefather, by the miserable Inheritance which
he left them: The unhappiness of the Estate so bequeathed being so heavy, that
men when they considered it, would rather never have been born, than thrown
under the weight of it: The merciful Son of God, with an unspeakable
compassion, interposed himself between them and the dreaded Ruin, and
interceded for their pardon. The eternal Father was highly pleased with his
Mediation; and as for his sake he did not lock the door of Hope against the
first Runagate, so neither did he afterward shut up his disobedient Children in
the irrecoverable misery of their Sin. For though they have cast themselves out
of the Mercies of the ancient Covenant, by breaking the Conditions of it, yet
the Son of God was pleased to be the Angel of a new Covenant, and brought it
from Heaven, and sent his Celestial Messengers at his Birth to proclaim the
Good Will which was contained in it, and sealed it with his Blood, which when
he was going to die, he said he would shed for the remission of Sins: And
having performed that Promise full of unspeakable kindness, when he was raised
from the dead, he commanded his Servants, whom he had made intimate with the
design of his Mercy, that they should publish it to all the World, and in his
Name preach Repentance, and upon that promise forgiveness of sin, and declare
that God would now accept of Return to Duty instead of Obedience which had
never failed; and that all such of sinful Mankind as would run away from their
disobedient Party, acknowledge their Fault, lament their Rebellion, throw down
their Arms, yield to Mercy, and return to their Allegiance, should come to be
as they were at first by Gods allowance, be put into the way of Happiness
again: For by the forgiveness of their sins God restores them to his Favor, a
Grace denied to a higher sort of Creatures than we are, Angels, when by sin
they flung themselves out of Heaven.

I have designed this Discourse to treat of the way which God has been pleased
to accept, and our Savior to declare, for our escaping the misery of sin,
which is Repentance. And of this I shall speak as I find it described in the
New Testament, where two words are chiefly used to express the nature of it,
(...), and (...).

1. Change of mind as to what is past. 2. Better care for the future.
And these I shall explain as Holy Writ and the practice of Gods Church do
direct.

1. A change of mind as to what is past; So Tertull. In Graeco sono
Poenitentiae nomen ab animi demutatione compositum est; which he said
respecting the word (...). He which repents must begin with a severe
condemnation of his former course: So Isidor. Pelusiota. l. 4. c. 60. (...).
How can he repent of what he has done, who does not condemn it as wicked? This
part of Repentance expresses it self in two things.

1. Humble Confession of Sin. 2. Earnest Prayer for Pardon.
1. Humble confession of sin, which is both required in many places of
Scripture, and appears to have been the practice of Penitents. He which
confesses and forsakes finds mercy -- If we confess our sins he is faithful
-- It is meet to be said unto God I have sinned -- He can never hope for pardon
who will not confess his sin. As Confession belongs to Repentance, so if it be
right, it must have these two things joined with it.

1. Sorrow, and 2. Shame.
1. We must make our Confessions, having in our souls a great sorrow for having
offended God, a great displeasure against our selves for our disobedience. When
the Apostle perceived the Corinthians to have fallen into a great sin, he wrote
a sharp Letter to them, and the consideration of that, and what they had done,
wrought in them the beginning of Repentance, 2 Cor. 7. 9.
a godly sorrow, or sorrow according to God, which he does require, and will
accept if it be sincere, according to the nature of the sin committed. It is
fit that he who has sinned should be grieved, when he considers what he has
done, and say as he did, Eheuquam ego totus displiceo mihi! Poenitentia denot
at paenam animi de re perper am gesta sibi displicentis. St. Peter's Penitents
were said to be pricked in their Hearts; Acts 2.
and the Scripture calls true Repentance a broken heart, a contrite spirit.
Psalm. 51.
And true Penitents usually expressed their sorrow in tears, with which David
is said to water his Couch -- and St. Peter, Psalm. 6. 6.
upon consideration of his grand sin is said to have gone, forth of the
Company, and to have wept bitterly. He which truly considers what it is to have
sinned, would if he could, wash away the stain with tears of blood. When the
weight of the sins of others began to sit close and heavy upon our Saviors
shoulders, it put him into such an Agony, that it made clammy drops of thick
sweat, like viscous blood, trickle from his Body to the ground.

Therefore Penitents of old, to express their due grief, used to gird
themselves with Sackcloth, and fit in Ashes: For anciently in great mournings
it was the custom to put on Sackcloth, to cover their heads with Ashes, and sit
in the Dust. As we see in the Story of the King of Niniveh in that great
affliction of soul which surprised him upon Ionas's denunciation of wrath
against him and his people; and in the case of Thamar, in the astonishing grief
which seized her upon the loss of her Honor: So Job when he humbled himself
for speaking too boldly of the mystery of Gods Providence, is said to have
repented in Sackcloth and Ashes. To this also they joined Fasting,
acknowledging that by reason of their sins they were not worthy to eat, and so
not to live; and when they did so, were said to afflict their souls: For true
Penitents have, as the Apostle observed in the Corinthians, Indignation against
their sins, and Revenge upon themselves for committing them. To these also in
their Penance they added Expiatory Offerings, confessing when they killed the
Sacrifice, they themselves deserved to die more than the Lamb or Goat did; Quae
me non dignior hostia vita est? There is nothing so bad but it deserves to live
rather than I the sinner who offer it. They saw the vileness and danger of sin,
and therefore cried out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do to be saved? Or as
they in Micah, O that I had any (...), any thing to give in exchange for my
soul to my offended God, thousands of Rams, or ten thousand Rivers of Oil!

By these Expressions we may perceive what a deep sense they had of the
baseness of sin, and how truly they were grieved that by it they had offended
God. To this I need add no more but the practice of the Primitive Church, to
show what a mighty sorrow the Penitents of those days thought necessary to
their Repentance. It is enough to amaze careless Souls to read it as it is
described by Tertullian, Tertul. de Iudicitia, and de Paenitentia.
and St. Gregory Nazianzen. Greg. Naz. de Poenitentia.
Penitents lay prostrate at the Church doors in Sackcloth, and Ashes, and
Horror; entreating the whole Fraternity, begging the prayers of Presbyters and
Widows, taking hold of the Garments and Knees of such as entered into the
Church, kissing their footsteps, as well as the Chains of Martyrs in Prisons,
with bare knees and wet eyes, beseeching their Prayers for their pardon.

And though the bad sinners of our times possibly think them foolish in so
great expressions of sorrow, yet I doubt, when things come to be determined
before the Great Tribunal of Christ, that they will be judged sottish for their
vain Censure, and that want of great grief for their sins will not then be
esteemed courage, but searedness of Conscience. He is most miserable who sins
and repents not; and his sorrow will do him little good, which does not wound
sin to the heart, which does not smite through, and cut in pieces the roots of
Disobedience, which are deep planted in a hard heart.

2. We are also to join shame with our sorrow: Shame is the proper attendant of
sin, as we may see in our first Parents, who were so ashamed of themselves
after they had sinned, that they sought, as well as they could, to hide
themselves from the Face of God; not only for fear of being punished by him,
but being ashamed of themselves, that for doing unworthily they had deserved
it. There is great reason we should entertain this passion of soul. The
penitent sinner will find things enough to be ashamed of, if he consider. What
are they? Five.

1. His Impudence, that he durst sin against God; therefore Ezra in his
penitent Confession of the great sins which he then lamented, says, Ezr. 9. 6.
O my God, I am ashamed to look up, and blush to lift up my face to thee; for
our iniquities are increased, and our sins are grown up to Heaven. v. 15.
We are in our trespasses, and cannot stand before thee, because of them. He
was so ashamed, that he says, v. 10.
And now, O our God, what shall we say, for we have forsaken thy Commandments?
So the Penitent in Jeremiah, Ier. 31. 19.
When I repented I was ashamed -- And the Converts whom St. Paul mentions, were
ashamed to think of their former practice; What fruit had you in those things
whereof you are now ashamed? Romans 6. 21.
There is great Reason for this. For men are ashamed when they do any thing
that is unbecoming them. It is a base thing for a man to do that which is
unworthy of what he is, or professes himself to be. Sin is the most unbecoming
thing in the World, contrary to our Nature, unworthy of a reasonable Creature,
absurd in regard of our state in Being; does debase and degrade the person that
commits it. Therefore when Aaron had consented to Idolatry with the people, it
is said, They made him naked to his shame. What a High Priest and worship a
Calf? A Creature and disobedient to him that made it! It is said of the Jews,
when converted, that they should loath themselves for all their abominations.
Nothing can make us so vile as sinning against God. He which consents to sin,
disrobes himself of the dignity of his Nature, Innocence. And when men come to
that impudence, that they are not ashamed of sin, it is noted in Scripture as
the height of all Villainy, and is a state near to utter Ruin. Men may grow so
base as to glory in their shame; i. e. in such things of which they ought to be
ashamed, as the Apostle tells us, and make no matter of it. So the Prophet
Jeremiah of those in his time, Ier. 6 15.
Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination; no, they were not
ashamed, Ier. 5. 3.
neither could they blush. No; but as in another place, they had a Whores
forehead, made their faces harder than a Rock. But their ruin followed at their
heels, and overtook them all, except some few, who repenting, shared another
temper, and said, We lie down in shame, -- 3 25.
and our confusion covers us; for we have sinned against the Lord our God,
and have disobeyed his voice. So the repenting Prodigal, O Father, I have
sinned against Heaven and against Thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son. He had done things unworthy of a Son, and being ashamed of himself, would
be glad to creep out of that base self the Son, so he might be become a good
Servant. He was ashamed to think he had been a Son, because he had carried
himself so vilely in that state.

2. Shame is due to the folly which those who sin are guilty of. He which sins
reveals his folly sufficiently in this, that either he understands not his
Interest, or slights those things which are of greatest import to him; and
therefore Fool is the proper name of a sinner in Holy Language. For what good
reason that Title is bestowed upon him, you may see in these four particulars.

1. He which sins thinks to be happy in a better way than that which God has
directed him to, and is so silly as not to understand the meanness of these
things for which he forsakes his God, and the sad Consequences of his
Disobedience. How great is the disproportion which is between the pure joy
which flows into the soul from the sense of Gods favor, and the muddy pleasure
which in any Channel whatsoever can be derived from sin? It is but little, and
very impure, mixed with dreadful Allays. This is so great a stupidity, that the
Prophet brings in the Heavens as wondering at it. Ier. 2. 12, 13.
Be astonished, O ye Heavens at this, and be ye horribly afraid, says the
Lord, for my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the
Fountain of Living Waters, and hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns, which
can hold no water. It Is true it was applied, principally to their forsaking the
living God, to serve dead Idols; v. 11.
Has a Nation changed their Gods, which yet are no Gods? but my people have
changed their glory for that which does not profit. It was a strange Impudence
in those wicked Jews of whom this Prophet speaks, who when they were in a bad
Condition, made such by their sins, would mend it by their sins. Ier. 44.
They were in captivity because of their wickedness, and in particular for
Idolatry, and were told so by the Prophet; See what use they made of it, v. 17.
We will burn Incense to the Queen of Heaven, and pour out drink offerings to
her, as did our Fathers, who were then well, and had plenty of all things --
Liars! They were now in Famine for that Disobedience, and yet said, we will do
what has come into our minds; when as all the Prosperity which they enjoyed
before, was from observing Gods Commands; and they bereaved themselves of it
now by forsaking God, Ier. 2. 17, 19.
as the Prophet told them before, that they procured this to themselves, in
that they forsook the Lord their God: And that their own wickedness should
correct them, and make them know that it was an evil thing and bitter that they
had forsaken God, and that the fear of displeasing him was not in them; and
that it should enter into their heart, i. e. to gnaw it, when they considered
what they had done. What less folly are they guilty of, who forsake the peace
of Conscience and hope of Immortality, and pleasures of Divine Favor, for the
embraces of an Harlot, voluptuous Riots, unjust Gain, or for all that Good that
any, or all sorts of sin can bring in exchange? When they come to themselves,
as it was said of the Prodigal (for a sinner is out of his wits) they say to
themselves as the Apostle did to the Romans, What profit have we of those
things which now only produce shame in our souls? Or as that great Soldier
when he saw the folly of his base Condescension, in the sad Consequences of it,
(...) (...); So the Prodigal, I have left the bread, and all good
entertainments of my Fathers house, to feed upon Husks with Swine. I have of a
Freeman made my self a slave to Corruption. When David, not weighing things in
the Balance of the Sanctuary, i. e. esteeming them as God does, according to
the true worth, did undervalue the happiness of good men, because they wanted
that prosperity which he saw some wicked men enjoy; when he came to consider
better, how did he condemn the folly of his former thoughts in these words, Ps.
73. 22.
-- So foolish was I and ignorant, I was as a Beast before thee. But as I have
none in Heaven but thee, so in Earth there is nothing that I can desire in
comparison of thee. Ps. 63. 2.
Thy favor is better than life, or any thing in it. This was the folly of the
first sinners, they would mend the estate God had put them in, by following
their own counsels, and so for the slight and short pleasure which they had in
eating forbidden fruit, lost the joy of Divine Favor, and the peace of their
own Consciences, and flung themselves into shame and fear.

Art not thou ashamed whoever thou art which consents to sin, to throw thy self
out of the joy of thy soul, a serene tranquillity of mind, into melancholy and
grief, when thou see how by sin thou have debased thy self, lost thy honor,
and divested thy self of the Dignity and Pleasure of Virtue for some mean
satisfaction of bodily Appetite, and indulging some vile Affection?

2. The folly of Sin appears more; he which disobeys God will transgress his
Laws, and go beyond the bounds which God has set, though they lay no curb upon
Appetite, nor stop the course of Action be to preserve us from that mischief,
into which we shall fall if we go farther than they permit. A madman will on,
though you stop him only upon the top of a Precipice. Is not the pleasure of
single Life enough with Chastity and Divine Love? or if Nature requires another
state; are not the modest allowances of Marriage enough, without the unclean
pleasures of forbidden Beds? Is not the satisfaction of eating and drinking to
a temperate cheerfulness, much better than to be drowned in excess of Wine, and
choked with Gluttony and Surfets? Is not a competency of worldly Means suitable
to the necessities of our Condition, and number of our Relatives thankfully
enjoyed, better than the tormenting content of a ravenous Temper, which makes
the man haunted with it, always to endeavor to add House to House, Land to
Land, and to increase his Heap with unjust Actions, as well as greedy Desires?
When the Fool, which makes a mock of sin, comes to himself, and is made to see
what he has done, his countenance will fall, as it was said of Cain, and he
will be ashamed to have parted with the sprightly, erect temper of his Soul,
which with Innocence he had in the favor of God, when by sin he finds himself
depressed, grieved, undone. Sampson broke the Law of his God, which as a
Nazarite he had upon him, and suffered a Harlot to cut off his Hair, but when
he went out to shake himself, as he said, and found the Spirit of God departed
from him, what horror with shame, with despondence of Soul, seized upon him?

3. The folly of a sinner appears also in this, that he is not sensible of the
great danger which his sin leads him into; no, though he has been often told
of it. See this point of Folly in a few Particulars.

1. He minds not that an action once done cannot be recalled, and that
therefore sin once committed cannot be undone, Non est nunquam omnino fecisse,
facere cess ass, He which sins makes himself guilty.

2. He acts as supposing that he may be happy without the Divine Favor, or may
disobey and not lose it; as if God could stand Neuter among men in the World,
and did not impartially weigh the actions of men, and were not of purer eyes
than to behold Iniquity. But the Fool sins on, neither minding the threatenings
which are annexed to the Laws which he breaks, nor considering that he who made
those threatenings is Almighty, and so can both put them in execution, and
appoint such punishments as we can neither imagine nor endure.

3. The sottishness of the security appears more plainly, because God has
declared that he has appointed a day wherein he will judge the World in
Righteousness. Acts 17. 31
Is thy heart set to do evil, because sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily? Shall a Malefactor think himself well, because he is not
hanged as soon as condemned, when the Judge has set a day for his Execution?
Alas! what small security is in that short respite? Do thou not know that the
goodness of God leads thee to Repentance, and yet wilt sin, and so treasure up
wrath to thy self, by hardness of heart, against the day of the Revelation of
Gods just Judgment? The Fool puts the Evil day far from him, which how near it
is, God only knows.

4. This is also one addition to this folly, that he will sin when he has been
told not only that there is a set Day of Judgment, and consequently of
Punishment, though delayed a while; but also that a sinner, by a course of
impenitence, may be shut up in a state inevitably obnoxious to the punishment
of that Day, a long while before the person dies, and so comes to his
particular Judgment. One may so much grieve the Lord, as the Israelites did in
the Wilderness, that he will swear they shall never enter into his rest -- They
may sin so long that no place is left for Repentance, and so no hope of Mercy.
It is a dreadful curse when God says, Let them fall from one wickedness to
another, that so often, and the sins so great, that they never come into his
Righteousness, Gray hairs are upon the foolish sinner, and he perceives not
that he grows old in sin and guilt. My Spirit shall not always strive with men.
Pharaoh having hardened his heart against several miraculous Declarations of
Gods Power and Anger, was irrecoverably destinated to Ruin, though God told him
that he preserved him a while to show his power and anger upon him, Exodus
before he utterly destroyed him. The sins of the Amorites were not at the
full. Genesis 1. 5.
Who knows whether he has filled up the measure which God will stop at? yet
fond sinners add to it daily. When our gracious Savior perceived Jerusalem to
be in this case, he wept over it, and said, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often
would I have gathered thee! O that thou had in this thy day seen the things
which belong to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. We know that
men by sin may grow so stupid, as to their minds, that they will pray for life
to that which is dead: and as to their Affections, they may be given up to
those which are so vile, as that it is a shame to mention them; and grow so
base that they will sell Heaven, as Esau did his Birthright for a Mess of
Pottage. I have heard of a man, who having been drunk overnight, and passed
over a very narrow Bridge, which no sober Horsman durst attempt, being brought
the next day to see what danger he went through, fell down in a swoon upon the
sight of it. But sinners are so besotted with the love of sin, that they will
on, though they are showed before that the Bridge they are going to is
impassable, and that the Lake of Fire and Brimstone is under it.

This is enough to have shown the folly of sin, which whosoever is guilty of,
when he considers it, will find reason enough to be ashamed of himself.

3. The third consideration in this matter is that high Injustice of which he
makes himself guilty that sins. There is nothing in the world so due to any
person, as Obedience is to God. That which is made by another, ought to receive
Law from him. There is nothing more absurd in Nature, than for a Creature to be
its own This was the Root upon which the misery of Mankind grew at first, that
they would be sui juris, their own Lawgivers: and (...) still, he which sins
knows (...) but his own Appetites, and this he declares in his Actions. And
sometimes it comes to that boldness that he says so in words too, as those
Miscreants, Ps. 12. 4.
Our lips are our own; who is Lord over us? Monstrous absurd! It is not so
unjust or shameful for Lacqueys to ride on Horseback, and Princes to attend
them on foot, as for a Creature to think to be at its own dispose, and to speak
and do what it will. No, said those pious souls who understood their estate,
James.
thou have made us, and not we our selves. And therefore, as the Apostle adds,
we should so speak, and so do, as those who shall be judged by the Creators
Law, and give an account to him who will pass a severe sentence upon the
injustice of Disobedience.

Men are mightily concerned for their own dues, and take it ill if any deprive
them of their Right. Shall not the God of heaven and earth regard what is due
to him by a Right which is transcendent to all created propriety? See what
notice God takes of his wrongs, A Son honors his Father, Mat. 1. 6.
and a Servant his Master. If then I be a Father, where is mine Honor? If I be
a Master, where is my fear? Art not thou ashamed, who art by nature but a
Servant, to deny the homage which is due to the Sovereign Lord of the World,
and yet art very careful of those petty Rights which are only due to thee by
his appointment? Do thou think it a shame for Creatures to do unjustly to one
another, and yet do not blush to wrong thy God? This is so strange a thing in
Gods account, that as the Prophet Malachi tells us God wonders at it; Mal. 3.
8. 9.
Will a man rob God? It is most unlikely; yet you have robbed me. God had
bestowed the Land of Canaan upon them, but reserved to himself, as Lord
Proprietor, several Tithes and Offerings which he would have paid to him, as an
Acknowledgment of himself, of whom they held what they enjoyed. They paid not
these Dues. But God does not care for it possibly. Does he not? See what
follows; ye are cursed with a dreadful curse, because you have robbed me, even
this whole Nation.

He which truly repents, turns with shame for the wrong which he has done to
his God, and blushes as a penitent Thief when he brings back stolen goods.
Ier. 2. 26.
As a Thief is ashamed when he is found, so is the House of Israel. And so we
read in the Confessions of those good men which prayed to God for 'em, when
they made their Repentance public, they were ashamed and confounded when they
considered the wrongs which they had done to God. To thee, O Lord, belongs
Righteousness, Dan. 9. 7, 8.
but to us shame and confusion of face: to us, not only the men of Judah, and
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, but to our Kings and Princes, because we have sinned
against thee. So Ezra and others.

4. This shame is heightened by this, in that he which sins against God is
guilty of most heinous Ingratitude. He which sins offends his most good God,
abuses his best Friend. Do not thou who sinnest, slight him in whom thou
live, movest, and have thy being, affront him who has fed and clothed thee
all thy days? This Ingratitude is so great an aggravation of the baseness of
sin, that the Prophet Isaiah astonished at it, Isa. 1. 2, 3.
cries out in Gods behalf, Hear O Heavens, give ear O Earth; why, what is the
matter? I have nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled
against me. Why, is that such a matter that God should resent it on that
fashion? Yes. For as it follows, it is a vileness so low that Beasts are not
capable of it; The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib: and as
they come for meat to their Masters, so they serve in grateful return for what
they receive. But Israel does not know, my people does not consider. They
neither have a sense of me their God, nor of the Favors they have received
from me, nor consider the Obligation which is upon them to obey me, nor how
ungrateful they are in not obeying, nor the baseness of their Ingratitude
whilst they disobey. So Jeremiah, Ier. 2. 31.
Have I been a wilderness to Israel, or a land of darkness, that they say we
are Lords, we will come no more at thee? I thought I had been to them that
Fountain of goodness at which they drank all their days. I thought that by the
constant Irrigations of Mercy I had made their souls like a watered garden. But
it was true of them which was said of Hezekiah, He returned not as he received,
2 Chronicles. 32. 25.
neither for his recovery from a deadly Sickness, nor deliverance from the
potent Army of the Assyrians. Therefore the Penitent has good reason to say, I
am ashamed, O Lord, I blush to think how many mercies I slight, how many
obligations I trample upon, how basely unthankful I have been. Does Iesurun
kick, and forget it was undeserved mercy which made him fat? Because thou art
full do thou sin, and not remember that thou rebellest against him who fed
thee? Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
O foolish people and unwise, do you thus requite the Lord? Or as the Prophet,
Hos. 2. 8, 9.
Do thou not know that I gave thee thy Corn and Wine, says God, and that I
multiplied thy silver and thy gold? I will return and take away my corn, wine,
and wool, and make thee know with what ingratitude thou have forgot thy
Benefactor and chief Patron.

The Penitent may do well to increase this shame in his soul, by the
consideration of some of the chief mercies by which God has laid Obligations
of Obedience upon him; and that will make him say with Ezra -- Have I sinned,
having received such deliverance as this? -- Was I delivered to do
abominations? O my God, I am ashamed to look up to Heaven -- I blush and hide
my face.

And to all considerations of Ingratitude add always this, never to be
forgotten, the Love of thy Savior in dying for thy sins, and then thou will
say, Do I please my self with committing sin, when my Savior in pure love
suffered so much pain with infinite amazements upon the Cross for it? What am I
so base as to trample under my feet the Blood of the Son of God, and to scorn
the prayers and tears of my Savior? Those whom this consideration does not
make ashamed now, will be confounded with it for ever hereafter, and beg Rocks
to fall upon them, that they may not come into the presence of that Friend whom
they have so vilely abused; not only because they see him now so great that he
can take vengeance upon them, but because they perceive themselves so base by
Ingratitude, that they highly deserve it.

5. Lastly, The Penitent has great reason to be ashamed of sin, as for the
aforementioned Considerations, so for this that he has made them out of
measure sinful by a horrid Perfidiousness. He which sins at first breaks the
(...), the Oath which is interwoven with our being, of which the Philosopher
spoke; God making no Creature but of which he takes an Oath, by the Law of its
Nature, that it shall be obedient to him: But he is perfidious also, because he
breaks those voluntary Promises which the sense of Obligations laid upon him,
engaged him to make to God. Sure this will make the Penitent blush, when he
finds reason to say to his soul, O my soul! Art not thou only so vile as to
consent to sin against God, but also to do it when thou have vowed not to do
so? and when those Vows were made upon most serious deliberation, and for those
Reasons which thou do still acknowledge to be most weighty?

This is enough to have said to show, not only how necessary Confession of sin
is to Repentance, but also how fit it is that sorrow and shame for sin
committed should be joined to the Confession of it. Yet this must not be
understood so, as if they were only applicable to some penitential solemn acts
of Confession; for they are to be continued through our whole life: For a good
man will always be sorry, and ever ashamed that he had once sinned. Though God
forgive, a true Penitent will hardly forgive himself. A Heathen could say, That
if we believe there is a Providence, he which has sinned shall not be despised
if he grow good; (...), yet he shall carry some marks of old displeasure: For
as another said, (...), there remains in the souls of Penitents the marks of
old sins, as skars do in the flesh, though the wounds be healed.

2. To Confession the Penitent must add earnest Prayer for pardon. This we
learn from our blessed Savior, who has taught us to put this into our
Prayers, as a chief petition, -- Forgive us our Trespasses. Shall God forgive
such as do not entreat him to do so? It is fit the sinner should fall upon his
knees before the Eternal Father, and beg pardon. When Daniel understood by
reading the Prophecy of Jeremiah, that the time was at hand in which God had
promised so to pardon the sins of the Jews, as to return their captivity, then
he set himself to seek it of God by supplication and prayer. Dan 9. 2, 3.
Why so? Because the promise was made upon condition that they should repent of
their sins which carried them captive, and pray for pardon and return: For so
we read, Ezekiel. 36. 37.
I will plant that which was desolate. and build the ruinous places -- I will
yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them; i. e. I
will grant it to them when they pray for it. Hereupon this holy man began in
prayer to do his part, and directed them to do theirs.

But as Prayer for Pardon is a Duty unquestionable, so Fervency is a
qualification so requisite, that without it Prayer will not be accepted, as it
appears by what our Savior has taught us in his Sermons, the Apostles in
their Epistles, sincere Penitents in their praetise, and of which we are
assured, because it has ever been made a condition of the Forgiveness promised.

It is usually expressed thus, They shall find me if they seek me with their
whole heart: Accordingly they are said to have sought God with their whole
desire. 2 Chronicles. 15. 15.
We read of the Prayer of Faith saving the sick, James 5. 5.
and obtaining forgiveness of sins; but the reason given in the next verse,
shows what kind of Prayer it must be, v. 16.
The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much; (...). The word
signifies high, and therefore Translators use two to express the meaning of it.
No doubt rightly; For the Apostle intended such prayer as in which the most
lively working of the soul expresses it self. The same word St. Paul used,
Gal. 5. 6.
speaking of Faith which saves, where he says that it is (...), i. e. which
shows its virtue in a powerful operation, and so is all one with (...), as
appears by two other places in his Epistles put together: For when he says of
the Word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
that it is (...), he says it is (...), Heb. 4. 12.
quick and powerful in working. This is enough to show the meaning of the word;
now to apply it to our purpose. If such a fervency of soul was requisite when a
righteous man prayed for the forgiveness of other men's sins, what is quisite
when an unrighteous man prays for the pardon of his own? Sure he needs to do as
St. James faith, James 17.
(...), to pray very earnestly; vehemence being usually signified in Hebrew by
the gemination or joining the Verb with the Noun.

The truth is, he which beggs forgiveness of God in a languid Prayer, does
declare plainly that he neither minds to whom he prays, nor for what: He which
entreats God to forgive him his sins, and understands how great a thing he
asks, and is sensible in what need he stands of it, and withal how unworthy he
is to receive it, and considers the greatness of the Person of whom he begs it,
and how much goodness that is which will bestow it, and consequently how high a
favor it must be if he receive it, will pray with all possible earnestness for
it. It is not fit to put up any cold petition to God, much less when we beg so
great a matter. How earnestly would a condemned man beg his life of the Judge,
if he might have it for asking; or but hope by entreaty to revoke the sentence
passed against him? Col 4. 12.
St. Paul uses another expression, well signifying the same thing, (...), to
strive earnestly in Prayer, as Jacob did when he wrestled with the Angel, and
would not let him go till he blessed him.

When our blessed Savior was in an Agony, i. e. in conflict with those amazing
horrors which the guilt of our sins set before him, he is said to have prayed
often, and as that dreadful weight pressed harder, he prayed more earnestly,
(...), extending, as I may say, all the power of his soul to its utmost
compass; showing the earnest working of his soul after he had risen from his
knees, by throwing his holy Body upon the ground, lying prostrate before the
Eternal Father, as the Author to the Hebrews tells us, offering Supplications
with strong cries and tears to him who was able to save him, and was so
delivered from his fear, Hear, O Penitent, was thy Savior so earnest in his
prayers in the conflict which he endured for the sins of others, and art thou
dull and flaccid in prayer for the pardon of thy own? Sure thou art not
sensible what kind of thing Divine Wrath is, or do not believe that sin
brings with it an obligation to make the Offender suffer it? do thou think
thy self able to endure it? or it may be persuadest thy self that it may be
escaped some other way? Awake, awake, O drouzy soul, and pray mightily to God
that thy sins may be forgiven thee, that thou may not fall into the hands of
the Living God, who is a consuming fire; pray that thou may be pardoned, and
so not be thrown into everlasting burnings. If thou be'st unconcerned or lazy
in this matter, thou art more profane than Esau, who though he was vile enough
in selling his Birthright, yet when the Blessing was departed from him, he not
only prayed for the reversion of the sentence by which it was done, but sought
it carefully with tears.

Thus much will serve to have spoken of the first part of Repentance, which
though it be necessary to be done, yet the second must be added to it. Having
perfectly changed our minds as to what is past, and heartily begged pardon for
it, we must be sure to have better care for the future. He which does not the
first, will never think of the second; and though he have done the former, if
he proceed not to the latter, it will do him no good, it being no better than
Corn in the blade which never comes to an Ear. As Tertullian said well, Quid
enim ex Poenitentia maturescit nisi Emendationis fructus? Repentance is
fruitless except it bring forth a better life. Present penitence without future
obedience are words which signify nothing in Christian Religion.

When John the Baptist did receive Disciples upon profession of Repentance,
which they made by confessing their sins to him, he bad them not think that
this would restore them to the Divine Favor, except they brought forth fruits
agreeable to that Profession; Matt. 3. 7, 8.
that is, works correspondent to it: Acts 26. 20.
and he assured them, that the Ax then laid to the Root of the Tree, would cut
it down, if it did not bring forth those fruits; and that fair Leaves should
not save it from being cast into the fire.

Of this second part of Repentance I shall speak in this Method.

1. By showing the true nature of after Care, and what is requisite to make it
acceptable.

2. By making Exhortation to this Duty, which I shall do only by these Motives,
taken

1. From the Reasonableness of Repentance in its own nature. 2. From the great
Encouragement which we have to it from the goodness of God, who is willing to
forgive sinners if they repent. 3. From the great and inevitable mischief which
awaites those who will not repent.
There are two things which will make our Repentance acceptable: our Return to
God will always be so, if it be

1. Speedy. 2. Sincere.
1. The vileness of sin is so great, as I showed before, that a Penitent cannot
reflect seriously upon it, but he must needs think it fit to undo it as soon as
he can. This we see in St. Peter; as soon as he thought what he had done, he
went presently out and wept bitterly, endeavoring, as soon as possibly he
might, to wash away his sin with tears. Excellent is the counsel which Salvian
gives in this case, Illico ubi concidere consurgant and elevationem protinus
meditentur in lapsu, ac si fieri ullo modo pernicitate poenitudinis potest, tam
velox sit remedium resurgentis, ut u x possit vestigium apparere collapsi. He
which Repents quickly declares how willing he was not to have sinned.

1. This is reasonable; for no man is sensible of danger approaching, but he
will endeavor to prevent it as soon as he can, and he may delay so long that
it will grow impossible. If a man's House be on fire, will he not presently
endeavor to quench it? If he be bitten with a Serpent, does he not seek for
present remedy? He which is fallen into sickness makes haste to send for a
Physician, every body knowing that recovery is then most to be hoped for, when
proper Remedies are used in time. A Disease may prevail so far by neglect of
those Medicines which would have cured it at first, that neither they nor any
other will be able to do it afterward. Delay in this affair makes the work grow
harder. By repeating of sin the Offender hardens his heart; and though
afterward he turn Penitent, he will find his task more difficult, because
instead of a slighter disposition, which he might have more easily conquered at
first, he must now conflict with a firm habit. Shall he which cannot outgo a
Footman hope to outrun Horsemen?

2. The demerit of sin increases by delaying to return. Can he hope for mercy
who has stood out in rebellion to the last? He which delays to repent
treasures up wrath against himself, when as God knows, if his wrath be kindled
but a little, there is no man able to endure it. It is strange that any Conceit
should come into a man's Head that acknowledges his dependence upon God, to
make him defer his return to him by repentance. It is possibly this, He means
at last to repent of his negligence. Does he, and yet is deliberately negligent
at present? It is a new sort of Virtue this, to sin pretending an intention to
repent; and as odd a kind of wisdom to abuse infinite goodness in hope to find
that favor, of which the course of life which we choose makes us infinitely
unworthy, and being continued in will give us strong reasons to despair of when
we die.

3. Pardon is not to be had, no nor repentance, when we will. He who is so
gracious, that he pleases to pardon when we truly repent, has not promised we
shall have grace to repent when we please. We are advised in Holy Writ to seek
the Lord whilst he may be found: Isa. 5. 5, 6
and when that is we are told, Prove. 8. 17.
I love them that love me, and those that seek me early shall find me.

How applicable this is to the matter of Repentance, we may see by what is said
in the fith and sixth verses of Psalm 32. David was in great distress by reason
of Divine Wrath, which lay upon him for his sins; whereupon he took himself to
repentance, speedily bewailing, and openly confessing his Faith to to God, and
so returning to his duty found pardon. For this shall every one that is godly
pray unto thee in a time when thou may be found. He that knows how great a
matter it is to be reconciled to an offended God, and that there is a time of
finding mercy, which if it be slipped, the sinner is eternally undone, will
thereupon make what speed he can to return to God, and humbly seek his favor
in a seasonable address, lest he lose himself with the opportunity.

It is not many years since the Master of a Ship loitering ashore, and not
taking the advantage of one Tide when the Wind blew fair, with which other
Ships went out, was forced by contrary Winds to stay in the Port till the
forementioned Ships made their Voyage, and returned. They are bold people, but
extremely sottish, who slight opportunities of doing that which belongs to
their chief good, when they know they cannot command the stay or return of such
seasons. Do thou slight God in thy youthful health, when to have served him
early is the unspeakable consolation of old age, and which they who then want
it would purchase with all the World, if they had it, upon their Deathbed? Is
not old age burden enough except it be plagued with the heavy remembrance of a
wicked life? This has made many to cry out with him in the Tragedy,

(...), etc. Euripid.


Alas for me, that men may not grow younger twice, and as often old, that so I
might in my after life correct what was not well done in the former part of it.

4. Though a man begin never so soon, this work of Repentance is not to be done
of a sudden: It will require great pains, and much time; and therefore none is
to be lost. Can sin, which has taken deep root in the soul, be drawn up at the
first pull? Can our unwillingness to do it be mortified in a moment? Is a habit
of sin soon mastered? No; but as we have been longer in contracting it, and so
making it stronger; it will not be conquered but by the contrary habit of
Virtue, which requires time to be implanted, grow and get strength in the soul.
It may be that we have many Vices to overcome, and do we hope to do that
presently? We have committed many Errors, and can we repent of them all on a
sudden? We have many things to do, and those not easy to one accustomed to
sin; We are to make our selves Vessels meet for our Masters use, but it will
require time to do it, considering how we are put out of order by sin; and
therefore all possible speed is necessary in the practice of Repentance.

2. As Repentance must be speedy, so it must be sincere; and that we shall
find, if it answer those descriptions of it which are given in holy Scripture,
where it is called The renewing of the mind, crucifying the old man and his
deeds, putting off the body of sin and destroying it, crucifying the flesh with
the affections and lusts, purging our selves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, and perfecting holiness in Gods fear, being made new creatures and
partakers of a Divine Nature, with many more expressions to the same purpose.

The Sense of which is comprehended in these four Particulars.

1. Sincere Repentance begins in a change of the inward disposition; for which
Reason the true Convert is called a new man, as we learn from Ephesians. 4. and the
alteration is so great, that it denominates the Penitent to be a new Creature;
Gal. 6.
which is not meant as to Transubstantiation of Nature, but Emendation of
Temper, making the Penitent not another person, but a better Man. A few
Scriptures considered will make this so plain, that every one may know what it
means, and judge himself accordingly. It consists in two things,

1. In change of Apprehension. 2. In Alteration of Affection.
1. In change of Apprehension; he which is truly Penitent has another sense of
things than he had before, which the Apostle calls renewing in the spirit of
the mind, by which he now understands the goodness of God, and perceives that
to be perfect and most acceptable, of which he had but mean thoughts before.
The carnal mind perceives not the things of God, they are foolishness to him;
he understands no reason in them: but the true Penitent has received another
mind, is made spiritual, and so can discern them, and acknowledges that to be
the chiefest wisdom, which before he accounted extreme folly. He which lives in
sin is so besotted with carnal Lust, that he can see no reason in Spiritual
things; no more can a blind man judge of colors. The true Penitent thinks
highly now of the favor of God, which he regarded not before; and counts all
things dross in comparison of the knowledge of Christ, which he despised
before; understands the Promises to be of infinite value, which he contemned
before; he is convinced of the necessity of God's pardon, the excellency of
Holiness, the reasonableness of virtue, and the necessary connection which is
between goodness and happiness.

2. It consists also in Alteration of Affections; for as he understands things
better, so he is otherwise affected toward them: without this the former would
be no proof of a sincere change, but a sign of hypocrisy, which a true
Penitent does as passionately desire to throw out of his soul, as he would cast
the Devil out of his House, if it were possessed by him. Many Scriptures speak
this plain enough, Gal. 5.
Those who are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with its affections and lusts
-- and have put off the old man, Ephesians. 4. 22
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts. The true Convert has a new
heart, another spirit, as it is called Number. 14. 24. The heart of stone is broke
in pieces, and being cast away, one of flesh is put in the room of it; which is
easily known, for by its softness it receives impressions from those things
which before wrought nothing upon it. The Iron sinew is broken, and the stiff
neck made pliable, stoops to the yoke of Christ. Self-will is denied, and
uncontrolled appetite passes into a state of mortification; the same mind
beginning to be in the Convert which was in Christ Jesus; he says with him, Not
my will, O Father, but thine be done: That which pleases thee shall please me.
Greedy desire cease, Covetousness languishes, Pride is melted down into
Humility, Feroculum illud and petulcum animal cicuratur, Insolence and abusive
temper is altered into sweetness and respect, Goatish lasciviousness is changed
into chastity of disposition, Revenge turned into Forgiveness, Malice into
Charity.

He which has repented sincerely, will by this find his conversion not to be a
vain pretense, because he perceives Religion to have passed into his Nature,
and the Gospel become a principle of new life in his soul, and that by the
sincere entertainment of it there he contrarily says of himself, I am not I;
Ego non sum ille Ego, I am not that I which I was before: He is another man, a
new Creature, a man now after Gods Heart: He is now a Sacrifice acceptable to
God, because he is salted with fire, that is, the vigor of the holy Gospel
has eaten out the Impurity of his Affections, and like a Divine Salt dried up
those corruptions which putrify the soul.

2. The sincerity of Repentance declares it self in outward expressions
agreeable to the inward change, and makes the course of life answerable to the
temper of heart. The Scripture tells us of newness of life as well as of the
new man. The Baptist told his Proselytes this same thing, when he bad them
bring forth fruits meet for Repentance; Mat. 3.
that is, to do works agreeable to the nature of the thing it self and the
profession of it. The sincere Penitent brings forth such fruits, as demonstrate
the Doctrines of the Gospel like living Roots to have been implanted in his
heart; i. e. he performs such actions as flow properly from virtuous
Dispositions and Habits. This the Apostle told the Galatians in other words,
Gal. 5. 25.
If you live in the Spirit, walk in the Spirit -- If you live -- i. e. have
made the truth of the Gospel the principle of your life -- walk in the Spirit;
i. e. live according to them, and let the power of heavenly Doctrine shine
forth in the beauty of holy Conversation. The Penitent now acknowledges Christ
for his Master; but to little purpose, except he do what he commands him.

Without a true change of soul a man pretending to some acts of Religion, is
like a dead Tree, unto which some branches of Fruit are tied; and if he pretend
to have a living Root, but brings not forth answerable fruits, he may make a
plausible show, because possibly adorned with green leaves; but the Tree is
such as our Savior will cut down, and cast out of his Garden. Our Savior has
given but one Rule, and they will do foolishly that go about to make another to
know the goodness of a Tree by, and that is the fruit of it; Matt. 7. 16.
For a good Tree brings forth good fruits. He does not say that the Tree
which is bad now, may not be made good, and then bring forth good fruits, for
that it may; but that so long as it brings forth corrupt fruits it is bad. Most
are ready to allow this Rule when they make a Judgment of others; but does it
not hold as well when they apply it to themselves? Yes; and therefore St. John
said well, 1 Ioh. 3. 7.
Little Children, let no man deceive you: he that does righteousness is
righteous, even as he is righteous. Let no man deceive you -- Why, were any in
danger in that point? Yes, many did then, as they do still, flatter themselves
that a good heart to God, as they call it, and some certain desire of living
well, will be sufficient to their Salvation: No, says the Apostle, He that
does righteousness, is righteous: He that will be accepted of God must do
righteousness, present to God an obedient Faith, by which of old, as the Author
to the Hebrews tells us, they wrought righteousness: as he, Ioh. 8. 29.
that is Christ, was righteous, and so was accepted of his Father; because, as
he said himself, He always did those things which pleased him. He who will
assure himself of his sincerity, must make no new Rules to judge of it, but
keep true to the old one, and not rest satisfied that he knovvs his Duty, and
approves of the Divine Will, or that he has some desires to be obedient; No,
he must truly perform the actions which agree with Gospel Principles and
Laws, still remembering that of our Savior, who is also our Judge, Ioh. 13.
17.
If you know these things, happy are you if you do them.

3. When you have got so far, and find the state of your soul right in the
forementioned Particulars, then remember that you must make your conformity to
the aforesaid Rules universal, and your Obedience uniform to all the parts of
the Gospel. If your Obedience be partial, you will find nothing within or
without that will keep you from being at a loss, as to the proof of your
sincerity. If it be necessary to forsake sin, it is necessary to forsake all
sin.

It was the Prayer of the Psalmist, Ps. 119. 18
That he might be found in Gods Statutes, and so not be ashamed. How did he
hope to attain this? He tells us, v. 6.
Then shall I not be ashamed, then I shall be sound, when I have respect to
all thy Commandments. Then I shall have confidence that I am a sincere Servant
of God, when I indulge no sin, when I devote my soul to entire Obedience, and
knovvingly disregard no Law of his.

This cannot be more clearly represented, than by that which St. James James
2. 10.
has said concerning this matter, Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet
offend in one point, is guilty of all. If any say, How can we keep the
whole, and fail in part, when the whole includes all the parts? They may
easily perceive that the Apostle means, Whosoever keeps the greater part, and
fails in some particular, disobeys some Law of Christ, is guilty of all; by
sinning vvilfully against one, he is guilty of all; i. e. he which sincerely
respects the Authority of the Lavv-giver, will shovv it in obedience to his
whole Law; for he which slights it in one, is guilty of the breach of the
rest, inasmuch as he contemns the Authority which gave them all. That this is
his meaning we are taught by verse 11. which says thus, For he which said, Do
not commit Adultery, said also, do not kill: Now if thou commit no Adultery,
yet if thou kill, thou art become a Transgressor of the Law; and so art guilty
of the breach of all, i. e. shall be as liable to Condemnation, as if thou
had sinned against all: Neither shall Obedience performed to some Laws save
thee from the punishment which is due to the breach of others. He which
serves a Prince in many things, and yet offends against some Capital Law,
will not find his partial obedience save him from the sentence of punishment
which shall be passed upon him for that.

To this I may add that excellent saying of our Savior to the Pharisees, Luke
11. 42.
when they pretended to be worthy of acceptance, because they had been very
observant of some things, though they neglected others; How! says our Savior,
These indeed you ought to have done, no doubt of it; but also you ought not to
have left the other undone. And since they pretended to obedience, v. 40.
for all this, Fools that you are, says our Savior, did not he which made
that which is without, make that which is within? You pretend to please God
with obedidience, you should do so; for he is the supreme Lawgiver; What then,
will you do it with partial obedience? Does he expect that all his Laws should
be obeyed, or does he give you leave to pick and choose? Did not God, the great
Former of all things, who made the inside and outside, expect that you should
be pure in soul and body? Do you think that external washings purify the soul?
You are as foolish in these thoughts, as he should be who thinks a Cup is
clean, when only the outside is washed. Will any man drink in such a Cup? You
please God indeed with your Obedience, when by sinning in some thing or other
you plainly affront him. He which thinks to be accepted of God for that partial
regard showed to some of his Precepts, when he slights others, can no more
obtain it, than a Lutonist can give content to such as have Musical ears, when
some Strings of the Instrument upon which he plays are out of Tune.

4. Sincerity must continue to approve it self such by perseverance. This I
shall explain as I find it expressed in two or three places of Sripture: -- I
will hear what God will speak to his servants, Ps. 85. 8.
begging mercy of him: v. 7.
and what does he say? He will speak peace to his people, he will receive their
prayers, and pardon their sins, if they repent sincerely of them: -- but let
them not return to folly -- This he requires as a Condition of their
Forgiveness, that they do not return to folly, which I have sufficiently
demonstrated sin to be; they must not relapse into their former courses, which
if they should, they will add to their former sottishness, and instead of
approving themselves sincere Penitents, show that they are most stupid Fools
and vile Hypocrites.

When our Savior healed the Paralytick; Ioh. 5. 14.
he bad him sin no more; and knowing by his Divine Wisdom what he had done 38
years before, which occasioned his weakness, bad him take heed of doing any
such thing again; assuring him, if he did, that he should be worse punished, as
a Contemned of the pardon now bestowed. So when the same merciful Jesus forgave
a very bad woman a sin great enough, Ioh. 8. 11.
he dismissed her not carelessly, but with this severe Injunction added, That
she should make her Repentance sincere by sinning no more. He did not say, Go,
go, thy Accusers are as bad as thy self, live as thou will, I accept thy
Repentance, I will save thee from punishment now and hereafter: No; but charged
her to be sincere in her Repentance; and as a Testimony of it, to sin no more.
By these Instances we may see what our Savior takes for a proof of sincerity,
and it seems that he expects it of all; for he prescribed the same method,
without alteration, to both.

A sincere Penitent is one that knows sin to be so base a thing, that nothing
but Infinite Goodness can forgive it; and is so sensible of the vile stain
which it leaves upon his soul, that he would, if he could, wash it off with
Tears of Blood; and can he easily go and commit it again? He is convinced that
the same wickedness and danger is in it, though set off with an agreeable
Tentation, as was before in it, when his Conscience was galled with reflection
upon the commission of it; and knows that he has as much need to sin no more,
after he has repented of it, as he had to vow he would not when he did repent.
Can Damnation be made plausible in any dress? Will any man drink Poison,
because he sees it sweetened with a great quantity of Sugar?

The ancient Fathers in their pious Discourses concerning Repentance did
usually inveigh against those which they called (...) and rejected those
Penitents, who sinning and repenting, but repenting and sinning still, checked
their life all along with one and the other; and affirmed, that such Converts
differed nothing from lame Unbelievers, except in this, that those false
Penitents knew they sinned, and so were worse; and pronounced peremptorily that
those who sinned, pretended to be sorry, but sinned still, had only a vain show
of Repentance; and that the true Penitent had such a sense of the nature of
sin, that he abhorred to commit it any more. The Author to the Hebrews calls it
Repentance from dead works; of which words what St. Chrysostom said is a very
good Exposition, Tom. 6. Orat. 19.
He which repents (...). Lactantius lib. 6. said, That to repent is to profess
and affirm that we will sin no more.

The Son of Sirach tells us what sense of old the Church of the God had
concerning the contrary sort of Repentance, Ecclus. 34. 25, 26.
in these words, If a man wash himself from the dead, and touches it again,
what good shall that washing do him? The Jews having touched any dead body,
were unclean by the Law given Number. 19. 11. and they were commanded to take it
off by water of Purification, as it is called; but if they had washed, and
touched it again, what good would that washing do? So he that repents and fasts
too, as they did in the days of solemn Humiliation, and then goes and does the
same things again, who will hear his prayer? and what good shall his
humiliation do him? He which bewails what is passed, and has no care to mend
for future, deplores his sin, and commits it again, is like one who washes an
unburnt Brick, the more water he pours on the fowler it is. It was the saying
of an ancient Writer, and what he said was warranted by one ancienter than he,
2 Pet 2. 21, 22.
St. Peter, who in his second Epistle has defined, that it is better never to
have known the way of Righteousness, which is the Gospel, than having known it
to turn from it. And he there compares that Repentance, which keeps not a man
from returning to sin, to the Dogs returning to his Vomit, and the washed Sows
tumbling again in the next mire. I shall close this with those words of our
Savior, Ioh. 8. 31.
which he spoke to such as believed on him, that they might assure themselves,
and not mistake for what they saw in themselves at present -- If you continue
in my words, i. e. the obedience of my Doctrine, you shall be my Disciples
indeed.

If that which has been said concerning Sincerity happen to raise doubts in
any soul concerning his estate, and he begins to say, That either the
Conditions of Salvation are very hard, or I am no true Christian. I must
answer, That if those things which I have said were not true, Christ's Gospel
would not be that which it most certainly is, the Mystery of Godliness, i. e.
the Doctrine of Holiness; and that it cannot be denied, but that Christ does
accept his Servants to mercy, though they do not perform perfect unsinning
Obedience: therefore I would speak something more to determine this matter, so
as not to encourage Hypocrisy, which is confessedly the worst of sins, nor yet
to discourage any that is sincere, because he is not perfect. Therefore I will
show what God requires of us, and what he will accoount sincerity. I will give
the Measures of it in five Particulars, which I will endeavor to adjust
according to the standard of the Sanctuary, the Infallible Rule, which is the
Word of God.

1. The Gospel requires great honesty of Intention, and simplicity of heart in
our Return to God. So the Prophet of his Penitents, Ier. 24. 7.
I will be their God, for they shall return to me with their whole heart,
having taken it quite off from their former Idolatries, and the Indulgence
which they had for their old sins. It was said of the Tribe of Zabulon, 1 Chronicles. 12. 33.
who came to restore David to his Throne, that they were not of a double heart;
pretending outwardly great love to David, but hankering in their minds to the
House of Saul. Just as the Israelites set their faces toward the Holy Land,
and journeyed toward it, but in their hearts turned back to Egypt. They kept
the steme of the Fleshpots in their phansies, and had the relish of the
Onions in their memories, and longed after them; and so went not toward the
promised Land with a full heart, but would have been glad of an opportunity to
have returned to Egypt. So I remember the Philistines Cows went when they
carried the Ark to Bethshemesh; they went, but they lowed as they went, and had
more mind to return to their Calves, than to go forward. Singleness of heart is
necessary for all who come unto God; and therefore the Son of Syrach warned all
such to take heed of approaching him with a double heart: Ecclus. 1. 28.
Which counsel St. James repeats, Iam. 4. 8.
Draw nigh to God, but first purify your hearts, you double minded, whose
Souls are partly for God, partly for Sin; which the Author to the Hebrews calls
drawing near with true heart, Hebr. 10. 22.
purged from all Hypocrisy, because the God with whom we have to do, loves
Truth in the inward parts, and can take no pleasure in such as are double
minded, i. e. fluctuate between a pretense of being virtuous, and a Law of sin,
called halting between two opinions; leaning one while one way, and one while
another, as those who halt do. It was not a piece, but all, which was meant in
that Demand, My Son give me thy heart; for so our Savior inculcating a Rule
long before given, says, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
with thy whole heart. The contrary is so odious to God, that he declared
plainly that he hated the Jews aforementioned, because their heart was not
whole with him; they did not follow him fully, Nam. 14. 24.
as was said of Ioshuah, who had another spirit, but turned aside like a
deceitful bow; you may as well make a crooked Bow, carry an Arrow directly to
the Mark, as present any thing acceptable to God with a false heart. Therefore
our Lord in his excellent Parable of the Sower has told us plainly, that his
Gospel will grow in no soil, but a good and honest heart. So St. Paul told the
Corinthians, that they could present no fruit as an acceptable Sacrifice to
God, 1 Cor. 5. 6.
except with unleavened bread of sincerity; for Hypocrisy sour's the person
and his actions.

The true Convert endeavors to bring himself to that pass, that he can say
truly, He loves God above all things; which cannot be, if he retain still the
love of any sin in his soul. That man is just as religious as the Assyrian
Samaritans, mentioned 2 King. 17. 33. who blending their Heathen Ceremonies
with Jewish Rites, made a Mungrel Worship, and served the Lord and their own
God's too. They did not know that the Law given was, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve. It was good counsel of the old
Philosopher, (...), Be one thing, deal plainly with God. Do thou pretend to
make over thy soul to God by a Deed, and art so weak as not to know that it
will be abhorred, when thou have spoiled the Grant which preserves, and maimed
it with a power of Revocation? Deal fairly; God will not be mocked. The true
Penitent must bid an Eternal farewell to all his former sins, and that he may
practice them no more, must cut off all affection to every sinful way; as the
wise General, when he had landed his men in the Country which he designed to
Conquer, burnt the Ships which brought him thither, that so his Soldiers might
not upon occasion think of a cowardly return.

Our Savior has declared, Luke 9. 62.
That he who puts his hand to the heavenly Plough, and does not renounce what
may make him look back, is not fit for the Kingdom of God. He which holds the
Plough, and often looks back, will make mad work on it; his Furrows will be all
crooked. Luke 17. 32.
When the same our Savior bids us, Remember Lot's wife, he signified to us
plainly enough, that such as have forsaken Sodom and their sins, must not look
back with hankering eyes upon them.

If thy heart be sincere with God, thou may do well to express it to God
upon thy knees in some such words as these are, O Lord, I have sinned against
thee, but I repent, and thou understandest the depth of my heart, and know
that I repent truly. Thou know all things; thou know that I love thee. In
thy sacred presence I make my Vow that I will obey thee. I will observe the
Rules of my Nature so far, as by them I am taught what my Duty is: and where
they fail, I will read carefully thy Gospel, and what I find there to be thy
Will, shall be to me an indispensable Law. I make this solemn protestation,
that I will harbor no Enemy of thine in my soul; and lest any thing lurk there
which may displease thee, let me know my heart by thy Instruction, and I will
cast it out. I desire to be in thy sight an Israelite indeed, and pray that I
may inherit the blessing which thou bestowest upon those in whose spirit is no
guile. This is well expressed in that holy Prayer which David made in these
words, Psa. 139. 23, 24.
Try me, O God, and seek the ground of my heart; prove me, and examine my
thoughts; look well if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the
way everlasting.

2. Honest Intention must be perfected with firm Resolution and fixed purpose
of soul; and that must be formed and settled by serious deliberation, that is,
due consideration of those things which are the matter of Obedience, and also
the difficulties which may occur in the doing them. He which undertakes the
business of Religion thus, will find in a little time that he needed to have
his Resolution so grounded. Our Savior in several of his excellent Discourses
has taught us this; let us consider some of them: Matt. 16. 24.
If any man will come after me, that is, to be my Disciple, let him deny
himself; he must think now of renouncing all self-will, and resigning himself
wholly to my Discipline, and take my yoke upon his Neck, yield himself wholly
to be governed by my Gospel. And lest we should be mistaken, and so fly off
afterward, our Savior has in that told us plainly what we must be, viz.
Godly, Righteous, Sober, Chaste, Humble, Charitable, Patient; and has shown us
fully what the work of his Servants is. Have you considered these things? Yes;
He requires nothing but what is exceeding good; I cannot be happy except I be
such a person as his Gospel requires. So far it is well, but this is not all;
for our Savior adds, That he must take up his Cross and follow him; i. e. he
must not only be willing to compose his temper and life according to our
Savior's Doctrine and Example, he must also be prepared to bear patiently
these Afflictions, which may happen to him only for being Christ's Disciple.

This our Savior declared in his general Discourses, and also when any
particular persons came to be Proselytes, he dealt plainly with them; and that
they might be fully informed, and follow him upon good grounds, he acquainted
them with what they might expect in his service. Matt. 8. 19, 20.
A certain Scribe, struck with admiration of his Miracles, and thereupon
possibly expecting that in a while such a Person would make his Disciples
great, professed that he would follow him wheresoever he went. Our Savior, to
see if this forward Man had any worthy Resolutions in him, told him how mean
his worldly condition was, in that the Foxes have holes in Earth, and Birds
have nests in Trees, but the Son of Man has not, as it happened to diverse of
his Servants, any certain Habitation: No House of his own for himself, much
less to entertain his followers. He bad him think of this, and then resolve
what to do.

For the fuller Explication of this matter concerning the right forming of
Christian Resolution, let us read that Discourse which our Savior made to a
great Multitude, when he was giving them his Divine Instruction touching this
affair: Luke 14. 26, 27, etc.
He which will be my Disciple, must not only embrace my Doctrine; but must make
account that possibly many things will fall out to him for his profession and
practice of my Religion, which will not be very pleasing to flesh and blood; he
may perchance offend not only his Neighbors, but his Parents, and and make
Enemies to him of his best Friends; may endanger the losing of his Liberty, and
after that his Life; and yet for all this he must not forsake my service: For
if any man come unto me, and does not hate his Father, Mother, Wife, and
Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea and his own Life, cannot be my
Disciple. Which words cannot be understood properly; for it is impious to hate
our Parents and other Relations, and absurd to hate ones self; but he means,
and other Scriptures teach us so, that we must love all persons and things less
than our Savior; and that will appear, when we suffer none of them to make us
desert the Obedience which we have promised him. And he that does not take up
his Cross, and come after me, etc. Not that Persecutions do always follow the
profession of Christian Religion; or that any man is bound upon the undertaking
of it, to abandon all he has in the World; v. 33.
not that we should presently do it because we are Christians, but that we
should be prepared to do it, preferring our Savior before all things, and
being resolved to part with all, rather than break our Faith given to him.

To illustrate further what he said concerning this way of forming a
Resolution, our Savior adds two Comparisons, taken from the Rules which men
follow in building Houses and making War. If any man think of raising a House,
he must cast up what it will cost him, both for Materials and Work; and if he
begin to build, being either not provided for so much Charge, or not willing to
lay it out, he will leave off in the middle of an imperfect Design, and be
laughed at for a foolish Undertaking: Or if a man go to War, he will consult
with himself whether he has Supplies enough for his Expedition, and Forces
sufficient to fight his Adversary; else he will think it better to keep Peace
if he have it, or send Ambassadors for it upon as good Conditions as he can
get. So in this Spiritual building or warfare, for in diverse respects Religion
may be compared to both, we must be at much cost, a great deal must be laid
out, and the Enemy which we have to oppose will bring much Force against us;
therefore we must prepare before hand, by considering what we will do when it
comes to the push, and bear the Crosses which we may meet, and follow Christ
notwithstanding any inconvenience which may happen to us for so doing. He which
frames his Resolution so, will not be surprised, i. e. have his heart infeebled
with sudden Assaults; he foresaw what would come: neither will he be weakened by
the Conflict, he prepared himself for the Encounter before hand. The wise Son
of Syrach understood this well when he said, My son, if thon come to serve
the Lord, prepare thy soul for tentation; which must be done by planting a firm
Resolution of Obedience in the bottom of our hearts. Our Savior has given the
reason of this in the Parable of the Sower, where he tells us of many that may
receive the Seed, that is the Doctrine of his Gospel, into their hearts with
joy, and it may seem to grow and flourish in their life, and yet it shall
wither in the time of Tentation, because it wanted root, had not depth of earth
and moisture, as the Evangelists phrase it differently, but meaning the same
thing, i. e. a well fixed Resolution will maintain future Obedience, as Corn is
nourished and supported by sufficiency of moisture, which it receives from a
sound root fixed deep in a moist ground, and by that enabled to bring its fruit
to perfection.

The Hypocrite and sincere Christian considered together in this matter, seem
to me to be well represented by Orphanah and Ruth, when they began a Journey
with Naomi their Mother in Law, pretending that they would accompany her from
the Land of Moab to her own Country -- They both set out with great
forwardness; Ruth 1. 10.
but when Naomi told them what small expectation of worldly advantage they
could have in her, Orphanah's love began to vanish, and extended only a
farewell kiss; v. 16.
but Ruth having heard the worst of it, would not be so shaken off -- I
perceive how it is, but my Resolution continues firm for all that, --
wheresoever thou go I will go; and nothing but death shall part thee and me.
So the true Christian to our Savior, I will follow thee, O Lamb of God,
wherever thou go: I do not bargain with thee for small way and fair weather;
nothing but death, no nor death it self shall part thee and me: As thy love to
me, O Jesus, was stronger than death, so shall mine be to thee. Neither things
present nor things to come, nor life nor death could separate St. Paul from the
Love of Christ.

Thus a Christian does become steadfastly minded, or as in the Hebrew,
strengthens himself in his Resolution, exhorting himself, as the Apostle did
the Antiochians, to cleave to God with purpose of heart. Acts 11. 23.
He did not make them believe that they should not suffer much inconvenience if
they did so: No; for he told them, as others, that they must through many
Tribulations enter into the Kingdom of God, but that they should resolve to
suffer hardship as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, as he told Timothy, and gave
him for a pattern his own purpose, with which he was well acquainted, which was
to serve Christ his Master, though he knew how many and how great Afflictions
awaited him continually in all places for so doing.

If any say, It is necessary to form a strong Resolution; but will such
thoughts as those do it? will the fore-consideration of mischiefs prepare us
against them? Men by foreseeing evils that may happen, do excite themselves to
take care to avoid them by steering a Course contrary to that which may lead
upon them. To this I answer, That considering before hand what Inconveniences
may happen to us in a matter undertaken upon weighty Reasons, will make them
hurt us less when we meet them: but that is not all which I meant as to this
Method of forming our Resolution; for that we must add the strengthening of
Faith in our souls, that we may have a firm belief of these things which the
Gospel has propounded to encourage us to undertake the Obedience of it,
notwithstanding all discouragements, and that is the great Reward which shall
be given to obedient Souls. When our Savior told such as came to him, that
possibly they might lose Father, Mother, Lands, Life, for his sake, it had been
a very poor Motive to make them embrace his Doctrine if he had said no more;
but he added, that such as did so should have an hundred fold more, that is,
more true satisfaction in what they did, than they could have had in any other
way in this life, and in the world to come life everlasting, or eternal
happiness.

Now that he who purposes to obey Christ's Gospel sincerely must fortify his
Resolution with the strength of Faith, is well expressed by an Apostle who had
Experience in this matter: 1 Pet. 5. 9, 10.
The Devil was in the world like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he might devour,
and would, if he could, by Persecution destroy Christianity, whom resist, being
steadfast in the Faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in
your Brethren who are in the world. But the God of all Grace, the most merciful
God, who has called us to eternal Glory by Christ Jesus, after you have
suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. By what?
another Apostle tells us, Col. 2. 5.
by the (...); or as v. 7. stablished in or by Faith, by which you are fixed to
your Savior, as a Tree is to a strong Root, or a House to a deep Foundation,
for he uses both Metaphors. Our Savior has made no new Methods since, and
therefore every sincere Christian must make use of this in the forming of his
Resolution, and in so doing he may say thus to himself -- O my Soul, thou art
now setting upon a course of holy Life according to the Precepts of thy
Savior, be real and make thy purpose strong, saying with that holy man, I have
fully purposed to offend no more, I will serve thee with my whole soul from the
bottom of my heart; I make a Resignation of my self to thy will, and bind my
self by a firm Vow, the strongest Bond I can find, that I will keep thy
Commandments; and when the Enemy of my soul shall tell me that thus I shall
miss the pleasure of sin, I will tell him, I know it, and that they are but for
a season, and to be despised in comparison of the favor of God, and joy of
doing what we should; and when he adds that probably I shall suffer in this way
many things not very pleasing to the flesh, I will tell him, that whatsoever
they are I reckon them unworthy to be compared to the reward of Obedience; and
when he frights me with the austerity of a strict life, I will tell him, that
excellent things have difficulty, and ask him, if he have not in his Ramblings
observed the careful observances of a Wrestler or Racer, how punctually they
keep themselves to strict methods of preparation for their Conflict, when all
that they hoped for was but a Crown of fading Leaves; and is it irrational for
me to do all I can for an eternal Crown? When he bids me look upon those
multitudes of suffering Christians, whom Religion brought into misery, in which
they perished, I will tell him that I will follow their Faith, considering the
end of their Conversation, the happy close of their holy Lives, which removed
them into the regions of endless Bliss, and thither I will follow them. And if
he say, But he whom you call Savior was crucified. Yes I will Answer, and died
and was buried, but he rose from the dead, and ascended into Heaven, and bade
me follow him; and because I hope ere long to be with him, I will keep in my
way, which will certainly bring me unto him.

3. To these two we must add a careful use of those means which are appointed
to make us such as we are commanded to be; Christ never intended his Gospel for
idle souls, i. e. such as will take no pains to be saved, who will not
carefully endeavor to be made good. They are not for Christ, those delicate
persons who cannot endure to think of working out their salvation with fear and
trembling, nor will hear of giving diligence to be found of God in peace. Our
Savior has told us expressly, that he will condemn that Servant, Luke 12. 47.
who did not prepare himself to do his Masters Will, either in the day time
being girt fit for any service, and being ready with lighted Candles to expect
his Master when he comes home at night.

A negligent Temper is odious in this business.

1. Because it is trifling in a matter of greatest Importance. 2. Because it is
sordid, and would serve the great and good God with that which costs it
nothing.
1. This Temper is far from that which should be in a sincere Christian, if it
be liable to the said Reproaches, as indeed it is. That man whom sin has made
sick, and will not carefully use the means appointed for his recovery, either
understands not his danger, or supposes the method prescribed for the cure of
his Disease not necessary, or will not be at the trouble of undertaking such
things as are requisite to his recovery, and rather than do so, will remain in
his sin, that is, die of his sickness; What prudent Physician would meddle with
such a Patient? It may be the sick Hypocrite would do some little things, when
such as are very great are necessary for his health. This is well expressed in
that smart Letter which Diogenes wrote to Dionysius, when some vain
Philosophers flattered him in his great Vices: Alas! man, said Diogenes, thy
Diseases are such that they need cuttings and burnings; but thou have got
together a few Dissemblers, which say to thee as fond Grandmothers and Nurses
do to sick Children, (...), i. e. Take this my Child, pour it in, if you love
me do, a little more, eat but this small bit. Triflers! The Children are
extreme sick, and must be made to take their Physic, or die. The sincere
Christian knows that our necessitous condition requires a great care for the
repair of it; that the Gospel which we are to obey is a Law of great Holiness,
and has in it many Commandments, requires obedience in thought, temper, and
action; yes, and that with resistance of many Temptations, strong, because
agreeable to our natural Appetites, which will make our work to go on sometimes
like that of the Waterman, when he hales his Boat against the Stream -- And we
shall find hindrances from infirmity of Flesh, and inconstancy of Spirit,
distractions of our Senses and many wild Phansies, besides the malice of a
watchful Devil. By this the Penitent sees what need he has of great care in
the use of all means, which may carry him on in his course; and he says, Since
my Savior has showed me the value of my Soul, that it is of more worth than
the acquist of all the pleasures in the World for my whole Life, and has in
great kindness told me how I may save it, I will carefully keep to his methods,
knowing, that if I use not the means given me for the avoiding of sin, I shall
be both guilty of the sin I commit, and of negligence in not endeavoring to
prevent it, and so draw upon my self foolishly a double curse. He has called
me to the heavenly Journey, and I will undertake it. It is an easy thing to
take a Map and travel over a great part of the World by the Eye; but he that
will arrive at a Country far distant from his own, must go over many craggy
Hills, pass through many deep ways, and cross rough Seas before he can get
thither; he that will not begin his Journey except it be made as easy to be
performed, as to be looked over in a Map, does plainly show that he did never
heartily, or else most foolishly, design it. He which has a Watch in his
Pocket may expect that it should tell him the hours of the Day, but not unless
he skrew the Spring to a just strength, and wind it up at due seasons. God has
put a Divine Principle like a Spring of holy Life in our Souls, and it will
show its force in us by making us feel in our selves a strong propension to
God, and an inclination to all goodness; but we must wind it up daily, and
strengthen it with such Meditations and Prayers as may keep it in vigor. Of
what life is a Watch, when the Spring is spoiled or unbent? Divine Grace is
like sparks of Fire hid in the Soul, but we must blow them up, as the Apostles
word is ((...)) the Fire will go out, 2 Timothy 1. 6.
which is not maintained with proper fuel, and the Spirit may be quenched. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.


2. The forementioned Temper is rejected by the sincere Christian; because it
is sordid, and would serve the great and good God with that which costs little
or nothing. He that would do as little as he can in Gods service, has but mean
thoughts of that great God with whom he has to do, and understands not the
greatness of that reward which God has in his infinite goodness promised to
such as serve him sincerely; or is so base, that however he will do no more
than pleases himself in point of Obedience. If this Christian had been a Jew,
you should have seen him go to his Fold, and there seek up and down till he had
found out a sheep, either lame, or such as had but one eye, if none were quite
blind, and that he would have gone and offered for a Sacrifice: but God did
then, and does still abhor that vile Temper. It Is true, God is so good, that in
some cases he does accept the Will for the Deed, when it is impossible to be
performed: but when the Case is otherwise, we shall forfeit our sincerity, and
for not preparing our selves to do our Master's Will be beaten with many
stripes. God is so gracious, that he has mercy upon our Ignorance, and pities
our invincible infirmities, and forgives that sin which we could not possibly
or probably avoid, and he helps our weaknesses: but still requires that we
should always stand upon our guard, watch always against surprises, as well as
abhor voluntary Transgression, desiring and endeavoring nothing so much as to
please God; and so much the rather, because we perceive that the Master whom
we serve is so gracious, that he acaccepts what we have done heartily and
sincerely, though it was not the most we could have done, nor done in the
best manner that possibly we could.

4. Sincerity also supposes that which Christ will require in every true
Disciple of his, a good attainment, a competent proficiency in the state of
Virtue. It were a mean business, if the sincerity of Christian Religion should
be contracted into a few cold Wishes, and the attainment of its Professors,
should not exceed the faint Wouldings of Hypocrites; especially since the
Christian Religion is the most Noble in its Design, and works with the
highest Principles, and yet improve the progress of its Disciples but into such
a motion as a Door has upon the Hinges, and so leave them in the sad condition
of those Hypocrites whom the Apostle reproacheth, who were always learning, 2 Timothy 3. 7.
but never came to the knowledge of the Truth; who were always learning,
came to those places where the Gospel was taught, but were never able to
come to experience the Truth of it in themselves. What was the Reason? Because
they gave heed to the Heretical Doctrine of some seducing Teachers, and so
nourished their Hypocrisy in Error; but if they had received the Truth of the
Gospel in the love of it, and resigned themselves to the government of it with
sincerity, it would have made them another kind of people. For this hear our
Savior -- You shall know the Truth, Ioh. 8 32
and the Truth shall make you free -- If you receive my Gospel with sincere
Faith, it will shovv it self in its effects upon you, it will make you free.
From what? from the slavery of sin, from all habitual sin, and also from the
acts of gross sins, every one of which is damnable; which, as Tertullian said,
a Child of God cannot do, or must cease to be the Child of God if he do them,
as Murder, Adultery, Perjury, Idolatry, etc. And if the true Penitent have been
formerly given to any sin, he will forsake that too: So David, I kept me from
mine Iniquity: Ps. 18. 23.
yes, when he had repented; and if he had not, he could not have had any
testimony of sincerity. The attainment of a sincere Christian is to have
goodness habitual to the soul, to be pleased with doing his Duty. For this see
1 John 5. 3. This is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and his
Commandments are not grievous. For whosoever is born of God overcomes the
World; and this is the victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith. The
sincere Christian shovvs his Love in Obedience, and not only so, but delights
to do his Duty. God's Commands are not grievous, i. e. as our Savior said
before, his yoke is easy, and his burden is light; and being born of God, he
overcomes the World by the Spirit of Faith which is in him, which is
stronger than the Spirit that is in the World.

This our Savior expects, as we see in the promise which he made after his
Ascension to him that overcomes: not to him which fights only; no, but to him
that overcomes; and this he might well do, because he gave power not only to
fight, but to overcome; and said long before, that to whom much is given, of
them more shall be required, that is, such improvement as may answer the
bestovving.

When our Savior compared himself to a Vine, and his Servants to the Branches
of it, supposing that he gave them sufficient vital Juice for the purpose, Ioh.
15. 8.
he told them that they were to glorify his Father by bringing forth much
fruit, and then they should be, and appear plainly to be his Disciples. By
which it is manifest, that our great Shepherd would have his Flock to be such
Sheep as those which Epictetus mentions, who were not to bring their Hay and
Grass and lay it before their Shepherds, to let them see how much they had
eaten; but having well digested their Food, were to bring it forth in Milk and
Wool, and so to approve themselves to him who sed them. So sincere Christians
are not to declare what they are in words or profession, much less in vain
ostentation, or to make excuses for what they are not; but having concocted our
Savior's Doctrine in their souls, do as St. James teaches, Iam. 3. 13.
Show out of a good conversation their works with meekness of wisdom.

Here I think it not unfit to admonish every one, who would have the Testimony
of their Conscience concerning their sincerity, that they should take heed of
excusing themselves to God, when they are not such as they should be; no,
though they may seem to have some places of Scripture on their side. And for
this I think it may not be amiss to relate to you, what St. Chrysostom told
his Church at Constantinople upon this occasion; he had often reproved them for
going to the Heathen shows, which by their immodesty were offensive to the
chaste, and also odious by their cruel effusion of Humane blood; After this
some of his wandering Sheep had gone to them again, and when he still continued
his Reproof, they answered, That truly they did what they would not, but
thought that was no great matter, since St. Paul made the same Defense for
himself; and so they were not more to be blamed than he, since they disliked
what they did. This hypocritical pretext put the holy man into a fit of
passionate Zeal, and he fell thus upon them; What, says he, do you not only
serve sin, but abuse the holy Scripture? Do you satisfy your lusts, and then
reproach the honor of an Apostle? I, I, every one that loves to sin, desires
to find out some excuse, which might maintain his practice; and now you fall
foul upon an Apostle, though I know it is not with an intent to reproach him,
but to make an Apology for your selves. Then that they might not think that St.
Paul spoke those words in that Chapter of himself; but in the person of one in
conflict with sin, but at present overcome by it, and being sensible of his
Danger, cries out, O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body of death? and that St. Paul himself was not now carnal, sold under sin, to
obey what it commanded; he adds, Was St. Paul carnal, in whom Christ lived, who
was governed by the Holy Ghost, who had Christ always speaking in him? etc. To
which one may very well add, What, was St. Paul only a Servant of Christ's in
Notion of Mind, but not in Obedience of Will, who had served him faithfully so
many years, and suffered the loss of all things for him, and was ready to do so
again? Whom the Law of the Spirit of Life had made free from the Law of Sin and
Death? who lived, but no longer he, but Christ in him, willing what he would in
him, and doing what he would by him; for to him he had resigned Soul and Body?
Strange! Is it the Art of a true Christian to contrive how he may evade his
Duty instead of doing it? Will any wise man build the peace of his Conscience,
and lay the stress of his hopes upon Excuses? Can any man make us believe that
the chief of the Apostles was so dull, as not to see a difference between an
Excuse and an Aggravation? Does any thing aggravate a sin more than to commit
it against ones conscience? Was this the sincerity of an old Disciple, the
attainment of Paul the aged? Had he but so learned Christ, or taught him no
better? To excuse himself that he sinned, he did what his Conscience told him
he should not have done? He has rejected this vile pretense as much as can be
in two places, where he speaks plainly of himself, Act. 13. 1.
I have lived in all good Conscience to this day; i. e. according to the
Principles of Virtue, which he had being a Jew; and what, did he grow worse
afterward? No: for he says, that having received Christian Principles, he did
then, as being more obliged, Acts 24. 16.
exercise himself always to have a Conscience void of offense to God and Man.
It had been a brave Defense (had it not?) for the Primitive Christians to have
told the Heathens according to this interpretation, that they desired to be
better than they, but were indeed as bad; especially since they had received in
their Regeneration a power, which enabled them to overcome those sins to which
the Heathens were slaves. For so the same Apostle, Gal. 5. 16.
Walk in the Spirit, and you shall not fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh. Not that
he meant dully, if they live in the Spirit, they should not live in the Flesh;
no, but that, if you follow the conduct of the Spirit, you will receive those
assistances from it, which shall enable you to overcome those Tentations which
Hypocrites pretend as the only Excuses, why they live after the Flesh. But
these assistances must be made use of. A man may be overcome of another, not
stronger than himself, if he will not use the Arms which he has to defend
himself. It is promised that if we resist the Devil, he shall fly from us --
But can any man think that if he do not resist the Devil, he will fly from him?
or that his yielding to the Devil will be any excuse to him when he is
overcome, and made his Slave, when he did not resist him?

To close this; since foolish Excuses are useless in these matters, let every
sincere Christian say to himself -- O my soul, it is time for thee to know what
thou have attained in Christian Religion, to seek a proof of Christ dwelling in
thee, and to find a good Evidence of true goodness. What does all that thou
have done amount to? Do thou find in thy self a thankfulness which is in some
good measure answerable to the goodness of Christ's Love, and the many Benefits
which thou have received from him? Have thou that Reverence toward him which
is due to the Dignity of his Person? Is thy Temper conformable to his Gospel,
and thy Life to his holy Example? Do thou only please thy self in the
contemplation of Divine Truths, and rest in the speculation of heavenly things?
do thou not also endeavor to find the power of Gospel Motives working in thy
soul to the ends for which they were propounded? Do thou carefully read the
holy Gospel, that thou may not be ignorant of, or forget any part of thy
Duty, and then pray with hearty Devotion for Grace to help thee to obey, and
then make use of what is bestowed, that thou may receive more, as need
shall require? Do thou give thy self leave to make Hypocritical Excuses for
Disobedience, and pretending that Christ is made Righteousness to us, think
that thou may indulge some sin in thy self? or rather abhorring that
falsness, do thou endeavor to give Testimony of thy Love to Christ's
Person, by obeying his Commands, and seek Reconciliation with God only upon
the terms which he has appointed? Do thou find that as the first purposes of
thy soul were to obey, so the habitual inclination of thy mind does propound
still the same way, and that the constant workings and daily motions of thy
soul are all set for the accomplishment of thy holy purposes? The good man, who
finds that it is thus with him, will be conscious to himself of his sincerity
to God; the inward sense and feeling of his soul will tell him, that his
Conversion is sincere: as a man knows himself to be an honest man, who
endeavors in all his actions to keep himself close to the Rules of good Life.

5. To what has been said I need ad no more, but that the sincere Christian
makes a daily progress toward the perfection of degrees, goes on to
perfection, as the Author to the Hebrews said. The sincere Christian does not
make it his work vainly to compare himself with others, whose defects he thinks
he has espied, and please himself in what he has attained, because they are
not so good; but humbly desires by daily endeavors to grow better than himself,
and to bring the sincerity of his estate nearer to the perfection of Degrees.
He is mindful of the advice given, to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ. He grows in knowledge, who understands his way to God
better and better; for the light of the Righteous shines more and more to
perfect day. The Traveller that understands his way pretty well, having a great
Journey to go, rises it may be by Moonlight, or takes the first dawnings of
the Morning for his Guidance; but as the day comes on, he grows more assured by
the clear light. But he grows in Grace too, i. e. he is bettered in soul, and
does his Duty to God better, and rides on more confidently, and with more
speed, as the Traveller does when he has more light to assure him of his way.

We learn from the Apostles of the Gospel Assistances bringing a good Christian
(...), Ephesians. 4. 13
to a perfect man, to that measure of stature which is full of Christ; and
makes the Christian like a man who is arrived to those years which bestow upon
him a great vigor of strength, a firm constitution ((...)) which the Apostle
prayed for the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 13. 9.
which he there calls (...), consummation in grace, which the Romans having
obtained, he said of them, that they were full of goodness. Romans 15. 14.
Our Savior is said to have grown in stature of body, Luke 25. 2.
in spirit, and in favor with God and Man, i. e. to have increased in such
Virtues, and abounded in such Actions, as did exceedingly please God and Man.
St. John calls this prospering in soul by merciful Additions of grace, 3 Ioh. 2.
which he prayed for his Friend Gaius.

That which a good man should endeavor in this matter, St. Paul has expressed
to the life in his own practice, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14.
i. e. I have not yet attained I am not made perfect, but I follow on, that I
may get to the further end, Christ leading me by the hand, and helping me
forward, which makes me to forget what is behind, and to add to what I have
done well, creeping forward, and pressing toward the Mark, that I may not come
short of the prize. I will end this Discourse with a short Gloss upon what is
said by David in a pathetick Psalm, Psalm. 84.
who makes mention of the great desire which the Israelites had under the
Mosaic Dispensation to go to Jerusalem, that there they might enjoy the
presence of God in his Temple; and this passion did so transport them, that
they envied the Happiness of Sparrows and Swallows, Birds which had leave to
make their nests there; but more admired the felicity of God's Servants who
dwelt in that House, enjoying the manifestations of the Divine Presence, and
praising God continually for the many and great Mercies which they had received
from him, and then pronouncing them happy in whose hearts were the ways
thither, i. e. who set and prepared their minds, resolving to be there, and
passing from Valley to Valley (for the Rode lay from Hill to Hill) with
unwearied steps traveled till they came to that most desirable place. -- This
does every sincere Christian; his aim is at the heavenly Jerusalem, i. e. the
Vision of Peace which is in the presence of God, and he makes all his life one
constant Journey thither, and is therefore truly called one of that Generation
of Travelers who march toward Sion, Psalm. 24.
and each day of his life is a step in his way: and though by the common
accidents of this life he may be so hindered that he shall slack his pace
awhile, and by the slumbers of the Night necessary to refresh his wearied Body,
his more active thoughts are laid asleep; yet the very Night passing on with
silent Minutes carries him, as a ship under sail does the Passenger sleeping in
his Cabin, nearer to his Port, and when he is awake, perceiving that he is
still in his way, he goes on rejoicing, and makes what haste he can to come to
his Journeys end, the fruition of God in Heaven.

Having shown the Nature of Repentance, I come now to urge the Practice of it
with three Motives, which are these, 1. The first is taken from the
reasonableness of Repentance in its own Nature. 2. The second is that
Encouragement which we have to it from the goodness of God, who is willing to
forgive the Penitent. 3. The third is taken from the great and inevitable
Mischief which awaites Impenitence.


1. It is fit that sinners should repent, because sin is the most unnatural
thing in the World. The state of sin is a contra-natural Temper, and the
actions in which it expresses it self, are most unreasonable. When John the
Baptist was sent before our Savior to prepare his way, that is, to dispose men
for the receiving of his Gospel, which is called Luke 1. 17. to make a people
ready prepared for the Lord, when he begun his work, by turning the disobedient
to the wisdom of the just; he was said Mat. 17. 11. (...), to restore all
things; the word signifies Reponere in naturae congruentem statum, to reduce
men into a state agreeable to Nature, which by sin was discomposed. What can be
more unnatural, than for the hearts of Fathers to be set against their
Children, and for Children to hate their Parents? Out of that unreasonable
course of sin he brought them by Repentance into their natural Station.

For the reason asoresaid, sin in Scripture is called distraction of mind; for
when the Prodigal Son made sensible of his Error returned to his Duty, Luke 15.
17.
he is said, (...), to come to himself; Sin had made him mad. The Prophet
Isaiah gives notice of the same thing, when he said, Isa. 46. 8.
Show your selves men, return to your mind, ye Transgressors. He that sins runs
away from God and his own Reason both at once. Resipiscentia, the Latin word
for Repentance, says the same; for he that Repents does, as Lactantius says,
Mentem quasi ab insania recipere. St. Paul in the second Epistle to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2. 5.
calls it (...), to awake one out of a drunken sleep. Those who slight the
great Reasons of their Duties to God, and leave themselves to be hurried on in
the course of their lives by brutish Appetites, act but like men who are mad or
drunk; and they will confess it, if ever they do return to a right use of their
mind and settled thoughts, which he has lost who thinks he may be and do what
he will. Nothing but want of Reason will make any man prefer the loose Wit of a
mad man, and the wild motions of a Lunatic, before the wise thoughts and
regular actions of sober men. He which sins tears all the Obligations by which
God has engaged him to Obedience, breaks all the Bonds which his Almighty
Creator has laid upon his Soul, as the Frantic in the Gospel did those which
were upon his Body; but he has another sense of things, and will not do so,
when he is restored to a right mind.

It Is true, it did not please God at first to make us immutable, yet that we
might not fall into Error by sudden Actions, he made us able to deliberate; and
since we do nothing so well usually but it may be bettered, and do many things
so ill that they ought to be mended, he gave us the power of Animadversion,
that by reflecting upon our selves and actions, we might correct by after
endeavors that which was not so well done at first; and it is most reasonable
that we should make use of this power, and fit for the Penitent to say, It was
best indeed not to have sinned, but it is next best to repent; and since I
cannot recall what is past, yet I will mend it as well as I can, as he said,
(...), I will endeavor to undo what was ill done in my former life. I will, as
St. John said of our Savior, (...), do what I can to destroy my sins. Another
Penicent said well, -- (...). i. e. having committed a base sin, I will
endeavor to mend it: (...), among other things, signifies to resume a work, to
do it better, to make up a defect.

A sinner, among other words in Scripture, is said (...), which signifies to
miss the mark; and therefore he should repent, and learn to aim better. Sin,
among other names, is called (...), which signifies a going astray. He must
needs be out of his way, who by sin is departed from the God of his life; and
therefore he should take up, as the Apostles advice is, Repentance toward God;
i. e. he ought to repent and return to God. Acts 20. 21.
We have been told, and that truly, that (...), that the beginning and end of
all happy life and perfection is the lifting up of our souls to God. And by
another, that man is (...), that a man does naturally return to God, and
therefore if we have by sin gone astray from him, and our own Nature, it is
most reasonable, as his words are, (...), to repair the mischief of our flight
from above, from God and Virtue, by returning to him.

To show the reasonableness of Repentance a little further, I shall only add
two things to be considered, viz.

1. That sin is the sickness, deformity, and pain of the soul. 2. That it is a
bold contempt of that excellent Order, which the Divine Wisdom has planted in
Humane Nature.
1. Sin is the sickness, deformity, and pain of the soul, and is as destructive
of its health, beauty, and safety, as distempered humors, defect in any
Member, solution of parts, or dislocation of a Joint can be to the Body; and if
it be not timely cured, will be the death of the Soul. Therefore the recovery
of a sinner is expressed in Scripture by words which signify Restoring of
health to a sick Man, the cure of a wound, the Reparation of a decayed or lost
Sense, the setting of a dislocated Bone in the right place again, and giving
ease to one that is in pain. And there is good Reason for it: For is not an
ignorant mind as bad as a blind eye? A will disabled to all virtuous choice
worse than a lame hand? And vile affections more ugly than distorted Members?
An evil Conscience as afflictive as a Cancer in the Breast? Pining Envy as
vexatious as the gnawing of the Stomach? Are not the Furies of Lust, and the
Rage of Drunkenness or Hellish Malice as unnatural Distempers in the Soul as
Feverish heats in the Body? Is not the Soul as much tormented with thinking of
the folly of Surfeits, as the Body is afflicted with the bad consequences of
them? Is not insatiable desire of worldly Greatness, Riches, and Pleasure, as
bad as the Hydropick Thirst?

A man would think himself in a bad Condition, if he should find himself
deprived of Sense, deformed in any principal Member, weakened in the powers of
his Body, troubled with a deaf Ear, a lame Hand, and gouty Feet, his Blood
inflamed, and feel himself racked with the pain of the Stone; he would have so
little pleasure in himself that he would hate life: But he who is corrupted
with sin is in a worse condition, for he has neither beauty, health, or vigor
in his Soul. He is maimed in his excellent Faculties, disabled to the use of
his best powers, and has defaced the beauty of his Soul, which is Virtue. A
good man is pleased with himself, because he feels that his soul is in health,
and that all his powers are in due symmetry, and finds that in his soul which
should make a man in love with himself. He perceives, as Plato said, that he is
(...), or as his Scholar Plotin expressed it, (...), in the Psalmists words,
beautiful within, that his soul is adorned with the (...), as Philo called it,
with complete virtue, which is the highest participation of the Divine Nature,
by which we are capable to imitate God, which we then do when our souls are
enriched with the sincere Love of God, true Wisdom, venerable Prudence, exact
Justice, Godlike Benignity, generous Courage, lovely Temperance, pure Chastity,
discreet Moderation, composed Passions; and in short, when we have, as he said,
(...), honest Endeavors, good Designs, prudent Conversation, temperate
Manners, and indeed all the Actions and Dispositions of Virtue.

These are the fair Delineations of the Divine Image, and finding those in his
soul, a good man is pleased with himself, and desires to be as he is.

But these beautiful Characters of Immortal Spirits are all defaced by
wickedness; and after they are blurred, whenever the sinner is forced to hold
a Looking-glass before his soul, he throws it away, because he cannot endure to
see himself. Aristotle said well concerning this, Arist. ad Nicom. l. 9. c. 4.
(...). A bad man has no love love for himself, because he finds nothing in
himself that is worthy to be loved. Much to the same purpose Philo Iud. A
wicked man has no joy in himself, after he has debauched his Nature, and
vitiated whatsoever was good in it, (...), having now nothing to rejoice in.
And writing upon that Verse in Genesis, that after man had perverted his Nature
by sin, as a punishment the Earth brought forth for his sake Briers and Thorns,
I, says he, and so did his heart too, it could not do otherwise, adding these
words, (...); i. e. for what else can grow or spring upon the soul of a Fool,
but such passions as do prick and wound it?

Besides that which I have said upon this matter, I must add one particular
mischief, and that no small one, which will always disturb a sinner, till he
return to God by Repentance; and that is an evil Conscience, a Serpent in the
Bosom, which has been well represented in our Savior's Discourses by a Worm
gnawing the Bowels, or as a Rust fretting the heart, a Fire in the Veins. It is
a (...), as Euripides calls it, a Divine Goad sticking in the soul; which the
Heathens acknowledged under the name of the Thespesian Vipers, and the
merciless Furies. This Cotta the Atheist, if we may believe Tully, confessed to
be a very great vexation without reference to God; his words are these, De Not.
D^or.
Sine ulla Divina ratione grave ipsius conscientiae pondus est. It is as
vexatious, as the company of an unpleasant Ghost to such as are haunted by it
day and night, who can never be quiet till it be laid.

But when respect is had to God, which it must and will have, for it is his
Deputy, the case is much worse; for it will torment the sinner, both with the
sense of his Disfavour, under which it puts him at present, and with the fear
of that punishment which it makes him expect in time to come. It is a huge
misery to be in such a state as makes a man afraid. of God, which the guilt of
sin always does. This I cannot better say, than in the words of a forementioned
Author, who speaking of the sad Condition in which Adam was after he had eaten
the forbidden Fruit, and upon the sense of his Fault had hidden himself from
God, hoping, at least wishing he had done so; when God enquiring after him,
though knowing well enough where he was, asked him this Question, Adam, where
art thou? He makes this Answer for him proper enough -- (...), etc. I am where
they are, who are not able to look upon God; where they are, who obey not God.
I am where they are, who hide themselves from their Maker; where they are, who
are fled from virtue, and are destitute of wisdom: I am where they are, who
tremble by reason of guilt and cowardice.

This being the melancholic condition of wretched sinners, after they come to
consider how things are with them in the cool of the day, when the heats of
their Wine and Lust are over, their ranting mirth ended, their Passions
becalmed, and they begin to bethink themselves, and to reflect upon their
Extravagancies, and are made to hear that still voice which called to Adam
after his prevarication; Wise men having compared the sprightly, erect,
cheerful temper of good men with this Law, justly pronounced that virtuous
persons do not only (...), Hier. 177
i. e. Not only exceed a vicious man in that which is honest, but also overcome
him in pleasure, for which only the sinner seems to betake himself to
wickedness. And this pleasure is so considerable, that Aristotle could say that
it did exceed that of the wicked, those Fugitives from Virtue, (...), in that
it is more pure and more solid, and so is, as another calls it, (...), such a
pleasure as one shall never have cause to repent of.

But those pains which I forementioned are more considerable, because they are
both more pungent and more lasting than those of the Body; which made
Simplicius say of them, ^^g. 252.
That they are (...), i. e. that they are more grievous, stay longer, and are
harder to be cured. A bodily Distemper is more easily relieved than an evil
Conscience: take away the present pain, and the Body returns to its health; but
the soul is pained with the remembrance of what is past, and the sear of what
is to come, which is so great an affliction, that many times it makes the
present state intolerable.

Therefore Holy Scripture and Ancient Philosophers called the state of Sin the
Death of the Soul: So our Savior said of the vicious Prodigal, that he was
dead; and the Apostle of the wicked world, that they were dead in sins and
trespasses; and the Heathen Philosopher the same, (...), etc. i. e. The death
of the soul is the deprivation of God and Reason, which are accompanied with a
turbulent conflict of inordinate passions. And that none might think that he
dully supposed that an Immortal Being can die, he adds, (...), i. e. Not that
they cease to be, but that they fall from the happiness of life. And in another
place he says, that wickedness is the corruption of an Immortal Being, (...),
it corrupts it as much as is possible; For this reason, when any of
Pythagoras's Sholars abandoned the practice of Virtue, and lest his Society,
they hung up a (...), an empty Coffin for him, looking upon him as one dead.
And they might very well do so; for is it not the destruction of a reasonable
Being, to be corrupted in those Principles which are essential to it, to be
spoiled in its best Faculties, to be hindered from the free exercise of its
Natural Powers, to be bereaved of that joy which a man has when he acts
according to that which is best in him, to be deadned to a vital sense of his
chief good, and to be deprived of the love of God, which is the very life of
good men? Whatsoever intercepts the favorable Influences of God's Benignity
does as much contribute to the death of the soul, as he would promote the
body's life, who by some fatal obstruction of the inward passages should
hinder the communication of vital Spirits to all the parts of the body. What
joy can a man have, when the indwelling God is grieved, and the Fool lives in
contradiction to the connate Principles of his soul?

2. This brings me to the second Demonstration of the Reasonableness of
Repentance, because sin is an insolent contempt of that excellent order which
God has planted in Humane Nature, which is his Law upon it, and is the
ornament and preservation of it.

There are few who have so little use of their soul bestoweds upon them, but
that they know they are better than their Bodies, and that the Faculties of it
do transcend those of the sensual Part; and that the mind does not only
understand what is best, but has Authority bestowed upon it to govern the
bodily Appetites, which being inferior in Nature, and needing a Guide, ought
to receive Law from it.

The soul does discover, being it self taught of God, by its natural light and
super-added Revelation, what is the happiness to which it was made, the best
good of which it is capable, and shows the means by which it may be attained,
directs and assists in the use of them, propounds rational Arguments to
persuade to use and persist in the use of them, and can baffle such Objections
as are raised, either by the homebred Enemy, or Foreign Tentations, to hinder
the soul in its cheerful progress toward its Felicity.

The soul tells us what satisfaction is allowable to the bodily appetites,
disting uisheth between lawful and unlawful, and utterly forbids the latter,
and commands that there be no excess in the former, shows what Moderation is,
and the benefit of it, and represents the mischief as well as the sin of
excess, and threatens death upon the eating of all forbidden Fruit. Order is
then observed, as it ought to be, when all the Faculties do obey this Superior,
upon whom God has bestowed power to discern Freedom of choice, and authority
to command. For which reason ancient Philosophers have called it by very
agreeable Names, as the (...), because it is the part to which is committed the
guidance of all the rest. It was called also (...) and (...), that which rides
and governs the lower Faculties, as the Charioteer does his Horses with Rains;
because it was placed in man to guide the Affections, and conduct the Faculties
of soul and body in what way they should go, and what pace, and to teach them
when to rest, and when they went astray to curb their Extravagancies, and to
reduce them into the right Path. It is worthy of all reasonable Beings to
maintain this Dignity, and it is their Duty to see that it be not trampled
upon. This made a great Philosopher say, that when a man is assaulted by any
sensual Tentation, he ought (...) -- and so (...), i. e. to stir up his
rational power to defend its proper Dignity, and to secure the exercise of its
Faculties according to their proper nature, and so to keep the Reason of his
mind from being enslaved.

Who knows not that the Irascible Faculty which is in us will tempt us, when
occasion is offered, to answer Reviling with Reproach, and Wrong with Revenge?
but the (...) is able, as Simplicius says, (...), not to suffer the Dog which
is in us to bark, much less to bite: and to return Good for Evil, both in Words
and Actions, Entreating for Rudeness, and for Cursing Prayers. And for the
Concupiscible part, it can deny what it craves, it can reduce the sensual
Appetite to that order which Nature requires, and bring it into a less compass
than the just measure of Nature, if it please: and to show its full Authority
over all sensual Inclinations and Impressions, it can appoint what is contrary
to their Tendence, and having resolved against it, can put what it has decreed
in Execution, and so though the Inferior part rebel, it shows its power, being
enabled by God (...), to restrain it, and maintain its own Superiority.

I'ts true, bodily Objects presented by the Senses will enter into the
imagination, and by sudden Phantasms make some impression upon the soul, but
the mind can cast them out again, can withdraw it self from the consideration
of them, can presently think upon other things, and as it pleases deliberate
whether that which the flesh desires be fit to be granted or no; and if it be
not, can reject it; and not only refuse to do that which would gratify the
sensual part, but the quite contrary.

St. James Iam. 1. 15
says that Lust, when it has conceived, brings forth sin; and sin, when it
is finished, brings forth death. Tentations to sin are presented; if the Will
embrace them, Lust conceives; and if it goes on to action it brings forth
death: but if a man reject the Allurement, and deny the consent of his Will,
and refuse to act according to the incitations of fleshly Appetites, the
Cockatrice is killed in the shell, and so cannot live to bite and hurt.

Thus we are secure in the Observation of God's Order, which if we neglect, the
mischief of our disregard will soon appear in the ill Consequences which attend
it: For God has so framed the Nature of our Souls, and so ordered our most
important Concerns, that we can never break his Order but we shall suffer for
it. What we neglect at present will meet us in bad effects afterward. When a
man has slighted the Government of himself, and laid the Rains upon the neck
of the Beast, he shall soon find himself served by his unruly Passions, as
Hippolytus was by his Horses, thrown and torn. Philosophers called inordinate
Appetite (...), a Beast with many Heads. It is bad enough to contest with one
Beast; but it is much more hazardous, when a man must scuffle with many. To
this dangerous Combat a sinner condemns himself: When he has parted with his
Reason, he has subjected his mind to the command of every insulting Appetite,
and must comply with every foolish Fancy: Being made the slave of sin, he
must, as the Apostle says, serve diverse Lusts, and so must needs be in a brave
condition, being under the Arbitrary Command not of one Tyrannical Patron, but
many, having indeed as many Lords as Lusts; and how basely they use their
vicious slaves, commanding by turns, the poor wretches feel to their grief, by
the perpetual disturbance which they receive from them; being sometimes more
then half drowned with Wine, sometimes set on fire with Wrath, at other times
swelled till they are ready to break with Pride, and often thrown into all
dirty pleasures.

I am not ignorant that some hardened sinners say, That they feel not the pains
of sin which are so talked of, neither are they much concerned, though they
break that precise order which is forementioned: They are well pleased with the
life of Sense, and are willing to go as their Appetites lead them; they esteem
that order good enough which some call Hurry; though they be censured, yet they
think themselves well paid for what they do with sleshly Divertisements; and
whatever Divines or Philosophers say to the contrary, they see no cause to
repent of their course.

To these men I shall only say two things;

1. That it is no sign of health in a man to want feeling. 2. That there are
Monsters in the World, but no Argument can be made from them against Nature.
1. It is no sign of health in a man to want feeling. Is a man to be acounted
well, because he is in an Apoplexy, and so not sensible of what you say or do
to him? Does any man reckon it a perfection in his body to want feeling or any
other sense? The soul has its Apoplexy too. A man may so debauch his Nature
with vicious practices, that at last he shall be past feeling, and commit all
filthiness with greediness, as the Apostle says. He sins, and pleases himself
that he feels no remorse; Is glad that he is listed in the number of those
(...). He become a whining Penitent? No, he is one of the Fortes Esprites: He
makes a mock of sin. Tell him of Repentance? tell them that are weary of their
lives, he is well enough. Let the sick send for the Physician out of his Bed:
He may sleep long enough for him, he needs him not. Its ridiculous talk to
speak to him of a spiritual Guide, he can govern himself.

This seems to be well; but the Friends of a sick person are much troubled,
when they perceive that he is not sensible of pain or danger, and they take it
for a sign of approaching death; neither do they entertain any hope of life,
till they have brought him to a sense of his sickness and weakness. The
Scripture tells us of a seared Conscience, 1 Timothy 4. 2
and of such whose minds are darkened, Ephesians. 4. 18, 19.
and of a reprobate mind, an undiscerning soul, and of a hardened heart as
callous as a Labourer's hand, and of a heart waxen gross, that is, a soul which
has no more sense of God, than the fat heart of an Ox, which in other places
is called the spirit of slumber; nothing can awake such a person to mind his
most important concerns. A wicked life benums a sinner, and we are no more to
regard his judgment of things, than what a blind man says of colors. A
reprobate mind is that sad punishment which God does often inflict upon wilful
sinners. Since we know this, we need not wonder that they do not repent, though
their Condition be most dangerous; for they understand it not.

2. There are Monsters in the World, but no Argument can be taken from them
against Nature. Will any body say that all should be as they are? Shall Error
be set for a Rule? If one be born deformed, or wanting some of those integral
parts which make up a Body, would any that is in his Wits be willing to be
conformed to that unnatural Idea? If a man had a Child born defective in any
Limb, blind, lame, or any way misshapen; would he not think it a great favor,
if it might be granted to him, to have this Child born again in a handsome form,
and restored to a beautiful proportion? Wise men have ever thought, that it is
a greater monstrosity to be misshapen in Soul; 2 Timothy 3. 9
the Mind corrupted, Ephesians. 4. 22
the Affections corrupted with Lust, and so made dishonorable to the state of
Human Nature. Romans 1.
The Holy Scripture does very justly call this a Corruption of Human Nature;
for every thing deserves that name, when it has lost that power which is the
proper Excellency of its Nature, and by which it is fitted to its End. This
Degeneracy is so great, that the Holy Scripture says, Men are degraded by it
into the condition of brute Beasts, 2 Pet. 2. 12. and in other places. The
Philosophers saw it by the Light of Nature, and have spoken more highly in the
case: Arrian. l. 1. c. 3.
Arrian calls them (...), i. e. the most unhappy among Beasts -- and adds, that
if there be any thing (...), more wretched and abject, a man depraved with sin
is that. The Poets meant the same when they spoke of the Transformation of
Ulysses his Companions, who by Debauchery were turned into Swine, grunting in
Circe's Prison, and there thrusting out their Snouts through the Grates in
which they were kept Slaves. So monstrous is the state of the Soul, when it is
made to truckle under every ungoverned Passion.

Second Motive.
This is enough to have shown the reasonableness of Repentance; and I might now
add the danger which a sinner incurs by Impenitence; for he makes himself
liable to that Vengeance, which God will take for the contempt of his Orders.
But before I speak of that, I shall discourse of my second Motive to
Repentance, which is taken from the Goodness of God who is willing to forgive
the Penitent sinner; and that is so great an Encouragement to this Duty, that
the Apostle says it leads us to Repentance. Romans 2. 4.
That it does so, will be seen plainly in the Account which I shall give of it
in six Particulars.

1. The first Encouragement is that Declaration which God has made concerning
his own Nature, that it is not implacable; but that he is willing to forgive
those who have sinned, if they repent of their sins. This Goodness of the
Divine Nature God made to pass before Moses, Exodus 34, 5, 6.
when he desired to see the the glory of the Godhead, when God proclaimed
himself to be the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering,
and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiveing
iniquity transgression and sin. This glorious Name was given, as that by which
God was willing to be known to the World; and it does give us notice of that
which does most concern us to know of the Deity.

God by his Royal Prerogative has power to forgive, if he please. By right of
Creation he is the Sovereign Rector of the World. He who made all things, must
need have authority to give them Law; it is fit that all Creatures should obey
him who gave them their Being. As he has power to give Law; so also to
threaten in case of Disobedience, and so he only is Dominus poenarum: the
punishment of sin is solely at his appointment; for whatsoever mischief sin may
do in the Consequences of it to others, it is his Law which is violated by it,
it is his Authority which is affronted.

But as God has only right to punish; so, if he please, it is his Prerogative
not to punish. His Threatenings are Conditional, and so in themselves capable of
Relaxation. He may depart from his Right, if he will, and forgive us what we
are not able to pay. He may pass by those wrongs for which we can never make
him amends, as indeed we cannot for one Sin; For, as Daniel said, To the Lord
our God belong Mercies and Forgiveness, Dan. 9. 9.
though we have rebelled against him. As it his Royal Prerogative, that he can
forgive; so it is his Divine Benignity, that he is willing to do it. The
goodness of God, for which we constantly adore him, is a voluntary propension
of the Divine Nature to do good to his Creatures according to their several
Capacities; and he has a particular Love to Mankind, which makes him willing
to promote their Happiness; and as sin is the only hindrance of that, he has
declared his love by his willingness to prevent the mischievous effects of it
by forgiveness. Here the Divine goodness does magnify it self against our
wickedness, the Divine Wisdom finds a way to save the Offender from the ruin of
his own Folly, and God's Justice shows it self wise and good, not reaching
after that satisfaction which cannot be had, to wit, not requiring that the
Offense be undone, for that cannot be; nor yet seeking the utmost which may be
had, which is, that the sinner be destroyed; but is content with such a
Reparation as may be made of the Divine Honor by Repentance, by which sin is
extirpated, and the sinner saved.

I have spoken of this Particular more largely, to fix a right Notion of the
temper of the Deity in men's Souls. It is no small comfort to us that we know
God is not necessitated to execute his Threatenings, and that he is of so Benign
a Nature, that he is willing to part with his Right, rather than ruin his
Creatures.

This is a mighty Encouragement to Repentance, and should make every sinner
say, as the Prophet did, Micah. 7. 18.
Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his Heritage? He retains not his anger for
ever, because he delights in mercy. Art thou so good, though I have been so
bad? I will rebel no more; I hope in thy Mercy, I will return.

We read that Benhadad and his great Army invaded Israel; 1 Kings 20. 30.
and when they were beaten, the very Report that the Kings of Israel were
merciful, made them come with Sackcloth upon their Loins, and Ropes about their
Necks, Suing for Pardon with all the signs of Penitence and Submission. We are
told also in the Story of Augustus Caesar, That there was one Corocotta, a
Spanish Thief, so famous for doing Mischief, that the Emperor promised Ten
thousand Sesterces to him that should bring him alive into his presence. Here
upon Corocotta fearing his danger if he continued his Course, and having heard
of the generous temper of Augustus, carried himself to him. It could not be the
hope of the price set upon his head that could make him do so; for what
pleasure can a man take in telling money, when he is going to be hanged? but
the hope of Pardon, which he obtained, and by the Nobleness of Caesar, the
money too. Sure the Report which we have heard of God, Ephesians. 2. 4.
that he is rich in Mercy, should encourage us to bring the Penitent Rebel into
his presence, and throw him prostrate before his Footstool. The Throne is a
Seat of Grace, and the King who sits upon it is the Father of Mercies. If we
repent we may come boldly, and have a good hope to find favor.

Princes do invite rebellious Subjects many times to lay down their Arms by
offering Acts of Oblivion, and it usually prevails; but however it may be the
Wisdom as well as Clemency of Princes, to offer pardon, because they know no
better way to overcome sturdy Rebels: But the Argument is more cogent to make
sinners repent, when God offers pardon, because he is Almighty, and so needs no
Arts to reduce the Obstinate; he can destroy them when he pleases; what he
offers is mere Grace; he would not have them perish through their foolish
wilfulness: would he not? O then, Rebel Heart, will thou not (...), as Clem.
Alexandr. Says, will thou not run away from thy disobedient Party? If thou
had been shut up in Despair, as the Devils are, imprisoned and made to know
that thou were reserved in Chains without hope, till the Judgment of the great
Day, thou might have some color for the hardness of thy heart; but now,
when Grace is not denied, if thou repentest not thou will have nothing to say
for thy self.

2. Especially since God has assured thee by an Oath, That he delights not in
the death of sinners, Ezekiel. 33. 11.
nor is pleased with the ruin of such as have rebelled against him. As I live,
says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way and live. According to that of St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 7.
He is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance: And that of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 4.
He would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.

It Is true, the Heathens painted the Godhead after a wild sort, making their
Pagods in dismal shapes of grim Monsters, armed with Claws and Teeth; Pictures
not unfit to represent those Devils whom they worshipped. Who having shown
their Enmity to God in making his Creatures Idolaters, declared also their
Malice to Men, by making Cruelty a great part of their Worship: not only whilst
they forced them to tear their Skin with their Nails, and cut their Flesh with
Knives, as the Worshippers of Baal did, of whom wa read 1 Kings 18. 28. and as
other Idolaters did, of whom we read in Heathen Authors; but made them
sacrifice their Sons and Daughters to Devils: Psa. 106.
or as in the next Verse, to the Idols of Canaan, v. 38.
in whom they were worshipped, and whose bloody Rites they appointed: They made
their Children pass through the Fire to Moloch; whether they made them perish
miserably in the hollow breast of a burning Image, or drew them so long between
two Fires that they died, the Cruelty was so great, that they were fain to
stifle the sound of their dreadful Shrieks with the noise of Drums. This was
the sense and practice of the Eastern World; and the West was not unlike to it,
for to one Idol of America, Vitzliputsli, they offered in some solemn
Sacrifices many thousands of Men and Women flayed alive, their breasts being
cut open, and their warm hearts taken out and presented to the bloody Idol. How
far our God is from that temper, he has sufficiently declared, since instead
of making us all dreadful Examples of just Vengeance in our own persons, he
gave his own dear Son to die for us.

That blessed Son was of the same temper too, as you may see in that part of
his Story which is recorded Luke. 18. 41. in which we are told of his approach
to Jerusalem, not long before his death, where foreseeing that great Change,
which for their sins their then flourishing Estate should in a short time
suffer, it is said, he wept over it. Wept over it? They had given him cause to
insult over them, they were as bad as sinners could be. They had rejected him
the Messiah, the great promise of God to their Nation, who came to them
according to all the prefigurations and predictions which were given to their
Fathers: they acknowledged Miracles to be a sufficient Testimony of God's mind,
and yet disbelieved him who gave them that proof: they scorned the Doctrine of
perfect Goodness which he taught, and yet confessed, that never man spoke as he
spoke: they despised the unparalleld Example of all Virtues which he gave in
his life, and put him to death who had done them all the good he could whilst
he lived -- yet knowing that for these things in a while they should be
punished with inexpressible Miseries, the foresight made his tears fall from
his eyes; and to these he added his blood, for he died for those who killed
him, and joined his Prayers to it for the pardon of such as had made him as
miserable as they could. After this how can any sinner be afraid of God, if he
repent?

3. The third Enconragement is, That God has by all manner of Invitations
called sinners to Repentance. The Scripture abounds with frequent Exhortations
to this Duty, and Declarations of God's desire of men's Return; sometimes it
records his Expostulations with the Obstinate, whom he also beseeches by his
Servants, and Sometimes bad them in his Name to command sinners to save
themselves this way.

Exhortations we find often in the Sermons of the Prophets, whom he sent of
old, rising early, and sitting up late, to warn sinners of their danger, Matthew.
3.
and charged the blood of such as perished upon them, if they did not do it.
This was the first Sermon of our Savior's Forerunner, Mark 1.
and his own, Repent, and believe the Gospel.

How desirous God was always of this in his Creatures, these, among many other
Expressions, give witness -- Oh that there were such an heart in them, Deuteronomy. 5.
29.
that they would fear me, that it might be well with them! O that they were
wise, 32. 29.
that they would understand! Psalm. 81. 31.
O that my people had hearkened to me! Luke 19. 42.
O that thou had known in this thy day the things which belong unto thy
peace! He expostulates with them, Ezekiel. 18. 31.
Why will ye die? and by his Servants beseeches them -- We are Ambassadors
for Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
as though God did beseech you by us, We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God. And he commands all men every where to repent. Act. 17. 30.


4. To perfect this Encouragement, he has assured pardon to the Penitent by
many plain Promises, in which God's goodness is obliged by his Truth; which
being made, the Apostle said well, that now, God is faithful and just to
forgive sinners. The Benignity of the Divine Nature is a good encouragement;
but when that has declared it self in particular promises ensured by God's
Veracity, we have firm grounds of Hope, plain measures of Expectation, and he
which does not give credit unto them, makes God a liar, as St. John says; puts
the same contempt upon God which men do upon the words of vain persons, who
never mean what they say, or are unable to perform what they promise. Without
this Revelation a Heathen could say, Petron.
Qui desperate Deum exasperat, nec bonum credit, i. e. He which despairs makes
God angry, and does not believe him to be good. After all this will thou not
repent?

5. Especially when God has given a mighty Demonstration of his full purpose
to fulfill what he has promised to penitent sinners, not only declaring these
Promises by his dear son, but by making him

1. A Sacrifice of Expiation for sinners in his Death, and 2. Also an Advocate
for them since his Resurrection.
1. God has made him a Sacrifice of Expiation in his Death. An Expiatory
Sacrifice is when one suffers for another, and so saves the other from
suffering; when Body is given for Body, Life for Life. Such was our Savior's
Passion for sinners: And therefore the Apostle said, 1 Timothy 2. 6.
He gave himself (...), a ransom for all men; Matthew. 20. 28.
Or as our Savior said himself, (...), a Ransom for many. He gave his Life as
such a price, by which Captives or Slaves are set at Liberty; and therefore he
is said to have redeemed us from the Curse, Gal. 3. 13.
being made a Curse for us: (...), He bought us off with a great price from the
Curse due to our sins, being himself content to be used for our sakes as one
who is accursed. What worse things could happen to any mortal man, than those
which Christ suffered? His Death was esteemed by all men as the most infamous
and most painful, and was looked upon by the Eternal Father as the common
Penance of Mankind, for whom he suffered it.

Thus our Savior became our' (...), gave his life for ours; Ephesians. 1. 7.
and we have ((...)) Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our sins;
Yes, through his blood: For he nailed our Bond to his Cross, Col. 3. 12.
and so canceled it, and freed us from our Debt. Thus has God been willing to
let us know, how unwilling he is to punish us if we repent. Though it be of the
nature of punishment that it be inflicted for sin, yet it is not necessary that
it should be upon the person offending, if the offended will accept of another
to suffer for him, and so free him. This is our Case; for God was pleased to
accept of the Temporal Death of his dear Son, to free all penitent sinners from
Death Eternal.

2. I need not prosecute this comfortable Argument any further; God has by it
abundantly signified his mind to relieve trembling sinners, having made his Son
a Propitiation for them in his Death, and declared also that he is an Advocate
for them since his Resurrection. 1 Ioh. 2. 1.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father. (...) in this place
signifies one who deprecates Anger, mitigates Wrath, begs pardon for such as
have offended. The Design of the Gospel is to preserve us from sin; but if one
chance to fall into sin, left he sin also into Despair, it gives this
encouragement to rise by Repentance, because we have an Advocate with the
Father, the Son of God, who intercedes for us, pleads our cause in Heaven. This
Encouragement is great upon many accounts;

1. Because long before his Incarnation he was designed to that merciful Office
by the Eternal Father: Is. 53. 12.
So we read in Isaiah (which the Evangelist Mark applies to our Savior) He
shall make Intercession for Transgressors, deprecate the Divine Anger for them,
appear in the presence of God for them. It is a great satisfaction to all
thoughtful minds, that they are assured of the truth of his Commission: We are
ignorant upon what grounds some have bestowed this part of his Mediation upon
Saints or Angels. The Scripture has told us that Abraham knows us not, Is. 63.
16.
and that Israel is ignorant of us, and that no man takes to him the honor of
mediating for others with God, but he that is called of God. But we have great
hope in this one Mediator, Heb. 5. 4.
because God has given him the honor to stand at his Right Hand, and plead
for sinners. He is the great Angelus Orationis, as I think Tertullian called
him; who, when the prayers of Saints goes up to Heaven, puts in his Merits to
make them acceptable. As for others, alas, poor Souls! they have no merits to
make their own Prayers sweet, and how then shall they perfume those of others?

2. This our Advocate was always, and is the most beloved Son of God. He dwelt
eternally in the Bosom of the Father; a phrase which signifies Intimacy and
Love. He is one to whom the Father never denied any thing: so he said himself,
I know that thou hear me always.

3. It is a great Encouragement that we have such an Advocate, who by his Death
merited a just Right to intercede with God for sinners. He might well pray for
pardon, who offered himself a Sacrifice of Expiation, and demand the Release of
Captives for whom he had paid the Ransom.

We are not to think that in Heaven our Savior prays for sinners, offering up
cries with tears for them; but intercedes with the Authority of Mediation,
which he obtained by his Death. He appears in the presence of God for us,
offering great Reasons for our pardon.

4. To this add, that he has, whilst he does this, strong desires in himself
to have us made partakers of it. We are told that he is a merciful High Priest
in things pertaining to God; and that he is willing to make Reconciliation for
us: not like the Masters of Requests in this World, who many times are so hard
to come at, that it is easier to get a Petition granted by the King, than
presented by his Servant. No; he is so merciful, that he has bid us come
boldly to the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. 16.
and to be confident that we shall obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time
of need; we may come (...), freely declare our case to God, have free access to
him for that purpose, and we shall not be turned away with shame, 1 Ioh. 2. 18.
as people are when their Petitions are slighted.

This goodness of our Savior's Temper is an inward Advocate for us, always
dwelling in his Breast, making him willing to receive the Petitions which we
offer to him, and also to present them to the Eternal Father, and to add to
them what may make them acceptable. He showed his benign Disposition before he
left this World, in that kind Excuse which he made for the neglect of his
Friends, Matt. 26. 40, 41.
who failed him in a time when he much needed their Service. For though he
reproved them for their fault -- What? could you not watch with me one hour in
this my great Agony? yet he mercifully both told them their Danger, and how to
avoid it, and made some Excuse for them, saying, The Spirit is willing, but the
Flesh weak. Besides this, he plainly showed his good Temper, when upon the
Cross he deprecated the Vengeance of the Eternal Father, and prayed it might
not fall upon such as had sufficiently deserved it. These Considerations do
give vast encouragement to sinners to repent, since by them they see how easily
they may come to Mercy.

To which I shall only add one more, which is, That God has declared himself
highly pleased when sinners do repent, and accept of his pardon. For this take
our Savior's word, Luke 15. 10.
I say unto you, that there is great joy in the presence of the Angels of God
over one sinner that repents. This our Savior further expresses in the
Parable of the Prodigal, which follows in the same Chapter; for when he came
back from his vicious Course, it is said there, that his Father, when he was
afar off, had compassion on him, ran to meet him, fell on his Neck and kissed
him, that is, gave him all signs of Reconciliation, and expressed all decent
Joy for his Return, in killing the fatted Calf to make him a Feast, and adding
Music and Dancing to make it pleasant. Though these things are spoken (...)
yet we think worthily and rightly of God, when by such Expressions we
understand how acceptable our Repentance is to him, and by that are moved to
repent.

And now upon the forementioned Considerations, how can the sinner but fall
upon his knees, and say? O Lord, I am sensible of my folly, I am pained with my
guilt; I am so obnoxious to thy wrath, that if thou should mark my sin in
order to punishment, I know I should not be able to abide it; but I see there
is mercy with thee that thou may be feared; thy goodness leads me to
Repentance, and I will follow its gentle conduct, and return to thee: And thus
I make my Prayer; O Lord, though I most justly deserve to be condemned, yet I
beseech thee not to condemn me. What profit is there in my Blood? Behold, I
offer thee for my Ransom a better Life than my own, that of thy dear Son: and
since thou did commend thy Love to mankind, that he should die for sinners; O
grant me part in that Love. Since thou wast pleased to make to meet upon him
the Iniquities of us all, lay mine upon him I beseech thee. It is easier for
thee to pardon my sins, than to have given thy dear Son to be a Sacrifice for
them. He has more pleased thee by his Obedience, than I have grieved thee by
my Disobedience. The voice of his Blood cries louder for pardon, than my sins
for vengeance. Since thy beloved Son died for our sins, and rose again for our
justification; since thou have reconciled me to thee by his death, now much
more let me be saved by his life.

And, O blessed Jesus, since thou did not refuse to die for my sins, I pray
thee that I may not die for them too. After thy Incarnation thou did declare
that thou came not to be ministered unto, but to serve others, and (O
unexpressible kindness!) to give thy life a Ransom for many; it is sufficient
for the sins of all the World; leave not mine out I beseech thee, but let me be
one of the Redeemed made happy by thee, because thou made thy Soul an
Offering for their sins. Thou wast pleased, among thy Titles of Glory, to take
this of a Savior; and as thou did not then despise that merciful Office, so
neither art thou yet weary of it; Save me, even me also, I pray thee, and say
unto my Soul, that thou art my salvation. It is long ago that thou did call
to thee all such as are weary and heavy laden, I am one of those, O Lord, my
sins ly heavy upon me like a load of Sand, and without thy help the Burden will
grow intolerable; I beseech thee, according to thy gracious promise, to take it
off and give me ease, O Lamb of God, who take away the sins of the World.

Thou wast pleased in the days of thy Flesh to pity the miseries of sinners;
Thy Compassion is not withered; thy pity is not dried up, it extends it self
from Generation to Generation; thou show mercy to thousands, and savest to
the utmost of all times all that come unto God by thee: I come unto the Eternal
Father hoping in thy mediation; save me I beseech thee, O Prince of pity.

Thou did command thy Servants to preach Repentance and Remision of sins in
thy Name, and did pray for such as should believe in thee through their Word;
I am one of those, most merciful Jesus, let the benefit of thy prayer reach me
also. Thou undertookest to make Intercession for sinners, and did beg their
Release, as well thou might, for thou did pay their Debt; O pray for me
also, most merciful Advocate. When thou wentest into thy Glory, thou did not
leave the Remembrance of poor Souls behind thee, but did let them know before
thy departure hence, that thou wast going to appear in the presence of God for
them; remember me too now thou art in thy Kingdom, O Lover of Souls, who ever
live to make Intercession.

Before I proceed to the last Motive, lest the former should miss their desired
Effect, I will stay here, and briefly answer two Objections, which without any
just ground some have made to their own hinderance in this Affair.

1. One says, That notwithstanding all which has been discoursed concerning
the goodnefs of God, yet I do not know whether he intends any kindness toward
me in his Declarations, because he may be some secret will have debarred me
from having any benefit by them.

2. Another says, It may be God would pardon me if I did repent; but what am I
better for that, since I find in my self no Power to repent?

1. To the first; After all that full Declaration which God has made of his
goodness, do thou doubt his Reality? And though he has affirmed his
readiness to save, doft thou think that by some hidden Will he has resolved
thy Damnation? Let me then say to thee, in the words of a late Divine of this
Church -- O thou Hypocrite! because thou have two wills, one in thy Words, and
another in thy mind, do thou think that God has so too? that he speaks one
thing, and means another? That he has a secret will contradictory to his
revealed? If it be secret, how came thou to know it? No; thou art wicked in
making God a liar and dissembler like thy self, So he. I will add, That such
blasphemous words, without Repentance, will be severely accounted for one day;
and that God will reprove thee, and set this, among thy other sins, in order
before thee. Leave of these vile Imaginations, and never let it enter into thy
mind to think, that God has declared one thing to men in his Word, and has
decreed another concerning them in himself. He is the God of Truth; and
therefore repent, and trust in his mercy.

2. To the other, Who says he would, but has no power to Repent, and so looks
upon the goodness of God in forgiving the Penitent as not available to him, I
answer; That it is true, since our fall we cannot return to God by our own weak
power; but that is no Excuse for Impenitence, because God is ready to supply
that Defect with the Assiistance of his Grace. Act. 5. 31.
God was pleased to make his dear Son a Savior to give repentance and
remission of sins; not only to pardon sinners upon their repentance, but to
give them grace to enable them to repent, and so obtain pardon. This grace may
be had for asking -- He will give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him. Luke
11. 13.
It is the good pleasure of him who has commanded us to will and do what we
ought, to enable us to will and do what we ought. Phil. 2.


This assistance of the Divine grace I shall express in St. Augustine's words,
Delit. and spir. c. 12.
Non in eo divinitus adjuvamur ad operandam justitiam, quod Legem Deus dedit
plenam bonis praeceptis; sed quod ipsa voluntas nostra, sine qua operari bonum
non possumus, adjuvatur and erigitur impartito Spiritu Gratiae; i. e. we are
not divinely assisted to the working of Righteousness in this, that God has
given us a Law full of good Precepts; but because our Will, without which we
cannot do good, is helped and erected by the Spirit of grace bestowed upon us.

It is a great favor, that God has been pleased to give us his Gospel, which
St. Paul calls (...), saving grace; It shows the way of Salvation to us: by it
we are made to understand the most important concerns of our souls; that shows
us the gracious conditions of our pardon, and lays before us strong Reasons to
convince us of the necessity of our compliance with what God has propounded,
if we will be happy, and demonstrates the reasonableness of Obedience. But God
is pleased also to invigorate his Gospel Methods with the gracious Operation of
his benign Spirit, which makes a Divine Light shine into the Mind, clears up
the mist of Ignorance which lay upon it before, and makes us know the things
which belong to our peace; awakens our Consciences, and makes us apprehensive
of the danger of sin, and affrights us with the truth of Divine Threatenings;
makes us consider heavenly Motives, opens our hearts, as it did Lydia's, Act.
16. 14
to attend to the things which are spoken to us, and inclines us to comply with
the reason of them; it raises our wills out of sloth and languor by a secret
ardor of life conveyed into our Souls, (...) (...), by ways which God knows, as
St. Basil says, and so puts into our minds good Desires, and makes us begin to
feel in our Souls a hunger after Righteousness; it melts us with the Love of
God and his dear Son, makes us ashamed to sin any more, and comforts us with
the hope of Pardon and Restoration to the Divine Favor, and so conjures us by
potent Arguments to enter into the Bands of the Covenant, and persuades us to
submit thankfully to the terms of the Gospel.

Thus our blessed Savior stands at the Door and knocks; Rev. 3. 20.
thus the heavenly Father draws us to his Son: Io. 6. 44.
and the sinner should say -- I find the gracious Spirit of God leading me
toward the Land of the Living. I will resign my self to his Conduct, I will be
led by him, I will follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes. Does my Savior
vouchsafe to knock at my Door? I am infinitely beholden to him, I will open to
him, I will let him in, and give him the possession of my Soul.

This is the Divine grace, and it is our Duty to make a careful use of it; and
then we shall have more to help us to perfect what is well begun. A ready
compliance with such merciful Assistance is highly requisite; for if we resist
God's kind Motions, and slight the help bestowed, we may frustrate the design
of his Mercy against our selves, and make that grace ineffectual which would
have saved us, if we had improved it with our concurrent endeavors.

We must not expect that God should pull us out of a state of sin, and drag us
into a state of virtue by an irresistible force: God is pleased in Conversion
to draw us toward himself by the Cords of a Man, by such Arguments as we
understand to be most reasonable, and by such Motives as are apt to persuade
such as will consider, and by the gentle Swasions of his good Spirit, with the
Cords of Love, and the Bands of Kindness. We must not think that God should act
upon us to the extent of his Omnipotence, but according to his Wisdom. He knows
what help is sufficient for us, and how fit it is that we should thankfully use
what is enough, without asking what is too much. He takes what method he
pleases in the dispensing of his grace, which we are not to appoint, but
obeserve. Our Duty is to accept of sufficient grace, and use it, that we may be
converted, and not teach God how to convert us.

God was always displeased with men, when neglecting the kindness which he
showed them, they would prescribe him methods for the communication of his
goodness.

When the Israelites were led through the Wilderness, Ps. 78. 41.
they were well enough provided for by God's care, and should have been not
only content, but thankful: they were neither; but lothing the Bread of Heaven,
which God had appointed for them, they would have Quails. They had them; but
they had better have been without them: for God was angry at their rude
unthankfulness -- For the limited the Holy One of Israel. They would not only
be provided for, but in such a way as they themselves should describe.

We have a very good account of this matter in that excellent Parable of
Isaiah, Isa. 5.
where God speaking of the Jewish people, whom he calls his Vineyard, says,
That he planted it in a fat Soil, hedged it, that is, guarded it with his
Providence, set a Vine which was generous, gave them excellent Laws, the
teachings of inspired men, and the assistances of his grace, and all sufficient
means to promote their bringing forth Fruit answerable to his Care: But after
all, instead of good Grapes, they brought forth wild Grapes; God was
displeased, and for the Justice of his Anger he appealed to the Judgment and
Conscience of those who had slighted his Favors, and said, What could I have
done more to my Vineyard than I have done? I have done what I thought fit for
me to do, and bestowed what I thought enough for them to receive, and because
they have made me no answerable Returns, I will take away my Hedge, and lay
them waste.

Now sinner, take heed what will become of thee, and have a care of Folly in
pretending to teach God what he might have done more for thee, and bring forth
Fruits meet for Repentance, according to the grace bestowed. Matthew. 21. 18.
Remember the Fig Tree in the Gospel, which having no Fruit upon it when our
Savior sought it, was cursed and withered: And take St. Chrysostom. counsel
concerning it; We were beaten in this type, thou art frighted in this tree,
thou art instructed, to thee is given wholesome Admonition; prevent the coming
of the Lord with good Fruits: What God expects from thee let him find, let him
have what he desires, lest what happened to this Tree from God, happen to thee
also. It is not fit for sinners to dispute concerning grace, but to make use of
it, and repent.

2. Of this they ought to be more careful, because God does allow fair space of
time to make use of the grace bestowed; he repeats his methods of Salvation,
and sometimes alters them, which is a great demonstration of his benignity, and
ought to move us effectually to make use of it. Though the Divine Spirit will
not always strive with men, yet he continues his merciful Contest a great
while. Though sinners be dull in apprehending, and careless in the
consideration of grace offered; yet God is not presently weary, but waits to
see if at last they will understand. Wisd. 12. 20.
It is mentioned as a great Favor which God bestowed upon the Canaanites, that
he did not destroy them at once, though they highly deserved it, but gave them
space for Repentance. Thou did punish the condemned with deliberation, giving
them time and place whereby they might be delivered from their malice. God is
pleased to lengthen the tranquillity of sinners, as Daniel says, and so gives
opportunity to make use of grace not only offered, but for some considerable
time slighted, that so they might be saved, if they will yet make use of his
Favor before their hearts are quite hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

We read of the Jews in the Wilderness, Isa.
that they vexed the Holy Spirit with their Disobedience; yet we read, that he
bore with their ill manners ((...)) 40 years, Act. 13 18.
and so gave them fair space to repent of their Ingratitude, and so save their
Souls, though their Carkases fell in the Desert. After they were come to Canaan
he used the same Patience, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16.
sending his Prophets, rising up early and sending them, because he had
compassion on his People -- and this he did till there was no remedy. This same
gentleness did our Savior use toward them in the days of his Flesh, which
made him say, when his grace was slighted, Luke 13. 34.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy Children together,
as a Hen does gather her Brood under her Wings, and ye would not? The same
gracious patience does he express toward us still. How often has God warned us
by our Spiritual Guides, and the Checks of our own Consciences? How often has he
advised us by such, whose known Prudence and great Charity was most likely to
have made their counsel acceptable? How mercifully has he timed his Proposals,
taking such seasons in which we were in a temper most likely to be wrought
upon, both when our hearts were softened with the sense of some merciful
Providence, and melted with kindness, the sparks of Ingenuity being blown up
into a flame, or when sickness or some great affliction had shaken off our
Carelessness, made us see great reason to think, and shown us necessity to
hearken to advice?

Shall not the forementioned Assistances, granted with so much patience, make
the sinner say? O Lord, I am that barren Fig Tree to which thou might have
said long ago, Never fruit grow on thee: (O heavy Curse!) How often have I given
thee cause to say, Cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? And when I have
begged that thou would stay another year, and promised to dig about it, and
did not; O Lord, thou have not cut me down, but spared me one year, and
another, and another. I thank thee, and now I will abuse thy goodness no
longer. I will dig about it with prayers, sighs, fasting, and watching; I will
water it with my tears, and endeavor that it may bring forth fruit answerable
to thy just expectation. O foolish Soul! Is it nothing to play with Divine
Patience, and to make God stand by whilst thou entertainest thy self with every
trifling Vanity? O merciful Lord, how many years have I grieved thee in this
Wilderness? How long have thou born with my manners? How often have I given thee
cause to say to me as once thou did, being neglected by thy sleepy Spouse,
who slumbred whilst thou stoodest knocking, and made thee suffer the Injuries
of the weather, Cant. 5. 2.
My Head is filled with Dew, and my Locks with the Drops of the Night, before
thou could have admittance? There are many besides the Gadarens, who have
turned thee out of their Coasts by their rudeness; O Lord, I am one of them, I
confess it with shame. But, O blessed Jesus, go not from me, though I deserve
it. Return according to thy Infinite goodness; I will ever watch, I will never
permit the Door of my Soul to be shut against thee.

The Third Motive.
3. The third Motive to Repentance is taken from that extreme misery which does
await the Impenitent, and will unavoidably fall upon them. This is told us
plainly, Romans 2. 3, 4, 5.
Think thou this, O Man, that judge them who do such things, and do the
same, that thou shall escape the Judgment of God? Or despisest thou the Riches
of his Goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering, not knowing that the
goodness of God leads thee to Repentance? But after thy hardness and
impenitent heart, treasurest up to thy self wrath against the day of Wrath and
Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God.

The goodness of God, as I have shown, leads the sinner to Repentance, and so
to Happiness by Pardon. This goodness he despises, and maintains in himself
the hardness of an impenitent heart, a heart that will not relent. But think
thou this, O man, that so doing thou can escape the Judgment of God? No; thou
do but treasure up wrath to thy self against the day of Wrath. Every sinner
has his measure for Iniquity, and the Impenitent fills it up; God also has
his Storehouse for Vengeance, and the obstinate sinner does there lay up wrath
against himself. At present this is a hidden Treasure, but it shall be opened
in the day of Wrath, when God will reveal the Righteousness of his Judgment
upon such as would not repent.

God has always declared this to be the last state of obdurate sinners; Ps.
68. 21.
He will wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy Scalp of such a one as
goes on still in his wickedness. Long before this it was said plainly by Moses,
Deu. 29. 19, 20.
If it come to pass, when he hears the words of this Curse, that he bless
himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace though I walk in the
imagination of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst; The Lord will not spare
him, but then the Anger of the Lord and his Jealousy shall smoke against that
man, and all the Curses that are written in this Book shall lie upon him, and
the Lord shall blot out his Name from under Heaven. He that despises the
methods of God's grace, and continues his Disobedience, and yet persuades
himself that all shall be well with him, does highly provoke God. The Hope of
the Disobedient is a great part of their Disobedience; for it is a presumptuous
believing against the express Declarations of God's Will, and they shall be
punished for it as an aggravation of their other sins. Such people slight the
Divine Threatenings, disbelieve the Truth and Power of God concerning their
performance; but they shall pay dear for it, especially in the great day of
Wrath, when Christ will come in flaming Fire to render Vengeance to those who
acknowledge God no better, and do wilfully disobey his Gospel.

This misery is dreadful, because the Sufferings, to which the Impenitent will
be condemned, are so great, that now they would be intolerable, but which then
they shall be made to endure. Of this I shall give account, 1. By a brief
Rehearsal of the Descriptions of them which we find in Holy Scripture. 2. By
the deep Impressions which they will make upon the spirits of damned
Impenitents, of which we are told in Holy Writ. 3. By setting down four
particular Notices, which we have received concerning the dreadfulness of that
state.


1. By a brief Rehearsal of the Descriptions of the misery of Impenitents,
which we find recorded in Holy Scripture. It has pleased God to express the
future Torments of Impenitent Souls, by taking resemblances from the bodily
pains with which they are now acquainted; and has chosen the most sharp of
those which men suffer on Earth, to be Emblems of those far greater which they
shall suffer in Hell. I shall name a few of them.

Sometimes that miserable Condition is described by the Torment of Fire, than
which nothing is more sharp; which is called Matthew. 5. 22. Hell Fire; which,
Chap. 13. 49, 50. is called a Furnace of Fire, into which the wicked shall be
cast in the end of the World; and Rev. 21. 8. a Lake of Fire and Brimstone,
into which several sorts of sinners there named shall be thrown; Heb. 10. 27.
it is called (...), which is translated Fiery Indignation, because of the
fierceness of Divine Vengeance. This is terrible, and therefore such as are
obnoxious to it are there said to be under a fearful expectation of Judgment.

It was a pain unspeakably dreadful which those old sinners endured, who were
enclosed in Sodom, and made to perish in the noysom smoke of Brimstone, and the
unsupportable Torment of Fire: But that is nothing to that which will be
kindled in Hell, where the Fire will never go out, nor the Persons who are
burnt in it ever be consumed.

Sometimes this Punishment is called the Gnawing of the never dying Worm;
Matthew. 9. 44.
sometimes it is represented by utter Darkness, which signifies the utmost
disconsolateness of a dismal Condition. Happiness in Holy Writ is called Light,
Col. 1. 12.
and Heaven the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. Those who are cast into
utter Darkness, are removed to the farthest Distance from God, Psalm.
who is the Fountain of Life, and in whose Light the Blessed see Light.

It is called The Blackness of Darkness, i. e. the most Horrid, 2 Pet. 2. 17
into which no glimpse of Light shines. This state is worse than that of a
Malefactor, who is condemned to be made up between two Walls, there to perish
in Darkness, Hunger, and Solitude.

Sometime this dreadful misery is signified by a Pit which has no bottom, into
which the ungodly are to be cast; and sometime by the Torment of a perpetual
Rack: sometime by a Cup of Wrath, Rev. 14. 10.
called the Wine of the Wrath of God, mixed with bitter Ingredients; and in this
World God does make sinners to drink some drops, but in the great day he will
make them drink up the Dregs of it, Ps. 75. 8.
the bitter Wrath which lies in the bottom, in which is no Alloy of Mercy.
Lastly, by the pains of the second Death which the ungodly must endure; which
is a thousand times worse than the first; for that is but a Temporal separation
of the Soul from the Body, this an Eternal separation of Body and Soul from God.

2. The greatness of this Misery is plainly declared by the deep impressions,
which we are told it will make upon the spirits of damned Impenitents, as we
perceive the acuteness of pain which men suffer by the grievousness of their
Cries. Matthew. 8. 12.
Our Savior says, that in the place to which the Impenitent shall be
condemned, there will be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. These are Expressions
of extreme grief, and show the extremity of Misery. A small matter will not
make one cry out, nor a little cold make the Teeth chatter. Rev. 6. 17.
No, it is because the great day of wrath is come, and who shall be able to
abide it? The Impenitent would then be glad of Annihilation; it would be good
for them that they were nothing, or as our Savior says, That they had never
been born. In great Anguish they will say to the Mountains, fall on us, and to
the Rocks, cover us, and hide us from the face of him that sits upon the
Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: But the Rocks will be as deaf to the
Impenitent then, as they are to God now.

3. Thirdly, The Impenitents misery is made known to them by four particular
Notices which are given them of their dreadful Condition in the other World.

1. They are told beforehand what Company they shall have in Hell, and that is
no better than the Devil and his Angels, Haters and hated of God: So the
Sentence runs, Matthew. 25. 41.
Go ye cursed into the Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. You hold of
his side, Wisd. 2. 24.
and it is fit you should share in his Lot. I called you to the hopes of my
Mercy, and offered you a part in the happiness of Obedient Souls; but you
rather chose to comply with your own and my Enemy, and to perish with Satan,
rather than to hearken to me. Get you gone from me and all the blessed into
that Fire, which was not designed for you, but was appointed as the punishment
of Devils; but since you would have your portion in it, I confirm your choice.

This is sad: For the Devils were always, and are still, Enemies to Mankind:
They were Murderers from the beginning, and are Malicious to the end. To be
shut up with such Companions is a greater Torment than to be nailed up in a
Vessel among Serpents. Will impenitent sinners be able to endure this? Can they
dwell with everlasting Burnings? Can they make an agreement with Hell, and a
League with Devils? Do they think that cursed Fiends will make them welcome in
Hell, because they have persuaded them to come thither? Can they expect
entertainment from such as are shut up in a lothsom Dungeon? What help will
they give others, who are themselves in unspeakable Torments, and who are so
malicious, that, if they could, they would not? It is better to repent, than to
go to such Company.

2. The Impenitent will be exceedingly pained, because they will then see that
it was their own folly, which brought them into the Misery which they shall
then suffer; and that their Obstinacy deprived them of the Eternal Happiness,
of which they might have been possessors. Those who in their life time would
not be at leisure to be saved, shall then be forced to entertain multitudes of
thoughts which will blow the Coals of the unquenchable Fire. They will be
galled perpetually by considering how sottishly they perished, sillily
preferring a few short Pleasures before everlasting Felicity, and that
notwithstanding it was offered them, and they often persuaded to choose it. They
will then see, and grieve to see it was folly enough to have chosen the
Temporary Pleasures of sin, though for that they should only have been deprived
of Eternal Joys; but that it was the highest Madness, when for that they shall
also suffer Eternal Pains, and find that the greatness of their Worldly
Prosperity, which they so much desired, having heightened their sin, shall also
add to the sharpness of their punishment.

They will then see how sottishly they followed the evil Example of their
fellow sinners, trampling upon God's Commands, and be sensible of the meanness
of the Excuse which they made for their Unbelief, when they said, They could
not think there was such a place as Hell, because they never talked with any
that was there, or ever heard it proved by Philosophy. And they will wish then
that they had believed God, who told them that there was such a place, that
they might endeavor to escape it, and not have hearkened to their Ranting
Companions, who not being able to produce any Arguments against it, made it
their work to huff the belief of it out of the World; and that the rather,
because they well knew, that if there be such a place, they themselves must be
forced to take an undesirable Lodging in it. They will then see that it was
unreasonable to ask for Demonstrations in matters of Divine Revelation, where
God demands Faith upon his Word, remembering how sillily the old World laughed
at Noah for building a Ship to sail, as they thought, upon dry ground, refusing
to believe that there would be a Deluge, till they were aflote upon the Waves
of it.

They will see then that Disbelief, after plain Declarations of God's Will, was
not Courage, but stupid Presumption; and that continuance in sin against great
Reasons to the contrary, was a malicious Obstinacy. They will then confess that
no Tentation was a just Counterpoise to God's Promises, and that their sensual
Appetites were no lawful warrant for the contradiction of the Reason of their
Minds, and that it was extreme folly to slight the Motions of God's Spirit, and
hearken to the Suggestions of the Devil. Will any dare to say to God then, I
knew thou wast austere, and reapest where thou did not sow? No; but
remembering that they were graciously and often assisted, they will then too
late curse the baseness of their Negligence and Ingratitude.

They will then be ashamed to return to God, having done nothing of the Errand
upon which he sent them into the World, but very much to the contrary of it;
and be afraid, because they go away not having left any Testimony of their
Virtue behind them, but many damning Examples of Vice. They will hate their
Being, perceiving by the sharp Remorse of their once baffled Consciences, that
they must be their own Tormentors: whilst the space which was granted them for
Repentance, makes their Impenitence more Criminal; and the sense of their
having highly deserved what they suffer will make them acknowledge, that they
are but justly deprived of that small Relief, which is commonly allowed to the
Miserable, Pity.

3. Thirdly, The Impenitent will be gal'd with Envy, to see others possess that
Happiness which once they might have enjoyed, but then slighted, and of which
they are now for ever deprived. This we learn from our Savior, Luke 13. 28, 29.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets, in the Kingdom of God, and you your
selves thrust out. And they shall come from the East, and from the West, and
from the North, and from the South, and shall sit down in the Kingdom of God.
This sight will whet the Teeth of the never dying Worm, which will not only
bite with the never ceasing remembrance of their un worthiness, and vex with
the pain of late Repentance and continual Self-accusation; but also pine with
Envy to see others happy in what they threw away. That which our Savior added
in this matter, v. 30.
is very considerable, There are last which shall be first, and there are first
which shall be last. There are many which proud sinners despise, as persons a
great way farther from Happiness than themselves, whom they laugh at for their
Ignorance, slight for their mean Condition, and jeer for their precise Life,
which shall enter into the Kingdom of God, when they themselves shall be stopped.
So it was with the Jews to whom our Savior spoke, they looked upon themselves
as Sons of the Kingdom, Heirs of Happiness, great in Knowledge, splendid in
their Family, beloved of God, satisfied in present Enjoyments, and big with
Expectation; yet these so seemingly forward should be overrun by such as they
thought unworthy to eat with them; and these should sit down with their pious
Ancestors, where they, their boastful Progeny, should be excluded.

This matter is well expressed Wisd. 5. from the first Verse to the seventh,
Then shall the righteous man stand in great boldness before the face of such as
have afflicted him, and made no account of his Labors. When they see it, they
shall be troubled with terrible fear, and shall be amazed at the strangeness of
his salvation, so far beyond all that they looked for. And they repenting and
groaning for anguish of spirit, shall say within themselves, This was he whom
we had sometime in Derision, and a Proverb of Reproach. We Fools accounted his
life madness, and his end to be without honor. How is he numbered among the
Children of God, and his lot is among the Saints? Therefore have we erred from
the way of Truth, and the Light of Righteousness has not shined upon us.

This excellent Author gives an account of these Hectors, Chap. 2. where he
tells us of them, that they placed all Happiness in this present Life -- Verse
2. We are born at all adventure, and we shall be hereafter as though we had
never been: and therefore they crowned their Heads with Rose-buds, and filled
themselves with wine, being careful lest they should go away without their part
of Iollity. As to the Righteous man, he declares their carriage verse 10, 12,
13, 14, 15. Therefore they abused him with Rudeness, and treated him with all
Cruelty in this World; but when they come into the other, and see him stand in
great boldness before God, they are seized with a terrible fear, and vexed with
Indignation at his Happiness, amazed at the strangeness of his salvation, whom
before they scorned. All Impenitent sinners will be in such pain at our
Savior's coming, when they see obedient Souls taken up to meet him in the Air,
and find themselves left upon the burning Earth, till they be called before his
Throne, and be there adjudged to a worse Fire.

The Author to the Hebrews set a sharp Edge upon his Exhortation, Heb. 4. 1.
when he put it into these words, Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being
left us of entering into his Rest, any of you should come short of it. It is not
easy to imagine what grief seized the Unbelieving Jews, when they saw Canaan,
and beheld those before them who were to go into that good Land, but themselves
barred from it. After the pronuntiation of that sad Doom, with what pain did
they wear away the hated remnant of their Lives, wandering in the Wilderness?
Much more grievous will it be to see the Savior of the World come with his
glorious Attendants, and take up all good men and women, and carry them to the
Heavenly Canaan, and leave the Impenitent, not to perish in the Wilderness, but
to be carried to that Company and Torment which I have mentioned before. Who
would not repent that knows this?

4. The misery of the Impenitent will be unsupportable, because they will
despair of ever mending their Condition. It must needs put Vinegar into their
Wounds, when they are assured that they cannot be healed.

This Assurance depends upon two things, 1. Upon this, That they are told
before hand that the Sentence which will be pronounced, is irreversible. 2.
Upon this, That they know that he who pronounces it, is Omnipotent, and so can
secure the Execution of it.


1. The Sentence is recorded in Scripture, and there we find it Irreversible:
It is, Go into ever lasting Fire, Matt. 25. ult.
into Fire which shall never be quenched; the Worm which torments you shall
never die. The Punishment is everlasting. Those who are cast into the Lake are
ordered to be tormented there for ever and ever. Rev. 20. 14.


This is the Sentence, and he who pronounces it is Omnipotent, and so can
secure the Execution of it. He who could hinder the Fire of Nebuchadnezzar's
Furnace from burning, tormenting, or consuming his Servants, must needs be able
to make a Fire which will burn and torment, and yet not consume his Enemies.
Shall bold sinners be annihilated because they desire it, knowing they shall
have no part of Felicity, if there be any in the other World? No; God has
appointed them worse than so; and it is but just. Why should not God punish
such as long as he pleases, who sinned as long as they could? Why should their
punishment have an end, who would never leave sinning? Life was propounded upon
good terms, which if it were refused, it was declared that Death would be the
Consequent: they were persuaded to choose Life, they would not; and having
refused it, will they be angry that they suffer what they would have? A Law was
given by the Sovereign Rector of the World, Death was threatened upon the breach
of it; they would break it: they were condemned by that Law; yet Pardon was
offered, they would not accept it: so that they perished not because they
sinned, nor yet because they were condemned; but because they would be
Executed. Their Misery is their Choice. But, as I said, this makes it
unspeakably great, it will have no end. There is no (...), as the LXXII.
translate the twentieth Verse of Psalm 55. no Ransom for such hereafter, as
would not return from sin by Repentance here. Dives was not only vexed with
Envy, when he looked up and saw Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, but mad with Rage
when he saw the unpassable Gulf between himself and them. That Parable is a Map
of the future state of Impenitents, they have no hope to ascend out of the
Infernal Pit; they are sent Prisoners to that Goal, whose Bars are made too
strong for all created Power to break.

The Conclusion.
Now I am come to the Close of this Discourse, which I shall shut up with this
short Exhortation; Let us all, in the fear of God, endeavor by timely and true
Repentance to escape the Wrath to come: Knowing the Terrors of the Lord, let us
persuade our selves to this Duty. Let us not baffle all the Methods of his
Grace, and amongst others this of his Threatenings. Have we no Passion upon
which God can work? Are not the Threatenings which I have mentioned dreadful?
Have we no Fear in us? or are we afraid of any thing but God? Have we lost the
use of the Natural Principle of Self-preservation, when it is applied to our
greatest Danger? Are Eternal Happiness and Misery words only? Do they not
signify things of greatest Importance? And yet do they make no Impression upon
our hard hearts? Sure then they are grown perfect Stone, and not to be softened,
except in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone. No, rather, O merciful God, take them
out of our Breasts, and into their room put hearts of Flesh. Must we needs sin
on though we be damned for it? What is it that makes sin so dear to us? We have
been told by one whom we ought to believe, That it were much better for us to
go into Heave with an Eye plucked out, with the loss of a right Hand, or a Foot
cut off, than to carry a whole Body into Hell. Yes; but we sin for fear. Matthew.
10. 28.
How? Do we fear them, who can kill the Body (if they be permitted from above)
but after that can do no more, and not dread him who can cast both Body and
Soul into Hell? It is a dreadful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God.

Impenitent, to what purpose do thou sin on, and put the Evil Day from thee,
whose approach thou can no more delay, than hinder the Morning Sun from
rising at the appointed Minute? 2 Pet. 2. 3.
Do thou not know that thy Judgment does not linger, and that thy Damnation
slumbereth not? Pardon upon Repentance is given at an easy rate, and upon that
it may be had. Sure thou dare not ask of God leave to sin; what then makes
thee so bold as not to repent? He that sins, Rebels; He that Repents not
continues his Rebellion; And can that man think that God will not be even with
him? How can such a one escape the Damnation of Hell? Matt. 23. 33.
Shall God ever hearken to thee crying from Hell, who do despise him who has
spoken to thee from Heaven? Be wise, fear and repent, remembering that good
advice which is given thee Luke 12. 57, 58, 59. Why even of your selves judge
ye not what is right? When thou go with thine Adversary to the Magistrate,
as thou art in the way, give diligence that thou may be delivered from him;
lest he hale thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer, and
the Officer cast thee into Prison. I tell thee thou shall not depart thence
till thou have paid the very last mite. In these words our Savior does
reproach men, for not using the same prudence in managing their affairs with
God, which they do with men. It is their known practice, that when they have a
difference of Concern with another who has an Advantage against them, they
compose it as soon as they can, hoping the sooner they do it to have fairer
terms, and fearing that if they put off the matter till it come before the
Judge, he will pronounce severely against them, and that having stood out to
the last, their Adversary will make his benefit of the Sentence, and force them
to pay the whole Debt, or else lie in Prison.

How much more should we give diligence to be reconciled to God? Shall we
maintain an Action at Law in which we are sure to be cast, and that against
God? Do we contend with the Lord? Are we stronger than He? No; let us humble
our selves speedily before him, and make our peace as soon as we can. He that
stands out in sin can hope for no pardon at the day of Judgment. Let us do as
the Psalmist bids us, Ps. 2. 12.
Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way; when his wrath is
kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him. Let us
with all Expressions of humble Subjection address our selves to the Son of God,
who only can reconcile us to his Father; and do it speedily, lest loitering in
the way of sin, his Wrath overtake us, and we perish in our sinful Course. If
his Anger once begin to burn, there is no Happiness, but for such who
beforehand have made him their Friend, and so can now put their Trust in him.
And let every Penitent for his Encouragement know, that in so doing he does
comply with the Intentions of God, who designing our good, has made his
Threatenings one means of our Salvation. He has menaced sin, and let us know
the sad Doom of the Impenitent; not that thereby we should be affrighted into
Despair, but that by this means we might be more easily persuaded to sin no
more, and so escape the Punishment threatened: Job. 5. 34.
For our Savior has told us what he has said of the Wrath to come, as he
has all other things in his Gospel, to this end, that we might be saved.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 15. lin. 7. for bad, read bold. p. 28. l. 13. r. but. p. 30. l. penult.
r. what shame, what. p. 50. l. 14. r. (...). p. 67. l. 15. r. faults. p. 78. l.
9. r. can truly say. p. 84. l. 11. r. sound. p. 93. l. 11. r. checkered. l. 14.
r. plain. p. 101. l. 2. r. Love. p. 103. l. 17. r. with Reserves. p. 118. l. 1.
r. smooth. p. 123. l. 16. r. pleasures. p. 124. l. 13. for careful observance,
r. carefulness. p. 132. l. 19. for life, r. use. p. 137. l. 12. for in, r.
with. p. 151. l. 15. r. perpend. p. 155. l. ult. r. reaching. p. 174. l. 1. r.
up in. p. 177. l. ult. r. have. p. 178. l. 4. r. (...). p. 182. l. 9. for
bodies, r. ceasing of bodily. p. 185. l. 17. r. (...). p. 187. l. 14. after
(...), add, the Divine part. p. 219. l. 3. dele full.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT The Reconcileableness OF REASON AND RELIGION.

By T. E. A LAYMAN. To which is annexed by the Publisher, A Discourse of Mr.
Boil, ABOUT THE POSSIBILITY OF THE RESURRECTION.

Homines absque rerum discrimine incredulos esse, summae est imperitiae.
Verulam. in Novo Organo.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for H. Herringman, at the Anchor in the Lower Walk of
the New Exchange. 1675.

THE Publisher TO THE READER.
THese Considerations about Religion and Reason, delivered by a Person of an
excellent Genius and Ability to consider the Nature of the things he is wont to
discourse upon, being fallen into my hands, nor being forbidden to publish
them; I thought the Subject so weighty, and the way of handling it both so
discreet and solid, that I could not forbear recommending it to the Press,
being fully persuaded, the Public in general, as well as all Persons in
particular that are concerned for the safety both of Reason and Religion, and
consequently for their Dignity as they are Men, and their Nobleness as they are
Christians, will find sufficient cause to be pleased with the publication of
it. To which I have nothing to add but that, whereas at the beginning of the
following Discourse there is mention made of its being to consist of Two Parts;
one, to show, that a Christian need not lay aside his Reason; and the other,
that he is not commanded to do so: The Author thought fit to keep that Paper,
which concerned the latter, from now accompanying the former, which seems the
most seasonable, and likeliest to make impressions on that sort of Persons,
whom he chiefly designs to persuade.

THE Preface.
It Is the just Grief, and frequent Complaint of those that take to heart the
Concerns of Religion, that they see it now more furiously assaulted and
studiously undermined than ever, not only by the vicious Lives of Men, but by
their licentious Discourses. I know, there have been Vices in the World, as
long as there have been Men: And it is an observation as old as Solomon, Eccles.
7. 10. That Men are apt to look upon their own Times as worse than those that
preceded them. And because I remember too, that in reciting this Complaint he
disapproves it; I shall not dispute, whether other Ages have been less faulty
than this we live in: But this I think I may say with as much Truth as Grief,
that, among us here in England, the Times, to which our memory can reach, have
been less guilty, than the present Time is, of a spreading and bold
Profaneness. For, though many allowed themselves to court Gold, and Cups, and
Mistresses, little less than now they do; yet these were still acknowledged to
be Faults even by those that committed them, and the Precepts and the Counsels
of Religion were neglected or disobeyed, but not their Authority thrown off or
affronted; Men retaining yet such a kind of respect for Her, as the elder Son
in the Parable did for his Father, when, receiving a command from him to go and
work in his Vineyard, he answered, I go Sir, though he went not, Mat. 21. 30.
But now too many of the Vicious do not only scandalously violate the Laws of
Religion, but question the Truth, and despise the very Name of it. They rather
choose to imitate the Rebels in the other Parable, and say of Religion what
they did of their lawful King, when they insolently declared, that they would
not have him to reign over them, Luke 19. 14. They seek not to hide their sins
like Adam, but think either to cover or protect all others by that greatest of
all, Impiety; and, instead of cheating Conscience into silence, (as sinners,
not impudent, are wont to do,) by deceitful promises of repenting hereafter of
their sins, they endeavor to stifle or depose it, by maintaining, that
Repentance is a weakness of mind, and Conscience ought not to be looked on as
the Vicegerent of a Deity, whose very Existence or Providence they dispute.

And that which more troubled me, and made me most apprehend the spreading of
this Impiety, was, that it was propagated in a new way, that made me fear, the
Arguments not only of vulgar Preachers, but even of learned Divines themselves,
would be much less fit than formerly to give a check to its progress. For, till
of late, the generality of our Infidels did, either as Philologers, question
the Historical part of the Scriptures, and perhaps cavil at some of the
Doctrines; or, if they employed Philosophical Arguments, as Pomponatius and
Vaninus did, they borrowed them from Aristotle, or the Peripatetick School. And
against both these sorts of Adversaries, the learneder Champions of the
Christian Religion, such as Vives, Mornay, and Grotius, had furnished Divines
with good and proper Weapons. For, the Historical part of the Scriptures, and
especially the Miracles, were strongly confirmable by competent Testimonies,
and other Moral Proofs, sufficient in their kind. And Aristotle being himself a
dark and dubious Writer, and his Followers being on that account divided into
Sects and Parties, which for the most part had nothing to allege but his
single Authority, 'twas not difficult to answer the Arguments drawn from the
Peripatetick Philosophy; and, if that could not have been done, it had not been
difficult to reject the Doctrines themselves as false or precarious. But our
new Libertines take another and shorter way, (though I hope it will not be a
more prosperous one,) to undermine Religion. For, not troubling themselves to
examine the Historical or Doctrinal parts of Christian Theology, in such a way
as Jews, Pagans, Mahometans, would do; These deny those very Principles of
Natural Theology, wherein the Christian, and those other differing, Religions
agree, and which are supposed in almost all Religions, that pretend to
Revelation, namely, the Existence and Providence of a Deity, and a Future State
(after this life is ended.) For, these Libertines own themselves to be so upon
the account of the Epicurean or other Mechanical, Principles of Philosophy, and
therefore to press them with the Authorities wont to be employed by Preachers,
is improper, since they are so far from paying any respect to the venerable
Fathers of the Church, that they slight the generality of the Heathen
Philosophers themselves, judging no Writers worthy of that name, but those
that, like Leucippus, Democritus, Epicurus, etc. explicate things by Matter and
Local Motion; and therefore it is not to be expected, that they should reverence
any more the Peripatetick Arguments of Scotus or Aquinas, than the Homilies of
St. Augustine, or St. Chrysostom; and to give Aristotle himself the Title of
The Philosopher, were enough to make some of them conclude the Ascriber were no
Philosopher. And this, by the way, may excuse me for not having brought into
the following Papers the Sentences of the Fathers or the Moralists, or the
Authority of Aristotle, or any of the SchoolPhilosophers, which I should have
declined to employ, though my frequent removes from place to place, when I was
writing these Papers, had not denied me the convenience of a Library.

Things being at this pass, though the Title of this Discourse acknowledges the
Author of it to be a Layman; yet I shall not beg pardon for the ensuing Papers
as for an intrenchment upon the Ecclesiastics. For besides that, though I know
some Functions, yet I know no Truths, of Religion, that have the peculiarity of
the Shewbread under the Law, Mat. 12. 4. with which it was lawful only for the
Priests to meddle; I will not so far mistrust the Charity of Churchmen, as not
to suppose, that they will rather thank than blame any man, that being not
altogether a stranger to this warfare, offers them his assistance against the
common Enemy in so important a quarrel, and so great a danger. The Fathers, and
other Divines, being wont to compare the Church Militant to a ship, 'twill not
be an improper extension of the Comparison, to say, that, when the Vessel is
threatened with shipwreck, or boarded by Pirates, it may be the Duty not only of
professed Seamen, but any private Passenger, to lend his helping hand in that
common danger. And I wish, I were as sure, that my endeavors will prove
successful, as I am, that such Churchmen as I most esteem will think them
neither needless nor unseasonable. Nay, perhaps my being a Secular person, may
the better qualify me to work on those I am to deal with, and may make my
Arguments, though not more solid in themselves, yet more prevalent with men
that usually (though how justly, let them consider,) have a particular pique at
the Clergy, and look with prejudice upon whatever is taught by men, whose
interest is advantaged by having what they teach believed. And I was the more
invited not to be a mere Spectator, or a lazy Deplorer of the danger I saw
Religion in, because it seemed not unlikely, that Philosophical Infidels, as
they would be thought, would be less tractable to Divines, though never so good
Humanists and Antiquaries, than to a person that reasons with them upon their
own grounds, and discourses with them in their own way, having had a somewhat
more than ordinary curiosity to acquaint himself with the Epicurean and
Cartesian Principles, and exercise himself in that Philosophy, which is very
conversant with things Corporeal, and strives to explain them by Matter and
Motion, and shakes off all Authority (at least that is not infallible.) Upon
such Considerations as these, I complied with an occasion I had of solemnly
asking Reason the Question, that Joshua once asked the Angel that appeared to
him in the Plains of Jericho, Art thou for us, or for our Adversaries? Josh. 5.
14; and of committing to Paper those thoughts that should occur to me on that
Subject. And this I the rather did, that I might thereby as well contribute to
my own satisfaction as to that of my Friends. For, as I think, that there is
nothing that belongs to this life, that so much deserves our serious care as
what will become of us when we are past it; so I think, that he who takes a
resolution either to embrace or reject so important a thing as Religion,
without seriously examining why he does it, may happen to make a good Choice,
but can be but a bad Chooser. And that I might not exclude, by too early a
method, those things, that, for ought I knew, might hereafter be pertinent and
useful, I threw my Reflections into one Book, as into a Repository, to be kept
there only as a heap of differing materials, that, if they appeared worth it,
they might be afterward reviewed, and sorted, and drawn into an orderly
Discourse. But, before I began to do what I intended, a succession of
accidents, (wherewith 'twould not be proper to trouble the Reader,) quite
diverted me to employments of a very distant nature; so that these Papers,
being thrown by, did for diverse years lie neglected, with many others, till at
length the person, for whose perusal I in the first place designed them, joined
with some other intelligent Friends to urge me to send them abroad, though I
was not in a condition to give them the finishing strokes, or so much as to
fill up several of the Blanks, my haste had made me leave to be supplied when I
should be at leisure. And indeed, notwithstanding the just aversness I had from
letting a piece so incomplete and uncorrected appear in this Critical Age; yet
the hopes, they confidently gave me, that this piece, such as it is, might not
be unacceptable nor useless, were not, I confess, altogether groundless.

Novelty being a thing very acceptable in this age, and particularly to the
persons I am to deal with, to whom perhaps it is none of the least endearments
of their Errors, I despair not, that 'twill somewhat recommend these Papers, to
which I designed to commit not Transcripts of what I thought they may have
already met with in Authors, but such considerations, as a serious attention,
and the nature of the things I treated of, suggested to me; so that most of the
things will perhaps be thought new; and some few things coincident with what
they may have elsewhere met with, may possibly appear rather to have been
suggested by considering the same subjects, to other Authors and to me, than to
have been borrowed by me of them. But some few things, I confess, I employ,
that were commonly enough employed before, and I hope, I may in that have done
Religion no disservice; For having taken notice, that some of the more familiar
Arguments had a real force in them, but had been so unwarily proposed as to be
liable to exceptions that had discredited them; I made it my care, by proposing
them more cautiously, to prevent such objections, which alone kept their force
from being apparent.

I was not unmindful of the great Disadvantage this Tract was likely to
undergo, partly for want of a more curious method, and partly because my other
occasions required, that if I Published it at all, it must be left to come
abroad unpolished and unfinished. But though this Inconvenience had like to
have suppressed this Discourse; yet the force of it was much weakened by this
consideration, that this immethodical way of Writing would best comply with
what was designed and pretended in this Paper, which was, not to write a
complete Treatise of the Subject of it; but only to suggest about it some of
those many considerations, that (questionless) might have occurred to (what I
do not pretend to) an Enlightened and Penetrating Intellect. And the Loadstone,
diverse of whose Phenomena are mentioned in the body of this little Tract,
suggested somewhat to me in reference to the Publication of it, by exciting in
me a hope, that, if this Discourse have any thing near as much Truth as I
endeavored to furnish it with, that Truth will have its operation upon sincere
Lovers of it, notwithstanding the want of regularity in the method: As a good
Loadstone will not, by being rough and rudely shaped, be hindered from
exercising its Attractive and Directive powers upon Steel and Iron.

As for the Style, I was rather shy than ambitious of bringing in the Thorns of
the Schoolmen or the Flowers of Rhetoric: For, the latter, though they had of
their own accord sprung up under my Pen, I should have though improper to be
employed in so serious and Philosophical a Subject: And as to the former, I
declined them, in complaisance to the humor of my Infidels, who are generally
so prejudiced against the Schoolmen, that scarce any thing can be presented
them with more disadvantage than in a Scholastic dress; and a Demonstration
will scarce pass for a good Argument with some of them, if it be formed into a
Syllogism in mode and figure. That therefore, which I chiefly aimed at in my
expressions, was significancy and clearness, that my Reader might see, that I
was willing to make him judge of the strength of my Arguments, and would not
put him to the trouble of divining in what it lay, nor inveigle him by
ornaments of speech, to think it greater than it was. I was also led by my
Reason, as well as by my Inclination, to be careful not to rail at my Infidels:
And though I have some cause to think, that many of them had their
understandings debauched by their lives, and were seduced from the Church not
by Diagoras or Pyrrho, but by Bacchus and Venus; yet I treat them as supposing
them to be what they would be thought, Friends to Philosophy: And being but a
Layman, I did not think my self obliged to talk to them as out of a Pulpit, and
threaten them with Damnation unless they believed me, but chose to discourse to
them rather as to erring Virtuosi, than Wicked wretches.

This moderation that I have used toward them, will, I hope, induce them to
grant me two or three reasonable requests; whereof the first shall be, that
they would not make a final judgment of these Papers till they have perused
them quite through; especially having in their Eye what is declared in the
Preamble, where both the design and scope of the whole discourse, and what it
does not pretend to, is expressed. The next thing I am to request of them, and my
Readers, is, that they would not have the meaner thoughts of my Arguments for
not being proposed with the confidence, wherewith many Writers are wont to
recommend weaker proofs. For I wrote to intelligent Men, and, in the judgment
of such, I never observed that a Demonstration ceased to be thought one for
being modestly proposed; but I have often known a good Argument lose of its
credit by the invidious Title of a Demonstration. And I must further beg my
Readers, to estimate my Design in these Papers by the Title of them, in which I
do not pretend to make Religion trample upon Reason, but only to show the
Reconcileableness of the one to the other, and the friendly agreement between
them. I am a person, who looking upon it as my Honor and Happiness to be both
a Man, and a Christian, would neither write nor believe any thing, that might
misbecome me in either of those two capacities. I am not a Christian, because
it is the Religion of my Country, and my Friends; nor, because I am a stranger
to the Principles either of the Atomical, or the Mechanical Philosophy. I admit
no man's Opinions in the whole lump, and have not scrupled, on occasion, to own
dissents from the generality of learned men, whether Philosophers or Divines:
And when I choose to travel in the beaten Road, it is not because I find it is
the Road, but because I judge it is the Way. Possibly I should have much fewer
Adversaries, if all those that yet are so, had as attentively and impartially
considered the Points in Controversy as I have endeavored to do. They would
then, it is like, have seen, that the Question I handle, is not whether Rational
Beings ought to avoid Unreasonable Assents, but whether, when the Historical
and other Moral Proofs clearly sway the Scales in favor of Christianity, we
ought to fly from the Difficulties that attend the granting of a Deity and
Providence, to Hypotheses, whether Epicurean or others, that are themselves
encumbered with confounding Difficulties: On which account I conceive, that the
Question between them and me is not, whether They, or I, ought to submit to
Reason (for we both agree in thinking our selves bound to that;) but whether
They or I submit to Reason the fulliest informed, and least biased by
Sensuality, Vanity, or Secular Interest.

I reverence and cherish Reason as much, I hope, as any of them; but I would
have Reason practice Ingenuity as well as Curiosity, and both industriously pry
into things within her sphere, and frankly acknowledge (what no Philosopher
that considers will deny) that there are some things beyond it. And in these it
is, that I think it as well her Duty to admit Revelation, as her Happiness to
have it proposed to her: And, even as to Revelations themselves, I allow Reason
to judge of them, before she judges by them. The following Papers will, I hope,
manifest, that the main difference betwixt my Adversaries and me is, that they
judge upon particular Difficulties and Objections, and I, upon the whole
matter. And to conclude; as I make use of my Watch to estimate Time, when ever
the Sun is absent or clouded, but when he shines clearly forth, I scruple not
to correct and adjust my Watch by his Beams cast on a Dial; so, wherever no
better Light is to be had, I estimate Truth by my own Reason; but where Divine
Revelation can be consulted, I willingly submit my fallible Reason to the sure
Informations afforded by Celestial Light.

I should here put an end to this long Preface, but that to the things, which
have been said concerning what I have written of my own, I see it is requisite
that I add a few words about what I quote from other Writers; especially
because in this very Preface I mention my having intended to entertain my
Friend with my own Thoughts. Of the Citations therefore that my Reader will
meet with in the following Papers, I have this Account to give him: (1.) That I
had written the Considerations and Distinctions to which they are annexed,
before I met with these cited Passages, which I afterward inserted in the
Margent, and other vacant places of my Epistle. (2.) That these Passages are
not borrowed from Books that treat of the Truth of the Christian Religion, or
of Christian Theology at all, but are taken from Authors that write of
Philosophical Subjects, and are by me applied to Mine, which are usually very
distant from Theirs. (3.) If you then ask me, why I make use of their
Authority, and did not content my self with my own Ratiocinations? I have this
to Answer; that my design being to convince another who had no reason to look
upon my Authority, and whom I had cause to suspect to have entertained some
prejudices against any Reasons that should come from one that confessedly aimed
at the defending of the Christian Religion, I thought it very proper and
expedient to let him see, that diverse of the same things (for substance,) that
I delivered in favor of that Religion, had been taught as Philosophical Truths
by Men that were not professed Divines, and were Philosophers, and such strict
Naturalists too, as to be extraordinarily careful not to take any thing into
their Philosophy upon the account of Revelation. And on this occasion let me
observe to you, that there are some Arguments, which being clearly built upon
Sense or evident Experiments, need borrow no Assistance from the Refutation of
any of the Proposers or Approvers, and may, I think, be fitly enough compared
to Arrows shot out of a Cross-Bow, or Bullets shot out of a Gun, which have the
same strength, and pierce equally, whether they be discharged by a Child, or a
strong Man. But then, there are other Ratiocinations, which either do, or are
supposed to depend, in some measure, upon the judgment and skill of those that
make the Observations whereon they are grounded, and their Ability to discern
Truth from Counterfeits, and Solid things from those that are but Superficial
ones: And these may be compared to Arrows shot out of a Long-Bow, which make
much the greater impression, by being shot by a strong and skilful Archer. And
therefore when we question, what Doctrines ought or ought not to be thought
Reasonable, it does not a little facilitate a Propositions appearing (not
Contrary, but) Consonant to Reason, that it is looked upon as such by those that
are acknowledged the Masters of that Faculty.

ERRATA.
Page 38. line 6. read of for or. ib. l. 9. dele all that is contained in that
whole parenthesis. ib. l. 19. The discourse, beginning in that line with the
words, if no body, and ending p. 43. l. 7. with the words, contiguous and
moved, is to be included between two signs of a Parathesis, [ ]. P. 43. l. 18.
del. Parenthesis before the words, as were, and put it l. 20. before the word,
and.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT The Reconcileableness OF REASON and RELIGION. The
First Part.
AS to what you write in your Friends name, near the bottom of the first page
of your Letter, perhaps I shall not mistake, if I guess, that, when He seems
but to propose a Question, he means an Objection; and covertly intimates, that
I, among many others, am reduced to that pass, that to embrace our Religion, we
must renounce our Reason; and consequently, that to be a Christian, one must
cease to be a Man, and much more, leave off being a Philosopher.

What liberal Concessions soever some others have been pleased to make on such
an Occasion as this, they do not concern me; who, being asked but my own
Opinion, do not think my self responsible for that of others. And therefore,
that I may frame my Answer so, as to meet both with the obvious sense of the
Question, and the intimated meaning of Him that proposes it, I shall roundly
make a Negative Reply, and say, That I do not think, that a Christian, to be
truly so, is obliged to forego his Reason; either by denying the Dictates of
right Reason, or by laying aside the Use of it.

I doubt not but this Answer is differing enough from what your Friend expects;
and perhaps those Grants, that have been made by the Indulgence or Inadvertency
of many persons, eminent for being Pious or Learned, may make you your self
startle at this Declaration: And therefore, though you will not, I know, expect
an Answer to what Objections your Friend may make, since he has expressed but
what He thinks ought to be a Christian's Opinion, not what he has to object
against what is so; yet, to satisfy those Scruples that you your self may
retain, I shall endeavor (but with the Brevity that becomes a Letter) to
acquaint you by themselves, with some of the Positive Inducements, that have
led me to this Opinion, and interweave some others, in answering the chief
Objections that I think likely to be made against it.

And this Preamble, short as it is, will, I hope, serve to keep you from
mistaking my design; which, as you may gather from what I have intimated, is
not to give you the positive proofs of the Christian Religion (which is not
here to be expected from a bare Defendant,) but to give you some Specimens of
such general Considerations, as may probably show, that the Matter (or
Essential Doctrines) peculiar to the Christian Religion, is not so repugnant to
the Principles of true Natural Philosophy, as that to believe them, a Man must
cease to act like a Rational Man, any more than he would be obliged to do by
embracing other Religions, or even the Tenants that have been held without
disparagement to their Intellectuals, by the mere Philosophers themselves;
which last Clause I add, because I presume, you do not expect, that I should be
follicitous to vindicate the Christians belief of a Deity from being
Irrational; since, besides that perhaps your Friend would think himself
affronted to be dealt with as an Atheist, without having professed himself one,
the Acknowledgment of a Deity blemishes the Christian's Reason no more, than it
does that of Men of all Religions, not to say of all Mankind; and imports no
other contradiction to Reason, than what has been judged to be none at all by
the Greatest, if not by all, of the Philosophers that were famed for being
guided by Reason (without Revelation.) And I shall venture to add (upon the by)
that, as I do not for my own part think the Atheists Philosophical Objections
(if your Friend had produced them) to be near so considerable for weight or
number, as not only those few that deny a God, but many of those that believe
one, are wont to think; so the Christian is not reduced, as is imagined, to
make the Being of a Deity a mere Postulatum; since, besides the Philosophical
Arguments he can allege in common with the best Champions for a Deity, he has
a peculiar Historical Proof that may suffice; the Miracles performed by Christ
and his followers being such, that if the matter of Fact can be (as it may be)
well evinced, they will not only prove the rest of the Christian Religion, but
in the first place, That there must be a God to be the Author of them.

But though of the two things which my design obliges me to Endeavor the making
good of, the most Natural order seems to be, that I should first show, That no
Precepts of Christianity do command a Man to lay aside his Reason in matters of
Religion; and then, That there is nothing in the Nature of the Christian
Doctrine it self that makes a Man need to do so; Yet I think it not amiss in
treating of these two Subjects to invert the Order, and first consider that
difficulty which is the Principal, and which your Friend and You jointly desire
to have my thoughts of; namely, Whether there be a necessity for a Christian to
deny his Reason? And then we shall proceed to examine, Whether, though he need
not disclaim his Reason, it be nevertheless his Duty so to do?

SECT. I.
To proceed then to the Considerations that make up the former Part of this
Epistle; I shall in the first place distinguish betwixt that which the
Christian Religion it self teaches, and that which is taught by this or that
Church or Sect of Christians, and much more by this or that particular Divine
or Schoolman.

I Need not persuade you, who cannot but know it so well already, that there
are many things taught about the Attributes and Decrees of God, the Mysteries
of the Trinity, and Incarnation, and diverse other Theological Subjects, about
which not only private Christians, but Churches of Christians do not at all
agree. There are too many Men, whose Ambition, or Boldness, or Self-conceit, or
Interest, leads them to obtrude upon others, as parts of Religion, Things that
are not only Strangers, but oftentimes Enemies to it. And there are others, who
out of an indiscreet Devotion are so sollicitous to increase the Number and the
Wonderfulness of Mysteries, that, to hear them propose and Discourse of things,
one would judge, that they think it is the office of Faith, not to elevate, but
to trample upon Reason; and that things are then fittest to be believed, when
they are not clearly to be proved or understood. And indeed, when on the one
side I consider the charitable design of the Gospel, and the candid simplicity
that shines in what it proposes, or commands; and on the other side, what
strange and wild Speculations and Inferences have been fathered upon it, not
only in the Metaphysical Writings of some Schoolmen, but in the Articles of
Faith of some Churches; I cannot but think, that if all these Doctrines are
parts of the Christian Religion, the Apostles, if they were now alive, would be
at best but Catechumini; and I doubt not but many of the nice Points that are
now much valued and urged by some, would be as well disapproved by St. Paul, as
by Aristotle; and should be as little entertained by an Orthodox Divine, as a
Rigid Philosopher. I do not therefore allow all that for Gospel, which is
taught for such in a Preachers Pulpit, or even a Professors Chair. And
therefore, if Scholastic Writers, of what Church soever, take the liberty of
imposing upon the Christian Religion their Metaphysical Speculations, or any
other merely humane Doctrines, as matters of Faith, I who, not without some
Examination, think Metaphysics themselves not to have been for the most part
over-well understood, and applied, shall make bold to leave all such private
Doctrines to be defended by their own Broachers or Abettors; and shall deny,
that it will follow, That in case of this multitude of Placets, which some bold
Men have been pleased to adopt into the Catalogue of Christian Verities, any or
all should be found inconsistent with right Reason, the Christian Religion must
be so too. For by that name I understand only that System of Revealed Truths
that are clearly delivered in the Scriptures; or by legitimate and manifest
consequences deduced thence. And by this one Declaration so many unnecessary
and perhaps hurtful Retainers to Christianity will be at once thrown off, that
I doubt not, but if you consider the Matter aright, you will easily discern,
that by this first Distinction I have much lessened the work that is to be done
by those that are to follow it.

SECT. II.
In the next place, among the things that seem not rational in Religion, I make
a great difference between those, in which unenlightned Reason is manifestly a
competent Judge, and those which Natural Reason it self may discern to be out
of its Sphere.

You will allow me, That Natural Theology is sufficient to evince the Existence
of the Deity; and we know that many of the old Philosophers, that were
unassisted by Revelation, were, by the force of Reason, led to discover and
confess a God, that is, a Being supremely perfect; under which Notion diverse of
them expressly represent him. Now, if there be such a Being, it is but reasonable
to conceive, that there may be many things relating to his Nature, his Will,
and his management of things, that are without the Sphere of mere or unassisted
Reason. For, if his Attributes and Perfections be not fully comprehensible to
our Reason, we can have but inadequate Conceptions of them; and since God is a
Being, toto Coelo, as they speak, differing from all other Beings, there may be
some things in his Nature, and in the manner of his Existence, which is without
all Example or perfect Analogy in inferior Beings. For we see, that even in Man
himself the Coexistence and intimate Union of the Soul and Body, that is, an
Immaterial and a Corporeal substance, is without all President or Parallel in
Nature. And though the truth of this Union may be proved; yet the manner of it
was never yet, nor perhaps ever will be, in this Life clearly understood, (to
which purpose I shall elsewhere say more.) Moreover, if we suppose God to be
Omnipotent, (that is, to be able to do whatever involves no Contradiction that
it should be done,) we must allow him to be able to do many things that no
other Agent can afford us any Examples of, and some of them perhaps such, as
we, who are but finite, and are wont to judge of things by Analogy, cannot
conceive how they can be performed. Of the last sort of things may be the
recollecting a sufficient quantity of the scattered matter of a Dead humane
Body, and the contriving of it so, that (whether alone or with some addition of
other Particles) upon a reconjunction with the Soul, it may again constitute a
living Man, and so effect that Wonder we call the Resurrection. Of the latter
sort is the Creation of Matter out of nothing, and much more the like
Production of those Rational and Intelligent Beings, Humane Souls. For as for
Angels (good or bad,) I doubt, whether mere Philosophy can evince their
Existence, though I think it may the possibility thereof. And since we allow
the Deity a Wisdom equal to this boundless Power, it is but reasonable to
conceive, that these unlimited Attributes conspiring may produce Contrivances
and frame Designs, which we Men must be unable (at least of our selves)
sufficiently to understand, and to reach to the bottom of. And by this way of
arguing it may be made to appear, That there may be many things relating to the
Deity above the reach of unenlightned humane Reason. Not that I affirm all
these things to be in their own Nature incomprehensible to us (though some of
them may be so,) when they are once proposed; but that Reason by its own light
could not discover them particularly, and therefore it must owe its knowledge
of them to Divine Revelation. And if God vouchsafes to disclose those things to
us, since not only he must needs know about his own Nature, Attributes, etc.
what we cannot possibly know unless he tells us, and since we know, that
whatever he tells us is infallibly true, we have abundant Reason to believe
rather what he declares to us concerning Himself and Divine things, than what
we should conclude or guess about them by Analogy to things of a nature
infinitely distant from his, or by Maxims framed according to the nature of
inferior Beings. If therefore he clearly reveal to us, That there is in the
Godhead, Three distinct Persons, and yet that God is One, we, that think our
selves bound to believe God's Testimony in all other Cases, ought sure not to
disbelieve it concerning himself, but to acknowledge, that in an unparalled
and incomprehensible Being, there may be a manner of Existence not to be
paralleled in any other Being, though it should never be understood by us Men,
who cannot clearly comprehend, how in our selves two such distant Natures as
that of a gross Body and an immaterial Spirit, should be united so as to make
up one Man. In such cases therefore as we are now speaking of, there must
indeed be something that looks like captivating ones Reason, but it is a
submission that Reason it self obliges us to make; and he that in such points
as these believes rather what the Divine Writings teach him, than what he would
think if they had never informed him, does not renounce or inslave his Reason,
but suffers it to be Pupil to an Omniscient and Infallible Instructor, who can
teach him such things, as neither his own mere Reason, nor any others could
ever have discovered to him.

I thought to have here dismissed this Proposition, but I must not omit to give
it a confirmation afforded me by chance (or rather Providence:) For, since I
writ the last Paragraph, resuming a Philosophical Enquiry, I met in prosecuting
it with a couple of Testimonies of the truth of what I was lately telling you,
which are given not by Divines or Schoolmen, but by a couple of famous
Mathematicians, that have both led the way to many of the Modern Philosophers
to shake off the reverence wont to be born to the Authority of great Names, and
have advanced Reason in a few years more than such as Vaninus and Pomponatius
would do in many Ages; and have always boldly, and sometimes successfully
attempted to explain intelligibly those things, which others scrupled not
either openly or tacitly to confess inexplicable.

The first of these Testimonies I met with in a little French Treatise put out
by some Mathematician, who, though he conceals his Name, appears by his way of
writing to be a great Virtuoso, and takes upon him to give his Readers in
French the new thoughts of Galilaeo, by making that the Title of his Book. This
Writer then speaking of a Paradox (which I but recite) of Galilaeo's, that
makes a point equal to a Circle, adds, Et per consequent l'on peut dire, Page
22, 23.
i. e. and consequently one may say, that all Circles are equal between
themselves, since each of them is equal to a point. For though the imagination
be overpowered by this Idea or Notion; yet Reason will suffer it self to be
persuaded of it. I know (continues he) diverse other excellent Persons (besides
Galilaeo) who conclude the same thing by other ways, but all are constrained to
acknowledge, that indivisible and infinite are things that do so swallow up the
mind of Man, that he scarce knows what to pitch on, when he contemplates them.
For it will follow from Galilaeo's Speculation, etc. which passage I have
cited, to show you, that Galilaeo is not the only Philosopher and Mathematician
who has confessed his Reason quite passed about the Attributes of what is
Infinite.

The other Testimony I mentioned to you, is that of the excellent Descartes in
the second Part of his Principles of Philosophy, Numb. 34:
where speaking of the Circle to be made by Matter moving through places still
lesser and lesser, he has this ingenious acknowledgment; Fatendum tamen est
(says he) in motu isto aliquid reperiri, quod men's quidem nostra percipit esse
verum, sed tamen quo pacto fiat non comprehendit, nempe Divisionem quarundam
particularum Materiae in infinitum, sive indefinitam, atque in tot parts ut
nulla cogitatione determinare possimus tam exiguam, quin intelligamus ipsam in
alias adhuc minores reipsa esse divisam. And in the Close of the next
Paragraph, he gives this for a Reason, why, though we cannot comprehend this
indefinite division, yet we ought not to doubt of the truth of it, That we
discern it to be of that kind of things that cannot be comprised by our minds
as being but finite.

If then such bold and piercing Wits, and such excellent Mathematicians are
forced to confess, that not only their own Reason, but that of Mankind may be
passed and non-plus'd about Quantity, which is an Object of contemplation
Natural, nay, Mathematical, and which is the Subject of the rigid
Demonstrations of pure Mathematics; why should we think it unfit to be
believed, and to be acknowledged, that in the Attributes of God, who is
essentially an Infinite Being, and an Ens singularissimum, and in diverse other
Divine things, of which we can have no knowledge without Revelation, there
should be some things, that our Finite understandings cannot, especially in
this life, clearly comprehend.

SECT. III.
To this Consideration, I shall for Affinities sake subjoin another, which I
leave to your Liberty to look upon, as a distinct one, or as an Enlargement and
Application of the former.

I consider then, that there is a great difference between a Doctrines being
repugnant to the general and well-weigh'd Rules or Dictates of Reason, in the
forming of which Rules it may be supposed to have been duly considered; and its
disagreeing with Axioms, at the Establishment whereof the Doctrine in Question
was probably never thought on. There are several Rules that pass current even
among the most Learned Men, and which are indeed of very great use when
restrained to those things whence they took their Rise, and others of the like
nature; which yet ought not to overthrow those Divine Doctrines that seem not
consonant to them. For the Framers of these Rules having generally built them
upon the Observations they had made of Natural and Moral things, since (as we
lately argued) Reason it self cannot but acknowledge, there are some things out
of its Sphere, we must not think it impossible, that there may be Rules, which
will hold in all inferior Beings for which they were made; and yet not reach to
that infinite and most singular Being called God, and to some Divine matters
which were not taken into Consideration when those Rules were framed. And
indeed, if we consider God as the Author of the Universe, and the free
Establisher of the Laws of Motion, whose general Concourse is necessary to the
Conservation and Efficacy of every particular Physical Agent, we cannot but
acknowledge, that by withholding his Concourse or changing these Laws of
Motion, which depend perfectly upon his Will, he may invalidate most, if not
all, the Axioms and Theorems of Natural Philosophy: These supposing the Course
of Nature, and especially the Established Laws of Motion among the parts of the
Universal Matter, as those upon which all the Phenomenon of Nature depend. It Is
a Rule in Natural Philosophy, that Causae necessariae semper agunt quantum
possunt; But it will not follow from thence, that the Fire must necessarily
burn Daniel's three Companions or their Clothes, that were cast by the
Babylonian King's Command into the midst of a Burning fiery Furnace, when the
Author of Nature was pleased to withdraw his Concourse to the Operation of the
flames, or supernaturally to defend against them the Bodies that were exposed
to them. That Men once truly dead cannot be brought to life again, has been in
all Ages the Doctrine of mere Philosophers; but though this be true according
to the Course of Nature, yet it will not follow but that the contrary may be
true, if God interpose either to recall the departed Soul and reconjoin it to
the Body, if the Organization of this be not too much vitiated, or by so
altering the Fabric of the matter whereof the Carcass consists, as to restore
it to a fitness for the Exercise of the Functions of Life. Agreably to this let
me observe to you, that, though it be unreasonable to believe a Miraculous
Effect when attributed only to a mere Physical Agent; yet the same thing may
reasonably be believed, when ascribed to God, or to Agents assisted with his
absolute or supernatural Power. That a Man born blind should in a trice recover
his sight upon the Application of Clay and Spittle, would justly appear
incredible, if the Cure were ascribed to one that acted as a mere Man; but it
will not follow, that it ought to be incredible, that the Son of God should
work it. And the like may be said of all the Miracles performed by Christ, and
those Apostles and other Disciples of his, that acted by virtue of a Divine
Power and Commission. For in all these and the like Cases it suffices not to
make ones Belief irrational, that the things believed are impossible to be true
according to the course of Nature; but it must be shown, either that they are
impossible even to the Power of God to which they are ascribed, or that the
Records, we have of them, are not sufficient to beget Belief in the nature of a
Testimony; which latter Objection against these Relations is Foreign to our
present Discourse. And as the Rules about the power of Agents will not all of
them hold in God; so I might show the like, if I had time, concerning some of
his other Attributes: Insomuch that even in point of Justice, wherein we think
we may freeliest make Estimates of what may or may not be done, there may be
some cases, wherein God's supreme Dominion, as Maker and Governor of the World,
places him above some of those Rules; I say, some, for I say not above all
those Rules of Justice which oblige all inferior Beings, without excepting the
greatest and most absolute Monarchs themselves. I will not give Examples of his
Power of Pardoning or Remitting Penalties, which is but a relaxing of his own
Right; but will rather give an instance in his Power of afflicting and
exterminating Men, without any Provocation given him by them. I will not here
enter upon the Controversy de Iure Dei in Creaturas, upon what it is founded,
and how far it reaches. For, without making my self a party in that Quarrel, I
think, I may safely say, that God by his right of Dominion, might, without any
violation of the Laws of Justice, have destroyed and even annihilated Adam and
Eve before they had eaten of the forbidden Fruit, or had been commanded to
abstain from it. For Man being as much and as entirely God's Workmanship as any
of the other Creatures; unless God had obliged himself by some promise or pact
to limit the Exercise of his absolute dominion over him, God was no more bound
to preserve Adam and Eve long alive, than he was to preserve a Lamb, or a
Pigeon; and therefore, as we allow, that he might justly recall the Lives he
had given those innocent Creatures when he pleased, (as actually he often
ordered them to be killed and burned in Sacrifice to him:) so he might, for the
declaration of his Power to the Angels, or for other Reasons, have suddenly
taken away the Lives of Adam and Eve, though they had never offended him. And
upon the same grounds he might without Injustice have annihilated, I say not,
damned their Souls; he being no more bound to continue Existence to a Nobler,
than a less noble Creature: As he is no more bound to keep an Eagle than an
Oyster always alive. I know, there is a difference betwixt Gods resuming a
Being he lent Adam, and his doing the same to inferior Creatures: But that
disparity, if it concern any of his Attributes, will concern some other than
his Justice; which allowed him to resume at pleasure the Being he had only lent
them, or lay any Affliction on them that were lesser than that Good could
countervail. But mentioning this instance only occasionally, I shall not
prosecute it any further, but rather mind you of the Result of this and the
foregoing Consideration; which is, That Divinely revealed Truths may seem to be
repugnant to the dictates of Reason, when they do but seem to be so: Nor does
Christianity oblige us to question such Rules as to the cases they were framed
for, but the application of them to the Nature of God, who has already been
truly said to be Ens singularissimum, and to his absolute Power and Will; so
that we do not reject the Rules we speak of, but rather limit them; and when we
have restrained them to their due bounds, we may safely admit them.

From Men's not taking notice of, or not pondering this necessary limitation of
many Axioms delivered in general terms, seems to have proceeded a great Error,
which has made so many Learned Men presume to say, That this or that thing is
true in Philosophy, but false in Divinity, or on the contrary: As for instance,
that a Virgin, continuing such, may have a Child, is looked upon as an Article
which Theology asserts to be true, and Philosophy pronounces impossible. But
the Objection is grounded upon a mistake, which might have been prevented by
wording the Propositions more warily and fully. For though we grant, that,
Physically speaking, it is false, that a Virgin can bring forth a Child; yet
that signifies no more, than that, according to the course of Nature, such a
thing cannot come to pass; but speaking absolutely and indefinitely, without
confining the Effect to mere Physical Agents, it may safely be denied that
Philosophy pronounces it impossible that a Virgin should be a Mother. For why
should the Author of Nature be confined to the ways of working of dependent and
finite Agents? And to apply the Answer to the Divines that hold the Opinion I
oppose; I shall demand, why God may not out of the substance of a Woman form a
Man, without the help of a Man, as well as at the beginning of the substance of
a Man he formed a Woman without the concurrence of a Woman? And so, that Iron
being a Body far heavier, ( in specie, as they speak,) will, if upheld by no
other Body, sink in water, is a Truth in Natural Philosophy; but since Physics
themselves lead Men to the acknowledgment of a God, it is not repugnant to
Reason, that, if God please to interpose his Power, he may (as in Elisha's
case) make Iron swim, either by withholding his concourse to the Agents,
whatever they be that cause Gravity in Bodies, or perhaps by other ways unknown
to us; since a vigorous Loadstone may, as I have more than once tried, keep a
piece of Iron, which it touches not, swimming in the Air, though this thin Body
must contribute far less, than water would, to the sustaining it aloft.

That strict Philosopher Des Carts, who has with great Wit and no less
Applause attempted to carry the Mechanical Powers of matters higher than any of
the Modern Philosophers; this Naturalist, I say, that ascribes so great a power
to Matter and Motion, was so far from thinking, that what was impossible to
them, must be so to God too, that, though he were urged by a learned Adversary
with an Argument as likely as any to give him a strong Temptation to limit the
Omnipotence of God; yet even on this occasion he scruples not to make this
ingenious and wary Acknowledgment, and that in a private Letter; For my part,
says he, I think we ought never to say of any thing that it is impossible to
God. For all that is true and good being dependent on his Almightiness, I dare
not so much as say, that God cannot make a Mountain without a Valley or cannot
make it true, Volum. second Lettre vi.
that one and two shall not make three; but I say only, that he has given me a
Soul of such a nature, that I cannot conceive a Mountain without a Valley, nor
that the Aggregate of one and of two shall not make three, etc. and I say only,
that such things imply a Contradiction in my Conception. And consonantly to
this in his Principles of Philosophy he gives on a certain occasion this useful
Caution, -- Quod ut satis tuto and sine errandi periculo aggrediamur, ea nobis
cautela est utendum, Part prima. Artic. 24.
ut semper quam maxim recordemur, and Deum Autorem rerum esse infinitum, and
Nos omnino sinitos.

SECT. IV.
In the next place, I think we ought to distinguish between Reason considered
in it self, and Reason considered in the Exercise of it, by this or that
Philosopher or by this or that Man, or by this or that Company or Society of
Men, whether all of one Sect, or of more.

If you will allow me to borrow a School-phrase, I shall express this more
shortly by saying I distinguish between Reason in Abstracto, and in Concreto.
To clear this matter, we may consider, That whatever you make the Faculty of
Reason to be in it self, yet the Ratiocinations it produces are made by Men,
either singly reasoning, or concurring in the same Ratiocinations and Opinions;
and consequently, if these Men do not make the best use of their Reasoning
Faculty, it will not be necessary, that what thwarts their Ratiocinations, must
likewise thwart the Principles or the Dictates of right Reason. For, Man having
a Will and Affections as well as an Intellect, though our Dijudications and
Tenants ought indeed (in matters speculative) to be made and pitched upon by
our unbiased Understandings; yet really our Intellectual Weaknesses, or our
Prejudices, or Prepossession by Custom, Education, etc. our Interest, Passions,
Vices, and I know not how many other things, have so great and swaying an
Influence on them, that there are very few Conclusions that we make, or
Opinions that we espouse, that are so much the pure Results of our Reason, that
no personal Disability, Prejudice, or Fault, has any Interest in them.

This I have elsewhere more amply discoursed of on another occasion; wherefore
I shall now add but this, About the Diversity of Religions.
That the distinction, I have been proposing, does (if I mistake not) reach a
great deal further than you may be aware of. For not only whole Sects, whether
in Religion or Philosophy, are in many cases subject to Prepossessions, Envy,
Ambition, Interest, and other misleading things, as well as single Persons;
but, which is more considerable to our present purpose, the very Body of
Mankind may be embued with Prejudices, and Errors, and that from their
Childhood, and some also even from their Birth, by which means they continue
undiscerned and consequently unreform'd.

This you will think an Accusation as bold as high; but to let you see, that
the Philosophers, you most respect, have made the same Observation, though not
applied to the same case, I must put you in mind, that Monsieur Des Carts
begins his Principles of Philosophy with taking notice, That, because we are
born Children, we make diverse unright Judgments of things, which afterward are
wont to continue with us all our Lives, and prove radicated Prejudices, that
mislead our Judgments on so many occasions, that he elsewhere tells us, he
found no other way to secure himself from their Influence, but once in his Life
solemnly to doubt of the Truth of all that he had till then believed, in order
to the re-examining of his former Dijudications. But I remember, our
illustrious Verulam warrants a yet further Prejudice against many things that
are wont to be looked on as the suggestions of Reason. For having told us, That
the Mind of Man is besieged with four differing kinds of Idols or Phantasms,
when he comes to enumerate them, he teaches, that there are not only such as
Men get by Conversation and Discourse one with another, and such as proceed
from the diverse Hypotheses or Theories and Opinions of Philosophers, and from
the perverse ways of Demonstration, and likewise such as are personal to this
or that Man, proceeding from his Education, Temperament, Studies, etc. but such
as he calls Idola tribus, because they are founded in humane Nature it self,
and in the very Tribe or Nation of Mankind; and of these he particularly
discourses of seven or eight; As that the Intellect of Man has an innate
Propensity to suppose in things a greater order and equality than it finds, and
that being unable to rest or acquiesce, it does always tend further and
further; to which he adds diverse other innate prejudices of Mankind, which he
sollicitously as well as judiciously endeavors to remove.

Now, if not only single Philosophers, and particular Sects, but the whole body
of Mankind be subject to be swayed by innate and unheeded Prejudices and
Proclivities to Errors about matters that are neither Divine, nor Moral, nor
Political, but Physical, where the attainment of Truth is exceeding pleasant to
humane Nature, and is not attended with consequences distasteful to it: Why may
not we justly suspect not only this or that Philosopher or particular Sect; but
the generality of Men, of having some secret propensities to err about Divine
things, and indispositions to admit Truths, which not only detect the
weaknesses of our Nature, and our personal disabilities, and thereby offend or
mortify our Pride and our Ambition, but shine into the Mind with so clear as
well as pure and chaste a light, as is proper both to discover to our selves
and others our Vices and Faults, and oftentimes to cross our Designs and
Interests?

And to this purpose we may take notice, that diverse of those very Idols, which
my Lord Bacon observes to besiege or pervert Men's Judgments in reference to
things Natural, may probably have the same kind of influence (and that much
stronger) on the minds of Men in reference to Supernatural things. Thus he
takes notice, that, if some things have once pleased the Understanding, it is
apt to draw all others to comport with, and give Suffrage, to them, though
perhaps the Inducements to the contrary belief be either more numerous or more
weighty. He observes also, that Man is apt to look upon his senses and other
perceptions as the measures of things, and also, that the understanding of Man
is not sincerely disposed to receive the light of Truth, but receives an
infusion as it were of adventitious Colors (that disguise the light) from the
Will and Affections, which makes him sooner believe those things that he is
desirous should be true, and reject many others upon Accounts that do no way
infer their being false. Now if we apply these things to Divine Truths (to
which 'twere well they were less justly applicable) and consider, that in our
Youth we generally converse but with things Corporeal, and are swayed by
Affections that have them for their Objects, we shall not much wonder, that Men
should be very prone, either to frame such Notions of Divine things as they
were wont to have about others of a far different and meaner nature; or else to
reject them for not being Analogous to those things which they have been used
to employ for the measures of truth and falsity. And if we consider the inbred
pride of man, which is such, that if we will believe the Sacred story, even
Adam in Paradise affected to be like God knowing good and evil, we shall not so
much marvel, that almost every man in particular makes the Notions he has
entertained already, and his Senses, his Inclinations and his Interests, the
Standards by which he estimates and judges of all other things, whether natural
or revealed. And as Heraclitus justly complained, that every man sought the
knowledge of natural things in the Microcosm, that is, himself, and not in the
Macrocosm, the World; so we may justly complain, that men seek all the
knowledge, they care to find, or will admit, either in these little worlds
themselves, or from that great World, the Universe; but not from the Omniscient
Author of them both. And lastly, if even in purely Physical things, where one
would not think it likely, that rational Beings should seek Truth with any
other designs than of finding and enjoying it, our Understandings are so
universally biased, and imposed upon by our Wills and Affections; how can we
admire, especially if we admit the fall of our first Parents, that our Passions
and Interests, and oftentimes our Vices should pervert our Intellects about
those revealed Truths; diverse of which we discern to be above our
comprehensions, and more of which we find to be directly contrary to our
Inclinations,

SECT. V.
And now 'twill be seasonable for me to tell you, That I think, there may be a
great difference betwixt a things being contrary to right Reason, or so much as
to any true Philosophy, and its being contrary to the received Opinions of
Philosophers, or to the Principles or Conclusions of this or that Sect of them.

For here I may justly apply to my present purpose, what Clemens Alexandrinus
judiciously said on another Occasion, that Philosophy was neither
Peripatetical, nor Stoical, nor Epicurean, but whatsoever among all those
several parties was fit to be approved.

And indeed if we survey the Hypotheses and Opinions of the several Sects of
Philosophers, especially in those points wherein they hold things repugnant to
Theological Truths, we shall find many of them so slightly grounded, and so
disagreeing among themselves, that a severe and inquisitive Examiner would see
little cause to admit them upon the bare Account of his being a Philosopher,
though he did not see any to reject them upon the Account of his being a
Christian. And in particular, as to the Peripateticks, who by invading all the
Schools of Europe (and some in Asia and Africa) have made their Sect almost
Catholic, and have produced diverse of the famous Questioners of Christianity
in the last Age, and the first part of this; the World begins to be apace
undeceived as to many of their Doctrines, which were as confidently taught and
believed for many Ages, as those that are repugnant to our Religion; and there
is now scarce any of the modern Philosophers that allow themselves the free use
of their Reason, who believes any longer, that there is an Element of Fire
lodged under the supposed Sphere of the Moon; that Heaven consists of solid
Orbs; that all Celestial Bodies are ingenerable and incorruptible; that the
Heart, rather than the Brain, is the Origin of Nerves; that the torrid Zone is
uninhabitable; and I know not how many other Doctrines of the Aristotelians,
which our Corpuscularian Philosophers think so little worth being believed,
that they would censure him, that should now think them worthy to be
sollicitously confuted; upon which score, I presume you will allow me to leave
those and diverse others as weak Peripatetick conceits, to fall by their own
groundlesness.

But you will tell me, that the Epicureans, and the Somatici, that will allow
nothing but Body in the World, nor no Author of it but Chance, are more
formidable Enemies to Religion than the Aristotelians. And indeed I am apt to
think they are so, but they may well be so without deserving to have any of
their Sects looked upon as Philosophy it self, there being none of them that I
know of, that maintain any Opinion inconsistent with Christianity, that I think
may not be made appear to be also repugnant to Reason, or at least not
demonstrable by it. You will not expect I should descend to particulars,
especially having expressly discoursed against the Epicurean Hypothesis of the
Origin of the World in another Paper; and therefore I shall observe to you in
general, that the Cartesian Philosophers, who lay aside all Supernatural
Revelation in their Inquiries into Natural things, do yet both think, and, as
to the two first of them, very plausibly prove, the three grand Principles of
Epicurus, That the little Bodies he calls Atoms are indivisible, That they all
have their motion from themselves, and That there is a vacuum in rerum natura,
to be as repugnant to mere Reason, as the Epicureans think the Notion of an
Incorporeal Substance, or the Creation of the World, or the Immortality of the
Soul. And as for the new Somatici, such as Mr. Hobbs (and some few others) by
what I have yet seen of his, I am not much tempted to forsake any thing that I
looked upon as a Truth before, even in Natural Philosophy it self, upon the
score of what he (though never so confidently) delivers, by which hitherto I
see not, that he has made any great discovery either of new Truths, or old
Errors. An Honorable Member of the Royal Society, has elsewhere purposely
shown, how ill he has proved his own Opinions about the Air, and some other
Physical Subjects, and how ill he has understood and opposed those of his
Adversary. But to give you in this place a Specimen how little their repugnancy
to his Principles or Natural Philosophy, ought to affright us from those
Theological Doctrines they contradict, I shall here (but not in the Body of
this Discourse, for fear of too much interrupting it) examine the fundamental
Maxim of his whole Physics, That nothing is removed but by a Body contiguous
and moved; it having been already shown (by the Gentleman newly mentioned)
that, as to the next to it, which is, that there is no vacuum, whether it be
true or no, he has not proved it.

If no Body can possibly be moved but by a Body contiguous and moved, as Mr.
Hobbs teaches; I demand, How there comes to be Local motion in the World? For,
either all the portions of matter that composed the Universe, have motion
belonging to their Nature, which the Epicureans affirmed for their Atoms; or
some parts of Matter have this motive power, and some have not; or else none of
them have it, but all of them are naturally devoid of Motion. If it be granted,
that Motion does naturally belong to all parts of Matter, the dispute is at an
end, the concession quite overthrowing the Hypothesis. If it be said, that
naturally some portions of Matter have Motion, and others not, then the
Assertion will not be Universally true: For though it may hold in the parts
that are naturally moveless or quiescent, yet it will not do so in the others,
there being nothing that may show a necessity, why a Body, to which Motion is
natural, should not be capable of moving without being put into motion by
another contiguous and moved. And if there be no Body to which Motion is
natural, but every Body needs an outward movent, it may well be demanded, How
there comes to be any thing Locally moved in the World; which yet constant and
obvious experience demonstrates, and Mr. Hobbs himself cannot deny. For if no
part of Matter have any Motion but what it must owe to another that is
contiguous to it, and being it self in Motion impels it; and if there be
nothing but Matter in the World, how can there come to be any Motion amongst
Bodies, since they neither have it upon the score of their own nature, nor can
receive it from external Agents. If Mr. Hobbs should reply, that the Motion is
impressed upon any of the parts of the Matter by God, he will say that which I
most readily grant to be true, but will not serve his turn, if he would speak
congruously to his own Hypothesis. For I demand, Whether this Supreme Being,
that the Assertion has recourse to, be a Corporeal or an Incorporeal Substance?
If it be the latter, and yet be the efficient Cause of Motion in Bodies, then
it will not be Universally true, that whatsoever Body is moved, is so by a Body
contiguous and moved. For, in our supposition, the Bodies that God moves either
immediately or by the intervention of any other Immaterial Being, are not moved
by a Body contiguous, but by an Incorporeal Spirit. But because Mr. Hobbs, in
some Writings of his, is believed to think the very Notion of an Immaterial
Substance to be absurd, and to involve a Contradiction, and because it may be
subsum'd, that if God be not an Immaterial Substance, he must by Consequence be
a Material and Corporeal one, there being no Medium Negationis, or third
Substance that is none of those two: I answer, That, if this be said, and so
that Mr. Hobbs's Deity be a Corporeal one, the same difficulty will recurr,
that I urged before. For this Body will not, by Mr. Hobbs's calling or thinking
it divine, cease to be a true Body, and consequently a portion of Divine Matter
will not be able to move a portion of our Mundane Matter without it be it self
contiguous and moved; which it cannot be but by another portion of Divine
Matter so qualified to impress a Motion, nor this again but by another portion.

And besides, that it will breed a strange confusion in rendering the Physical
Causes of things, unless an expedient be found to teach us how to distinguish
accurately the Mundane Bodies from the Divine (which will perhaps prove no
easy task;) I see not yet, how this Corporeal Deity will make good the
Hypothesis I examine. For I demand, How this Divine Matter comes to have this
Local Motion that is ascribed to it? If it be answered, That it has it from
its own Nature, without any other Cause; since the Epicureans affirm the same
of their Atoms, or merely Mundane Matter, I demand, How the Truth of Mr.
Hobbs's Opinion will appear to me, to whom it seems as likely by the Phenomenon
of Nature that occur, that Mundane Matter should have a congenit Motion, as
that any thing that is Corporeal can be God, and capable of moving it; which to
be, it must, for ought we know, have its Subsistence divided into as many
minute parts, as there are Corpuscles and Particles in the World that move
separately from their neighboring ones. And, to draw toward a Conclusion, I
say, that these minute Divine Bodies, that thus moved those portions of Mundane
Matter, concerning which Mr. Hobbs denies that they can be moved but by Bodies
contiguous and moved, these Divine Substances, I say, are, according to the
late supposition, true Bodies, and yet are moved themselves not by Bodies
contiguous and moved, but by a Motion which must be Innate, derived or flowing
from their very essence or nature, since no such Body is pretended to have a
Being as cannot be referred as a portion, either to the Mundane, or the Divine
Matter. In short, since Local Motion is to be found in one, if not in both, of
these two Matters, it must be natural to (at least some parts of) one of them
in Mr. Hobbs's Hypothesis; for, though he should grant an Immaterial Being, yet
it could not produce a Motion in any Body, since, according to him, no Body can
be moved but by another Body contiguous and moved.

As then to this grand Position of Mr. Hobbs, though, if it were cautiously
proposed as it is by Des Carts, it may perhaps be safely admitted, because
Cartesius acknowledges, the first Impulse that set Matter a moving, and the
Conservation of Motion once begun, to come from God; yet, as it is crudely
proposed by the favorers of Mr. Hobbs, I am so far from seeing any such cogent
Proof for it, (as were to be wished for a Principle on which he builds so much,
and which yet is not at all evident by its own light,) that I see no competent
Reason to admit it.

I expect your Friend should here oppose to what I have been saying, that
formerly recited Sentence, that is so commonly employed in the Schools as well
of Divines as of Philosophers: That such or such an Opinion is true in
Divinity, but false in Philosophy; or on the contrary, Philosophically true,
but Theologically false.

Upon what Warrant those, that are wont to employ such Expressions, ground
their Practice, I leave to them to make out; but as to the Objection it self,
as it supposes these ways of speaking to be well grounded, give me leave to
consider, That Philosophy may signify two things, which I take to be very
differing.

For first it is most commonly employed to signify a System or Body of the
Opinions and other Doctrines of the particular Sect of those Philosophers that
make use of the Word. As when an Aristotelian talks of Philosophy, he usually
means the Peripatetick, as an Epicurean does the Atomical, or a Platonist the
Platonic.

But we may also in a more general and no less just Acception of the term,
understand by Philosophy, a Comprehension of all those Truths or Doctrines,
which the natural Reason of man, freed from Prejudices and Partiality, and
assisted by Learning, Attention, Exercise, Experiments, etc. can manifestly
make out, or by necessary consequence deduce from clear and certain Principles.

This being briefly premised, I must in the next place put you in mind of what
I formerly observed to you, that many Opinions are maintained by this or that
Sect of Christians, or perhaps by the Divinity-Schools of more than one or two
Sects, which either do not at all belong to the Christian Religion, or at least
ought not to be looked upon as parts of it, but upon supposition, that the
Philosophical Principles and Ratiocinations, upon which, and not upon express
or mere Revelation, they are presumed to be founded, are agreeable to right
Reason.

And having premised these two things, I now answer more directly to the
Objection; that, if Philosophy be taken in the first sense abovementioned, its
teaching things repugnant to Theology, especially taking this word in the more
large and vulgar sense of it, will not cogently conclude any thing against the
Christian Religion. But, if Philosophy be taken in the latter sense for true
Philosophy, and Divinity only for a System of those Articles that are clearly
revealed as Truths in the Scriptures; I shall not allow any thing to be false
in Philosophy so understood that is true in Divinity so explained, till I see
some clearer Proof of it than I have yet met with. I have had occasion in the
foregoing Discourse, to say something, that may be applied to the Point under
debate; and in the following part of this Letter I shall have Occasion to touch
upon it again: And therefore I shall now say but this in short, That it is not
likely, that God, being the Author of Reason as well as Revelation, should make
it men's Duty to believe as true that which there is just Reason to reject as
false.

There is indeed a Sense, wherein the Phrases, I disapprove, may be tolerated.
For if by saying, that such a thing is true in Divinity, but false in
Philosophy, it were meant, that if the Doctrine were proposed to a mere
Philosopher, to be judged of according to the Principles of his Sect, or at
most according to what he, being supposed not to have heard of the Christian
Religion, or had it duly proposed to him, would reject it, the Phrase might be
allowed, or at least indulged. But then we must consider, that the Reason why
such a Philosopher would reject the Articles of Christian Faith, would not be,
because they could by no Mediums be possibly proved, but because these
Doctrines being founded upon a Revelation, which he is presumed either not to
have heard of, or not to have had sufficiently proposed to him, he must, as a
Rational man, refuse to believe them upon the score of their Prooflesness. And
the same Philosopher, supposing him to be a true one, though he will be very
wary, how he admits any thing as true that is not proved, if it fall properly
under the cognizance of Philosophy; yet he will be as wary, how he pronounces
things to be false or impossible in matters which he discerns to be beyond the
reach of mere natural Reason, especially if Sober and Learned men do very
confidently pretend to know something of those matters by Divine Revelation,
which though he will not easily believe to be a true one, yet he will admit, in
case it should be proved true, to be a fit Medium to evince Truths, which, upon
the Account of mere natural Light, he could not discover or embrace. To be
short, such a Philosopher would indeed reject some of the Articles of our Faith
hypothetically, i. e. upon supposition that he need employ no other Touchstone
to examine them by, than the Principles and Dictates of Natural Philosophy,
that he is acquainted with (upon which score I shall hereafter show, that
diverse strange Chemical Experiments, and other Discoveries would also be
rejected;) but yet he would not pronounce them false, but upon supposition that
the Arguments, by which they lay claim to Divine Revelation, are incompetent in
their kind. For as he will not easily believe any thing within the Sphere of
Nature that agrees not with the Established Laws of it; so he will not easily
adventure to pronounce one way or other in matters that are beyond the Sphere
of Nature: He will indeed (as he justly may,) expect as full a Proof of the
Divine Testimony that is pretended, as the Nature of the thing requires and
allows; but he will not be backward to acknowledge, that God, to whom that
Testimony is ascribed, is able to know and to do many more things than we can
explicate How He can discover, or imagine How any Physical Agent can perform.

[Since I proposed to you this fifth Consideration, I happened to light on a
passage in Des Cartes's Principles, which affords of what I have been
discovering the Suffrage of a Philosopher, Princip. Philos. part. prima. Artic.
25.
that is wont to be accused of excluding Theology too scrupulously out of his
Philosophy. His words are so full to my present Purpose, that I need not, to
accommodate them to it, alter one of them, and therefore shall transcribe them
just as they lie: Si forte nobis Deus de seipso, vel aliis, aliquid revelet,
quod naturales Ingenii nostri vires excedat, qualia sunt mysteria Incarnationis
and Trinitatis, non recusabimus illa credere, quamvis non clare intelligamus,
nec ullo modo mirabimur, multa esse tum in immensa ejus natura, tum etiam in
rebus ab eo creatis, quae captum nostrum excedant.]

And let me add on this occasion, that whereas the main Scruples that are said
to be suggested by Philosophy against some mysterious Articles of Religion, are
grounded upon this, that the Modus, as they speak, of those things is not
clearly conceivable, or at least is very hardly explicable; these objections
are not always so weighty as perhaps by the confidence wherewith they are
urged, you may think them. For whereas I observed to you already, that there
are diverse things maintained by School Divines, which are not contained in the
Scripture, that observation is chiefly applicable to the things we are
considering; since in several of these nice Points, the Scripture affirms only
the thing, and the Schoolmen are pleased to add the Modus: And as by their
unwarrantable boldness the School Divines determine many things without Book;
so the scruples and objections that are made against what the Scripture really
delivers, are usually grounded upon the Erroneous or Precarious Assertions of
the School Philosophers, who often give the Title of Metaphysical Truths to
Conceits that do very little deserve that name, and to which a rigid
Philosopher would perhaps think that of Sublime Nonsense more proper. But of
this I elsewhere say enough, and therefore shall now proceed to the
consideration I chiefly intended, viz. That from hence, That the Modus of a
revealed Truth is either very hard, or not at all explicable, it will not
necessarily follow, that the thing it self is irrational, provided the positive
Proofs of its Truth be sufficient in their kind. For even in Natural things
Philosophers themselves do and must admit several things, whereof they cannot
clearly explicate or perhaps conceive the Modus. I will not here mention the
Origin of Substantial Forms as an instance in this kind, because though it may
be a fit one as to the Peripatetick Philosophy; yet not admitting that there
are any such Beings, I will take no further notice of them; especially because
for a clear Instance to our present purpose, we need go no further than our
selves, and consider the Union of the Soul and Body in man. For who can
Physically explain, both how an immaterial Substance should be able to guide or
determine, and excite the motions of a Body, and yet not be able to produce
motion in it (as by dead Palsies, great Faintnesses, etc. it appears the Soul
cannot,) and, which is far more difficult, how an incorporeal Substance should
receive such Impressions from the motions of a Body, as to be thereby affected
with real pain and pleasure; to which I elsewhere add some other properties of
this Union, which, though not taken notice of, are perhaps no less difficult to
be conceived and accounted for. For how can we comprehend, that there should be
naturally such an intimate Union betwixt two such distant Substances as an
(Incorporeal) Spirit and a Body, as that the former may not, when it pleases,
quit the latter, which cannot possibly have any strings or chains that can tie
or fasten to it that which has no Body on which they may take bold. And I there
show, that it is full as difficult, Physically to explicate how these so
differing Beings come to be united, as how they are kept from parting at
pleasure, both the one and the other being to be resolved into the mere
appointment of God. And if to avoid the abstruseness of the Modus of this
Conjunction betwixt the Rational Soul and the Humane Body, it be said, as it is
by the Epicureans, that the former is but a certain Contexture of the finer and
most subtle parts of the latter, the formerly proposed abstruseness of the
Union betwixt the Soul and the Body will indeed be shifted off; but 'twill be
by a Doctrine that will not much relieve us. For those that will allow no Soul
in Man but what is Corporeal, have a Modus to explain, that I doubt they will
always leave a Riddle. For of such I desire, that they would explain to me,
(who know no effects that Matter can produce but by Local Motion and Rest, and
the consequences of it,) how mere matter, (let them suppose it as fine as they
please, and contrive it as well as they can) can make Syllogisms, and have
Conceptions of Universals, and invent speculative Sciences and Demonstrations,
and in a word do all those things which are done by Man, and by no other
Animal; and he that shall intelligibly explicate to me the Modus of matters,
framing Theories and Ratiocinations, will, I confess, not only instruct me, but
surprise me too.

And now give me leave to make this short Reflection on what has been said in
this Section, compared with what formerly I said in the first Section: That if
on the one hand we lay aside all the Irrational Opinions that the Schoolmen and
other bold Writers have unwarrantably fathered on Christian Religion, and on
the other hand all the Erroneous Conceits repugnant to Christianity, which the
Schoolmen and others have prooflesly fathered upon Philosophy, the seeming
Contradictions betwixt solid Divinity and true Philosophy will appear to be but
few, as I think the Real ones will be found to be none at all.

SECT. VI.
The next Consideration I shall propose, is, That a thing may, if singly or
precisely considered, appear Unreasonable, which yet may be very Credible, if
considered as a Part of, or a manifest Consequence from, a Doctrine that is
highly so.

Of this I could give you more Instances in several Arts and Sciences, than I
think fit to be here specified; and therefore I shall content my self to
mention three or four.

When Astronomers tell us that the Sun, which seems not to us a foot broad, nor
considerably bigger than the Moon, is above a hundred and threescore times
bigger than the whole Globe of the Earth, which yet is forty times greater than
the Moon; the thing thus nakedly proposed, seems very Incredible. But yet,
because Astronomers very skilful in their Art, have, by finding the
Semidiameter of the Earth, and observing the Parallaxes of the Planets,
concluded the proportion of these three Bodies to be such as has been
mentioned, or thereabout, even Learned and Judicious Men of all sorts,
(Philosophers, Divines, and others,) think it not Credulity to admit what they
affirm.

So the relations of Earthquakes that have reached diverse hundreds of miles; of
Eruptions of fire, that have at once overflown and burned vast Scopes of Land;
of the blowing up of Mountains by their own fires; of the Casting up of new
Islands in the Sea it self, and other Prodigies of too unquestionable Truth;
(for I know what work Ignorance and Superstition have made about other
Prodigies:) If they were attested but by slight and ordinary Witness, they
would be judged Incredible, but we scruple not to believe them, when the
Relations are attested with such Circumstances, as make the Testimony as strong
as the things attested are strange.

If ever you have considered, what Clavius, and diverse other Geometricians
teach upon the sixteenth Proposition of the third Book of Euclide, (which
contains a Theorem about the Tangent and the Circumference of a Circle,) you
cannot but have taken notice, that there are scarce greater Paradoxes delivered
by Philosophers or Divines, than you will find asserted by Geometricians
themselves. And though of late the Learned Jesuit Tacquet, and some rigid
Mathematicians, have questioned diverse of those things, yet even what some of
these severe Examiners confess to be Geometrically demonstrable from that
Proposition, contains things so strange, that Philosophers themselves, that are
not well acquainted with that Proposition and its Corollaries, can scarce look
upon them as other than Incomprehensible, or at least Incredible, things; which
yet, as improbable as they are considered in themselves, even rigid
Demonstrators refuse not to admit, because they are legitimately deducible from
an Acknowledged truth.

And so also among the Magnetical Phenomenon there are diverse things, which
being nakedly proposed must seem altogether unfit to be believed, as indeed
having nothing like them in all nature; whereas those that are versed in
Magnetic Philosophy, even before they have made particular Trials of them,
will look upon them as credible, because, how great Paradoxes soever they may
seem to others, they are consonant and consequent to the Doctrine of Magnetism,
whose grand Axioms (from what cause soever Magnetisms are to be derived) are
sufficiently manifest; and therefore a Magnetical Philosopher would not, though
an ordinary Philosopher would, think it unreasonable to believe, that one part
of the same Loadstone should draw a Needle to it, and the other part drive the
same Needle from it; and that the Needle in a Seamans Compass, after having
been carried perhaps many hundred Leagues (through differing Climates, and in
stormy weather) without varying its Declination, may upon a sudden, without any
manifest cause, point at some part of the Horizons several whole degrees
distant from that which it pointed to before. To which might here be added
diverse other scarce credible things, which either others or I have tried about
Magnetical Bodies; but I shall hereafter have occasion to take notice of some
of them in a fitter place.

Wherefore, when something delivered in or clearly deduced from Scripture is
objected against, as a thing which it is not reasonable to believe, we must not
only consider, whether, if it were not delivered in that Book, we should upon
its own single Account think it fit or unworthy to be believed; but whether or
no it is so improbable, that it is more fit to be believed, that all the proofs
that can be brought for the Authority of the Scripture are to be Rejected, than
that this thing which comes manifestly recommended to our belief by that
Authority, is worthy to be Admitted: I say, manifestly recommended by that
Authority, because that, if the thing be not clearly delivered in Scripture, or
be not clearly and cogently deduced thence, so far as that clearness is
wanting, so far the thing it self wants of the full Authority of the Scripture,
to impose it on our assent.

[Perhaps it will procure what I have said the better Reception, if I add a
couple of Testimonies not of any modern Bigots, no nor of any devout Fathers of
the Church; but of two modern Authors of Sects, and who in their kinds have
been thought extremely subtle Reasoners, and no less rigid Exacters of Reason
in whatever they admitted.

The first passage I shall allege, is the Confession of Socinus, who in his
second Epistle to Andreas Dudithius, speaks thus: I am vero ut rem in pauca
conferam, quod ad meas aliorumve opiniones, quae novitatis prae se ferunt
speciem, attinet, mihi ita videtur; si detur, Scripturam sacram ejus esse
Authoritatis, ut nullo modo ei contradici possit, ac de interpretatione illius
omnis duntaxat sit scrupulus, (which he allows) nihil, utut very simile aut
ratione conclusum videatur, asserri contra eas possit quod ullarum sit virium,
quotiescunque illae sententiis atque verbis illius Libri aut rationibus liquido
inde deduct is probatae atque assertae fuerint. Which confession of Socinus is
surpassed by that of his Champion Smalcius, to be produced elsewhere in this
Paper. The other passage I met with in the Excellent Monsieur Des Cartes's
Principles of Philosophy, Part. 2. Artic. 34, 35.
where discoursing of the either Infinite or Indefinite Division of the
Particles of Matter, which is necessary to make them fill exactly all the
differingly figured spaces, through which various motions do sometimes make
them pass; he confesses (as he well may,) that the point is exceedingly
abstruse, and yet concludes: Et quamvis quomodo fiat indefinita ista Divisio
cogitatione comprehendere nequeamus, non ideo tamen debemus dubitare quin fiat,
quia clare percipimus illam necessario sequi ex natura materiae nobis
evidentissime cognita^, etc.]

And in this place it may be seasonable as well as pertinent, to take notice of
three or four particulars, which, though they be in some measure implied in the
former general Consideration, yet deserve to be distinctly inculcated here,
both for their importance, and because they may as well be deduced as
Corollaries from the foregoing Discourse, as be confirmed by the proofs I shall
add to each of them. Of these the first shall be this, that we must not
presently conclude a thing to be contrary to Reason, because Learned Men
profess or even complain, that they are not able clearly to comprehend it,
provided there be competent proof that it is true, and the thing be Primary or
Heteroclite.

For it is not always necessary to the making the belief of a thing Rational,
that we have such a Comprehension of the thing believed as may be had and
justly required in ordinary Cases; since we may be sure of the Truth of a
thing, not only by Arguments suggested by the Nature of the thing it self
clearly understood by us; but by the external Testimony of such a Witness, as
we know will not deceive us, and cannot (at least in our Case) be reasonably
suspected to be himself deceived. And therefore it may in some Cases suffice to
make our belief Rational, that we clearly discern sufficient Reason to believe
that a thing is true, whether that Reason spring from the Evidence and Cogency
of the extrinsick Motives we have to believe, or from the Proofs suggested to
us by what we know of the Thing believed, nay, though there be something in the
nature of that Thing, which does puzzle and pose our Understanding.

That many things that are very hard, and require a great attention, and a good
judgment to be made out, may yet be true, will be manifest from what I shall
within a Page or two note about diverse Geometrical Demonstrations, which
require, besides a good stock of knowledge in those matters, an almost
invincible Patience to carry so many things along in ones Mind, and go through
with them. That also there are other things, which, though they be as
manifestly Existent, as those newly mentioned can be demonstratively True, are
yet of so abstruse a kind, that it is exceeding difficult to frame clear and
satisfactory Notions of their Nature, we might learn, if we were inquisitive
enough, even from some of the most obvious things; such as, for instance,
Matter and Time: As to the former whereof, (Matter,) though the World and our
own Bodies be made of it, yet the Idea's that are wont to be framed of it even
by the greatest Clerks, are encumbered with too great difficulties (some of
which I elsewhere mention) to be easily acquiesc'd in by considering Men. And
as for the latter, (Time,) though that justly celebrated saying of Augustine,
Si nemo ex me quaerat quid sit Tempus, scio; si quaerenti explicare velim,
nescio; seem in the first part of it to own a knowledge of what Time is, yet by
the latter part, (wherein he confesses he cannot declare what it is,) I am not
only allowed to believe that he could not propose an intelligible Idea of it,
but invited to think that in the first part of the sentence he only meant, that
when he did not attentively consider the Nature of it, he thought he understood
it, or that he knew that there is such a thing as Time, though he could not
explain what it is.

And indeed, though Time be that, which all Men allow to be, yet, if per
impossible (as the Schools speak) a Man could have no other Notion or Proof of
Time and Eternity, (even such Eternity as must be conceded to something,) than
what he could collect from the best Descriptions of its Nature and Properties
that are wont to be given; I scarce doubt, but he would look upon it as an
unintelligible thing, and encumbered with too many Difficulties to be fit to be
admitted into a wise man's Belief. And this perhaps you will grant me, if you
have ever put your self to the Penance of perusing those confounding Disputes
and Speculations about Time and Eternity, that partly in Aristotle and his
Commentators, and partly among the Schoolmen, and others, are to be met with
upon these abstruse Subjects. And no wonder, since the Learned Gassendus and
his Followers have very plausibly (if not solidly) shown, that Duration, (and
Time is but Duration measured) is neither a Substance nor an Accident, which
they also hold of Space; about which the Altercations among Philosophers and
Schoolmen are but little, if at all, inferior to those about Time. And I the
rather choose to mention these instances of Time and Space, because they agree
very well with what I intimated by the expression of Primary or Heteroclite
things.

To which may be referred some of those things, that are called Spiritual or
Supernatural, about which the same Considerations may have place, especially by
Reason of this Affinity between them, that when we treat of either, some Proofs
may in certain Cases be sufficient, in spite of such Objections, as in other
(and more ordinary Cases) would invalidate Arguments seemingly as strong as
those Proofs.

If it be here objected, That I am too bold in venturing without the Precedence
or Authority of Learned Men, to introduce so great a difference betwixt other
things and those which I call Primary and Heteroclite: I answer, That I shall
not solicitously enquire, whether any others have had the same thoughts that I
proposed; since, whether they be new or no, they ought not to be rejected, if
they be Rational.

And I have this inducement to suppose, that there ought to be in some cases a
great difference between them and other things, and consequently between the
judgments we make of the ways of arguing about them, and about other things; so
that they are exceeding difficult to be clearly conceived and explicated by our
imperfect Faculties, and by that difficulty apt to make what Men say of them,
though true, to be less satisfactory and acquiesced in, than things not more
true or rational, suggested upon enquiries about Subjects more familiar, or
which are at least more proportionate to our Faculties: For, those abstruse
things, of which we have been speaking, being such, as either have no proper
and clear Genus, by the help of which they may be comprehended, or have not any
thing in Nature, that is (sufficiently) like them, by a resemblance to which we
may conceive them; or being perhaps both Primary and Heteroclite too, as not
being derived from the common Physical Causes of other things, and having a
Nature widely differing from the rest of things; it is no wonder, that our
limited and imperfect Understandings should not be able to reach to a full and
clear Comprehension of them; but should be swallowed up with the Scruples and
Difficulties that may be suggested by a bold and nice enquiry into things, to
which there seems to belong, in some respect or other, a kind of Infinity.

Upon these, and other Considerations of kin to them, I count it not
irrational, to think that things Primary and Heteroclite, as also by a parity
of Reason, some things Immaterial and Supernatural, may be sufficiently proved
in their kind, if there be such a positive proof of them as would be competent
and satisfactory, in case there were no considerable Objections made against
the thing proved (especially supposing that the asserted Doctrine be not
encumbered with much greater inconveniences than the contrary Doctrine, or than
any other, proposed concerning that Subject:) Nay, I know not, why we may not,
in judging of Primary and of Immaterial things, safely enough prefer that
Opinion, which has the more Cogent Positive Proofs, though it seem liable to
somewhat the greater inconveniences; because in such cases our understanding
is gratified with what it most requires in all cases, that is competent
Positive Inducements to assent; and it is not confounded by the Objections,
because a disability to answer them directly and fully may very well proceed
either from the too abstruse Nature of the thing, or the limitedness and
weakness of our humane Intellects.

And thus we may render a Reason, why, when we discourse of such uncommon
Matters, we may sometimes reasonably acquiesce in proofs in spite of such
Objections as in ordinary cases would be prevailing ones. For the things, about
which these proofs are conversant, being Primary or Heteroclite, or of as
abstruse a Nature as if they were so, it too often happens, that, what Opinion
soever we choose about them, we must admit something that is encumbered with
great difficulties, and therefore will be liable to great Objections, that
perhaps will never be directly and satisfactorily answered. And since it may
fare thus with us, where two opposite Opinions are contradictory, we may
conclude, that those difficulties will not cogently evince the falsity of a
Theological Opinion, which are but such, that the same, or as great, may be
objected against another, that either is manifestly or confessedly a Truth, or
which must necessarily be admitted to be one, if the contrary Theological Tenet
be supposed not to be one.

2. Another Corollary that may be drawn from the Discourse that afforded us the
former, may be this; That it may not be unreasonable to believe a thing, though
its Proof be very difficult to be understood. To manifest this, I shall need no
other Argument, than what may be afforded by diverse Geometrical and other
Mathematical Demonstrations; some of which are fetched by intermediate
Conclusions from Principles so very remote, and require so long a series of
Mediums to be employed about them, that not only a Man that were of Pilate's
temper, who having asked Him that could best tell him, What is Truth, would not
stay awhile to be satisfied about his Inquiry, would before he reaches half way
to the End of the Demonstration, or perhaps of the Lemma's, be quite
discouraged from proceeding any further; but even sedulous and heedful Perusers
do find themselves oftentimes unable to carry along such a chain of Inferences
in their minds, as clearly to discern whether the whole Ratiocination be
coherent, and all the particulars have their due strength and connection. And
if you please to make a Trial upon some of the Demonstrations of Vitellio, or
even of Clavius, that I can direct you to, I doubt they will put you to the
full Exercise of your Patience, and quite tire your Attention: And though the
modern Algebrists by their Excellent way of expressing Quantities by Symbols,
have so abridg'd Geometrical and Arithmetical Demonstrations, that by the help
of species it is sometimes easy to Demonstrate that in a Line, which in the
ordinary way would require a whole Page, (as our most Learned Friend Dr. Ward
has ingeniously shown, by giving the Demonstrations of about twenty of Mr.
Hobbs's Theorems in less than so many Lines;) yet some Demonstrable Truths are
so abstruse, that even in the Symbolical way Men need more attention to discern
them, than most Men would employ in any Speculation whatsoever. And Descartes
himself, as famous and expert a Master as he was in this way, confesses in a
Letter to one of his Friends, that the Solution of a Problem in Pappus cost him
no less than six weeks study; though now, most Mathematical Demonstrations do
indeed seem far shorter than they are, because that Euelid's Elements being
generally received among Mathematicians, all his Propositions are so many
Lemmata, which need be but referred to in the Margin, being known and
demonstrated already. By all which it may appear, that, granting some
Theological Truths to be complained of by many as things so mysterious and
abstruse, that they cannot readily discern the force of those Proofs, that
Descartes, and other subtle Speculators have proposed to evince them; yet if
other Learned Men, that are competent Estimators, and are accustomed to bring
much Patience and Attention to the discernment of difficult and important
Truths, profess themselves satisfied with them, the Probations may yet be
cogent, notwithstanding the difficulty to have their strength apprehended. For
if such a difficulty ought to pass for a mark that a Ratiocination is not
valid, no Reasonings will be found fitter to be rejected or distrusted, than
many of those whose Cogency has procured such a Repute to Mathematical
Demonstrations.

3. It may also be deduced from the foregoing discourse, That it is not always
against Reason to embrace an Opinion which may be encumbered with a great
Difficulty, or liable to an Objection not easy to be solved; especially if the
Subject be such, that other Opinions about it avoid not either the same
Inconveniences, or as great ones. The first part of what is said in this
Consideration, will often follow from the Supposition made in the precedent
Discourse. For those things that render a Doctrine or Assertion difficult to be
conceived and explained, will easily supply the Adversaries of it with
Objections against it.

And as for the latter, viz. the Clause which takes notice that the
Consideration, to which it is annexed, will chiefly take place in that sort of
Opinions that are specified in it; it will need but little of distinct Proof.

For it is manifest enough, that if the Subject or Object, about which the
Opinion proposed is conversant, be such, that not only the contradictory
Opinion, but others also, are obnoxious either to the same Inconveniences, or
to others that are equal or greater; the difficulties that are urged against a
Theological Doctrine, may (as has been shown already in the first Corollary)
be rationally enough attributed, not to the unreasonableness of the Opinion,
but to somewhat else.

The last Consectary, that (as I intimated) may be deduced from the precedent
Discourse, is, That it is not always Unreasonable to believe something
Theological for a Truth, which (I do not say is truly inconsistent with, but)
we do not clearly discern to comport very well with something else that we also
take for a Truth, or perhaps that is one indeed; if the Theological Tenet be
sufficiently proved in its kind, and be of that sort of things that we have
been of late and are yet discoursing of.

The generality of our Philosophers, as well as Divines, believe, That God has
a foreknowledge of all future Contingencies; and yet how a certain Prescience
can consist with the Free Will of Man, (which yet is generally granted him, in
things merely Moral or Civil,) is so difficult to discern, that the Socinians
are wont to deny such things, as depend upon the will of free Agents, to be the
proper Objects of Omniscience; and the Head of the Remonstrants, though a very
subtle Writer, confesses that he knows not, how clearly to make out the
consistency of Gods Prescience and Man's freedom; both which he yet confesses to
be Truths, being compelled to acknowledge the former, (for the latter is
evident,) as well by the Infiniteness that must be ascribed to Gods
Perfections, as by the Prophetic Predictions, whereby such contingent Events
have been actually foretold. And the reconcilement of these Truths is not a
difficulty peculiar to the Christian Religion, but concerns speculative Men in
all Religions, who acknowledge the Deity to be infinitely perfect, and allow
Man, as they do, to be a free Agent.

[But I have made this Section so prolix already, that I must not enlarge on
this third particular. And therefore I shall shut it up with an acknowledgment
of Descartes, which may be applied not only to it, but to almost all that has
been discoursed in this Section, and indeed to a great part of this Letter. He
then in an Epistle, that came not forth till some years after the Writers
death, speaks thus to the Philosophical Adversary to whom it is addressed: As I
have often said, when the Question is about things that relate to God, or to
what is Infinite, we must not consider what we can comprehend of them, Volume
2. Letter 16.
(since we know that they ought not to be comprehended by us) but only what we
can conceive of them, or can attain to by any certain Reason or Argument.

SECT. VII.
And now it is time to advance to one of the main Considerations I had to
propose to you concerning the Subject of this Letter, and it is this; That when
we are to judge, whether a thing be contrary to Reason or not, there is a great
deal of difference, whether we take Reason for the Faculty furnished only with
its own innate Principle, and such Notions as are generally obvious, (nay, and
if you please, with this or that Philosophical Theory;) or for the Faculty
illuminated by Divine Revelation, especially that which is contained in the
Books commonly called the Scripture.

To clear and enforce this the better, I shall invite you to take notice with
me of the two following particulars.

We may then in the first place consider, That even in things merely Natural,
Men do not think it at all Irrational, to believe diverse such things upon
extrinsecal Proofs, especially the Testimony of the skilful, as, if it were not
for that Testimony, a Man, though born with good parts, and possibly very
Learned in the Peripatetick or some other particular Philosophy, would look
upon as Irrational to be believed, and contrary to the Laws of Nature.

Of this I shall give you some Instances in the Phenomenon of the Loadstone,
and particularly such as these; That the Loadstone, though (as was above
intimated) with one part it will draw, yet with another the same stone will
repel the same point of the same excited Needle; and yet at the same time be
fit to attract either point of another Needle that never came near a Loadstone
before: That though it be the Loadstone that imparts an attractive virtue to
the Iron, yet when the Loadstone is cap'd, as they called it, and so a piece of
Iron (and consequently a distance) is interposed betwixt the stone and the
weight to be raised, it will take up by many times more than if it be it self
applied immediately thereunto, insomuch that Mersennus relates, In his little
Tract de Magnetis Proprictatibus. p. m. 350.
that (if there be no mistake,) he had a Loadstone that of it self would take
up but half an Ounce of Iron, which when armed (or cap'd) would lift up ten
Pounds, which (says he) exceeded the former weight three hundred and twenty
times: That a Mariners Needle, being once touched with a vigorous Loadstone,
will afterward, when freely poised, turn it self North and South; and if it be
by force made to regard the East and West, or any other points of the Compass,
as soon as it is left at liberty, 'twill of its self return to its former
Position: That a Loadstone floating on water, will as well come to, and follow
a piece of, Iron that is kept from advancing toward it; as, when it self is
fixed, and the Iron at liberty, 'twill draw that Metal to it: That without any
sensible alteration in the Agent or the Patient, the Loadstone will in a trice
communicate all its virtues to a piece of Steel, and enable that to communicate
them to another piece of the same Metal: That if a Loadstone, having been marked
at one end, be cut long-wise according to its Axis, and one Segment be freely
suspended over the other, the halves of the marked end, that touched one another
before, will not now lie together, but the lower will drive away the upper; and
that which regarded the North in the marked end of the entire Loadstone, will
join with that extreme of the lower half, which in the entire stone regarded
the South: That (as appears by this last named Property) there are the same
Magnetical Qualities in the separated parts of a Magnet, as in the entire
stone; and if it be cut, or even rudely broken into a great many parts or
fragments, every one of these portions, though perhaps not so big as a Corn of
Wheat, will, if I may so speak, set up for its self, and have its own Northern
and Southern Poles, and become a little Magnet, sui juris, or independent upon
the stone from which 'twas severed, and from all its other parts: That, if a
Loadstone be skilfully made Spherical, this little Magnetic Globe, very fitly
by our Gilbert called a Terrella, will not only, being freely placed, turn
North and South, and retain that Position, but have its Poles, its Meridians,
its Equator, etc. upon good grounds designable upon it, as they are upon the
great Globe of the Earth And this will hold, whether the Terrella be great or
small.

I might not only much increase the number of these odd Magnetical
Phaenomena's, but add others about other Subjects: But these may suffice to
suggest to us this Reflection, That there is no doubt to be made, but that a
Man, who never had the opportunity to see or hear of Magnetical Experiments,
would look upon these as contrary to the Principles of Nature, and therefore to
the Dictates of Reason, as (accordingly) some Learned Aristotelians, to whom I
had occasion to propose some of them, rejected them as Incredible. And I doubt
not, but I could frame as plausible Arguments from the mere Axioms of
Philosophers, and the Doctrine of Philosophic Schools against some Magnetical
Phenomenon, which Experience has satisfied me of, as are wont to be drawn from
the same Topics against the Mysterious Articles of Faith; since among the
strange Properties of the Loadstone there are some, which are not only
admirable and stupendous, but seem repugnant to the Dictates of the received
Philosophy and the course of Nature. For, whereas Natural Bodies, how subtle
soever, require some particular Dispositions in the Medium through which their
Corpuscles are to be diffused, or their Actions transmitted, so that Light it
self, whether it be a most subtle Body, or a naked Quality, is resisted by all
opacous Mediums, and the very effluvia of Amber and other Electricks will not
permeate the thinnest Glass, or even a sheet of fine Paper; yet the Loadstone
readily performing his Operations through all kind of Mediums, without
excepting Glass it self.

If the Poles of two Magnetic Needles do both of them regard the North,
another Philosopher would conclude them to have a Sympathy, at least to be
unlikely to disagree; and yet, if he bring these Extremes of the same
Denomination within the reach of one another, one will presently drive away the
other as if there were a powerful Antipathy between them.

A somewhat long Needle being placed horizontally, and exactly poised upon the
point of a Pin, if you gently touch one end with the Pole of a vigorous Magnet,
that end shall manifestly dip or stoop, though you often take it off the Pin,
and put it on again. And this inclination of the Needle will continue many
years, and yet there is not only no other sensible change made in the Metal by
the Contact of the Loadstone; but one end has required a durable Preponderancy,
though the other be not lighter, nor the whole Needle heavier than before. And
the Inclination of the Magnetic Needle may be by another touch of the
Loadstone taken away without lessning the weight of the part that is deprived
of it.

The Operation that in a trice the Loadstone has on a Mariners Needle, though
it makes no sensible change in it, or weakens the Loadstone it self, will not
be lost, though you carry it as far as the Southern Hemisphere; but it will not
be the same in all places, but in some the Magnetic Needle will point directly
at the North, in others 'twill deviate or decline some degrees toward the East
or the West: And, which seems yet more strange, the same Needle in the same
place will not always regard the same point of the Compass, but, looked on at
distant times, may vary from the true Meridian, sometimes to the West, and
afterward to the East.

All the communicable virtues of the Magnet may be imparted to Iron, without
any actual Contact of the two Bodies, but barely by approaching in a convenient
way the Iron to the Loadstone for a few moments. And the Metal may likewise be
deprived of those virtues in a trice, without any immediate Contact by the same
or another Loadstone.

If you mark one end of a Rod, or other oblong piece of Iron, that never came
near a Magnet, and hold it perpendicularly, you may at pleasure, and in the
hundredth part of a minute, make it become the North or South Pole of a
Magnetical Body. For it, when it is held upright, you apply to the bottom of it
the North-extreme of an excited and well-poiz'd Needle, the lower end of the
Iron will drive away that Extreme, which yet will be drawn by the upper end of
the same Iron. And if by inverting you make this lower end the uppermost, it
will not attract, but repel the same Lilly or North-point of the Needle, just
under which it is to be perpendicularly held.

Though, vis unita fortior, be a received Rule among Naturalists; yet
oftentimes, if a Magnet be cut into pieces, these will take up and sustain much
more Iron than the entire stone was able to do.

If of two good Loadstones the former be much bigger, and on that account
stronger than the other, the greater will draw a piece of Iron, and retain it
much more strongly than the lesser; and yet, when the Iron sticks fast to the
greater and stronger Loadstone, the lesser and weaker may draw the Iron from
it, and take it quite away.

These Phenomenon, (to mention now no more,) are so repugnant to the common
sentiments of Naturalists, and the ordinary course of things, that, if
antecedently to any Testimony of experience these Magnetical Properties had
been proposed to Aristotle himself, he would probably have judged them
fictitious things, as repugnant to the Laws of Nature: Nevertheless, though it
seems incredible, that the bare touch of a Loadstone should impart to the
Mariners Needle a Property, which, (as far as we know) nothing in the whole
World that is not Magnetical can communicate or possess; and should operate (as
Men suppose) upon it at three or four thousand Leagues distance; yet this is
believed by the Peripateticks themselves upon the Testimony of those Navigators
that have failed to the East and West Indies; and diverse even of the more rigid
of the modern Philosophers believe more than this, upon the Testimony of
Gilbert, Cabaeus, Kircherus, and other Learned Magnetical Writers, who have
affirmed these things; most of which I can also averr to you upon my own
knowledge.

Thus the Habitableness of the Torrid Zone, though (as I lately noted) upon
probable grounds denied by Aristotle, and the generality of Philosophers for
many Ages; yet not only that, but its Populousness is now confidently believed
by the Peripatetick Schoolmen themselves, who never were there.

And though Ptolomy, and some other eminent Astronomers, did with great care
and skill, and by the help of Geometry, as well as Observations, frame a Theory
of the Planets so plausibly contrived, that most of the succeeding
Mathematicians for 12 or 14 Ages acquiesc'd in it; yet almost all the modern
Philosophers and Astronomers, that have searched into these matters with a
readiness to believe their Eyes, and allow their Reason to act freely, have
been forced, if not to reject the whole Theory, yet at least to alter it quite,
as to the Number and Order of the Planets, though these last named Innovations
are sometimes solely, and always mainly built upon the Phenomenon discovered to
us by two or three pieces of glass placed in a long hollow Cane, and honored
with the name of a Telescope.

The last of the two things I invited you to consider with me, is this, That
when we are to judge, which of two disagreeing Opinions is most Rational, i. e.
to be judged most agreeable to right Reason, we ought to give sentence, not for
that which the Faculty, furnished only with such and such Notions, whether
vulgar or borrowed from this or that Sect of Philosophers, would prefer, but
that which is preferred by the Faculty furnished either with all the Evidence
requisite or advantageous to make it give a right Judgment in the case lying
before it; or, when that cannot be had, with the best and fullest Informations
that it can procure.

This is so evident by its own light, that your Friend might look upon it as an
affront to his Judgment, if I should go about solicitously to prove it. And
therefore I shall only advertise you, that, provided the Information be such as
a man has just cause to believe, and perceives that he clearly understands, it
will not alter the case, whether he have it by Reason, as that is taken for the
Faculty furnished but with its inbred Notions and the more common Observations,
or by some Philosophical Theory, or by Experiments purposely devised, or by
Testimony Humane or Divine, which last we call Revelation. For all these are
but differing ways of informing the Understanding, and of signifying to it the
same thing; as the Sight and the Touch may assure a Man, that a Body is smooth
or rough, or in motion or at rest; (and in some other instances several senses
discover to us the same Object, which is therefore called Objectum Commune;)
and provided these Informations have the conditions lately intimated, which way
soever the Understanding receives them, it may safely reason and build Opinions
upon them.

Astronomers have within these 100 years observed, that a Star has appeared
among the Fixed ones for some time, and having afterward disappeared, has yet
some years after that, showed it self again. And though, as to this surprising
Phenomenon, our Experimental Philosophers could have contributed nothing to
the producing it, and though it is quite out of all the received Systems of the
Heavens that Astronomers have hitherto delivered; yet the Star it self may be a
true Celestial light, and may allow us to Philosophize upon it, and draw
Inferences from the Discoveries it makes us; as well as we can from the
Phenomenon of those Stars that are not extraordinary, and of those Falling
Stars that are within our own Ken and Region.

That the Supernatural things, said to be performed by Witches and Evil
Spirits, might, if true, supply us with Hypotheses and Mediums whereby to
constitute and prove Theories, as well as the Phenomenon of mere nature, seems
tacitly indeed, but yet sufficiently, to be acknowledged, by those modern
Naturalists, that care not to take any other way to decline the Consequences
that may be drawn from such Relations, than sollicitously to show, that the
Relations themselves are all (as I fear most of them are) false, and occasioned
by the Credulity or Imposture of Men.

But not to do any more than glance at these matters, let us proceed upon what
is more unquestionable, and consider, that, since even our most Critical
Philosophers do admit many of the astonishing Attributes of Magnetic Bodies,
which themselves never had occasion to see, upon the Testimony of Gilbert, and
others, who never were able to give the true causes of them; because they look
upon those Relators as honest Men, and judicious enough not to be imposed upon
as to the matter of Fact: Since (I say) such amazing things are believed by
such severe Naturalists, upon the Authority of Men who did not know the
intimate nature of Magnetic Bodies; and since these strange Phaenonomena are
not only assented to as true by the Philosophers we speak of, but many
Philosophical consequences are without haesitancy deduced from them, without
any blemish to the judgment of those that give their Assent both to the Things
and the Inferences; why should it be contrary to Reason to believe the
Testimony of God either about his Nature, which He can best, and He alone can
fully know, or about the things which either he himself has done, as the
Creation of the World and of Man; or which he means to do, as the destroying
the World, (whether the whole World, or our great Vortex only, I dispute not,)
and the raising both of good and bad Men to life again, to receive Rewards and
Punishments, according to their Demerits. For methinks that Apostle argues very
well, who says, If we receive the testimony of men, 1 John. v. 9.
the testimony of God is greater; especially about such things concerning his
own Nature, Will, and Purposes, as it is evident that Reason, by its own
unassisted light, cannot give us the knowledge of.

So that we Christians in assenting to Doctrines upon the account of
Revelation, need not, nor do not, reject the Authority of Reason, but only
appeal from Reason to it self, i. e. from Reason, as it is more slightly, to
its Dictates, as it is more fully informed. Of which two sorts of Dictates there
is nothing more rational, than to prefer the latter to the former.

And for my part I am apt to think, that, if what has been represented in this
Section were duly considered, this alone would very much contribute to prevent
or answer most of the Objections, that make such of the Questioners of
Religion, as are not resolutely vicious, entertain such hard thoughts of some
Articles of the Christian Faith, as if they were directly repugnant to Reason.
For, (as we were observing) that is not to be looked on as the judgment of
Reason, that is pronounced even by a rational Man according to a Set of
Notions, though the Inferences from these would be rational, in case there were
nothing else fit to be taken into consideration by him that judges; but that is
rather to be looked upon as the judgment of Reason, which takes in the most
Information procurable, that is pertinent to the things under consideration.
And therefore Men, though otherwise learned and witty, show themselves not
equal Estimators of the case of those that believe the Articles we speak of,
when they pronounce them to assent Irrationally, because the things they assent
to cannot be demonstrated or maintained by mere natural Reason, and would
probably be rejected by Democritus, Epicurus, Aristotle, or any other of the
ancient Philosophers, to whom they should be nakedly proposed, and whose
judgment should be desired about them. For, although this Allegation would
signify much, if we pretended to prove what we believe only by Arguments drawn
from the nature of the thing assented to; yet it will not signify much in our
case, wherein we pretend to prove what we believe, chiefly by Divine Testimony,
and therefore ought not to be concluded guilty of an Irrational Assent, unless
it can be shown, either that Divine Testimony is not duly challenged by us for
the main of our Religion; or that in the particular Articles we father
something on that Testimony which is not contained in it, or rightly deducible
from it. And to put us upon the proving our particular Articles of Faith,
sufficiently delivered in the Scriptures, and not knowable without Revelation,
by Arguments merely natural, without taking notice of those we can bring for
the proof of that Revelation on whose account we embrace those Articles, is to
challenge a Man to a Duel, upon condition he shall make no use of his best
weapons; and is as unreasonable, as if a Schoolman should challenge your Friend
to prove, that the Torrid Zone is inhabited, against the Reasons that the
Aristotelians are wont to give to prove it uninhabitable, without allowing him
to make use of the testimony of Navigators, who assure us of the constant
Brises that daily ventilate the Air, and qualify that heat which otherwise
would not be supported, and who furnish us with those other circumstances
whereon to build our proofs, which we, that were never there, can have but by
Relation.

And indeed, the limitations, that Christian Religion puts to some of the
dictates of Philosophy, which were wont to be admitted in a more general and
unrestrained Sense, and the Doctrines about God and the Soul, etc. that it
superadds to those which the light of Nature might lead Men to about the same
Subjects; though to some they may seem injurious to Philosophy and Reason, are
as little unkind to either, as is the Gardener to a Crab-stock, or some such
other wild Plant, when by cutting off some of the Branches, and by making a
slit in the Bark, that he may graft on it a Pare-main, or some other choice
Apples, by this seemingly hard usage he brings it to bear much nobler fruit,
than, if left to its own natural condition, it ever would have done.

I know not, whether to all that has been said in this Section, I may not add
thus much further, that it sometimes happens, that those very things, which at
first were proposed to the understanding, and believed upon the score of
Revelation, are afterward assented to by it upon the account of mere Reason. To
which purpose I consider, that not any of the ancient Philosophers, nay (as far
as I have read) even of those that believed God to be the Author of the World,
dreamed, that He created Matter of nothing, but only formed the World out of
praeexistent Matter, whereas Christian Divines usually teach as an Article of
Faith, That, besides what they call a mediate Creation, as when Fishes were
made out of the water, or Adam's body was made out of the earth, there was an
immediate Production of Matter it self out of nothing.

SECT. VIII.
After what has been hitherto discoursed, it may be seasonable to consider,
what kind of Probation, or what degree of Evidence may reasonably be thought
sufficient to make the Christian Religion thought fit to be embraced.

Perhaps I shall not need to tell you, that, besides the Demonstrations wont to
be treated of in vulgar Logic, there are among Philosophers three distinct,
whether kinds or degrees, of Demonstration. For there is a Metaphysical
Demonstration, as we may call that, where the Conclusion is manifestly built on
those general Metaphysical Axioms that can never be other than true; such as
Nihil potest simul esse and non esse; Non Entis nullae sunt Proprietates
Reales, etc. There are also Physical Demonstrations, where the Conclusion is
evidently deduced from Physical Principles; such as are, Ex nihilo nihil fit.
Nulla substantia in nihilum redigitur, etc. which are not so absolutely certain
as the former, because, if there be a God, He may (at least for ought we know)
be able to create and annihilate Substances; and yet are held unquestionable by
the ancient Naturalists, who still suppose them in their Theories. And lastly,
there are Moral Demonstrations, such as those where the Conclusion is built
either upon some one such proof cogent in its kind; or some concurrence of
probabilities that it cannot be but allowed, supposing the truth of the most
received Rules of Prudence and Principles of Practical Philosophy.

And this third kind of Probation, though it come behind the two others in
certainty, yet it is the surest guide, which the Actions of Men, though not
their Contemplations, have regularly allowed them to follow. And the
Conclusions of a Moral Demonstration are the surest that Men aspire to, not
only in the conduct of private Men's affairs, but in the Government of States,
and even of the greatest Monarchies and Empires. And this is considerable in
Moral Demonstrations, that such may consist, and be as it were made up of
particulars, that are each of them but probable; of which the Laws established
by God himself among his own People, as well as the practice of our Courts of
Justice here in England, afford us a manifest instance in the case of Murder,
and some other Criminal Causes. For, though the Testimony of a single Witness
shall not suffice to prove the accused party guilty of Murder; yet the
Testimony of two Witnesses, though but of equal Credit, that is, a second
Testimony added to the first, though of it self never a whit more credible than
the former, shall ordinarily suffice to prove a Man guilty; because it is
thought reasonable to suppose, that, though each Testimony single be but
probable, yet a concurrence of such Probabilities (which ought in Reason to be
attributed to the Truth of what they jointly tend to prove) may well amount to
a Moral certainty, i. e. such a certainty as may warrant the Judge to proceed
to the sentence of death against the Indicted party.

To apply these things now to the Christian Religion: If you consider, with how
much approbation from discerning Men that judicious Observation of Aristotle
has been entertained, where he says, that it is as unskilful and improper a
thing to require Mathematical Demonstrations in Moral Affairs, as to take up
with Moral Arguments in matters Mathematical; you will not deny, but that those
Articles of the Christian Religion that can be proved by a Moral, though not by
a Metaphysical or Physical, Demonstration, may without any blemish to a Man's
Reason be assented to; and that consequently (by virtue of the foregoing
Considerations) those other Articles of the Christian Faith, that are clearly
and legitimately deducible from the so demonstrated Truths, may likewise
without disparagement be assented to.

We may also here consider further, That the choosing or refusing to embrace
the Christian Religion, which is not proposed to us only as a System of
Speculative Doctrines, but also as a Body of Laws, according to which it
teaches us, that God commands us to worship Him, and regulate our Lives; the
embracing, I say, or not embracing this Religion, is an act of humane choice,
and therefore ought to be determined according to the dictates of Prudence.
Now, though in matters that very much import us, we may wish for and endeavor
after such Reasons, whereby to determine our Resolves, as may amount to Moral
Demonstrations; yet Prudence will not always require, that we should refuse to
act upon Arguments of a less Cogency than Moral Demonstrations. For oftentimes
in humane Affairs it so falls out, that diverse hazards or other inconveniences
will attend whatever resolution we take; and in that case, all that Prudence
requires, or can enable us to do, is, to take that resolution which upon the
whole matter seems to be preferable to any other; though that which is thus
preferred, may perhaps be liable to some Objection that cannot be directly
answered, but only obliquely, by the preponderancy of the Arguments that
persuade the choice against which the Objection is made.

But here perhaps you will tell me, that the safest way in a case of such
importance, is to suspend an action that is every way attended with
difficulties, and to forbear either embracing or rejecting the Christian
Religion, till the truth or falseness of it come to appear evident and
unquestionable.

To which I answer, that indeed in matters of bare Speculation, about which our
Understandings only need to be conversant, the suspension of Assent is not only
practicable, but usually the safest way; but Des. Carts himself, who has been
the greatest Example and Inculcator of this Suspension, declares, that he would
have it practiced only about humane Speculations, not about humane Actions;
Sed haec interim dubitatio ad solam contemplationem veritatis restringenda; non
quantum ad usum vitae: quia persaepe rerum agendarum occasio praeteriret,
antequam nos dubiis nostris exolvere possemus. Non raro quod tantum est
verisimile cogimur amplecti, vel etiam interdum, etsi e duobus unum altero
verisimilius non appareat, alterutrum tamen eligere. And in some of his other
writings he speaks so much to show, that it is unreasonable to expect in
matters, where embracing or rejecting a course that requires practice is
necessary, such a certainty as he judges necessary to make a true Philosopher
acquiesce in reference to Propositions about speculative matters, that I find
by one of his Letters, that he was vehemently accused for having taught, that
Men need not have as sure grounds for choosing virtuous and avoiding vicious
courses, as for determining about things merely Notional.

And here let me observe to you the difference, that I take notice of in the
cases where we are put upon deliberating, whether we will choose or refuse a
thing proposed. For it may be propounded to us, either as a proffer on whose
acceptance an advantage may be hoped, or as a duty, which, besides the
advantage it promises to the performance, has a Penalty annexed to the
nonperformance, or as an only expedient to avoid a great mischief, or obtain
a great good.

Thus when in the Theatrum Chymicum some of its chief Authors, as Lully, Geber,
Artephius, who pretend to have been Adepti, i. e. Possessors of the Elixir,
very earnestly exhort their Readers to apply themselves to so noble and useful
a study as Alchymy (by the help of which, the last named Artephius is said to
have lived a 1000 years,) they make but a Proposition of the first sort. For
though a prosperous attempt to make the Philosophers stone (supposing there be
such a thing) would possess a Man of an inestimable Treasure; yet, if he either
refuse to believe these Writers, or, if he do believe them, refuses to take the
pains required of him that would follow their counsel, he can only miss of the
wealth, etc. they would make him hope for, but is really never a whit the
poorer, or in a worse condition than if they had not endeavored to engage him.

But if an absolute Sovereign commands something to be done by his Subjects;
and to enforce his Command, does not only propose great Recompenses to those
that shall perform what is prescribed, but threatens heavy penalties to the
disobedient; this will belong to the second sort of Cases above mentioned, in
which, as it is evident, a Man has not the same latitude allowed him as in the
first.

But if we suppose, that a Man by a translation of very peccant Matter has got
a spreading Gangrene in his Arm, and a skilful Surgeon tell him, that, if he
will part with his Arm, he may be recovered, and save his life, which else he
will certainly lose: This Case will belong to the last sort above mentioned;
the Patients parting with his Arm being the only remedy of the Gangrene, and
expedient to save his life, and recover his health. And here also it is
manifest, that there are far stronger Motives, than those mentioned in the
first Case, to make a positive and timely Resolution.

To bring this home to our Subject, I need but mind you, that the Christian
Doctrine does not only promise a Heaven to sincere Believers, but threatens no
less than a Hell to the Refractory.

The voice of Moses to the Jews is this, Behold, I set before you this day a
blessing and a curse; Deutr. 11. 26, 27, 28.
a blessing, if ye obey the Commandments of the Lord your God, which I command
you this day; and a curse, if ye will not obey the Commandment of the Lord your
God, but turn aside out of the way which I command you this day.

And the Commission that Christ gave his Apostles to preach the Gospel, runs
thus: Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature, i. e.
to all Mankind; Mark 16. 15, 16.
he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not,
shall be damned.

By this you may perceive, that as far as there is either truth or probability
in the Christian Religion, so far forth he that refuses to become a Disciple to
it, runs a venture, not only to lose the greatest blessings that Men can hope,
but to fall eternally into the greatest miseries that they can fear. And indeed
our Case in reference to the Christian Religion may not only be referred to the
second sort of Cases lately mentioned, but to the third sort too. For as the
language of the Author of the Christian Religion was to his Auditors, If ye
believe not that I am He (the Messiah) ye shall dye in your sins; John 8. 24.
so of the two greatest Heralds of it, the one tells the Jews that neither is
there salvation in any other: For, there is no other Name under heaven given
among men whereby we must be saved: Acts 4. 12.
And the other tells the Thessalonians, That the Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them
that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; 2 Thessalonians.
1. 7, 8, 9.
who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power.

By all this it appears, that the Christian Religion is not proposed barely as
a proffer of Heaven in case Men embrace it, but as a Law that Men should
embrace it upon the greatest penalty, and as the only expedient and remedy to
attain eternal happiness, and escape endless misery; so that the forbearing to
submit our necks to the yoke of Christ, being as well a ruinous course, as to
reject it, that which Reason here puts us upon, is, not so much to consider,
whether or no the Arguments for the Christian Religion be Demonstrations, and
will enable a Man to answer directly all Objections and Scruples; (for there
are diverse courses that Prudence may enjoin a Man to steer, whilst Philosophy
suggests speculative doubts about the grounds of such Resolutions:) but whether
it be more likely to be true, than not to be true, or rather, whether it be not
more advisable to perform the conditions it requires upon a probable
expectation of obtaining the blessings it promises, than by refusing it to run
a probable hazard of incurring such great and endless miseries as it
peremptorily threatens.

It will perhaps be said, that this is a hard Case But that is an Allegation I
am not here to consider; since it properly belongs to the Doctrine about the
Providence of God, who being the only Author and absolute Lord of the
Creatures, who can receive neither Laws nor Benefits from them, that can oblige
him to them; has a right to prescribe them what Laws he thinks fit, that are
not impossible for them to obey, and to punish their disobedience to such Laws;
and much more has a right to annex what conditions he pleases to that
inestimable Felicity he holds forth; the proffer of it upon any terms being a
free act of his mere goodness, and the value of it incomparably surpassing
whatever we Men can do or suffer to obtain it; especially considering, that, as
he might enforce his Commands, as Sovereigns commonly do by threatening
Penalties to the disobedient, without proposing Rewards to the performers; so
he has given Men such probable Arguments to ground their expectations on, that
they will be self-condemned, if they reject the Religion he proposes, and yet
maintain it to be decent (if I may so speak) for him to crown their Faith with
unvaluable blessings. But, as I was saying, the direct and full Answer to this
Allegation belongs not to this place, where it may suffice to say, that whether
the Case be hard or no, yet this is the Case. And therefore though the proofs
of the Christian Religion did not amount (which yet I do not grant) to Moral
Demonstrations, a Man may act rationally in embracing that Religion, if, all
things considered, it appear more likely to be true, than not to be true.

And I shall by and by show you, that this is not the only Case, where
Prudence puts us upon making resolutions notwithstanding contrary doubts.

I know the harshness of the Case is by most Men made to consist in this, That
for a Religion, whereof the truth supposed in its promises and threats is not
demonstratively proved, we must resign up our pleasures, and sometimes undergo
considerable hardships and losses, and consequently we must quit what is
certain, for what is uncertain. I have in another Paper had occasion to say
something else to this Objection, than what (to avoid repetition) shall make up
my present Answer, which consists of two parts.

The first whereof is, That what we are to give up to become Christians, is not
really so valuable in itself as the Objecters think, and that it is of scarce
any value at all, if compared to the goods we may acquire by parting with them.
For alas! what is it that Christianity requires us to forego, but small petty
enjoyments? which those, that have had the most of, have found them, and
pronounced them unsatisfactory whilst they possessed them, and which manifest
experience shows to be no less transitory, than they have been declared empty,
since a thousand Accidents may take them from us, and Death will infallibly
after a short time (which can be but a moment compared to Eternity) take us
from them. And if it be said, that these Enjoyments, such as they are, are at
least the only happiness that we can make our selves sure of, I must freely
profess, that I think it therefore the more reasonable to part with them, if it
be necessary upon the hopes that Christian Religion gives us. For (especially
if a Man behold those things not only with a Philosophical eye that can look
through them, but with a Christian eye that can look beyond them,) if there be
no greater happiness, I do not think so poor a thing as Men call Happiness
worth being greedily desired; and if there be such a transcendent happiness as
Christianity holds forth, I am sure, that deserves to be the object of my
Ambition. So that either the Meanness of worldly happiness will make me think
it no great misery to want it, or the Excellency of heavenly Felicity will make
me think it great wisdom to part with earthly for it.

And now, in the second part of my Answer, I must invite you to consider with
me, that Christian Religion requires not of us actions more imprudent, than
diverse others, that are generally looked upon as complying with the dictates of
Prudence, and some of them practiced by great Politicians themselves in the
weighty affairs of State.

You know what a common practice it is in great storms at Sea, for the
Merchants themselves to throw overboard their Goods, and perhaps too their
Victuals, (as in Paul's case) though they be sure to lose what they cast away,
and are not certain either that this loss will save the ship, or that the ship
may not be saved without it. The wisest, and even the worldliest Men, whether
Princes or private persons, think themselves never more so, than when they toil
and lay out their care and time, and usually deny themselves many things to
provide advantagiously for Children which they have but a Woman's word for, and
consequently a bare Moral probability to assure them to be theirs.

In the Small Pox many Physicians are for Bleeding, and others (as most of our
English Practitioners) are very much against it. Supposing then (which is no
very rare Case) that a person invaded by that disease, be told by one of his
Physicians, that unless Nature be eased of part of her burden by Phlebotomy,
she will never be able to overcome the disease; and on the contrary, the other
assures him, that, if by exhausting the treasure of life (the Blood) he further
weakens Nature which is but too weak already, the disease must needs overcome
her: What can a prudent Man do in this Case, where he can take no resolution,
against which probable Arguments, that are not directly and fully to be
answered, may not be opposed, and where yet the suspension of his resolution
may be as ruinous, as the venturing to take either of those he is invited to?

And in the formerly mentioned Case, of a Man that has a spreading Gangrene in
his Arm, if he consents that it be cut off, which Prudence often requires that
he should do, he is certain to lose one of his usefullest limbs, and is not
certain but that he may save his life without that loss, nor that he shall save
it by that loss.

And to give you an Instance or two of a more public nature: How many Examples
does History afford us of famous Generals, and other great Commanders, who have
ventured their Forces and their Lives to seize upon places promised to be
betrayed to them by those they had corrupted with money; though the ground,
upon which they run this hazard, be the engagement of some, who, if they were
not Traitors that could falsify their faith, would never have been bribed to
make so criminal and ignominious an engagement? How often have the greatest
Politicians either resolved to enter into a War, or taken courses that they
foresee will end in a War, upon the informations they receive from those they
have corrupted in other Princes Councils; though, to believe such
Intelligencers, those who venture so much upon their informations, must suppose
them faithless and perfidious Men?

It were not difficult, to add other Instances to the same purpose, by which
joined with what has been above discoursed, it may appear, that a Man need not
renounce or lay aside his Reason to resolve to fulfill the conditions of the
Gospel, though the Arguments for it were none of them demonstrative ones. For
so much as a Probability of attaining by it such inestimable blessings, as it
proposes, and little more than a bare Probability of incurring, by rejecting
it, such unspeakable miseries as it threatens, may rationally induce a Man to
resolve upon fulfilling its reasonable conditions, and his Prudence may very
well be justified if it do but appear, that (1) It is more probable that some
Religion should be true, than that so many well attested Miracles alleged by
the ancient Christians should be false; and that God who is the Author of the
World, and of Men, (for so much, I think, may be Physically proved) should
leave Man whom he has so fitted, and by benefits and internal Laws obliged to
worship him, without any express direction how to do it: And that (2) If there
be any true Religion, the Christian is the most likely to be that, in regard
not only of the excellency of its Doctrine and Promises, but of the Prophecies
and Miracles that bare witness to it, the Records of which were made by honest
plain Men, who taught and practiced the strictest virtue, and who knew their
Religion condemned Lying, freely joined their Doctrine and Narratives with
their blood: the truth of which was so manifest in the times when they were
said to be done, that the evidence seemed abundantly sufficient to convert
whole Nations, and among them many considerable and prudent persons, who had
great opportunity as well as concern to examine the truth of them, and who were
by their interest and education so indisposed to embrace Christianity, that, to
make a sincere profession of it, they must necessarily relinquish both their
former Religion, and their former Vices, and venturously expose for it not only
their Fortunes, but their Lives.

If it be here objected, that it is very harsh, if not unreasonable, to exact
upon so great penalty as Damnation so firm an assent, as is requisite to Faith,
to such Doctrines as are either obscurely delivered, or have not their truth
demonstratively made out: I answer, that whatever others may think, I don't
believe, that there is any degree of Faith absolutely necessary to salvation,
that is not suitable to the evidence that Men may have of it, if they be not
wanting to themselves through Laziness, Prejudices, Vice, Passion, Interest, or
some other culpable defect. For considering that God is just, and gracious, and
has been pleased to promulgate the Gospel, that Men whom it supposes to act as
such (that is, as rational Creatures) should be brought to salvation by it; I
see no just cause to think, that he intends to make any thing absolutely
necessary to salvation, that they may not so far clearly understand as they are
commanded distinctly and explicitly to believe it; and what is not so
delivered, I should, for that very Reason, unwillingly admit to be necessary to
salvation: And you may here remember, that I formerly told you, I was far from
thinking all the Tenants either of the Schools, or of particular Churches, to
be so much as Christian Verities, and therefore am very unlike to allow them
here to be fundamental and necessary ones; and I take it to be almost as great
as common a mistake, that all the Doctrines that concern fundamental Articles,
must be fundamental too; as if because the Head is a noble part of the Body,
and essential to life, therefore all the hair that grows upon it, must be
thought such too. But then as to the absolute firmness of Assent, that is
supposed to be exacted by Christianity to the Articles it delivers, I am not
sure that it is so necessary in all cases to true and saving Faith, as very many
take it to be. For first the Scripture itself tells us, that some of the Truths
it reveals, are unfathomable Mysteries, and some other Points are (...), hard
to be understood; and it is unreasonable to suppose, that the highest firmness
of Assent is to be given to such Articles, or to those parts of them, as their
obscurity keeps us from having so much reason to think that we clearly
understand them, as we have to suppose we understand those that are far more
plainly revealed. And (secondly) to speak more generally, it is harsh to say,
that the same degree of Faith is necessary to all Persons, since Men's natural
capacities and dispositions, and their education, and the opportunities they
have had of being informed, do very much, yet perhaps not culpably, dispose
some more than others to be diffident, and apt to haesitate, and frame doubts.
And the same Arguments may appear evident enough to one Man to make it his duty
to believe firmly what they persuade, which in another, naturally more
skeptical, or better acquainted with the difficulties and objections urged by
the opposite Party, may leave some doubts and scruples excusable enough. And
when either the Doctrine itself is not clearly delivered, or the Proofs of it,
that a Man could yet meet with, are not fully cogent; for that Man, not to give
such Truths the same degree of Assent that Demonstration may produce, is not,
as many interpret it, an affront to the Veracity of God, since he may be
heartily disposed and ready to believe all that shall appear to him to be
revealed by God, and only doubts, whether the thing proposed be indeed revealed
by him, or whether the diffident Party rightly understands the sense of these
words wherein the Revelation is contained; which is not to distrust God, but
himself: And that in some cases, a degree of Faith not exempt from doubts, may,
through Gods goodness, be accepted, we may learn from hence, that the Apostles
themselves, who were so much in Christ's favor, made it their Prayer to him,
That he would increase their Faith: And he that begged, that if he could do any
thing for his son, and cried out, Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief, was so
far accepted by that merciful High Priest, who is apt to be touched with the
sense of our infirmities, that his Request was granted, though it could not be
so but by having a Miracle done in his favor. The Disciples distressed by a
storm, and crying to their Master, as thinking themselves upon the very point
of perishing, were saved by him at the same time when he gave them the Epithet
of men of little faith: And at another time, Peter walking upon the Sea, though
he had lost a degree of that Faith that made him first engage upon that
adventure, and was reproved for it by Christ, was yet rescued from that sinking
condition which both he and his Faith were in. And we are told, in the Gospel,
of a Faith, which, though no bigger than a grain of Mustard Seed, may enable a
Man to remove Mountains: And though this passage speaks not primarily of
justifying Faith, yet still it may serve to show, that degrees of Assent, far
short of the greatest, may be so far accepted by God, as to be owned by
miraculous Exertions of his Power. For the Faith then that is made a necessary
condition under the Gospel, as the genuine fruit and scope of it is Obedience;
so it is not indispensably such a Faith as excludes doubts, but refusals. And
though the Assent be not so strong as may be produced by a Demonstration; yet
it may be graciously accepted, if it be but strong enough to produce Obedience;
and accordingly whereas Paul in one place declares, that in Christ Jesus
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith
operative through love; we may learn his meaning from a parallel place, where
varying the words, and not the sense, of the latter part of the sentence, he
says, that in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision but the keeping of the Commandments of God. I readily grant,
that attainment of a higher degree of Faith is always a blessing, and cannot be
sufficiently prized, without being sincerely aimed at; but there are in some
Virtues and Graces degrees, which though to reach be a great happiness, yet
it is but the endeavoring after them that is an indispensible Duty. Likewise
it is true, that the firmness of assent to Divine Verities, does, in some
regard, bring much honor to God; as it is said of the Father of the Faithful,
(who in reference to the promise made him of Isaac, did not consider his own
age, nor Sarahs long barrenness, so as to entertain any diffidence of what God
had told him,) that being mighty in faith, he gave glory to God: But it is true
too, that in another respect a practical assent built upon a less undoubted
evidence, may have its pre-eminence; for when Christ now risen from the dead,
had said to the distrustful Didimus, Thomas, Because thou have seen me, thou
have believed; he immediately adds, But blessed (that is, peculiarly and
preferably blessed) are those that have not seen, and yet have believed; and
indeed he does not a little honor God, (in that sense wherein Mortals may be
said to honor him) who is so willing to obey and serve him, and so ambitious
to be in an estate where he may always do so, that upon what he yet discerns to
be but a probability of the Christian Religions being the most acceptable to
God, he embraces it with all its difficulties and dangers, and upon this score
venturously resolves to submit, if need be, to a present and actual dereliction
of all his Sins and Lusts, and perhaps his Interest and his Life too, upon a
comparatively uncertain expectation of living with him hereafter.

The Conclusion of the First Part.
And here I will put a Period' to my Answer to your Friends Question in one of
the two senses of it, and so to the first Part of this Discourse. Against all
which perhaps your Friend will object, That at this rate of arguing for the
Christian Religion, one may Apologize for any Opinion, and reconcile the most
unreasonable ones to right Reason. But it is not difficult for me to reply, That
this Objection is grounded either upon a mistake of the design of this Letter,
or upon the overlooking of what is supposed in it. For I do not pretend, that
the Considerations hitherto alleged should pass for Demonstrations of the
Truth of Christianity, which is to be proved by the excellency of the Doctrines
it reaches, and that of the Rewards it promises, (both which are worthy of
God,) and by diverse other Arguments, especially the Divine Miracles that attest
it: But that which I was here to do, was, not to lay down the grounds why I
received the Christian Religion, but to return an Answer, backed with Reasons,
to the Question that was proposed: Whether I did not think, that a Christian,
to continue such, must deny or lay aside his Reason? The sum of the Answer is
this, That the Doctrines really proposed by the Christian Religion, seeming to
me to be by proper Arguments sufficiently proved in their kind, so as that the
proofs of it, whether they be demonstrative or no, are sufficient, (the nature
of the things to be proved, considered) to justify a rational and prudent
Man's embracing it; this Religion (I say) seeming to me to have such positive
Proofs for it, I do not think, that the Objections, that are said to be drawn
from Reason against it, do really prove the belief of it to be inconsistent
with right Reason, and do outweigh the Arguments alledgable in that Religions
behalf. To propose some of the general grounds of this Answer of mine, was the
design of the Considerations hitherto discoursed of; which (as I hinted to you
at the beginning) could be no other than general, unless you had mentioned to
me some of your Friends particular Objections, which when he tells you, you
will perhaps find that I have already given you the grounds of answering them.
And though to propose Arguments to evince positively the Truth of our Religion
after the example of the excellent Grotius, and some other very learned
Writers, be not, as you see, either my task or my design; yet if you
attentively consider what I write in that short Discourse, wherein I manage but
that seemingly popular Argument for Christianity, that is drawn from the
Miracles that are said to attest it, you will perchance be invited to think,
that when all the other Proofs of it are taken in, a Man may, without
renouncing or affronting his Reason, be a Christian.

But to proceed to the more considerable part of what I presumed your Friend
will object, I answer, That the considerations I have alleged in the behalf of
some Mysteries of the Christian Religion, will not be equally applicable to the
most absurd or unreasonable Opinions. For these Considerations are offered as
Apologies for Christian Doctrines, but upon two or all of these three
Suppositions. The first, That the Truth of the main Religion of which such
Doctrines make a part, is so far positively proved by real and uncontrolled
Miracles, and other competent Arguments, that nothing, but the manifest and
irreconcilable Repugnancy of its Doctrines to right Reason, ought to hinder us
from believing them. The second, That diverse of the things, at which reasonable
Men are wont to take exception, are such, as Reason it self may discern to be
very difficult, or perhaps impossible for us to understand perfectly by our own
natural light. And the third, That some things in Christianity which many Men
think contrary to Reason, are, at most, but contrary to it, as it is
incompetently informed and assisted, but not when it is more fully instructed,
and particularly when it is enlightened and assisted by Divine Revelation. And as
I think these three Suppositions are not justly applicable, (I say not, as the
Objection does, to the most absurd, or unreasonable Opinions, but,) to any
other Religion than the true, which is the Christian; so the last of these
Suppositions prompts me to take notice to you, that, though we ought to be
exceeding wary, how we admit what pretends to be supernaturally revealed; yet
if it be attended with sufficient evidence of its being so, we do very much
wrong and prejudice our selves, if out of an unreasonable jealousy, or, to
acquire or maintain the repute of being wiser than others, we shut our eyes
against the light it offers. For besides that a Man may as well err by
rejecting or ignoring the Truth, as by mistaking a falsehood for it; I consider;
that those Men that have an Instrument of knowledge, which other Men either
have not, or, (which is as bad) refuse to employ, have a very great advantage
above others toward the acquiring of Truth, and with far less parts than they,
may discover diverse things, which the others, with all their Pride and
Industry, shall never attain to. As when Galilaeo alone among the modern
Astronomers was Master of a Telescope, 'twas easy for him to make noble
discoveries in Heaven of things, to which not only Ptolomy, Alphonsus, and
Ticho, but even his Masters, Aristarchus Samius, and Copernicus, themselves
never dreamed of, and which other Astronomers cannot see but by making use of
the same kind of Instrument. And on this occasion let me carry the Comparison,
suggested by the Telescope, a little further, and take notice, that if Men
having heard, that there were four Planets moving about Jupiter, and that Venus
is an opacous body, and sometimes horned like the Moon, had resolved to examine
these things by their naked eyes, as by the proper Organs of Sight, without
employing the Telescope, by which they might suspect, that Galilaeo might put
some Optical delusion upon them; they would perhaps have assembled in great
multitudes to gaze at Venus and Jupiter, that (since plus vident Oculi quam
Oculus) the number of eyes might make amends for their dimness. This attempt
not succeeding, they would perhaps choose out some of the youngest and sharpest
sighted Men, that by their piercing eyes that may be discovered which ordinary
ones could not reach. And this Expedient not succeeding neither, they would
perhaps diet their Stargazers, and prescribe them the inward use of Fennel, and
Eyebright, and externally apply Collyriums and Eye-waters, and those to as
little purpose as the rest. With such a pity, mixed with Indignation, as
Galilaeo would probably have looked on such vain and fruitless attempts with,
may a judicious Christian, that upon a due examination admits the Truth of the
Scriptures, look upon the presumptuous and vain endeavors of those Men, who, by
the goodness of their natural parts, or by the improvements of them, or by the
number of those that conspire in the same search, think, with the bare eye of
Reason to make as great discoveries of heavenly Truths, as a person assisted by
the Revelations, contained in the Scripture, can with great ease and
satisfactoriness attain. To which let me add this further improvement of the
Comparison, that as a skilful Astronomer will indeed first severely examine,
whether the Telescope be an Instrument fit to be trusted, and not likely to
impose upon him; but being once resolved of that, will confidently believe the
discoveries it makes him, however contrary to the received Theories of the
Celestial Bodies, and to what he himself believed before, and would still, if
the Telescope did not otherwise inform him, continue to believe; so a well
qualified Inquirer into Religions, though he will be very wary, upon what terms
he admits Scripture; yet if he once be fully satisfied, that he ought to admit
it, he will not scruple to receive upon its authority whatever supernatural
Truths it clearly discloses to him; though perhaps contrary to the Opinions he
formerly held, and which, if the Scripture did not teach him otherwise, he
would yet assent to. And as the Galaxy and other whitish parts of the Sky, were
by Aristotle and his Followers, and many other Philosophers, who looked on them
only with their naked eyes, for many Ages reputed to be but Meteors; but to
those that look on them with an eye assisted by the Telescope, they plainly
appear true Constellations made up of a multitude of bright (though little)
Stars; so there are Theological Doctrines, which to Philosophers, and others
that look on them with the naked eye of Natural Reason, seem to be but light
and fantastical things; which yet, when Reason, assisted and heightened by
Revelation, comes to contemplate, it manifestly sees them to be true and
celestial Lights, which only their sublimity keeps concealed from our weak
(naked) eyes.

FINIS.

