The Information and Examination of a SMITH and his JOVRNEYMAN. Committed to
Newgate by Sir William Turner Knight, for Conspiring the Death of the KING.
The Information of John White, against Jennings and Saltmarsh given before Sir
William Turner Knight; One of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, for the City
of London.
JOhn White says, he was Apprentice to the aforesaid Jennings, a Lock-Smith in
Jewen-street, and that Nicholas Saltmarsh the Jorneyman, about the 13th. of
June last, came in late at Night, and entered into discourse with him about the
five Jesuits that was to be tried, and other News, but Saltmarsh said, if he
might confide in White, he would tell him that which was News indeed.

Whereupon this Informant White promised secrecy: then Saltmarsh told White,
that about the time of Colemans Execution, this Mr. Jennings would have hired
him to Pistol the King in St. James's Park, Encouraging him that it was the way
to preferment, and that there would be those ready to rescue him after the
fact; and that the man was happy that did it.

This Informant White, notwithstanding he had promised secrecy, told Saltmarsh
that neither in Duty or Conscience could he conceal this; which tended to the
ruin of the King and Kingdom.

Then Saltmarsh threatened White, that if he did discover it he would forswear
it, so that this Informant White should not be believed.

This Informant says, that through ignorance, want of assistance and liberty,
he could not discover it in three days, at last asked leave of his Mr. Jennings
to go and discover this Treason, but instead of assistance, Jennings his Master
put this Informant White into Bridewell.

This Informant farther says, that before and after he was in Bridewell,
Jennings tampered with him to deny his words, and he would discharge him, but
this Informant White, found means in Bridewell to have Jennings and Saltmarsh
to be apprehended, and brought before Sir William Turner, and gave this against
them upon Oath.

The Information of -- Fellow-Apprentice with White.
This Informant says, that about the 13th. of June last, in bed he heard
Saltmarsh tell White, that their Master Jennings would have hired him to Pistol
the King, and he concurred in all circumstances to the Information his Fellow
Apprentice White had sworn before.

The Examination of Nicholas Saltmarsh, Jorneyman Lock Smith.
This Examinant Saltmarsh, confesses he came in late about the 13th of June
last, but denies he ever mentioned Pistolling of the King, but says White
began a discourse that he had cast a figure, and found that this Examinant
Saltmarsh and Jennings, had had some discourse about killing the King.

This Examinant Saltmarsh farther says, that White Obliged him to secrecy, and
then proposed, if this Examinant would swear, that his Master Jennings would
have hired him to pistol the King, it would be 500. pounds in their ways, by a
Late Proclamation that offered 500. pounds to those that could discover any
that would kill the King. But this Examinant Saltmarsh would not join with
White, and says, he never had such discourse with his Master Jennings about
killing the King, but says, White would have drawn him in to swear against his
Master Jennings to get 500. pounds as abovesaid.

The Examination of -- Jennings Lock-Smith.
This Examinant says, That he never had any Discourse with his Journeyman
Saltmarsh about killing the King, but owneth, that his Apprentice White asked
leave to go to discover the Treason; and this Examinant says, he promised to
assist White, but afterward thinking it was out of malice to Saltmarsh, and
finding himself charged also, and that White went about to take away the
Examinants Life, this Examinant was advised by his own Father to put his
Apprentice White into Bridewell; But this Examinant Jennings utterly denies,
that ever he tampered with his Apprentice White to deny his words, either
before or after he was in Bridewell.

One Mr. -- made Oath unto that, as follows.
That he was sent for to go with Jennings and others to Bridewell, to see what
could be done with Jennings his Apprentice White, to see if he would deny his
words, and be sorry for what he had said of his Master, and that he would get
him a discharge, but White persisted that he had spoken nothing but what was
truth, and would not deny his words.

After some hours spent, this being the sum of their Examinations, as near as
can be remembered, Jennings and Saltmarsh were committed to Newgate upon
suspicion of High Treason, to be tried next Sessions at the Old Baily.

White was remanded to Bridewell, and to be well provided for, and no friend
hindered from coming to him.

FINIS.

