Dr. Isham's SERMON At the FUNERAL OF Dr. SCOTT.

Imprimatur.

Carolus Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.
Martii 19. 1694/5.
A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF THE Reverend JOHN SCOTT, D. D.

Late Rector of S. Giles in the Fields, March 15. 1694/5.

By Z. ISHAM, D. D.

Rector of S. Botolph Bishopsgate, London.

LONDON: Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1695.

A SERMON ON
PHIL. iii. 20, 21. Our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for
the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall change our vile body, that it may
be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he
is able even to subdue all things unto himself.


I. WHen a pestilential Distemper was raging in Africa, the holy Father S.
Cyprian takes occasion from thence to encourage the Christians against the fear
of Death; and to set before them such Consolations as were proper for this
Calamity: he assures them that Amplectamur diem, q^i assignat singulos
d^micilio suo; qui nos istinc ereptos, and laqueis secularibus exsolutos
paradiso restituit and regno coelesti. De Mortal.
The day of their decease would restore them to Paradise, and to the Kingdom of
Heaven; and the concluding Argument that he uses, is to remind them of the
excellent Company they should meet with in the other world, immediately upon
their departure from hence: There is waiting for us above (says he) a great
number of our dearest Friends; our Parents, and Brethren, and Children are all
desiring our access to them; and being now secured of their own immortality,
they are still solicitous for our Salvation; and what a common rejoicing will
it be both to them and us, to have the sight and embraces of one another? And
then he goes on to speak of the Apostles, and Prophets, and Martyrs, and
Virgins, that we shall find in the heavenly Mansions: as if nothing could be
more desirable than to hasten thither with all possible speed; Quis non ad suos
navigare festinans, ventum prosperum cupidius optaret, ut velociter caros
liceret amplecti? Thus we see this glorious Martyr discoursing with such
earnestness of the next life; as if he were then hoisting up his Sails, and
lanching forth into the Ocean of Eternity: and he is the more to be hearkened
to, because he had received (as he tells us) immediate Nobis ipsis minimis
quoties revelatum est, ut public praedicarem fratres nostros non esse lugendos
accersitione Dominica de seculo libera^^s; nec accipiendas esse hic atras
vestes, quando illi ibi indumenta alba sam sumserint? Ibid.
revelation from God, concerning the happiness of departed Souls: and from what
he has said, in conjunction with others, we may gather it to have been the
more approved Opinion of the Primitive Church, that the Spirits of righteous
Men go directly to Heaven; and the Fathers who speak otherwise, and favor an
intermediate Estate, seem to have done it upon their own peculiar Notions; as
they might inoffensively do, in a Matter not clearly decided by the light of
Scripture. The comfort which that admirable Father gives to the Christians of
his Age, is very seasonable for us at this time; when God, in his unsearchable
Judgment, has removed from us so many eminent Persons; and particularly within
the space of a week, Mr. Wharton March 5. Dr. Scott, Mar. 10. Dr. Dove, Mar. 11.
three of the greatest Ornaments of our Church; as it were in attendance upon
the untimely Obsequies of that blessed Queen, (that bright Luminary of Religion
and Virtue) whose delight it was to protect and adorn it. However we must with
humble submission adore the Justice of God: and we hope that he intends not War
against us by calling his Servants home; that he will now accept of a
Sacrifice, and that some of these holy Prophets will prevail with him to stop
the hand of his destroying Angel. Turn us, O God of our salvation, Psalm. ^xxx^
4, 5, 6.
and cause thine anger toward us to cease: Will thou be angry with us for
ever? will thou draw out thine anger to all generations? Will thou not revive
us again, that thy people may rejoice in thee? Doubtless he will revive us, and
speak peace unto us; if we attend to what he has spoken to us, and turn not
again to folly: and what he speaks to us upon this mournful occasion; what
thoughts and resolutions he expects from us; and what our Eloquent Brother
would speak to us, if he were not now silent; we may hear from the Apostle: Our
conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord
Jesus Christ: who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to
subdue all things unto himself.

II. In which words I shall desire you to consider these two Points: First, A
duty represented, and that is to have our Conversation in Heaven: And secondly,
an incitement to it from the Consideration of our future bliss. I begin with
the Duty which is intimated in my Text, namely the having of our Conversation
in Heaven: for the Explication whereof I shall briefly insist upon these two
Heads: First, What is imported hereby; And secondly, How reasonable it is to
act accordingly. First, let us observe what is imported by having our
Conversation in Heaven: the word is (...), and seems here to signify the
Rights and Immunities of a Citizen; and to intimate that we are by Profession
Citizens of that glorious Corporation which is above, and ought to demean our
selves as such, that we may not lose the Freedom and Privileges belonging to
it: this is a continuing City, Heb. 13.1^. and (...) C^^m. (...);
and a City which has foundations; as the Apostle calls it: and a very learned
Father tells us, that the Stoics would allow Heaven only to be properly a
City, no Community upon Earth deserving that name. (...). (...). Jud. p. 196.
It Is a fair conjecture that our Apostle does here more particularly allude to
the dignity of the Freemen of Rome, which in his days was mightily esteemed,
and enjoyed by many that were not born there, and lived in Countries very
remote: and this resembles the condition of Christians, who are Naturalized
and Incorporated into another City, even while they remain at such a distance
from the place of their Liberty, and are laboring under the servitude of this
present Life.

III. To explain the compass of the Duty before us, we may take notice, that it
includes the three following steps; First, a due Esteem of the Happiness of the
next Life: Secondly, the kindling of our desires and affections toward the
attainment of it: and Thirdly, a Conversation answerable thereunto. First, we
are to esteem the Felicity of the next Life, suitably to what we know of it; we
are not to diminish our concern for it, because it flatters not our Sensuality,
is a pure and invisible Possession; and we are to follow our Savior's
Judgment, comparing it to treasure hid in a field, for which a wise Purchaser
will sell all that he has: and to a Pearl of great price, Mat. 13.44, 45. and
16.26.
which a Merchant finding exposed to Sale, he went and sold all that he had,
and bought it: and assuring us, that if a man could gain the whole world by
losing his own soul, he would make a very foolish Bargain. It Is possible, I
confess, for Men that are wholly taken up with the Distractions and Enjoyments
of this present World, to have a speculative Regard for those Felicities which
are promised to us hereafter; and in their lucid Intervals, to think them more
valuable than those weak and empty satisfactions, which they are so eager in
pursuing. But still whatever the Judgment may be of cool Reason, the Opinions
of Men are to be weighed by their Actions; and if sensual objects carry the
Soul after them, and are labored after with the warmest prosecutions, it is
plain enough they are nearest to the heart, and preferred before the spiritual
Joys of the life to come.

IV. Secondly, the having our Conversation in Heaven implies the seeking for it
earnestly, and the inflaming of our desires and affections toward it for what
we love and set a value upon, we are naturally willing to enjoy; and it is
impossible that any man should have a true Notion of Heaven, and not wish to be
possessed of it hereafter: Only here lies the misery of deluded Sinners, that
they would have it consistent with their Lusts and Pleasures, and attainable
upon such terms as God cannot allow. But when Christ has commanded us to seek
the kingdom of God and his righteousness, Mat. 6.33.20.21.
with preference to all other things, and to lay up our treasure in Heaven,
that our heart may likewise be there: We are not to think of Heaven, as we
would of a beautiful and magnificent City, where we have no business, and to
which we never intend to go; but we are to look upon it, as the place to which
we are Traveling, and where God has provided for us the best Patrimony; and
hereupon to anticipate the possession of it by our fervent wishes, and to be
affected as the Psalmist was; My soul thirsts for God, for the living God;
when shall I come and appear before God? Psalm 42.2.
He that has a rich Vessel coming home from the Indies, will be frequently
grasping it in his mind, and harkening continually after the tidings of it, and
full of solicitude till it safely arrives in the Harbor: and so the devout
Soul that has a lively Sense of the Glories of another Life, is ever looking
toward them, and longing for an admission to them, and lifting up her Head
with joyful expectation, because her Redemption draws nigh. Supposing we
sincerely believe the Resurrection of the Body, and the Life Everlasting; it
follows in a natural Course, that we should be very desirous of attaining to
this Immortality, and have strong Inclinations to dwell in the Habitations of
Eternity; or else the Will does not go after the Judgment with such ardency and
sedulity, as it does in secular pursuits: and it is a vain Profession that we
make, I look for the Resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to
come.

V. Thirdly, The having our Conversation in Heaven imports the living
answerably to our hopes of Futurity; for otherwise they will be miserably
disappointed, and without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Heb. 12.14.
And this is not only the condition immutably fixed, but is also necessary to
dispose us for the relish of those pure and spiritual Pleasures; which can be
no Paradise to an unclean Soul: and if we could imagine the rich Glutton, with
all his vicious Appetites translated into the Portion of Lazarus, even the
bosom of the Patriarch would have been to him a place of Torment. God has been
unspeakably Merciful, in preparing an eternal Reward for us, upon such easy
and just Conditions as he has enabled us to perform; and in sending his Son to
be our Guide, and our Sacrifice: but it is absurd to presume that we are bound
to do nothing for this mighty recompense; that we shall be wafted to bliss,
while we lie sleeping in the Bark; that we may go with unclean hands, and
polluted hearts into the dwellings of purity; and that the blood of the
everlasting Mediator was shed for lazy, and impenitent sinners that trample
upon his Cross. There is no Man so very brutal, but that he wishes with
himself, he might be happy after death; and if he has not quite extinguished
the Sparks of Natural Religion, and has any glimpse of the immortality to
come, he desires to be made partaker of it: but how many are in Hell, that
during their abode here were hoping foolishly they might get to Heaven at last?
And what can it avail to wish faintly, and slothfully for blessedness, without
striving to obtain it, in the way which God has appointed? It was the good and
faithful servant, that improved the Talents committed to him, and not the
unprofitable Loiterer, who entered into the joy of his Lord. Matthew. xxv. 21,
There is no mocking of God; and without serving him sincerely, there can
neither be any comfort after death, nor dying with peace and satisfaction. Who
can express the darkness and horrors of a deathbed, when men have lived
dissolutely, and profanely; and their Old Vices are got together to haunt them
like Specter; and Conscience is awakened to Accuse and Condemn them; and the
world deserting them, nothing remains but the guilt of their sins to pursue
them immediately to the Bar of Justice? But no Consolations are equal to those
resulting from a life religiously spent; and the true Christian under the
bitterest agonies of death has a God to Converse with, and a Savior before
his Eyes, and an Eternity of Joy ready to receive him: and he can say with
assurance, Psalm. lxxiii.25, 26.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee: my flesh and my heart fails; but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever.

VI. I come now in the second place to evince the reasonableness of having our
Conversation in Heaven: and that I may not trespass in staying upon such an
undeniable Truth, I shall only mention these three Considerations. First, That
our Christian Profession engages us to this Holy temper; and by our Baptism we
are born as it were into another World, and made the Citizens of Heaven; and
consequently are obliged to the behavior of such: and he that honestly follows
a Crucified Master, and renounceth the allurements of this World, must be
supposed to have a prospect of the other, Co^, (...).
where Christ sits on the right hand of God. Secondly, Heaven is the place
for which we are created; and God in forming Man after his own Image, designed
him for the everlasting fruition of himself: innocent Men would have been
Translated to a much higher Paradise; and we that are fallen know it to be the
end of our Redemption, Heb. xii. ^2.
that we should come to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; and
that we should inherit the kingdom prepared for us from the foundation of the
world. Mat. xxv. 34.
Thirdly, Heaven is the place of the greatest happiness attainable by us; and
not only inexpressibly beyond all these lower satisfactions, but also above our
comprehension: for till we know the most extended capacity of the Soul, and
what degrees of blessedness, what proficiency, what illuminations it is capable
of; and till we know moreover how far God will discover himself in filling all
the dimensions of it, and in raising it to the highest pitch of created
Perfection; we cannot have a just, and proportionable Idea of that ineffable
happiness, which is purchased for us by the blood of Christ. So much however
God has revealed to us concerning our future reward, as is sufficient to
quicken our most active endeavors for it: Joh. iii. 2.
It does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know, that when God shall
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is: and certainly the
Vision of God's Essential Glories, which are unapproachable to us here, and the
resemblance to his transcendent Nature; the beholding of him Face to Face, the
dwelling within the Circle of his Throne, and the seeing of the Mysteries of
Faith unvailed; together with the consequential ardency of Affection toward
God, and the loving, and admiring, and adoring of him proportionably to the
light of the understanding; all this is infinitely more worthy of our Ambition,
than all the fading enjoyments of the World; and may engage us to be diligent
in our Christian Race, and in working for Eternity.

VII. This will be further Evident from the second Point which I offered;
namely the incitement given by our Apostle, from the consideration of our
future bliss: Our conversation is to be in heaven, because we look for our
Savior's coming from thence in glory; to raise us up to an immortal life, and
to change our vile, and infirm, and mouldering bodies, into such as will be of
a noble and lasting Frame, and fashioned after the pattern of his own
Resurrection. In this Argument of our Apostle we may take notice of two
Assertions; the first of them is, That this vile Body, which we carry about
here, is to rise again, and to be rebuilt after the likeness of the glorious
Body of Christ: and if it were otherwise, it is not easily conceivable how the
Doctrine of the Resurrection can be properly maintained. For that only can
justly be said to rise again which is fallen and buried in the earth: but the
Soul is incapable of dying; and therefore unless the same Body be revived,
unless there be a Resuscitation of that which was asleep in the Grave, we are
in danger of losing the Resurrection. Did not Christ arise with the same Flesh
that was Crucified, and retaining the very Print of the Nails? and are we not
to be raised after the same model? and he has told us, that all that are in
the graves shall hear his voice, Joh. 5.28, 29.
and shall come forth unto the Resurrection either of life, or of damnation:
And his Apostle has taught us, that this corruptible must put on incorruption,
1 Cor. 15.53.
and this mortal must put on immortality: It shall put on a new Garment, and by
consequence shall remain entire; and from hence the Identity of the corrupted,
and the rising Body seems to be clearly revealed. If it be so, it is in vain to
contradict it by Philosophical Cavils; for to support our belief, the Apostle
minds of us Gods omnipotent strength, whereby he is able to subdue all things
unto himself. The Power of God is but a weak Argument for the Truth of an
Article of Faith, unless the Revelations of his Will be clear and convincing;
for otherwise by this Plea the most absurd monstrosities in Religion may be
defended: but where the Divine Will is perspicuously declared, (as in the case
of the Resurrection) the Omnipotence of God comes in for a seasonable, and
sufficient reply to all the astonishing difficulties that our Reason can muster
up. It Is, I confess, not easy to conceive, how the Members that have been
consumed in the Grave, and scattered into a thousand places, and traveled
through all the Elements, should after many Ages reassemble their broken
pieces, and shake off their rottenness, and reassume their ancient Figure, and
rise up into a beautiful Frame. But who can prescribe Limits to an Almighty
Being? The thunder of his power who can understand? Job. 26.14.
and since he has promised to raise up Mankind, who can say to him, that it
cannot possibly be? We know the infinite Power of God, in building this vast
Universe, when he had no matter to work upon; and in fashioning Man, the Image
of himself, out of the dust of the ground; and we cannot but admire the daily
Miracles of his Providence, in continuing the successive Generations of Men,
and Forming them all in the Womb: And then we may conclude, that he who has
done all this, is likewise able to recollect, and reanimate our putrified
Bodies, and to over power all the obstacles that stand in his way: Act. xxvi. 8.
And why should it be thought a thing incredible with us, that God should raise
the dead?

VIII. The second Assertion in our Apostle is this; That there is to be a
change in our Bodies at the Resurrection, and a likeness to the glorified Body
of Christ: they are to be substantially the same, but clothed with a Robe of
unknown Glory, and with new Endowments and Qualities, suitably to that Heavenly
Life which they must enter into. The question was made in the days of our
Apostle, How are the dead raised up? 1 Cor. xv. 35. and 42, 43, 44,
and with what body do they come? and he not only clears the certainty of our
Resurrection, but also the conformity of it to that of Christ: and it was an
old Hieron. Ep. 27.
Tradition in the Church, that every Christian shall be raised up in the same
ripeness of Age, as our Savior was of at the time of his Passion. The body is
sown in corruption, and raised in incorruption; that is, in this Life it has
the Seeds of dissolution, and upon the withdrawing of the Soul, must of
necessity fall into dust and rottenness; but hereafter it will be subject to no
decay, no frailty, and no misery, being framed of such a durable substance, as
to prove an immortal Habitation to the returning Soul: It will not be pinched
with necessities, and pains, and diseases, nor troubled with daily repairs, and
with providing against the ruins of Mortality; Luk xx 35, 36
for they that shall be counted worthy to obtain the Resurrection of the dead,
cannot die any more; as being equal to the Angels, and the Children of God.
Again, The body is sown in dishonor, and raised in glory; that is, a
brightness, and luster, and Majesty will over spread those Bodies, which are
here of a despicable and mean aspect; especially when they are committed to the
ground, with the pale and frightful Visage of Death, which turns the fairest
Countenance into a spectacle of blackness and horror: but in the Resurrection
a fresh and unperishing Beauty shall dwell upon the exalted Body; Mat. xiii. 43.
and then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their
Father; they shall be surrounded with beams of perpetual Light resting upon
them; and such a Resulgency there was in the face of Moses, when he came down
from conversing with God in the Mount; and in the Transfiguration of Christ,
when his face did shine as the Sun, and his raiment was white as the light.
Matt. xvii. 2.
Again, The body is sown in weakness, and raised in power; that is, those
Indispositions and Infirmities which beset the Flesh in our present Estate, and
make it a dull and sluggish, and cumbersom lump, shall then be removed; and
there shall be no clogs and fetters of the Soul, to obstruct her operations.
Here we are too sensible, how backward the Flesh is to obey the Spirit: and
even in our approaches to God we find a heaviness and deadness upon us from the
reluctance of it; and we are soon tired even by the best performances: but the
glorified Body will be an equal Companion to the Soul, and nimbly execute
whatever is fitting for it, and fly with the wings of an Angel upon any
superior call, and join with unwearied delight in the never ceasing work of
the Saints, and in the adorations of God. Lastly, the body which is sown is
natural; that is, invested with such Faculties, and Appetites, and
Inclinations, as are peculiarly fitted to this lower World; but it is raised a
spiritual body; that is, adorned with celestial Qualities, and accommodated to
that Divine Employment, which is to entertain us everlastingly in the next
Life. Here the unruly, headstrong Body is very difficult to be managed; but
when it shall be Spiritualized, and purified, and adapted to the Joys of
Heaven, it will be at perfect amity with the Soul, and tuned for ever to the
Hallelujahs of the Spirits above.

IX. This is that blessedness which is to inspire us with vigor in all the
exercises of a Christian Life, and to prepare us with alacrity for a Christian
Death: but lest it should be objected, that this is not an adequate
encouragement in our fears, and losses, and calamities; for if we must wait for
happiness, till the second coming of our Lord, and the reassumption of our
Bodies; what is there to rebate the apprehensions of death? why should we not
be unwilling to quit our present satisfactions, for those which are not to come
till after a long, and uncertain period? and what ground is there of thanks to
God for the departure of our friends? for the preventing of such objections, I
shall subjoin this Consideration to what has been said; That Righteous Souls
depart from hence into a State of Felicity. We cannot trace the motions of the
naked Soul, nor see the Angels that conduct it: but an intelligent and immortal
Substance, wherever it is, must undoubtedly have a suitable Habitation, and
live, and think, and contemplate; and probably with more freedom, and vivacity,
than in these Cottages of Clay. But to suppose it in a slumbering, and unactive
Estate; and much more to suspect the vanishing of it, is to degrade our selves
below the conceptions of the Heathen World, and to resist the natural
Impressions of Conscience: Natura ipsa de immortalitate animorum tacita
judicat, Cicero.
says the Roman Orator. Wherefore we justly believe, that the Spirits of
Righteous Men are in some active, and joyful Repose; sensible of their present
bliss, and expecting fuller degrees of it: they know themselves to be delivered
from the troubles, and sorrows of mortality, from the tossings of the World,
and the entanglements of Sin; they enjoy God with more familiarity, than they
could here in the most exalted raptures of Devotion; and looking beyond the
circle of time, they behold a brighter Eternity moving toward them, and a
triumph of Glory preparing for them: and then how can we doubt of their having
a present Reward? how can we attend upon them, and not congratulate their Joy?
What Communication they have with us, God has been pleased to hide from us,
and probably to prevent our Addresses to them: but we may presume their Love
toward us is equally enlarged with the rest of their Graces; and possibly they
(...). Orig. de Orat.. 34. (...). Id. Ex. ad Mart. p. 192. (...). Basil. Hom.
20. (...). Greg. Nyss. Orat. in XL Mart. Speramus quod liberis suis apud
Christum praeful a^^stat. Ambros. de obit. Theodos. Pro te Dominum rogat,
mihique veniam impetrat peccatorum. Hieron. Ep. 25.
intercede for us, though not in a sacerdotal way, (as Christ alone can do)
yet in the way of Charity, as Members of the same Body with us. We acknowledge
to God in our Public Prayers, that the spirits of just men made perfect do
live with him, after they are delivered from their earthly prisons; and the
souls of them that sleep in the Lord Jesus, are received into the heavenly
habitations, and enjoy perpetual felicity: and if Lazarus was carried to
Abraham 's bosom; Luke xvi. 22.
if the penitent Thief went from the Cross with our Savior into Paradise; Luke
xxiii. 43. Act. vii. 59.
if S. Stephen had reason to pray, Phil. i. 23.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit; if the Apostle was willing to depart, that he
might immediately be with Christ; and if the souls of the Martyrs are under the
heavenly Altar, Rev. vi. 9, 10, 11.
clothed in white robes, and Communicating with God; then we may be confident
of the delightful rest of Confecto itinere virtutis, ac fidei, ad complexum and
osculum Domini venerunt Cyprian. Ep. 37. edit. Oxon. (...). Clem. Alex. 1. 4.
(...). Basil. Ep. 188. Fruitur nunc Theodosius luce perpetua, tranquillitate
diuturna, and munerationis divinae fructibus gratulatur. Ambros. de obit.
Theod. Testor Jesum, quem Blaesilla nunc sequitur; testor sanctos angelos,
quorum consortio fruitur. Hieron. Ep. 25.
Saints departed, and follow them with acclamations to the seat of blessedness.

X. This is the proper Consolation for us, upon parting with that excellent
Man, in whose place I now stand; who was so well known, and respected in this
Audience, that it would be vanity in me to offer at his Character, unless I
could praise him in his own Eloquence: and yet before we leave him in the House
of Silence, it may justly be expected that I should do some right to his
Memory, and enforce some instructive Lessons from his great Example. In doing
so, I shall not pretend to draw the Lines of his History, nor mention any
common, and undistinguishing seize, nor use any Art in setting him forth;
but with a simplicity fit for this place, and suitable to his unaffected life,
I shall briefly consider him in these two Heads; his Private Virtues, and his
Services for the Church. He had many Virtues of no ordinary growth: and we may
call them to mind, by reviewing his much applauded Work of the Christian Life:
which he intended to Continue, and Perfect, if Providence had not put a stop to
his useful design, first by a long Craziness, and then by taking him suddenly
from us. Next to his Piety toward God, his Social Virtues (as his own
distinction is) were those for which we shall be most sensible of our loss in
him; for his Kindness, and Humanity, and amicable Disposition, and Affability,
and pleasantness of Temper, and Condescension, and Sincerity, and readiness to
do all good Offices for any that had recourse to him. In helping others, and
laying out for their advantage the Authority which he had gained; in giving
Counsel, and Directions; and in Cementing Amity and Peace, he exhausted very
much of his time; and delighted as much in doing any friendly turn, as if the
profit had redounded to himself. In Works of Mercy he took a peculiar Pleasure;
and did as zealously promote them, as if he had relieved himself by supporting
the Poor: he was a Common Father to the persecuted and afflicted; and the
Brethren, 3 John v. 6.
and Strangers, whose Bowels he has refreshed, will bear witness of his
Charity before the Church. Friendship is one of the noblest Ornaments of Human
Nature; and if God himself is Love, 1 John iv. 16.
it is the Portraiture of God drawn upon the Soul: and for this Virtue he was
exceedingly valued by those that were intimate with him; he was not infected
with any of those Vices which blast it, with Pride, or Moroseness, or Envy, or
Selfishness; his inclinations were to refresh and cherish all Men, and only to
neglect himself: his Doors, and his Heart were open to all; and he has left
behind him the indelible commendation of a true, and steadfast, and faithful
Friend.

XI. Again, let us look upon him in his Public Character; Dan. xii 3.
and if they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and
they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever, and ever; we may
be humbly confident of his having a proportionable reward. His Education
happened to be in the times of Confusion, and yet without any detriment to him:
for he imbibed the Principles of that renowned University in which he was bred,
and not of the Men who then governed it; the same good Spirit, that called him
thither from another Employment, directing him what to do: and when the Church
was covered in ruins, he discerned her Beauty; and received Holy Orders from
one of those ejected Confessors, who during the devastation did secretly
preserve the Apostolical Discipline. His appearance in the World was early; and
as God had furnished him with extraordinary Talents, and had enabled him to
improve them well, and to possess Abilities equal to his high Profession; the
same Divine Goodness chose a fitting Theater for them to be manifested upon.
His Eloquent, and Solid, and Fervent Preaching commanded the applauses of Men;
and his constancy in it procured their love: and though his frequency in this
Work, and his diligence in his Pastoral Charge, and his industry in resolving
Cases of Conscience, and his restless application to the labors of his
Calling, wasted him by degrees; yet he could not be satisfied without doing his
duty: and that which sent him the sooner to God, will enlarge his recompense
from him. He ran his Course in times of great trial, and discrimination; and in
all of them he approved his inflexible, and uncorrupted integrity; and adhered
steadfastly to the Principles of our Church: and they will carry a Man safely
through all difficulties, and all Revolutions; and though it should be his Lot
to be reviled, and oppressed by Men, yet he cannot be dejected in Conscience,
nor forsaken by God. He owned it for his Rule, in all vicissitudes to keep a
Clean and quiet Conscience; as knowing that this would be a Sanctuary, when all
earthy Comforts should fail: and he remembered the wise Maxim, He that
observes the wind shall not sow; and he that regards the clouds, shall not
reap: Eccl. xi. 4.
and therefore without minding the weather, or taking directions from the Sky,
he went on directly in his Calling; and made it his business to sow to the
spirit, that he might of the spirit reap life everlasting. Gal. vi. 8.
When Popery invaded our Established Religion, he was one of those worthy
Champions that defended it with an upright Zeal: they held up their Shields
together, and united their Counsels, and endeavors as one Man: they saw their
Diocesan (whom they mightily honored) singled out for the first Sacrifice,
because he would not surrender them; they saw the Roman Eagle advancing every
day, and fresh attempts made to demolish our Church; and then it was that by
Preaching, and Praying, and Writing they gained an universal esteem, and
supported our Holy Religion. In this Cause our Friend whom we are waiting upon
did Cordially concur with his Brethren; and was prepared to suffer as much as
any of them. He understood our Constitution entirely, and that made him the
more hearty in asserting it upon all occasions; and (I trust) there is no man
here but honors his memory the more for being so: for though our enemies have
branded us for this constancy, and have been sowing Divisions, and putting
ignominious marks of distinction between us; we cannot be so blind, as not to
see the artifice is contrived, in order to the more easy subversion of all of
us: and if a resolute adherence to well chosen Principles; if to defend that
Liturgy, which we have solemnly testified our approbation of in the presence of
God; if to be firm to our subscriptions, and to our Vows of Ordination; if to
contend for the Faith once delivered unto the Saints, Jude 3.
and for that Government by which we were consecrated to the Service of the
Church, and which we believe to have been transmitted down to us from the
Apostles; if this be a reproach, I fear, it will soon be counted a reproach to
be a Christian. Our deceased Brother did therefore upon all emergencies
maintain an unspotted fidelity to the Church; and acted consonantly to what he
had professed concerning it, Epist. Ded. to the Bishop of London.
in these words: Whatsoever her fate may be, I am chained to her Fortunes by my
Reason, and Conscience; and shall ever esteem it more eligible to be crushed in
pieces by her Fall, which God avert, than to flourish, and triumph on her
Ruins. This resolution he kept to the last, and still with a peaceful, and
charitable Spirit; and without aiming at his own interest through that of the
Church: for when offers were made to him of higher Stations in the Church, he
declined them upon the sense of decays creeping upon him; and he rejoiced more
in the advancement of other worthy Men, than he would have done in his own. His
inherent Greatness wanted no outward accessions; and the Preferment he was
ambitious of, was to go from his Flock unto the Shepherd and Bishop of our
Souls. 1 Pet. ii. 25.


XII. Under his Protection, and Custody let us now leave him: and let us pray
to God, to raise up new Instruments of his Glory; and to send forth more
laborers into his harvest, Mat. ix 38.
for those whom he has called home to receive their wages. In him whom we now
attend we have lost one, whom many of us respected as an Instructor, an Oracle,
a Father to us: but we have still an Eternal, and Unchangeable God; and he can
compensate all our losses; he can create Workmen, as well as appoint their
Work; and he can say to the most unqualify'd of us, as he did to Joshua; As I
was with Moses, Joh i. 5.
so I will be with thee; I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. For a
Conclusion, I shall add one word to you, in Ministering to whom this servant of
God ended his Race: he came to you in his declining years, and with the
disadvantage of succeeding one of the most Eminent persons of our Church; and
yet you honored, and loved him; and thought you still enjoyed his Great
Predecessor: and therefore if I were to speak in his name, it would be to
return thanks for your kindnesses to him: but acting by a higher Commission, I
shall rather desire you to express your regard to his memory, by obeying those
good Instructions, which he brought from our Common Master to whom he is gone;
and to remember the word of God, Heb. xiii. 7.
which he has spoken unto you; and to follow his faith, considering the end of
his Conversation.

Which happy end God in his infinite goodness grant to us all, through the
Merits, and Mediation of Christ Jesus our Lord, and Savior. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 13: penult, for minds of us, r. reminds us of. p. 14. l. 15. for ancient
r. ancient.


