IT has been observed, that nothing has been so destructive to the Peace and
Repose of Mankind, as those monstrous Differences in Matters of Religion: and
that meek, gentle, and peaceable Christian Religion has been prevaricated by
the Devil's Malice and Men's Lusts, to be the cause of most dreadful Heats and
Animosities. Amongst all eontests of that nature, none has been so long
continued, and with that Warmth Vigor and Activity, as that between Christ and
Antichrist. For Popery as it was founded in Blood, Treason, and Treachery, so
it has been propagated and maintained by a continual Series of more then
Devillist Cruelties and cunningness; It has interwoven it self with the
Pollices of all the States in Europe, and linked most of the Crowns of
Christendom to its Interest. But herein it has most eminently outstriped all
the other implacable Enemies of God, that it has usurped an absolute
Jurisdiction over men's Souls and Consciences; and thereby debauched them so
far, as to think the blackest Crimes to be Meritorious Acts, and to boggle at
no Villainy, though never so horrid, for the Advantages of the Romish Sea; nay,
what is more, think that therein they do God good Service. And though Eternal
Justice has eminently declared it self against them and their Practices by
various Methods and Dispensations; as sometimes by hanging up as it were, some
of the Notorious Malefactors in Chains, and making them public Monuments of
his Severity; yet so hardened and blinded have they been by their Sin, so misled
by a villainous Crew of Canting and lying Priests and Friars, that they have
realy believed, that the Penalty inflicted on them for their bloody Villainies,
has been their Martyrdom. We see the Devil may have Martyrs as well as God.
Among Instances of this kind, was that lamentable Object, that deserves our
great pity, who was executed lately on Tower Hill for his Hellish Treasons. He
was a Peer of this Realm, and nobly descended, very considerable as to Estate,
and allied to many great Families; no doubt, he had Gentility running in his
Veins, having derived it from his great Ancestors. But observe the damnable
perniciousness of the Romish Religion, whose bloody Principles and Tenets he
having once sucked in, thought himself in Conscience obliged to violate all
Laws, both Sacred and Humane, to lay aside all Loyalty and Gratitude toward
his Prince; of whose Royal Bounty and Favors he had in a special manner so
largely and so frequently tasted, and under whose gracious Government he and
his Fraternity lived so securely and peaceably, and enjoyed very quietly
without any molestation, the exercise of their Religion notwithstanding; nay,
had many severe Laws to the contrary, several Advantages above several of other
his Majesty's Protestant Subjects; and yet maliciously to conspire to
Assassinate so good a Prince, so gracious to him in particular, and to bring a
storm of Ruin and Confusion on his native Land, O monstrous and more than
Devilish Villainy!

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorem. But for all these infernal Treasons and
Conspiracies, he was at last brought to public Justice, and after a fair
Trial, was cast by the Lords his Judges, where he received the following
Sentence from the Mouth of the Lord High Steward in Westminister-Hall, December
the 7 th. 1680.

The Judgment of the Law is, and this Court does accord, you go to the place
from whence you came, from thence you must be drawn on a Hurdle to the place of
Execution; when you come there, you must be hanged up by the Neck, but not till
you are dead, for you must be cut down alive, your privy Members must be cut
off, your Bowels ripped up before your Face, and thrown into the Fire. Then your
Head must be severed from your Body, and your Body divided into four Quarters,
and those must be at the disposal of the King, and Almighty God be merciful to
your Soul.

After Sentence pronounced, the Lord High Steward told the Prisoner, that the
House of Lords in consideration of his Quality, do intend to move the King to
pardon all the rest of the Execution of his Sentence, except only the taking
off his Head: Which his Majesty was graciously pleased to grant:

And he was Executed accordingly by severing his Head from his Shoulders.

And we will do him the Honor to give him this Elegy.

Thus Stafford for his horred Treasons fell
A missed Martyr unto Rome and Hell;
And thus Eternal Vengence first does blast
The Traitors Plots, and ruins them at last,
Snaky Ambition who do always twine
Thy self 'bout great men's Thoughts, and do incline
And hurry them on violent Actions Skill,
Betrayest the Judgment, and corrupt'st the Will:
Makes them to think they will never stand high enough,
Cheat'st them with Honors that is an empty puff.
Still forcest them to soar up higher higher
Though It be through Sin, through Blood, through Sword, through Fire.
Till to the Temples Pinnacle they are flown,
Then let'st them fall, pressed with a Vengence down.
If with false Notions of Religion clad,
Thou then let'st loose thy Reins and run'st stark mad.
Do toss and wrack the Minds thou do enslave,
Till brought with Shame and ruin to the Grave.
Deluded Stafford, miserable Wight,
Was a great Instance of thy cursed spite.
Cursed Popery, whose Principles does bend
Its Bigots to such Actions, such an end,
We must rejoice for Justice done t'him all,
And yet lament his miserable Fall.
And Curse the Infernal Maxims of proud Rome,
Who brought so great a Man to such a Doom.
EPITAPH.
Poor wretched Viscount Stafford here lies dead,
Here lies his Body, but without a Head.
Still that was Plotting against Church and State.
For which the Laws adjudg'd it such a Fate.
All that are not Printed for the above said Persons, are Counterfits.

London, Pirnted for N. Ponder at the Sign of the Peacock over against the
Stocks-Market. and S. Lee at the Feathers in Lumbard-Street, near the
Post Office.


