ANTIQUITIES OF THE CITY OF EXETER.

Collected by Richard Izacke, Esquire; Chamberlain thereof.

-- Pro captu Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli.

Mart. Books receive their Doom according to the Readers Capacity.

Imprimatur,

October 20. 1676. G. JANE.

LONDON, Printed by E. Tyler and R. Holt, for Richard Marriott; sold by George
Marriott, at his Shop at the Sign of the Temple by the Inner Temple Gate,
Fleet Street. 1677.

To the Right Worshipful the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the Ancient
and Honorable City of Exeter.
Gentlemen,
It Is fit my obedience should last as long as your Commands, in a willing
readiness whereunto about eight years since I presented you this Book enlarged
with some private Acts and other Secrets of your Council, properly there
inserted for your daily use, and as necessarily here omitted, for hat they
immediately concern your selves, and not others, and therefore unfit to be
communicated.

-- Nonumque prematur in Annum. Hor.
Eight years digest what you have rudely hinted,
And in the ninth year let the same be Printed.
As I never had opportunity of presenting you any thing properly mine, so
neither durst I be guilty of so much Injustice as to deny you that so truly
your own, as is this fruit of my slender endeavors, which by your equal
command was at first undertaken, and now made more public to the World,
whatever the same be, it is really yours; but more principally the publick's
whose, both you and I, and all that we can do, are; If it may in any sort prove
serviceable to you, and you thereby become more useful to the public, I have
my desired end.

And well considering the indefatigable labors of my primitive Predecessor in
this place and Office, the learned Mr. John Hooker (whose works bespeak him
famous within these our Gates) can deem it no less than a duty Incumbent on my
self as one of his Successors to tread in his Steps, by imitating him in his
virtues, even by doing something in my Generation, that may show my gratitude
to this truly Ancient and renowned City of Exeter for many plentiful favors
conferred on me.

In a word, I Have here methodically set down the chiefest of your Officers, from
the first of them to the last, most of your ancient Customs intermixed with such
Historical Observations peculiar hereunto, as hastily I have collected, all
which with my self I cast at your Feet.

Inveniunt veluti Patronos saepe Libelli,
Vobis sic librum dedico, meque simul.
As little Books their worthy Patrons often do find,
So with my Book my self to you I here do bind.
I cannot exempt my self from the common frailty of nature, possibility of
erring (humanum est errare, belluinum perseverare) on the least conviction, I Will
at once confess my oversight, and amend it, if not prevented by the charity of
the discoverer, for which he shall not only reap my thanks, but withal the
benefit of that old Aphorism. Blessed be the amending hand; nam facile est
recolere, laboriosum condere.

For these twenty Years last past and upwards with all faithfulness I have
endeavored to serve you in my Office, the chiefest point whereof consists in
preserving the right of Orphans, whose cause I have espoused, and (under your
protection) through some difficulties maintained, wherein I have met with some
Beasts here, (as St. Paul did at Ephesus) in the shape of Men, unreasonable,
unnatural, and incredulous, for the Apostle tells us, that they who provide not
for their own are worse then Infidels, of some such kind of Men this place has
not been free, who have seemingly denied the Faith by preferring Strangers to
their own Lineage, Children and Posterity in the disposal of their Estate,
contrary both to the Law of God and Man, for by the Custom of this City (which
is also used in London, and both confirmed by sundry Acts of Parliament) no
Freeman (his Debts and Funeral being first discharged) can deprive his Children
of one full third part of his personal estate, by means of which Law I have
recovered the right of some Orphans, herein, and in so doing, my Conscience
(more then a thousand witnesses) informs me, that I have been still careful in
the discharge of my Trust, being constantly encouraged so to do through your
exemplary rule of distributive Justice.

Sirs, you have the sole propriety of and in these my labor's and as absolute
a power to dispose thereof as of the Author, who subscribes himself my Masters

Your most humble Servant and Chamberlain Richard Izacke.
September 30. 1676.
map of Exeter A MAPP OF the City of EXETER
Figures of Reference
1 East gate 2 St. Laurence 3 The Castle 4 Corry lane 5 St. Lane Cross 6 St.
Stephen 7 Bedford house 8 St. Peter 9 Bishops Palace 10 Palace gate 11 Trimly
12 Bear gate 13 St. Marys 14 Church yard 15 St. Petroks 16 High street 17
Guildhall 18 Alhallows 19 Gold smith street 20 St Paul 21 Paul Street 22 St
Pancras 23 Waterbery street 24 North gate 25 North gate street 26 St. Karians
27 Cook row 28 Bell hill 29 South gate street 30 South gate 31 Genny Street 32
St. Gregory's 33 Milk lane 34 the Shambles 35 St. Olaues 36 St. Mary arche 37
Arches lane 38 St. Nicholas 39 St. John 40 Friar hay 41 Little Britain 42
Alhallows 43 St. Marys steps 44 West gate 45 Smithen street 46 Idle lane 47
Prestern street 48 Rack Lane




Prooemium.
Deo, Patriae, Tibi.
THis City is pleasantly seated upon a Hill among Hills, saving toward the
Sea, where it is pendant in such sort, as that the Streets (be they never so
foul) yet with one shower of Rain are again cleansed; Nature her self seeming
to be the chief Scavenger thereof, very beautiful is the same in building, and
for considerable matters matchable to most Cities in England.

Quinque habet insignes Civitas Exonia portas
Praeter sex alias famaeque, notaeque minoris. Dr. Vilvai^*

Exeter five Gates has of chief Note and Name,
Besides six others of less Mark and Fame.
It has five Gates and many Turrets, whose compass measures a mile and half,
having Suburbs extending a far distance in each quarter, well watered it is
likewise, being full of Springs, and has certain Conduits which are nourished
with Waters deducted from several Fountains near the said City, and conveyed
through Pipes of Lead under the ground into the same, having likewise four
special streets, which all meet in the midst of the City corruptly called
Carfoix, but more properly Quater voy's, which divides the whole City into
four Quarters, In every of which there be sundry Streets and By-lanes
particularly herein inserted.

Toward the East Quarter of the said City is a stately Cathedral Church,
dedicated to the honor of St. Peter, within which Circuit (before the
Bishopric was translated from Crediton hither) were Three Religious Houses,
one of them was an house for Monks, supposed to be Founded by King Etheldred;
Another was for Women, commonly called Moniales or Nuns, which is now the
Calender-hay, and the Dean's house (both which were by Bishop Leofrick added
and united to the said Cathedral Church;). The Third was also an house for
Monks of the Order of St. Bennet, and originally Founded by King Athelstan,
Anno Domini 932. And it is that part of the said Church formerly called our
Lady's Chapel, being then dedicated to the Blessed Virgin Mary; And of late,
sc. 9 Car. 2. 1657. (through the Munificence of Robert Vilvain Doctor in
Physic, and a Native of this City) converted into a Library; All which said
Monks were from hence sent up, and settled at Westminster, from whom ('it is
thought) that place took its denomination.

In this Church are two very fair Towers standing as it were in the midst,
dividing the higher part from the lower; In that of the North was lately a Cage
of four small broken Bells out of use, as also a Clock Bell called Peter's
Bell, freely bestowed upon the said Church by Peter Courteney, 3 R. 3. 1485.
sometimes Bishop thereof, the same weighing twelve thousand and five hundred
pounds weight, with a very fair Clock and Dial, discovering the course of the
Sun and Moon, who at his own proper costs and charges did likewise build the
said Tower.

In the South Side stands the other Tower, wherein are Ten Bells, all or the
most part of them, tending to daily use and service; These with all the Church
goods, in the sixth year of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, by Commission
were Escheated, and Commandment then given to the Treasurer of the said Church,
for answering the same at all demands.

In the Quire of the said Church, is remarkable the Episcopal Chair or Seat
there erected by Bishop Booth, 10 Ed. 4. 147^.
a very sumptuous, high and admirable work; This Church's building was not opus
unius saeculi, but from time to time being enlarged, and at length thoroughly
perfected by the Contributive endeavors of sundry worthy successive Bishops
and Benefactors, and was from its first foundation in the Reign of King
Athelstan, Anno Domini 932. to the perfect finishing thereof, which was so done
by Bishop Grandison 43 Ed. 3. Anno Domini 1369. Four hundred thirty and seven
years, yet is the same so uniformly compacted, as if the whole had been built
by one man, and done in an instant of time.

In the highest port of the Hill whereon this City stands, being the North
East part thereof, is the Castle, vulgarly called Mons rugosus, or Rugemont, of
the red Earth (say some) whereon it is built; which History does report to be so
done by Julius Caesar, ^rafton fol. y^
in the Fiftyeth year before Christ's Incarnation, Famous for its Antiquity and
Situation, commanding the whole City and Territory round about, and has a very
pleasant prospect to the South Sea, The Seat sometimes of the West Saxon Kings,
then of the Earls of Cornwall; It now alone shows the Fragments of the Ancient
Buildings ruinated, whereon time (which is edax rerum) has too much
Tyrannized, within the Site whereof, is a Chapel built by the Lady Elizabeth
de Fortibus, then Countess of Devon, whereunto she gave certain Lands, called
the Prebend of Hayes, and the Prebend of Cutton, for certain weekly services
there to be duly performed. Therein is also an house for the Judges of the
Circuit to keep the Assizes, and the Justices of the County to keep their
general Quarter Sessions of the Peace, and the Shriff his Shire Court.

At the lower end of this City without the Walls thereof, Ptolemy
fleeteth a long stately River formerly called Isaca or Isca, now Exe, which
has his Head or Spring in a certain Desert or Moor, commonly called Exmoor,
distant hence about four and twenty miles, and flows into the main Sea.

Another learned Historian writing hereof says, Camden
That the River Isca (so termed of the Britains) was mentioned by Ptolemy: The
English Saxons call it Exe, it comes close to the said City, and leaves
thereunto its name, whereupon Alexander Neckham (sometime Prior of St. Nicholas
within this City) thus writes in his Poem of divine sapience.

Exoniae fama celeberrimus Iscia nomen Praebuit --
To Exeter, Exe a River of Fame
(First Iscia called) imposed the Name
This River affords variety and excellent good Fresh water fish, chiefly, and
that plentifully too, Salmons, a dainty and wholesome Fish, and a double riddle
in Nature; First, for its invisible feeding, no man alive having ever found any
meat in the maw thereof; Secondly, for its strange leaping (or rather flying)
insomuch, that some will have them termed Salmons a saliendo, being both Bow
and Arrow, it will shoot it self out of the water an incredible height and
length; I might well add the admirable growth thereof (if true what is
confidently affirmed) that it increases from a spawn to a full grown Fish
within the space of a year; And lastly, whereas in other places suitably with
the Buck, they are seasonable only in Summer, here with Buck and Do they are
in season all the year long.

Salmo non aestate no^us, nec frigore desit.
Salmon in Summer is not rare,
In Winter we of them do share.
This ensuing Copy of Verses would persuade us, that the Founder of this City
is hardly to be discovered, caput enim inter nubila condit.

The ground of my first Ancesiry
Is worn out through Antiquity,
Caerisk the Britains did me fame,
And Monkton Saxons did me Name,
Till of the River running by
Exeter Iclepid became I;
Seven times besieged mightily
Mine Enemies in slight put I.
This City is the only Emporium, or principal ornament of the West, which has
been named diversely by diverse Nations, The Britains called it Caerisk, Caer
with them signifying a City, as Caersalem, that is, a City of Peace; It has
also the appellation of Caer-ruth, of the red soil (as it is conceived) whereon
it stands, and likewise it was termed Pencaer, that is a Head, or principal
City: The English Saxons called it Exancester, Cester being a common addition
imposed by the Romans upon places that had Castles, In imitation of whom the
Saxons continued that name, until for many Monasteries here erected, and
multitude of Monks, it won the name of Monkton: And finally it obtained the
name of Exeter, from the aforesaid River of Exe: For from whence springs the
Fame
Thence commonly the Name.
(It being a thing very familiar with the Saxons to derive Names to places from
Rivers adjacent) who dedicated her name thereunto, Bale.
whereof an Ancient Author speaks thus -- Est Exonia urbs Devoniae Comitatus
loco praecelso ad occidentom posita, abluiturque flumine Exi, a quo nomen
habet. Another says, Hoveden
Quod clarissima urbium est Excestria, quae ab amni Excestro, qui candem
praeterfluit, est sic nuncupata: As of an Abbey in France at this day, a Town
has the name of Abvile, quasi Abbatis villa, and many other such like.

Iscia, Peucaira, urbs Monachorum, Excestria dudum
Nota his nominibus quatuor usque fuit. Dr. Vilvain.

Iscia, Peucair, Moncton, Excester of old,
Were four Names well known given, which ever hold.
1. That this City has been often infested with Hostility, none but such as
are unacquainted with History, can be ignorant; First, I find it begirt with
the Forces of Vespatian, General unto Claudius the Roman Emperor, whereof an
old Author thus writes -- Vespatianus cum Exercitu Romano Civitatem nunc
vocatam Exeter octo diebus obsedit, Stowe.
sed minime praevaluit, J^ffery Monmouth.
Arvirago Rege Civibus auxilium tunc praestante. Anno Domini 49.

2. The Danes arriving out of Norway, in the mouth of the River Exe, bent their
fury against this City (whose Trenches toward the North yet remain visible as
so many sculptures of their siege) but the same was stootly defended, and the
Enemy repulsed with much shame and infamy, which was in the Reign of Alphred
King of the West Saxons, Anno Domini 875. whereof an Historian says thus --
Exercitus Danorum a Wartham nocte quadam foedere dirupto ad Exancester se
diverterint, quod Britannic^ dieitur Caerisk, Heveden.
and audito Regis adventu ad puppes fugerunt.

3. Histories report, that a Battle was fought at Pinhos (a place about two
miles distant from this City) against the Danes, Anno Domini 1001. who besieged
this City with great fury, and were as valiantly withstood, at length (by the
power and help of the County of Devon) the Citizens sallied out, and encountered
the Enemy in their Camp, where the fight was cruel, and the slaughter great,
and being discomfited, they departed with Ignominy; The Danes allege two
principal causes that provoked them to attempt the Conquest of this Kingdom,
whereof (one for the rarity) I may not omit.

Lethbrook alias Lethbreech, Verstegan fol. 159
a Nobleman of Royal Blood amongst the Danes, flying his Hawk nigh the
Seashore, together with her game fell into the Sea, which to save he took a
Boat, and with the violence of the Tempest suddenly arising, was driven into
England, at a place called Roddam in Norfolk, from whence he was brought unto
the King, unto whom he declared his birth and adventure, and for his skill in
Hawking (wherein he excelled) was by the King kindly entertained, whereat Beric
(the King's Falconer) being much troubled with envy, and observing time to
single out Lethbrook, in fine, murdered him in a Wood, whose body was
discovered by a Spaniel Dog, and Beric of the Fact suspected, and afterward
convicted thereof, was adjudged to be put into Lethbrook's Boat, and so
committed to the mercy of the Sea, but the Fates thus decreed, That Beric (a
strange accident) was driven on the coast of Denmark, near the place where
Lethbrook put forth, and the Boat being known, Beric was examined what became
of Lethbrook, who treacherously accused Edmond King of the East Angles of the
Fact, whereof the Danish King (glad of the occasion) raised an Army, and made
Captains thereof Hunguar and Hubba the two Sons of Lethbrook, whom (the rather
to encourage to revenge) their Sisters wrought with their Needles in an Ensign
the proportion of a Raven, which from thenceforth they did bear as no small
sign of their good luck, yet carried they that ominous Banner not long
unconquered, the same being in a short space (with many of their lives) lost.

This Hubba in the days of Alphred the Saxon Monarch landed at Appledore, a
maritime Town in the North-part of Devon, nigh Bideford and Barnstable, with
three and thirty sail of Ships, as he came out of South Wales, where he had
wasted all in his way with Fire and Sword, and there lying siege to the Castle
of Kenweth, they were so valiantly withstood, Stowe fol. 78.
as that the Danes lost twelve hundred men, their said Banner taken, and their
Captain Hubba slain, whom they buried on the shore near his ships, and after
the manner of Northern Nations piled on him a heap of copped stones, as a
Trophy of his memorial, whereof the place took name Hubbaston, so much spoken
of by Antiquaries, and albeit the stones were long since swept away by the Seas
encroaching, yet the name still remains on the strand near Appledore aforesaid,
and to this day commonly known by the name of Whibleston.

4. After the great massacre of the Danes by the command of King Etheldred in
this Island, Swayn King of Denmark, landed here with a great Army, Anno Domini
1030. and beleagred this City, which was manfully withstood for two months
space, but at length (through the treachery of one Hugh a Norman here entrusted
as Governor by Queen Emma) Swayn entered, Baker's Chron. fol. 13.
and put all to Fire and sword, and levelled the whole City to the ground,
whereof grievously complains an Author, Hoveden.
thus -- Swayn Rex Danorum per injuriam and proditionem Normanici Comitis (quem
Emma Domina praefecerat) Civitatem Exoniensem infregit, spoliavit and murum ab
orientali usque ad occidentalem portam desiruxit, and cum ingenti praeda naves
repetiit; and had scarcely recovered her self; When

William the Conqueror laid close siege thereunto, against whose furious
attempts the Citizens made no less valiant opposition, until such time as part
of their Wall fell down, whereupon they were constrained to surrender, The King
then in token and Commemoration of this Victory, altered the Gates of the
Castle, And likewise took their several and respective Oaths to become his
Liege-Subjects for the future, Anno Domini 1068.

6. In the Reign of King Stephen (upon the revolt of Baldwyn Rivers, then Earl
of Devon, to the part of Mawd the Empress) they fortified this City and Castle
against him, and were enforced after a long and tedious siege, through Famine
to yield, Anno Domini 1140, since which time it has been thrice besieged, and
with gallant resolution defended;

7. First, By Hugh Courteney Earl of Devon on the behalf of King Edward the
Fourth, who by mediation was removed, 9 Ed. 4. Annoque Domini 1469.

8. Next Perkin Warbeck (that imaginary and counterfeit Prince) laid close
siege hereunto, 'till Edward Courteney Earl of Devon (who in the service was
wounded) together with the Lord William his Son and others, raised the same,
and with much magnanimity repulsed the Rebels, 12 H. 7. 1497.

9. Lastly, From the Tenth day of June (being the Monday in Whitson-week) to
the Sixth day of August then next following, by the Insurrection of the Commons
of Cornwall and Devon, this City was strictly besieged for five and thirty days
space without any intermission; And albeit the Citizens were miserable pinched
with Famine, and for the last twelve days lived on Horse-bread, and
Horseflesh, yet still retained their Loyalty to their Sovereign Lord the King,
And at last through much difficulty, were relieved by the courage and valor of
George Lord Russel, whom the King sent down as General of an Army for their
deliverance by whom the Enemy was vanquished, and on the Sixth day of August,
in the second year of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, Annoque Domini 1549.
the Gates of the City were again opened, In remembrance whereof an Anniversary
with much joy and solemnity is here kept, and thankfully observed on every
sixth day of August; Of which good service thus worthily performed by the
Citizens hereof, a Learned Author of late thus speaks -- Whosoever example God
grant all Cities may follow, Boswell in his Armory of Honor for. 110.
and withal learn to be noble by Exeter.

A Modern Author and Native of this City, Dr. Vilvain.
of late wrote this Distich, and translated the same.

Vrbs sit^ Devoniae in Medie cui Excestri^ nomen,
Cincta fuit decies obsidione gravi.
In midst of Devon Exeter City seated,
Has with Ten Sieges grievously been sireitned.
It Is well known what sufferings Persons of the best Quality within this City,
in the time of the late Rebellion did undergo by manifesting their Loyalty to
their Sovereign Lord and King, even by Fines, Imprisonments, by Sea and by
Land, Compositions, Sequestrations, Decimations, and what not? A Sequestrator
was then found to be like the great Sultan's horse, that where he treads, the
grass grows no more; In a word, they ruined the Father, beggered the Son, and
strangled the hopes of all Posterity in many flourishing Families, as too sad
experience has informed too many now alive. My Litany or supplication is
steadfast.

Dii terris talem nostris avertite pestem.
Reform the wicked World, most gracious God,
Heal our Backslidings, and remove thy Rod.
And one Gentleman (amongst sundry others for their Loyalty to the King here
murdered) being privileged to be decently Interred in St. Sydwell's Church,
without the Eastgate of the said City, his Corpse was thither attended by some
thousand Persons of a depressed party, of which number I then thought my self
happy to be one, In whose memory this ensuing Epitaph was Inscribed on his
Tombstone, viz.

Hic jacet Hugo Grove de Enford in Comitatu Wiltoniae Armiger, in restituendo
Ecclesiam, in asserendo Regem, in propugnando legem, ac libertatem Anglicanam
captue and decollatus decimo sexto Maii, 1655. Whose Speech on the Scaffold at
the time of his Execution here follows.

Good People,

I Never was guilty of much Rhetoric, nor ever loved long Speeches in all my
Life, and therefore you cannot expect either of them from me now at my death,
all that I shall desire of you (besides your hearty prayers for my Soul) is
that you will bear me witness that I dye a true Son of the Church of England,
as it was established by King Edward the Sixth, Queen Elizabeth, King James,
and King Charles (of ever blessed Memory) that I die a loyal Subject to King
Charles the Second my undoubted Sovereign, and a Lover of the good old Laws of
the Land, the just privileges of Parliament, and the right liberties of the
people, for the re-establishing of all which I undertook this engagement, and
for which I am now ready to lay down my life, God forgive the Judges and
Council, perverting the Laws, God forgive the bloody-minded Jury, and those
that procured them, God forgive Captain Crook for denying his Articles so
unworthily, God forgive Mr. Dove High Sheriff of Will. and all others f^^
^wearting so maliciously against me, God forg^^^ll mine enemies, I heartily
forgive them, God bless the King, and all that love him, and turn the hearts of
all that hate him, and God bless you all, and be merciful to you, and my Soul.

The last Speech of John Penruddock Esquire, on the same Scaffold, and on the
same day, being Wednesday, 16. Maii 1665. likewise beheaded.

Wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of Death? I thank
God, who has given me the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Gentlemen,

IT has ever been the Custom of all persons whatsoever, when they come to die
to declare themselves in order to the satisfaction of the World, whether they
be guilty of the facts of which they stand charged, the crime for which I am
now to die is High Treason (as it is said) I cannot deny but that I was at
Southmolton in this County, but whether my being there, or my Actions amount to
so high a crime as High Treason, I leave to the Law and World to judge; If I
were conscious of any base end in this my undertaking, I would not be so
injurious to my own Soul, or disingenuous to you, as not to make a public
acknowledgement thereof, I suppose that diverse persons as they are biased by
their several interests and Relations, will give their opinion to the World
concerning us; It Is impossible therefore to express my self in those
particulars, as not to expose both my Judgment and Reputation to others on a
breach of Charity concerning me or my Actions, I thought sit to decline all
discourse which may give them a capacity either to injure my self or cause. My
Trial was Public, Honorable, and Eminent, my several Examinations (I believe)
will be produced when I am in my Grave, I will refer you therefore to my first
Trial, which I am sure some of you heard, and to the latter, which many of you
in good time may see; Had Captain Crook done himself and us, that right that a
Gentleman and Soldier ought to have done, I had now, enjoyed my own right, and
had not been here this day, I forgive the Man with all my heart, truly, he did
us an injury by enforcing those Articles upon us, which his own Conscience
tells him he had no intention to perform; but truly Gentlemen, his protesting
against those Articles which he himself with so many protestations and
importunities put upon us, has drawn so much dishonor and blood upon his
head, that I fear some heavy Judgment will pursue him, although he has been
false to us, I pray God, I do not prove a true Prophet to him, I am very glad
that some of our party have enjoyed the benefit of his Articles, though I am
thereof deprived, albeit I drew them with my own hand, thus much I am obliged
to say for the honor of the Soldiery, who have been so far from the breaking
of any Articles given to others, that they have rather bettered them then
otherwise. It Is now my misfortune to be made a Precedent and an example
together, but I will not do the Protector so much injury, as to load him with
this dishonor, seeing that I have been informed that he would have made good
our Conditions, if Crook that gave them, had not abjured them; This is not a
time for me to enlarge on any Subject, seeing I am now become the subject of
death my self, but as I said that the Articles were drawn by my hand, I thought
my self obliged to a particular Justification of them, I could tell you of some
Soldiers that are turned out of his Troop for defending of those Conditions of
ours, but let that pass, and for ever hence-forward instead of Life, Liberty,
and Estates, which we lost by not having the benefit of the Articles, let
hanging, drawing, and quartering, be the denomination of Captain Crook's
Articles; Nevertheless, I thank the Lord Protector, for that he has indulged
me so far as to have my Head severed from my Body, I should now give an account
of my Faith, but truly Gentlemen, this poor Nation is rent into so many several
opinions, as that it is impossible to give you my own, without displeasing some
of you; however, if any be so critical as to enquire of what Faith I die, it is
the same belief of the Apostles, and of Athanasius Creed, I have subscribed,
and do own the Nine and Thirty Articles of the Church of England, if this will
not satisfy, I refer my self to this Reverend Doctor Short, to whom I have
unbosomed my self as to the particulars of my Religion. And now having given
you an Account concerning my self, I hold my self obliged in duty to some of my
Friends to take off some suspicion that lies upon them, I mean as to some
Persons of Honor, with whom upon my examination I was charged to have a
correspondency withal concerning this business, viz. The Lord Marquess of
Hertford, the Marquess of Winchester, and the Earl of Pembrook, I did then
acquit them, and do now second it with this protestation, that I never had any
correspondency with any of them in relation to this particular business, or
indeed to any that concerned the Protector or his Government; As for the
Marquess of Winchester, I saw him some twelve years since, and not later, and
if I should see him here present, I believe, I should not know him; As for the
Earl of Pembrook, he was not a Man likely to whom I should discover my
thoughts, because I know not how he stands affected. I was likewise examined
concerning my Brother Freke, my Cousin Hastings, and Mr. Dorrington, they are
Men of very great Estates which may make them liable to this Inquisition, and
endeavored to be brought into my condition, but I do here so far acquit them,
as to give the World this protestation, That I am confident they are as
innocent as the youngest Child here, I have no more to say to you now, but that
I am in Charity with all Men, and (I thank God) I can forgive my greatest
persecutors, I can go on my bare knees to the greatest of mine enemics to
forgive them; And I do freely forgive all that ever had a hand in my Death. I
have offered the Protector good security for my future demeanor, as (I
suppose) he could have expected, if he had thought sit to have given me my
Life, Certainly, I should not have been so ungrateful as to have employed it
against him; I do humbly submit to God's pleasure, knowing that the Issues of
Life and Death are in his hands, my Blood is but a small sacrifice: If it had
been saved, I am so much a Gentleman, as to have given thanks to him that
preserved it, and so much a Christian as to forgive them that takes it away;
but seeing God by his Providence has called me to lay it down, I submit to
him, Death is a debt, a due debt owing by all, it is terrible to nature, but I
look on it without terror, it pleased God to make me a good Husband, and I am
not come to pay this Debt before it be due: I am not ashamed of the cause for
which I die, and I hope that none of my Friends or Allyants will be ashamed of
it, or of the Ignominy of my death, seeing it is for so good a Cause, I do not
look upon it as the pulling down of my Family, but the raising it up one story
higher, I am not so prodigal of Nature, as to throw away my Life, but have used
all, yet none but Honorable and honest means to preserve it: These unhappy
times have been very fatal to my Family, Two of my Brothers slain, and my self
going to the slaughter, it is God's Will, and I must submit to that Providence;
I must render a due acknowledgement of the great civilities I have received
from this City of Exeter, and from some Persons of Quality, and for the
plentiful provision made for the Prisoners, especially I thank this noble
Sheriff, for his many great favors and courtesies toward us, and in
particular to my self, and I desire the Sheriff to present my due respects to
the Protector, and although he had no mercy for my self, yet that he would have
respect to my Family; for the business I now die, I look on it as an Individuum
vagum, I know not what they mean when they assert this to be Treason (except
they make it like the Wind in the Gospel, to blow where it lists) I know not
to what end it may come, I pray God that my own, and my Brother's blood (who is
now to die with me) may be the last, I am now stripping off my clothes to fight
a duel with death (and conceive no other duel to be lawful) but my Savior has
pulled out the sting of this mine enemy, he made himself a Sacrifice for me, I
do not account that man deserving a drop of his blood that will not spend all
for him in a good cause: As I now put off these garments of cloth, so I hope I
have put off my garments of sin, and have put on the Robes of Christ's
Righteousness here, which will bring me to the enjayment of his glorious Robes
anon. I desire to see the Axe (and he kissed it) saying, I am like to have a
sharp passage of it, but my Savior has taken away the sting of death, and I
hope he will sweeten it to me; Thus I commit my Soul to God my Creator and
Redeemer, look on me (O Lord) at my last gasping, hear my Prayer, and the
Prayers of all good people, I will close with praying for the King, I thank
thee (O God) for all thy dispensations toward me, Glory be to God on high, on
Earth peace, and good Will toward Men; Causa, non poena seu passio facit
Martyrem. To dic in the defense, and for the Testimony of any Divine Truth is
truly to be a Martyr.

Memorable has been the steadfast obedience and fidelity of this City to the
Crown, in the various succession of Ages and Times of the Britains, Romans,
Saxons, Danes, and Normans, which have been well remunerated by their several
and successive Kings in their distinct Reigns, as is manifested by the many and
large Immunities, Liberties, and Privileges from time to time conferred on
their City.

Whatever the Antiquity of this City be, I find that 'twas built before London,
even at Brute's first landing here by his Nephew Corinaeus, on whom Brute
bestowed this Western Country, Hooker. Stowe. Bale.
Anno Mundi, 2855. The same being before Christ's Incarnation eleven hundred
years and upwards, And presently thereafter Brute built London, calling it
Troynovant.

This City is thought to be one of the first Cities that the Britains
constituted in this Island, which was so done Anno Domini 162.

1. Edward Son of Alphred King of the West Saxons (who divided England into
Shires, Anno Domini 888.) held a Parliament, or great Committee within this
City.

2. Athelstan his Son having driven out of this City the Britains, and minding
to make a full Conquest both of them and this their Country, fiercely pursued
them into Cornwall, where he wholly subdued them; And having obtained such a
Victory, returns again to the City, which during his abode herein, he
re-edified, and environed the same with a Stone-wall of a mile and half in
compass, Sir Thomas Smith de Rep. Angl.
in a manner circular, saving toward the West, and beautified with
Battlements, It being formerly enclosed only with a Ditch, and fortified with a
few stakes, Hoveden^
whereof an Antiquary makes mention in these words, sc. Hanc urbem primus Rex
Athelstanus in potestatem Anglorum, effugatis Britonibus, redactam turribus
munivit, and muro ex quadratis lapidibus cinxit, ac Antiquitus vocatant
Moncton, nunc Exeter vocari voluit, ac ibi sedens non tam lacerata ejusdem
Civitatis Moenia reparabat, quin and mansum quoddam dedit ad fundandum
Monasterium pro Monachis Deo and Sancto Petro famulantibus.

3. And I find in another Charter, thus, That those of this Monastery might
(sine ulla molestia animi Militare coram Dominu Rege) and should be always Free
(ab omni Regali and seculari gravedine, tam Majori quam Minori, exceptis
perpetua oratione, pontium constructione, and sola expeditione) the meaning of
which last word has been expounded to be when the King goes to War in person,
then those of this Monastery were personally to attend him.

4. The Saxons called it Moncton from the multitude of Monasteries in this
place, Anno Domini, 450. which so continued the space of many hundred years,
even until the Reign of the aforesaid King Athelstan, who Anno Domini 932.
first called it Exeter.

5. This King Athelstan granted, Stone. fol. 85.
and freely gave to this City two Mints for Coynage in token of their
Integrity, and great trust he reposed in them, Anno Domini 930.

6. King Canute (to expiate the oppression and cruelty of his Father Swayn)
made Restitution of their Lands and Privileges lately destroyed, And likewise
bestowed on the Cathedral Church of St. Peter within the said City, the Manor
of Stoke, whence his adjunct (Canon) came.

7. King Edward the Confessor (for the greater dignity of the place) translated
hither the Bishop's See from Crediton, who with his Queen Edith installed
Leofric (Lord Chancellor of England, and one of the King's Privy Council) to
be the first Bishop of this Church.

Within the Quire adjoining to the High Altar is a Monument fairly Arched, and
under the same Arch are three seats with side pillars of Brass, erected in
memory of the said King Edward, Edith his Queen, and Leofric the first Bishop
of Exeter, the middle of them being the Seat of the said Bishop sitting in his
Pontisicalibus between the King and the Queen: And that it may further appear
what great favor and honor this Bishop received both from the King and the
Queen at his Instalment, which was on the seven and twentyeth day of May in the
sixth year of the said King's Reign, Annuque Domini 1049. I here recite the
very words mentioned in the said King's Charter, sc. I King Edward taking
Bishop Leofric by the right hand, and Edith my Queen by the lefe, do install
him the first and most famous Bishop of Exeter, with a great desire of
abundance of blessings to all such as should further and increase the same,
but with a fearful and execrable curse upon all such as should diminish or
take any thing from it.

This King was the first that miraculously healed Disease commonly called
Struma, Stone. fol. 96.
or the King's Evil, which blessing God has continued to all his Successors,
even to this very day.

Queen Edith remained his Wife for eighteen years space, her Epitaph, viz.

Antiqua fuit orta domo, pia vixit inivit
Virgo pudica thorum, sponsa pudica polum.
8. William the Conqueror in the second year of his Reign Annoque Domini 1067.
freely bestowed St. Stephen's Church within this City on this Cathedral, and
made the Bishop Patron thereof.

And in his general Survey we read thus of this City; In Civitate Exonia habet
Rex C C C. Domesd^^^
domus XV. minas reddentes Consuetudinem Hac reddit XVIII. libras per annum, de
his habet B. Vicecomes VI. Libras ad pensum and arsuram and Colliny XII. libras
ad numerum in Ministerin Edithae Regina.

In bac Civitate sunt vastaae XLVIII. domus postquam Rex venit in Angliam.

Haec Civitas Tempore Regis Edvardi non geldabili^ nisi quando Londoni^,
Eb^racum and Wintonia gelelabunt, and haec erat dimidia marca argenti ad oput
militum.

Quando Expeditio that per terram aut per mare, serviebat haec Civitas quantum
quinque Hidae terrae.



10. (After King Stephen's Usurpation Ma^^d the Empress Anne Domini 1160.
Enlarged their Liberties to whose memory for some hundreds of years they kept
an Anniversary.

11. King Henry the First granted them A Charter to be Free from all Customs
in England, both by Land and Water, with many other large Privileges and
Immunities, which have been since confirmed and enlarged by sundry successive
Kings and Princes of this Realm; namely,

King Henry the Second. King Richard the First. King John. Richard King of the
Romans. King Henry the Third. Edmond Earl of Cornwall. King Edward the First.
King Edward the Second. King Edward the Third. King Richard the Second. King
Henry the Fourth. King Henry the Fifth. King Henry the Sixth. King Edward the
Fourth. King Henry the Seventh. King Henry the Eighth. King Edward the Sixth.
Queen Elizabeth, and King Charles the First.
12. King Edward the First (who with his Queen in this City kept their
Christmas) by his Letters Patent bearing date the tenth day of March in the
third year of His Reign granted to this City a yearly Tribute or Collection to
be made, of all manner of Wares brought hither to be sold, toward the paving
of the streets, repairing of the Walls, and better support and maintenance of
the said City, which in old English is called Bagavel, Bethugavel, and
Chippingavel.

13. King Henry the Sixth in the Thirtyeth year of his Reign came hither, and
was well entertained, lodging in the Bishop's Palace, where (during his abode)
his Justices of Oyer and Terminer kept Jail-deliver, before whom Two Men were
arraigned for Treason, found guilty, and had sentence of Death, but the Bishop,
Dean and Chapter being therewithal grieved, went to the King, and declared to
him that the said Justices sat in Commission within their Sanctuary, contrary
to the privileges thereof, and orders of Holy Church, wherefore the King to
appease them, pardoned the condemned persons.

14. King Edward the Fourth, by his Letters Patent, bearing date the one and
twentyeth day of July, in the Third year of his Reign, Anno Domini 1463.
constituted nine Aldermen herein, bestowed on the City, Magdalen Fair, All
Felons Goods, with many other Privileges, and in the ninth year of his Reign,
Anno Domini 1469. was pleased in person to visit the said City, who presented
him a purse with one hundred nobles therein, which the King kindly received,
Martin 's Chros. 349.
and at his departure gave them a Sword to be carried before the Mayor in all
public places within the said City, yet do not I find the Office of a
Sword Bearer conferred on any person, until King Henry the Seventh's time.

15. King Richard the Third, taking likewise an occasion of visiting this City,
another purse with two hundred nobles therein, was in like manner presented him
as a Free Gift by the said City, which the King kindly received, and very much
commended the good Government of this City.

16. King Henry the Seventh in the thirteenth year of his Reign (marching
hither to suppress Perkin Warbeck) whom having vanquished, he entered the City,
and lodged here certain days in the Treasurers House of the Cathedral Church,
and adjoining to the North Tower thereof, he heartily thanked the Citizens for
their faithful and valiant service done against the Rebels, promised them the
fullness of his favor, and (for an addition of honor to the said City) gave
them a Sword taken from his own side, and also a Cap of Maintenance, commanding
that for the future in all public places within the said City, the same Sword
should be born before the Mayor as formerly, as for the like purpose his noble
Predecessor King Edward the Fourth had done, and the said Cap to be worn
accordingly, whereupon 2 Sword Bearer was elected and sworn to attend that
Office.

17. King Henry the Eighth in the nine and twentyeth year of his Reign, by
Charter made this City a County of it self, and enlarged the bounds thereof,
which were afterward confirmed by Act of Parliament, wherein the Citizens had
granted them freedom from Toll and Murage, and withal to enjoy the same Customs
with London in all things, and also liberty to choose Sheriffs yearly, with
many other Immunities.

18. King Edward the Sixth gave them (in reward of their loyalty in the late
Commotion and Rebellion) the Manor of Exiland without the West-gate of the
said City, and also renewed their Charter.

19. Queen Elizabeth gave it this Motto (semper fidelis) confirmed their
Liberties, made the Mayor of the said City Escheator thereof, and in the third
year of her Reign, Anno Domini 1561. granted them a Charter for Orphans, which
in her Fifth year was confirmed by Act of Parliament.

20. King Charles the First (of ever blessed Memory) in the Third year of his
Reign, Anno Domini 1627. renewed their Charter, and in his Twentyeth year
lodging at Bodford-house within this City, in his march toward Cornwall (being
in pursuit of the Earl of Essex General of the Parliament Forces and his
Adherents, consisting of a ^ody of twenty thousand men, which the King there
defeated) Knighted their Mayor by name Sir Hughh Crocker, descended from the
Crockers of blazon or coat of arms Lynam, in the County of Devon, who for their
Coat Armory bear Argent a Cheuron engrailed Gules between three Crows proper,
one of whose Ancestors, namely Sir John Crocker Knight, whom I find to be a
sworn Servant to King Edward the Fourth in the Office of his Cupbearer, who (
in remuneratione servitii) gave him a Cup d^ Or for his Crest unto his said
Coat Armory, which to this day is still enjoyed by that Family, whereof they do
not a little triumph.

21. King Charles the Second, Anno Regni 23. coming down by Sea to view the new
Citadel at Plymouth, and taking this City in his way homeward by Land, lodged
here one night in the Dean's house, and was very bountifully entertained at the
sole charge of the City, who presented him with five hundred pounds in Gold,
which his Majesty graciously received, expressing much favor toward the said
City, and Knighted their Mayor Sir Benjamin Oliver. His Majesty's short abode
herein hindered the Conduits from emptying an Hogshead of Wine, which was
provided for that purpose, and afterward disposed of to his Majesty's service;
The King came hither on the Three and twentyeth day of July being Sunday about
eight of the Clock in the Evening, and went hence early the next morning about
three of the Clock, and rode that day to the Earl of Pembrook's house at Wilton
to Bed, and the next day returned to White-ball.

The City of London being yielded up to William the Conqueror, he granted to
the Citizens thereof a Charter (written in the Saxon Tongue) and therein
ratified and confirmed all their ancient usages, liberties and customs, which
Charter with certain new Grants were likewise confirmed to them by King Henry
the First, King Richard the Ewst, and King John, who gave them two Charters,
all which were so made unto them by the name of the Citizens of London, without
any mention made of a Mayor, at which time London, and so long before the
Conquest, was governed by two Port-Reeves (that is to say) Governors of the
City, and notwithstanding the many alterations made by the said William the
Conqucrour from the Saxons to the Normans, yet this name of Office still
continued in the said City, of London, from the said Saxons time, to the time
of King Richard the First, who in the first year of his Reign, changed the name
of Port Reeves into the name of Bailiffs by which name (for as yet the name of
a Mayor in that City was not in use) they were called until the ninth year of
King John, Anno Domini 1209. as it is affirmed in the Chronicles.

Fabian who was himself a Sheriff of London, and by that means most likely to
know the truth, affirms, that there was no Mayor of London until the tenth
year of King John, Anno Domini 1210.

But rather in the sixteenth year of that King, Grasion. fol. 59.
Anno Domini 1214. according to the date of the King's Letters Patent, wherein
he granted to the Citizens of London liberty to choose a Mayor yearly, See the
Charter.
who for the due execution of the said Office, was to take his Corporal Oath
before the King, as appears by the said Letters Patent, bearing date the
ninth day of May in the sixteenth year aforesaid.

The City of Exeter being likewise yielded up to the said William the
Conqueror, he restored it again to the Citizens thereof to be governed by
themselves, as in times past, and according to their ancient usages and
Customs, which was also by Charter confirmed unto them by King Henry the
First, the words of the said Grant being (to the Citizens of Exeter) which was
afterward ratified by King Henry the Second, King Richard the First, and then
King John by his Letters Patent bearing date the fifteenth day of June, in the
second year of his Reign confirmed the same, by the name of the Mayor and
Citizens of Exeter, whereby it appears that in the beginning of King John's
Reign there was a Mayor in Exeter, but when, and by what King this Officer was
first Instituted and Ordained, non constat; The Liberties to them granted were
for the most part the like that London had, so upon the whole it is evident that
London had no Mayor in diverse years after Exeter.

Thus much for good order and methods sake, I held fit to be here inserted, and
the rather in regard it could not elsewhere be so properly related, The
consideration of the whole cannot but add splendor to this honorable City,
which (not much unlike Jerusalem) the Hills stand almost round about; May the
same become a Jerusalem indeed, a City of Peace within it self, may Schism and
Faction (commonly the Forerunners of Rebellion) therein perish, may that Sin
be like the untimely Fruit of a Woman that never comes to see the Sun, May
Unity, Unanimity, and Uniformity be still within our Gates, and like Walls and
Bulwarks for its defense; May the two staves of Beauty and Bands, Order and
Government, and Brotherly Unity here for ever flourish; May that twisted Cord
never be untyed; Let no Alexander's Sword be ever found to cut asunder this
(much stronger then a Gordian) knot; May Justice and Judgment herein run down
as Water, and Righteousness as a mighty stream, that Injustice (like an Ocean)
may never have power to drown all with it is inundation; And the God of all this
Order be evermore with us, and bless us, And may all those everlastingly
prosper that wish well so our Sion, and pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

A perfect Catalogue of all the Bishops of this Church, the County wherein they
were born, the particular days of their Instalment or Consecration, continuance
of Government, the time of their Deceases, and places of their respective
Burials, together with their Coats of Armory, and Mottoes described.
blazon or coat of arms

THe Church of Exeter bears Gules a Sword in Pale Blade and Hilt proper, two
Keys in Saltier Or, in this Achievement joining Peter and Paul.

Bishops. Counties. Installed or Consecrated. Governed. Deceased. Buried.
blazon or coat of arms Nulla Salus Homine.
He bears Or a Cross flurt sable having in the Fess point a Miter of the First.
1. Leofricus Lord Chancellor of England, and one of the King's Privy Council.
Lorain. 27. Maii 6 Edward the Confessor. 1049. almost 24. years. 20. December.
1073. In St. Peter's Churchyard, and since by enlarging of the Church under
the South tower under a gray marble stone. blazon or coat of arms Virtus
premitur non opprinitur.
He bears Gules a Bend Argent surmounted of a Fess Or. 2. Osbertus. Normandy.
28. Martii 7 William the Conqueror. 1074. 30. years. 3. Maii 1104. In his own
Church. blazon or coat of arms In cruce Victoria.
He bears Azure a Saltier Or. 3. William Warewest. Normandy. 13. August 4 Hen.
1.1104. 20. years. 9. September 1124. In Plympton Priory in Devon, founded by
himself. blazon or coat of arms Firm en Foy
He bears Checky Or and Gules a chief Verry. 4. Robert Chichester. Devon. 9.
January 28 Hen. 1.1128. 22. years. 4. February 1150. In his own Church on the
South Side of the High Altar. blazon or coat of arms In cruce Victor^^.
He bears Azure a Saltier Or. 5. Robert Warewest. Devon. 17. Martii 15 Stephen
1150. 9 years. 20. Aprilis 1159. In Plympton Priory aforesaid by his Uncle, and
mediate Predecessor. blazon or coat of arms Nil amatum nisi cegnitum.
He bears party per pale Gules and sable six Dolphins neyant Argent. 6.
Bartholomew Iscanus. Exeter. 25. Maii 5 Hen. 2.1159. 14. years. 7. Augusti
1174. In his own Church. blazon or coat of arms Fugiunt crucemtenebrae.
He bears Argent a cross and a chief sable. 7. John the Chanter. Exeter. 6.
Octobris 30 Hen. 2.1184. 6. years. 15. Decembris 1190. In the South Side of the
Quire of his own Church opposite to the door that leads into the Bishop's
Palace. blazon or coat of arms Aut vincam, aut peribe.
He bears Or a Lion Rampant Gules a Border Azure mitred of the First. 8. Henry
Marshall. London. 27. Aprilis 2 Rich. 1.1191. 12. years. 1. Maii 1203. In the
North-side of the Quire of his own Church. blazon or coat of arms Henos est
onus.
He bears Azure three Mitres Or 2. and 1. 9. Synion d' Apulia. Apulia. 12.
Decembris 8 Johannis 1206. 18 years. 16. November. 1224. In the North-side of the
Quire of his own Church, behind the Pulpit there. blazon or coat of arms
Difficilia quae Pulchra.
He bears Gules two Bends Wavy Or. 10. William Brewer one of the King's Privy
Council. Devon. 30. Decembris 9 Hen. 3.1224. 19. years. 24. Julii 1244. In the
middle of the Quire of his own Church. blazon or coat of arms Veritas erit
Victrix.
He bears Lozengy Or and Sable. 11. Richard Blondy. Bedfordshire. 28. Martii 29
Hen. 3.1245. 12. years. 24. Martii 1257. In the North-side of the Quire of his
own Church. blazon or coat of arms Vincit patientia.
He bears Or on a Cheuron Sable three cinquefoils of the first between two keys
erect in chief and a Sword of the second. 12. Walter Bronscomb. Exeter. 10.
Aprilis 42 Hen. 3.1258. 23. years. 22. Julii 1281. In the Lady Chapel of his
own Church. blazon or coat of arms Vincit Patientia.
He bears Azure a Cross Argent between two Roses above and beneath two
Flower-de-luces Or. 13. Peter Quivell. Warwickshire. 29. Decembris 10 Edward
1.1281. 11. years. 18. Octobris. 1292. In the Lady Chapel of his own Church.
blazon or coat of arms ^^od me deficit Christo sufficit.
He bears Ermine a Fess Gules. 14. Thomas Bitton. Wiltshire. 15. Januarii 22
Edward 1.1293. 14. years. 21. September. 1307. In the Quire of his own Church at
the Foot of the High Alear. blazon or coat of arms Mediocria firma.
He bears Argent two bends Wavy Sable. 15. Walter Stapledon Lord Treasurer of
England, and one of the King's Privy Council. Devon. 28. Septembris 1 Edward
2.1037. 20. years. 15. Octobris. 1327. In the North-side of the Quire of his
own Church, nigh the High Altar. blazon or coat of arms Loyal au Mort.
He bears a Cheuron between ten Crosses formy d' Argent in a field Gules. 16.
James Berkley. Glocestershire. 26. Martii 2 Edward 3.1328. 4. months. 24. Julii
1328. In his own Church. blazon or coat of arms Pe^it ardus virtus.
He bears palewise of six Argent and Azure a bend Gules thereon a Mitre between
two Eaglets displayed Or. 17. John Grandison. Herefordshire. 8. Octobris 2
Edward 3.1328. 42. years. 15. Julii. 1370. In a Tomb of Lead in a Chapel by
himself builded, and adjoining to the West wall of his own Church. blazon or
coat of arms Vincit qui patitur.
He bears Sable a Fess imbattelled between three Katherine wheels. 18. Thomas
Brentingham Lord Treasurer of England, and one of the King's Privy Council.
Devon. 10. Martii 44 Edward 3.1370. 24. years. 3. Decembris 1394. In the
North-side of the body of his own Church, near the North door. blazon or coat
of arms Guard ta foy.
He bears Or a Cheuron Gules. 19. Edmond Stafford, Lord Privy Seal, afterward
Lord Chancellor of England, and one of the King's Privy Council. Staffordshire.
20. Junii 19 Richard 2.1395. 23. years. 4. September. 1419. In the Lady Chapel
of his own Church, on the North-side. blazon or coat of arms Fat^ prudentia
Major.
He bears Argent a Fess engrailed sable thereon three Trefoils d' Or. 20. John
Catherike. Cheshire. 8 Novembris 7 Hen. 5.1419. 2. months. 11. Januarii 1419.
In a Church at Avynion. blazon or coat of armsHe bears Argent a bend sable and
thereon three Roses of the First. 21. James Carry. Devon. 10 Februarii 7 Henry
5.1419. 6. weeks. 24. Martii 1419. In a Church at Florence. blazon or coat of
arms (...) est le pluis grand ^oneur.
He bears Azure three Skovellers heads Argent erazed. 22. Edmond Lacy.
Herefordshire. 6. Aprilis 8 Hen. 5.1420. 35. years. 23. Maii 1455. In the
North-side of the Quire of his own Church. blazon or coat of arms Bien defend
le droit.
He bears Gules a Saltier Argent. 23. George Nevill Lord Chancellor of England,
and Chancellor of the University of Oxford, and one of the King's Privy
Council. Durham. 25. Novembris 34 Henry 6.1455. 10. years. translated to York.
4. September. 1476. In the Cathedral Church of York. blazon or coat of arms
^^scimur and Patimur.
He bears Argent three boars heads erazed and erect Sable, a File of three
points Gules. 24. John Booth. Cheshire 22. Februarii 6 Edward 4.1466. 12.
years. 1. Aprilis 1478. In St Clement Danes Church London, without Templebar.
blazon or coat of arms Quod verum tutum.
He bears Or three Torteauxes a lable in chief Azure. 25. Peter Courtency.
Devon. 18. Novembris 19 Edward 4.1479. 9. years. Translated to Winchester. 20.
December. 1491. In the Cathedral Church of Winchester. blazon or coat of arms
Omnia vincit amor.
He bears Azure a Pelican in her Nest proper. 26. Richard Fox Lord Privy Seal
and one of the King's Privy Council. Lincolnshire. 27 Januarii 3 Hen. 7.1488.
6. years. Translated to Bath, and from thence to Winchestor. 2. Februarii 1528.
In the Cathedral Church of Winchestor. blazon or coat of arms Modus est
Pulcherrima virtus.
He bears Argent on a Cheuron sable three Escalop shells of the first. 27.
Oliver King. Cornwall. 20. Februarii 9 Hen. 7.1494. 5. years. Translated to
Wells. 20. Novembris 1499. In Windsor Church. blazon or coat of arms Finis
coronat opus.
He bears Gules three Cushions Argent tasseled Or. 28. Richard Redman.
Hartfordshire. 14. Decembris 14 Hen. 7.1499. 5. years Translated to Ely. In the
Cathedral Church of Ely. blazon or coat of arms De^^ undine.
He bears sable six Swallows in pile Argent 29. John Arundell. Cornwall. 15.
Martii 19 Hen. 7.1504. 2. years, 19. Februarii 1506. In St. Clement Danes
Church without Templebar, London. blazon or coat of arms Vita est vigilia.
He bears sable a Cheuron Or between three Owls proper, on a chief of the second
three Roses Gules. 30. Hugh Oldham. Lancashire. 3. Aprilis 22 Hen. 7.1507. 16.
years. 25. Junii 1523. In a Chapel on the South Side (...) the Quire of his
own Church. blazon or coat of arms Nulli praeda.
He bears Argent a Cross Sable thereon a bucks head cooped between four Doves
Argent, a chief Azure charged with a cross croslet between two Roses d' Or. 31.
John Voysey Lord President of Wales. Warwickshire. 23. Julii 15 Henry 8.1523.
26. years. Resigned. prout Postea. In the Church of Sutton Colshill in
Warwickshire. blazon or coat of arms Vero nihil Verius.
He bears quarterly per Fess Indented Gules and Or in chief a Rose between two
Flower-deluces, in base a Flower-de-luce between two Roses all counterchanged.
32. Miles Coverdale. Yorkshire. 20 Septembris 3 Edw. 6.1550. 3. years. 20.
Maii 1565. In St. Bartholomew's Church behind the Royal Exchange, London.
blazon or coat of arms Nulli Praeda.
He bears ut Prius. 33. John Voysey. Warwickshire. 4. Septembris 1 Mariae 1553.
3. years. 9. Octobris 1555. In the Church of Sutton Colshill in Warwickshire.
blazon or coat of arms La Familla des Justs Delu^urera.
He bears Ermine a Lion Rampant Gules Crowned Or langued and armed Azure. 34.
James Turbervill. Dorsetshire. 1. Maii 4 Mariae. 1556. 2. years and half
deprived. 1 Novembris 1559. In the body of the Quire of his own Church. blazon
or coat of arms Merces mea Christus.
He bears Azure a pale engrailed Ermine between two Lions Rampant Argent langued
and armed Gules. 35. William Alleigh. Buckinghamshire. 14 Julii 1 Elizabeth
1560. 9. years. 15. Aprilis 1570. In the body of the Quire of his own Church,
nigh the High Altar. blazon or coat of arms Post mortem vita.
He bears Azure a Pheon Argent. 36. William Bradbridg. Somersetshire. 28.
Aprilis 32 Elizabeth 1570. 8. years. 27. Junii 1578. In the North-side of the
Quire of his own Church. blazon or coat of arms Speruit pericula virtus.
He bears a Lion Rampant standing to a Saltier engrailed Gules. 37. John Walton.
Lancashire. 24. Augusti 20 Elizabeth 1578. 14. years. 13. Martii 1593. In the
South Side of the Quire of his own Church. blazon or coat of arms Bye labor
levit.
He bears Argent ten Torteanxes in pile in chief a label of three points Azure.
38. Gervis Babington. Devon. 2. Maii 35 Elizabeth 1594. 3 years. Translated to
Worcester. In the Cathedral Church of Worcester. blazon or coat of arms Aquila
non capit muscas.
He bears Argent a bend fable between three Ogresses. 39. William Cotton.
London. 16. Maii 39 Elizabeth 1597. 28 years. 26. Augusti 1621. In the
South Side of the Quire of his own Church. blazon or coat of armsHe bears ut
Prius. 40. Valentine Carry. Northumberland. 20. November. 19 Jacobi 1621. 6.
years. 10. Junii. 1626. In the North-side of the Quire of S. Paul's Church
London. blazon or coat of arms Silentis and Spe.
He bears sable three Talbots heads erazed Argent. 41. Joseph Hall.
Leicestershire. 23. Decembris 3 Caroli 1.1627. 14. years. Translated to
Norwich. 8 Septembris 1656. In Hyem Church near Norwich. blazon or coat of arms
Vuescit vulnere virtus.
He bears Argent a Lion Rampant sable gutty Or langued and armed Gules between
three Cressants of the same. 42. Ralph Brownrig. Suffolk. 3. Maii 18 Canoli
1.1642. 18. years, and half. 7. December. 1659. In the Temple Church, London.
blazon or coat of arms Birmitas in Coel^^
He bears Azure a Cheuron between three Leopards heads Or. 43. John Gauden.
Essex. 2 Decembris 12 Caroli 2.1660. A year and half. Translated to Worcester.
21 Septembris 1665. In the Cathedral Church of Worcester. blazon or coat of
arms Cr^^ scal^ Coe^^.
He bears Azure a Cross flory Or. 44. Seth Ward. Hartfordshire. 20 Julii 14
Caroli 2.1662. 5. years. Translated to Sarum. Bishops. Counties Installed or
Consecrated. Governed. Deceased. Buried. blazon or coat of arms Rose Munda.
He bears Ermines three Roses Argent seeded Or. 45. Anthony Sparrow. Suffolk 23.
Novembris 19 Caroli 2.1667.

Chamberlains.
ALbeit the Office of a Chamberlain, be very Ancient and usual in other Cities
within this Realm, especially in London, yet was it here erected but of late
years, and therefore not as yet reduced to that perfection which it is
elsewhere: Queen Elizabeth in the Third year of Her Reign, was pleased to grant
unto this City a Charter for Orphans, which in Her Fifth year was confirmed by
Act of Parliament, of much more Antiquity this Officer cannot well pretend
himself to be: The first person elected into the said Office was.

1. John Hooker. 21. Septembris 2 Mariae, 1554. 2. William Tickell. 15.
Septembris 43 Elizabethae, 1601. 3. John Martin. 7. Junii 11 Jacob^, 1612. 4.
William Prowss. 26. Junii 22 Jacobi, 1624. 5. Richard Tickell. 21. Aprilis 5
Caroli, 1629. 6. John Crewkern. 14. Aprilis 12 Caroli, 1636. 7. John Door. 1.
Decembris 22 Caroli, 1646. 8. Richard Izacke. 25. Octobris 6 Caroli 2.1653.
Swordbearers.
THe Swordbearer is an Officer of late Erection, appointed in the Thirteenth
year of the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, Annoque Domini, 1497. In which
year the King came personally hither, and in respect of the good service then
done by the Mayor and Citizens hereof against Perkin Warbeck and his Accomplices;
The King not only applauded the courage and loyalty of the Citizens, but also
well rewarded them in sundry particulars, amongst which, he bestowed on them an
honorable Cap of Maintenance to be worn, and also a Sword of Justice, which he
then took from his own side, to be born before the Mayor on all public
occasions, for the decent carriage whereof in an orderly manner this Officer
was Instituted, whose duty chiefly consists in two points, viz.

1. To bear the Sword as aforesaid when time requires.

2. To attend on the Mayor's person for his safety, and the worship of the City.

The First person Elected into the said Office was,

Recorders.
THe Recorder is an Office of later Institution then the Mayor, for (as it
seems by the course of the Records) some one of the Officers was of ability to
direct the Court according to the Laws of the Land, and Customs of the said
City, but at length matters in Law increasing, by good advice 'twas held
expedient that a Learned Man should be chosen to be always attendant upon the
Court and Chamber of this City, to direct them in all matters of difficulty
according to Law, whereon an Act was made, that a Recorder should be here
chosen yearly, as the Mayor and other Officers are, and then was Elected
accordingly (being the first Recorder of the said City)

1. John Weeks, Esquire. 28 Edward 3.1354. 2. John Hull, Esquire. 3 Richard
2.1379. 3. William Wynard, Esquire. 6 Henry 4.1404. 4. Nicholas Radford,
Esquire. 32 Henry 6.1453. 5. John Moor, Esquire, 33 Henry 6.1454. 6. Thomas
Dowrish, Esquire. 8 Edward 4.1468. 7. William Huttesfold, Esquire; afterward
made the King's Solicitor, and then surrendered this Office 19 Edward 4. 1479.
8. Thomas Hext, Esquire. 22 Edward 4.1482. 9. William Burgoyn, Esquire. 11
Henry 7.1496. 10. Roger Holland, Esquire. 13 Henry 7.1498. 11. Sir Thomas
Dennys, Knight. 5 Henry 8.1513. 12. John Harris, Esquire; Sergeant at Law. 36
Henry 8.1544. 13. Jews Pollard, Esquire. 2 Edward 6.1548. 14. Edmund Stuer,
Esquire. 2 Mariae. 1554. 15. John Charles, Esquire. 6 Mariae. 1558. 16. Jeffery
Tothill, Esquire. 5 Elizabeth, 1563. 17. Sir Robert Dennys, Knight. 16
Elizebeth, 1574, Surrendered this Office. 18. Edward Drew, Esquire; Sergeant at
Law. 34 Elizabeth. 1592. Afterward chosen Recorder of London, and then
surrendered this Office. 19. John Hele, Esquire; Sergeant at Law. 35 Elizabeth.
1593. Surrendered the Office. 20. William Martin; Esquire; 3 Jacobi. 1605. 21.
Nicholas Duck, Esquire. 15 Jacobi. 1617. 22. Richard Waltham, Esquire. 4 Caroli
1.1628. 23. Peter Ball, Esquire. 8 Caroli 1.1632. Afterward made the Queens
Solicitor, then her Attorney and Knighted, in the late Civil War for his
Loyatly sequestered. 24. Edmond Prydeaux, Esquire. 19 Caroli 1.1648. Surrendered
the Office 25. Thomas Bampfield, Esquire. 6 Caroli 2.1654. Surrendered the
Office, and made a voluntary restitution of the profits of the said Office to
the Poor. 26. Sir Peter Ball, Knight; Restored. 12 Caroli 2.1660. Surrendered
the Office. 27. Sir Thomas Carew, Knight. 28 Caroli 2.1676.
Sheriffs.
THe sheriff is an ancient Officer in this Realm, to whose care the King
commits the custody of the County; In sundry particulars this City was formerly
under the Power and Jurisdiction of the Sheriff of Devon, and so continued
until the nine and twentyeth year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth,
Annoque Domini, 1537. who then in much favor hereunto, was pleased to make
this City a County of it self; and distinct from the County of Devon: And
albeit the Authority, Office and Jurisdiction of the Sheriffs within their
several limits do agree, yet by Charter the yearly nomination and Election of
the Sheriffs within this City, and County of the same, is referred to the
Mayor, and four and twenty of the Common Council of the said City, before whom
(after the Sheriffs are so clected) being the Monday after the Feast of St.
Michael The Archangel yearly, they take their Corporal Oaths for the due
execution of their said Offices in the open Court: The first Elected into the
said Office was,

Henry the Eighth.
29. 1537. William Burgoyn. 30. 1538. William Buckenam: 31. 1539. Robert
Tooker. 32. 1540. William Hurst. 33. 1541. John Midwinter. 34. 1542. Thomas
Prestwood. 35. 1543. John Woolcott. 36. 1544. John Way, and John Helmer. 37.
1545. John Maynards. 38. 1546. Nicholas Lymett.
Edward the Sixth.
1. 1547. John Tuckfield. 2. 1548. John Drake. 3. 1549. William Tothill. 4.
1550. William Smith. 5. 1551. John Hurst. 6. 1552. Moris Levermore.
Mary.
1. 1553. John Peryam. 2. 1554. Walter Staplchill 3. 1555. Griffith Amerideth.
4. 1556. John Peter. 5. 1557. Robert Midwinter. 6. 1558. John Blackall.
Elizabeth.
1. 1559. Richard Prestwood. 2. 1560. Thomas Richardson. 3. 1561. John Dyer. 4.
1562. Hugh Pope. 5. 1563. Edward Bridgman;
6. 1564. Thomas Richardson. 7. 1565. John Smith. 8. 1566. Robert Chaff. 9.
1567. Edward Lymett. 10. 1568. Richard Hellyar. 11. 1569. Simon Knight. 12.
1570. Thomas Bruerton. 13. 1571. William Trivett. 14. 1572. Nicholas Martin.
15. 1573. Thomas Prestwood. 16. 1574. George Per^yman. 17. 1575. John Po^e. 18.
1576. Richard Prowse. 19. 1577. Thomas Martin. 20. 1578. Henry Ellicott. 21
1579. Jeffery Thomas. 22. 1580. Thomas Reymond. 23. 1581. John Davy. 24. 1582.
John Peryam. 25. 1583. George Smith. 26. 1584. William Martin. 27. 1585. John
Levermore. 28. 1586. Thomas Chapel. 29. 1587. Nicholas Spicer. 30. 1588.
Philip Yard. 31. 1589. Thomas Spicer. 32. 1590. John Chapel. 33. 1591.
Richard Beavys. 34. 1592. John Howell. 35. 1593. Thomas Walker. 36. 1594. Henry
Hull. 37. 1595. Christopher Spicer. 38. 1596. Richard Do^ch^ster. 39. 1597.
Alexander Mayn. 40. 1598. William Spicer. 41. 1599. John Prowse. 42. 1600.
Thomas Edwards. 43. 1601. John Ellicott. 44. 1602. Walter Borough.
James.
1. 1603. Hugh Crossing. 2. 1604. Alexander Germyn. 3. 1605. William Newcomb.
4. 1606. John Lant. 5. 1607. Jeffery Waltham. 6. 1608. Robert Parr. 7. 1609.
John Marshall. 8. 1610. John Sheer. 9. 1611. Ignatius Jurdain. 10. 1612. Thomas
Martin. 11. 1613. John Modyford. 12. 1614. John Gupwill. 13. 1615. Thomas
Crossing. 14. 1616. John Tailor. 15. 1617. Thomas Amy. 16. 1618. Peter
Collaton. 17. 1619. John Acland. 18. 1620. George Pyle. 19. 1621. John Lynn.
20. 1622. Thomas Wakeman. 21. 1623. John Jurdain. 22. 1624. Nicholas Spicer.
Charles the First.
1. 1625. Thomas Flay. 2. 1626. Nicholas Martin. 3. 1627. John Hakewill. 4.
1628. Gilbert Sweet. 5. 1629. Francis Crossing. 6. 1630. Adam Bennett. 7. 1631.
Roger Mallock. 8. 1632. John Crocker. 9. 1633. James Tucker. 10. 1634. Robert
Walker. 11. 1635. John Hayn 12. 1636. John Penny. 13. 1637. Richard Saunders.
14. 1638. Thomas Tooker. 15. 1639. Christopher Clark. 16. 1640. Henry
Battishill. 17. 1641. Walter White. 18. 1642. James Gould. 19. 1643. John
Cupper. 20. 1644. Richard Yeo. 21. 1645. John Martin. 22. 1646. Ralph Herman.
23. 1647. Richard Crossing. 24. 1648. Nicholas Broking.
Charles the Second.
1. 1649. Francis Lipping cut. 2. 1650. Richard Sweet. 3. 1651. James Pearse.
4. 1652. James Marshall. 5. 1653. Thomas Ford. 6. 1654. Christopher Clarke. 7.
1655. Christopher Lethbridg. 8. 1656. Bernard Bartlett. 9. 1657. Henry Prigg.
10. 1658. Henry Gandy. 11. 1659. Walter Deel^e 12. 1660. William Bruen. 13.
1661. Nicholas ^sacke. 14. 1662. John Acland. 15. 1663. Isaac Mawditt, and
Stephen Olivean. 16. 1664. Thomas Walker. 17. 1665. George Tuthill. 18. 1666.
Peter Hagedot. 19. 1667. James Slade. 20. 1668. Benjamin Oliver. 21. 1669.
William Sanford. 22. 1670. Isaac Mawditt 23. 1671. Christopher Brodridg. 24.
1672. John Parr. 25. 1673. John Collins. 26. 1674. William Gy de, Junior. 27.
1675. Andrew Quash.
Petsons dying in the time of their respective Mayoralties,
1. Nicholas Ilchester. 21. Februarii. 51 Henry 3.1267. fol. 16. 2. Martin
Le-kenn. 17. Martii. 8. Edward 3.1334. fol. 47. 3. Nicholas Halberton. 14.
Julii. 22 Edward 3.1348. fol. 52. 4. Roger Plenty. 7. Decembrit. 47 Edward
3.1373. fol. 61. 5. William Wilsford. 19. Julii. 14 Henry 4.1412. fol. 69. 6.
Richard Jeffery. 3. Augusti. 11 Edward 4.1471. fol. 88. 7. Robert Newton. 9.
Maii. 18 Henry 7.1503. fol. 104. 8. John Danester. 15. Augusti. 18 Henry
7.1503. fol. ibid. 9. William Wilsford. 29. Januarii. 3 Henry 8.1511. fol. 106.
10. John Symons. 27. Septembris. 15 Henry 8.1523. fol. 113. 11. John Peryam. 5.
Septembris. 14 Elizabeth. 1579. fol. 134. 12. Thomas Prestwood. 28. Novembris.
18 Elizabeth. 1576. fol. 135. 13. William Chapel. 15. Decembris. 21
Elizabeth. 1579. fol. 136. 14. Richard Beavys. 26. Augusti. 44. Elizabeth.
1602. fol. 143. 15. Alan Penny. 21. Martii. 16. Charles 2.1664. fol. 169.
1. Francis Gilbert, 25. Julii, 13 Henry 7.1498. 2. William Down, 18 Octobris,
1 Henry 8.1509. 3. William Somaster, 19. Augusti, 2 Henry 8.1510. 4. Richard
Prowse, 6. Maii, 21 Henry 8.1529. 5. William Beamont, 22. Aprilis, 28 Henry
8.1536. 6. John May, 19. Octobris, 1 Mariae, 1553. 7. Richard Bartlett, 19.
Junii, 8 Elizabethae, 1566. 8. Robert Harrison, 26. Jannarii, 33 Elizabethae,
1591. 9. John Wood, 9. Novembrie, 34 Elizabethae, 1592. 10. Robert Northcott,
25. Novembris, 35 Elizabethae, 1593. 11. Thomas Tooker, 18. Aprilis, 9 Jacobi,
1611. 12. John Clark, 12. Septembris, 10 Jacobi, 1612. 13. Leonard Cranbury,
13. Novembris, 11 Jacobi, 1613. 14. William Birdall, 10. Octobris, 16 Jacobi,
1618. 15. Robert Bletchingdon, 24. Martii, 17 Caroli, 1642. 16. John Cogan, 17
Decembris, 22 Caroli, 1646. 17. Thomas Willing, 23. Octobris, 18 Caroli 2.1666.
The Titles of their several Corporations within the said City, and their
distinct Coats of Armory displayed.
The Cordwainers.
Vinulla invertitur orde.


1. The Cordwainers and Curriers were first Incorporated by grant under the
Common Seal of the said City, 11 Richard 2.1387. which was again confirmed 21
Edward 4.1481. And lastly, 3 Mariae 1555. They give Azure a Cheuron Or between
3 Goats heads Argent attired.

The Glovers and Skinners.
Soli Deo Gloria.


2. The Glovers and Skinners were first Incorporated by grant under the Common
Seal of the said City, 2 Edward 4.1462. which said grant was again confirmed,
22 Edward 4.1482. And lastly, 2 Elizabeth 1560. They give Ermine on a chief
Gules three Crown Imperial.

The Tailors.
Concor^^a parvae res crescunt, Discordia maxima dilabuntur.


3. The Master Wardens and Company of Tailors were first Incorporated by the
like grant 6 Edward 4.1466. which was again renewed, ^ Edward 4.1469. And
afterward renewed by King Philip and Queen Mary, 2 and 3 Regnorum. And lastly,
confirmed by Queen Elizabeth 22 Regui, 1580. They give Argent a Te^t between
two Robes d'estate Gules attired Or, on 2 chief Azure a Lion Passant. Gardant
of the third.

The Bakers.
Praise God for all.


4. The Bakers were first Incorporated by the like grant, 22 Edward 4. 1482.
which was again renewed, 2 Mary, 1554. They give Gules 2 balance held by a
hand in chief between three garbs d' Or, a chief barry wavy of four Argent and
Azure.

The Barbers.
De Praescientia Dei.


5. The Barbe Surgeons were first Incorporated by the like grant, 2 Henry
7.1487. They bear quarterly parted with a cross Gules, and thereon a Lion
Passant Gardant Or, The first and fourth sable a Cheuron between three Phlegms
Argent the second and third quarters Argent a Rose Gules Crowned Or.

The Weavers, etc.
Labor labori laborem addit.


6. The Weavers and Fullers were first Incorporated by the like grant, 5 Henry
7 1490. which was again renewed 44 Elizabeth, 1602. They give party per saltier
Azure and Gules, on the first two Shuttles Or, on the second above a brush,
beneath a pair of Sheers Argent a chief Ermine and thereon a slay between two
burling Irons Or.

The Haberdashers, etc.
Serve and Obey.


7. The Cappers, Haberdashers. and Felt-makers were first Incorporated by the
like grant, 5 Henry 7.1494. which was again confirmed, 4 Elizabeth, 1562. They
give barry nebuly Argent and Azure on a bend Gules a Lion Passant Gardant Or.

The Merchants.
Des Duce, Fortuna Comite.


8. The Merchants (by the name of the Governor, Consuls, and Society of
Merchant Adventurers trading to France) were first Incorporated by Charter
granted, 4 Mary 1556. They give Azure a Castle Or standing on the Waves of the
Sea proper, in chief two ducal Crowns d' Or.

The Smiths, etc.
Tractent Fabrilia Fabri.


9. The Smiths, Cutlers, and Sadlers, were first Incorporated by the like
grant, 2 Elizabeth, 1560 which was again renewed, 5 Jacobi, 1607. They give
sable a Cheuron Argent between three Hammers Crowned Or.

The Coopers, etc.
Qui fugit molam, fugit farinam.


10. The Coopers and Hellyars were first; Incorporated by the like grant, 8
Elizabeth 1966. They give gernudy of six pieces Gules and sable, a Cheuron
Argent charged with a mallet between two Axes of the second between 3. hoops
Or, on a chief of the third three Lilli^^ Azure.

The Butchers.
Omnia subjecisti sub pedibus oves and Boves.


11. The Butchers were first Incorporated by the like grant, 17 Elizabeth,
1575. They give Azure two Axes salterwise Or between three Bulls heads couped
Agrent, upon a chief of the third a Boars head gules between two gaths of the
first.

The Brewers.
In God is all our Trust.


12. The Brewers were first Incorporated by the like grant, 21 Elizabeth, 1579.
And afterward was again renewed. They give Gules on a Cheuron Argent three
Tonns sable between six garbs disposed salterwise Or.

The Painters, etc.
Amor queat Obedientia.


13. The Painters, Joyners, Carpenters, Masons, and Glasiers, were first
Incorporated by the like grant, 44 Eliz. 1602. The Painters give Azure a
Cheuron between 3. Phenixes heads erazed Or. The Joyners and Carpenters give
Argent a cheuron engrailed between 3. Compasses dilated sable. The Masons give
sable on a Cheuron between 3. towers Argent a pair of Compasses dilated sable.
The Glasiers give Argent two crossing Irons in Saltior sable between four Nails
on a chief Gules a demi Lion Passant Gardant Or.

MEMORIALS Of the City of EXETER.
Regna Regum 2. Joh. Anno Dom. 1200.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Rifford Walter Zooch Peter Way

THe first Magistrates or Governors of this City in the several Reigns of the
Saxons and Danes in this Kingdom before the Conquest were Four Port-Reevs, that
is to say, praefecti or praepositi, Chief Lords or Guardians: After the
Conquest they were called Provosts or Rulers; then were they by the Normans
termed Bailiffs or Stewards, from the French word, bailler, tradere, one that
has Commission to govern others; and lastly Mayors, and so continue to this
day.

Not long after the Conquest a Senate was here constituted of Six and Thirty
persons, but since by King Henry the Seventh, they are reduced to the number of
Four and Twenty, as appears by his Charter dated 10. Julii, 13. Regni, Anno
Domini 1498.

William the Conqueror being possessed of this City, (upon the Inhabitants
submission) restored it to them again with the Ancient Liberties thereof,
reserving to himself their Allegiance, and an Annual Rent for the Fee-Farm
thereof; and afterward 'twas by Charter incorporated and made one Fellowship
or Body politic, whose appellation has since been various and mutable, as

1. By the name of Mayor and Citizens. 2. By the name of Mayor, Bailiffs and
Citizens: and 3. Lastly, By the name of Mayor, Bailiffs and Commonalty.
Regna Regum 3. Joh. An. D. 1201.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Rifford Thomas Erming Jeffery Wayland

The nature and form of a Foreign Attachment acccording to the Ancient Custom
of this City is in this manner, viz B. being indebted to A. and C. to B. A.
brings his Action of Debt against B. by virtue of which Plaint one of the
Sergeants at Mace of the said City (being a sworn Officer of the Court)
attacheth either money or goods in the hands of C. as the goods of B. whereof
he makes a true return at the next Court accordingly, where the said plaint is
called, and the Defendant four Court days following publicly demanded; in all
which time he has liberty to come in and avoid the said Attachment by putting
in Bayl to the said Action; but if the Defendant appear not, then a scire
facias is awarded by the Court against C. who being served therewith by the
said Sergeant, and return thereof made by him at the next Court, where, if C.
makes default of his appearance, his neglect will be taken and recorded pro
confesso, and Judgment will be pronounced against him; and if he appears, his
Oath as to part, or the whole debt, will be his purgation; and when Judgment is
entered for the Plaintiff, before the said goods shall be delivered out of the
Court to him, he must first of all swear the truth of his said debt, and also
bring in two sufficient pledges to become bayl for him, each of them in the sum
recovered, on this condition; That if the said Defendant disprove the foresaid
debt within a year and a day then next ensuing here in Court, that then the
said Plaintiff shall make restitution of the debt so recovered as aforesaid, or
they will do it for him.

Regna Regum 4. Joh. An. D. 1202.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Rifford Abraham Ayloff Richard Perkins

Regna Regum 5. Joh. An. D. 1203.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Rifford Thomas Nevil Aldred Skinner

Henry Marshal having well governed this Church as Bishop thereof above twelve
years space, this year died, who purchased the Patronage and Lordship of
Woodbury of one Albemarly, and freely gave the same to the Vicars Choral of his
Church toward their better maintenance and livelihood. In the Northside of the
Quire of his own Church under a very fair Tomb he lies interred, with his
Effigies at length pourtrayed thereon, with a Crosier in his hand, and all done
in Gray Marble.

Regna Regum 6. Joh. An. D. 1204.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Rifford William Robins William Legrave

Regna Regum 7. Joh. An. D. 1205.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Rifford John Mellifluen Walter Delve

Regna Regum 8. Joh. An. D. 1206.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Rifford Henry Jennings George Spelman

Simond d' Apulia (an Italian born) was this year on the twelfth day of
December installed Bishop of this Diocese:

Regna Regum 9. Joh. An. D. 1207.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Rifford Stephen Weildy John Fitz-Henry

Regna Regum 10. Joh. An. D. 1208.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Fitz-Robert Adam Lyford Thomas Gyllam

Regna Regum 11. Joh. An. D. 1209.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Fitz-Robert Walter Delve Philip Dyer

The Ancient Custom of this City is tha^ when the Defendant is arrested, and
the Plaintiff nonsuited, he ought to pay the costs thereof before he commenceth
against the same Defendant another Action of the like nature.

Regna Regum 12. Joh. An. D. 1210.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Fitz-Robert Richard Kerswel Henry A^wood

Regna Regum 13. Joh. An. D. 1211.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Fitz-Robert John Thurland William Rugg

About this time flourished one Joseph Iscanus, or Joseph of Exeter, so named
in regard of his birth in this place, or (as some say) being a Minister or
Priest in the Cathedral Church of St. Peter here; and was afterward made
Archbishop of Bordeaux in France, he was very well learned in all good Letters,
but especially in Poetry, and for his excellency in the Greek and Latin Tongues
he was held famous.

Regna Regum 14. Joh. An. D. 1212.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Fitz-Robert Richard Forester Andrew Thring

Alexander Nequam alias Neckam, Prior of St. Nicholas within this City, and ^
Canon Residentiary of this Church, a famous Scholar at this time likewise here
flourished, who was learned in Philosophy, Poetry, Oratory, and Theology,
whereby he obtained a glorious name, even to be called ingenii miraculum, the
miracle of wit; between whom, and Philip Repington Bishop of Lincoln, on their
respective names there passes some wit; the latter of them sending the
Challeng, scil.

Et niger, and nequam, cum sis cognomine nequam,
Nigrior esse potes, nequior esse nequis:
Both black and bad, whilst bad the name to thee,
Blacker thou may, but worst thou can not be.
To whom Nequam thus replied.

Phi nota foetoris, lippus malus omnibus horis,
Phi malus and lippus, totus malus ergo Philippus.
Stinks are branded with a Phi, lippus Latin for blear eye
Phi and lippus bad is either, then Philippus worse together.
Upon whose Sepulcher were inscribed these barbarous Verses.

Eclipsin patitur sapientia, Sol sepulitur,
Cui si par unus, minus esset flebile funus,
Vir been discretus, and in omni more facetus
Dictus erat, nequam, vitam duxit tamen aequam.
Thus translated.

Wisdom's eclipsed, sky of the Sun bereft,
Yet less the loss if like alive were left:
A man discreet, in manners debonair,
'Bad name, black face, but carriage good and fair.
Regna Regum 15. Joh. An. D. 1213.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Blondy Henry Milton John Treby

Regna Regum 16. Joh. An. D. 1214.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Blondy William Might John Molton,

Regna Regum 17. Joh. An. D. 1215.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Blondy Roger Needham Walter Bender

Regna Regum 18. Joh. An. D. 1216.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Turbert Lawrence Elkin Richard Falson

Regna Regum 1. Henry the 3. An. D. 1217.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Fitz. Henry William Green Thomas Courtys.

King John being deceased, Henry his eldest Son being of the age of nine years
was proclaimed, and crowned King at Gloucester, 28. October.

Regna Regum 2. Henry the 3. An. D. 1218.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Gervis Philip Dyrling Martin Le^kinn

Regna Regum 3. Henry the 3. An. D. 1219.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Turbert John Mintin Stephen Lake

This Bishop Simon continued diverse good Ordinances instituted by his Primitive
Predecessor in this Church, Bishop Leofricus; (amongst others) that all his
Canons should take their Diet at one Table; for which end a Steward to provide
them necessary Victuals was appointed.

Regna Regum 4. Henry the 3. An. D. 1320.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Turbert Walter Bellamy Robert Field

Regna Regum 5. Henry the 3. An. D. 1221.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Fitz-Henry William Grang William Facy

Regna Regum 6. Henry the 3. An. D. 1222.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Fitz-Henry Henry Fitz-Henry William Hailment

The Parish Churches within this City and Suburbs thereof were this year first
limited and brought up to the number of nineteen,and are in the several
Donations of:

1. St. John's, in the King. 2. St Edmonds, in the Mayor, Bailiffs and
Commonalty of this City. 3. St. Stephens. 4. St. Mary Arches, in the Lord
Bishop of the Diocese. 5. St. Mary the Moor. 6. St. Petrocks 7. St. Martins. 8.
St. Pancras. 9. St. Keryans. 10. St Lawrence. 11. St. Georges 12. St. Olaves.
13. St. Paul's. 14. The Holy Trinity. 15. Alhallows on the Walis. 16. Alhallows
in Goldsmithstreet, in the Dean and Chapter of this Church. 17. St. Mary
Stepps, in Mr. Southcott. 18. St. Sidwell. 19. St. David's are Daughter Churchas
to Hevitree.
Regna Regum 7. Henry the 3. An. D. 1223.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Gervis Walter Tuleston Roger Monk

This year did Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury (a Native of this
City) divide the whole Bible into Chapters.

Regna Regum 8. Henry the 3. An. D. 1224.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Turbert Hillary Blond M^r. in Roff

Simon d' Apulia, having been eighteen years Bishop of this Dyocess,on the
sixteenth day of November this year deceased, of whom there remains no great
Memorial of his Acts; he was here placed by the Pope, in whose Causes he was
very diligent, he was immediate Successor to Henry Marshall (who reduced into
Commons again the Vicar's Choral of this Church at Common Hall;) Successor to
John, Successor to Bartholomew Iscanus, Successor to Robert Warewest, Successor
to Robert Chichester, Successor to William Warewest (Founder and Canon of
Plympton) Successor to Osbertus, Successor to Leofricus the first Bishop of
Exeter, and the last of Crediton: before whom were twelve Bishops of this
Diocese successively, containing in it self the Counties of Devon and Cornwall,
namely, 1. Werstanus. 2. Putta. 3. Eadulphus. 4. Thelgarus. 5. Algarus. 6.
Alfwold. 7. Alwolfus. 8. Sydemannus. 9. Alphredus. 10. Alwolfus. 11. Alnoldus.
12. Levingus.


Regna Regum 9. Henry the 3. An. D. 1225.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Turbert William Hastment John Turbert

William Brewer was this year, 30. Decembris, Consecrated Bishop of this Church
by Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury.

Richard the King's Brother is created Earl of Cornwall.

The Pope demands a Pension out of this Cathedral Church, but 'twas denied.

Regna Regum 10. Henry the 3. An. D. 1126.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Fitz. Henry Martin Roff William Hastment

An Army of forty thousand men appointed to be raised in England,and to be
transported beyond Sea to fight the Infidels in the Holy Land, over whom this
Bishop and the Bishop of Winchester were constituted the two general Captains;
who conducted their charge accordingly, and at the City Acon met with the
Emperor Frederick.

Regna Regum 11. Henry the 3. An. D. 1227.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Turbert Martin Roff John Turbert

The King gave this City to his Brother Richard Earl of Cornwall,to hold to him
and his Heirs for ever.

Great Storms, Tempests, and Fires, whereof ensued great harms.

Regna Regum 12. Henry the 3. An. D. 1228.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Turbert Hilary Blond William Hastment

Regna Regum 13. Henry the 3. An. D. 1229.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Fitz-Henry John Turbert Walter Gervis

The Earl of Cornwall joyneth with the Barons against the King his Brother,but
is soon reconciled.

Regna Regum 14. Henry the 3. An. D. 1230.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Fitz-Henry Hilary Blond Walter Gervis

The King resumeth sundry Castles and Forts within this Realm into his own
hands (amongst which) the Castle of Exeter, which was then the Inheritance of
Robert Courteney Sheriff of Devon by lineal descent, he being the Son and Heir
of Hawise the Daughter and Heir of Mawd, the Daughter and Heir of Alice, the
Daughter and Heir of Adely, the Sister and Heir of Richard de Briono, the Son
and Heir of Baldwyn of Baldwyn de Briono, and of Albreda his Wife, Niece of
William the Conqueror, who gave the said Office unto the said Baldwyn and
Albreda, and to their Heirs for ever; and thus the Courtneys, who had enjoyed
the same in their own name by three descents, were now disseised thereof.

Regna Regum 15. Henry the 3. An. D. 1231.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Gervis Martin Roff Eustice Fuzherbert

Regna Regum 16. Henry the 3. An. D. 1232.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Turbert Walter le Caws Jermin Roff

Regna Regum 17. Henry the 3. An. D. 1233.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hillary Blondy Martin Roff Walter le Caws

The two Bishops of Exeter and Winchester,who conducted the Forty thousand
English men hence for the recovery of the Holy Land from the Infidels, returned
home, and with very great joy were received.

Regna Regum 18. Henry the 3. An. D. 1234.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Roff Walter Grang Philip Dyer

A great Plague of Pestilence here happened, which continued three years
together.

Regna Regum 19. Henry the 3. An. D. 1235.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Fitzhenry Adam Rifford Walter Grang

The Lady Isabella ( Sister to the King) was sent over the Seas to be married
to Frederick the Emperor (who had sent hither his Ambassadors the Archbishop
of Colen, and the Duke of Lorain;) but she was committed to the care and
custody of the Bishop of Exeter, who conducted her to the Emperor at Worms,
where they were married; and the Bishop very honorably entertained, whose work
being herein worthily performed, took his leave, and with great Presents was
dismissed, and accompanied in his way homewards by the said Archbishop, and
many other Persons of Honor; and on his return having rendered to his Master
the King a good account of his trust and employment, was well rewarded for his
pains, and made one of the King's Privy Council.

Regna Regum 20. Henry the 3. An. D. 1236.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Turbert John Caporn Jordan Leyden

This Bishop being returned home to his own house,and minding (as his
Predecessors had done) to leave some good memorial behind him, did erect and
constitute a Dean and four and twenty Prebendaries within his Cathedral Church,
and upon the third Sunday in Advent installed Serlo the Archdeacon of Exeter
the first Dean thereof; unto whom and his Successors for their maintenance of
hospitality he incorporated Brampton and Coliton Rawley, and for his
Prebendaries he purchased so much Lands, as every of them had yearly four
pounds, some say three pounds and twelve shillings de claro, pro pane and sale,
which afterward in Bishop Gauden's time was increased to twenty pounds 2
piece, scil. 12. Caroli Secundi, Annoque Domini 1660.

The King Confirmed the Charter and Liberties of the City.

Regna Regum 21. Henry the 3. An. D. 1237.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Roff Jeffry Strange Thomas Pitcher

The King marries the Lady Elianor Daughter to the Earl of Provence.

Regna Regum 22. Henry the 3. An. D. 1238.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martyn Roff Walter Chanon Philip Palmer

All Bishops in England had Palaces in London for their convenience, wherein
they resided, and kept great hospitality during their attendance in Parliament
there.

A Subsidy of the thirtieth part of every man's goods within this City granted
to the King.

Regna Regum 23. Henry the 3. An. D. 1239.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Gervis John Bushett John Okeston

Here happened a continual drowth for three months space,and then a continual
rain for the like time; after which followed a great dearth and mortality.

Regna Regum 24. Henry the 3. An. D. 1240.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Roff Thomas Pitcher Walter Molton

The Cell of St. Alexis (which was the house afterward termed St. Buryans)
being a place of and for two Monks) was now removed and united to St John's
Hospital within the Eastgate of the said City.

Regna Regum 25. Henry the 3. An. D. 1241.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Roff Thomas Pitcher Walter Molton

Regna Regum 26. Henry the 3. An. D. 1242.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Roff Philip Dyer Thomas le Pointou

Regna Regum 27. Henry the 3. An. D. 1243.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Roff Philip Dyer Walter Molton

Regna Regum 28. Henry the 3. An. D. 1244.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Adam Rifford* Philip Dyer Walter Okeston.

A permutation made between the Mayor and Citizens hereof, Founders of the
Hospital of St. John's within the Eastgate of the said City, and the Bishop of
this Church Founder of the Lazar-house of St. Mary Magdalen without the
Southgate of the said City, the cause of which exchange was this; the Lazar
people did upon every Market day come into the Market with a Clap-dish, and
went from one person to another to beg Corn, and all other Victuals there
brought to be sold; which liberty they claimed by the grant of Bishop
Bartholomew Iscanus, who by his Deed dated 13. Februar. 1163. granted to the
said sick people a Toll of all Corn and Bread sold in the several Markets and
Fairs of this City, also that they should collect the Citizens Alms on certain
days of the week. The poor people having received these the Bishops blessings,
came into the said Markets accordingly with their Clap-dishes, demanding the
said Toll; but the people (having not been acquainted with any such Custom, and
withal not brooking such ugly faces, nor the intruding of such sick folk
amongst them) some gave them rough speeches, others shunned their company, and
the rest forbad them of the said Marker, insomuch that the Alms-people found
there little relief, wherewith the Bishop was much grieved: which to allay,
this permutation was made, that the Bishop and his Successors should from
thenceforth be Patrons of St. John's Hospital, and the Mayor and Citizens
should be Patrons of St. Mary Magdalen's Hospital aforesaid, which was observed
accordingly.

Bishop Brewer having well governed this Church nineteen years and upwards, 24.
Julii died, and lies buried in the middle of the Quire of his own Church under
a very fair Marble-stone, thus inscribed. Hic jacet Willielmus Brewer quondam
hujus Ecclesiae Cathedralis Episcopus, Fundator etiam quatuor principalium
ejusdem Ecclesiae dignitatum.

Regna Regum 29. Henry the 3. An. D. 1245.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Roff Robert Molton Robert Spew

Richard Blondy was, 28. Martii, Consecrated Bishop of this Diocese by Boneface
Archbishop of Canterbury at Reading.

Regna Regum 30 Henry the 3. An. D. 1246.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Adam Rifford John Okeston Philip Dyer

Regna Regum 31. Henry the 3. An. D. 1247.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Roff Baldwin Child Walter Okeston

The Earl of Cornwall for avoiding to intermeddle with the differences between
the King and his Barons leaving the Court, and to be out of the way, retireth
himself into this City.

Regna Regum 32. Henry the 3. An. D. 1248.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Hastment Walter Good Hilary White

A long controversy depending in Suit of Law between the Mayor and Citizens
hereof Plaintiffs, and the Dean and Chapter Defendants, touching the Fee and
Liberties of St. Sydwelis without the Eastgate of the said City, was now ended
by composition made at Lanceston, before Richard Earl of Cornwall, Richard
Bishop of Exeter, Roger Tinkelby, Gilbert Preston, and John Cobham, the King's
Justices of Assizes, as follows.

1. The Tenants of the Dean and Chapter dwelling within the City and Suburbs of
the same, and who do occupy any Art, Trade or Mystery, shall at all Taxes and
Tallages be taxed and assessed with the Citizens, so that the said Taxation be
just and indifferent.

2. Also, that the Bailiff of the said Dean and Chapter, shall levy, gather and
receive the said Tax, and pay it over unto the Mayor of the said City, or to
his Officers; but if the said Bailiff be remiss and negligent, then the
Officers of the Mayor shall and may levy and collect the same.

3. Also, that an indifferent man shall be chosen by each Party to be the
Common Bailiff for them both, who on his Oath shall yearly gather, and from
time to time collect of all the said Dean and Chapter's Tenants the Customs of
Bagavell, Bathuga^ell, and and Chippingavell.

4. Also, that all Plaints entered against any of the Dean and Chapter's Tenants
within the said City shall be tried and determined before the Mayor and
Bailiffs.

5. Also, that all Plaints entered against any of the Dean and Chapter's Tenants
dwelling within the Fee of St. Sydwells shall be determined before the Bailiff
thereof.

Also, if any of the Tenants of the said Dean and Chapter being Bakers or
Brewers, are to be punished for breach of the Assize in the Pillory or Tumbrel,
the same on the request to the Mayor to be done within the City.

7. Also, all Pleas of the Crown to be determined before the Mayor.

Lastly, All Traitors, Murderers and Felons that shall be found within the said
Fee, to be apprehended by the Bailiff, and by him to be brought and delivered
over to the Mayor.

Regna Regum 33. Henry the 3. An. D. 1249.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Roff Philip Dyer Walter Okeston

At this time flourished one Richard Fishacre, a Native of this City, and an
excellent Scholar, who professed Divinity and wrote sundry Books thereof: he
lived the greatest part of his time, died, and was buried in the University of
Oxford.

Regna Regum 34. Henry the 3. An. D. 1250.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Adam Rifford John Okeston Robert Tailor

Walter Gervis a worthy Citizen hereof Founded Exbridge, and Collected (say
some) 3000 l. toward the building it, wherewith he purchased much Land, and
bequeathed also his own for the maintenance of the same (a Ferry being here
formerly kept:) On which Bridge a Church was built (wherein this Gervis was now
interred) dedicated to St. Edmond, King of the East Angles, who being overcome
at Hoxon by Pagans under the Command of Swayn King of Denmark, having subdued
his Army in the Field, and taken him prisoner; first grievously scourged him;
and then tied him to a Tree, and so shot him with Arrows to death for being a
Christian, and refusing to deny the Faith of Christ; for which he was Canonized
a Saint and Martyr: Which persecution was thus acted 9. Etheldredi Regis,
Annoque Domini 872.

Regna Regum 35. Henry the 3. An. D. 1251.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Adam Rifford John Okeston Philip Dyer

Regna Regum 36. Henry the 3. An. D. 1252.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Roff Philip Dyer Thomas Pintin

An Excommunication pronounced in the Cathedral Church against the Breakers of
the Liberties thereof.

Regna Regum 37. Henry the 3. An. D. 1253.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Adam Rifford John Okeston John Windsor

Regna Regum 38. Henry the 3. An. D. 1254.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Okeston Baldwyn Child Rowland Overwilt

Regna Regum 39. Henry the 3. An. D. 1255.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hilary Blondy Walter Chaw Martin Roff junior

Regna Regum 40. Henry the 3. An. D. 1256.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Philip Dyer Thomas Hughton Richard Ernold

Richard Earl of Cornwall being elected King of the Romans, was very honorably
conducted out of England to Colen, where he was Crowned by the Archbishop
thereof.

Regna Regum 41. Henry the 3. An. D. 1257.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hilary Blondy Eustice Fitzherbert Richard Poyters

Richard Blondy having well governed this Church about twelve years space, 24.
Martii died, and leaving but a small Memorial behind him, lies buried in his
own Church.

Walter Bronscomb, a Native of this City, and Archdeacon of Surry, was the
next elected Bishop of this Church, and 10. Aprilis consecrated at Canterbury
by Boneface Archbishop thereof.

Upon Palm Sunday, Walter Lodswell Chancellor to the late Bishop Blondy,
Richard Sutton his Register, John Fitzherbert his Official, and William
Ermscore the Keeper of his Seal, did all of them open penance in St. Peter's
Church, for false contriving and disposing of sundry Spiritual livings of the
said Church under the Bishop's Seal, without his privacy or consent, even
whiles he lay sick on his Deathbed, being past all hopes of recovery,

Regna Regum 42. Henry the 3. An. D. 1258.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hillary Blondy. Roger Fitzhenry Walter Chaw John Caporn

The number of the Officers joined with the Mayor in Government increased to
Three, and their names altered, being no more called Port-Reevs, but
Seneschalli or Stewards. In the Norman Tongue they were called Provosts, and
the Court by them kept called the Provosts Court.

Regna Regum 43. Henry the 3. An. D. 1259.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Philip Dyer Walter Chaw Geffery Straung Martin Dirling

Regna Regum 44. Henry the 3. An. D. 1260.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Okeston Martin Dirling Nicholas Ilchester Thomas Langdon

A Controversy now arose which continues a long season, between the Mayor and
Citizens and the Prior of St. Nicholas, touching certain Liberties, which at
length was referred to the determination of Twelve indifferent Citizens to be
returned and sworn for that end.

Regna Regum 45. Henry the 3. An. D. 1261.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hilary White Richard Valtian John Pudding Philip Palmer

Regna Regum 46. Henry the 3. An. D. 1262.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Okeston William Jeffery Roger Fitzhugh Walter Minson

Regna Regum 47. Henry the 3. An. D. 1263.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Nicholas Ilchester John Okeston Richard Tantifer John Feniton Martin Dirling

An Order made for the electing of Four Seneschals or Stewards, whereof one of
them to be Receiver general for that year of all the Cities Rents and Revenues;
and likewise Four Sergeants at Mace, named Subballivi, to be always in
readiness to serve the Mayor and Courts

Regna Regum 48. Henry the 3. An. D. 1264.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Philip Dyer John Okeston Walter Okeston John Windsor Jervis Pintham

Regna Regum 49. Henry the 3. An. D. 1265.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Okeston John Okeston Martin Dirling Thomas Gatepath Richard Tantifer

Regna Regum 50. Henry the 3. An. D. 1266.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Dirling John Feinton Philip Blebuch Richard Tantifer John Pudding

This Bishop Bronscomb Founded a College in Perin in Cornwall called Glaseney,
and endowed the same with fair Possessions and Revenues. Also he gave the
Bartons of Rokesdon and St. Mary Clist to St. John's Hospital in this City. he
likewise built a very sumptuous House, calling it Bishop's Clist, about three
miles hence, and left the same to his Successors. And also instituted in his
Church an Annual Festival on St. Gabriel's day; and lest people should complain
of the dearness of their Devotion, he left good Land to defray the cost of that
Solemnity.

Regna Regum 51. Henry the 3. An. D. 1267.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Nicholas Ilchester Walter Chaw Philip Palmer Thomas Langdon Richard Newton
Hugh Langdon

Nicholas Ilchester died in the time of his Mayoralty, scil. 21. Februarii, and
Walter Chaw was chosen in his place to supply for the residue of the year that
Office.

A composition made between the Abbot and Covent of Sherburn, and the Mayor and
Commonalty of this City, concerning the Passage and Ferry at Exmouth; and 'twas
ordered that the said Abbot should disclaim his title and interest to the same,
reserving a free passage to, from, and by the said Ferry unto the said Abbot
and Covent and their Families without payment of any thing, with a Proviso,
That if the City's Passenger be not ready, nor their Passage Boat in place to
set them over, that then at their own liberty they may take any other Boat for
that season.

Regna Regum 52. Henry the 3. An. D. 1628.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Okeston. Richard Tantifer Hugh Falcon William Pening John Cook

An Inhabitant of this City (for so the story goes, and 'twill hardly persuade
credit) being a very poor man, and having many Children, thought himself blessed
too much in that kind, wherefore to avoid the charge which was likely to grow
upon him that way, absents himself seven years together from his Wife, and then
returning again, and accompanying her as formerly, she was within the space of
a year thereafter delivered of Seven Male Children at one Birth, which made the
poor man think himself utterly undone, and hereby dispairing, put them all in a
Basket, with a full intent to have drowned them; but Divine Providence
following him, occasioned a Lady (then within the said City, and thought to
have been the Countess of Devon) coming at this instant of time in his way, to
demand of him what he carried in his basket, who replied, that he had therein
Whelps, which she desired to see, purposing to make choice of one of them, who
upon view perceiving that they were Children, compelled the poor man to
acquaint her with the whole circumstance, whom, when she had sharply rebuked
for such his inhumanity, presently commanded them all to be taken from him, and
put to Nurse, then to School, and so to the University, and in process of time
being attained to men's estate, and well qualified in Learning, made means and
procured Benefices for every one of them: But such like Eleemosynary Acts in
this our Age (wherein the Charity of too too many is waxen cold) are almost
vanished.

Regna Regum 53. Henry the 3. An. D. 1269.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Alphred Duport John Barkamsteed Richard Tantifer Philip Palmer John Cook

Regna Regum 54. Henry the 3. An. D. 1270.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Dirling Philip Clark Richard Tantifer Hugh Falcon William Pening

Regna Regum 55. Henry the 3. An. D. 1271.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Dirling Richard Tantifer William Poyell John Cook Hugh Falcon

Richard King of the Romans died, and his Son Henry was slain in Italy.

Regna Regum 56. Henry the 3. An. D. 1272.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Dirling John Feniton Thomas Gatepath Richard Allen Hugh Falcon

The King dyed 16. Novembris, and Prince Edward Crowned King in August
following, being but then returned from the Holy Land.

Regna Regum 1. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1273.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Geythen Robert Newton Walter A^port Thomas Farthing Michael Thorn

Walter Bishop of Exon by policy gains Clist Sachfield and Cornish Wood to
his Bishopric, and builds a fair House there, called Bishop's Clist.

Regna Regum 2. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1274.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Dirling John Okeston Richard Tantifer Richard Allen Nicholas Atlane

Regna Regum 3. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1274.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Alphred Duport Richard Tantifer Richard Allen Richard Newton Thomas Gatepath

The King by his Letters Patent dated 10. Martii this year granted to this City
a Collection of a certain Tribute for all manner of Wares brought hither to be
sold, toward the paving of the Streets, repairing of the Walls, and
maintenance of the said City, commonly called in old English Bagavel,
Bethugavel and Chippingabel.

Regna Regum 4. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1276.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Alphred Duport. John Fenitoni Richard Allen Richard Newton Thomas Gatepath.

An Inquisition was here taken for the King touching Lands and Libertties
concealed, and 'twas found by Verdict that Crolditch alias Lammas Fair was
divided into Moities or halfments between King John and the Commonalty of this
City; and that King John resumed or took the whole into his own hands, and gave
it to the Prior and Covent of St. Nicholas within the said City, sed quo jure
non constat. Et ulterius Juratores dicunt quod Cives Exon. clamant habere omnes
libertates and liberas consuctudines quas habent Cives Londinenses.

This Fair is kept yearly in Southenhay 1. Aug. and both before and since the
Conquest, did wholly appertain to the Commonalty of this City, as may appear in
the Book of Domesday remaining in the Exchequer at Westminster, and exemplified
under the Great Seal of England, bearing date 3. Fe^r. 39. Regni Ed. 3. 1365.
prout ibidem patet.

Regna Regum 5. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1277.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Feniton Richard Allen Honry Falcon John Rook John Zouch

This Fair being divided into Moities, and belonging to the Prior of St.
Nicholas, and the Earl of Devon, in course of time it returned again to the
King's hands, namely, King Henry the Eighth, the one upon the suppression of
the said Pri^ry of St. Nicholas 27. Regni, 1535. (which by purchase is returned
to the City) and the other by the attainder of Henry Courteney Marquess of
Exeter 29. Regni, 1537. which part as an appendant or parcel of the Manor of
Toppinsham belongs to the King.

Regna Regum 6. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1278.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Alphred Duport Richard Tantifer Nicholas Atlane Hugh Falcon Thomas Gatepath

The Liberties and Privileges incident to the said Fair.
1. It has continuance for three whole and two half days, beginning at twelve
a clock at noon on Lammas Eve. 2. The whole soil or plot of Southenhay is the
Lords of the Fair during that time, and till twelve of the clock the day after
end thereof. 3. The Lords may set and demise the said soil one day before the
Eve of the said Fair. 4. The Lords have the whole profit of the said Fair. 5
Also they have there the Cognizance of Pleas, and a Court of Pypowders as
incident to all Fairs. 6. Also they have power to punish all Offenders within
the said Fair. 7. Also they are to have an House or Toll Booth there, and a
pair of Stocks.
Regna Regum 7. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1279.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Feniton Richard Allen Richard Newton Thomas Gatepath John Rook

8. No man is to sell any Wares within the said City or Suburbs during the said
Fair, on pain of forfeiture thereof to the Lords, and may be seized on if they
lie within the reach of a man's arm. 9. The Stewards of the said Fair are to
view all Weights and Measures, and finding them defective, to reform the same
according to Law.
Regna Regum 8. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1280.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Alphred Duport Richard Allen John Zouch John Rook Alexander Troycott

Bishop Bronscomb having well governed this Church about 23 years, 22. Julii
died, and lies buried in the Lady Chapel of his own Church under a very
fair-Tomb of Alabaster, whereon this ensuing Epitaph is inscribed, scil.

Olim sincerus pater omni dignus amore,
Primus Walterus magno jacet hie in honor,
Edidit hic plura dignissima laud statuta,
Quaetanquam jura servant nunc hic omnia tuta:
Atque hoc Collegium quod Glasney plebs vocat omnis
Condidit egregium, pro voce data sibi somnis
Quot loca confruxit? pietatis quot bona fecit?
Quam sanctam duxit vitam, vox dicere quae scit?
Laudibus immensis jubilet gens Exoniensis,
Et chorus and turbae, quod notus in hac suit urbe.
Plus st sc^re velis, Festum statuit Gabrielis.
Gaudeat in coelis igitur pater iste fidelis.
Regna Regum 9. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1281.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Alphred Duport Richard Allen John Zouch John Rook Alexander Troycott

Peter Quivell was 29. Decembris Consecrated Bishop of this Diocese under John
Archbishop of Canterbury. He first instituted the Office of a Chaunter in his
Church, whereunto the Rectories of Painton and Chudleigh were Impropriated. And
also the Office of a Sub-Dean in his said Church to which was likewise
impropriated the Rectory of Egloshail in Cornwall. He was also liberal
Benefactor to the Hospital of St. John's here.

Regna Regum 10. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1282.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Dirling Nicholas Gervis Roger Fiz. Henry Nicholas Atlane Richard
Tantifer

Elizabeth Countess of Devon, married to William de Fortibus Earl of Aumarle,
and thereby was named Countess of Devon and Aumarle

Regna Regum 11. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1283.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Alphred Duport David Tailor Nicholas Atlane Richard Gaupath Hugh Folcon

Testamentum Willielmi Lane probatum sui: in plena Curia secundum Consuetudinem
Civitatis praedictae

Testamentum Rogeri Weaver probatum fuit in plena Curia secundum Consuetudinem
Civitatis praedictae.

Regna Regum 12. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1284.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Alphred Duport David Tayl^r Henry Aysh Stephen London Nicholas Atlane

Inquisitio capta coram Majore and seneschallis pro insultu facto in coemeterio
beati Petri Exoniensis.

The Franciscan Friars obtain license to remove their House and to build a new
one without the Southgate.

Regna Regum 13. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1285.
Mayors and Bailiffs
David Tailor Walter Langdon Stephen London Henry Aysh John Horn

The Mayor was this year chosen upon the Thursday after Ashwednesday.

In this year are the first Records of the said City in Parchment Rolls that
can be found, which remain extant in the Council Chamber here.

The King and Queen at the Bishop's request came hither, and kept their
Christmas within this City, chiefly occasioned through the death of one Walter
Lichlade the first Chaunter of this Church, who was murdered as he came from
Mattens (which was then usually said about two of the clock in the morning)
upon an Inquisition of whose death Alphred Duport late Mayor, and the Porter of
the Southgate were both indicted, arraigned, found guilty, and Executed
accordingly; for that the Southgate was that night left open, by which means
the Murderer escaped.

A Composition made between the Mayor and Commonalty, and the Bishop, Dean and
Chapter for enclosing the Churchyard by erecting and shutting the Gates
thereof at night, which was afterward confirmed by the King and Edmond Earl of
Cornwall.

The Grant of the Mayor and Citizens to the Bishop, Dean and Chapter for the
enclosing of St. Peter's Church yard by erecting of Gates there.
Vniversis Christi fidelibus ad quorum notitiam praesens scriptum pervenerit,
tota Communitas Civitatis Exoniensis salutem in Domi^s sempiternam. Noverit
universitas ve^ira nos unanimi consensu nostro concessisse venerabili Patri
nosiro Domino Petro Exonieniensi Episcop^ and ejusdem loci Decano and Capitul^,
quod includere p^ssint Coemeterium Ecclesiae Cath^dralis b^ati Petri
Exoniensis, and portas erig^re and and de noct^ claudere post ignitegium
pulsatum, quotquot sibi viderint necessarias vias nostras, quantum in nobis
est, and stratas quascunque per medium Coemeterii antedicti protendentes
claudendo and obstruendo, dum tamen habeant super hoc consensum and voluntatem
Domini Regis and Domini nostri Domini Edmundi Comitis Cornubiae, ita quod
nullus nostrum aut haeredum nosirorum occasionem habeant ingredi^ndi
Coemeterium praedictum post horam ignitegii, ut supradictum est, (excepto
tempore guerre, aut alio tempore necessitatis) pro pace Domini Regis observanda
and pro incendio evitando and aliis consimilibus casibus evenientibus:
Praeterea liceat omnibus qui demos habent infra Coemiterium praedictum, domos
suas erigere and corrigere de die, quandocunque necesse fuerit, and arctas
fenestras facere versus Coemet^rium praedictum, it^ quod nullus ingredivel
egredi possit per easdem, and s^ aliquis fugitivus in Ecclesia beat^ Petri
antedicta se posuerit, and abinde se transfer voluerit ad Ecclesiam beati
Petroc^, quod ibidem custodiatur per nos, and Chirographo confecto sigillum
nosirum Commune duximus apponendum. Retinentes penes nos alterom partem
sigillis praedicti Episcopi and Decani and Capituli ejusdem signatam, His
Testibus Domino Olivero de Dinham, Galfrido de Kamul, Willielmo Martin, Henrico
de Rawleigh, Richardo de Poltimore, Roberto de Dennys, Militibus. Waltero de
Braynton, Henrico de Pynn, Philippo Deneband, and multis al^is.

A grant made to the Mayor and Citizens, by the Bishop, Dean and Chapter for
the enclosing the said Churchyard, erecting of Gates, and not hindering the
Execution of Justice there.
Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quorum notitiam presens scriptum pervenerit,
Petrus miseratione divina Exoniensis Episcopus Decanus and Capitulum ejusdem
loci salutem in vero salvatore, Cum dudum dilecti nobis in Christo filii Cives
Exonienses de consensu Domini Edvardi illustris Regis Angliae, Domini Edmundi
Comitis Cornubiae nobis concessissent quod includere possumus Coemeterium
Cathedralis Ecclesiae nostri beati Petri Exoniensis and portas and posternas in
locis necessariis erigere, and illas de nocte claudere, juxta tenorem scripti
praedictorum Civium nobis inde facti, and nos pacem and tranquillitatem
Ecclesiae nostrae praedictae and Canonicorum nostrorum and Ministrorum
nostrorum Exoniensium residentium propter incursus latronum and alioorum
malefactorum evitandos omni cord desideramus, Quod quidem ad effectum
producere quomodo nullatenus possemus, nisi vicos and venellas inter domos
nostras versus Coemetcrium praedictum protendentes claudere possemus, Ita quod
in iisdem vicis and venellis portas and posternas erigamus, praedicti Major and
Cives ad honorem Dei and Ecclesiae nostrae praedictae, and ad securitatem
Canonicorum praedictorum and aliorum ministrorum nostrorum juxta tenorem
Chartae Domini Regis, and Chartae Domini Edmundi Comitis Cornubiae nobis de
Coneessione clausi praedicti, facturi quantum in ipsis est, concesserunt nobis
quod includere possemus Coemiterium praedictum and praecinctum Coemeterii
praedicti per vicos and venellas praedictas, Ita tamen quod portas and venellas
competentes in iisdem vicis and venellis erigamus, unde promittimus eisdem
Majori and Civibus praedictis quod unam largam pertam ad currus and carectas
apud le Fissand', Broadgate
and unam largam Portam ad currus and carectas in vico Sancti Martini, St.
Martins-gate
and unam largam Portam ad idem ad domum Archidiaconi Exoniensis, Palace-gate
and unam portam de latitudine octo pedum ad summagia and hernasia ducenda in
venella inter domum Decani Exoniensis, Bear-gate
and domum quae nune est Domini Rogeri de Dortesford, and unam posternam de
latitudine quinque pedum cum una craticula versus Ecclesiam Sancti Georgii ubi
lata porta fuit, and unam posternam de latitudine octo pedum ad summagia and
hernasia ducenda in venella quae ducit versus Fratres praedicatores ad domum
Domini Reginaldi le Ercenesk, Little Stele-gate
Birkly-gate
and unam posternam per medium Ecclesiae beati Petroci erigemus, St.
Petrock's-gate
Ita quod praedictae portae and posternae in aurora diei aperiantur, and tota
nocte claudantur, concessimus etjam eisdem Majori and Civibus praedictis quod
non liceat nobis nec Successoribus nostris aliquid terrae viae seu stratae,
ultra certas and aliquas metas Coemeterii praedicti authoritate nostra propria
sanctuario nostro imposterum appropriare, and quod praedicti Major and Cives.
and little haeredes habeant plenum posse ad attachimenta sua facienda, and omnia
alia exequenda, quae ad Coronam and pacem Domini Regis pertinent extra antiquas
metas Coemeterii praedicti sicut facere and exequi consueverunt sine
impedimento nostro vel successorum nostrorum, and nos and successores nostri
praedictos Majorem and Cives. and little heredes versus Dominum Regem, and
Dominum Edmundum Comitem Cornubiae and omnes alios quoscunque de omnibus quae
eis opponi poterint occasion Concessionum Clauso praedicto conservabimus
indemnes. In cujus rei testimonium praesenti scripto sigilla nostra duximus
opponenda. His testibus, Domino Hugone de Courteney, Domino Olivero de Dinham,
Domino Hugone Peverell de Sampford, Domino Richardo de Poltymore, Domino
Henrico de Rawleigh, Magistro Homund de Parle Bean (tune seneschallo Domini
Edmundi Comitis Cornubiae) in Devonia, Domino Thoma de Pinn Vicecomite tune
Devonensi, and aliis, datum Exoniae die Lunae proxime post Festum
Annunciationis Dominicae, Anno Domini 1286.

Regna Regum 14. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1286.
Mayors and Bailiffs
David Tailor Stephen Langdon Henry Golderott Peter Green Roger Russell^

Actio nocumenti Hugonis Peverell do Sampford in qua queritur de Domino Petro
Episcopo Exoniensi, ac Decano and Capitulo ejusdem, eo quod levaverunt murum,
and erexerunt portam ex transverso vici Domini Regis in dicta Civitate, and
claudercnt eam nocte, Rot. 44.

Dominus Nicholaus Recter de Thorverton admissus est ad libertatem Civitatis
praedictae per successionem and tanquam hares patris sui defuncti.

A great part of Exbridg through foul weather and high water fell down, and
again soon repaired.

Regna Regum 15. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1287.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Zouch Richard Allen Richard Montin William Kerswell John Well

Bishop Quivill within his Diocese called a Synod among his Clergy, who made
many good Canons. He also impropriated the Parish of St. Newlein, and Stoke
Gabriel, and united them to the Office of the Chancellor of the Cathedral
Church, on Condition that a Lecture of Divinity be there weekly read by him,
otherwise the Gift to be void, and the Bishop may again dispose thereof; This
is now duly performed by a Sermon preached every Friday morning in the Quire of
the Cathedral.

Regna Regum 16. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1288.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Zouch Walter Langdon William Buffett Williom Gatepath Jorden Atlane

Memorandum quod Aldermanni hujus Civitatis sunt elegendi per sacramenta
vigin^i quatuor tam ad exercenda sua Officia infra Civitatem, quam in suburbiis
ejusdem extra Portas. Rot. 11.

Consuctudo est quod Tencmenta infra Civitatem Exoniensem and ejus suburbia
scituata legata alicui, aon possunt plene possideri, neque legaturus habere
inde seisinam, antequam Testamentum in plena Curia probatur secundum
Consuetudinem dictae Civitatis. Rot. 20.

Regna Regum 17. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1289.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Allen John Rook Richard Montin Walter Langdon Robert Wyton

Consuetudo in Civitate Exoniense est quod omnia Tenementa infra praedictam
Civitatem and suburbia ejusdem sunt partibilia inter Fratres and Sorores. Rot.
5.

Relevium de 2 s. 6 d. solutum fuit per Alanum de Barcomb secundum
Consuetudinem Civitatis praedictae Majori and Communitati dictae Civitatis de
Tenemento Archidiaconi Cornubiae quod accidit per mortem Henrici Bullock nuper
Archidiaconi ibidem. Rot. 11.

Regna Regum 18. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1290.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Zouch Henry Goldecot John Webb^ William Gatepath Richard Montin

Placitum inter servientes ad Clavam Civitatis Exoniensis quaerentes versus
Ballivum Episcopi, eo quod inhibuerit dictos servientes proclamare apud
Crediton Nundinas apud Civitatem praedictam serviendas in Festo Pentecostis
juxta Chartas Domini Regis inde Majori and Communitati Civitatis praedictae
factas.

An Inquisition taken at Exeter the day of the decollation of St. John the
Baptist before Malcoline Harleigh general Escheator of the King on this side of
Trent, before whom the Jurors of the Hundred of Wonneford (inter alia) upon
their Oaths do say, That Isabella de Fortibus Countess of Devon has made a
great purpresture or nuisance in the River of Fxe by erecting of a certain Wear
in the same; and that the said River and the whole course thereof appertains to
the King, in the right of the City of Exeter, that is to say, from Checkston
unto the Bridge of the said City called Exbridg, to the great annoyance, hurt
and damage of the said City, and the whole Country adjoining.

Another Inquisition was now likewise taken before the said Escheator; and the
Comonalty of the City of Exeter upon their Oaths do say, that the said City is
of the Crown, and appertains to the Crown, and so anciently has ever been, and
that the same is immediately held of the King; And further they say, that King
Henry the Third ( Father of the King that now is) gave the said City to his
Brother Earl of Cornwall and his Heirs, and that the Citizens of the said City
do hold the same City in Fee-Farm of the said Earl, as before they held it of
the King, yielding therefore yearly unto the said Earl, 13 l. 10 s. And further
they say, touching purprestures; That whereas the Water and River of Exe for
ever of old time did appertain unto the said City so far and unto the Port of
Exmouth; And the Fishing in the said Water and River is and ought to be Common
unto all men who list to Fish therein; yet nevertheless, Isabella Countess of
Devon about six years last past made and raised a Wear overthwart the River of
Exe, and which is of such an height that the fishing and taking of Salmons and
other Fish there, is destroyed on this side of the said Wear, to the great
damage and annoyance of the said City and County: And further they say, that
whereas in times past Boats and Vessels were wont to pass too and from the said
River even to the Bridge of the said City laden with Wines and Merchandises,
to the great Commodity of the whole Country, now no Boat or Vessel can so pass
up unto the said City by reason of the said Wear, to the great damage of the
said City and Country; And further they say, that all Lands and Tenements
within the said City be deviseable, legable and may be given and bequeathed by
the last Will and Testament, as well as any other Goods and Chattels
whatsoever, even in like manner as it is used and accustomed in London.

Regna Regum 19. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1291.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Zouch William Gatepath John Rook. William Kerswell William Buffett

Regna Regum 20. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1292.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Gatepath William Kerswell Henry Goldecot William Well Richard Montin

Bishop Quivell in the Eleventh year of his Government, 18. Octobris, by
drinking a Syrup, and in too hasty swallowing it was choked, and lies buried
in the Lady Chapel of his own Church The Franciscan or Gray Friars reported
that he died of God's just Judgment, for that he favored not, nor would suffer
them to build their new intended House, notwithstanding his promise made to the
King of so doing.

This Mayor with Richard Poltymore, Herbert de Pyne, and William le Speak
Knights were witnesses to a Deed of one Ongarus de Sancto Milone a Citizen
hereof, wherein he gave to the Dean and Chapter of this Church his Wood at
Stoke, called Stoke-Wood, and united the same to their Manor of Stoke, now
commonly called Stoke Canonicorum.

Regna Regum 21. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1293.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Tantifer John Feniton John Cook Alexander Coryton Robert Newton

Thomas Bitton, 15. Januarii, was installed Bishop of this Diocese (the Sea of
Canterbury being void) by John Roman Arch. Bishop of York.

Hugh Courtney the second of that name was now made Earl of Devon, as Heir
General to the Lord Ridevers late Earl of Devon, that is to say, the Son of
Hugh, the Son of John, the Son of Robert and Mary, the Daughter and Heir to
William Ridevers named William de Verona, the Son to Baldwyn the First, the Son
to Richard Ridevers the first Earl of Devon, so created by King Henry the
First, Son to William the Conqueror.

Regna Regum 22. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1294.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Zouch Walter Langdon John Rook William Buffett John Horn

Modus, forma, and processus, quomodo Meretrices infra Civitatem praedictam
sunt attachiandae. Rot. 15.

Regna Regum 23. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1295.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Zouch Walter Langdon William Kerswell William Buffett Roger Wheaton

Customia pro vinis solebat reddi de antiquo pro singulo dolio 4 d. Rot. 31.

Regna Regum 24. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1296.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Tantifer Walter Langdon William Kerswell Robert Newton Roger Wheaton

Consuetudo est quod viginti quatuor de Communi Concilio dictae Civitatis elegi
debent and solebant per consensum majoris partis dictae societatis.

Regna Regum 25. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1297.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Tantifer Walter Langdon Robert Newton William Kerswell Henry Trecott

The King came into the County of Devon, and visited the House of Plimpton, and
took this City in the way of his return homewards.

A Composition made between the City, and the Dean and Chapter for a Lane
leading to the City-walls between St. Catharques Almes-house and the Black
Friars, now the Earl of Bedford's house.

Regna Regum 26. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1299.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Tantifer William Buffett William Kerswell Roger Wheaton Nicholas Paige

It was now found by Verdict, that as the Lands within this City of a Freeman
descend to any person, so by the Custom the Freedom of he said City descends
therewith.

Regna Regum 27. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1299.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Horn Nicholas Paige Roger Beynim Robert Newton Stephen Bennant

Inquisitio capta fuit versus maritum pro eo quod verberavit and male
tractaverit uxorem, unde commissus fuit Goal. Rot. 23.

Major and Communitas consituere solebant Custodes de and in Portu Exonicensi
ad scrutandum in navibus batellis, and alibi, ne aliquis monetum argentum vel
aurum extra Regnum transvehat. Rot. 26.

Libertas seu Franchesia Civitatis Exoniensis descendit per successionem
haereditariam sive ^i Patre, Fratre, vel Avunculo, vel quocunque alio, cui quis
haeres existis. Rot 36.

Regna Regum 28. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1300.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Gatepatb John Paige Jordan Atlane Robert Newton John Perour.

Edmond Earl of Cornwall died sans issue whereby the Earldom reverted again to
the Crown, and came to the King's hands.

Regna Regum 29. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1301.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Tantifer Stephen Langdon William Kerswell John Gervis Roger Beynim

The Mayor of this City was this year chosen by the Voices of four and twenty
Freemen and Citizens hereof upon their Oaths. Rot. 1.

Great contention arose between the Dean and Chapter of this Churth, and the
Warden and Friars Preachers (commonly called the Black Friars) touching the
Burial of Sir Henry Rawley Knight, whose Corpse the Dean and Chapter required to
be presented at St. Peter's Church before it should be interred, which the said
Friars refusing to do, yet the Dean and Chapter caused it there to be brought,
where the same being presented, 'twas sent back again to the Fryer's house,
which they would not receive therein but made fast their Gate, by means whereof
the said Corpse lay so long unburied 'till it stank, and at last the Canons were
enforced to bury it in St. Peter's Church.

Regna Regum 30. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1302.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Beynim Roger Newton Walter Duport Thomas Farthein Michael Champernon

An Agreement made between the Dean and Chapter, and the Pryor and Friars
Preachers: That no person within the said City and Suburbs should be buried
within the Church or Cemitery of the said Friars, but that he should first be
presented at St. Peter's Church. Rot. 16.

A great contention arose between the Mayor and Commonalty of this City, and
the Tenants of the Lord of Kenton and Wyke Earl Marshal of England for denying
to pay Murage for their Wares and Merchandises. Rot. 13.

About this time flourished one Walter of Exeter,, so named being here born,
who was a Monk of the Order of St. Bennet, and dwelt in a little Cell in
Cornwall called St. Caroke, near about Lystithiel, he was well seen in History,
and at the request of one Baldwyn a Citizen here, wrote the History of Guy of
Warwick.

Regna Regum 31. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1303.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Wheaton Walter Langdon William Kerswell William Buffett Henry Trecott

A Controversy arose between the Mayor and Commonalty, and the Tenants of
Kenton touching certain Attachments made upon the River of Exe.

The like difference arose between the Tenants of Kenton against the
Inhabitants of Limston and Prattishead. Rot. 18.

Sundry persons breaking ground in Croll ditch for standings before the time
appointed for Lammas Fair, were all attached to answer the Mayor and Commonalty
for the same. Rot. 42.

Consuetudo in Civitate Exoniensi est approbata, quod liceat unicuique Civi
infra eandem Civitatem omnia Tenementa quae in eadem Civitate habuerit aut
perquisiverit in Testamento su^ legare cui voluerit. Rot. 49.

Regna Regum 32. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1304.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Wheaton Walter Langdon William Kerswell Robert Newton Walter Duport

Ordered that no person should buy any Wares, Merchandises or Victuals bringing
hither to be sold until the said Goods be brought into the Market, upon pain of
forfeiture of the same. Stat. 5. Edw. 6. cap. 14.

Also that no person bringing any Wares or Merchandises by water to this City,
shall unload or put the same to sale, 'till the Custom be paid. Stat. 1. Edw.
6. cap. 13.

Regna Regum 33. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1305.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Beynim Walter Langdon Robert Ashperton William Kerswell Henry Trecott

Regna Regum 34. Edw. the 1. An. D. 1305.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Beynim Walter Langdon Robert Newton William Kerswell Henry Trecott

Bishop Bitton having well governed this Church fourteen years on St. Matthew's
day, being 21. Sept. died, and in the middle of the Quire of his own Church
lies buried.

The King dyed 7. Julii, and his Son Edward the Second was Crowned in February
following.

Regna Regum 1. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1307.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Gatepath Jordan Atlane Jordan Perour Thomas Farthein Michael Turand

Walter Stapledon elected Bishop of this Diocese, and Consecrated at Canterbury
by Robert Winchelsy Archbishop thereof, 28. Sept. He was descended of Noble
Parentage, which being joined with his Learning, Wisdom and Policy, got him
into great favor with the King, who made him one of his Privy Council, and
Lord Treasurer of England. He founded and erected two Houses in Oxford, the one
named Stapledon's Inn (but since Exeter College) the other called Hart-Hall,
he was also a special Benefactor to St. John's Hospital here.

Regna Regum 2. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1308.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Beynim Michael Turand Walter Duport Robert Newton Thomas Farthein

This Bishop approaching toward the Eastgate of this City descended from his
Horse, and went on foot to St. Peter's Church, the whole Street whereon he
walked being covered with black cloth, which (as soon as he was passed over)
was taken up again, and given to the poor, he was installed here with great
Pomp and Solemnity, but about his Feast, and service thereof there fell some
discord between him and Hugh Courteney Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir Hugh
Courteney Knight, who claimed to be Steward of the said Feast, for that he held
the Manor of Slapton of the Bishop by that service, at length the difference
was thus made up, viz.

1. First, that the said Hugh Courteney and and his Heirs being of lawful age,
and holding the said Manor of Slapton, shall be Stewards at the Feast of the
installing of every Bishop of this See.

2. Also, that they shall at the first coming of the Bishop to Exeter meet him
at the Eastgate of the said City when he descends from his Horse, and then
going a little before him on the right hand, shall keep off the press of the
people from him, and attend him into the Quire of the Cathedral Church there to
be installed.

3. Also, the said Hugh Courteney and his Heirs shall at the said installing
Feast serve in the first Mess at the Bishop's own Table.

4. Also, in consideration of which service the said Hugh Courteney and his
Heirs shall have for their Fee four Silver Dishes of those which he shall so
place in at the first Mess, two Salt-sellers, one Cup wherein the Bishop shall
drink at that Meal, one Wine-pot, one Spoon, and two Basins wherein the Bishop
shall then wash; All which said Vessels are to be of Silver, Always provided,
that the said Hugh Courteney or his Heirs (being of full age) do attend the
said service in person, if not hindered by sickness, or the King's Writ
procured by the said Bishop or his Successors, then to appoint some worshipful
Knight, to supply the place by a Deputation, and shall swear that his Lord is
so sick, that he cannot personally attend the service: Then shall the Knight be
admitted to perform the same, and shall have (to the use of his said Lord) the
Fees aforesaid; And if the said Knight alleges that his Lord is by the
procurement of the Bishop served with the King's Writ, and thereby hindered
from attendance, and will swear this to be true in his conscience, he shall
then be admitted to do the same service, unless the Bishop will positively
swear the contrary, In which case the Knight shall depart without doing the
said service, or receiving any thing for the same for that turn only.

5. Also, the said Hugh Courteney and his Heirs shall do all other services to
the said Bishop and his Successors for the said Manor of Slapton which
appertain to the same for evermore; And furthermore if the Heirs of the said
Hugh Courteney be of lawful age, or not, at the time of the Feast of this
Instalment, and performed not the service as aforesaid, that then they shall
not have any of the said Silver Vessels, nor any other thing due for the said
service for that time by reason of their said Office, nor any other person in
their name or Behalf.

6. Also, it shall not be lawful for the said Hugh Courteney, his Heirs or
Assigns, at the Feast of the Instalment of any Bishop of Exeter for the time
being, to put in o^ put out any person, or to do any other thing by himself or
others belonging to the said Feast by reason of his Office, or that he shall
demand or require any more or other thing than what is before declared.

7. And furthermore, the said Hugh Courteney and his Heirs, and the Knight
aforesaid who shall do the said service for them, shall have Hay and Provender
for their Horses, and for their servants Horses, attending on them; and also
his Livery of Wine and Candles as is meet and convenient.

8. In consideration of which premises to be hereafter had, without any denial
or contradiction for evermore; The said Hugh Courteney for himself and his
Heirs has quietly remised and released to the said Bishop and his Successors
all other exactions, demands or quarrels for and concerning the said Office
Fees, or any other thing belonging to the said service of Stewardship for
evermore; Given at Newton Plympton under the Seals of the said Bishop, Dean and
Chapter, the morrow after the Feast of St. Thomas the Apostle, Anno Domini
1308. and the second year of King Edward the Second. Witnesses, William Martin,
Philip Courteney, Thomas Chichester, Stephen Haccomb, Roger Novant, Thomas
Archdeacon, John Bickton, John Troyagn, Knights, Robert Stockhay, John
Buttlesgate, Robert Vpex, Henry Buckrell, cum multis aliis.

Regna Regum 3. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1309.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Beynim Thomas Farthein Walter Duport William Newton William Kerswell

A controversy arose, whence ensued great troubles between Hugh Courteney the
third Earl of Devon, and the Mayor and Commonalty of this City, the occasion
thus; The said Earl on a certain Market day sent his Cator hither to buy Fish,
at which time there were only three pots of Fish in the Market; the Bishop's
Cator likewise came, and both of them thinking the whole to be too little for
either of them, were at some strife thereabout; The Mayor on his part minding
the welfare of the Commons of the said City, and that they also might have the
benefit of the said Market, did decide this controversy, and delivered one pot
of the said Fish to the Earl's Cator, another of them to the Bishop's Cator,
and the third he here reserved for the Market; The Earl being advertised hereof
thought himself much wronged by the Mayor, in not having all the Fish, and was
much displeased thereat, and threatened to be revenged on him, and shortly
thereafter coming hither, sent to the Mayor to come to him (unto whom it seemed
the Mayor was a retainer) and the Mayor being advertised of the Earls
displeasure, and well knowing him to be of a choleric disposition, calls
together his Brethren and honest Commons of the said City to the Guild Hall,
unto whom he declares the Earls displeasure with him and the cause, and that
he was now going to him, and desired them to accompany him thither, and to
afford him their succor (if need so required) which they readily promised;
Then said the Mayor (my Masters) I know the Earl will quarrel with me, and as
he has threatened, so will he be avenged on me, and for as much as his
displeasure is against me for the Citie's interest, and by discharging the duty
of my Office, I am to crave your assistance, in case the Earl should offer me
any violence: After these and the like Speeches they went to the Earl's House,
and into his Lodging Chamber the Mayor was brought, and the door closed on him;
The Earl storms at the Mayor, none of whose answers would satisfy the Earl,
which the Mayor perceiving, took off an outer Coat he then wore (it being the
Earl's Livery) and delivered it to him again, whereat the Earl fell into
greater passion, and the Commons (attending at the Door) doubting of the
Mayor's safery, knocked at the said door, and demanded their Mayor, which being
(after sundry requests) denied, they attempted to break open the same, which
the Earl apprehending, and doubting what might ensue thereon, entreated the
Mayor to pacify the People, which was soon done, and so peaceably they all
returned; And albeit the Earl then (to avoid the fury of the People) seemed
pacified, yet could he never thereafter show a good countenance toward this
City, whereupon an Ordinance was made by the Mayor and Common Council, that no
Franchised man of this City should wear any Foreigners Livery, Cognizance or
Badge, (without the Mayor's License) and inserted the same in the Freeman's
Oath, which is to this day observed.

Regna Regum 4. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1310.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Tantifer Walter Langdon Peter Zouch Peter Lovecock Walter Lekenn

Regna Regum 5. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1311.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Waltor Langdon William Duport John Perour Adam Dyer Thomas Farthein

The said Hugh Courteney Earl of Devon in his high displeasure against this
City maliciously destroyed the Haven belonging thereunto, or an Arm of the Sea
coming up from Topisham to the Walls of the said City, whereupon sundry Bills
of Complaint were exhibited against him to the King, and diverse Inquisitions
thereon taken, but no redress could be had, Might at that time so much
overcoming Right.

Regna Regum 6. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1312.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Gatepath Philip Lovecock William Kerswell William Farthein John
Smalecomb

The King in his Writ named the Mayor and Bailiffs of this City, Justices of
his Peace. About this time flourished one Godfrey of Cornwall, who proceeded
Doctor in Divinity both at Oxford, and also at Paris in France, he was a
Prebendary of this Church, and did much service in both these Universities; he
was very skilful in Aristotle, and in the Master of the Sentences, wherein he
was more affected and experienced then in the Scriptures, and better acquainted
with the making of a subtle Syllogism, than in the explaining of the Text; he
wrote sundry Books, about the number of Thirty.

Regna Regum 7. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1313.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Beynim Thomas Farthein Philip Lovecock William Kerswell John Perour

The ancient Custom of this City touching the admission of any Person to the
Freedom and Liberties of the same

1. First, the Mayor of the said City, of his own free guise may admit any one
person to the said Liberties.

2. Also, the Court may admit another person to the Liberties at their will and
pleasure.

3. Also, the Heir of any Franchized man may by his Patrimony claim his
Freedom, whether the Inheritance descends from the Grandfather, Father, Uncle,
Brother, or any other person being Freeman of the said City, by and under whom
he derives any Estate of Inheritance.

4. Also, all such as have served as Apprentices under any Franchized man for
seven years space, at the request of the Master, upon the testimony of the
truth thereof, that he truly served out his said time, are to be admitted
Freemen, paying the usual Fees of the Court, viz.

To the Mayor 1 s. 8 d. To the Recorder 1 s. 4 d. To the Townclark 8 d. To the
Camberlain 8 d. To the four Bailiffs 8 d. a piece 2 s. 8 d. To the Swordbearer
4 d. To the four Sergeants at Mace 4 d. a piece 1 s. 4 d. To the Poor of the
Mawdlin 1 d. For Inrolment of the Apprentices Indentures 1 s. 0 d. 9 s. 9 d.

5. Lastly, all other persons are to be admitted by way of Redemption, and by
such reasonable Fines as the Mayor and Common Council of the said City shall
set on them.

All which do thus appear in the course of the Court Rolls in the several
Reigns of this King, King Edward the Third, King Richard the Second, etc.

Regna Regum 8. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1314.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Beynim Richard Soller Michael Skinner Richard Lekenn John Davy

Regna Regum 9. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1315.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Philip Lovecock Thomas Farthein Richard Seller Ralph Dyer Matthew Capper

Consuctudo recepta est and usitata in Civitate Exoniensi quod si mulier u viro
suo decesserit ut adultera, and vixerit in Adulterio, neque dotem habebit,
neque ulla action uti debet pro eadem. Rot. 50. Which well agrees with the
Common Law, according to this Distich:

Sponte virum mulier fugiens, and adultera facta, Dote sua careat, nisi sponsi
sponte retracta.

Regna Regum 10. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1316.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Philip Lovecock Nicholas Torand John Tredeyners John Buffeit John Davy

The displeasure of the foresaid Earl of Devon being grown into anger, and from
thence to an extreme hatred and revenge, he now persevered therein, devising
all possible means to prejudice the whole City, as by intruding upon their
Liberties, destroying their Haven, building up a Key at Topsham, taking from
them perforce the Fishing in the River of Exe, and every way oppressing them,
in so much that what was once observed of King Henry the Second, and Thomas
Beckett, may as truly be said of this Earl in reference to this City.

-- Immortale odium atque insanabile vulnus. The said Mayor and Commonalty
exhibited their Bill of Complaint unto the King against the said Earl, who
thereupon sent forth his Writ to the Sheriff of Devon bearing date 20. Martii
hoc Anno, for an Inquisition to be taken, and albeit the same was accordingly
executed, yet was it never returned up; For which cause the King sends his
second Writ unto the said Sheriff, dated 12. Junii then next following,
strictly charging him to speed the execution thereof, and to make return, which
was so done; And albeit the Inquisition was found against the said Earl, yet
could no relief be thereupon had, or redress made of the said grievances.

Regna Regum 11. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1317.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Beynim William Kerswell Thomas Farthein Martin Lekenn Martin Capper

The Bakers of this City were found guilty touching their Bread, which was
light, and not according to the Assize, for which offense they were Fined,
whereof seventeen of them dwelled within the Bishop's Fee, and did therefore
claim to be exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Mayor, but could not prevail
therein.

Bishop Stapledon built a very fair House without Temple Bar London, used by
himself, and many of his Successors, when they were summoned up to London to
attend the service of the Parliament, which said House was since purchased by
the Earl of Essex, who resided therein, whereby 'twas called Essex House.

Regna Regum 12. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1318.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Philip Lovecock Martin Lekenn John Tredeyners Thomas Spycer Robert Woan

The King preparing a great Army to march against the Scots, having invaded
England, did rate and tax the Cities within this Realm to aid him, and that too
according to their tenure, at which time this City did set forth thirty
Soldiers well arrayed and furnished with Armor, money, and all things
necessary for the said War.

John Powdras alias Powderham, a Tanner's Son born within this City, named
himself to be the Son of King Edward the First, and that he being in his Cradle
was by a false Nurse stolen thence, and that the King that now is, was placed
in his room; but in fine he confessed the whole truth, even that he was
persuaded thus to say by the motion and instigation of a Familiar Spirit, which
he kept by him in the likeness of a Cat; but his Spirit at last failing him, he
was at the Gallows fairly executed for his said offense.

Inquisitio capta ad inquirendum de malefactori^us and meretricibus, and
Juratores dicunt quod Alicia Hamlyn, Joanna Hamlyn, Rosa Hamlyn, Alicia Byren,
and Albreda de Romsey sunt Communes Meretrices, and Communia tenent lupanaria,
dicunt etiam quod Henricus Halwell Clericus tenet and nutrit Aliciam at Newham
Meretricem suam. Rot. 8.

Cui pater est populus, pater est sibi nullus, and omnis,
Cui pater populus, non habet ille patrom,
Est pater ignotus, filius inde nothus.
To whom the People Father is,
To him is Father none at all:
To whom the People Father is,
Well Fatherless we may him call.
Beasts are privileged above many,
We have but one Sire, they have many.
Regna Regum 14. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1320.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Philip Lovecock Martin Lek^nn Thomas Furbor Walter Suegoth^ll Thomas Farth^in

Henry Tracy an Inhabitant of this City had a numerous Issue, being the Father
of Eight Sons and Five Daughters, the Sixth and Seventh Sons were of one Birth
Twins, and so well like in all Lineaments, and so equal in stature, so colored
in hair, and so like in face and gesture, that they could not be known one from
the other no not by their Friends, Parents, Brethren or Sisters, but privately
by some secret marks, and openly by wearing some several colored Ribands, or
the like, which in sport they would sometimes exchange to make trial of their
Friends Judgment, yet somewhat more strange was that their minds and affections
were as one, for what the one loved, the other desired, and so on the contrary,
the loathing of any thing by the one, was the distasting of the same thing by
the other, yea, such a confederation or inbred power or sympathy was in their
natures, that if Nicholas were sick or grieved, Andrew felt the like pain
(though far distant and remote in their persons, and that too without any
intelligence given to either party) And 'twas also observed that if Andrew were
merry, Nicholas was likewise so affected, although in different places, which
long they could not endure to be asunder, for they ever desired to eat, drink,
sleep, and wake together, yea, so they lived and dyed; For they both served the
King in Arms against his Barons, and in a Battle, the one being slain, the
other stepped presently into his place, where, in the height of danger (no
persuasions able to remove or hinder him) was there likewise killed, Of these
Two Gentlemen may be truly paralleled what was but feigned by the Poets of
Twins, that they were born, eat, slept, and died not asunder, which offers me
an occasion to remember a witty Jest pleasantly (or as some will simply)
retorted by a young Gentleman that casually came to the Court of Augustus
Caesar, so well like the Emperor in bodily Lineaments, as hardly the one could
be distinguished from the other, which being known to the Emperor, the young
man was sent for and brought into the Emperor's presence, in whom be saw
himself better than in any Picture Apelles could have drawn, and discoursed
with him in these words; Young man, has not your Mother been some time
resident in Rome, (implying, that by his Fathers familiarity he might have been
begotten) to whom the Gentleman instantly replied, That his Mother was never in
Rome, but his Father often, and thereby returned upon the Emperor, what he
intended to have put on him.

Regna Regum 15. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1321.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Wotton John Perour John Tailor Thomas Spicer John Davy

A Subsidy granted of the sixth penny of every man's Goods within this City.

In the wall of the Quire on the South side of St. Peter's Church are two
ancient Monuments, and thereon two Statues in their complete Armor, their
Helmets lying under their Heads, their Pourtraytures cut cross legged (to
signify they had been at the Holy Land) upon the one are the Arms of Bohun,
Earl of Hereford; and on the other, the Coat Armor of Rawleigh of Rawleigh,
whose Heir is Chichester.

Regna Regum 16. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1322.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Wetton Richard Soller Walter Sweinthill William Brewer Thomas Furbor

Two Writs of nisi prius were brought down and tried at the Castle of Exeter
before John Stoner and Richard Stapledon Knights, the King's Justices of
Assizes for this Western Circuit; In one of them Hugh Courteney the third Earl
of Devon was Plaintiff, and the Mayor and Commonalty of this City were
Defendants, touching the Manor of Exiland and Suburbs there, which the said
Earl claimed to be ancient demesne and parcel of his Barony of Oakhampton, and
so exempted from the said City, and no part of the Suburbs of the same. The
other Writ of nisi prius was between the said Earl and the Prior of St.
Nicholas within the said City Plaintiffs, and the said Mayor and Commonalty
Defendants, touching the Customs, Privileges, and Liberties of a Fair,
commonly culled Lammas Fair; In both which Trials Verdicts were found and given
for the said Mayor and Commonalty.

Regna Regum 17. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1323.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Wotton John Lekenn Walter Hughton John Davy Roger Tailor

Queen Isabella being attended on by Walter Stapledon Bishop of this See, and
sundry other Noble men, sailed into France to the French King her Brother,
taking with her the young Prince her Son, with an intent to make a Peace
between the two Realms.

Regna Regum 18. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1324.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Philip Lovecock Martin Lekenn Henry Lovecock Thomas Furbor John Erchdeacon

Bishop Stapledon secretly departs from the Queen without taking any leave,
and returns into England, discovers all the secrets and actings of the Queen,
joyneth with the Spencers, and makes preparation to prevent the Queens attempts.

The Custom of Woodhay is that a Logg out of every Seam of Wood which is
brought over Exbridge, is to be taken for and toward the reparation of the
said Bridge.

Regna Regum 19. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1325.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Philip Lovecock Nicholas Wallys Richard Soller Martin Lekenn Thomas Oxton

Memorandum, That out of the great Roll of this year there are cut out and
conveyed away the first nine Rolls.

Regna Regum 20. Edw. the 2. An. D. 1326.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Philip Lovecock John Birch Thomas Furbor Martin Lekenn Thomas Spicer

The King hearing that the Queen is landed in England with an Army, sets his
things in order, and flies toward Bristol, leaving Walter Bishop of this
Church to be Custos of London, whom the Londoners took and beheaded in
Cheapside, and buried his body in a Sandhill in his own house without
Temple Bar, which about six Months after was taken up and brought hither to
this City, where in his own Church very honorably was the same interred in the
North side of the Quire, having governed the same about twenty years.

The King is deposed, and Edward his Son of the age of fourteen years was
proclaimed King and Crowned.

Regna Regum 1. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1327.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Soller Thomas Gervis William Kirton Richard Pleigh William Austin

James Berkley was elected Bishop of this Diocese, and 26. Martii consecrated
thereunto, and 24. Julii then next following died, and was buried in his own
Church (as some say) but others think that he never came hither at all,

Ballivi Civitatis Exoniensis peticrunt cis allocari and habuerunt Curiam suam
de uno praelito terrae coram Ada de Stauton and sociis suis Justiciariis Domini
Regis de Banco.

Regna Regum 2. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1328.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Philip Lovecock Thomas Furbor Martin Lekenn Henry Haughton Peter Beynim

John Grandison being elected Bishop of this See, was accordingly 8. Octobris
consecrated thereupon, and was also made one of the King's Privy Council, sent
often beyond Sea as an Ambassador, wherein he did always so discreetly demean
himself, as that thereby he got great reputation and honor.

Regna Regum 3. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1329.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Philip Lovecock Thomas Gervis Henry Lovecock John Lekenn Richard Pleigh

A Synod held at London before Simon Archbishop of Canterbury, who ordered
that a diligent inquiry should be made after the death of Bishop Stapledon,
whose Murderers and all others who were privy or any way consenting to his
death, were sentenced to die, and executed accordingly.

This King by his Charter granted to this City cognizance of Pleas (i. e.) that
no Freeman hereof should implead another Freeman of the same City out of the
Liberties of the said City on pain of losing his Freedom.

Regna Regum 4. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1330.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Lekenn John Trediners Henry Haughton Henry Gatepath Walter Gervis

The Guildhall of this City was new built.

The Porter of the Westgate put out of his Office and punished for opening of
the said gate in the night season without the leave of the Major.

Regna Regum 5. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1331.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Philip Lovecock Henry Hughton John Lekenn Robert Pleigh Robert Kirton

Simon Mapham Archbishop of Canterbury sent out his Process in order to the
Visitation of this Diocese, and to begin the same in St. Peter's Church, for
which purpose upon the Monday next after Ascension day he came hither, from
whom Bishop Grandison appealed, and with force withstood the said Archbishop,
not suffering him to come within this Church or Cloisters.

A Writ directed to the Dean and Chapter for the trial of certain Lands lying
within the Fee of St. Sydwell, but in regard they had not power there to hold
Plea of Land, the said Writ was afterwasd renewed, and returned before the
Mayor and Bailiffs of this City, and before them the matter was heard and
determined in the King's Court held at the Guildhall here.

Regna Regum 6. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1332.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Lekenn Thomas Furbor Lawrence Colwell Reynold Noldekin John Sutton

Whosoever builds upon his own Land within this City, by the ancient Custom
thereof may not destroy, or in any sort obstruct the accustomed light of the
Tenements next adjoining.

Regna Regum 7. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1333.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Gervis Reynold Noldekin William Brewer John Lakenn John Sutton

An Inquisition was had, and by a Jury John Matthew a Servant to the Townclark
hereof was found guilty for conveying away the Rolls of the Records of eight
Courts, and had placed others in their stead.

Regna Regum 8. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1334.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Lekenn Thomas Lichfield John Sutton Henry Lovecock Alexander Wallis
Robert Turner

Charta Martini Lekenn Majoris Civitatis Exoniensis in Constituendo legatum
locum Majoris tenentem, in haec verba, scil.

Noverint universi per praesentes quod eg^ Martinus Lekenn Major Civitatis
Exoniensis infirmitate corporis gravi positus, adeo ut Curiis Domini Regis
dictae Civitatis commodo interesse non valeo, dilectum mihi in Christo Thomam
Lichfield dictae Civi^atis concivem in loco meo posui, and per praesentes pono
ad tenendum Curiam sive Curias-dictae Civitatis, quoties me ab eisdem abesse
contigerit, and ad faciendum omnia alia in dicta Civitate and Curia quae ego
facerem, si personaliter interessem. In cujus rei testimonium has literas
patentes sigillo Officii Majoratus ficri feci Sigillatum, datum Exoniae
praedicto decim^ septimo die mensis Martii Anno Regni Regis Edvardi tertii a
conquestu octavo.

This Martin Lekenn 18. Martii died in his Mayoralty, and Thomas Lichfield was
elected Mayor to supply for the residue of this year that Office.

Regna Regum 9. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1335.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Hughton Robert Pleigh Thomas Furbor William Lydeland Alexander Wallis

Custos and Magister domus beatae Mariae Magdalenae extra portam Australem
Civitatis Exoniensis tulerunt glebam pro redditu exeunte de quodam gardino
extra portam ori^ntalem Civitatis praedictae, vocato Morley Shulteshay, jacente
inter gardinum Willielmi Tantifer and Richardi Russell, and haec Consuetud^
vocata Gleba.

Adjudicatum fuit Decano and Capitulo beati Petri Exoniensis quoddam Tenementum
sc^tuatum is vico Australi Civitatis Exoniensis secundum Consuetudinem
Civitatis praedictae and dicitur Shortford.

Decanus and Capitulum beati Petri Exoniensis recuperaverunt seisinam unius
Tenementi in Parochia Sanctae Sativole extra portam orientalem dictae Civitatis
secumdum consuetudinem esusdem Civitatis, and dicitur Gavelock.

Regna Regum 10. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1336.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Hughton Thomas Furbor John Coals William Shillingford John Colebrook

The King in Parliament holden at Westminster made a Duchy of the Earldom of
Cornwall, and gave the same to his eldest Son Prince Edward (surnamed the Black
Prince, from his dreadful acts) and sent his Letters thereof to the Mayor (by
the name of the Mayor of his Honorable City of Exeter) and also sent a Writ
for the proclaiming thereof, and withal made this City parcel of the said
Duchy, as formerly it was of the Earldom. This City being now held of the said
Duke as parcel of the said Duchy by the Fee Farm Rent of twenty pounds per
Annum.

Regna Regum 11. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1337.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Gervis Rober Noble Richard Pleigh John Newton John Davy

Bishop Grandison Founded and built the College and Church of O^tcry, St Mary
in the County of Devon, and endowed the same with great Livelihoods; He was
also a liberal Benefactor to the Vicars Choral of his own Church.

Regna Regum 12. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1338.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Haughton Nicholas Godescott Richard Pleigh Thomas Furbor John Davy

Consuctudo in Civitate Exoniensi est quod nothus non gaudebit privilegio ullo
pariter cum legitimis, which well agrees with a rule in Law. Qui ex damnato
coitu nascuntur, inter liberos non computentur.

Regna Regum 13. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1339.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Lichfield Robert Bridport John Cook John Newton Roger Wythom

Fines for the Conveyance of Lands or Rents were now usually levied within this
City, whereof I here thought good to instance one or two instead of many, viz.

Haec est finalis Concordia facta inter Johanem Carpenter quaerentem, and
Robertum Cottrell. Defensorem de duabus acris terrae jacentibus in suburbiis
extra portam orientalem Civitatis Exoniensis.

Haec est finalis Concordiae facta inter Robertum Br^dworthy quaerentem and
Walteram d^ Swemthull and Matildam uxorem ej^^ defensorem de uno Messuagio
jacente in summo vico Civitatis Exoniensis.

Regna Regum 14. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1340.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Hughton Robert Bridport Thomas Furbor Richard Pleigh Richard Halberton

I held it likewise requisite to set down how ancient the Inrolment of Deeds
has here been, and thereof only to give you a like precedent or two, viz.

Irrotulatur Charta Willielmi Leigh facta Thomae Robin; de uno Messuagio jacent
infra Parochiam d^^i Stephani Civitatis^ Exoniensis.

Irrotulatur Charta Rogeri Shillingford facta Waltero Hugthon de uno M^ssuagio
^acente extra portam occidentalem Civitatis praedictae.

Regna Regum 15. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1341.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hanry Hughton Reynold Wythen Thomas Furbor Richard Pleigh John Sutton

The ancient Custom of this City is when the Chief Lord in Fee cannot be
answered of the rent due to him out of his Tenement, and no distress can be
there levied for the same; The Lord must come to the Tenement, and there take a
stone or some other dead thing of the said Tenement, and bring the same to the
Court at the Guildhall held before the Mayor and Bailiffs, and thus must he do
seven quarter days successively; And this is called Aglebe, And if on the said
seventh quarter day the Lord be not satisfied of his rent and arrears, then the
said Tenement shall be adjudged to the said Lord, To hold the same a year and a
day, And this is called Gavelock. And then forthwith Proclamation shall be
openly made in the Court, That if any man pretends any Title to the said
Tenement, that he appear within the year and day then next following, and
satisfy the Lord of the said rent and arrears; but if no appearance be made,
and the rent not paid; Then shall the Lord come again to the said Court, and
pray that according to the said Custom the said Tenement be adjudged to him in
his Demesh as of Fee, according to the intention of the Law in such like cases,
which is commonly called le cessavit per biennium; And this Custom here is
called Shortford and in French Foreclose; And so the Lord shall have from
thenceforth the said Tenement with the appurtenances in Fee to him and his
Heirs for ever.

Regna Regum 16. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1342.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Furbor Robert Bradworthy Nicholas Halberton Nicholas Godescott Walter
White

Bishop Grandison with others by order of Parliament, Were sent over as
Ambassadors to the Pope touching a Treaty of Peace, and afterward concluded
between England and France.

Nemo infra aetatem viginti and unius Annorum existens potest ullo modo terras
seu Tenementa sua alicui dimittere per consuetudinem Civitatis praedictae. Rot.
40.

Regna Regum 17. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1353.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Furbor William Hastment Roger Treseler Richard Pleigh Robert Noble

Regna Regum 18. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1344.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Hughton John Newton John Sutton Richard Pleigh Robert Noble

The King was advertized (but untruly) of a Riot here committed by sundry lewd
and evil disposed persons, which information was so enforced, that the King
(being otherwise encumbered with the care of his Foreign Wars) conceived the
worse of the Report, and thereupon sent down his Commission of Oyer and
Determiner dated 20. Aug. this year, and directed to the Mayor and Justices of
the said City, strictly requiring them to have a special care as well for the
appeasing of the said Tumult and Riot, as for the punishment of the Offenders
according to the nature and quality of their Offense.

Regna Regum 19. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1345.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Hughton Nicholos Halberton Robert Treseler William Hascom John Sutton

The Plague of Pestilence reigned here almost three years space.

Regna Regum 20. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1346.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Furbor John Gist Robert Noble John Pleigh Walter White

This Robert Noble having a beautiful Daughter, named Helen, who was
beleaguered with many Lovers, in so much that she might justly with the Poet
complain.

In me turbaruunt luxuriosa proci. But she bidding a defiance to them all,
resolving within her self to die a Virgin, by leading a single life, one of the
number despairing of any success in his Suit, bestowed on her this Encomium.

As noble Helen was the cause
Of ten years War in Troy:
So Helen Noble is the cause
Of this my great annoy.
Regna Regum 21. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1347.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Hughton Thomas Spicer John Bonleigh John Sutton John Newton

Arnulphus Atwere summonitus fuit ad respondendum Henrico Hughton (tempore
Majoratus) de placito vasti, and recuperaverit damna sua juxta consuetudinem
Civitatis praedictae.

Here happened a great contention about the Election of the Mayor and other
Officers this year, about which great troubles were like to have ensued, had
they not been happily prevented: For avoiding the like for the future, it was
ordered by the Mayor and Common Council of this City that from henceforth no
person should be chosen Mayor hereof, but a wise, grave, sober, and an honest
man, and had been tried in the Office of a Steward of the said City for one
whole year; And further, that he be able to expend yearly of his own Freehold
five pounds at the least; And that he should be chosen only by a double Jury,
that is to say, by four and twenty persons, who upon their several and
respective Oaths should make their Election according to this Order.

Regna Regum 22. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1348.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Nicholas Halberton Robert Noble John Whit^ Nicholas Godescott Robert Noble
junior John Byrch

Upon the death of Nicholas Halberton late Mayor of this City, who died 14.
Julii, Robert Noble was elected into the said Office to undergo the same for
the residue of the said year.

Regna Regum 23. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1349.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Bridport John Spicer Henry Furbor John Otrey John Sleigh

In Easter Term this year in the King's Bench at Westminster 'twas found by
Verdict that the Passage Lastage and Key of Prattished at Exmouth, and all the
Profits thence arising were and are parcel of the Fee Farm of this City, holden
of the Duke of Cornwall as a Member of the Manor of Lydford, under the yearly
rent of 20 l.

Regna Regum 24. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1350.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Bridport Robert Brown Thomas Spicer John Gyst Richard Olliver

Decanus and Capitulum Exoniae clamant cognitionem omnium placitorum infra
Feodum sanctae Sativule extra Portam orientalem Civitatis praedictae coram
Ballivis suis ibidem (exceptis placitis Coronae.)

Sir John Carew Baron of Carew made Lord Deputy of Ireland.

Regna Regum 25. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1351.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Bridport John Swanton Roger Atwill Richard Somaster John Spicer

Wiliielmus Milbury Indictatus fuit eo quod implacitaverit Thomam Furbor in
Curia Christianitatis coram Officiali Archidiaconatus Exoniensis.

Regna Regum 26. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1342.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Bridport Richard Olliver Thomas Spicer Robert Brown John Gyst

De attachiamento capto extra Portam orientalem in suburbiis Exoniensibus, and
quarens in misericordia pro eo quod injuste ibidem cepit.

Regna Regum 27. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1353.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Spicer Roger Atwil Simon Atpitt John Otrey John Samaster

The Pasture of Croldich alias Southenhay was set to rent for five shillings
per Annum.

Licentia petita and concessa pro discarcandis navibus in portu Exoniensi.

Regna Regum 28. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1354.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Spicer John Gyst Roger Atwill Henry Furbor William Bennett

John Weeks Esquire elected the first Recorder of this City, and had a pension
of three pounds per Annum allowed him, and afterward this Officer was chosen
yearly like the Mayor and other Officers of the said City.

Testamentum Reginaldi at Hayne in qu^ legavit Tenementa sua in suburbiis
Exoniensibus ad Ecclesiam-beati Petri Exoniensis pro sustentatione
incarceratorum in Castro Exoniensi.

Licentia data est per Majorem hujus Civitatis pro discarcanda navi apud
Colepool.

Regna Regum 29. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1355.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Bridport John Hull Roger Atwill John Otrey Robert Brown

Regna Regum 30. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1356.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Gyst William Bennett William Gervis Henry Furbor Adam Br^sinter

Memorandum quod in placito inter Adamum Wilsford quaerentem versus Willielmum
Bennet difendentem coram Richardo Thorp and sociis sii. Justiciariis Domini
Regis de Banco pro insultu facto in Exonia.

Ballivi Civitatis Exoniensis venerunt and clamant inde libertatem suam, and
quia hujusmodi libertas eis allocata fuit hic scilicet in Termino Michaelis
Anno Regni Regis nunc Tertio, Ideo habeant libertatem.

Simile nunc concessum fuit inter Adamum King quaerentem versus Willielmum
Plumtree defendentem.

Regna Regum 31. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1357.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Spicer Nicholas Brittestow John Hull Roger Atwill John Dirkin

Inter Nicholam Brittestow versus Willielmum Thorold, simile privilegium
concessum fuit.

The King sent hither his Letters Patent under his Great Seal bearing date 25.
Martii, whereby he required the speedy supply of Three Ships, and in every of
them threescore Mariners and twenty Archers, which the City soon procured, and
delivered them over to one Gervis Aldlamy than Vice Admiral of Devon, who
conducted them to Sandwich, and there presented them to John Montegomer Lord
High Admiral of England.

Prince Edward brought over into England John the French King, and sundry of
his Noblemen, all as Prisoners, who landed at Plymouth, and from thence came to
this City, where they were honorably received, and so conveyed to London.

Regna Regum 32. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1358.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Nolle Robert Brown John Ally William Gervis William Stokleigh

Regna Regum 33. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1359.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Spicer John Dirkin Roger Atwill Richard Olliver Walter Atwood

Bishop Grandison built the two last Arches in the West end of his Church from
the Font there, covered the Roof of the whole, and finished the Buildings of
the same.

Licentia concessa est pro discarcanda navi apud Colepool per Finem quadraginta
solidorum.

Regna Regum 34. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1360.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Spicer Warren Bailiff Walter Crisp Richard Goldsmith Robert Bromn

Consuctudo in Civitate Exoniensi est quo^ ubi maritus and uxor ejus sunt
seisiti de aliquibus terris and Tenementis infra eandem Civitatem ut de jure
uxoris, sive in Feodo simplici, vel Talliato, maritus post exitum inter eos
habitum potest dimittere dictas terras ad terminum viginti and novem Annorum.
Haec Consuetudo habetur etiam Anno secundo Richardi Secundi. Reg. 29.

The City was much infected with the Pestilence.

Regna Regum 35. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1361.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Gist William Rok^^ Roger Atwill Walter Atwood William Stokely

Regna Regum 36. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1362.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Gist Roger Plenty Nicholas Brittestow William Hardy Robert Stoke

The Bakers of this City had by way of a Confederacy secretly agreed among
themselves that in regard they could not sell their Bread at their own
pleasure, and make it at their own Assiize, that therefore they would not bake
at all, by means whereof the City for two days together was destitute of Bread,
for which offense they were all indicted, found guilty of the said offense and
Fined 26 s. 8 d.

Regna Regum 37. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1363.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Gist Roger Atwill William Gervis William Seamer Walter Atwood

Si legata sint Tenementa Testamento, and idem Testamentum non probetur, and
seisina inde non sit capta and liberata infra Annum and diem, tunc secundum
Consuetudinem Civitatis praedictae non valent legata. Rot. 33.

Quilibet existens aetatis sexdecim Annorum potest secundum consuetudinem
Civitatis praedictae condere Testamentum de terris suis. Rot. 33.

Both which Customs are contrary to the course of the Common Law, for the later
cannot be made 'till full age, and the former paffeth without livery and
seisin, for in the Testator's life time livery could not be made, because his
will is ambulatory until his death, and no estate passes during his life, nor
can livery be made after his decease, for then it comes too late.

Regna Regum 38. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1364.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Gist Walter Atwood John Tirling Roger Fitzhugh Henry Welland

Regna Regum 39. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1365.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Nicholas Tavern^r William Hardy Rebert Wilsford Adam Scutt John Nymett

Exemplificatio sub magno sigillo Angliae ad requisitionem Majoris Ballivorum
and Comitatis C^vitatis Exoniensis fuit obtenta cujusdam Certificationis per
Thesaurarium and Camerarium Regis and ejus mandatum factae, and in Canceliarium
missae in haec verba, scil. Civitas Exoniensis tempore Regis Edvardi non
geldabit, nisi quando Londonia, Eboricum, and Wintonia geldabunt, and hoc erat
dimidium Marcae argenti ad opus Militum quando expediti^ne ibat per terram aut
per mare. Burgensis Fxonienses habent extra Civitatem terrarum Duodecim
Carucatas quae nulli reddunt Consuetudinem nisi ad ipsam Civitatem, Ac etiam
clamant habere retorum brevium, extractas Finium, and tenere placitum de vetito
Namio, and habent Furcas, pillorium, and tumbrella, emendatores Assisae panis
and Cervisiae fractae, Wayfe and Coronatores de se, and quandam feriam ad gulam
Augusti per quatuor dies duratam, and Mercatum per tres dies in septimana,
scilicet, per dies Lunae, Mercurii, and Veneris, and hoc a tempore Conquestus
Angliae eisdem libertatibus plene usi sunt ut before patet in placito de quo
Warranto, Ac etiam quod Civitas Exoniensis est de antiquo dominico Coronae
Domini Regis, ac Burgenses ejusdem illam tenut ad Feodum Firmum de Domino Rege
per servitium, 39 l. 1 s. 6 d. unde reddunt per Annum Priori Sanctae Trinitatis
London, 25 l. 12 s. 5 d. and residuum Comiti Cornubiae, and hoc per Chartam
Henrici Regis patris Domini Regis factam Richardo quondam Regi Almaniae and
haeredibus suis, and quaesiti a quo tempore solverunt praedictos denarios
praedicto Priori, dicunt, a tempore Henrici primi Regis; Ideo Dominus Rex
habeat breve, si voluerit.

Regna Regum 40. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1366.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Nicholas Brydestow Martin Battishill William Gervys Roger Atwill Thomas Wilby

Bishop Grandison built a very fair House at Bishop's Taington within this
Diocese, and bestowed it (being well furnished) on his Successors, and
impropriated unto the same the Parsonage of Radway, to the end (as he sets
down in his last Will and Testament) Vt haberent locum unde Caput suum
reclirarent, si forte in manum Regis eorum temporalia caperentur, which
Prediction proved ominous, and fatal to some of his Successors, for not only
this new built House and Impropriation, but also the most part of the
Temporalties of this Bishopric are since become the Possession and Inheritance
of Temporal men.

Regna Regum 41. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1367.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Nicholas Brydestow John Nymett Martin Battishill William Gervis Henry Furbor

This year was a nisi prius appointed to be tried at the Castle of Exon before
John Mowbray and Edmond Chely Justices of the Assizes between the Dean and
Chapter Plaintiffs and John Gist late Mayor, the Bailiffs and Commonalty of
this City Defendants; At which time the Dean and Chapter, doubting of the
Merits of their Cause, or failing in their Evidence, and therefore not willing
to proceed, did for the hinderance thereof use this art, they exhibited a Bill
of Complaint to the King, advertizing his Grace that the said Mayor by his
Proclamation commanded every Citizen here at the next Assizes to attend him in
Armor and Weapons to the said Castle, whereby he might hinder the said
Justices to proceed in the said Trial, by means whereof the Jury could not then
be sworn. The King not liking hereof, sends his Commission to John Mountague
and four others to examine the truth of this Information, but before they sat,
the said Two Justices and one Sir Guy do Bryon were come to the Court, where
being examined touching the said Riot, and testifying that there was no such
matter as was untruly suggested, the King sent his Inhibition to the said
Commissioners forbiding them to proceed therein, which writing bears date 12.
Febr. this year.

Regna Regum 42. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1363.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Warren Bailiff Robert Wilsford Walter Whithorn Walter Atwood Thomas Webb

Regna Regum 43. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1369.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Plenty Reymond Gosse Adam Scutt Roger Atwood Water Crisp

The building of this Cathedral Church was now finished, and albeit the work
remained long in hand, even from the time of King Athelstan the First Founder
thereof Anno Domini 932. to the later days of Bishop Grandison and the perclose
of this year, being in all 437. years distant from its first Foundation, yet is
the same so uniformly compacted, as if it had been builded by one man, and done
in an instant of time.

Regna Regum 44. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1370.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Martin Battishill Walter Whithenn John Gray John Nymett John Webb

Bishop Grandison died on St Swythen's day 15. Julii, and lies buried in a Tomb
of Lead within a Chapel built and adjoining to the West wall of his Cathedral
Church by himself, To which he was a very liberal Benefactor, and worthily
governed the same about two and forty years; This Tomb was of late ransacked by
sacrilegious hands, his leaden Cossin (in hope of a prey) taken up, the ashes
scattered about, and his bones thrown I know not where; surely the Relics of
this worthy Prelate deserved a more reverend respect even amongst savage Beasts.

Regna Regum 45. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1371.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Plenty John Gray Thomas Webb John B^ll John Gimmer^ll

By the King's especial favor Thomas Brentingham (refusing the Bishopric of
Hereford, to which he was also now chosen) was elected, and 10 Martii
Consecrated Bishop of this Diocese by William Archbishop of Canterbury.

Edward the Black Prince returns sick from France with the Princess his Lady,
and Richard their Son (who was afterward King of England by the name of
Richard the Second) and arrived at Plymouth, in their way toward London came
to this City, where they were honorably entertained.

Regna Regum 46. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1372.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Gist Walter Atwood Roger Atwill Robert Stoke Walter Fowk

About the middle of the Body of St. Peter's Church near the South Isle stands
erected a fair Monument of one Hugh Courtency sametime Earl of Devon, and
Margaret his Countess Daughter of Humfry de Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex,
and Constable of England; both their Effigies are cut in Freestone, near unto
which a large stone is inlaid with Brass, and thereon a Sculpture armed with an
Helmet under his head, on the top whereof is a Plume of Feathers issuing out of
a Coronet, which seems to be a hid Crest, which said Monument is without
Inscription or Arms; but in the Window right against it is Courteney Coat by it
self, and also impaled with the said Bohuns; blazon or coat of arms scil. 1. Or
Three Torteauxes. 2. Azure a Bend Argent cotized Or between six Lyoncels
Rampant of the same. This Earl Hugh died at Tyverton in the last year of this
King's Reign Philip Courteney of Powderham was the fourth Son of this Earl Hugh.

Joining to this Tomb is a fair Gravestone, richly inlaid with Brass, of the
Portraiture of Peter Courteney Son of the foresaid Earl Hugh and Margaret, who
was Captain of Callis, the Arms thereon engraven are 1. Courteney by it self.
2. Impaled with Bohun, whose Epitaph so much thereof as yet remains legible,
here follows.

Devoniae natus, Comes, Petrusque vocatus
Regis cognatus, Camerarius intitulatus,
Ecclesiae gratus, Capitaneus ense probatus,
Vitae privatus, fuit hinc super asira relatus,
Et quia sublatus, de mundo transit amatus,
Coelo firmatus, maneat sinc fine beatus,
Thus translated.

The Earl of Denshie^'s Son, Peter by name,
Kin to the King, Lord Chamberlain of Fame,
Captain of Callis, for Arms well approved,
Who dying was above the Stars removed
And well beloved went from the World away
To lead a blessed life in Heaven for aye,
Regna Regum 47. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1373.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Plenty Robert Wilsford Adam Scutt Richard Bozom Thomas W^bber John
Russell

Upon the death of Roger Plenty late Mayor of this City, who died 7. December.
Robert Wilsford was chosen in his stead to undergo the said Office for the
residue of the Year.

The Plague of Pestilence entered this City chiefly occasioned through excessive
heat.

Regna Regum 48. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1374.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Wilsford Adam Gould William Gervis Thomas Webber John White

Regna Regum 49. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1375.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Wilsford John Talbott William Gervis Robert Stoke William Fowk

Consuctudo est in Civitate Exoniensi a tempore cujus contrarii memoria hominum
non existit quod qualemcunque statum alicujus mariti uxor habet in aliquibus
terris and Tenementis, Idem maritus post prolem inter ipsos habitam potest
continuo, and quocunque tempore postea durants inter eos matrimonio dimittere
dictae uxoris suae terras and Tenementa cui voluerit.

Regna Regum 50. Edw. the 3. An. D. 1376.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Gray John Nymett Adam Gould Walter Whitrow Richard Stay^^

Johannes Wells and Rogerus Mabb attachiati fuerunt pro eo quod emerunt and
forstallaverunt pisces apud Alphington ad mercatum hujus Civitatis venientes,
Rot. 5.

The King died in June, and Richard the Second aged nine years was Crowned in
July next following.

Regna Regum 1. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1377.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Wilsford Adam Scutt William Gervis John Russell Reymond Gosse

Omnia Messuagia, Tenementa and terrae in Civitare Exoniensi and suburbiis
ejusdem sunt partibilia, legabilia and divisibilla. Rot. 13. and 42.

Bishop Brentingham made one of the King's Privy Council, and shortly
thereafter Lord Treasurer.

The King Confirmed the Cities Charters, and enlarged them with new Liberties
and Privileges.

This City built and set forth a fair Ship for the King's present service
against the French.

Regna Regum 2. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1378.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Wilsford Reymond Gosse William Dawn Henry Scam Peter Hadleigh.

Consuetudo est approbata in quodam placito Assise frisce Forcie quod quilibet
homo seisitus de Tenementis ut de jure uxoris suae post exitum inter eos
habitum donare and dimittere potest toto tempore durante intor eos matrimonio
pro libito su^ Tenementa quae fuerunt de jure uxoris suae pro termino vigi^ti
and nove^ Annorum, durante quo termino uxor hujusmodi mariti and baredes eorum
ab omni action seu ingressis excludi debent. Rot. 3. and 49. Ed. 3.16.

Regna Regum 3. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1379.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Wilsford John Read William Gervis John Russell Richard Brown

The City by reason of a great Plague was left almost desolate.

Regna Regum 4. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1380.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Gray John Russell William Gervis Henry Wesco^t Henry Scam

One William Bremelham was indicted for arresting one Peter Hadleigh without
the Southgate in the Highstreet there, and carrying him to the Bishop's Prison.

Regna Regum 5. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1381.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Nymett Richard Bosom William Gervis Henry Wescott William Coscom

Omnia deodanda infra Civitatem Exonisem and suburbia ejusdem Civitatis
pertinent ad Majorem and Communitatem dictae Civitatis. Rot. 45. Omnia quae
movent ad mortem sunt deodanda.

Bishop Brentingham is discharged of being Lord Treasurer.

Regna Regum 6. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1382.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Wilsford William Gervis Simon Grendon Baldwyn Whitleigh Thomas Smythayes

Consuetudo est in Civitate Exoniensi quod si aliquis Tenementa sua infra
candem Civitatem vel suburbia legavit alicui and haredibus de corpore suo
procreatis vel procreandis, per defectum hujusmodi exitus, Executores Tenementa
illa vendere and alienare possunt, quamvis Tenentes hujusmodi eadem prius
alienaverint, quia Executores eundem statum defuncti de jure habent. Rot. 47.

Vxor^s alicujus Tenentis in Feodo Talliato nondebent dotari de Tenementis
Talliatis secundum Consuetudinem Civitatis praedictae. Rot. 48.

Regna Regum 7. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1383.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Talbot John Panton Henry Allen Peter Heighly John Webb

Regna Regum 8. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1384.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Wilsford William Coscom John Pearse William Railsford Robert Stoke

A great part of Exbridge by means of high waters fell down, and sundry persons
therewith destroyed.

Regna Regum 9. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1385.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Adam Scutt Thomas Smithays Peter Hadleigh Thomas Wondry William Oak.

Sir Philip Courteny the King's Cousin made Lord Deputy of Ireland.

Regna Regum 10. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1386.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Wilsford Simon Grendon Henry Hull John Webb John Shaply

Enacted in Parliament (commonly called Insanum Parliamentum, or the mad
Parliament) that this Realm shall be governed by Twelve Peers under the King,
of which number Thomas Brentingham Bishop of this Diocese for his Wisdom and
great experience was appointed one.

Regna Regum 11. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1387.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Bosom William Oak John Grills Richard Pewterer Baldwin Whitley

The Cordwainers and Curriers of this City were first incorporated.

Consuetudo est in Civitate Exoniensi quod omnia Tennementa infra eandem
Civitatem and suburbia ejusdem sunt legabilia, and quod nullum legatum factum
de hujusmodi terris valet, si testamentum non sit proclamatum and irrotulatum
in plena Curia coram Majore and Ballivis dict^ Civitatis, and seisina inde
liberata per subballivos ejusdem. Rot. 11.

Regna Regum 12. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1388.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Wilsford Henry Allen John Russell William Gervi^ John Ponton

Quilibet liber homo dictae Civitatis secundum Consuetudinem ibidem in quolibet
placit^ personali babebit certum diem respondendi, ad quem diem sic praefixum
potest facere defaltam, and deinde distringas versus cum adjudicari debet. Rot.
49.

Regna Regum 13. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1389.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Bosom Adam Gould Simon Grendon Thomas Smithays William May

A great number of people here died, the City being infected with the Plague.

Regna Regum 14. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1390.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Wilsford John Shapleigh John Russell Reymond Gosse Robert Eascon

A Portugal Ship laden with Corn arrived at Exmouth, and unloded before
license was had of the Mayor; wherefore the said Goods were seized on as
forfeited, but on the payment of a Fine of four pounds, at the request of
Edward Earl of Devon the Goods were restored. Rot. 41.

Regna Regum 15. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1391.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Bosom William Custom William Gervis Simon Grendon William Oak

Bishop Brentingham was a liberal Benefactor to the Vicars Choral of this
Church by finishing those Buildings in the Calander-hay, which were left undone
by his Predecessors.

Regna Regum 16. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1392.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Wilsford John Panton John Russell Reymond Gosse Henry Hull

Regna Regum 16. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1393.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Bosom William Oak William Gervis Simon Grendon William Coscom

Regna Regum 18. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1394.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Wilsford Philip Shapbigh Henry Hull John Ponton Thomas Easton.

Bishop Brentingham, having well governed this Church Four and Twenty years,
December 3. died, and lies buried in the Northside of the body of his own
Church, right opposite to the Courtneys Monument, between two Pillars under a
large Marble Stone, whereon was the said Bishop's Portraicture Inlaid in Brass,
which is so worn out by time, or imbezeled by plundring hands in this
sacrilegious Age, as that no Arms, Effigies, or Inscription remain.

Regna Regum 19. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1395.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Simon Grendon Thomas Wandry Richard Pewterer Roger Doly William Coscom

Edmond Stafford Doctor in the Civil Laws, 20. Junii, was elected Bishop of
this See, and accordingly consecrated at Lambeth by William Courtney Arch
Bishop of Canterbury.

Regna Regum 20. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1396.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Talbot Henry Hull William Wilsford William Oak Robert Wyndet

Inquisitio capta versus Johannem Daintry and Willielmum Clerk, pro insultu
facto infra Coemeterium Sancti Petri Exoniensis super Richardum Talbot and
Johannem Stow, super quo sunt arrestati and missi Prisonae quousque, etc.

Regna Regum 21. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1397.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Adam Scutt William Wilsford John Batten John Russel Richard Lark stoke

The King created John Holland Earl of Huntington Duke of ^xeter, and exiled or
banished Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury and Lord Chancellor of
England, in whose place this Bishop Stafford was elected Lord Chancellor, who
at the Parliament shortly after holden at Westminster, (he being Speaker of the
higher House) made a very Learned Oration to prove the absolute Power and
Authority of A King, whose Theme was -- Rex unus erit omnibus unus

Regna Regum 22. Rich. the 2. An. D. 1398.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Simon Grendon Richard Pewterer Robert Easton Thomas Wandry Ralph Swan

The King is deprived, and Henry Duke of Lancaster is proclaimed King by the
name of Henry the Fourth.

Regna Regum 1. Henry. the 4. An. D. 1399.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Gray John Batten John Russel John Wilsford John Shaply

John Holland the late created Duke of Exeter was beheaded.

Regna Regum 2. Henry. the 4. An. D. 1400.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Wilsford Robert Easton Richard Kenneridg Thomas Wandry Peter Sturt

John Holland late Duke of Exeter, had two fair Mansion-houses in this Western
Country, one whereof was within the Castle of Exeter, heretofore a beautiful
and Princely House, but now wholly destroyed, and hardly any Monument thereof
left. The other was at Dartington besides the Town of Totnes, and now in the
possession of Arthur Champernon, Esquire.

Regna Regum 3. Henry. the 4. An. D. 1401.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Oak John Lake John Wilsford Roger Doly John Shaply

Consuctudo Civitatis Exoniensis est in curia ibidem quod defendens in placitis
Assisae, nove disseisinae super adjornamentum essonii post tertiam defaltam
semper dies datus est partibus in octo dies. Rot. 42.

Regna Regum 4. Henry. the 4. An. D. 1402.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Wilsford Thomas Easton Nicholas Boughwood John Shepherd Richard Lark
stoke

In the Parish Churchyard of Budley in the County of Devon; A Stone shows
this Inscription, ^rate pro anima Radulphi Node. This (as Tradition delivers)
was the Sepulture of one that presumed to fly with artificial Wings from that
Tower, and so falling, broke his Neck which Phaetonical fact of his has well
deserved the name of Node, be the Inscription what it is, who being a Native of
this City, gives me here an occasion to mention him. Bladud a British King, who
for his love to Learning went to Athens, and brought from thence four
Philosophers, and brought from thence four Philosophers, and Founded the first
University at Stanford near Oxford, which was afterward translated to Oxford,
he was the first discoverer of the hot Baths in Somersetshire, and being a
famous Magician, and practicing that Art, by attempting to fly, Node like,
under-went even in the like manner the like destiny; Not unlike to either, have
I read of an active Turk in Cons^antinople, having openly published that he
would fly the space of a Furlong, and for that end being mounted on the top of
an high Tower, showed himself to the people without number assembled, girded in
a long and large white garment gathered into many plaits and foldings, to take
advantage of the Wind, the foolish Man vainly persuading himself to have
hovered in the Air, as do the Birds upon their Wings, and thus a great while
standing as ready to take his flight, the beholders still laughing, and crying
out, fly Turk fly, how long shall we expect thy flight? who having a long time
thus deluded the expectation of his Spectators; at length finding the Wind fit
(as he thought for his purpose) with his Arms spread abroad, committed himself
with his vain hopes unto the Air, but instead of mounting aloft, this foolish
^^arus came tumbling down with such violence, as that he brake his Neck, Arms,
and Legs, with almost all the bones of his Body. I have likewise read of
another person having the like mind to fly (the truth of Poetical Reports. for
it is said, that the first Writers were Poets, so were their writings but
fictious) tied Wings to his Hands and Feet, and taking his rise from a Tower
did fly near a Furlong, which is the eighth part of a Mile, till something
failing him, down he fell, and brake both his Thighs, it is pity but that ^^arus
like he had fallen into the water, and then

-- Nomina fecit aquis. Regna Regum 5. Henry. the 4. An. D. 1403.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Hull John Shapleigh Robert Cobb Peter Sturt Roger Doly

Regna Regum 6. Henry. the 4. An. D. 1404.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Wilsford John Wilsford Robert Okesty Thomas Wandry John Shaply

Regna Regum 7. Henry. the 4. An. D. 1405.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Simon Grendon Peter Sturt Richard Pewterer Robert Cobley John Coscom

Regna Regum 8. Henry. the 4. An. D. 1406.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Wilsford John Batten Walter Cobley John Exbridge Thomas Wandry

Regna Regum 9. Henry. the 4. An. D. 1407.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Adam Scutt Nicholas Boughwood John Lake Reynold Gould John Shaply

Regna Regum 10. Henry. the 4. An. D. 1408.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Wilsford Richard Lark stoke Henry Mayew John Pallow Thomas Easton

The Musical Waits were first received and entertained in this City.

It was an usage in these days, and first began by the grant and gift of Bishop
Bartholomew Istanus that the Lazar people of St. Mary Magdalens Hospital
without the Southgate of the said City should with a Clap-dish, weekly gather a
certain Toll of all the Bread and Corn brought hither in the Markets to be
sold, and upon every Tuesday and Thursday, gather the Alms and Charity of every
Inhabitant hereof, which order was now for diverse causes destroyed, yet the
Proctor of the said Hospital comes every Thursday to St. Peter's church, and
gathers the benevolence of the Canons Residentiary.

Regna Regum 11. Henry. the 4. An. D. 1409.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Bosom John Shapleigh Robert Cobly Stephen Frank Walter Cobley

Thomas Earl of Dorset the King's Brother was created Duke of Exeter.

Regna Regum 12. Henry. the 4. An. D. 1410.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Adam Scutt Roger Gould Ralph Swan John Cooper Robert Cobly

Custodes Ecclesiae beatae Mariae Majoris Exoniensis recuperaverunt per
Assisant redditum 4 s. per annum, exeuntem de parcella terrae longitudinis
Centum pedum, and latitudinis lx. pedum, jacentem in vico de Prestonstreet
inter terras Johannis Gilbert and gardinum nuper Simonis Grendon. Rot. 23.

Regna Regum 13. Henry. the 4. An. D. 1411.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Wilsford John Shepherd John Batten John Lake Peter Sturt

Regna Regum 14. Henry. the 4. An. D. 1412.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Wilsford Henry Hull John Pollow John Wilsford Stephen Frank Richard
Cross

William Wilssford late Mayor of this City, 19. July died, in whose place was
elected Henry Hull to supply for the residue of the year that Office.

'Twas now found for this City by verdict, that the passage and Ferry of
Exmouth, and the lastage, stallage, and petty Customs of all Wares and
Merchandises, landed and discharged within the Port of Exon were Fee Farm of
the said City, held under the Rent of 20 l. per annum, payable to the Duke of
Cornwall.

The King died in March, and his Son Henry the Fifth, proclaimed and Crowned
King in April next following.

Regna Regum 1. Henry. the 5. An. D. 1413.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Peter Sturt John Co^k William Jew Ralph Swa^ John Batten

In the last Will and Testament of Richard Prall, sometime a Freeman of this
City in the 43. Roll of this year. is contained the ancient usage and Custom of
this City. concerning the reasonable part and portion of every Free-man's
Estate after his Decease due to his Widow and Children.

Regna Regum 2. Henry. the 5. An. D. 1414.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomjas Easton John Lake John Wi^sford Thomas Sharp John Clerk

Regna Regum 3. Henry. the 5. An. D. 1415.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Peter Scutt Roger Gould Robert Cobly Robert V^ysy William Shaply

Est vetus and antiqua Consuetudo in Civitate Ex^niensi quod quaelibet persona
habens terras and Tenementa in eadem Civitate aut Suburbiis ejusdem debet aquam
pluvialem in gutture conducere, ne descendat ad nocumentum viciniorum, Rot. 48.

Regna Regum 4. Henry. the 5. An. D. 1416.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Batten Thomas Shepp William Hull Thomas Hickly Walter Bogbrook

Regna Regum 5. Henry. the 5. An. D. 1417.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Cook John Clerk William Shaply Nicholas Trelawny Stephen Butterford

Regna Regum 6. Henry. the 5. An. D. 1418.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Batten Robert Hickly John Hull (...) Voysey (...) Crabb (...)

Bishop Stafford for the furtherance and increase of Learning added two
Fellowships unto Stapledon's Inn in Oxford, reformed the Statutes of the said
house, and altered the name thereof, calling it Exeter College.

Regna Regum 7. Henry. the 5. An. D. 1419.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Ea^ton John Shillingford John Stipping Ralph Dolbear William Overton

Bishop Stafford having well governed, this Church twenty three years, 4. Sept.
in much reputation died, and in the Lady Chapel of his own Church in a
sumptuous Tomb of Alabaster was very honorably interred.

John Catherike Bishop of Chichester, 8. November. then next following, was
elected Bishop of this See, who enjoyed the same but two Months, and lies
buried at Avinion.

James Carry at Rome was elected Bishop of Lichfield, and taking Florence in his
way homewards toward England, was there elected Bishop of this Church, and 10.
Febr. hoc Anno, consecrated thereunto, but long he enjoyed not this Office, for
there he suddenly died, and was buried.

He was one of the Sons of Sir John Carry Knight, late one of the Judges of the
Honorable Court of King's Bench, and from thence preferred and made Lord Chief
Baron of the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Richard the Second, who
not able nor willing to bow with every blast of terror (like another Bishop of
Carlisle in the same cause and time) spoke so freely opposing (in regard of his
Oath) the proceedings of the Procurators for his Master the King's resignation,
being his true and undoubted Sovereign, That he was dis officed, his Goods and
Lands confiscated, and himself banished, This Justicer had a numerous Issue,
amongst whom Sir Robert Carry Knight, the true Image of his Father, not only as
Virgil said of Asc^ni^s, resembling his Father Aeneas in countenance, -- Sic
oculos, sic ille manus, sic ^^a ferebat, -- but rather in virtues of Wisdom and
Fortitude, for in skill of Arms (which was not his Father's profession) he
excelled, procuring thereby such favor of King H^nry the Fifth, when, in the
beginning of which King's Reign, a Knight named Aragonise, who in diverse
Countries for his Honor had performed many noble Achievements, at length
visited blazon or coat of arms England, and challenged many persons of his Rank
and Quality, to make trial of his skill in Arms, which the said Sir Robert Carry
accepted, between whom was waged a cruel encounter, and a long and doubtful
Combat in Smith-field, London; where this Mars vanquished this Aragonise, for
which he was by the King Knighted, and restored to part of his Father's
Inheritance; And by the Law of Heraldry, whosoever fairly in the Field
conquered blazon or coat of arms his Adversary, may justify the wearing and
bearing of his Arms whom he overcame, and accordingly he takes on him the Coat
Armory of the said Aragonise, being Argent on a bend Sable, three Roses of the
First, and ever since born by the name of Carry, whose ancient Coat of Armory I
find to be Gules a Cheuron Argent between three Swans proper, one whereof they
still retain in their Crest.

Regna Regum 8. Henry. the 5. An. D. 1420.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Batten John Shilling ford John Cutler John Coscom William Shaply

Edmond Lacy Bishop of Hereford, was translated hither, and 6. Aprilis
consecrated Bishop of this Diocese.

Regna Regum 9. Henry. the 5. An. D. 1421.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Cook Robert Voysey John Salter John Atyate Nichalas Tr^lawny

William Jourden paid a Fine of five pound, for a License to discharge his Ship
at Colepool.

Roger Batten being arrested at the suit of Richard Crymell in an Action of
Debt for six pound, for two Tun of Wine, was admitted to do his Law for the
same with three hands according to the Custom of the said City. Rot. 40.

By the Custom of this City, if there be not sufficient, Citizens or
Inhabitants of Freehold, to be returned in a Jury on a Trial, that then a
return may be made of other Citizens, who have moveable Goods sufficient.

At a Parliament held in London, Bishop Lacy in the Convocation House made an
excellent Oration touching the Reformation of the Clergy, whereat the King was
present, and did so well approve thereof, as that he was resolved (had his days
been but lengthned) to have seen the same put in due execution.

The King died in August, and his Son Henry the Sixth, of the Age of nine
Months, was proclaimed King.

Regna Regum 1. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1422.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Easton John Cutler William May William Cook John Stokely

Thomas Duke of Exeter made Governor of the King's Person. Henry the 6.


Regna Regum 2. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1423.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Batten John Hull William Bishop William French William Vpton

Ordered by the Mayor and Common Council of this City, that the eldest Son and
Heir apparent of any Freeman shall not be admitted to the Freedom of the said
City by Patrimony, or by right of his Father, during his Father's lifetime,
nor that any Apprentice shall be made Free of the said City for his Service,
unless he were bound by Indenture, and have truly served seven years at the
least, and the same to be proved by good Testimony. Rot. 26.

Regna Regum 3. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1424.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Cook John Salter Thomas Nymett John ^oscom Nicholas Trelawny

A Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage granted to the King toward his Wars.

Canon Bread and Wine first given to the Mayor and Officers, against the Feasts
of Christmas and Easter.

Regna Regum 4. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1425.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Voysey William May Peter Plenty John Cross John Smert

By the Custom of this City, a Man seized of Land therein, in the right of his
Wife, may grant an Estate thereof for a Town Term (i. e.) nine and twenty
years, reserving a reasonable Rent. Rot. 52.

Thomas Duke of Exeter died.

Regna Regum 5. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1426.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Easton William Oak William Vpton Walter Merefield William Bishop

'Twas proved in open Court that the Mayor of this City for the time being, had
the charge and government of every Freeman's child (after his Father's death)
being within the Age of one and twenty years, and is to appoint Guardians for
the said Orphan, as well for his good Education, as for the preservation and
right ordering of his Estate and Fortune left unto him. Rot. 4.

Regna Regum 6. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1427.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Hull John Cross Stephen Butterford John Trelawny John Bacon

Ordered by the Mayor and Common Council of this City, that if any of the
Members thereof, being duly warned by one of the Sergeants at Mace of the said
City, to appear at the Council Chamber to consult touching the public affairs
of the said City, and shall refuse so to do, he shall forfeit and pay for every
such default 3 s. and 4 d. unless a reasonable excuse of his absence be offered
and allowed. Rot. 2.

Regna Regum 7. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1428.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Shilling ford William Vpton John Smert John Cook William Servington

By Custom the Mayor of this City, time out of mind, has had and ought to have
the cognizance, hearing and determining of all scolds and disordered persons.
Rot. 16.

The Master and Company of the Bakers, had made an order among themselves not
to give any advantage Bread, or 1 d. on the dozen, and for some days refused to
bake any Bread at all, that the Citizens should yield to their order, and that
the Mayor should weekly give an Assize pleasing to them, But this Mayor being a
very wise Man, and well learned in the Laws (the matter being discoursed and
well considered) commanded the said Master and Wardens, and chiefest of the
offenders to Ward, where they were kept, ^till they had openly acknowledged
their Confederacy, revoked their said Order, and paid their several Fines
imposed on them for their said offense.

Regna Regum 8. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1429.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Shilling ford William Vpton John Orum John Bea^fitz Benn^t Drew

An Action was here traversed in the King's Court held at the Guild Hall,
before the Mayor and Bailiffs of the said City, touching a Nuisance, for the
carrying away of another Man's Water, and a Verdict found for the Plaintiff
according to the Custom of the said City. Rot. 7. and 17.

Regna Regum 9. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1430.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Hull Thomas Cook Nicholas Athole Andrew Thring Walter Pope

Omnia Trnementa infra Civitatem Exoniensem and suburbia ejusdem in F^od^
simplici sunt devisabilia and legabilia. Rot. 51.

The Custom of this City is, that in every Action where a Foraigner is to do
his Law in a Court of Pypowders, he may do it by his own hand alone. Rot. 5.

Regna Regum 10. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1431.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Cook John Cross John Smert John Troly Walter Merefield

Regna Regum 11. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1432.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Cook John Bacon John Kirton Walter Pope Ralph Crudg

It Is recorded, that if any person in a suit depending in this Court be
condemned, and be present, he shall be committed to Ward, and there remain in
execution, till he have made full satisfaction of the Debt. Rot. 6.

Also that by the Custom of this City, no person coming within the Port of Exon
with a Vessel laden with Goods, ought to unload the same, but only at the
place accustomed, without special license of the Mayor of the said City, had to
the contrary. Rot. 2.

Regna Regum 12. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1433.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Salter Nicholas Athole Richard Orange John Bag Robert Ford

Regna Regum 13. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1434.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Cook John Kirton Andrew Thring John Bagg Thomas Parson

Regna Regum 14. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1435.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Cook John Kirton Andrew Thring John Bagg Thomas Paison

Regna Regum 15. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1436.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Cutler Bennet Drew John Coscom John Brown John Merefield

A long controversy arose between the Mayor and Commonalty, and the Dean and
Chapter about St. Lydwel's Fee, which was afterward by an Act of Parliament
determined, and the bounds and limits thereof ascertained, as by an
exemplification thereof it appears, which bears date, 4. May this year.

Regna Regum 16. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1437.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Hull Richard Oreng William Atwill John Kelly William Hodge

The Butchers of this City had a confederacy, and amongst themselves made this
ensuing order, That they would not keep any Shops or standings in the Shambles,
but only in their own dwelling houses, and accordingly John Smith and John
Tailor two of the company put the same in execution, but the matter being
discovered and heard before the Mayor, the Confederates were committed to Ward,
where they remained, till they had revoked their said order and paid the Fines
severally imposed on them.

Regna Regum 17. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1438.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Bennet Drew Hugh Germin Vincent Heart John Coscom William Duke

The Bishop claimed to have Cognizance of pleas within his Court or Fee.

Regna Regum 18. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1439.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Cook John Bagg John Smert Robert Ford William Hoody

Bishop Lacy now began the building of the Chapter House in the Cloister
adjoining to his own Church, which is a very fair and sumptuous structure.

Regna Regum 19. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1440.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Vpton John Keluleigh Bennet Wichalse William Crymell John Latch

Every Foraigner in an Action of Debt here brought before the Mayor and
Bailiffs, shall do his Law with his own hand only, but every Citizen and
Inhabitant with his own, and two other hands. Rot. 5.

Regna Regum 20. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1441.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Cook Hugh Germin Thomas Parson John Coscom John James

Regna Regum 21. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1442.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Cutler Peter Bray John Obley John Standbury Andrew Thring

By the Custom of this City every Inhabitant with the same, selling Ale and
Bread within the Liberties of the said City, and not Free of the same, shall
pay quarterly to the Mayor and Commonalty hereof for the use of the said City
-- 7 d. ob. Rot. 49.

Regna Regum 22. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1443.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hugh Germin William Crymell John Clerk John Peacock Thomas Rowse

Regna Regum 23. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1444.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Shilling ford John Beaufitz John Tailor John Gage Nicholas Hamlin

This Man being elected Mayor for the year ensuing, refused to be sworn, and to
execute the Office, whereupon an advertisement was forthwith made to the King
and Council, who sent a Writ under the Privy Seal directed to the said John
Shilling ford commanding him on pain of one thousand pound, to accept of the
said Office, who upon the Monday next after the Feast of St. Valentine, at two
of the Clock in the Afternoon of that day, came to the Guild Hall, and was
there sworn accordingly; And albeit, at his first entrance into the said
Office, he took the same on him unwillingly, yet afterward did he perform it
with cheerfulness, and got great Applause by his diligence therein.

Regna Regum 24. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1445.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Hull John Clerk John Germin John Botty Walter Swan

The Dean and Chapter of this Church founded and built the High-School within
this City, for the better education of youth in good literature, and appointed
a Master thereof, for whose encouragement, a convenient house for his
habitation adjoining to the said School was erected, and a pension of 20 l. per
Annum, allowed him.

Regna Regum 25. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1446.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Shilling ford John Germin Richard Druell John Bobidge Thomas Sampson

Emmet the Wife of Robert Webber, being presented for a Scold, and speaking
certain slanderous words of one John Lucas, was therefore punished,
notwithstanding the Ordinary cited her into his Court, and claimed the
Jurisdiction, but the Mayor would not permit the same. Rot. 6. and 54.

Regna Regum 26. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1447.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Shilling ford John Germin John Hamond Nicholas Hamlyn John Spine

This Mayor was a very wise Man, and well learned in the Laws of the Realm,
bold, and sturdy, and in his Government very just and upright, and so well
directed he the same, to the great benefit of the Commonwealth, of this City
as few of his Predecessors had done better: In his time was the long and
troublesome suit between Bishop Lacy and the Dean and Chapter of this Church,
against the Mayor and Commonalty of this City, touching their liberties, which
suit this Mayor did follow with all care and diligence, which was referred to
Thomas Courteney Earl of Devon, and Sir William Bonvill Knight, who determined
the said differences by their Award, one branch whereof was, That the Mayors
and Bailiffs, their Successors and Officers, should for ever thereafter carry
their Maces within the said. Church of St. Peter's, Cemetary and Fee, without
disturbance of the Bishop, Dean, and Chapter, and their Successors, or any of
their Officers, which the rather I here insert, for that of late some
opposition has been hereunto made.

Exbridge was now in great decay, the stone work thereof being much foundred,
and the higher part being all of Timber was consumed and worn away; And this
Mayor being of good credit, and acquainted with John Kemp then Archbishop of
York, and Cardinal, and one of the Executors of Henry Beauford, Cardinal and
Bishop of Winchester (who for his Wealth was called the rich Cardinal:) This
Mayor requested the said Archbishop Kemp to contribute some relief toward the
new building of the said Bridge, which he promised, but the Mayors sudden death
thereafter frustrated both the promise and expectation.

Regna Regum 27. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1448.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John C^tler William Duke Wal^er Sams Thomas Evelton John Avell

The Bishop of Winchester, Thomas Earl of Devon, and John Lord Sturton, 3. Aug.
came to this City, and brought with them a command from the King, directed to
the Mayor, for the loan of some Money, to be levied on the Inhabitants of this
City, for the victualling and furnishing of three ships to convey certain
Soldiers into Britain, which supply was speedily and very cheerfully granted.
Rot. 63.

Regna Regum 28. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1449.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hugh Germin Bennet Wichalse William Bishop William Atwill Thomas Sampson

They that become Bail for any Man here arrested, if they bring him not in at
the next Court, do forfeit one hundred shillings.

Regna Regum 29. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1450.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Wiliam Crymell William Bishop William Efford John Friend Robert May

The Stewards of this City heretofore named Seneschalli, were now called
Ballivi or Bailiffs.

Regna Regum 30. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1451.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hugh Germin Thomas Rowse Thomas Sampson John Salmon John Hamond

The King in a progress this year 16. Julii, came to this City, and in this
manner was received: At his first coming into Devon, he lodged at the Abbey of
Ford, where he staid one night at the costs of the Abbey, from thence he came to
Ottery St. Mary, where he was received with great solemnity, and lodged in the
College there two nights and from thence came hither, and by the way was met
withal; First, by the most part of the Knights and Gentlemen of the County of
Devon, the Mayor and Commonalty of this City (being above three hundred
persons, and every one of them apparelled in the Cities Livery) met Him at
Honyton's Clift; next, the Clergy met him at Livery Dole, clothed in their
Copes and Vestments, and at the Cross without the South-gate, the Mayor
delivered to the King the Keys of the Gate, and rode in before Him bare-headed,
carrying the Mace before the King through the streets (which were richly hanged
with Silks and Tapestry) unto the Broad-gate; where the Bishop, Canons, and
Quire (apparelled in their Copes) received Him with a procession, the King
alighting from his Horse, followed them on Foot into the Cathedral Church of
St. Peter up to the High. Altar, and having there paid his Tribute of Prayers
and Oblations thankfully to God Almighty, was brought into the Bishop's Palace,
and there lodged; It so happened that the next day thereafter the King's
Justices (by virtue of his Commission to them directed) sat in the Bishop's
Hall, and there kept Jail-delivery, two Men being indicted, arraigned, found
guilty, and condemned for Treason, and should have been executed; but the
Bishop and Chapter being therewithal grieved, told the King that the Justices
sat in Commission within their Sanctuary, contrary to the privileges thereof,
and orders of Holy Church, wherefore the King to appease them, pardoned the two
condemned persons, The King remaining here eight days, his charges were equally
born by the Church and City, and then returned to London.

Regna Regum 31. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1452.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Pope John Avell Thomas Evelton Andrew Thring Walter Pafford

John Carminoke a Citizen hereof, went out to Duryurd-wood, and cut down six
Timber Trees, and brought them home, who being questioned for the same, said
that he was a Freeman of this City, and so one of the Lords of the said Wood,
and therein justified himself, yet was he committed to prison, and paid his
Fine for the said Trespass.

Regna Regum 32. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1453.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hugh Germin John Tillerd Walter York Robert Smith Henry D^lling

A great fight happened on Clift-heath, between Thomas Courteney Earl of Devon,
and the Lord William Bonvil Baron of Shut, where many persons were grievously
wounded, and much hurt done, the occasion whereof was about a dog, but great
displeasure thereby came to the City, where presently after the fight the Lord
Bonvil sheltred himself, which the Earl took amiss, thinking it had been so
done by the City in some displeasure to himself.

Regna Regum 33. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1454.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Oreng John Betty Vincent Here Thomas Kelly John Spyne

This Mayor was a Gentleman of a noble Parentage, descended from the Family of
the Orenges, who dwelt in the Countries of Anjow and Mayn, and came over when
Sir John Fastalff, Governor of Anjow and Mayn, recovered the Castle of St.
Owen, descended from Sir Guillam Orange then Captain thereof in the fifth year
of this King's Reign: This Richard gave the same Arms that the said Sir Guillam
did, Viz. Argent Three Smiths Barnacles impaled gules, who afterward became
sick, being infected with the disease of the Leprosy, who notwithstanding his
great birth and Nobility, his wealth and ability, yet most humbly submitted
himself to the good pleasure of Almighty God, and was contented to dwell among
the Lazar people in St. Mary Magdalens Hospital without the South-gate of the
said City, where he finished his days, and lies buried in the Chancel of the
Chapel belonging to that House.

Thomas Kelly and John Spyne, two of the Bailiffs, went forth of the City, and
absented themselves from the Courts without the Mayor's license, for which
offense they were both committed to Prison, Fined, and paid the same
accordingly.

Regna Regum 34. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1455.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hugh Germin Richard Druell Thomas Evelton Thomas Blowyer John Turner

Bishop Lacy having well governed this Church 35. years, 23. May died, and lies
buried in the North-side of the Quire of his own Church.

George Nevil, second Son of Richard Nevil Earl of Sal^^bury, was the next
elected Bishop of this Diocese, who 25. November. was, consecrated, being not
full twenty years of Age, and at his Age of twenty five was made Lord
Chancellor of England:

Regna Regum 35. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1456.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Duke Thomas Calwoodly Richard Jeffery Robert Smith William Pry

William Crymell (late Mayor of this City) being duly summoned to attend the
Mayor at the Council Chamber, and refusing to appear was therefore abridged of
having any more his Canon bread, and Wine Money.

Regna Regum 36. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1457.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Kelly John Friend William Hog John Turner John Hamond

The Eastgate of this City by reason of a long standing became ruinous, and
fell down in the mid day without hurting any person.

Regna Regum 37. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1458.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Druell Robert Smith William Hog John Hamlyn John Barsly

A controversy now happened between the Cordwainers and the Tuckers of this
City, contending which of their Companies should have the pre-eminence in their
march, in the Mayor's watch upon Midsomer-Eve, for the present appeasing of
which discord, 'twas ordered that both Companies should march together, one of
either Company hand in hand.

At the same time happened another Controversy, for the manner in these days
was, that the Mayor and Aldermen did use to ride in their Robes, at every
Midsomer-watch, and John Kelly (late Mayor of the said City) being warned thus
to attend the Mayor in the said Watch according to the ancient usage and Custom
of the said City, which he refusing to do, was for his contempt fined ten
marks, and paid the same accordingly, a commendable precedent of an upright
Government, when, without respect of Persons, Laws and Justice are kept
observed, and impartially administered; for as the Soul is the life of the Body,
so the keeping of good Orders and Laws is the preservation of all Cities, and
Commonwealths, the Apostles rule herein being very remarkable, Where there is no
order, there is certainly confusion, no mean between them being admitted.

Regna Regum 38. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1459.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Betty John Spyne John Turner Richard Rumwell John Thomas

This year there happened an affray in the body of St. Peter's the Cathedral
Church between some young Gentlemen, diverse of them being grievously wounded,
and because the said Church (in common opinion) was thereby thought to be
unhallowed, and polluted by blood shedding, The Dean and Chapter therefore
commanded the Church-doors to be shut up, and the services therein to cease,
until the said Church should be new hallowed or consecrated, which (in the
Dyocesans absence) they procured one Thomas (then Suffragan to the Bishop of
Bath) to restore the said Church to it is former state.

Regna Regum 39. Henry. the 6. An. D. 1460.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Duke Thomas Calwoodly William Hog Thomas Hayle Richard Duke

This City resenting the King's distress, did levy a contribution within the
same, and did set out one and thirty Soldiers well arrayed, and sent both the
Men and Money unto the King, with their Letters still testifying their
readiness to serve his Grace on all occasions.

Regna Regum 1. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1461.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Kelly John Hamlyn John Hammond John Turner Thomas Blowyer

The Conduit at Carfoix (commonly called the great Conduit) was new builded by
means of William Duke (late Mayor of this City) who being well affected toward
the same, Edw. the 4.
did not only oversee the work, but at his own charges covered it with Lead.

Regna Regum 2. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1462.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hugh Germin John Thomas William Aysh Walter Gervis Thomas Hayle

The Glovers and Skinners were first incorporated by the Mayor and
Common Council of this City, whose first Master was named John Macyr, and their
Wardens John Hackworthy and Simon Carew, And 'twas ordered by the said Master,
Wardens, and Company, that no person of their said Fellowship, should sell any
Wares belonging to that Art and Mystery being Foraigners goods, upon pain to
pay for every such offense twenty shillings.

Regna Regum 3. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1463.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Druell Richard Jeffery John Hammond John Coming Henry Wychalse

An Ordinance made by the Mayor and Common Council of this City, that every
Baker within the same, and Suburbs thereof, should from time to time, grind all
his Corn at the Cities Mills, etc. Duryurd and Crickelpit. Rot. 1.

'Twas also ordered, that every Inhabitant within the said City, that holds
therein any Tenement for the term of nine and twenty years (commonly reputed a
Town-term) should be returned to serve in Juries, if the said Tenement be of
the yearly value of forty shillings. Rot. 2.

The King by his Letters Patent dated 21. July, gave to this City all Felons
goods, Maudlin Fair, with many other privileges.

Regna Regum 4. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1464.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hugh Germin Richard Rumwell John Heart Robert Chubb Richard Baker

The Guild Hall being ruinous and in decay was new builded.

By the ancient Custom of this City, no excommunicated person can put in suit
of Law any other person whatsoever. Rot. 2.

Regna Regum 5. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1465.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Druel John Hammond Robert Symons John Coming John Ruett

Bishop Nevill having finished the Chapter House, begun to be built by his
immediate Predecessor, and having well governed this Church about ten years
space, was translated hence to York, and made Archbishop thereof, who was
rendered famous for that prodigious Feast there made at the time of his
instalment.

Regna Regum 6. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1466.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hugh Germin Thomas Hayle Richard Clerk William Obley Steph^n Rudgway

John Booth Doctor of Law, elected Bishop of this Church, and 22. Feb. was
thereunto consecrated by Thomas Bourchier, Arch Bishop of Canterbury.

Thomas Calwoodley, and Richard Clerk, elected Citizens hereof to serve in
Parliament, procured an Act for paving the streets of the said City, which then
were full of Pits, dangerous and noisome.

Regna Regum 7. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1467.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Calwoodley Richard Baker Robert Russel Thomas Pyke Nicholas Nawns

A Controversy arose between the Bishop and the City, touching a Tower on the
Cities Walls, behind the Bishop's Palace at the lower end of his Orchard, where
the Bishop's Prison was then kept, by reason whereof he claimed the Inheritance
of the same, but on a fair Trial it proved to the contrary, which said Tower
the City pulled down, and employed the Lead and other materials thereof toward
the reparation of the said Walls.

Regna Regum 8. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1468.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Hamlyn Robert Clubb Thomas Blowyer Richard Nawns John Luffingc^t

Humphry Lord Stafford made Earl of Devon.

Regna Regum 9. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1469.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Smith John Coming William Fewnding Robert Newton Robert Gyles

The King was pleased in person to visit this City, and was well entertained by
the Mayor, to whom the King at his departure hence gave a Sword commanding that
it should be always carried before the Mayor and his Successors. At the King's
first coming hither, the Mayor delivered him up the Keys of the Gates, and the
Maces, and withal a Purse with one hundred Nobles therein, which the King
graciously received, but the Keys and Maces he re-delivered to the Mayor to be
used as formerly. The Queen and Prince being likewise here, the City presented
to them twenty pounds a piece in Gold.

Regna Regum 10. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1470.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hugh Germin Richard Clerk John Orange Thomas Bond John Gibbs

Bishop Booth built the Bishop's stately Chair in the Quire of his Church,
which being finished, he could not quietly sit down therein; so troublesome
were the times by reason of the Civil Wars between the two Houses of York and
Lancaster.

Hic jacet Johannes Keys Praecantor bujus Ecclesiae, and fundator primus missae
celebrandae post horam decimam, qui obiit undecimo die Novembris hoc Anno. In
the Quire of the Cathedral he lies buried.

Regna Regum 11. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1471.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Jeffery Hugh Germin Walter Gervis David John's John Tybott John Bernard

Tertio Augusti died Richard Jeffery, in whose stead Hugh Germin was elected
Mayor to supply that Office for the remaining part of this year.

The Cawsey between the City and Cowley-bridge paved by a Priest.

Regna Regum 12. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1472.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Clerk John Oreng John Atwill William Durk Thomas Ivelton

The useful service of the night Belman (chiefly instituted to prevent Fires
and Felonies) began in this Man's Mayoralty.

Regna Regum 13. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1473.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Rumwell William Obleigh John Ty^ott Robert Bouefant Richard Byrch

The Duke of Clarence came hither, and was honorably received and entertained
at the Cities public charge.

A Composition was made between the Abbot of Sh^burn, and the Mayor, Bailiffs,
and Commonalty of this City touching the passage of Exmouth by deed dated, 3.
Augusti.

Regna Regum 14. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1474.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hugh Germin John Atwill David John's Thomas Ivelton John Starr

Regna Regum 15. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1475.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Oreng Stephen Rudgway Roger Worth Henry Hanneford John Tailor

A Controversy happened between the Mayor and Citizens, and the Company of
Tailors touching a new Incorporation which they had now procured from the King,
whereof ensued great troubles and long and chargeable suits, which after two
years continuance were determined by the King, whose final order therein under
his private Seal was sent to Dr. Peter Courteney, then Dean of this Church, who
acquainted and delivered the same to both parties, and albeit that this
concluded all Suits in Law, yet the animosity could not well be appeased in a
long time thereafter.

Regna Regum 16. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1476.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Atwill David John's Matthew Jubb Richard Wagget John Germin

Fault being found with the Customer of Devons Account, a precept from the King
out of his Court of Exchequer, was sent unto the Mayor of this City, commanding
him to send up a true Copy of the Collection of the petty duties or Town Custom
of the said City for the year last past, which was so done and returned up by
Philip Atwill the King's Messenger (purposely sent hither for that end) by
which Rolls the Customers Account was controlled.

Regna Regum 17. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1477.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Kelly Roger Worth Robert Newton John Starr John Gibbs

Upon complaint of the Bakers of this City against Foraign Bakers whom they
would have to be utterly excluded from coming hither with any Bread, and one
special cause alleged was, when they came here, they would carry their Bread
from house to house, to the great prejudice of the Bakers of this City,
whereupon 'twas ordered that the said Foraign Bakers should have free coming
and going to the Markets here, and should keep their standings only at the
great Cond^^t to sell their Bread, which said Ordinance to this time is duly
observed.

Regna Regum 18. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1478.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Obleigh Robert Newton Richard Germin John Hampton John Colshill

Bishop Booth having well governed this Church twelve years, at his house at
Horsey in Hampshire, 1 Aprilis died, and lies buried in St. Clements Church
without Temple Bar, London.

Regna Regum 19. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1479.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Atwill Robert Russel John Atwill John Harlewin John Weston

Peter Courteney Dean of this Church, was elected the next Bishop thereof, and
18. Novembris, consecrated thereunto by Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury.

Thomas Kirkby Treasurer of this Church, and Master of the Rolls in Chancery, a
Man very well learned, and for the many singular good gifts in him, much
commended.

A multitude of people died here by reason of the Plague, wherewith the whole
City was infected.

Regna Regum 20. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1480.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Calwoodley Robert Symons William Duke John Matthew Henry Redway

John Bonefant one of the Attorneys of the King's Court here held at the Guild
hall was complained upon openly in the said Court for sundry lewd practices and
forgeries, which being on examination found true, he was disfranchised, and
dismissed from further practicing as an Attorney in the said Court, which he
little regarding, and not yielding that obedience thereunto which in duty he
ought, the said complaint was renewed against him to the King, who forthwith
sent A Commission to the Right Honorable Thomas, Marquess of Dorset then Lord
Lieutenaut of this County to hear and determine the same, who thereupon came
hither, and finding the said John Bonifant guilty of many misdemeanors, gave
this sentence on him; commanded that he should be carried on Horseback, on a
Market Day through the City, with a Paper on his breast thus Inscribed; For
Forging of false Deeds and Evidences, and counterfeiting of Seals evidently
proved.

Regna Regum 21. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1481.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Druell John Rewer John Down John Calwoodley William Lang

The Charter of the Corporation of the Cordwainers and Curriers of this City
was renewed under the common Seal of the same.

Regna Regum 22. Edw. the 4. An. D. 1482.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Worth Matthew Jubb Thomas Pyke William King John Slugg

The Bakers of this City were now Incorporated by the Mayor and Common Council
hereof by Charter under their common Seal.

The Charter of the Corporation of Glovers and Skinners hereof was renewed
under the common Seal of the said City.

An Ordinance here made, that every Receiver General of this City on selected
days, should wear a Scarlet Gown, as do the Mayor and Ald^rmen, but for
distinctions sake, without any Tippet.

Edw 5.
The King died in April, Edward the Fifth his Son, proclaimed King and dies,
Richard the Third proclaimed King in June next following.

Regna Regum 1. Rich. 3. An. D. 1483.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Atwill John Cotshill William Dork Thomas Pyke John Symons

This John Atwill was Mayor of this City five several times, and did bear the
office of Magistracy in the Reigns of four successive Kings, namely, Edward the
Fourth, Edward the Fifth, Richard the Third, and Henry the Seventh, three of
them came to this City, and were very honorably entertained: as says a Native
hereof, Tempore quinque suo regnantes ordine vidit
Horum Eirenarcha ad quatuor ille fuit.
He saw five Princes which the Scepter bore,
Of them he was a Magistrate to Four.


This King (being informed that the Earl of Richmond was by Charles the Eighth,
King of France invited to come to his Court, and aided with good sums of Money,
and that many of the Nobility and Gentry of England were with him) makes
diligent search and enquiry after all such as might be suspected to be
favorers of Richmond's association, who (besides those that were executed in
London) Sir Thomas Seintleger (who married Ann the Duke of Exeter's Widow, this
King Richard's own Sister) and Thomas Rame Esquire, were both here executed.

The King coming hither, the Mayor and his Brethren apparelled in their Robes,
met and received him at the Eastgate, where Thomas Hext the Recorder made unto
the King a gratulatory Oration (for which, the City bestowed on him a Scarlet
Gown) then the Mayor delivered to the King the Maces, and the Keys of the
Gates, and withal presented to his Grace two hundred Nobles in a Purse, which
was graciously received, and the Maces and Keys re-delivered to the Mayor. The
King lodged in the Bishop's Palace, the Noblemen and the King's train in the
City, where great care was taken for their honorable entertainment, and the
whole at the Cities charge, during the short space of the Kings abode here, he
viewed the Ci^^ ^^ud also the Castle, and commended the situation of both,
especially the latter, being so naturally strong as that it commands both City
and Country about it, and no less pleasant for Aspects, and understanding the
name thereof to be Rugemom grew suddenly sad, affirming (through a Prophecy)
that his days should not be long thereafter, even when he had seen Richmond,
which howsoever vain, proved a prediction true, and that not of this Castle (as
he misinterpreted) but rather of Henry Earl of Richmond, afterward King Henry
the Seventh, who the year ensuing gave him Battle at Bosworth in
Leichestershire and slew him in the open Field, such resemblance was there
between the names of Richmond and Rugemont.

Regna Regum 2. Rich. 3. An. D. 1484.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Matthew Jubb John Weston John Hooker John Whitlock John Starr

The forepart of the Guild Hall and the Council Chamber were new builded.

The King sent to the Mayor to be supplied with certain Soldiers for his
present service, whereupon twenty Men well arrayed were delivered to Sir Ralph
Hastings to be conducted to the place appointed, and to remain there for twenty
days space, at the Cities charge, and the said Sir Ralph during his abode here
was honorable entertained, and one Biston (the King's Messenger) was well
rewarded for his journey hither, touching the aforesaid expedition.

Regna Regum 3. Rich. 3. An. D. 1485.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Russell Henry Hanniford Philip Atwill Matthew Allington Nicholas Hamlyn

Bishop Courteney finished the North Tower of his Church, and freely bestowed
the Clook Bell therein, bearing his Christian name, Peter.

Under which Tower in an Isle there purposely erected lies interred one William
Sylke, sometime Subchaunter of this Church, and reported to be the Donor of the
Luminaries or Candle-lights, yearly burnt in the Quire of the said Church
between the Feasts of Alhallontide and Candlemas, an effigies of whose Skeleton
is there largely pourtrayed in white Alabaster, under a fair Arch thus
inscribed, -- Sum quod eris fueramque quod es, pro me precor ora, William Sylke.

Seven Fairs are here kept, viz. Ashwednesday, Shere-Thursday, Whit-Monday, St.
Mary Magdalen, Lammas, St. Nicholas, and St. Thomas.

Regna Regum 1. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1486.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Calwoodley Thomas Bond George Chapman Walter Champnys John Bonefant

The King not forgetting the fidelity of Peter Courteney Bishop of this Church,
gave him the Bishopric of Winchester, on whose Translation hence, Richard Fox
the King's faithful Counselor, 27. January, 1488. was consecrated Bishop of
this Diocese by Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, and also made Lord Privy
Seal, and one of the King's Privy Council, and afterward was so to King Henry
the Eighth: This noble Prelates Memory shall be eternally blessed for being the
cause of the most happy marrying of the Lady Margaret (this King's Daughter)
unto James the Fourth, King of Scotland, by whose glorious issue, Great
Brittany now enjoys the height of splendor and felicity.

Regna Regum 2. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1487.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Newton Jobn Hooker Henry Faux Richard Turner WIlliam Baker

The Barbers of this City were Incorporated under the common Seal hereof.

Ale-tasters appointed to see that wholesome Beer should be made and sold.

Consuctudo est Civitatis Exoniensis quod quilibet Inhabitans infra eandem
Civitatem ac non existens liber ejusdem, and Mercimonia vel aliquam artem
frequentans debet annuatim reddere redditum, donec sit liber. Rot. 49.

Regna Regum 3. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1488.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Clerk George Chapman John Rudgway John Ector William Eastcott

Bishop Fox and Sir Richard Edgecomb were sent hence as Ambassadors to James
King of Scotland, for continuing a peace between the Two Kingdoms.

Sir Robert Willoughby Lord Brook was sent over to Britain to the aid of the
Duke thereof with Eight Thousand Men, and for his better accommodation in the
service: The King sent his Letter to the Mayor of this City, who forthwith
supplied him with Two Hundred Soldiers well arrayed.

Edward Courteney Earl of Devon was made a Free and Franchized man of this
City, as Son and Heir to Sir Hugh Courteney a Freeman hereof. This Edward was
of a second House unto Thomas Courteney Earl of Devon, who taking part with
King Henry the Sixth, was slain at Teuksbury-field, who dying without Issue
male, the Earldom descended to this Edward, Son to Sir Hugh de Courtney, the
Son of Sir Hugh de Courteney, second Son to Edward Earl of Devon, and Ancestor
to this Thomas, slain at Teuksburyfield aforesaid.

Regna Regum 4. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1489.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Stephen Rudgway Matthew Allington Robert Bonesant Walter York Simon Davy.

Order was taken by the Mayor and Common Gouncil of this City, by an especial
command from the King and his Privy Council, that every Inhabitant here should
be furnished with sufficient Arms for himself and Family, and accordingly was
every man assessed to his number in order to his ability.

This year were delivered to the Mayor the day when he was sworn into the said
office, a certain Roll called the Black Roll, and a Book therein which
contained the ancient Orders, Privileges, and Customs, for the good Government
of the said City, with other things relating to the state and dignity thereof;
In which Book the like was contained touching the City of London, and order
taken that the same should yearly be delivered over from Mayor to Mayor. This
Roll in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, was by one Griffith Ameridith
delivered unto Sir William Cecil, Knight, Secretary of State to that King, and
never returned.

Regna Regum 5. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1490.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Hooker John Calwcodley Richard Vndy Wymond Austin John Welsh

The Weavers and Fullers incorporated under the common Seal of this City.

Regna Regum 6. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1491.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Chubb Nicholas Hamlyn Robert Bonefant William Nordon John Goscott

Roger Holland and Thomas Dennis, Esquires; were admitted and sworn Freemen of
this City, but because they did not inhabit within the same, 'twas ordered that
they should not give their voices for the Election of any Mayor, or other
Officer hereof.

Bishop Fox and George Lord Dawbney, were sent hence in an Embassage to Charles
the French King for conclusion of a Peace between the Two Kingdoms, which was
effectually obtained.

This Bishop Fox was Godfather to the King's second Son, named Henry, who was
afterward King of England, by the name of Henry the Eighth.

Regna Regum 7. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1492.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Atwill Walter Champnis John Winter Ralph Pudesly Richard Cliff

Edward Courteney Earl of Devon, made a Freeman of this City.

Regna Regum 8. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1493.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Colshill Richard Vndy John Danester Richard Nordon John Merefield

The best Wheat in the Market was sold for six pence the Bushel.

The Cappers, Haberdashers and Felt-makers, incorporated under the common Seal
of this City.

Regna Regum 9. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1494.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Obleigh John Slugg Thomas Andrew John Hull Thomans Olliver

Bishop Fox having well governed this Church six years space, was removed
hence, and consecrated Bishop of Bath, and from thence translated to
Winchester, he was a great favourer and furtherer of Learning, for the better
increase whereof, he founded and built Corpus Christi College in the
University of Oxford, and also a fair Free Grammar School at Grantham in
Lincolnshire, and another at Taunton in Somersetshire, in his latter days he
waxed blind, and dying in Winchester, was there honorably buried in his own
Church.

Oliver King (one of the King's Chaplains in Ordinary, Dean of Windsor, and
Register of the Noble Order of the Garter there) was consecrated Bishop of this
Church, 20. Februarii, by John Morton Archbishop of Canterbury.

Regna Regum 10. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1495.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Calwoodley John Bonefant Philip Bullock John Wilkin Nich^las Aburn

It Is Enrolled that the Custom of this City is, that every Artificer dwelling
here, and not Free, shall pay every Wednesday, and Friday, ob. for all such
Wares as they shall set to sale, until such time as they shall be Free of the
said City. Rot. 19.

Also that the liberties of the said City for Cognizance of pleas, to be held
before the Mayor hereof, was allowed in certain Actions had before Thomas
Bryan, and his fellows Justices of the Common Bench at Westminster, in Easter
Term. Anno 11. Rot. Ed. 4. etc.

Regna Regum 11. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1496.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Atwill Walter York William Frost Thomas Langworthy William Binks

A great division happened amongst the Citizens about the Election of the
Mayor, and for avoiding the like for the future, 'twas ordered by the Mayor and
Common Council hereof, that no Man should be Mayor, or bear any Office here,
nor any Election held good, unless the same were done according to the Ancient
Orders and Customs of the said City, and withal that the Mayor and Four and
twenty of the said Common Council, should elect the Mayor and all other Oficers
of the said City.

Regna Regum 12. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1497.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Frost John Danester Richard Hewett John Buckenam William Wilkinson

Perkin Warbeck (that Imaginary and counterfeit Prince) besieged this City,
till Edward Courteney Earl of Devon (who in the service as wounded) together
with the Lord William his Son, raised the same, and repulsed the Rebels.

Ordered that the present, and all future Mayors shall have their Scarlet
Gowns, and Cloaks lined with Sarcenet, and every Receiver General to have a
Gown of Crimson in grain, and every one of the Four and twenty, to have his
Gown of Violet or murry color in grain.

There want two Rolls of the Records of the Courts of this year, wherein are
set down the manner and order of the Election of the Mayor and Officers of this
City, whereof the King being advertized, and desirous to have the Government
hereof quiet and peaceable, summoned the Mayor and Common Council before him,
and being informed the manner of their Election, and the many troubles incident
thereunto, directed this method and delivered the same engrossed in Parchment
under his Privy Seal (a Copy whereof is hereafter inserted) which has been
ever since duly observed; And to begin this order, the King named one William
Frost (formerly one of his Servants) and one of the Bailiffs of the said City
the year next Precedent, to be Mayor, whom to encourage to persevere in his
duty, the King took off his Sword from his side, and gave it unto the Mayor,
with a Cap of maintenance, to be worn and carried in state before him, and his
Successors for ever, as it is used in the City of London.

Henry by the Grace of God, King of England, and of France, and Lord of Ireland;
To all, and every of our Subjects, to whom shall appertain these our Letters,
hearing or seeing, greeting,
Whereas in diverse times past, great inconveniences, strifes and debates, have
been had, and made within this our City of Exeter, for the Election of a Mayor,
four Bailiffs, four and twenty of the Common Council; and four Sergeants at the
Mace of the same, as by the grievous complaints of the Citizens and Inhabitants
of our said City, unto us thereupon made, more plainly it has been declared,
And for a peaceable Election of and upon the premises hereafter to be used and
had within our said City, We of our especial Grace, tender Love and Zeal, which
we have and bear to our said City, and for the redress, restfulness, and
Commonweal of the same, by the assent and consent of the Common Council of our
said City, and other sad and discreet Citizens of the same, Have ordered,
provided, and established, that from henceforth, there shall be Four and twenty
of the most sufficient and discreet Citizens and Inhabitants of our said City
of the Common Council, for term of their lives, and none of them to be removed,
except it be for poverty, disease, great Age, or other cause reasonable, which
causes shall be adjudged and determined by the said Four and twenty, or by the
more part of them, and after decease of any of the Four and twenty, or the
removing of them as is before rehearsed, that then the residue of the said Four
and twenty shall elect and choose unto them another Citizen most sufficient and
Inhabitant of our said City, to fulfill the whole number of the said Four and
twenty, according as the custom is of the four and twenty Aldermen within our
City of London, the names of the said four and twenty of the Common Council now
named before us in a Schedule hereunto annexed; Also we Will that the Monday
next before the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, yearly hereafter the Mayor
of the said City of E^eter, for the time being, with his Brethren and Commons
of our said City, that then shall be Franchized Men, shall assemble themselves
in the Guild Hall of our said City, and then and there the Four and twenty, or
the more part of them, upon their Oaths by privy scrutiny, and by the Report of
the Recorder and Town Clerk, for the time being, upon their Oaths, shall Elect
and choose Two of the most able Citizens of the said four and twenty for a
Mayor of our said City, for the year then next ensuing, which has been
approved before in the Office of a Mayor, or else of a Receiver, (The Mayor
then for the time being, always excepted to be elected one of the Two persons
so before named to be elected, as is before rehearsed.) Also we Will that the
said Four and twenty at the same time, shall Elect and choose Four Bailiffs,
whereof one shall be Receiver, and that as well of the Four and twenty, as of
other the most able Citizens and Inhabitants within our said City, so that they
be Franchised Men, and of good name and Fame; Also we Will, that the same day,
the said Four and twenty shall Elect and choose Three Sergeants Franchised Men
of our said City, who best can, and best may attend and execute their Office
after their discretion, and after the Election so made and had, then the said
Recorder and Town Clerk, or one of them, shall publish and show to the said
Four and twenty which Two of them for the Election of a Mayor has most voices,
and to show their names to the Commons that be Franchized Men, and they to
choose one of them to be Mayor of our said City, for the year then next
ensuing, and he that shall so fortune to have most voices of Franchized Men, to
be accepted and admitted for to be Mayor, and after this done, the said
Recorder and Town Clerk, or one of them to present and show the names of all
other Officers so elected and chosen unto the said Commons, in the presence of
the said Four and twenty: Also we Will, that the Monday next ensuing the said
Election, the said Citizens so elected to be Mayor, and all other Officers, in
open Court at the Guild Hall, shall be sworn and take their Oaths, according to
the old usages and laudable Customs of our said City: And after that the same
Mayor so sworn, shall choose an able Citizen, and a Franchised Man to be the
Fourth Sergeant of our-said City, which Sergeant before this time has been
used to be chosen and named only by the Mayor, and none other, according to the
old Customs of our said City, also that none of the said Four and twenty, nor
other Officer of our said City, use or wear any Lords clothing, nor Gentleman's
Livery nor bear Cognizance from henceforth, upon pain of being deprived of
their Office, and losing their Franchizes; Also we Will, that what Person or
Persons, of what Estate, Degree, or Condition soever, he or they be, presume,
or contend the breach of this our direction and provision for the Election, and
other Premises, as before are rehearsed, That he or they so offending, shall
forfeit unto the use of our said City ten Marks, and over that, stand in our
high displeasure.

Given under our Privy Seal at our Manor of Greenwich, the tenth day of July,
in the Thirteenth year of our Reign.
Richard Symons a crafty Priest took into his tuition one Lambert a witty Dutch
boy persuading him that he was the only Son of the Duke of Clarence, and the
first Heir male of the House of York, and therefore inheritable to the Crown,
who by the advice of his supposed Aunt, the Lady Margaret Sister to King Edward
the Fourth, and Duchess Dowager unto Charles the deceased Duke of Burgoyn, he
(feigning himself to be Richard Duke of York, Edward the Fourth's second Son)
arrived in Kent, where being disappointed, sailed into Scotland, and from
thence into Cornwall, where being safely landed, and aided with three thousand
men of the meanest of the people, marches toward this City, and besieges it,
where, when his fair speeches, and rhetorical Arguments could not persuade the
Inhabitants thereof to surrender the City into his hands, he scaled the Walls,
and fired the Gates thereof, which proving unsuccessful to him, discontentedly
departed, and marches eastward; The King hearing of this uprore, comes hither
(guarded with an Army) in person, and having by the way defeated the Rebels,
and taken many of them Prisoners, caused them to be brought before him in St.
Peter's Church yard (lodging in the Treasurer's House, where a Window between
the Gate of the said House, and the North Tower of the Cathedral was erected on
purpose for the King to behold the said Rebels) where they appeared
bare-headed, in their Shirts, and Halters about their Necks, the King in hope
of their Reformation and future obedience, graciously pardoned them, chosing
rather to wash his hands in milk by forgiving, than in blood by destroying them.

Bini impostores Lambert, Perkinque Scelesti
Henricum variis implicuere malis.
Lambert and Perkin, Two Impostors vile,
With sundry mischiefs Henry did embroil.
Regna Regum 13. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1498.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Vndy John Hull John Vigures John Brendon William Cleyhanger

Consuetudo est in Civitate Exoniensi quod quilibet homo actionem suam
manutenere potest ratione Conventionis per nuda verba, prout aliquis alius
haberet ad communem legem per aliquod Scriptum inde confectum, and haec
Consuetudo apparet in multis aliis Recordis hujus Civitatis, sc. Junii 15. 17,
20, 27. and alibi. Rot. 20. and 43.

Regna Regum 14. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1499.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Nicholas Hamlyn John Symons John Scrivener John Wills Robert Bonefant

Bishop King died 20. November. and lies buried in Windsor Church, on whose
Decease, Richard Redman was translated hither from his Bishopric in Wales, and
14. December. was consecrated Bishop of this Church.

Sundry Merchants of this City were complained of to the King, for concealing
his Customs, whereupon Commissioners were appointed in all Ports, to discover
the truth of the matter, and the Merchants being generally found guilty, made
Fine with the King for their respective offenses.

Regna Regum 15. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1500.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter York Thomas Andrew Jeffery Jews John Bowyer Robert Sheerman

Consuetudo Civitatis Exoniensis est talis quod quilibet homo habens aliquas
terras seu Tenementa infra Civitatem praedictam and Suburbia ejusdem, tenetur
aquam pluvialem sumptibus suis propriis portare, and inde actio nocumenti capta
fuit inter Johannem Bonefant querentem versus Walterum Pollard defensorem. Rot.
24.

Regna Regum 16. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1501.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Calwoodley William Crudg William Peek Thomas Olliver John Whitwever

In the Month of October, the Lady Katherine Prince Arthur's Spouse, arrived at
Plymouth, unto whom forthwith resorted the Gentry of the Country, and conducted
her hither, and lodged her in the Dean's House, and had such entertainment as
did belong to so honorable a Personage, whilst she remained here, the Weather
proved stormy, and the Weathercock on St. Marys Steeple, kept such a noise,
that the Princess could not sleep, which occasioned the taking down of the said
cock, which was erected again on her departure, and shortly thereafter the
whole Steeple was taken down. This honorable Lady was by journeys conveyed to
London, where in the Month of November then next following, she was married to
Prince Arthur, and presently thereon made a Journey into Wales, where in the
Month of April then next ensuing, Prince Arthur died, after whose death, this
Lady was married to King Henry the Eighth, ( Prince Arthur's Brother) whose
Wife she remained twenty years space, and then was divorced.

Regna Regum 17. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1502.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Champ^is Richard Hewett John Nosworthy Jervis Lushant Thomas Hill

Regna Regum 18. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1503.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Newton John Danester William Frost John Guscott John Limpenny John
Thomas John Nordon John Wilkins

The Plague of Pestilence reigned excessively, wherein Robert Newton, 9. May,
and John Danester, 25. Augusti, both of them Mayors successively, John Guscott,
and John Nordon Bailiffs (amongst a multititude of others) here died.

Regna Regum 19. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1504.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Andrew John Gumby Peter Colshill John Thomas John Bradmore

An Inquisition taken upon the deceases of sundry Freeholders of this City,
who died in the last Plague, of all such their Lands within the said City and
Liberties thereof, as were holden of the Mayor, Bailiffs, and Commonalty of the
same, as chief Lords by Socage Tenure; And 'twas likewise found that every of
them, and every like Freeholder is, and ought in right to pay for a Relief, 2
s. 6 d.

Bishop Redman having well governed this Church about five years, was removed
hence to Ely, and installed Bishop thereof: Upon whose Translation

Regna Regum 20. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1505.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Crudg John Bonefant William Shaxton John Scott John Hoig

John Arundell (who had been sometimes Dean of this Church) but now Bishop of
Lichfield and Coventry, was translated hither, and 15. Marcii consecrated
Bishop hereof.

Regna Regum 21. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1506.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Hewett John Limpenny John Oreng Richard Duke Reynold Russell

Bishop Arundell having well governed this Church about Two years space, 19.
Februarii, dies in London, and lies buried in St. Clement's Church without
Temple Bar.

Regna Regum 22. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1507.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Calwoodley John Buckenam Matthew Moor Vincent Scott Reynold Russell

Hugh Oldham (Chaplain to the Countess of Richmond, the King's Mother) 3.
Aprilis was installed Bishop of this Diocese.

Regna Regum 23. Henry. the 7. An. D. 1508.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Limpenny William Wilsford William Bennet John Kever William Huntingdon
William Matthew

Upon the Death of William Huntingdon one of the Bailiffs of this City, William
Matthew was elected Bailiff in his stead to supply that Office for the residue
of the year.

William Frost late Mayor hereof died, and 11. May, his last Will and Testament
was here proved in due form of Law, in the King's Court held at the Guild Hall
before the Mayor of the said City, according to the ancient Custom thereof: He
was a prudent Man, and his reputation being great with the King, much good came
thereby to the City, chiefly in the suit of the Scavage against London.

Regna Regum 1. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1509.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Buckenam John Bradmore William Somaster John Colshill William Hoig

Aprilis 22. the King died, and his Son Henry the Eighth, was proclaimed King.

Regna Regum 2. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1510.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Andrew John Oreng John Moor John Amory William Peryam

Testamentum Willielmi Obley in quo (inter alia) legavit Tenementa sua in
Smythenstreet, Roberto Mayn and Catharinae uxori ejus and haeredibus de uxore,
and pro defectu hujusmodi exitus remanere inde Majori and Communitati Civitatis
Exoniensis, datum 10. Augusti hoc Anno.

Regna Regum 3. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1511.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Wilsford William Crudg Robert Brown Robert Kensey John Boughay Henry
Hamlyn.

Upon the Death of William Wilsford, late Mayor, who deceased 29. Januarii,
William Crudg was elected Mayor to supply that office for the residue of the
year.

Goods seized as forfeited for the non-payment of the petty duties, or Town
Custom, and composition made for the same.

Leather brought to the Market unsealed, and therefore seized on as forfeited.

Regna Regum 4. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1512.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Symons John Moor John Britnall William Hurst Richard Russell

A War here proclaimed against the French King.

The King intending to invade France, sent hither his Mandatory Letters to the
Mayor, to provide thirty Soldiers to attend him in the said Expedition, which
was forthwith dispatched, and a Voluntary collection here made to set them out
well arrayed.

Regna Regum 5. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1513.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Hewett John Winter John Bodley William Ratcliff John Robins

Sir Thomas Dennis Knight, elected Recorder of this City, and lived in the
distinct Reigns of seven Kings and Queens of this Realm, Viz. Edward the
Fourth, Richard the Third, Henry the Seventh, Henry the Eighth, Edward the
Sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth. He was a Domestic Servant to King
Henry the Seventh, one of the Privy Council to King Henry the Eighth,
Chancellor to Queen Ann of Cleve, Custos Rotulorum of Devon, and lastly, seven
times Sheriff of the said County, and once, two years together, contrary to the
Statute of 23 Henry 6.8. whereby he forfeited two hundred pound to the King and
the Informer, a moiety to each, wherewith he acquainted the King, who ordered
his Attorney general, to file an Information against him for the same, and had
Judgment thereon, which the King pardoned, and the Informer released by
acknowledging satisfaction on Record.

Every person standing under a Booth or Covering at Fair times, ought to pay 4
d.

Regna Regum 6. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1514.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Moor Thomas Hunt William Forest Robert Buller John Williams

An Inquisition taken before the Mayor, upon the several deaths of the Lady
Catherine, Countess of Devon, Richard Hellier, William Foursden, John Obley,
Ann Wilsford, John Fortescue, and Robert Batten; whereby 'twas found that the
said persons were seized of Lands within this City, at the time of their
respective deaths, and held the same in Free Socage of the Mayor, Bailiffs and
Commonalty, to whom was due from every of the said persons, for a relief, two
shillings and six pence.

John Garrett Fined for erecting a standing in the high street without License.

Richard Hewett dis-franchised for suing several Freemen of this City at the
common Law, out of the jurisdiction of this Court, contrary to his Oath.

Regna Regum 7. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1515.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Crud^ Jeffery Jews John Bridgeman Gilbert Kirk Thomas Fowle^

The Custom touching the Dominicals here was tried in the King's Court, held at
the Guild Hall, and a Verdict found for the Plaintiff, whereby the Custom was
held good.

Goods seized as forfeited for non-entry of the Town Custom.

William Shapton fined 20 s. for suing a Freeman hereof, out of the liberties
of the said City.

John Bodley dis-franchised for the like offense.

Regna Regum 8. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1516.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Buckenam John Nosworthy John Woolcott Richard Chubb Robert Trow

A Jury was here sued on a Writ of attaint.

Bishop Oldham was very liberal to the Vicars Choral of his Church, and again
reduced them to the good order of keeping Commons in their Common Hall, who
toward the maintenance thereof, gave them certain revenues, and impropriated
unto them the Rectory of Cornwood. He was a great favourer and furtherer of
Religion, Learning, and Learned Men, wherein the two Colleges of Brazen Nose,
and Corpus Christi in the University of Oxford, will for ever bear witness of
his hounty to either of them, and the Town of Manchester in Lancashire, has
likewise good cause to remember this Bishop, who founded and endowed a School
therein with large revenue, for the education of youth in good literature.

Patronum faciunt dos, aedificatio, fundus.
A Patron's be that does endow with Lands,
Or builds the House, or on whose ground it stands.
Regna Regum 9. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1517.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Hunt Richard Duke Nicholas Staplehill John Richards Matthew Long Hugh
Paige William Cotton

In the Month of December, Nicholas Staple-hill the eldest Steward died, in
whose place John Richards was chosen, who also deceased in March following, in
whose stead Matthew Long was elected, who continued in the said Office the
residue of the year.

'Twas now an usage here, that the Receiver and Bailiffs, at the time of the
election of the Mayor and Officers, kept breakfasts and dinners yearly for
them, which proved chargeable, and some exceeding their ability, became thereby
decayed, and little advantage coming to any person, Richard Duke the present
Receiver with the advice of his Brethren discontinued the custom keeping no
breakfast, for which he was fined, the like order did the succeeding Bailiffs
observe the year following, whereupon 'twas ordered by the Mayor and Common
Council, that the succeeding Bailiffs should for ever yearly keep their
respective breakfasts and dinners, as formerly, on pain of 40 s. some of them
thought it better to pay the Fine, than to spend 20 l. in a Breakfast, but the
major part of them, whether by persuasion, or standing in a vain and naked
reputation, received the old custom, till the coming hither of the Honorable
Lord Russel, Lieutenan^ of this County, by whose advice, an order was had
bearing date, 21. Sept. 4 Ed. 6. That no more such Breakfasts or dinners should
be made, but in lieu thereof, every Receiver should pay 5 l. or 4 l. and every
Steward 4 l. or 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. at the Chambers discretion, which said Fines
should be yearly bestowed on the reparation of the Walls of the said City.

Regna Regum 10. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1518.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Crudg Reynold Russell John Maris Negell Collin John Michell

Bicton was given by William the Conqueror, to William Porto one of his
Servants, Henry the first gave it to one John surnamed Janitor, of his Office,
who by Tenure of these Lands, was to keep the common Prison within the County
of Devon, Galfrid le Balstar held Land by the same Service in the time of King
Edward the Second, from which name by Sackvill this Land came to Henry
Copleston Esquire, whose Grandson sold it to the aforesaid Sir Thomas Dennis,
Ann one of his Daughters and Coheirs, being married to Sir Henry Roll Knight,
from whom to that worthy Gentleman Dennis Roll Esquire, as by hereditary right,
this descended; And now Sir John Roll, Knight of the Bath, enjoys the same in
the right of his Lady Florence one of the Daughters and Co heirs of the said
Dennis Roll, here the Gaol of the County was wont to be kept, but the place
being of no great strength 'twas removed within the Walls of this City at the
lower part of the Castle-garden where it still continues.

This year the King added the word (Octavus) to his style, as Henricus Octavus
Dei Gratia, etc.

Regna Regum 11. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1519.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Jeffery Jews William Shapton Richard Martin John Awells Richard Andrew

The goods of one John Jones attainted for Murder being seized on for the
Cities use were remitted to his Widow on the payment of a small Fine.

John Beblew dis-franchized for suing John Northbrook (both Freemen of this
City) at the common Law, and out of the Jurisdiction of this Court, contrary to
his Oath.

The pay formerly made for Queen Mawdt obit was at present respited, and
afterward utterly abolished.

Regna Regum 12. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1520.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Broadmere Richard Russel Richard Verny John Harris John Blackaller

All Freemen ordered to live within the City on pain of dis-franchisement.

John Moor Fined for breaking of the Cities Pipes, and letting out of the water.

Richard Ratcliff Fined forty shillings for suffering strangers to sell Wares
within his house, and for coloring of Foraigners goods.

Regna Regum 13. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1521.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Nosworthy William Bennet Christopher Lambert Thomas Hunt John Buller

This year the King added to his style (Fidei Defensor.)

This Mayor was a very wise Man, professing the Laws of the Realm, who governed
the City so well, as that none, or few before him did better, preferring the
welfare of the public before his own private affairs, reformed many abuses,
and established many good orders herein: First, he rectified the great
disorders of the Courts, as well the King's Court, as the Provost's Court, the
Attorneys whereof he caused to be sworn for their just dealings in their
Clyents causes, he caused a great Press with leaves, locks and keys, to be
made in the Council Chamger, for the safe keeping of the Records of the City,
which heretofore lay scattered abroad, and thereby all of them from the
Conquest to the Reign of King Henry the Third were lost, he prescribed and set
down the duties of every particular Officer within the City, and saw the
observation thereof. There happening a dearth, or scarcity of Corn, for the
ease of the poor Commons, he made good provision, and laid it up in a
storehouse, which got him the love of the people, all the days of his life
thereafter. He also reduced the Cornmarket to be kept at certain hours, and
hanged up a Bell to be rung at the beginning and close of the said Markets, and
about the middle to be tolled: First, that the Citizens and Inhabitants hereof
should supply their wants, and then Foraigners should buy. He was likewise very
careful to see the Assize of Bread and Ale well kept, and much delighted in
Hospitality; In all things he did so well demean himself, as that he was
honored of the best, reverenced of the Inferior, and generally beloved of all.

Regna Regum 14. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1522.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Duke William Hurst Robert Hooker John Way Robert Smith

Notandum est quod nulla navis applicans in^ra portum Civitatis Exoniens^s
potuit se exoner are absque licentia prius obtenta Majoris seu Receptoris
Civitatis predictae sub poena forisfacturae omnium bonorum and Merchandizarum.

Goods seized on as forfeited for non-payment of the Town Custom duties, and
composition made for the same.

A controversy happened between the Parishioners of St. Mary the Moor, and one
John Bonefant, touching a Tenement in South-gate-street, whereof one Richard
Russel, one of the Common Council of this City, was a Feoffee in trust for the
said Parish, and when the cause came to trial, Bonefant produced a Release made
by the said Russell, whereby the Parishioners lost their Land; The Chamber not
liking such untrusty dealings of any of their Members, called him before them,
and finding that he had betrayed a trust reposed in him for the Poor, dismissed
him of their Society, and dis-franchized him of the liberties of the City.

Regna Regum 15. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1523.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Symons Thomas Hunt John Britnall Richard Faux Roger Luxton John Holmer

This John Symons died, 27. Septembris, being Tuesday, and the next day after
his Election, and Thomas Hunt was chosen to supply the Office until William
Hurst the new Mayor Elected, did return from London and take his Oath, in whose
absence, the rest of the Officers then chosen, were sworn according to the
ancient Custom of the City.

Bishop Oldham died 25. Junii, and lies buried in a Chapel on the South Side
of the Quire of his own Church, built on purpose for his Interment, dying
excommunicated.

John Voysey, alias Herman, Doctor of the Laws and Dean of this Church was by
the King (being his Chaplain in Ordinary, and Dean of his Chapel) 23. Julii,
preferred to this Bishopric, and afterward made Lord President of Wales, and
had the Government of the King's eldest Daughter the Lady Mary Princess of
Wales, and afterward Queen of England, whose Godfather he was.

Bishop Voysey and the Earl of Devon sent to Dover to receive the King of
Denmark.

Regna Regum 16. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1524.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Hurst Henry Hamlyn William Buckenam John Woolcott William Davy

One Joan Luter a common Strumpet, being frequently admonished of her debauched
Life and Conversation, and not reforming the same, This Mayor went in person to
her house, brought her thence, and committed her to Ward, that she might
receive due punishment for her said offenses, her Lovers and Companions hearing
the news, used all means possible to prevent the same, who seeing they could
not prevail with the Mayor to enlarge their Harlot, attempted to rescue the
Prisoner, insomuch that William Somaster then Sword Bearer, attending his
Master the Mayor in the High Street, for his defense was enforced to draw his
Sword, and in fight defeated the said Lovers, whereupon their Wench was sent to
the House of Correction, and afterward whipped openly at the Carts Tail.

Regna Regum 17. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1525.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Bennet Robert Buller John Winter William Holmer John Tuckfield

The Lord Henry Courteney Earl of Devon created Marquess of Exeter, and shortly
afterward beheaded.

The Farm of Weapons (here forfeited for breaking of the King's Peace) was
devised to Richard Faux.

Several Writs of ne Molestando sent to Bristol, to discharge the duty of Town
Custom pretended to be due to them from the Freemen of this City, from the
payment whereof by sundry Charters they are exempted.

Regna Regum 18. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1526.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Hamlyn Robert Hooker Nicholas Lymett John Trub^dy William Hussy

William Hussy one of the Bailiffs, neglecting to keep his Dinner according to
a former Order in that behalf made, was therefore Fined 4 l. and paid it
accordingly.

Regna Regum 19. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1527.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Britnall John Blackaller John Croft John Seller John Duck

The Custom was pleaded, touching a Child's portion, and 'twas proved that if
any Freeman died, leaving a Wife and Children, his goods were to be divided
into three equal parts, whereof the Widow was to have one third part, the
Children another third part, and the Executor to have the other third part; but
in case he leaves Children, and no Wife, then are the goods to be divided into
two equal parts, whereof the Children are to have one moiety, and the Executor
or Administrator is to have the other moiety, or halfendeal of the said goods.
Rot. 36.

John Broadmere late Mayor, and now one of the Aldermen of this City,
obstinately refusing to render an Account, and to pay what he owed them, And
being often summoned to attend them, and refusing, was Fined ten Marks, and
required forthwith to appear and submit himself, on pain of disfranchisement,
which he did accordingly; A good precedent when Magistrates without respect of
Persons thus impartially administer justice.

Regna Regum 20. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1528.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Buller Gilbert Kirk John Maynard William Tothill Robert Whitread

Goods of a Felon on his Attainder forfeited to the City, and seized on
accordingly.

John Northbrook distrained for non-payment of his Shop Fine.

Two Freemen hereof, for suing two other Freemen in the King's Bench out of the
Jurisdiction of this Court, for matters properly here determinable, contrary to
their Oaths, were both dis-franchised.

Another for the like offense submitted to a Fine.

Ordered that the presentiments be weekly estreated, and brought into the
Mayor's Court by the Sergeants at Mace, which they refusing to do, are to lose
their Offices.

By the Custom of this City, every person condemned in any Action within the
Courts hereof, ought to pay the Sergeants at Mace, for levying of the same, a
penny of every shilling, if the condempnation be not above 40 s. if it exceeds
40 s. the party condemned shall pay twelve pence of every pound.

Regna Regum 21. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1529.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Hooker William Peryam Thomas Spurway Robert Turner Robert Tooker

John Breknoll for abusing John Thomas with slanderous words in the Council
Chamber (being both Members thereof) was Fined, and paid accordingly 40 s.

John You another Member of this Society, in respect of his great Age and
Impotency, was on his petition dismissed hence.

John Rise Treasurer of this Church, builded the new Calendar-hay within St.
Peter's Close.

Regna Regum 22. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1530.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Blackaller Richard Martin Thomas Prestwood Richard Mawditt Stephen
Larimore

A pension of twenty shillings per Annum, by Patent under the Common Seal of
the City granted to Anthony Hertney (Surveyor to the Marquess of Exeter) for
his Life.

This year the King added in the end of his style (Supremum caput Ecclesiae
Anglicanae.)

Regna Regum 23. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1531.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Gilbert Kirk Hugh Paige Thomas Bonefant William Chanon Edward Sheer

The last Wills and Testaments of John Nosworthy and Thomas Andrew late Mayors
of this City, according to the ancient Custom hereof were here proved in the
King's Court held at the Guild Hall.

Thomas Bennet a Master of Arts, was condemned of Heresy, and a Writ de
Haeretico comburendo, being brought to Sir Thomas Dennis Knight, Sheriff of the
County of Devon, commanded a stake to be erected in Southen-hay in order to the
said Bennet's execution, which the Chamber would not suffer, and therefore was
carried to Livery-dole, and there burned to death, In which place the said
Sheriff afterward Founded and Erected a fair Almshouse for twelve aged Men to
inhabit, allotting to each of them, a low Room, and a Chamber over the same,
and a little plat of ground for a Garden, all enclosed with a Wall, and twelve
pence a piece, weekly for their maintenance, with a Gown; and a hundred Faggots
yearly for ever; And a decent Chapel within the said House, and a Chaplain to
read Prayers daily therein unto them.

Regna Regum 24. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1532.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Peryam Thomas Hoig John Tuck field Roger Blackall William Takle

A Pale erected in St. Peter's Close, between St. Martin's Church, and the
Sub-Dean's House, which was by the Chamber ordered to be taken down, and
accordingly done by giving notice thereof to the Dean and Chapter of this
Church, it being a nuisance, or encroachment.

Regna Regum 25. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1533.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Martin John Thomas Humphry Andrew Richard Rateliff William Burges

The eldest Son of every Member of the Common Council hereof, may claim, and
have his Freedom in the lifetime of his Father.

A pension of four pounds per Annum, by Patent granted to Thomas Cromwell
Esquire, one of the King's Privy Council, during his Life under the Common Seal
of the said City.

Another pension of five Marks per Annum, by Patent likewise granted under the
said Seal to Sir William Courteney Knight, for his Life.

Regna Regum 26. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1534.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Britnall Thomas Hunt Richard Colwell John Rixley John Shelder

Thomas Carew (Son to Baron Carew, that was slain with the shot of a Gun at
Turwyn, as he sat in Council) a proper young Gentleman seeking preferment by
the Wars, fell in favor with my Lord of Surrey, Lord High Admiral under this
King, and served at Floden-field, where a Scottish Knight challenging to fight
with any Englishman, prayed the Lord Admiral, that he might answer him, which
granted, he soon met his Antagonist in the Field, and with great applause
vanquished him. Afterward attending the Lord Admiral riding to discover the
Country, espied a band of Scots at some distance approaching toward them, who
(fearing a surprise) hasined to a Bridge, but by the way Mr. Carew entreated
the Lord Admiral to exchange Apparel with him, whereby (if need required) he
might the better provide for himself, which done, and he richly Armed with my
Lord Admirall's Armor, turned his Horse ath'wart the Bridge, so that none
could well pass, by which means the Lord Admiral escaped the Enemy, and he the
while stoutly defended himself, but in fine, was taken prisoner, and so carried
to Dunbar Castle in Scotland, where he was well entertained by the Lady of the
said Castle, who had a Brother Prisoner in England, in hope of an exchange,
which was soon effected; on his return home, the Lord Admiral, made him his
Vice Admiral, and showed him all respect possible. This Gentleman being a
Native hereof, and descended of so worthy a Family, I held it necessary to
render him in this place thus much of his deserved right.

Regna Regum 27. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1535.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Hurst Thomas Spurway Bennet Clubb John Lane Nicholas Walrond

The Court Rolls of this year are all wanting.

Here died a multitude of people through the infection of the Plague.

Every Freeman that takes an Apprentice ought to Inroll his Indenture with the
Town-Clark on pain of five shillings.

Regna Regum 28. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1536.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Blackaller John Buller William Burgoyn Peter Stretch John Allen

Toward the end of this Man's Mayoralty, the King by his Letters Patent under
the Great Seal of England, dated 3. Augusti 29. Regni, constituted this City a
County of it self, dividing it from the County of Devon, and thereby granted
them all Liberties and Priveleges belonging to the same.

A voluntary Benevolence and Contribution made by the Inhabitants of the County
of Devon, toward the building of Cowley-Bridge.

Regna Regum 29. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1537.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Hunt William Buckenam William Smith John Peter William Berryman

William Jourden was indicted, found guilty, and condemned for high Treason,
before Sir Richard Pollard Knight, a Commissioner for that purpose appointed
under the Great Seal of England, who sat in trial of the said offense in the
house of John Croston Register, in St. Mary Arches-lane within this City.

There fell abundance of Rain, which made the Waters so high and violent, as
that one of the peers of Exbridge fell down, In the Evening of the day
precedent, one John Cove (who had been at Doncaster under the command of the
Marquess of Exeter) was returned home to his house beyond the said Bridge, and
the same night being in his Bed, one end of his house next to the water side
fell down, his Servants in the Chamber over him in bed a sleep fell into the
River and were drowned, but he and his Wife lying in a low Room, were carried
into the River bed and all, he commanded his Wife not to stir, and he using
sometimes his hands, and then his Feet instead of Oars, kept himself on the
West side of the River, out of the violent stream, there glyding, and (through
God's great mercy) got an Hillock, where the Waters were shallow, and so both
recovered the Shore in safety.

Regna Regum 30. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1538.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Hamlyn Robert Tooker Nicholas Reev John Paramore John Manustephin

This Mayor was the first devisor that the weekly Markets for Wool, Yarn, and
Kersies were here Erected, for the compassing whereof he waded through
difficulties; not only with his dissenting Brethren at first, but also with the
Inhabitants of the Town of Crediton, who for a while did much impugn the same.

Henry Marquess of Exeter, and the Lady Gerthrud his Marchioness, were both
Arraigned, found guilty, and condemned of High Treason, and 12. Decembris was
he Executed for the same, but the Lady was reprieved.

John Bonefant one of the Attorneys of this City, 10. Augusti then next
following, was hanged, drawn, and quartered in Southen-hay, for the like
offense.

Regna Regum 31. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1539.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Gilbert Kirk Thomas Prestwood Griffith Amerideth Moris Levermore William Lot

About the end of November one of the middle Arches of Exbridge fell down, and
was again speedily Erected by the Bridge-Warden, toward which reparation he
bought great stones at the Priory of St. Nicholas, Founded by William the
Conqueror, and (lately deceased) whereby a Prophecy (long before reported) was
fulfilled, sc. That the River of Exe should run under St. Nicholas Church.

An Act of Porliament procured for the raising of a new work or Haven for the
better conveyance of Goods in Boats and Barges to and from this City.

Regna Regum 32. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1540.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Spurway John Midwinter Richard Sweet Robert Cotton John Thomas

Consuctudo Civitatis Exoniens^s est quod omnia terrae and Tenementa insra
eandem and suburbia ejusdem sunt divisibilia and legabilia,

John Potell dis-franchised for making his Apprentice Free before the end of
his term.

Small was the resort in the beginning to the Yarn Market, but the house being
built, it increased; which did not a little trouble the Crediton Men (having
used their utmost endeavors to interrupt this settlement) fearing hereby that
their Market (formerly the only Market in these Western parts, for the sale of
Kersies, Wool, and Yarn) would be much neglected, if not utterly destroyed,
They brought the matter in question before the Lords of the Council, and
Entitled the Bishop of the Diocese therewith, but in fine, they had the
repulse, and the Market here continued to be one of the greatest benefits
accruing to the said City, ten thousand pound weekly being therein bestowed in
Serges.

The King was here proclaimed King of Ireland, formerly called Lord of Ireland.

Regna Regum 33. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1541.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Buckenam John Way John Peryam John Macy Robert Sweet

A young Child named Thomas Hunt, standing near to the wheel of an Horse-mill
(which Nicholas Reev Brewer, had erected to the great dislike of the Millers)
was by mischance come within the compass of the cog-wheel, and therewith torn
in pieces; And on an Inquisition taken, 'twas found that the said Wheel was the
cause of the Child's death, whereupon the said Mill was forthwith demolished,
and the Horse as a Deodand, seized on to the Cities use.

Regna Regum 34. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1542.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Buller John Woolcott John Drake Christopher Potter Richard Limbear

Goods forfeited for non-payment of the duty of the Town Custom, and
composition made for the same.

Goods of a Felon on his Attainder forfeited to the City, and seized on by the
Sheriff.

Robert Bridgman Fined for counterfeiting the seal of the Leather.

John Row Junior, Fined for selling Leather unsealed in the open Market.

Regna Regum 35. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1543.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Tooker John Holmer John Hurst William Parsons William Downman

The Spanish Ambassador taking this City in his way toward London; This Mayor
at his own charge lodged, and honorably entertained him and his whole company
in his own house, during their abode here, being the space of three days.

Goods seized as forfeited for non-entry of the Town Custom.

Ordered that the Sheriff of this City and County for executing of a common
process for a Freeman, shall demand and take but Twelve pence, and for an
Inhabitant but Sixteen pence.

Ordered that the Sheriff do make up his Account yearly, between Michaelmas and
Christmas.

Regna Regum 36. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1544.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Prestwood John Maynard John Webb William Halse Hugh Pope

At the Mayor's Election, all Freemen of the City ought to be present and give
their Voices upon pain (without a reasonable excuse) of dis-franchisement.

The Commons of this City gave a free benevolence toward the reparation of the
Walls.

The New Haven or Watercourse of Exe, was now begun to be made, toward the
charges whereof, most part of the Parish Churches of this City gave some
portion of their Plate, amounting in the whole, to nine hundred ounces of
silver, parcel gilt.

Sir Thomas Bodley (the honorable Founder of the public Library in the
University of Oxford, a great restorer of Learning, and a munificent Benefactor
hereunto) was 2. Martii born here,

Regna Regum 37. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1545.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Hurst Nicholas Lymett Robert Midwinter Henry Booth John Berry

Shop Fines imposed upon sundry Foraigners inhabiting within the City.

Part of Cowley Bridge fell down.

Regna Regum 38. Henry. the 8. An. D. 1546.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Britnall John Tuck field John Stowell Edward Bridgman Thomas Grigg

Goods seized on as forfeited, being laid on Land without License, the Town
Custom duty not discharged, nor agreement made for the same.

Januarii 28. the King died, and his only Son Edward the Sixth, of the Age of
nine years, was proclaimed King.

Regna Regum 1. Edw. the 6. An. D. 1547.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Midwinter John Drake Thomas Skidmore John Bodley John Blackall

Goods seized as Foraign bought and sold, and redeemed by a Fine,

Nicholas Reev one of the Common Council, for several misdemeanors dismissed
of the said Society.

Nicholas Lymett another Member of the said Society, being blind, was on his
petition likewise dismissed.

Regna Regum 2. Edw. the 6. An. D. 1548.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Blackaller William Tothill Jeffery Arundell Henry Maunder John Tocker

From the 10th, day of June, to the 6th, day of August then next following, by
the insurrection of the Commons of Devon and Cornwall, this City was so
strictly besieged, especially for 35. days, and that albeit for the last 12.
days, the Citizens lived on Horse-bread, and Horseflesh, being miserably
pinched with Famine, yet remained they faithful to their Liege Lord and
Sovereign The King; and in fine, by the valor of John Lord Russel (whom the
King sent hither as General of an Army for their deliverance) the Enemy was
vanquished; In reward of which great service thus performed by the City, the
King bestowed on it his Manor of Exiland, adjoining to the same and parcel of
the Suburbs thereof, and renewed their Charter, of which deliverance, an
Anniversary is here solemnly and thankfully observed on the 6th. day of August.

Regna Regum 3. Edw. the 6. An. D. 1549.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Tuck field William Smith Richard Prestwood William Reynolds Thomas Lambert

This Bishop Voysey through the whole course of his Life appeared Court-like
and bountiful, which in the end turned not so much to his credit, as the spoil
of the Church, for of two and twenty Lordships which his Predecessors had
enjoyed, and left to him of a great yearly revenue, he left but Three to his
Successor, and those also leased out; And where he found fourteen
Mansion-houses, excellently well furnished, he left but one of them behind him,
and that very bare and naked, robbed of all its Furniture, and yet charged with
sundry Fees and Annuities, by which means this Bishopric sometimes accounted
one of the best, is now become one of the meanest in Temporal Lands, who having
governed this Church about twenty six years, surrendered it into the King's
hands: Whereupon

Miles Coverdale (who the year immediately precedent attended upon the Lord
Russell in the service of the commotion) was at Lambeth, 20. Sept. consecrated
Bishop hereof by Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury.

The City purchased from the Crown, the Fee or Manor of St. Nicholas within
this City; a Priory lately dissolved by Act of Parliament.

Two Citizens for coloring of Foraigners goods were dis-franchised.

Regna Regum 4. Edw. the 6. An. D. 1550.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Prestwood John Hurst Walter Staplehill Peter Lake Thomas Beaufit^

The bounds and limits of the County were by Act of Parliament ascertained and
confirmed.

Bishop Coverdals translated the Bible from Hebrew and Greek into English, and
being unwilling to be disturbed in his study, procured from Oxford, one Robert
Weston Doctor of the Civil Law to be his Chancellor (who was afterward Lord
Chancellor of Ireland) unto whom he committed his Consistory, and the whole
charge of his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, allowing him not only all the Fees
incident thereunto, but also lodged and entertained him, and his whole Family,
and besides gave him a yearly pension of forty pound, and having well governed
this Church about three years space, King Edward died, and the Crown descending
to Queen Mary, Religion was altered, and he deprived of his Bishopric, and
went beyond the Seas to the King of Denmark, by, and under whom he was
protected, where having a while remained, went again into Germany to the
Palsgrave, who most kindly received him, and replaced him in his former
Benefice of Burgh-saber (where in his younger days he was settled) and there
continued until the Death of Queen Mary, and then returned into England, but
would never return to his Bishopric, albeit it was reserved and often
proffered him, but lived a private Life in London, still exercising his
Function as a Minister of the Gospel, and 20. Maii 7 Elizabeth, 1565. there
died, and lies buried in St. Bartholomew's Church, behind the Royal Exchange;
In whose Memory, this ensuing Epitaph was Erected.

Hic tandem requiemque ferens finemque laborum.
Ossa Coverdali mortua tumbus habet,
Exoniae qui praesul erat dignissimus olim
Insignis v^^ae vir probitate suae,
Octoginta annos grandaevus vixit, and unus
Indignum p^ssus saepius exilium,
Sic demum varin jaciatum casibus, ista
Excepit gremio terra benigna suo.
Regna Regum 5. Edw. the 6. An. D. 1551.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Hurst Moris Levermore John Strobridg Henry Harris Robert Herwood

A Commission was sent hither directed to this Mayor, and also to Miles Bishop
of Exon, Thomas Prestwood, and others, for the taking an Inventory of all the
Plate, Jewels, Goods, and Ornaments whatsoever, belonging to any Church within
this City and County, whereof the said Commissioners prayed that there might be
deducted out of their Certificate, the value of about a thousand ounces of
Plate, which some of the said Parishes had formerly given to the said City
toward the making of the new work or Haven.

Goods seized as forfeited for non-entry of the Town Custom.

Regna Regum 6. Edw. the 6. An. D. 1552.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Tothill John Peryam Thomas Spicer John Smith Richard Gifford

This Mayor had successively two Wives, and had Issue by them six and thirty
Children.

A pension of forty shillings per Annum, by Patent under the Common Seal
hereof, was granted to Sir Peter Carew Knight.

Margery Ratcliff Widow, for coloring of Foraigners Goods, was Fined Forty
shillings.

Julii 26. The King died, and Mary the Eldest Daughter of King Henry the
Eighth, was proclaimed Queen, the 19. of the same month.

Regna Regum 1. Q. Mary. An. D. 1553.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Smith Walter Staplehill John Peter John Dyer Thomas Richardson

After the deprivation of Bishop Coverdale, Bishop Voysey was again restored to
this See, who being above one hundred years of Age, in a pang died suddenly in
his own house, going to his Close-stool in the night season, and lies buried in
Sutton Colfield Church in Warwickshire, under a fair monument, whereon his
Effigies and Arms are Engraven, and on a label thus -- Dextra Dei exaltavit me,
with this Epitaph -- Orate pro anima Johannis Voysey alias Herman nuper
Praelati Ecclesiae Exoniae.

None but Freemen and Inhabitants of this City, ought to be chosen to serve in
Parliament as Citizens hereof.

Regna Regum 2. Q. Mary. An. D. 1554.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Midwinter Griffith Amerideth Michael Brown William May John Cogan

This Mayor built the little Conduit in South-gate-street.

Goods forfeited to the City by a Felo de se, and also of an attainted person
for Felony, and seized on accordingly.

Queen Mary married to Philip King of Spain, 25. Julii.

John Hooker Gentleman, the first Chamberlain of this City.

Regna Regum 3. Q. Mary. An. D. 1555.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Moris Levermore John Peter William Seldom John Spark Peter Tross

Sir John Pollard Knight, admitted to the Freedom and Liberties of this City,
and chosen one of the Citizens hereof to serve in Parliament, wherein he did
very good service for the City.

Goods seized as forfeited for non-entry of the Town Custom.

Regna Regum 4. Q. Mary. An. D. 1556.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Staplehill Robert Midwinter Richard Hellyard Stephen Vilvain John Howell

James Turbervill 1. May, was consecrated Bishop of this Church, wherein he
continued for the space of two years and half, even 'till the Death of Queen
Mary, and then being deprived, afterward lived a private life. He obtained by
the Queens grant, a restitution of the Manor of Crediton, sold by Bishop
Voysey, and annexed it to his Church. but afterward 'twas again alienated by
Bishop Babington.

The Council Chamber was circled round with Wainscot.

The Earl of Bedford coming hither was very honorably entertained.

The Cloth-Market kept in North-gate-street, from the corner of
Waterbearer-street, down to the Gate.

The Merchant Adventurers trading to France, by the Queens Charter were
Incorporated.

Regna Regum 6. Q. Mary. An. D. 1557.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Peter John Blackall Eustice Olliver Thomas Marshall Robert Chaff

Agnes Priest, a poor silly Woman of the County of Cornwall, about 54. years of
Age, 15. Novembris was burned to death in Southenhay for her Religion, denying
the real presence in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and saying that the
same was but a sign or figure of Christ's body, and affirming that no person
does eat really the body of Christ, but spiritually. Her own Husband and
Children were her greatest persecutors, from whom she fled, for that they would
force her to be present at mass; After her condemnation, she refused to receive
any money from well affected people, telling them, that she was going to a
City, where money had no mastery.

Regna Regum 5. Q. Mary. An. D. 1558.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Buller Richard Prestwood Simon Knight Thomas Chapel Edward Lymett

The Company of Bakers presented one to be their Master who was no Freeman of
the said City, for which offense they were Fined.

Leathern Buckets, Ladders and Crooks were here provided in readiness, in case
of any fire happening.

Novembris 17. The Queen died, and Elizabeth the youngest Daughter of King
Henry the Eighth, was proclaimed Queen, and in January next following, Crowned.

Regna Regum 1. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1559.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Midwinteo John B^r^more John Woolcott James Walker Hubert Colwell
William Chapel

Upon the death of John Paramore late Receiver General of the City, John
Woolcott was elected in his stead to supply that Office for the residue of the
year.

Presently after the Coronation of Queen Elizabeth, Bishop Turbervil was
deprived of his Bishopric, and committed to prison.

William Alleigh born at Wickham in the County of Buckingham, and bred first at
Eaton, then in King's College in Cambridge, whence he was preferred and became
Lecturer in St. Paul's, London (an ancient Office founded in that and many other
Cathedrals to read Divinity) whose learned Lectures are extant in Print, was
afterward consecrated 14. Julii, Bishop of this Diocese, and being accompanied
with the Earl of Bedford came hither, and at the Broad-gate by the Mayor and
his Brethren was courteously received.

The Queen out of the great respect she had to this Bishop, sent him yearly a
silver cup for a New Years gift.

This Mayor very much opposed this Bishop when he brought a Commission to be a
Justice of the Peace within the said City, contrary to the Charters and
Liberties thereof.

The troublesome suits in Law between the Corporation of Merchants and the
Freemen hereof now began.

Regna Regum 2. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1560.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Blackall John Dyer Richard Gibb Richard Haslewood Jeffery Thomas

The Pulpit in the Quire of St. Peter's Church was now erected.

John Rainsby a Freeman hereof for certain misdemeanors was dis-franchised.

Thomas Fursdon a Freeman, for suing another Freeman out of the Liberties
hereof; was also dis-franchised.

William Ward a Freeman dis-franchised for suing two other Freemen of this
City, in the Bishop's consistory Court for matters determinable in her
Majesty's Court, and on his submission restored again.

Regna Regum 3. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1561.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Hurst Hugh Pope Thomas Prestwood Ralph Duckenfield Gilbert Saymell

The Queen granted the City a Charter under her great Seal for Orphans, which
in the Fifth year of Her Majesty's Reign was confirmed by Act of Parliament.

The High-School, near the little Conduit in the High Street here, by a common
contribution at the request of Mr. Williams the Schoolmaster, was new builded,
cieled and seated.

Nicholas Marks dis-franchised for suing a Freeman out of the Jurisdiction of
this Court.

Regna Regum 4. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1462.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Peter Edward Bridgman Philip Yard William Grigg William Lant

The Mayor and Aldermen of this City by the Queens Letters Patent bearing
date,7. Nevembris, have power given them to place poor people in the Almshouse
called the Combrew; And also to appoint pensions to four poor Men belonging to
St John's Hospital within the Eastgate of the said City, in haec verba --

Elizabetha Dei Gratia, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regina, Fidei
Defensor, etc.
Omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint salutem,
cum a tempore quo in contrarium memoria hominum non existit in Civitate nostra
Exoniensi exstiterunt duodecim pauperes sive Eleemosynarii in duodecim parvis
Messuagiis scituatis and existentibus in quodam loco vocato le Combrew infra
dictam Civitatem, and quilibet little duodecim pro tempore existente per totum
idem tempus habuerunt and habere consueverunt, duranti vita sua, qualibet
septimana septem denarios eis allocatos pro sustentatione sua. and pro
manutentione pauperum ejusdem Civitatis imperpetuum, ex fundatione cujusdam
Domini Willielmi Bonvile, cumque etiam per totum idem tempus existunt infra
eandem Civitatem quatuor alii pauperes sive Eleemosynarii quorum quilibet per
se pro tempore existente similiter habuit viginti unum solidos and octo
denarios per Annum duranti vita sua pro sustentatione corundem quatuor pauperum
nuper petitos ex fundatione nuper Prioris and Conventus nuper Hospitalis Sancti
Johannis Baptistae infra portam orientalem dictae Civitatis, and quiae vera and
considerata scientia hujusmodi Eleemosynarum infra Civitatem praedictam super
mortem cujuslibet talium pauperum est melius cognita Majori and Aldermannis
dictae Civitatis Exoniensis pro tempore existentibus, dedimus and concessimus,
and per presents literas nostras patentes damus and concedimus pro nobis and
successoribus nostris Majori, Ballivi^ and Communitati Civitatis praedictae and
suecessoribus suis quod Major and Aldermanni dictae Civitatis vel Major pars
eorundem qui pro tempore erunt, habeant plenam potestatent Jurisdictionem and
Awhoritatem, and quod possint and valiant ad omnia tempus and tempora
imposterum super mortem cujuslibet praedictorum pauperam, vel aliter per
discretiones suas nominare, instituere and appunctuare alium and alios de
pauperibus and Eleemosynariis dictae Civitatis, quondo contigerit super
defaltam aut vacationem alicujus little per mortem decedentis vel aliter ad
dictum Messuagiunt and Messuagia locum and locos secundum intentiones
praedictae fundationis, and illum and illot sic per praefatos Majorem and
Aldermannos nominatos, institutos seu appunctuatos haberet and gauderet,
haberent and gauderent Messuagia praedicta cum pertinentiis, ac omnia aliae
sustentationes and proficua quaecunque secundum tenorem praedictam seperalium
fundationum, Ita videlicet quod supervisor, Receptor aut Seneschalli nostri seu
successorum nostrorum, aut aliquis alius sive aliqui alii ad aliquod in
praemissis faciendum sive exigendum imposterum non ingrediantur seu
intromittant, nec eorum aliquis intromittat; nec aliqua praemissa partium
facienda facere presumant seu eorum aliquis presumat in perturbationem
praemissorum ullo modo, proviso semper quod been licebit nobis and
successoribus nostris omnino imposterum infra duo^ menses post mortem cujus^^et
praedictae pauperum per Billam signatam nominare and appunctudre unum alium vel
alios de pauperibus dictae Civitatis, qui pro tempore fuerint ad praedictum
locum vel locos, quando evenerit per mortem, vacationem, vel aliter, Aliquo
clauso vel Articulo in presentibus non obstante. In cujus rei testimonium has
literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes,

Test me ipsa apud Westmonasterium Septimo die Novembris, Anno Regni Nostri
Quarto.
Regna Regum 5. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1563.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Peryam Thomas Richardson George Peryman Henry Ellicott Richard Prowse

Goods seized as Foraign bought and sold within St. Peter's Churchyard, and
composition made for the same.

All persons placed in Almshouses, within this City or Suburbs thereof, are
daily to resort unto the Cathedral Church at the time of Divine Service.

The Plague of Pestilence being in London, no goods brought thence were
permitted to be brought hither, and St. Nicholas Fair was for this year
discontinued.

Regna Regum 6. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1564.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Moris Levermore John Smith Thomas May Andrew Geer John Web^

Hugh Pope being Elected Mayor, and refusing the Office, was therefore Fined,
and another chosen,

An annuity of 10 l. per Annum, by Patent under the Cities Common Seal granted
to Sir William Cecill (afterward made Lord Treasurer) in remuneratione
servitii.

Another annuity of 20. marks per Annum in like manner granted to Jeffery
Tothill in remuneratione servitii praes^it^.

Regna Regum 7. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1565.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Woolcott Robert Chaff Thomas Bruerton Robert Lambell Alexander Trigg

This Mayor passed all the Offices toward the Mayoralty about 22. years last
past, when he was a Merchant flourishing with Wealth, but falling afterward
into decay, and no less in respect of his old Age, 'twas thought fit not to
cast the Office of Mayoralty upon him, nevertheless the lot being now fallen to
him, a fitting house was purposely provided for him, and the charge of keeping
the same for this year was undertaken by the Chamber, and defrayed accordingly.

Regna Regum 8. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1566.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Richardson Simon Knight Nicholas Martin John Pope Thomas Bird

The Exchequer of St. Peter's 23. Octobris was robbed, but the Thieves were so
honest, as that when they had carried home the money, and finding the same to
be more then they needed, returned the overplus.

Regna Regum 9. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1567.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Smith William Chapel Thomas Martin John Hutchins John Jones

A voluntary collection here made of threescore pounds in money toward the
reparation of St. Mary Michels Tower and Spire, the Weathercock thereof being
blown down.

Regna Regum 10. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1568.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Robert Chaff Edward Lymett John Levermove Richard Newman Roger Robinson

Calabear Wear by means of a great Frost was much in decay, and afterward new
made in a frame of Timber.

Regna Regum 11. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1569.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Chapel Thomas Bruerton John Pyle William Hunt John Collins

Bishop All^igh having well governed this Church nine years and upwards, 15.
Aprilis departed this Life, and lies buried under a fair Marble stone in the
Quire of his own Church with this Inscription thereon -- Reverendus Pate^
Willielmus Alleigh Exoniensis Episcopus, Ace^rimus Evangelicae veritatis
propugnator, morum probitate praecelebris, bonarum Disciplinarum mirabili
scientia clarus, in Christo Domino sub hoc marmore quiescit, obiit Decimo
Quinto Aprilis, Anno Domini, 1570.

William Bradbridge Dean of Sarisbury was the next elected Bishop of this
Church, and accordingly consecrated at Lambeth by Matthew Parker Archbishop of
Canterbury, 28. Aprilis.

The Plague reigning here, the chiefest Men of the City removed into the
Country with their Families.

Regna Regum 12. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1570.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Simon Knight William Tryvett William Param^re Hugh Wilsdon Walter Jones

The Yarn Market was new builded.

Regna Regum 13. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1571.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Bruerton Nicholas Martin John Dorr William Martin William Monugwell

Agnes the Wife of John Jones late of this City was burnt to death in
Southen-hay, for poisoning her said Husband.

Regna Regum 14. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1572.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Pery^m John Blackall Thomas Prestwood Thomas Reymond Henry James Richard
Sweet

This John Peryam toward the end of his Mayoralty, sc. 5. Septembris died, and
John Blackall was elected Mayor in his place to perform that Office for the
residue of the year.

Regna Regum 15. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1573.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Tryvett George Peryaman John Davy Alexander Mayn Thomas Chapel

A general Watch is here yearly kept on Midsomer-eve according to the ancient
custom of the said City, a chief end whereof is for the cleansing of the
Harness and Artillery.

Regna Regum 16. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1574.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Nicholas Martin John Pope John Peryam John Sanford Richard Harding

In the month of December there fell such a sudden storm of Hail, Wind and
Thunder, as the like had not been heard or seen.

A pension of 40 s. per Annum, by Patent under the Common Seal granted to Sir
Gawen Carew Knight for his Life, on whose decease the same was in like manner
settled on Edmond Tremayn Esquire, to them both in reward of their good
services done this City.

In an Isle at the East end of the Cathedral Church there is a fair Tomb of
Freestone with the Portraicture of Sir Peter Carew Knight, completely armed,
who was Brother to the Lord Carew of Clopton, sometime Lord President of
Munster, afterward Master of his Majesty's Ordinance, then Chamberlain to
Queen Ann, and a Privy Counselor, and lastly Earl of Totnes, both of them
Sons to Dean Carew of this Cathedral Church, who was the Queens Chaplain in
Ordinary, and endowed with other dignities.

Regna Regum 17. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1575.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Peter Richard Prows^ George Smith Nicholas Spicer Richard Beaufitz

A Freeman of this City being impleaded at Westminster for matters determinable
here, our Charters for Cognizance of Pleas were sent up, and by Plea demanded,
and the cause thereon was ordered to be tried here.

Thomas Williams Esquire, serving in Parliament as one of our Citizens, was
elected Speaker of the House of Commons, to whom was sent hence a present of 20
l. in gold in reward of his good service there done for this City, on whose
death to supply his room in Parliament, Sir Peter Carew Knight, was here
Elected as one of our Citizens.

Regna Regum 18. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1576.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Prestwood Robert Chafe Thomas Martin Thomas Spicer Lawrence Barcomb
John Choppell

This Thomas Presiwood in the beginning of his Mayoralty, sc. 28. December. died,
and Robert Chaff elected his Successor to execute that Office for the residue
of the year.

For the more decent sitting of the Mayor and Justices in Court, the higher
part of the Guild Hall was erected, seated and plaunched.

Regna Regum 19. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1577.
Mayors and Bailiffs
George Peryman Michael Germin John Hakewill John Dod John Field

Thomas Spicer of this City Merchant, on a Wager loaded two Hogsheads of Wine
on a Horse, and carried them from one seller to another, about the space of a
Furlong.

Bishop Bradbridg at his Benefice of Newton-Ferrers in Devon, 27. Junii being
alone, suddenly died, a Man only memorable for this, that nothing memorable is
recorded of him, saving that he well governed this Church about eight years,
and lies buried in the North-side of the Quire of his said Church, near the
high Altar.

Regna Regum 20. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1578.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Prowse Jeffery Thomas William Perry Thomas Turbervill William Shepherd

John Wolton sometime a Cannon Residentiary of this Church, 24. Augusti was
installed Bishop thereof by Edmond Grindall, Archbishop of Canterbury.

The Guild Hall was new cieled and glazed, and before it a new Pump erected.

John Jones of this City Goldsmiths, bestowed on the Mayor hereof a Basin and
Ewer of silver parcel gilded of 30 l. value, for the use of the said Mayor and
his Successors for ever for the Cities honor.

A house of Correction was here erected, toward which the Citizens gave
liberally, whereof many of them afterward repented.

Regna Regum 21. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1579.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Chapel Simon Knight Thomas Reymond John Aplin John Brushford Peter
Vilvain

This William Chapel died, 15. Decembris, in whose place Simon Knight was
chosen to supply that Office for the remaining part of the year.

Regna Regum 22. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1580.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Bruerton John Davy Robert Webber John Riggins Nicholas Capenter

In the Month of October by the Queens Command, eleven Horsemen well arrayed
with their whole Furniture, were sent into Ireland at the sole charges of the
Bishop, Dean and Chapter.

In the same Month was here seen a Comet or Blazing star.

Regna Regum 23. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1581.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Martin John Peryam Henry Hull Richard Dorchester Henry Spurway

An Act of Parliament made that all Gavel-kind Land within the Country of this
City, shall be inheritable, as Lands at the Common Law, the charges whereof
were defrayed by the City.

Sluices erected on the new work or Flaven, for the better conveyance of Wares
and Merchandises, to and from the said City.

Regna Regum 24. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1582.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Michael Germin George Smith John Howell John Follet John Moor

The Right Honorable William Earl of Bath, 7. Augusti, here married the Lady
Elizabeth, Daughter to the Earl of Bedford, to whom the City presented a Basin
and Ewer of silver gilded, and also made them a triumph in Southen-hay, in
honor of their said Marriage.

Regna Regum 25. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1583.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Jeffery Thomas William Martyn Thomas Walker Richard Jourden Nicholas Errom

Every Inhabitants dwelling House being on fire, he forfeits 20 s. and for his
Chimney 6 s. 8 d. by the ancient custom of this City

Regna Regum 26. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1584.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Davy John Levermore John Prowse Thomas Bridgman Christ^pher Spic^r

In the Month of September, Don Anthonio King of Portugal, being driven out of
his own Country by Philip King of Spain, arrived at Plymouth, and upon St.
Michael's day came to this City, who with his retinue (during their abode here)
were lodged in this Mayor's house, and by him very liberally entertained.

Regna Regum 27. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1585.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Nicholas Martin Thomas Chapel William Spicer. Gilbert Smith Richard Pery.

At Lent Assizes held at the Castle of Exeter, there were certain Prisoners
arraigned before Sergeant Flowerdby (one of the Judges of Assizes for this
Western Circuit) when suddenly there arose such a noisome smell from the Bar, as
that a great number of the people then present were therewith infected, whereof
in a very short space thereafter died the said Judge, Sir John Chichester, Sir
Arthur Basset, and Sir Bernard Drake Knights, Robert Carry, and Thomas Risdon
Esquires, Justices of the Peace, and then sitting on the Bench, and eleven of
the Jury impannelled and sworn for the Trial of the said Prisoners at the Bar,
and the Twelfth man only escaped; The cause of the sickness was said to be
thus, Sir Bernard Drake having been at Sea, took a Portugal Ship which had
there hovered up and down a long season, insomuch, that the Merchants and
Mariners therein by diseases (chiefly occasioned through want of Victuals and
Necessaries) were all worn out, These men he brought into Dartmouth; and caused
them to be sent to the Gaol near Exeter Castle, with which contagious disease
all persons therein were soon infected, (and most of them died) and no less
both City and Country.

Regna Regum 28. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1586.
Mayors and Bailiffs
George Smith Nicholas Spicer Lawrence Seldon William Brayly Thomas Edwards

Regna Regum 29. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1587.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Peryam Philip Yard John Ellicott Jasper Horsey Roger Selby

A Letter of Attorney made to retain persons under the Common Seal to demand
cognizance of pleas.

Goods seized as forfeited being landed, the Town Custom duty not discharged.

Goods seized on by the searchers of Leather as forfeited, and composition made
for the same.

John Carpenter sometime a servant to Sir Thomas Dennis Knight, elected
Muster-Master of this City.

Several Ships were hence set forth every way well furnished for the Queens
service against the Spanish Invasion, whose Captains, Mariners and Soldiers,
were by the City paid their wages.

Regna Regum 30. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1588.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Chapel Thomas Spicer Thomas Radford Richard Reynolds Thomas Greenwood

The Earl of Essex coming hither, was very honorable received, and at the
Cities sole charge entertained.

Regna Regum 31. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1589.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Prowse John Chapel Edward Langdon Walter Horsey John Pain

In the month of September, the Plague begun here to reign.

At the Election of the Mayor and Officers of this City, on Monday next before
St. Michael's day, Sir Robert Dennys Knight Recorder hereof (being absent by
reason of sickness) wrote a Letter to the Chamber for his excuse, and prayed
them to appoint a deputy to supply his place, pro hac vice, and they ordered
the Camberlain, who took the secret voices of the Four and twenty, and
presented the same to the Commons in the Guild Hall, according to the Ancient
and Laudable Custom of the said City.

The little Conduit in the High Street, and also the House in the Courtelage
behind the Gisild-hall were new builded.

Regna Regum 32. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1590.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Wiliam Martin Richard Sweet John Howell William Newcomb Walter Borough Thomas
Baskervil

Upon the Death of Richard Sweet late Receiver General of this City, John
Howell was Elected his Successor in that Office, for the residue of the year.

Regna Regum 33. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1591.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Michael Germin Thomas Walker Jeremy Hilliard Hillary Galley John Depford

John Tailor a Freeman of this City, for coloring Foraigners goods, and for
suing another Freeman at Westminster out of the Jurisdiction of this Court
contrary to his Oath, had two distinct Fines imposed on him.

The Cloth-market removed from North-gate-street into South-gate-street, to be
kept between the Conduit there and the Bear-lane.

Regna Regum 34. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1592.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Nicholas Spicer Richard Beavis Walter Body Alnett Budly Richard Wheaton

The Company of Butchers within this City, disturbing the markets, and taking
away the Victuals of Foraign Butchers resorting hither, were for their
misdemeanour many of them committed to prison.

Regna Regum 35. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1593.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Spicer Henry Hull Alexander Germin Paul Triggs Henry Pain

The forepart of the Guild Hall was new built.

Bishop Wolton having well governed this Church 14. years space (being
constantly an earnest assertor of Conformity against the opposers thereof) 13.
Martii deceased, and lies buried in the South Side of the Quire of his own
Church; In whose memory on a fair stone fixed in the Wall, are inscribed these
ensuing Verses, -- Epitaphium in obitum Reverendissimi Patris Johannis Woltoni
Episcop^ Exoniensis.

Hic jacet, haud jacet hic tumulo quem credis inesse,
Terra nequit tantum contumulare virum,
Ingenium, genium, mores, pietatis honores
Eloquiumque pium busta perusta tegent,
Falleris, Vltonus tonus est, sic spiritus unde
Hoc nosti? tonus est coeli^us orb tonans.


Gervis Babington was the next Elected Bishop of this Diocese, and therein
consecrated, 2. Maii, being translated hither from his Bishopric of Landaff in
Wales, and having well governed this Church about three years, was removed
hence and made Bishop of Worcester.

Regna Regum 36. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1594.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Davy Christopher Spicer Hugh Crossing John Lant Clement Owlborow

A stock of money advanced by several members of the Common Council to provide
in Corn for a public store of the City, chiefly, for the relief of the poor in
this time of scarcity.

John Coldwell Doctor in Physic, and Bishop of Sarum, about this time gave his
See a strong purge, by consenting to the alienation of Sherburn Manor from
his Bishopric, he was assaulted in a dangerous juncture of time to give a
denial, for after he was Elected Bishop, all his Church preferments were
disposed of, and before his Election was confirmed, Sir Walter Rawleigh Knight,
importuned him to pass Sherburn to the Crown, and effected the same, whereupon
Sir Walter presently begged it of the Queen, much after the same manner Sir
William Killegrew Knight, got the Manor of Crediton, (a Bough almost as bigg,
as all the rest of the Body) from this Church of Exeter, by the consent of this
Bishop Babington.

Regna Regum 37. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1595.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Chapel Richard Dorchester John Chapel Ju^. Jeffery Waltham John Eadts

Posthorses to be here always in readiness for the public safety of the City,
and more spocial service of the Queens Majesty.

Goods seized as forfeited being landed, Town Custom duty not discharged.

Regna Regum 38. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1596.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Levermore Richard Jourden Alexander Main Thomas Blackaller David Bagwell
Robert Parr

William Cotton Doctor in Divinity (upon the Translation of Bishop Babington to
Worcester) 16. Maii was installed Bishop hereof.

Upon the death of Richard Jourden late Receiver General of this City,
Alexander Main was chosen in his place to supply that Office for the residue
of the Year.

A pension of 4 l. per Annum, granted to John Hooker in reward of sundry
services performed by his Father to this City.

Regna Regum 39. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1597.
Mayors and Bailiffs
George Smith William Spicer John Sendy Samuel Alford William Pope

The Town of Tiverton being lately consumed by Fire, 10 l. in money was sent
them to relieve their Poor.

Felons goods forfeited to the City, and seized on accordingly by the Sheriff.

Regna Regum 40. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1598.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Peryam John Prowse John Tailor Nicholas Langdon Richard Body

Mr. Palmer's Almshouse without the South-gate was appointed only for Women to
inhabit therein, and one Whitrow's Widow being admitted into the said House,
and taking Husband contrary to the Orders thereof, was thence therefore
expelled.

Regna Regum 41. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1599.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Howell Thomas Edwards Giler Savery William Martin Ignatius Jourden

The deep way between the Hospitals of the Wynard's and St. Mary Magdalens,
without the South gate was filled up and paved.

Recognizances at Sessions forfeited, and composition made for the same with
the Chamber on the Delinquent's petitions.

Regna Regum 42. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1600.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Martin John Ellicott John Lambell Thomas Snow Richard Brinley

Goods of a Felo de se forfeited to the City, and seized on accordingly.

Five Hides of Leather likewise seized on, being not well tanned according to
the Statute.

Regna Regum 43. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1601.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Walker Walter Borough John Sheer John Marshall Hugh Morell

The Town of Tiverton being again destroyed by Fire, was hence relieved with
the sum of 100 l. in money collected of the Inhabitants hereof by a voluntary
contribution.

Bishop Cotton (on the death of the old Schoolmaster of the High-School here)
refers the nomination of a new one to the Chamber, who recommending one Mr.
Perryman (a Learned, but a lashing master) was accordingly admitted thereunto.

Regna Regum 44. Q. Elizabeth. An. D. 1602.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Beavis William Martin Alexander Germin Robert Ellicott Richard Sweet
John Modyford

On the Death of Richard Beavis late Mayor hereof, who died 26. Augusti,
William Martin was Elected Mayor, to supply that Office for the residue of the
year.

Queen Elizabeth departed this Life, 24. Martii, and 29. of the same month was
King James here solemnly proclaimed King.

Regna Regum 1. James. An. D. 1603.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Nicholas Spicer Hugh Crossing Nicholas Beavit Oliver Tapper Robert Hind

The Plague being entered this City, a Pesthouse (for the better succor of
persons infected therewith) was provided near the said City by the special care
of the Magistrates hereof.

Mawdlin and Lammas Fairs (in regard of the said sickness) were not now kept.

Goods landed at Toppisham and forfeited, the duty of the Town Custom being not
discharged.

Regna Regum 2. James. An. D. 1604.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Davy William Newcomb William Horsham John Penny Thomas Crossing Thomas
Richardson

William Horsham dying in his Stewardship, Thomas Richardson was chosen in his
place to supply that Office for the residue of the year.

A Gelding here seized on as a Deodand, and sold by the Receiver General
hereof, for five pound, which he made good on his Account.

Two Freemen hereof for suing two other Freemen out of the Jurisdiction of this
Court, were both of them Fined and disfranchised.

Regna Regum 3. James. An. D. 1605.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Hull John Lant Thomas Martin Edward Clement Peter Colleton

A considerable sum of money was raised, as a voluntary contribution made by
the Inhabitants hereof toward the erecting of St. Sydwel's Tower.

Goods of an attainted person for Felony seized on to the Cities use.

On the Fifth day of November, the Gunpowder Treason was discovered, and the
Actors found and Executed, whereof a great Scholar made this observation --
Quinto Novembris, Anglia Memineris, quid?
Papae furorem, Dei favorem, id.
The Fifth of November, England remember, what?
The Pope's Conspiracy, God's great delivery, that.


Regna Regum 4. James. An. D. 1606.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Dorchester Gilbert Smith John Gupwill John Aclund George Pyle

New maces of silver with the King's Arms engraven thereon, made for the four
Sergeants.

Holloway without the South-gate was well repaired, and the ground levelled.

Regna Regum 5. James. An. D. 1607.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Sir George Smith, Knight. Jeffery Waltham Robert Parr Peter Bolt George Leech
Thomas Wakeman

The Price of Corn much increasing, a considerable quantity thereof is bought
and put up in store for the necessary relief of the poor herein.

Twenty pound in money given by the City toward the building of fitter seats
in the Castle for the Judges of Assizes that come this Circuit, which was
advanced on the motion of Mr. Recorder Martin, as from the Judges.

A patent under the common Seal, granted to the Right Honorable Earl of
Dorset, Lord Treasurer of England, to be Lord High Steward of this City, who at
Whitehall, 19. Aprilis as he sat in Council died suddenly.

Regna Regum 6. James. An. D. 1608.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Prowse John Marshall Thomas Amy Christoyher Spicer John Blight

Goods seized on as forfeited being Foraign bought and sold, and composition
made for the same.

A Gelding as a Deodand, forfeited to the City, and seized on accordingly.

Regna Regum 7. James. An. D. 1609.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hugh Crossing John Sheer William Grigg John Hayn William Birdall

An Act of Parliament made for the continuance and repair of Head-weare on the
River of Exe, and the new Leat. cap. 19.

Regna Regum 8. James. An. D. 1610.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Borough Ignatius Jourden Thomas Flay John Jourden John Lynn

An exemplisication had of an Act of Parliament lately made for Trews-wear^.

John Pearse one of Mr. Hurst's Almsmen expelled the said House, for disobeying
the good Orders and Constitutions thereof, by marrying a Woman under the Age of
fifty five years.

Regna Regum 9. James. An. D. 1611.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Lant Thomas Martin Nicholas Spicer John Crocker John Tirry

Thomas Tooker lately Elected Swordbearer of this City, was arraigned before
the Judges of Assizes at the Castle of Exon for the murder of his Wife, found
guilty thereof, and had sentence to die, and was accordingly Executed at
Hevitree Gallows.

A voluntary contribution of 30 l. in money was here made, and sent to the poor
of St. Sidwells, whose Houses were lately destroyed by sire.

Several Bridges over the new Work or Haven builded.

Regna Regum 10. James. An. D. 1612.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Newcomb John Modyford William Mace Abraham Paul Anthony Salter

The Goods of an attainted person seized on for the Cities use, and composition
made for the same.

Northen-hay levelled, and a pleasant walk made thereon, and upon the Mount
over against Gallants-Bower, seats or Benches of Timber erected, and all at the
Cities charge.

Regna Regum 11. James. An. D. 1613.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Jeffery Waltham John Gupwill John Chafe Gilbert Sweet James Tailor

A Patent under the Common Seal granted to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Northampton to be Lord High Steward of this City.

Regna Regum 12. James. An. D. 1614.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Walker Thomas Crossing John Levermore George Passemere Henry Willett

Regna Regum 13. James. An. D. 1615.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Marshall John Tailor Richard Prowse Hugh Germin William Bartlett

The goods of an attainted person seized on as forfeited to this City.

Regna Regum 14. James. An. D. 1616.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Sheer Thomas Amy Nicholas Martin Christopher Clark William Read

An exemplification of a Decree had out of the Exchequer, touching the Fishing
in the River of Exe.

Regna Regum 15. James. An. D. 1617.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Ignatius Jourden Peter Colleton Adam Bennet John Hakewill John Savage

Mr. Recorder Duck being chosen Reader of Lincolns Inn, two Hogsheads of Claret
Wine, were presented him from this City, as a Testimony of their respects
toward him.

Regna Regum 16. James. An. D. 1618.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Martin John Acland Nicholas Ricroft Roger Yeo Alexander Osborn

Sir Walter Rawleigh Knight, in the first year of this King's Reign, at
Winchester, before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, was attainted of High
Treason, which said sentence did lie Dormant Almost 16. years, during which
time he continued a Prisoner in the Tower, until about three years last past,
when he was permitted to go at large, and had a Commission for a Voyage to
Guiana, and after his return, was remanded to the Tower, the Record of the
Attainder being brought and certified into the King's Bench, he was by Habeas
Corpus directed to the Lieutenant of the Tower, brought unto the Bar, where
being demanded what he could say, why the Court should not proceed and grant
execution against him, replied, that the King had employed him as General of a
Voyage, and gave him power of the lives of others, and whether this did amount
to a pardon or no, he knew not, to whom the Court replied, that the King
pardons no Treasons by any implication, but by express words, and so execution
was awarded against him, and he committed to the Sheriffs of London and
Middlesex, and by them was brought to the Gate house, and the next day being
the 29. of October, this year was beheaded in the great Court at Westminster.
He was a person of as rare endowments of mind as this Age did afford in any
capacity, take him as a Statesman, Seaman, Soldier, or Learned Writer, Tam
Marti, quam Mercuri^; his own Motto in every respect he well deserved, whose
real worth and virtues to describe is a sufficient task for an abler Pen, well
remembering that old sentence, praestat nulla quam pauca dicere de Carthagine, I
cease. Some say that he was born at Budley in Devon, others, that he was a
Native hereof, and born in the house adjoining to the Palace-gate, on either
account as our Countryman, I held it unfit to pass him by altogether in
silence.

Regna Regum 17. James. An. D. 1619.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Prowse George Pyle Walter White John Pearse George Langworthy

Joan Garnsey Widow, placed in Mr. Hurst's Almshouse, and being married
contrary to the orders of the said House, she and her Husband both were thence
expelled.

Edward Heart Town-clark of this City, surrendered his said Office to the
Chamber, wherein John Martin Chamberlain of the said City was Elected, and
during his life enjoyed both the said Offices, simul and semel.

Regna Regum 18. James. An. D. 1620.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Hugh Crossing John Linn William Skinner Richard Saunders Thomas Tooker

Bishop Cotton having well governed this Church about 23. years 26. Augusti
died, and lies buried in the South Side of the Quire of his own Church; In
whose memory a fair Monument is there erected, with his Portraicture or
Effigies in Alabaster, which in the late troubles was removed into an Isle at
the upper end of the said Church, and in a marble stone these ensuing Verses
inscribed -- Memoriae Reverendi Patris Dignissimi
Praesulis Domini Gulielmi Cottoni olim
Exoniensis Episcopus Sacrum.
Venentur titulos alii atque encomia captent
Tu propria virtute nites (Dignissime Praeful)
Corda virum tumulus tibi sunt Epitaphia linguae
Virtutesque tuae tituli quae dissita multis
Juncta tibi zelus prudens prudentia mista
Serpentem innocua caute Moderata Columba
Foeta operumque fides, opera edita, and abdita, mundo
Abdita (sic humilis pietas jubet) edita caelo!
Mite supercilium, faices angusta, sereni
Vultus, Majestas frontis veneranda serena,
Ira fugax, solemn raro visura cadentem.
Mensa benigna, domusque patens, aditusque paratus
Condivit tua dicta lepos gravitasque leporem.
Pacificis placidus, tantum hostis seditiosis,
Non tibi sublimi mores in sedc superbi
Vita nec in prima (ut multis) fuit im^ Cathedra
Praelatusque gregi, sed non elatus honores es.


Two other Verses were hereunto added, and thus translated -- A Paulo ad Petrum
pia te Regina vocavit.
Cum Petro and Paulo Caeli Rex arc^ locavit.
Whom the Queen from Paul to Peter did vemove,
Him God with Paul and Peter placed above.


Valentine Carry Doctor in Divinity, on the 20. day of November then next
following, was consecrated Bishop of this Diocese.

Regna Regum 19. James. An. D. 1621.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter Borough Thomas Wakeman Francis Crossing Henry Bat^ishill John Garland

A Patent under the Common Seal of the City, granted to the Right Honorable
the Earl of Suffolk to be Lord High Steward thereof.

Regna Regum 20. James. An. D. 1622.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Modyford John Jourden Roger Mallock Richard Harbert John Monugwell

License given Grace Sheer Widow, by the Chamber to send her Son Joseph Snow an
Orphan of this City beyond the Seas.

The Chamber in procuring the Charter for establishing the Hospital of St.
John's within the Eastgate of the said City, and in repairing and new building
of the Edifices thereunto belonging, did expend above 400 l.

Regna Regum 21. James. An. D. 1623.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Gupwill Nicholas Spicer James Tucker John Cooze Trisfram Mi^hell

The Commission of the Deputy Lieutenants of this City and County was renewed.

Regna Regum 22. James. An. D. 1624.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Crossing Thomas Flay Hugh Crocker Nicholas Mercer Augustine Drake

A Patent under the Common Seal of the City granted to the Right Honorable
William Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery, to be Lord High Steward thereof.

The Plague here entered in the Month of July, and continued very hot for one
years space, sweeping away many Families.

Regna Regum 1. Charles the 1. An. D. 1625.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Walker Nicholas Martin William Golding James White George Jourden

This Mayor being Elected, refused to accept of the Office (in regard of the
contagious sickness here still reigning) but withdrew himself into the
Country, whereupon a petition was sent hence to the King, who commanded this
Mayor to undertake the Office on his Allegiance, whereunto he readily yielded
obedience, and performed it very worthily.

A Pesthouse in the Parish of St. Sydwells was purchased by the City for the
benefit of such poor people, as were or should be infected with the Plague.

No common Beggars in the open streets of the City were permitted, but
presently sent to the Work house, or house of Correction to get their bread by
the sweat of their brows, idleness being the root of all evil, it being no less
true then a witty saying, That the Devil tempts all men but the idle man, who
tempts the Devil, the idle man's brain being a shop for the Devil to work in.

Regna Regum 2. Charles the 1. An. D. 1626.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Tailor John Hakewill Robert Walker John Berry Joseph Trobridg

Bishop Carry having well governed this Church about 6. years, 10. Junii died,
and lies buried in the North-side of the Quire of St. Paul's Church London, but
has a stately monument of Marble, with his Effigies Pourtrayed in Alabaster,
erected as his memorial in an Isle at the upper end of his own Church: Upon
whose decease

Regna Regum 3. Charles the 1. An. D. 1627.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Acland Gilbert Sweet George Harris John Anthony Richard Madeck

Joseph Hall Doctor in Divinity was Elected, and 23. Decembris, consecrated
Bishop of this Diocese.

The King under his great Seal renews the Cities Charter.

A Pump erected near St. Paul's Church.

The City of Sarum being infected with the Plague of Pestilence, for the better
relief of their sickly poor, a considerable sum of Money was here collected,
and sent to them.

Regna Regum 4. Charles the 1. An. D. 1628.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Lynn Francis Crossing John Tailor Jun. John Cupper Humphry Bidgood

In the Lady Chapel of this Cathedral is a fair monument erected to the memory
of Sir John Doderidge Knight, who died 13. Septembris, and his Effigies is
lively Pourtrayed in Alabaster in his scarlet Gown and Robes, and a Court Roll
in his hand; He was first Sergeant at Law to Prince Henry, then Solicitor
General to King James of famous memory, after that, principal Sergeant at Law
to the said King, and lastly called by him to be one of the Judges of the
Honorable Court of King's Bench, where he spent the rest of his days, being
17. years: He was so general a Scholar as it is hard to say, whether he were
better Artist, Divine, Common or Civil Lawyer, he departed this Life at
Forsters near Egham in Surry, and according to his desire, his body was brought
down and here interred, 14. Octobris then next following, whose Epitaph is thus
inscribed, Learning adieu, for Doderidge is gone
To fix his Earthly, to an Heavenly Throne:
Rich Vrn of Learned Dust, scarce can be found
More Worth inshrined in six foot of ground.
NVnC obiit DoDerigVs JVDeX.


blazon or coat of arms

Another fair Monument thereunto adjoining is erected in memory of his Lady
with this Inscription on a marble stone. -- Hic jacet Domina Dorothea uxer
Johannis Doderidge Militis, unius Justiciariorum Domini Regis ad placita coram
Rege tenenda assignati, and filia Amisii Bampfield Militis, quae obiit primo
Mart^, Anno Domini, 1614. and in an Escutcheon their Arms impaled, sc.

1. Argent two Pales Wavy Azure between 9. Cross Croslets gules.

2. Or on a bend gules three Mollets d'argent.

Regna Regum 5. Charles the 1. An. D. 1619.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Nicholas Spicer Adam Bennet John Mar^in Thomas Blackall J^hn Mad^ck

A Patent under the Common Seal, granted to the Right Honorable Richard Lord
Weston, Lord High. Treasurer of England, to be Lord High Steward of this City.

A considerable sum of money here collected by way of a voluntary contribution,
and sem to the Town of Cambridge being infected with the Plague.

Regna Regum 6. Charles the 1. An. D. 1630.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomes Flay Roger Mallock James Geuld John Gill William Blackall

The Earl of Arundel Lord High Marshal of England coming to this City, was by
the Mayor and his Brethren honorably entertained.

Prince Charles was born 29. Maii, at St. James near Charing Cross, and
baptized Sunday 27. Junii then next following, at whose Birth Heaven it self
seemed to open one eye more then ordinary, a star appearing all that day, and
two days thereafter the Sun was Eclipsed.

This Mayor procured great quantities of Corn (there being a likelihood of a
scarciry) and much fuel he bought in the Summer, and supplied the necessities
of the Poor therewith in the Winter, without any advantage to himself.

Regna Regum 7. Charles the 1. An. D. 1631.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Nicholas Martin John Crocker Simon Snow John Parr Marmaduke Bevercomb

Nicholas Vaghan, Gentleman, elected Muster Master of this City, and a pension
of 6 l. per Annum, conferred on him.

Goods taken on two Felons (who are since on their legal Trials condemned and
executed) restored to the right owners.

The Lady Mary the King's Eldest Daughter, was born 4. Novembris, at St. James
aforesaid.

Regna Regum 8. Charles the 1. An. D. 1632.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Hakewill James Tucker Richard Crossing Ralph Herman Richard Main

The Free School within the Eastgate of this City, erected, founded by the
Mayor, Bailiffs, and Commonalty hereof, for the education of youth in good
Literature, who allow the Master thereof a dwelling house adjoining to the said
School, and a yearly pension of 30 l. and 10 l. more to an Usher.

Felons goods forfeited to the City, and seized on accordingly.

Regna Regum 9. Charles the 1. An. D. 1633.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Gilbert Sweet Robert Walker Philip Crossing Richard Yeo Edward Anthony

The Chamber (on the Poors behalf therein) by a decree in Chancery recovered of
the Dean and Chapter of this Church, the sum of 286 l.

An Estate of a Felo de se, forfeited to the City, and composition made for the
same.

James Duke of York was born 13. Octobris, at

Regna Regum 10. Charles the 1. An. D. 1634.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Francis Crossing John Hayne Christopher Brodridge Thomas Knott John Pinny

Philip Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery, Elected Lord High Steward of this City
by Patent under the Common Seal thereof.

A fair cap of maintenance, of Velvet richly wrought with Gold, with a suitable
scaberd for the Sword of Justice usually carried before the Mayor, was procured
and made use of accordingly by the Swordbearer in honor of the City.

Sir Nathaniel Brent Knight, Deputed by and under William Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, came into this Diocese by way of a visitation, before whom a Latin
Sermon was here Preached by Dr. Kellet, one of the Canons Residentiary of this
Church, and other decent entertainment, both by the City and Clergy conferred
on him.

Regna Regum 11. Charles the 1. An. D. 1635.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Adam Bennet John Penny James Marshall John Clarke Robert Trescott Stephen
Olivean

Upon the death of John Clark, late one of the Bailiffs, Stephen Olivean was
Elected in his place, to supply that Office for the residue of the year.

Several attempts made to bring in the River through the City.

Goods seized on as forfeited being Foraign bought and sold.

Regna Regum 12. Charles the 1. An. D. 1636.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Roger Mallock Richard Saunders Alan Penny Thomas Ford Henry Every

The sum of 32 l. in Money, and also a Garden adjoining to St. Katherines
Almshouse recovered from Robert Michell Doctor in the Civil Laws, by virtue of
a decree obtained in the High Court of Chancery, for the poor people of the
said House.

A new Churchyard, 24. Augusti, St. Bartholomew's day, was here solemnly
consecrated by Bishop Hall, a piece of ground formerly called Fricruhay, ^ying
within the Walls of the said City, and in the West quarter thereof, which said
ground was given by the City, and levelled and enclosed by the concurrent
charge of both Church and City, by the careful oversight of the Mayor.

Regna Regum 13. Charles the 1. An. D. 1637.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Crossing Thomas Tooker John Colleton Nicholas Corwithean Humphry Tocker

Peter Hellyar Elected Schoolmaster of the English Free school within St.
John's Hospital, and Master of the Boys in that House, has been a liberal
Benefactor thereunto.

Regna Regum 14. Charles the 1. An. D. 1638.
Mayors and Bailiffs
James Tucker Christopher Clark Christopher Parr Oliver Tapper Richard Evans

License granted to Richard Saunders Merchant, to sue Nicholas Bolt Merchant,
at the Common Law, they being both Freemen of this City.

The Chapel at St. John's Hospital was again consecrated by Bishop Hall, being
newly beautified at the sole charge of Alice Hele, Widow.

Regna Regum 15. Charles the 1. An. D. 1639.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Rebert Walker Henry Battishill Richard Sweet Thomas Kendall William Spiller

The Town of Taunton in Somerset, being visited with the Plague, the sum of 185
l. 17 s. 4 d. was sent to them as a voluntary collection here made for the
relief of the poor of that Town.

This Mayor and Mr. Simon Snow, were Elected our Citizens to serve in the
ensuing Parliament.

Any Person marrying an Aldermans Daughter, may freely claim his Freedom of the
City.

Regna Regum 16. Charles the 1. An. D. 1640.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Penny Walter White Samuel Crocker John Lovering John Butler

Twelve Doctors of several Professions born within this City, and at one time
were all living, one of them is the Author of these ensuing verses, namely,
Dr. Robert Vilvain, who says thus -- Bis sex Exoniae sunt intra moenia Nati
Doctores Pariter qut viguere diu,
Theiologi quinque, and Medici sunt quatuor ex his,
Sunt tres Juridici, qui viguere simul.


Thus Translated by the same Author.

There were twelve Doctors born in Exeter,
Within the Walls who lived long together,
Of these were Five Divines, and Four Physicians
Who lived together, but Three sole Civilians.
1. John Bridgeman, Lord Bishop of Chester. 2. George Barkham, Dean of Buckin
in Essox. 3. George Hakewill, Chaplain to Prince Henry, and Archdeacon of
Surry. 4. Michael Germin, Chaplain to the Queen of Bobemia. And 5. Anthony
Short, these are the Divines. 6. Sir Simon Baskervil Knight. 7. Robert Vilvain.
8. Richard Spicer. 9. Anthony Salter, these are the Physicians. 10. William
Spicer. 11. Joseph Martin. And 12. Robert Michell, these are the civil Lawyers.

Regna Regum 17. Charles the 1. An. D. 1641.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Saunders Hugh Crocker Nicholas Broking Thomas Pit John Lavers

Bishop Hall having well governed this Church about 14. years, was translated
hence, and installed Bishop of Norwich, whose Life and Doctrine were most
exemplary, he died 8. Septembris, Anno Domini 1656. A branch of whose will I
thought good to relate, sc. In the Name of God Amen, I Joseph Hall, D. D. not
worthy to be called a Bishop of Norwich, etc. I bequeath my Soul, etc. my Body
I leave to be interred without any Funeral pomp, at the discretion of my
Executors, with this only Monition, that I do not hold God's House a meet
Repository for the dead Bodies of the greatest Saints; This Reverend Prelate
may be said to have died with his Pen in his hand, whose writing and living
even expired together.

Ralph Brownrig Doctor in Divinity, was the next Elected, and 3. Maii,
consecrated Bishop of this Diocese, who albeit he lived about 18. years after
his said consecration, yet by reason of the intestine Wars in this Kingdom, he
never came hither.

Regna Regum 18. Charles the 1. An. D. 1642.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Christopher Clark John Cupper Christopher Clark Jun. Philip Foxmill Nicholas
Brinly

All the Trees in Northen-bay and Southenbay Elms (of above one hundred years
growth) were felled and destroyed.

The City was twice this year besieged by the King's Forces: First, by my Lord
Hopton about Christmas, who having only viewed the same, presently drew off his
Army and marched into Cornwall. Secondly, by Prince Maurice who laid close
siege thereunto, and 3. Septembri^ following, got the possession thereof, being
surrendered to him on Articles.

Regna Regum 19. Charles the 1. An. D. 1643.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Sir Hugh Crocker, Knight. Richard Yes Christopher Lethbridge William Holmes
Isaac Mawditt

The King in person coming to this City (being in pursuit of the Earl of Essex
(General of the Parliaments Forces) and his accomplices, who were marched into
Cornwall with an Army) lodged here in Bedford-house two days, and having
defeated his enemies, returned hither again, and was pleased to bestow the
dignity of Knighthood on the Mayor; Prince Charles attended his Father in all
this march, and lodged here in the Dean's house, The Queen likewise resorted
hither for safety, Bedford-house was prepared in readiness for her reception,
where during her abode, sc. 16. Junii, Her Majesty was delivered of a young
Princess, who was baptized in the Cathedral Church here, by Dr. Burnell
Chancellor and a Canon residentiary of the said Church on Sunday 3. Julii then
next following, In the body of the Church a Font was erected on purpose, under
a rich canopy of Estate, and Sir John Berkley then Governor of the said City,
the Lady Poulett, and the Lady Dalkeith (the said Princess's Governess) were
her witnesses, and named Henrietta Maria (being the Fourth and youngest
Daughter of King Charles, by Mary the Daughter of Henry the Fourth King of
France) and was from hence carried up to St. James near Westminster, and
afterward conveyed into France, and married to the Duke of Orleans (the French
King's Brother) she was esteemed for beauty to be one of the fairest Princesses
in Christendom.

This City presented the King's Majesty with 500 l. The Queen with 200 l. And
Prince Charles with 100 l. more.

Regna Regum 20. Charles the 1. An. D. 1644.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Nicholas Spicer John Martin William Sanford Nicholas Summers Henry Gaudy

Regna Regum 21. Charles the 1. An. D. 1645.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Cupper John Colleton James Gould James Tucker Jun. George Edmonds Edward
Painter

This City was besieged by Sir Thomas Fairfax (General of the Parliaments
Forces) and on Articles surrendered to him.

The Receiver-General displaced for his Loyalty, and another chosen into the
said Office for the residue of the year.

Regna Regum 22. Charles the 1. An. D. 1646.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Walter White Richard Crossing Bernard Bartlet Henry Prigg Edward Lawrence

Regna Regum 23. Charles the 1. An. D. 1647.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Adam Bennet John Lovering Nicholas Broking Thomas Ford Richard Ledgingham
Francis Dyett

John Lovering Elected Receiver General, and one of the Bailiffs of this City
for this year, and refusing to be sworn, was therefore Fined 100 l. and three
months thereafter, Nicholas Broking was chosen into the said Offices, and
supplied the same accordingly for the residue of the year.

Regna Regum 24. Charles the 1. An. D. 1648.
Mayors and Bailiffs
James Gould Ralph Herman Francis Lippingcot George Macy Thomas Tacke

Several young Elms were planted in the Bonbay.

January, 30. the King was barbarously murdered by his own sworn Subjects in
the height of their Rebellion, pretending (as the Jews did to our Savior)
they had a Law, by which he must dye, a sadder Catastrophe did the Sun never
behold, since the murdering of the Lord of Life, and in it self a sin so
horrid, as that Justice knew not well how to punish, nor mercy to forgive.

One thing not to be forgotten is, that there happened an accident in the Inn
commonly called the White-Hart in South-gatestreet, an old Well long neglected,
which the owner ( Roger Cheek of this City Brewer) had a purpose to cleanse,
and in order thereunto, caused one Paul Penrose to go down for the scouring
thereof, who therein suddenly fell dead, whereupon a second person named
William Johnson (both of them by profession Carpenters) was employed to descend
after him, who presently in the said Pit likewise died, a third person
adventuring himself to preserve his friend, had therein also perished, if with
all celerity he had not been drawn up again, who almost dead, was by rouling,
and pouring Oil and Aqua-vitae into him (through much difficulty) preserved,
who when he came to himself did affirm, that there came such a strange stench
out of the Caverus of the Earth, as that deprived him of breath, hereof diverse
men censured diversely, some that there was a Cockatrice in the Pit, some one
thing, some another, but the general received opinion that it was occasioned by
a Damp.

Regna Regum 1. Charles the 2. An. D. 1649.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Crossing Richard Saunders Adam Bennet Richard Evans Samuel Slade
Richard Candish William Relston

Richard Crossing Elected Mayor, and refusing the Office, no Fine was set on
him, nor any other Mayor chosen for that year, but supplied by Deputies.

Regna Regum 2. Charles the 2. An. D. 1650.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Evans Richard Sweet Francis Lippingatt Jun. Richard Culling, non Jur.
John Monugwell Jun. William Cowell

Richard Culling Elected one of the Bailiffs, and refusing the said Office, was
therefore Fined, and William Cowell chosen in his stead.

Regna Regum 3. Charles the 2. An. D. 1651.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Sweet Thomas Ford Walter Deeble William Bruen Edward Foxwell

Edward Foxwill elected one of the Bailiffs, and refusing the said Office was
therefore Fined, and paid the same, and the next year-following chosen into the
said Office, and executed it accordingly.

Regna Regum 4. Charles the 2. An. D. 1652.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Ralph Herm^n James Pearsey Simon Snow Richard Spicer Richard White Edward
Foxwell

A new Receiver chosen (on the resignation of the old) for the residue of the
year to put himself in a capacity of being elected into the Office of Mayoralty
of the said City.

Regna Regum 5. Charles the 2. An. D. 1653.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Simon Snow Christopher Clark Jun. James Marshall John Pynn Walter Holditch
Thomas Dix

A new Receiver Elected, on the resignation of the old, for the purpose
mentioned in the last year.

A strange accident happened in Parisstreet, without the Eastgate of this
City, and parcel of the Suburbs thereof, one John Bettison Clerk, Rector of the
Parish of St. Mary Clist, about three miles distant hence, 11 Januarii, about
six of the clock in the Evening of that day, returning homewards from this
City, being mounted on a good Gelding, and having his Wife behind him thereon
(the Well in the said street, about 40. foot deep, being decayed, and the mouth
thereof being covered over only with a few Thorns or Brambles) the Gelding with
his Riders still sitting him, fell down therein, the Neighbors hearing a noise
and outcry, the Evening being dark, presently brought forth lights, and
perceiving the sad disaster, suddenly procured means to help the Parson and his
Wife out of the said Well, who were both recovered up safe and sound, without
the least harm, the fear being greater then the danger, then was the Gelding
likewise taken up, but so much bruised, that he soon died.

Regna Regum 6. Charles the 2. An. D. 1654.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Richard Crossing Christopher Lethbridge Malachy Pyne John Crook John Atwill

A Bill in Chancery in the name of the Mayor and Bailiffs of this City, was
exhibited against George Speak Esquire (being seized of Mr Wynard's Lands to
several uses) for the new building of Wynard's Hospital, without the South gate
of the said City (burned in the late troubles) and also for the increase of the
poors maintenance therein.

Regna Regum 7. Charles the 2. An. D. 1655.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Nicholas Broking Bernard Bartlett Bernard Spark John Main Thomas Crispin

Several Persons of Quality for their Loyalty in proclaiming Charles the
Second, King of England, etc. at Southmolton in the County of Devon were taken
Prisoners, brought hither, and so confined to the High Gaol, where they were
often visited, their wants supplied, and plentiful provision daily made for
them by the honest Inhabitants of this City and County adjacent. Commissioners
of Oyer and Terminer shortly thereafter coming hither for the Trial of the said
Prisoners, who being found guilty of High Treason, John Penruddock and Hugh
Grove, both of the County of Wilts, Esquires, were in the Castle beheaded,
others of them were executed on the Gallows at Hevitree, two or three
reprieved, and the rest banished the Kingdom, and sold for slaves. After their
condemnation they sent this ensuing Letter after their Judges, which was
delivered at Chard, viz.

Honorable Sirs, We know that our Redeemer (blessed for ever) has pulled out
the sting of death, and therefore hope we shall never be so little his, as to
fear dying; again, we know long life to be one of God's great blessings, and
therefore hope we shall never be guilty of the neglect of any lawful means in
the acquiring of it, endeavors for the last are no way inconsistent with
preparation for the first, a Divine and a Physician are used at the same time,
being therefore encouraged from the Character we have received from your
eminent Piety, which above all outward Actions inclines the Heart to Mercy, and
Deeds of Charity; And considering how improbable it is, that so many Persons of
Honor, Interest and Merit, should be denied any request, We presume to make
these humble addresses to your Honors, that you will be pleased to become
intercessors to the Lord Protector on our behalfs, either by Letter or
otherwise, as your Honors shall think fit, nor yet can we think our
inconsiderable lives in themselves of moment sufficient for your troubles, but
when we shall lay the ruin of so many tender and innocent Relations, whose
dependencies are solely on our lives, and are too numerous to be made miserable
by our deaths; we cannot despair of Bowels of Compassion in you, we dare not
prescribe rules, but if we may not be thought fit to live in this
Commonwealth, we hope at last we may be suffered to spend the remainder of our
days in her defense, together with the rest of Christendom, against the too
powerful and common Enemy the Turk; And when it shall be considered; that the
satisfaction of no Man's death lies upon us, that none of our Brothers blood
cries for ours, and withal, that we had on Capitulation the protection of the
Sword for our lives, which yet we dar^ but touch with the top of our Rob, we
hope, we shall not appear Subjects for nothing but vengeance, and your Honors
favors shall not be cast away, nor ever be bestowed upon Men that can more
value, and set higher prizes upon them, then

Your Honors most humble Servants. J. P. H. G. R. D. etc.


Regna Regum 6. Charles the 2. An. D. 1656.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Ford Henry Prigg William Byne William Shower Tobias A^^^

Regna Regum 9. Charles the 2. An. D. 1657.
Mayors and Bailiffs
James Pearse Henry Gandy John Gupwill Edmund Starr William Penny

One hundred Trees felled and taken out of Duryurd Wood, wherewith St. Peter's
Churchyard was railed in at the Citizes sole charge.

Regna Regum 10. Charles the 2. An. D. 1658.
Mayors and Bailiffs
James Marshall Walter Deeble Edward Wheeler Samuel Beard William Hooper

The Corn-market removed into the old Shambles, which place was purposely of
new erected in a decent manner for that end.

The Horse-way leading toward the Broad-gate in St. Peter's Church yard, paved
at the Cities charge.

Regna Regum 11. Charles the 2. An. D. 1659.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Christopher Clark Jun. William Bruen Paul Draper John Elwill John Guswill

Many of the Commons of this City arose and put themselves in Arms, declaring
for a Free Parliament, the tumult appeared so great, as that most of the
Shop-windows were not opened for two or three days space, at which time here
being several Gentlemen of Quality, of the County of Devon, 'twas by them
agreed, that a Remonstrance should be forthwith drawn up and sent to the
Parliament, which was as follows.

To the Right Honorable William Le^thall Esquire, Speaker of the Parliament.
We the Gentry of the County finding our selves without a regular Government
(after your last interruption) designed a public meeting to consult remedies,
which we could not so conveniently effect till this week of our general
Quarter Sessions at Exon, where we found diverse of the Inhabitants groaning
under high oppressions, and a general defect of Trade to the utter ruin of
many, and fear of the like to others, which is as visible to the whole County,
that occasioned such disorders, as were no small trouble and distrubance to us,
which by God's Blessing upon our endeavors were soon suppressed and quiet
without blood; And though we find since our first purposes an alteration in the
State of affairs by your re-establishment at the helm of Government, yet
conceive that we are but in part redrest of our grievances, and that the chief
expedient will be the recalling of all those Members that were secluded in
1648. and sa^e before the first force upon the Parliament, and also by filling
up vacant places, and all to be admitted without any Oath or engagement
previous to their entrance, for which things, if you please to take a speedy
course, we shall defend you against all opposers, and future interruption with
our lives and fortunes, for the accomplishment whereof we shall use all lawful
means, which we humbly conceive may best conduce to the peace and safety of
this Nation.

Which was without delay accordingly sent up and presented by Thomas Bampfield
Esquire, and became a Precedent to many other Cities and Towns in England, even
to do the like, whereby the Army in and about London, consisting of 14000. old
Foot-Soldiers were dispersed throughout the Kingdom, whereof 1500. were sent
hither, and all to prevent the like Insurrections that happened in Exeter,
whence ensued an Ordinance of Parliament, that no Soldier should presume to
depart five miles from his quarters on pain of losing his arrears, and death.
Then marched General Monk into the City of London, with his Army consisting of
7000. old Soldiers, whom God in his wonderful mercy was pleased to make
instrumental of restoring our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, to his
undoubted Dominions after a long and tedious Exile, without the effusion of one
man's blood, who landed at Dover 26. Maii, 1660, and came into London the 29.
day of the same month, and was Crowned King at Westminster, the 23. day of
April then next following to the great joy of His Three Kingdoms.

On Friday 11. Maii, 1660. Charles the Second was proclaimed King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, at several public places within this City, viz.
At the Guild Hall, the little Conduit in St. Peter's Churchyard, at the
Bear-corner in South-gate-street, at the great Conduit, and at St. John's Bow,
with great solemnity, during all which time the said Conduits ran with Wine;
The Mayor, Aldermen, Common Council-men, Officers and Liverymen being in their
Scarlet and other Gowns, Robes, and Liveries respectively, attended on by a
Troop of Horse, commanded by Major Hagedott, and the several Companies of the
Trained Bands herein, with many thousand Inhabitants on Foot, shouting aloud
for joy, the Bells ringing, Canons playing from the Castle, whilst the Soldiers
gave many a Volly of shot, and at night Tar-barrels, and Bonefires capered
aloft; al which was thus done with the greatest expression of gladness that
possibly could be imagined.

Regna Regum 12. Charles the 2. An. D. 1660.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Christopher Lethbridge John Pynn John Anthony Edward Eveleigh Abraham Gibbs

This City presented the King with 700 l. in Plate, to welcome his return home;
And to His Sister the Princess Henrietta Mariae (born within this City) 200 l.
more in Plate.

John Gauden Doctor in Divinity, was ^^ Decembris consecrated Bishop of this
Diocese, who coming from London hither, was in the way saluted by sundry
Gentlemen both of the City and Country, and being attended on by several
Coaches, and some hundred of Horse, was with great joy and solemnity brought
herein.

Grenvill Weeks Gentleman, Elected Muster Master of this City and County, and a
pension of 6 l. per Annum allotted him for the same.

Standings erected in South-gate-street, and covered over head, being a place
formerly appointed and still used as a Sergemarket; in which Commodity 10000 l.
weekly is here bestowed.

An Order made or rather continued by the Mayor and Bailiffs, that if any
person should be here imprisoned upon a plaint, and the Plaintiff bring not the
Declaration into the Court in Writing, within three weeks after the Arrest, and
file the same, that the Defendant should be discharged from his Imprisonment.

Sir James Smith Knight, and Robert Walker Esquire, were Elected our Citizens
to serve in Parliament, appointed to be held at Westminster, on the 8. day of
May next ensuing.

Regna Regum 13. Charles the 2. An. D. 1661.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Gandy John Acland Benjamin Olliver George Knowling George Shapcott

The Musical Waits hereof (after many years sequestration) were restored to
their places and pensions.

This City presented to the Queen Mother 300 l. in Plate, as a Testimony of
their joy for her Majesty's safe return home.

Bishop Gauden against the Feast of Christmas gave the sum of 50 l. amongst
poor Housekeepers of this City.

A Decree had in the High Court of Chancery against George Speak, Esquire; for
the new building of Mr. Wynard's Almshouses (demolished in the late troubles)
the Poors pay therein increased, and other grievances complained of, redressed.

Bishop Gauden having well governed this Church a year and half, was translated
hence, and consecrated Bishop of Worcester: On whose removal

S^th Ward Doctor in Divinity and Dean of this Church, 20. Julii was
consecrated Bishop hereof.

The King (in pursuit of an Act of Parliament) grants Commissions under his
Great Seal to diverse Gentlemen in every County of England, for the regulating
of all Corporations therein.

Regna Regum 14. Charles the 2. An. D. 1663.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Martin Isaac Mawditt John Butler Alan Penny George Tuthill John Gibbons
Andrew Quash

This Mayor being elected, and refusing to accept of the said Office, the King
was advertized thereof, by way of a petition hence, who commanded the said
Mayor to undertake the same, whereunto he readily yielded obedience, and
performed his trust therein with much reputation and honor.

A Patent under the common Seal of the City, granted to my Lord Duke of
Albemarle to be Lord High Steward hereof.

A Freeman hereof for coloring of Foraigners goods dis-franchised.

Two new Receivers chose and sworn successively to be in a capacity of being
elected Mayors of the said City.

Regna Regum 15. Charles the 2. An. D. 1663.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Butler Stephen Olivean Anthony Salter M. D. Nicholas Isacke John Gandy
Benjamin Beard Henry Smith

Two others chosen and sworn Receivers successively for the end mentioned in
the year next precedent.

Isaac Mawditt, 30. Augusti died in the time of his Sheriffalty, and within
four days thereafter Stephen Olivean the present Receiver was elected Sheriff
for the residue of the year.

Paris-street without the Eastgate of this City being much decayed, was well
repaired and paved, which was as necessary and as commendable a work as has
been done of late years, the care and oversight whereof this Mayor undertook,
and soon dispatched the same.

Regna Regum 16. Charles the 2. An. D. 1664.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Alan Penny Anthony Salter in Med. Doctor. George Tuthill John Parr Robert
Bucland Richard Hooper

A Comet for many days together appeared within our Horizon, whence ensued a
War between us and the Dutch.

This Mayor died, 21. Martii, being Tuesday at night, and the Monday following
being Easter-Monday, Anthony Salter Doctor in Physic, and Brother-in-law to
the said Mr. Penny was elected Mayor, and the Monday thereafter, solemnly sworn
in Court to execute the said Office for the residue of the year.

In the interval, viz. 23. Martii, the King's Declaration pronouncing War
against the States of the United Provinces, was here with great solemnity
proclaimed, The Lieutenant and Alderman being in their Scarlet Gowns, the rest
of the Company and officers, together with the several Corporations within this
City in their Gowns and Formalities, by the Deputy Herald at Arms with a Troop
of Horse, four silver Trumpets, Drums, etc.

A pleasant Walk made on Northen-hay, and above 200. young Elms on each side
thereof planted.

A new place of Burial appointed at the lower end of Southen-hay, and enclosed
with a Brick-Wall, and 28. Octobris being St. Simon and Jude's day by the Right
Reverend Bishop Ward with all solemnity was the same consecrated, and called by
the name of Trinity Churchyard, lying within the Parish of the Holy Trinity,
whereon was made this ensuing Copy of Verses: What bold-fac'd Sadduc^e dare now
mistrust
That longed-for Resurrection of the just?
Whose Martyred Temples which before our Eyes
Were once dis-tomb'd, more beautiful arise,
And that the Saints have Elbow-room to rest,
This day a Plot profane, is truly blessed,
Thou Angel of our Church may thou never be
Translated, 'till to Immortality;
That all our Foes who do us dis-regard,
May be kept out by this our well-fenc'd Ward.


Many hundred pounds were here collected, and sent to London, and other Towns
infected with the Plague of Pestilence, toward the better relief of the Poor
therein.

A Pesthouse near this City for the benefit of the Inhabitants (in case the
Plague should happen amongst us) was purchased and much improved by building.

Regna Regum 17. Charles the 2. An. D. 1665.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Nicholas Isacke Peter Hagedot John Collins Francis Ma^owder Edward Cheek

The King's Arms near the head of the new Haven, were erected at the Cities
charge, as formerly.

On the last day of February, the King's Declaration of War against the French
King was here solemnly proclaimed.

Two hundred pound in money and necessaries was sent hence to the Town of
Bradnyuch being of late almost consumed by Fire, by a voluntary contribution of
the Inhabitants here made.

The great Organ erected in the Cathedral Church, being the fairest, and by
many sounds the deepest of any Organ in the Kingdom.

Part of the Cities Wall near the Eastgate fell down, and repaired.

A new Pulpit in the Quire erected, much more beautiful then the former.

Regna Regum 18. Charles the 2. An. D. 1666.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Acland James Slade Endymion Walker Robert Daby^ct John Summers

In five weeks space died three Dignitaries of this Church; namely,

1. Robert Hall Doctor in Divinity, a Canon Residentiary and Treasurer of the
said Church, who was a Zacheus for his stature, and with him tall in Charity,
and Piety, 29. Maii died, he was the Eldest Son of that worthy Prelate, Doctor
Joseph Hall, late Bishop of this Diocese, and afterward of Norwich; who
imitated his Father's virtues in sundry particulars, chiefly, in Learning,
constant Preaching, and Hospitality, wherein he exceeded. In a word, he was in
his time accounted a Nathaniel indeed, an upright honest Gentlem^n in whom was
no guile. He lies interred in the North-side of the Quire of the said Cathedral
Church; In whose memory, there is a fair monument erected, and thus inscribed on
a marble stone, sc. Heic situs est Robertus Hall Josephi Domini Episcopi ^ilius
primogenitus -- Sacro-Sanctae Theologiae Doctor facundus.
Hujus Ecclesiae, Vivus, Thesaurarius --
Mortuus Thesaurus.
Vivus Mortuus --
Residentiarius.
-- Obiit 29. die Maii 1667. Aetatis suae 61.

2. James Smith Doctor in Divinity Chanter and another Canon Residentiary of
the said Church died 20. Junii:

3. And Lastly, John Bury Doctor in Divinity another Canon Residentiary of the
said Church, and a liberal Benefactor to the Workhouse belonging to this City,
died 5. Julii next thereafter.

The King's Proclamation for Peace with France, Denmark and Holland, 4.
Septembris was here published.

Bishop Ward having well governed this Church for five years space and upwards,
5. Septembris, was translated hence to the Bishopric of Sarum, whose loss was
much lamented by those who know his worth.

A voluntary collection of 270 l. and 19 s. was here made for those distressed
Persons who suffered by the late Fire in London, for whose better relief, was
the same accordingly sent unto them.

Regna Regum 19. Charles the 2. An. D. 1667.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Thomas Walker Benjamin Olliver John Spark John Carwithean Samuel Call

Anthony Sparrow Doctor in Divinity, was 14. Octobris elected Bishop of this
Diocese, and 3. Novembris next following at London, by Gilbert Archbishop of
Canterhury consecrated thereunto, and 23. of the same month of November here by
proxy installed.

Southen hay was now levelled, and pleasant Walks made therein, and in several
Row's two hundred young Elms planted.

Bernard Spark Merchant deceased, 15. Augusti, and two days thereafter, Agnes
his Widow and Relict, likewise died, and were both buried in one day, and in
one grave, in the body of the Cathedral Church.

John Spark Clerk, and Elianor his Wife, about eight years since here died in
one day, and were likewise Interred in one Grave.

Because we lived and loved so long together,
Let Us not behold the Funerals of either;
May one hour end us both, may I not see
This my Wife buried, nor Wife bury me.
Regna Regum 20. Charles the 2. An. D. 1668.
Mayors and Bailiffs
George Tuthill William Sanford Robert Davy Joseph Mawditt Edward Cross

Regna Regum 21. Charles the 2. An. D. 1669.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Peter Hagedot Isaac Mawditt Humphry Levermore George Saffin John Baker

There happened on Midsomer-Eve about midnight, a grievous Fire in the stable
belonging to an Inn-house, called the Ble^^ Anchor in the High Street of this
City, near St. Luces-lane, which consumed several stables and outhouses, with
diverse Cattle therein, and endangered the dwellings of the Neighborhood,
nay, the whole City, but through God's mercy and Blessing on the ready means
then used, the same was happily prevented.

In the month of June, a sturgeon of nine Foot and half long, and six Foot in
compass, was taken in the River over against the Red Rock or Goodman's Well on
this side of Topsham, by an Inhabitant of this City.

Regna Regum 22. Charles the 2. An. D. 1670.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Sir Benjamin Olliver, Knight Christopher Brodridge Peter Risdon John Cholwill
Edward Heckman

In Rocks-lane a new Well was dug of 35. foot deep, and commonly bore water
25 foot.

On the 23. day of July being Sunday between 7. and 8. of the Clock in the
Evening, the King coming down by Sea to view the new Citadel at Plymouth, and
taking this City in his way homeward by Land, lodged here that night in the
Dean's house within the Close, and was bountifully entertained at the Cities
sole charge, who presented his Majesty with 500 l. in gold, which he graciously
received, and expressed much favor toward the said City, and Knighted the
Mayor, the next morning early about three of the Clock, his Majesty went hence
and lodged that night at the Earl of Pembroke's house, Wilton, near Salisbury,
and the day following returned safely to White Hall; The King's short abode in
this City, hindered the great Conduit at ^arfoix from emptying her self of an
Hogshead of Wine, which the City had provided in readiness for that purpose,
and after His Majesty's departure made a free disposition thereof for His
service.

Regna Regum 23. Charles the 2. An. D. 1671.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Sanford John Parr Francis Kingwell John Warren Thomas Edm^nds

Upon the 7. day of February, about the middle of the night, a sudden Fire
happened without the West-gate of the City, which burned four Houses to the
ground, with most of the goods therein, and in one of them, all the persons,
namely, Thomas Hayne, his Wife, and their Niece, a little maid about the Age of
seventeen years.

The King's Declaration for War against the Dutch, was on the 16. day of April
here openly published.

The day following by his Majesty's command, was kept a public ^ast-day for
God's blessing on our Naval Forces in the intended War.

Hele's Hospital Founded by Sir John Maynard Knight, His Majesty's principal
Sergeant at Law, and others, for the education and maintenance of poor Female
Children, born within this City and County was well settled, and fifteen poor
maids therein admitted, and a Governess over them appointed, and likewise a
President, Steward, and other Officers elected for the better government of the
said House.

The King (in order to his promise made the last year when he visited this City
in person, and as a signal testimony of his love toward the same) was pleased
to send hither the Effigies or Pourtrayture at length, and richly Framed, of
his dear Sister the Duchess of Orleans (lately deceased) a Princess born
within this City, and for Beauty was esteemed to be one of the fairest in
Christendom, which said Picture being placed in a fair Case of Timber, richly
adorned with gold, is erected in the open Guild Hall of the said City, and
there to remain as a perpetual Monument of His Majesty's high favor toward
this his truly Ancient, Loyal, and Honorable City of Exeter.

At the lower end of Pari^-street without the Eastgate of this City, and
within the Parish of St. Sydwell, a new Workhouse was erected, for the keeping
to work therein the Poor of the said Parish and City, and it is hoped that it
will succeed well, and prove as necessary a work, as of late years has been
devised, toward the raising of which Foundation, the Citizens and Inhabitants
hereof with others, liberally contributed.

Regna Regum 24. Charles the 2. An. D. 1672.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Henry Gandy John Collins William Bodley William Cove Abisha Brocat

St. Sydwel's- street from the Eastgate unto St. Anns Chapel, was well paved
by the Dean and Chapter of this Church, being Lords of the said Manor.

Regna Regum 25. Charles the 2. An. D. 1673.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Isaac Mawditt William Glyde Ju. Henry Cudmore Humphry Leigh Edward Hill

Part of the City Wall at the lower end of Southen-hay, toward Trinity
Churchyard, in the night time suddenly fell down, and was forthwith newly
erected, being ninety foot in length, and thirty foot in height.

Elizabeth Flay, Widow, devised to the Chamber a silver Basin and Ewer, parcel
gilded, to be used by the Mayors of this City successively for ever.

Thomas Walker Esquire, one of the Aldermen hereof (on the death of his late
Father) was elected as one of our Citizens to serve in Parliament, in his said
Father's stead and place.

The Peace between us and the Dutch was here proclaimed.

This Mayor procured the sum of three hundred pounds or thereabouts, wherewith
he provided a public storehouse of Corn in this time of scarcity, and the
price increasing, caused it to be delivered out to the Poor herein, two pence
or three pence in a peck cheaper then 'twas bought in the Market in Meal ready
ground.

Regna Regum 26. Charles the 2. An. D. 1674.
Mayors and Bailiffs
Christopher Brodridge Andrew Quash Nicholas Trype Simon Trobridge Jeb Beard

On Tuesday the nine and twentyeth day of December, the house of one Richard
Jewel, within the Parish of St. Sydwell's in the Suburbs of this City casually
fell down, about seven of the Clock in the morning of that day, grievously
bruised the said Jewel, and destroyed his Wife and a Grandchild therein.

Richard Lant Esquire, gave the sum of 100 l. toward the new building of
Grendon's Almshouse, commonly called the ten Cells, lying in Preston-street
within this City. And for the better relief of the Poor therein; And likewise
of the Poor in Bonvill's Almshouse in Rock lane within the said City, he
freely gave the Fee and Inheritance of a Tenement called New-house, in the
County of Dorset, of the yearly value of 50 l.

Regna Regum 27. Charles the 2. An. D. 1675.
Mayors and Bailiffs
John Part Henry Smith Franeis Worth, Mort. Thomas Smith John Pearse

Sir William Courteney of Powderham, in the County of Devon Baronet, made a
Free and Franchised man of this City.

Edward Cotton Doctor in Divinity, and Treasurer of this Church, died 12.
Novembris, and was buried the 16. of the same Month, near unto his Grandfather
Bishop Cotton's Grave, in the South Side of the Quire of the Cathedral Church,
behind the Bishop's Chair there; In his lifetime he was beloved, and his Death
generally bewailed by all Ranks, and Conditions of men that knew him, for he
was a right Honest and Worthy Gentleman, a constant and excellent Preacher, a
great lover of Hospitality, a daily liberal Benefactor to the Poor, and an
Universal Scholar, insomuch that the old Hexameter may justly be attributed to
him. -- In Septem fu^rat liberalibus ille Magister.

Goods of a Felon on his Attainder forfeited to the City, and being seized on,
composition was then made for the same.

Francis Worth one of the Common Council of this City, and one of the Stewards
of the same for this year, died 20 Januarii, and was decently Interred in St.
Petrock's Church, in whose Office of a Steward, John Lee was Elected to supply
the same for the residue of the year.

The great Bell in the North Tower of the Cathedral Church, called Peter's
Bell, and three other Bells in the South Tower there, sc Grandison, Stafford,
and Cob^horn, being all cracked, were taken down, and new cast.

The Right Honorable Christopher Duke of Albemarle Lord High Steward of this
City and County, and Lord Lieutenant of the same, and also of the County of
Devon, coming hither to settle the Militia in both Counties, made his abode
here about the space of three weeks, lodged in the Deanery, where he kept open
house for all comers and goers whatsoever, his Grace honored the Mayors Table
twice with his presence, where he was sumptuously entertained; He was also made
a Free and Franchised man of the said City at the Guild Hall, where his Grace
being attended on by Sir Edward Seymor, Sir Copleston Bampfield, Sir Arthur
Northcott, and Sir Hugh Acland Baronets, Sir John Roll, and Sir Simon Leach,
Knights of the Bath; Sir Thomas Daniel, Sir William Walrond, and Sir Henry
Ford, Knights Batchellors, with diverse other Gentlemen of Quality, were all of
them then likewise ^worn Freemen of the said City.

The Farm of the Key at Christmas falling into the Chambers hands, they
bethought themselves how to improve the same for the best advantage of the City
and Country adjacent; In order whereunto, they cleansed the Key and River,
levelled the Island thereunto belonging, and encompassed the same with a firm
stone wall, whereby the Merchants Goods may be the better Landed and secured,
at the lower end of the new Haven, they likewise did cut out a new Leat through
the Marshground, about half a mile in length, and also a Pool, wherein near an
hundred sail of Ships may with safety at all times ride, and from thence to the
said Key, Boats and Barges may daily pass up and down through the River to load
and discharge the Merchants goods (which formerly could hardly be so done in a
weeks time) for which good end, sundry new and other Lighters are here provided
in readiness, and the rate for conveyance of all Goods and Merchandises abated
almost a third part, which worthy undertaking being thus projected, was this
Summer vigorously carried on, and completed by the daily indefatigable
endeavors of Mr. Henry Smith Receiver General of the said City, whereby he
has very much obliged us all, In which said work, the Chamber having expended
about the sum of three thousand pounds, whereunto Doctor George Carry Dean of
this Church, has been a liberal Benefactor.

Regna Regum 20. Charles the 2. An. D. 1676.
Mayors and Bailiffs
William Glyde Thomas Bale Daniel Gundry George Sanford Joseph Boson

Bishop Sparrow having well governed this Church about nine years force, was
translated to the Bishopric of Norwich, in whose stead Thomas Lamplugh Doctor
in Divinity was, 3. Octobris, elected Bishop of this Diocese, and 12.
Novembris, at Lambeth by Gilbert Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, consecrated
thereunto.

READER,
THese few Lines should have been placed in the Four and Twentyeth year of the
Reign of Charles the First, James Gould was Mayor, in which year be pleased to
add what follows;

After the King's Death, Proclamations being brought to this Mayor, he refused
to proclaim or receive them, but with scorn and contempt (being by the
Messenger left in his house) threw them out of his door; And when the Judges of
the Assizes in their Circuit came hither, he likewise slighted them and would
not acknowledge their power, for which they Fined him two hundred pounds, for
the recovery whereof they troubled him in the Court of Exchequer, to which he
appeared and defended himself so well and so far, until the Attorney General
entered A non vult prosequi, against him; And at the next Summer Assizes the
Judges Executed their Commission at Tyverton (where before, or since they never
sat) which was purposely done by way of Revenge of this Mayor's stubborness
toward them, who was a person of a low stature, but of an undaunted courage,
of whom may truly be said what was once attributed to King Alexander the Great,
-- Men's tamen in parvo corpore Magna fuit.

Hebrews 13.16. To do good and to distribute, forget not, for with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased.


It Is not only equal, but just, that such as have been Founders of Hospitals or
Benefactors unto them should have due respect in preserving their memories from
violation or ruin; And no less for the encouragement of others to tread in
their footsteps, and to imitate them in their virtues (for virtues are but
personal, vices communicative). In short, I have here set down a perfect
Catalogue of the Names and Gifts of all such worthy Benefactors as by their
last Wills and Testaments, or otherwise, have given any Lands, Rents,
Annuities, or Money for and toward the relief of poor people, in several
Almshouses within this City and County of Exeter, whose charitable Acts herein
ought not to be silenced and buried in the Pit of Oblivion, but to be had in an
everlasting remembrance. As it is good not to do evil, so it is evil (having time
and opportunity) not to do good. Here you will find several kinds of Charity,
wherein you may observe that these worthy persons have made it their study to
discover the several necessities of the Poor, and have left behind them a
storehouse of provision, for them that are in need, even Bread for the Hungry,
Cloth for the Naked, Salve for the Wounded, Relief for the Sick, a House for
them that are Harbourless, Education and Maintenance for the Younger, a Bank
for the Merchant and Tradesman in Extremity; For Riches are called Goods, not
because they make us good, but because we may do good with them, if God give us
grace and opportunity. Charity for certain is the Rich Man's School, where he
ought to learn works of Mercy both in heart and hand, the Disciples had all
things amongst themselves in common, not by a legal community, but a charitable
communication, for Charity is bonum sui diffusivum not perfect unless imparted,
the charitable Man is the best Friend to himself, laying up in store for the
time to come, for every good work he does is a grain of seed for Life Eternal,
read the Scripture, which, if you believe, put it forthwith in practice,
Proverbs 14.21.19.17. Psalm 41.1, 2.3. Eccles. 11.1, 2.
and let your good works go before you, that your Father's Name in Heaven may
be glorified, Charity ought to be free, and it is accounted as no gift, when
that which is given, can no longer be withheld, Bis dat, qui cito dat, the
gift is doubled by a speedy deliverance. Lay not up Riches for Moths and Worms,
and for Children that are Wicked, who play and sport upon their Fathers Graves,
but rather follow the example of our Savior, who went up and down doing good,
in healing of Diseases, and doing works of Alms and Charity, than which he has
not laid on us any other duty with a stricter injunction, good works are
necessary to Salvation, though not to Justification, as the Tree with her
Fruits, the Sun with his Light, the Fire with his Heat, and the Water with her
moisture; Show me thy Faith (^aith St. James) by thy works, which are, viae ad
Regnum, sed non causae Regnandi, they are the way to the Kingdom, but not the
cause of reigning there; we are not saved propter opera, and yet sine operibus
we shall not enter Heaven. Let us take a pattern from the Emperor Titus, who
thought he had lost a day wherein he had not done some Act of Charity, how many
of our Forefathers have we read of, who went up and down the streets to find
out the necessities of the Poor, as meet Objects to be relieved with their
Charity? Let me advise you to whom God has given a greater measure of these
Earthly Riches to dispense with some part thereof, as these your pious
Ancestors have done, for God expects it from you, be not as a possessor, but as
a Steward, and know withal that you must be accountable for the Poors portion
before God; And if you love Riches (says St. Augustine) put them in a place
assured for Eternity; Pliny says, that the greatest Divinity is to see a
mortal Man oblige his like, and that it is the shortest way to arrive at
Eternal Glory, the practice of giving Alms is so excellent, as 'twill make you
therein (with all humility be it spoken) like God himself, for his Nature is to
give, and to do good, as the Fire to heat, and the Sun to Illuminate; And Rich
Men have a particular obligation above others, seeing God has chosen them to
be his Stewards, Messengers of his favors, and the Conduits of his Liberality,
Charity will stand by you when you lie upon your sick and dying beds, 'twil
cover a multitude of your sins, 'twil be your best Friend at the day of
Judgment, when all Riches and Friends will stand you in no stead: In a word,
Charity is the fulfilling of the whole Law; My Prayer therefore is, that God
may so open your hearts for this good work, that these words may belong to you,
Come ye blessed of my Father Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, for I was an
hungered, and ye gave me Meat, I was thirsty, Math. 25. ^er. 34.35, 36.
and ye gave me Drink, I was a Stranger and ye look me in, naked and ye
clothed me, etc.

A Catalogue of the Benefactors and their Gifts bestowed on the several
Almshouses within this City and County.
1. WIlliam Fitz-Ralph sometime of this City Gentleman, Founded an Almshouse
here, and called it St. Alexis, for certain poor people to be placed therein by
the Governors of the said City, as by his Deed dated 10 Henry 2. Anno Domini,
1164. appears, which said Almshouse so continued about the space of threescore
and ten years, and then 'twas added by the Mayor and Citizens hereof to the new
Hospital of St. John's within the East gate of the said City. He bears barruly
of six Argent and Azure three buckles Gules 2. and 1.

2. Gilbert Long and John Long, Sons of Walter Long a Citizen hereof, founded
an Hospital called St. John's within the Eastgate of the said City, and
endowed the same with all their Lands and livelihood, and after their Deceases
appointed the Mayor and Citizens hereof to be Patrons of the same, as by their
deed dated 23 Henry 3. Anno Domini 1239. may appear, the maintenance of which
said house was much augmented by sundry Benefactors thereunto, and flourished
about three hundred years, even until the latter end of the Reign of King Henry
8. when it was suppressed. They give ^able a Lion Rampant between eight cross
cros^ets Argent armed and langued Gules.

3. Oliver Mannering and George Mannering, Gentlemen, were the Restorers of the
House called St. Anns Chapel in St. Sydwell's Parish without the Eastgate of
the said City (sometime an house for an Hermit) and made the same an Hospital,
wherein are now Resident eight persons who are paid six pence a piece weekly by

They give Argent two bars Gules within a bordure engrailed sable.

Ralph Duckenfield Gentleman, by his last Will and Testament, dated 18
Elizabeth, Anno Domini 1576. bequeathed a Tenement in Preston-street to the
poor people of the said Almshouse. He bears Argent a Cross sarcelly sable
voided of the Field.

4. John Palmer sometime of this City Baker, by his last Will and Testament
dated 26. Octobris 19 Edward 4. Annoque Domini 1479. Founded an Almshouse
without the South-gate for four poor Women, allotting to each of them yearly
six shillings and eight pence toward their maintenance, and appointed the
Chamber to be Governors of the said house.

5. John Moor Esquire (sometime Mayor of this City) and Bartholomew Fortescue
Gentlemen, together founded an Almshouse for three poor people, upon the
East End of Exe-bridge, and appointed the said Chamber to be Governors
thereof. 1. Gives Ermine three cinquefoils Argent on a Cheuron Azure. 2. Gives
Azure a bend engreiled Argent Cotized Or.

6. John Gilberd Esquire, founded an Almshouse near the Town of Newton Bushel
in the County of Devon for three poor people, toward whose relief he gave two
Closes of Land, and two hundred marks in Money to the said Chamber that four
pounds per Annum, be quarterly paid them, as by his deed dated, 4. Octobris, 31
Henry 8. Anno Domini 1539. appears. He bears Argent on a Cheuron sable three
Roses of the First.

7. Simon Grendon Esquire (thrice Mayor of this City) founded an Almshouse in
Preston-street within the said City, commonly called the ten Cells for the
habitation of ten poor Women, and endowed the same with certain Lands called
Culverlands near Scarlet's Cross within the Parish of St. Sydwell's, of the
yearly value of forty shillings, as by his Deed dated, 8 Henry 4. Anno Domini
1406. may appear, the sole Government of which said house rests in the
Chamber of this City. He bears Argent two Cheurons Gules, a ^able of three
points in chief Vert.

Stephen Rudgway Gentleman, bequeathed yearly to the said house six pence
halfpenny. He bears sable two Wings conjoined in lewer Argent.

Alice Heath Widow, by her last Will and Testament dated 18. May, 2 Mary,
Annoque Domini 1554. bequeathed all her Lands in East and West Teingmouth, in
the County of Devon, of the yearly value of thirty six shillings and nine
pence, for the benefit of the said Alms house, who bears 1. Argent a Cross
engreyled between twelve Billets Gules. 2. Ermine a Lion Rampant Gules Crowned
Or, armed and langued Azure.

William Hern Clerk (sometime Parson of St. Petr^ek's within this City) by his
Deed indented, dated 10. Aprilis, 4 Elizabeth, Anno Domini 1502. gave to this
Chamber the sum of 140 l. for the purchasing of certain Lands for the better
relief of the Poor in the said house, and others: to the Poor herein is
particularly allotted yearly the sum of three and forty shillings and four
pence. He bears Gules and Hern Or.

William Buckenam Esquire (sometime Mayor of this City) by his last Will and
Testament, dated 8 Elizabeth, Anno Domini 1566. bequeathed to this Chamber one
full moiety or halfendeal of all that Tenement with the appurtenances commonly
called the Bear-Inn in Southgate-street for the benefit of the said Almshouse,
which at present is stated out under the yearly Rent of ten pounds. He bears a
Lion Rampant within a bordure engra^led Gules, a mollet of the same in a field
Argent.

David Hensley Clerk (sometime Parson of Kenn in the County of Devon) by his
deed dated 8 Octobris, 8 Elizabeth, Anno Domini 1566. gave to the said
Almshouse an Annuity of 20 s. per Annum, issuing out of a Close of Land called
Lampland in the said Parish of Kenn. He bears Argent a Lion Rampant Azure armed
and ungued Gules.

John Haydon of Cadhay in the Parish of Ottery St. Mary, in the said County of
Devon Gentleman, by his deed indented dated 6. Martii, 32 Elizabeth, Anno
Domini 1590. (inter alia) gave to the Poor of the aforesaid Almshouse the
yearly sum of forty six shillings and eight pence to be bestowed in bread for
them at two feasts of the year, s^. Christmas and Easter for ever. He bears
Argent two bars gemels Azure on a chief Gules a Bar dansetty Or.

John Baker late of this City Baker by his last Will and Testament, dated 8.
Februarii, 1 Jacobi, Anno Domini 1603. (inter alia) devised to the said
Almshouse the sum of three shillings and four pence yearly for ever.

Richard Lant of Kingston in the County of Surrey Esquire, toward the
rebuilding of the said Almshouse (it being much decayed) freely gave the sum
of one hundred pounds, and endowed the same together with Bonvill's Alms house
in Rockslane in the said City, with Lands of the yearly value of fifty pounds
for ever. He bears party per pale Argent and Gules, a cross engrailed
counterchanged.

8. William Lord Bonvill Founded an Almshouse in Rocks-lane alias the Combrew
within this City for twelve poor people, and endowed the same with Lands of the
yearly value of one and twenty pounds eleven shillings and four pence, which
with his other Lands by the Attainder of the Marquess of Dorset (heir to the
said Lord Bonvill) the same fell to the Crown, but the Poor were still paid by
the King's Receiver, and upon their respective deaths, the Mayor and Aldermen
of this City name others to succeed them by virtue of Queen Elizabeth's Letters
Patent to them granted on that behalf, dated 7. Novembris, 4 Regni, Annoque
Domini 1562. He bears sable six mullets Argent, 3. 2. and 1.

The aforesaid John Baker gave more to this Almshouse by his said Will, the
sum of three shillings and four pence for ever

The aforesaid Stephen Rudgway gave more yearly to this Almshouse six pence
halfpenny.

9. John Stevens Doctor in Physic (and sometime a Canon Residentiary of this
Church) next without Bickly-gate, Founded an Almshouse for thirteen poor
people, calling it St. Catharines Almshouse, and gave toward their relief
yearly seventeen shillings and four pence, but with meat and drink, their
necessities were daily supplied, through the Charity of the Canons Residentiary
of the said Church, and their houses to be repaired by the Dean and Chapter, to
whom the nomination of the Alms-men therein was left after the Founders death.
He bears Gules on a bend Or three garlands Vert.

The aforesaid William Hern gave more to the said Almshouse yearly, the sum of
2 l. 16 s. 4 d.

A Garden behind their house, and six and thirty shillings more is yearly paid
them as the interest of thirty pounds recovered, Anno Domini 1636. by virtue of
a Decree obtained in the High Court of Chancery, against Robert Michell Doctor
in the Civil Laws, and others.

Robert Hall Doctor in Divinity (and late Treasurer of this Church) by his last
Will and Testament in writing, dated 25. Aprilis, Anno Domini 1667. (inter
alia) bequeathed to the said Almshouse, the sum of ten pounds per Annum, for
ever, to be paid them quarterly by equal portions. He bears sable three Talbots
heads erazed Argent.

10. William Wynard Esquire (sometime Recorder of this City) Founded an
Hospital without the South-gate of the said City, calling it God's house, for
twelve poor Men, allotting to each of them eight-pence weekly toward their
maintenance, the government of which said house he left to his heirs, and that
they should in all things perform his will, he appointed the Mayor and Bailiffs
of this City, to be Overseers thereof, and twice yearly, that is to say, within
eight days of Easter, and St. Michael the Archangel, to visit the said house,
with power to hear the complaints of the poor therein, and to redress them,
reform all abuses, or cause them so to be done, which said Almshouse in the
fury of the late intestine Wars, within this Kingdom being destroyed by Fire,
was began (by virtue of a Decree obtained in the High Court of Chancery by the
said Visitors) rebuilded, at the charge of Ter^tenant and Defendant in that
suit, George Speak of White Lackington in the County of Somerset Esquire, and
several complaints redressed, amongst which, the poors pay is increased weekly
to two shiliings to each person therein, and shortly the sum of 12 l. per
Annum, more to be added thereunto for the better relief of the said Alms-men.
He bears Argent on a bend Azure three mollets of the first.

11. John Hurst late of this City Merchant, by his last Will and Testament,
dated 16. Novembris, 6 Edward 6. Anno Domini 1552. gave six several Tenements
lying within the Parish of Alhallows on the Walls, for the habitation of six
poor people, and six other Tenements, a shop and a stable lying in St. Mary
Arches-lane toward their maintenance, also he gave two hundred marks in Money
to be paid them by two shillings weekly. He bears Argent a star of eight points
Gules, in chief a ^able of three points of the second.

12. William Hurst Esquire (who had been five times Mayor of this City) Founded
an Alms house without the Eastgate for the better relief of twelve poor
people, allotting to each of them twenty shillings per Annum, the government of
which said house, he wholly left to the Chamber of this City, as by his deed
Indented, bearing date 19. Octobris, 10 Elizabeth, Anno Domini 1568. may
appear. He bears ut Prius.

John Lant Esquire (sometime Mayor of this City) by his last Will and
Testament, bearing date 9. Julii, 12 Jacobi, Anno Domini 1614. bequeathed to
the said Chamber the sum of 100 l. in Money for the better support and
maintenance of the said Almshouse. He bears party per pale Argent and Gules a
cross ingreiled counterchanged.

13. John Davy Esquire (thrice Mayor of this City) by his Deed indented,
bearing date 10. Februarii, 42 Elizabeth, Anno Domini 1600. founded an
Almshouse within the Parish of St. Mary Arches, for the relief of two poor Men
and their wives, and two single persons, men or women, and settled the sum of
sixteen pounds per Annum, for their maintenance, that is to say, to the married
men and their wives fourteen pence a piece, and to the single men, or women,
eighteen pence to each of them. He gives Azure three cinquefoils Or on a chief
Argent a Lion Passant Gules.

14. The aforesaid William Hern by his said Deed, gave to two poor people in a
house without the South-gate of this City, who were afterward removed and
settled in a house within the Key-gate the sum of eight shillings and eight
pence yearly. He bears ut Prius.

The aforesaid John Baker, gave more to these poor people by his said Will
yearly, the sum of two shillings.

15. Thomas Flay Esquire (late Mayor of this City) by his last Will and
Testament, bearing date 26. Junii, 10 Caroli, Anno Domini 1634. bequeathed
diverse Lands and Tenements to Elizabeth his Widow and Relict, to the end that
she should erect four convenient houses within the Parish of St. Paul in the
said City, for the habitation of four poor widow women, allotting to each of
them weekly twelve-pence; which said trust, the said Elizabeth Flay, has well
performed, and through her own Charity, has added twelve-pence a piece weekly
to every one of them, and also (at her own charge) has added and erected two
other houses thereunto, and appointed them for two poor Ministers and their
wives (who shall be destitute of better habitations) or for the Widows and
Relicts of such Ministers, and allowing to each of them weekly five shillings.
They bear, sc. 1. Ermin on a pale Azure three Doves Argent. 2. Sable a Cheuron
Ermin between three Castles d' Or.

16. Christopher Lethbridge Esquire, (late Mayor of this City) by his last will
and Testament, dated 17. Novembris, 21 Caroli Secundi, Anno Domini 1669.
Founded an Almshouse within the South-gate of the said City and Parish of the
holy Trinity for six poor people, allotting them yearly the sum of fifteen
pounds and twelve shillings. He bears a bridge of five Arches turreted Gules in
a Field Argent, in chief an Eagle displayed sable.

A TABLE: OR, INDEX: OF The most remarkable things contained in this Book,
Alphabetically digested. Methodus Memoriae Matter. An Alphabet of the Officers.
Mayors.
A.
ALlen Richard 27 Atwill John 89 Atwill John 90 Atwill John 91 Atwill John 96
Atwill John 97 Andrew Thomas 105 Andrew Thimas 106 Acland John 151 Acland John
171
B.
BLondy William 5, 5, 5 Blondy Hillary 14, 14, 15 Blondy Hillary 16 Blondy
Hilary 17 Blondy Hilary 18 Beynim Roger 31, 32, 33, 33, 36, 38, 40, 41 Bridport
Robert 52, 53, 53, 53 Bridport Robert 54 Brydestow Nichola^ 57, 58 Bailiff
Warren 58 Battishill Martin 59 Bosom Richard 63, 64 Bosom Richard 63, 64 Bosom
Richard 69 Batten John 70, 70, 73, 74 Betty John 85 Buckenam John 106 Buckenam
John 108 Broadmere John 111 Bennet William 114 Britnall John 114 Buller Robert
115 Blackaller John 116 Brytnall John 117 Blackaller John 118 Buckenam William
121 Buller John 121 Brytnall John 123 Blackaller John 123 Buller John 128
Blackall John 129 Brewerton Thomas 134 Blackall John 134 Brewerton Thomas 136
Beavis Richard 143 Borough Walter 145, 149 Bennett Adam 154, 159, 160 Brokinge
Nicholas 162 Butler John 169 Brodridge Christopher 177
C.
CHawe Walter 16 Cook John 70, 73 Cook John 74 Cook William 76 Cook Thomas
76 Cook William 76 Cook Thomas 76, 78 Cutler John 77, 78 Cook William 77
Cutler John 80 Crymell William 80 Calwoodley Thomas 87 Clarke Richard 88
Calwoodley Thomas 90 Calwoodley Thomas 94 Clarke Richard 94 Chubb Robert 96
Colshill John 96 Calwoodley John 97 Calwoodley John 104, 105 Champneys Walter
104 Crudge William 105 Crudge William 106 Crudge William 116 Crudge William 108
Chaff Robert 133 Chapel William 133 Chaff Robert 135 Chapel William 136
Chapel Thomas 139 Chapel John 141 Crossinge Hugh 145 Crossinge Hugh 148
Crossinge Francis 154 Crossinge Thomas 154, 155 Clarke Christopher 157 Crocker
Sir Hugh Knight 158 C^pper John 159 Crossinge Richard 162 Clarke Christopher
Jun. 164
D.
DYer Philip 14 Dyer Philip 15 Dyer Philip 16 Dirling William 16 Duport Alphred
18, 18, 19, 20, 20, 21, 21, 21 Dirling Martin 18, 18, 18, 18 Dirling Martin 21
Drew Bennett 77 Duke William 83, 84, 85 Druell Richard 84 Druell Richard 86, 86
Druell Richard 91 Danester John 104 Duke Richard 112 Davy John 137 Davy John
141 Davy John 143 Dorchester Richard 144
E.
EAston Thomas 70, 71, 73 Easton Thomas 74 Evans Richard 161
F.
FItz-Robert John 3, 3, 3, 4, 4 Fitz-Henry Roger 5, 6, 6, 7, 8 Fitz-Henry Roger
9 Feniton John 19, 20 Furbour Robert 50 Furbour Thomas 50, 51, 51 Frost William
98 Frost William 104 Flay Thomas 153 Ford Thomas 164
G.
GErvis Walter 5, 6, 8 Gervis Walter 10 Geythen Richahd 18 Gatepath William 29
Gatepath William 31, 33 Gatepath William 38 Gervis Thomas 47, 49 Gist John 54,
55, 55, 56, 56 Gist John 59 Gray John 61, 62 Grendon Simon 65, 65, 68 Gray John
66 Gupwill John 150 Gould James 159 Gandy Henry 168, 176 Glyde William 178
H.
HAstment Walter 11 Horn John 30 Hughton Henry 48, 48, 49 Hughton Henry 49,
50, 51, 51, 52 Halberton Nicholas 52 Hull Henry 69 Hull John 74, 75 Hull John
77, 79 Hamlyn John 87 Hooker John 95 Hamlyn Nicholas 103 Hewett Richard 105,
10^ Hunt Thomas 109, 113, 119 Hurst William 113, 122 Hamlyn Henry 114, 119
Hooker Robert 115 Hurst William 118, 125, 129 Howell John 142 Hull Henry 143
Hakewill John 153 Herman Ralph 161 Hagedot Peter 173
I.
ILchester Nicholas 16, 16 Jermin Hugh 78, 80 Jermin Hugh 81 Jermin Hugh 82,
83, 85, 86, 86, 88, 88 Jerffery Richard 88 Jubb Matthew 93 Jermin Michael 137,
139 Jourden Ignatius 146 Isacke Nicholas 171
K.
KElly John 84 Kelly John 85 89 Kirk Gilbert 116, 120 Knight Simon 134, 136
L.
LAngdon Walter 38 Lovecock Philip 40, 40, 41, 42 Lovecock Philip 45, 45, 45
Lekenn Martin 46, 46, 47, 47 Lovecock Philip 46 Lekenn Martin 47 Lichfield
Thomas 47, 49 Limpeny John 106 Jews Jeffery 110 Levermore Moris 127, 132
Levermore John 141 Lant John 145 Lynn John 151 Le^hbridge Christopher 167
M.
MOor John 107 Martin Richard 117 Midwinter John 127 Midwinter Robert 128
Martin Nicholas 134 Martin Thomas 137 Martin Nicholas 137 Martin William 139
Martin William 132, 143 Marshall John 146 Martin Thomas 146 Modyford John 150
Martin Nicholas 153 Mallock Roger 155 Marshall James 164 Martin John 168
Mawditt Isaac 176
N.
NOble Robert 52, 55 Nymett John 62 Newton Robert 94, 104 Nosworthy John 111
Newcomb William 145
O.
OKeston John 14 Okeston Walter 15, 15, 16, 17 Oak William 66 Orange Richard 82
Orange John 89 Obl^igh William 90, 97 Oliver Sir Benjamin Knight. 174
P.
PLenty Roger 58, 59, 61 Pope Walter 82 Peryam William 117 Prestwood Thomas
122, 124 Peter John 128, 130 Peryam John 132, 134 Peter John 134 Prestwood
Thomas 135 Peryman George 135 Prowse Richard 136, 139 Peryam John 138, 142
Prowse John 144, 148 Penny John 156 Pearse James 164 Penny Alan 169 Parr John
177
R.
RIfford Henry 1, 2, 2, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3 Roff Martin 9, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10,
12, 12, 13, 14 Rifford Adam 10, 12, 13, 14 Rifford Adam 14 Rumwell Richard 88
Russell Robert 93 Rudgway Stephen 95 Richardson Thomas 133
S.
SOller Richard 46 Spicer John 53, 53, 54 Spicer John 54, 55, 55 Scut Adam 63,
65, 68 Sturt Peter 70 Scutt Peter 70 Shillingford John 75, 75 Salter John 76
Shillingford John 78, 79, 79 Smith Robert 87 Symons Richard 107 Symons John 133
Spurway Thomas 120 Smith William 126 Staplehill Walter 127 Smith John 133 Smith
George 138 Spicer Nicholas 140, 143 Spicer Thomas 140 Smith Sir George Knight
142, 144 Sheer John 146 Spicer Nicholas 152, 159 Sweet Gilbert 154 Saunders
Richard 157, 160 Sweet Richard 161 Snow Simon 161 Salter Anthony M.D. 169
Sanford William 174
T.
TVrbert Walter 5, 5, 6, 6, 7, 7, 8, 8, 9 Tailor David 22, 26 Tantyfer Richard
29 Tantyfer Walter 30, 30, 30, 38 Tantyfer William 31 Taverner Nicholas 56
Talbot John 63, 65 Tooker Robert 121 Tuckfield John 123 Tothill William 126
Trivett William 134 Thomas Jeffery 137 Tailor John 151 Tucker James 155 Tuthill
George 173
V.
VOysey Robert 74 Vpton William 77 Vndy Richard 103
W.
WHite Hillary 15 Wheaton Roger 32, 32 Wotton William 44 Wotton Robert 44, 45
Wilsford Robert 61, 61, 61, 61, 62, 62, 63, 63, 63, 64, 64, 64 Wilsford Robert
65 Wilsford William 66, 66, 68, 68, 68, 69, 69, 106 Worth Roger 91 Woolcott
John 132 Walker Thomas 142, 146, 150 Waltham Jeffery 146 Walker Robert 155
White Walter 159 Walker Thomas 172
Y.
YOrk Walter 103
Z.
ZOuch John 26, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30
Recorders.
B.
BVrgoyn William Ball Sir Peter Knight Bampfield Thumas
C.
CHarles John Carew Sir Thomas Knight
D.
DOwrish Thomas Dennis Sir Thomas Knight Dennis Sir Robert Knight Drew Edward
Duck Nicholas
H.
HVll John Huttesfold William H^xt Thomas Holland Roger Harris John Hele John
M.
MOor John Martin William
P.
POllard Jews Prydeaux Edmond
R.
RAdford Nicholas
S.
STuer Edmond
T.
TOthill Jeffery
W.
WEeks John Wynard William Waltham Richard
Sheriffs.
A.
AMerideth Griffeth Amy Thomas Acland John Acland John
B.
BVrgoyn William Buckenam William Blackall John Bridgman Edward Bruerton Thomas
Beavys Richard Borough Walter Bennett Adam Battishill Henry Broking Nicholas
Bartlett Bernard Br^en William Brodridge Christopher
C.
CHaff Robert Chapel Thomas Chapel John Crossing Hugh Crossing Thomas
Colleton Peter Crossing Francis Crocker John Clarke Christopher Cupper John
Crossing Richard Clarke Christopher Jun Collins John
D.
DRake John Dyer John Davy John Dorchester Richard Deeble Walter
E.
ELlicott Henry Edwards Thomas Ellicott John
F.
FLay Thomas Ford Thomas
G.
GVpwill John Gould James Gandy Henry Glyde William Jun.
H.
HVrst William Helmer John Hurst John Hellyer Richard Howell John Hull Henry
Hakewill John Hayne John Herman Ralph Hagedot Peter
I.
IErmin Alexander Jourden Ignatius Jourden John Isacke Nicholas
K.
KNight Simon
L.
LYmett Nicholas Levermore Moris Lymett Edward Levermore John Lant John Lynn
John Lippingcott Francis Lethbridge Christopher
M.
MIdwinter John Maynard John Midwinter Robert Martin Nicholas Martin Thomas
Martin William Mayn Alexander Marshall John Martin Thomas Modyford John Martin
Nicholas Mallock Roger Martin John Marshall James Mawditt Isaac
N.
NEwcomb William
O.
OLivean Stephen Olliver Benjamin
P.
PRestwood Thomas Peryam John Petter John Prestwood Richard Pope Hugh Prestwood
Thomas Perryman George Pope John Prowse Richard Peryam John Prowse John Parr
Robert Pyle George Penny John Pearse James Prigg Henry Parr John
Q.
QVash Andrew
R.
RIchardson Thomas Richardson Thomas Reymond Thomas
S.
SMith William Staplehill Walter Smith John Smith George Spicer Nicholas Spicer
Thomas Spicer Christopher Spicer William Sheer John Spicer Nicholas Sweet
Gilbert Saunders Richard Sweet Richard Slade James Sanford William Smith Henry
T.
TOoker Robert Tuckfield John Tothill William Tryvett William Thomas Jeffery
Tailor John Tucker James Tooker Thomas Tuthill George
W.
WOolcott John Way John Walter Thomas Waltham Jeffery Wakeman Thomas Walker
Robert White Walter Walker Thomas
Y.
YArd Philip Yeo Richard
Chamberlains.
C.
CRewkern John
D.
Door John
H.
HOoker John
I.
IZacke Richard
M.
MArtin John
P.
PRowse William
T.
TIckell William Tickell Richard
Swordbearers
B.
BEaumont William Bartlett Richard Birdali William Bletchingdon Robert
C.
CLarke John Cranbury Leonard Cogan John
D.
DOwn William
G.
GIlbert Francis
H.
HArrison Robert
M.
MAy John
N.
NOrthcott Robert
P.
PRowse Richard
P.
SOmaster William
T.
TOoker Thomas
W.
WOod John Willing Thomas
Receivers.
A.
ALlen Richard 18 Allen Richard 19, 20, 20, 21, 26 Atlane Jordan 33 Atwill
Roger 53 Atwill Roger 56 Atwood Walter 56, 59 Allen Henry 64 Athole Nicholas 76
Avell John 82 Atwill John 88 Allington Matthew 93 Andrew Thomas 103 Amerideth
Griffith 127 Amy Thomas 146 Acland John 146 Acland John 168
B.
BArkamstead John 18 Buffett William 38 Byrch John 45 Bridport Robert 49, 49
Bradworthy Robert 50 Brown Robert 53, 55 Bailiff Warren 55 Bennett William 54,
111 Brittestow Nicholas 54 Battishill Martin 57 Bosom Richard 62, 63 Batten
John 66, 68 Boughwood Nicholas 68 Bacon John 76 Bagg John 77 Bray Peter 78
Beausitz John 78 Bishop William 80 Betty John 82 Baker Richard 87 Bond Thomas
94 Bonefant John 97, 105 Buckenam John 105 Bradmore John 106 Brown Robert 106
Bry^nall John 113 Buller Robert 114 Blackaller John 114 Buller John 118
Buckenam William 119 Blackall John 128 Bridgman Edward 130 Br^^erton Thomas 138
Beavy Richard 140 Borough Walter 142 Bennett Adam 152 Battishill Henry 155
Broking Nicholas 159 Bartlett Bernard 163 Bruen William 164 Butler John 168
Brodridg Christopher 174 Bale Thomas 178
C.
CLarke Philip 18 Coscom William 63, 64 Cook John 70 Clerk John 70, 79 Cutler
John 73 Cross John 74, 76 Cook Thomas 75 Crymell William 78 Calwoodley Thomas
84, 85 Clubb Robert 87 Coming John 87 Clerk Richard 8^ Colshill John 91
Chapman George 94 Calwoodley John 96 Champnys Walter 96 Crudge William 104
Chafe Robert 132 Chapel William 133 Chapel Thomas 137 Chapel John 139
Crossing Hugh 143 Crossing Thomas 146 Coll^ton Peter 146 Crossing Francis 151
Crocker John 153 Clark Christopher 155 Crocker Hugh 157 Cupper John 157 Collins
John 159 Crossing Richard 159 Clarke Christopher Jun. 161 Collins John 176
D.
DVport William 38 Dyrkin John 55 Drew Bennett 77 Duke William 80 Druell
Richard 83 Danester John 98 Duke Richard 109 Drake John 123 Dyer John 129 Davy
John 136 Dorchester Richard 141 Deeble Walter 164
E.
EAston Robert 66 Easton Thomas 66 Edwards Thomas 142 Ellicott John 142 Evans
Richard 159
F.
FEniton John 16 Feniton John 18, 19, 20 Fartheyn Thomas 36, 38, 40 Furbor
Thomas 46, 47, 48 Friend John 84 Flay Thomas 150 Ford Thomas 161
G.
GErvis Nicholas 21 Goldecott Henry 27 Gatepath William 28 Gervis Thomas 46, 46
Godescott Nicholas 49 Gise John 51, 53 Gosse Reymond 58, 62 Gray John 66 Gould
Adam 61, 64 Gervis William 63 Grendon Simon 63 Gould Roger 69, 70 Gervis Walter
88 Guscott John 104 Gumby John 105 Gupwill John 146 Gould James 159 Gandy Henry
164 Glyde William 176
H.
HVghton Henry 47 Hastment William 51 Halberton Nicholas 51 Hull John 54 Hardy
William 56 Hull Henry 14, 32, 64, 140 Hickly Robert 70 Hull John 74, 103
Hamlyn John 85 H^mond John 86 Hayle Thomas 86 Hanniford Henry 93 Hooker John 94
Hamlyn Nicholas 96 Hewett Richard 104 Hunt Thomas 107, 117 Hurst William 112
Hamlyn Henry 114 Hooker Robert 114 Hoyge Thomas 117 Holmer John 121 Hurst John
124 Howell John 132 Hakewill John 151 Hayne John 154 Herman Ralph 159 Hagedot
Peter 171
I.
JErmin Hugh 77, 78 Jermin John 79, 79 Jermin Michael 31, 135 Jeffery Richard
86 John David 89 Jubb Matthew 91 Jourden Richard 141 Jermin Alexander 143
Jourden Ignatius 145 Jourden John 150 Isacke Nicholas 169
K.
KErswell William 29, 41 Kirton John 76, 76 Kelvleigh John 77 Kirk Gilbert 115
Knight Simon 133
L.
LAngdon Walter 22 Langdon Stephen 26, 31 Langdon Walter 26, 29, 30, 30, 30,
32, 32, 32, 33, 38 Lovecock Philip 38 Lekenn Martin 41, 42, 45 Lekenn John 45
Lake John 66, 70 Larkstoke Richard 68 Limpeny John 105 Jews Jeffery 108 Lymett
Nicholas 122 Levermore Moris 125 Lymett Edward 133 Levermore John 137 Lant John
143 Lynn John 148 Lovering John 159 Lethbridge Christopher 162
M.
MAy William 74 Moor John 107 Martin Richard 116 Midwinter John 120 Maynard
John 122 Midwinter Robert 127 Martin Nicholas 31, 34, 134, 150 Martin Thomas
135, 145 Martin William 137 Main Alexander 132 Marshall John 144 Modyford John
145 Mallock Roger 153 Martin John 159 Marshall James 160 Mawditt Isaac 168, 173
N.
NEwton Robert 18, 90 Newton Roger 31 Noldekin Reynold 47 Noble Robert 49
Newton John 51 Nymett John 58, 61 Nosworthy John 108 Newcomb William 143
O.
OKeston John 16, 18 Olliver Richard 53 Oak William 64, 74 Orange Richard 77
Orange John 88, 106 Obleigh William 88 Olivean Stephen 169 Oliver Benjamin 170
P.
PAlmer Philip 16 Paige Nicholas 30 Paige John 31 Perou^ John 44 Pleigh Robert
48 Plenty Roger 55 Panton John 63, 64 Pewterer Ri^hard 65 Pollow John 69 Peryam
William 125 Paige Hugh 126 Prestwood Thomas 120, 134 Peryam John 126, 137 Peter
John 127 Prestwood Richard 128 Paramore John 128 Pope Hugh 129 Perryman George
134 Pope John 134 Prowse Richard 135 Prowse John 142 Parr Robert 133 Pyle
George 148 Penny John 154 Pearse James 161 Prigg Henry 164 Pynn John 167 Penny
Alan 168 Parr John 174
R.
QVash Andrew 177
R.
ROok John 27 Rokes William 55 Read John 62 Russel John 62 Rowse Thomas 81
Rumwell Richard 86 Rudgway Stephen 89 Russell Robert 90 Rewer John 91 Russell
Reynold 110 Russell Richard 111 Richardson Thomas 132 Reymond Thomas 136
S.
SOller Richard 40, 44 Sutton John 47 Spicer Thomas 52, 139 Spicer John 52
Swanton John 53 Sc^tt Adam 61, 61 Smithayes Thomas 63 Shapleigh John 64, 68, 69
S^apleigh Philip 65 Sturt Peter 68 Shepherd John 69 Shepp Thomas 70
Shillingford John 71, 73 Salter John 74 Smith Robert 84 Spyne John 85 Symons
Robert 96 Slugg Johm 97 Symons John 103 Shapton William 110 Spurway Thomas 118
Smith William 123 Staplehill Walter 126 Smith John 132 Smith George 137 Spicer
Nicholas 138, 150 Sweet Richard 139 Spicer Christopher 141 Spicer William 142
Smith Gilbert 144 Sheer John 145 Sweet Gilbert 151 Saunders Richard 155 Sweet
Richard 161 Snow Simon 161 Salter Anthony 169 Slade James 171 Sanford William
173 Smith Henry 177
T.
TAntyser Richard 17, 18 Tantyfer Richard 18, 20 Tailor David 21, 21 Turand
Michael 33 Torand Nicholas 40 Tredeyners John 46 Talbot John 61 Tillers John 82
Thomas John 85, 117 Tooker Robert 119 Tuckfield John 122 Tothill William 133
Trivett William 134 Thomas Jeffery 136 Tailor John 146 Tucker James 153 Tooker
Thomas 155 Tuthill George 169
V.
VOysey Robert 73 Vpton William 75 Vndy Richard 96
W.
WAllys Nicholas 45 Wythen Reynols 50 White John 52 Wilsford Robert 58 Whythen
Walter 59 Wandry Thomas 65 Wilsford William 65, 116 Wilsford John 68 Wi^balse
Bennet 80 Worth Roger 89 West^n John 93 Winter John 107 Way John 121 Woolcott
John 121 Walker Thomas 139 Waltham Jeffery 144 Wakeman Thomas 149 Walker Robert
154 White Walter 156
Y.
YOrk Walter 97 Yard Philip 138 Yeo Richard 157
Stewards.
A.
AYloff Abraham 2 Atwood Henry 3 Allen Richard 18, 18, 18, 19 Atport Walter 18
Atlane Nicholas 18, 20, 21, 21, 21 Aysh Henry 21, 22 Atlane Jorden 26, 31
Ashperton Robert 32 Austin William 46 Atwill Roger 53, 53, 54, 54, 55, 55, 57,
59 Atpitt Simon 53 Ally John 55 Atwood Walter 55, 55, 56, 58 Atwood Roger 58
Allen Henry 63 Atyate John 73 Athole Nicholas 75 Atwill William 77, 80 Avell
John 80 Aysh William 85 Atwill John 88, 90, 162 Atwill Philip 93 Allington
Matthew 93 Austin VVymond 96 Andrew Thomas 67 Aburn Nicholas 97 Amory John 106
Awells John 110 Andrew Richard 110 Andrew Humphry 117 Allen John 118 Amerideth
Griffith 120 Arundell Jeffery 123 Aplyn John 136 Alford Samuel 142 Acland John
144 Amy Thomas 144 Anthony John 151 Anthony Edward 154 Allyn Tobias 164 Anthony
John 167
B.
BEuder Walter 5 Bellamy Walter 6 Blond Hillary 6, 8, 8, Bushett John 10
Blebuch Phllip 16 Buffett William 26, 28, 29, 30, 32 Beynim Roger 30, 31 Bonnam
Stephen 30 Buffett John 40 Brewer William 44, 47 Beynim Peter 46 Bouleigh John
52 Byrch John 52 Brown Robert 53, 54, 55 Bennett William 53, 106 Brasynter
Adam 54 Brittestow Nickolas 55 Battishill Martin 58 Boll John 59 Bosom Richard
61 Brown Richard 62 Batten John 65, 69, 70 Boughwood Nicholas 66 Bogbrook
Walter 70 Butterford Stephen 70, 74 Bishop William 74, 74, 80 Bacon John 74
Beaufitz John 75 Bagg John 76, 76, 76 Brown John 77 Botty John 79 Bobidg John
79 Blowyer Thomas 83, 85, 87 Barsly Peter 84 Baker Richard 86 Bond Thomas 88
Bernard John 88 Bonefant Robert 88, 95, 96, 103 Byrch Richard 88 Bonefant John
94 Baker William 94 Bullock Philip 97 Binks William 97 Buckenam John 98 Brendon
John 103 Bowyer John 103 Bradmore John 105 Boughay John 106 Brytnall John 107
Bodley John 107 Buller Robert 107, 123 Bridgman John 108 Blackaller John 111
Buller John 111 Buckenam William 113 Bonefant Thomas 116 Blackall Roger 117
Burges William 117 Burgoyn William 118 Berryman William 119 Bouth Henry 122
Berry John 122 Bridgman Edward 122 Blackall John 123 Beaufitz Thomas 124 Brown
Michael 127 Bruerton Thomas 132 Bird Thomas 133 Beaufitz Richard 135 Barcomb
Lawrence 135 Brushford John 136 Biggins John 136 Bridgman Thomas 137 Brayly
William 138 Borough Walter 139 Baskervill Thomas 139 Body Walter 140 Budley
Aluett 140 Blackaller Thomas 141 Bagwell David 141 Body Richard 142 Brinley
Richard 142 Beavis Nicholas 143 Bolt Peter 144 Blight John 144 Birdall William
145 Bartlett William 146 Bennett Adam 156 Battishill Henry 149 Berry John 151
Bidgood Humphry 151 Blackall Thomas 152 Blackall William 153 Beverbomb
Marmaduke 153 Brodridg Christopher 155 Butler John 156 Broking Nicholas 157
Brinley Nicholas 157 Bartlett Bernard 159 Bruen William 161 Beard Samuel 164
Beard Benjamin 169 Baker John 173 Bodley William 176 Brocas Abisha 176 Beard
Job 177 Boson Joseph 178
C.
COurtys Thomas 5 Caws Walter 8, 8, 14, 15, 15 Caporn John 9, 15 Chanon Walter
10 Child Baldwin 12, 14 Cook John 17, 18, 18, 29, 49, 75, 162 Clark Philip 18
Coryton Alexander 29 Champernon Michael 31 Capper Matthew 40 Capper Martin 47
Colwell Lawrence 41 Coals John 48 Colebrook John 48 Crisp Walter 55, 58 Coscom
William 62, 63, 64 Cobb Robert 68 Cobley Robert 68, 69, 69, 70 Coscom John 68,
73, 74, 77, 77, 78 Cobl^y Walter 68, 69 Cooper John 69 Cross Richard 69 Clerk
John 70, 78 Crabb Walter 70 Cutler John 73 Cross John 74 Crudg Ralph 76
Grymell William 77 Coming John 86, 86 Chubb Robert 86 Clerk Richard 86 Colshill
John 90, 106 Calwoodley John 91 Chapman George 94 Champneys Walter 94 Cliff
Richard 96 Cleyhanger William 103 Colshill Peter 105 Ch^bb Richard 108 C^tton
William 109 Collin Nigell 110 Croft John 114 Chanon William 116 Colwell
Richard 117 Clubb Bennet 118 Cotton Robert 120 Cogan John 127 Chafe Robert 128
Chapel Thomas 128, 135 Colwell Hubert 128 Chapel William 128 Collins John
131, 171 Chapel John 135, 141 Carpenter Nicholas 136 Crossing Hugh 141
Crossing Thomas 143 Clement Edward 143 Colleton Peter 149 Crocker John 145
Chafe John 146 Clarke Christopher 146, 157 Crossing Francis 149 Cooze John 150
Crocker Hugh 150 Cupper John 151 Crossing Richard 153 Crossing Philip 154 Clerk
John 154 Colleton John 155 Carwithean Nicholas 155 Grocker Samuel 156 Candish
Richard 160 Culling Richard 161 Cowell William 161 Cheek Edward 171 Carwithean
John 172 Call Samuel 172 Cross Edward 173 Cholwill John 174 Cone William 176
Cudmore Henry 176
D.
DElve Walter 3, 3 Dyer Philip^ 3, 9, 10, 10, 10, 12, 13, 14, 14 Dyrling Philip
5 Dyrling Martin 15, 15, 16, 16 Duport Walter 31, 32, 33, 36 Dyer Adam 38 Dyer
John 40, 40, 44, 45, 49, 49, 134 Dyer Ralph 40 Dyrkin John 54 Down William 62
Doly Roger 66, 68 Dolbear Ralph 71 Drew Bennett 75 Duke William 77, 90 Druell
Richard 79 Dolling Henry 82 Duke Richard 85, 195 Durk William 88, 91 Down John
91 Davy Simon 95 Danester John 96 Davy William 113 Duck John 114 Drake John 121
Dewnman William 121 Dyer John 126 Duckenfield Ralph 129 Dorr John 134 Dodd John
135 Dorchester Richard 137 Depford John 139 Dyett Francis 159 Deeble Walter 161
Dix Thomas 161 Draper Paul 164 Dabynott Robert 171 Davy Robert 173
E.
ERming Thomas 2 Elkin Lawrence 5 Ernold Richard 14 Erchdeacon John 45 Easton
Robert 64, 65 Easton Thomas 65, 68 Exbridge John 68 Evelton Thomas 80, 82, 83
Efford William 80 Ector John 94 Eastcott William 94 Ellicott Henry 132 Errom
Nicholas 137 Edwards Thomas 138 Ellicott John 138 Eads John 141 Ellicott Robert
143 Every Henry 155 Edmonds George 159 Elwill John 164 Eveleigh Edward 167
Edmonds Thomas 174
F.
FItz-Henry John 3 Forester Richard 4 Falson Richard 5 Field Robert 6 Facy
William 6 Fitz-herbert Eustice 8, 14 Fitz-Henry Roger 15, 21 Fitz Hugh Roger
15, 56 Feniton John 16 Falcon Hugh 17, 18, 18, 18, 20 Farthing Thomas 18, 31,
33, 33, 38, 41, 42 Falcon Henry 19, 21 Farthein William 38 Furbour Thomas 42,
44, 45 45, 48, 49, 49, 50 Furbour Henry 52, 53, 54, 58 Fowk William 61 Frank
Stephen 69, 69 French William 74 Ford Robert 76, 77 Friend John 80 Fewnding
William 87 Faux Henry 94 Frost William 97 Forest William 107 Fowler Thomas 108
Faux Richard 113 Field John 135 Follett John 137 Flay Thomas 135 Ford Thomas
155, 159 Foxwill Philip 157 Foxwill Edward 161, 16^
G.
GIllam Thomas 3 Green William 5 Grang William 6 Gervis Walter 8, 8, 46, 35
Grange Walter 9, 9 Good Walter 12 Gatepath Thomas 16, 18, 18 19, 20, 20
Gatepath Richard 21 Goldecott Henry 26, 29 Green Peter 26 Gatepath William 26,
27 Gervis John 31 Gatepath Henry 46 Godescott Nicholas 50, 52 Gyst John 53
G^rvis William 55, 56, 57, 58, 61, 61, 62, 62, 62, 64, 64, 64 Gray John 59
Gimmerell John 59 Gould Adam 61 Gosse Reymond 62, 64, 64 Grendon Simon 63, 64,
64, 64 Grills John 63 Gould Reynold 68 Germin John 79 Germin Robert 87 Gibbs
John 88, 89 Germin Richard 90 Grigg Thomas 122 Gifford Richard 126 Gibb Richard
129 Grigg William 129, 145 Geer Andrew 132 Greenwood Thomas 139 Galley Hillary
139 Germin Alexander 140 Gupwill John 144, 164 Genmin Hugh 146 Garland John 149
Golding William 150 Gould James 153 Gill John 153 Gandy Henry 159 Guswill John
164 Gibhs Abraham 167 Gibbons John 168 Gandy John 169 Gundry Daniel 178
H.
HAstment William 6, 7, 7, 8 Hughton Thomas 14 Horn John 29 Hughtom Walter 45
Haughtom Henry 46, 46 Halberton Richard 49 Halberton Nicholas 50 Hull John 54,
70 Hardy William 55 Hadleigh Peter 62, 63 Heighley Peter 63 Hull Henry 63, 64,
65 Hull William 70 Hodge William 77 Heart Vincent 77, 82 Hoody William 77 Hamlyn
Nicholas 78, 79, 83 Hammond John 79, 81, 84, 85, 86 Hog William 84, 84, 85
Hamlyn John 84 Hayle Thomas 85, 85 Heart John 86 Hanneford Henry 89 Hampton John
90 Harlewin John 90 Hooker John 93 Hull John 97 Hewett Richard 98 Hill Thomas
104 Hoig John 105 Huntingdon William 106 Hoig William 106 Hamlyn Henry 106
Hurst William 107 Harris John 111 Hunt Thomas 111 Hooker Robert 112 Holmer John
113 Holmer William 114 Hussy William 114 Hurst John 121 Halse William 122
Harris Henry 125 Horwood Robert 123 Hellyard Richard 127 Howell John 127
Haslewood Richard 129 Hutchins John 133 Hunt William 133 Harding Richard 134
Hakewill John 135, 146 Hull Henry 137 Howell John 137 Horsey Jasper 138 Hoisey
Walter 139 Hilliard Jeremy 139 Hind Robert 143 Hoisham William 143 Hayne John
145 Harbert Richard 150 Harris George 151 Herman Ralph 153 Holmes William 158
Holditch Walter 161 Hooper William 164 Hooper Richard 169 H^ckman Edward 174
Hill Edward 176
I.
JEunings Henry 3 Ilchester Nicholas 15 Jeffery William 16 Jew William 70 James
John 78 Jeffery Richard 84 John's David 88 Ivelton Thomas 88 Jubb Matthew 89
Jones John 133 Jones Walter 134 James Henry 134 Jourden Richard 134 Jourden
Ignatius 142 Jourden John 145 Jourden George 150
K.
KErswell Richard 3 Kerswell William 30, 30, 30, 31, 32, 32, 32, 33, 36, 38
Kirton William 46 Ken^e^idge Richard 66 Kirton John 76 Kelly John 77 Kelly
Thomas 82 Kirton Robert 47 King William 91 Kever John 106 Kensy Robert 106
Kirk Gilbert 108 Knight Simon 128 Knott Thomas 154 Kendall Thomas 155 Knowling
George 108 Kingwell Irancis 174
L.
LYsord Adam 3 Leskin Martin 5 Lake Stephen 5 Leyden Jordan 9 Langdon Thomas
15, 16 Langdon Hugh 16 London Stephen 21, 22 Langdon Walter 27 Lovecock Peter
38 Lekenn Walter 38 Lovecock Philip 38 Leken Richard 40, 46 Lekenn Martin 41,
46, 46 Lovecock Henry 46, 47 Lekenn John 46, 47, 47 Lydeland William 48
Larkstoke Richard 65, 66 Lake John 68, 69 Latch John 77 Luffingcott John 87
Lang William 91 Langworthy Thomas 97 Jews Jeffery 103 Lushant Jervis 104 Long
Matthew 109 Lambert Christopher 111 Luxton Roger 113 Lymett Nicholas 114
Largmore Stephen 116 Lane John 118 Levermore Moris 120 Lot William 120 Lumbear
Richard 121 Lambert Thomas 123 Lake Peter 124 Lymett Edward 128 Lant William
130 Lambell Robert 132 Levermore John 133 Langdon Edward 139 Lant John 141
Langdon Nicholas 142 Lambell John 142 Leach George 144 Lynn John 145 Levermore
John 146 Langworthy George 148 Lovering John 156 Lavers John 157 Lethbridge
Christopher 158 Lawrence Edward 159 Ledginham Richard 159 Lippingcott Francis
159, 161 Levermore Humphry 173 Leigh Humphry 176 Leigh John 177
M.
MEllifluen John 3 Milton Henry 5 Might William 5 Molton John 5 Minton John 5
Monk Roger 6 Molton Walter 10 Molton Robert 12 Minson Walter 15 Montin Richard
26, 27, 27, 29 May William 19, 73, 127 Mayhew Henry 68 Merefield Walter 74, 76
Merefield John 77, 96 Matthew John 98 Moor Matthew 105 Matthew Wiliam 106 Moor
John 106, 137 Marys John 110 Michell John 110 Martin Richard 110 Maynard John
115 Mawditt Richard 116 Monustephin John 119 Macy John 121 Midwinter Robort 122
Maunder Henry 123 Marshall Thomas 128 May Thomas 132 Martin Nicholas 133, 146
Martin Thomas 133, 143 Martin William 134, 142 Monugwell William 134 Main
Alexander 134 Marshall John 142 M^rle Hugn 142 Modyford John 143 Mace William
145 Mallock Roger 150 Monugwell John 150, 161 Michell Tristram 150 Mercer
Nihholas 150 Madock Richard 151 Martin John 152 Madock John 152 Main Richard
152 Marshall James 154 Mawditt Isaac 158 Macy George 159 Main John 162
Mapowder Francis 171 Mawditt Joseph 173
N.
NEvill Thoams 3 Needham Roger 5 Newton Richard 16, 18, 19, 20 Newton Robert
29, 30, 30, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 87, 89 Newton William 36 Noldekin Reynold 47
Newton John 49, 49, 52 Noble Robert 51, 51, 51, 52 Nymett John 56, 59 Nymett
Thomas 74 Nawns Nicholas 87 Nawns Richard 87 Nordon William 96 Nordon Richard
96 Nosworthy John 104 Nordon John 104 Newman Richard 133 Newcomb William 139
O.
OKeston John 10, 12, 13, 14 Okeston Walter 10, 12 Overwilt Rowland 14 Oxton
Thomas 45 O^^ey John 52, 53, 54 Olliver Richard 53, 55 Oak William 63, 64, 65
Okes^y Robert 68 Overton William 71 Orum John 75 Or^nge Richard 76 Obley John
78 Obley William 86 Orange John 88, 105 Olliver Thomas 97, 104 Olliver Eustice
128 Owlborough Clement 141 Osborn Alexander 146 Olivean Stephen 154 Olliver
Benjamin 1^8
P.
PErkins Richard 2 Pitcher Thomas 10, 1^ Palm^r Philip 10, 15, 18 Pinton Thomas
10, 14 Payters Richard 14 Pudding John 15, 16 Pintham Gervis 16 Pening William
17, 18 Poyell William 18 Payge Nicholas 30 Perour John 31, 38, 38 Perour Jordan
33 Pleigh Richard 46, 46, 49, 49, 49, 50, 5^, 51 Pleigh Robert 47 Pleigh John
5^ Pearse John 63, 148, 177 Pewterer Richard 63, 65, 68 Ponton John 64, 65
Pollow John 68 Plenty Peter 74 Pope Walter 76 Parsons Thomas 76, 78 Paison
Thomas 76 Peacock John 78 Pafford Walter 82 Pry William 84 Pyke Thomas 87, 91,
91 Pudesly Ralph 96 Peek William 104 Peryam William 106 Prestwood Thomas 116,
129 Peryam John 121, 134 Paige Hugh 109 Paramore John 119 Peter John 119, 126
Pope Hugh 122 Prestwood Richard 123 Peryman George 132 Prowse Richard 132, 146
Pope John 133 Pyle John 133 Paramore William 134 Perry William 136 Prowse John
137 Pery Richard 137 Pain John 139 Pain Henry 140 Parr Robert 141, 144 Pope
William 142 Penny John 143 Pyle George 144 Paul Abraham 145 Passemere George
146 Parr John 153, 169 Pinny John 154 Penny Alan 155 Parr Christopher 155 Pit
Thomas 157 Painter Edward 159 Prigg Henry 159 Pym John 161 Pyne Malachy 162
Pyne William 164 Penny William 164
Q
QVash Andrew 168
R.
RObins William 3 Rugg William 4 Roff Martin 6, 7, 7, 8, 8, 14 Roff German 8
Rifford Adam 9 Rook John 19, 19, 20, 21, 23, 29 Russell Roger 26 Russell John
61, 61, 62 64, 64, 64, 65 Raylesferd William 63 Rumwell Richard 85 Ruett John
86 Rudgway Stephen 86 Russell Robert 8^ Redway Henry 90 Rudgway John 94 Russell
Reynold 105, 105 Russell Richard 107 Ratcliff William 130 Robins John 107
Richards John 109 Ratcliff Richard 117 Rixley John 117 Reeve Nicholas 119
Reynolds William 123 Richardson Thomas 126, 123 Robinson Roger 133 Reymond
Thoams 134 Radford Thomas 139 Reynolds Richard 139 Reed William 146 Ricroft
Nicholas 146 Rolston William 160 Risdon Peter 174
S.
SKinner Aldred 3 Spelman George 3 Strange Jeffery 10, 15 Sp^w Robert 12
Smalcomb John 38 Skinner Michael 40 Soller Richard 40, 45 Spicer Thomas 41, 44,
45 53, 53, 126, 135 Swegothull Walter 4^ Sw^inthill Walter 44 Sutton John 47,
47, 50, 51, 51, 52 Shillingfore William 48 Spicer John 53 Sleigh John 52
Somaster Richard 53 Somaster John 53 Sto^eleigh Willima 55, 56 Stoke Robert 55,
59, 61, 63 Seamer William 56 Scutt Adam 65, 58 Stayce Richard 6^ Scam Henry 62,
62 Smithayes Thomas 63, 64 Shapleigh John 63, 66, 66 68, 68 Swan Ralph 65, 69,
70 S^urt Peter 66, 68, 69 Shepherd John 66 Sharp Thomas 70 Sbapleigh William
70, 70 Stipping John 71 Salter John 73 Stokeleigh John 73 Smert John 74, 75,
76, 77 Servington William 22 Stanbury John 78 Swan Walter 79 Sampson Thomas 79,
80, 81 Spyne John 79, 82 Sams Walter 80 Salmon John 81 Smith Robert 84 Symons
Robert 86 Starr John 88, 89, 93 Slugg John 91 Symons John 91 S^rivener John 103
Sheerman Robert 103 Shapton William 105 Scott John 105 Scott Vincent 105
Somaster William 106 Staplehill Nicholas 109 Smith Robert 112 Seller John 114
Spurway Thomas 114 Sheer Edward 116 Shelder John 117 Stretch Peter 118 Smith
William 119 Sweet Richard 120, 134, 155 Sweet Robert 121 Stowell John 122
Skydmore Thomas 123 Staplchill Walter 124 Strobridge John 125 Smith John 126
S^lden William 127 Spark John 127, 172 Saywell Gilbert 129 Sanford John 134
Spicer Nicholas 135, 145 Shepherd William 136 Spurway Henry 137 Spicer
Christopher 137, 144 Spicer William 137 Smith Gilbert 137 Seldon Lawrenc^ 138
Selby Roger 138 Sandy Roger 142 Savery Giles 142 Snow Thomas 142 Sheer John 142
Salter Anthony 145 Sweet Gilbert 146 Savage John 146 Skinner William 148
Saunders Richard 138 Snow Simon 153 Spiller William 155 Sanford William 159
Sonners Nicholas 159 Slade Samuel 160 Spicer Richard 161 Spark Bernard 162
Shower William 164 Starr Edmond 164 Shapcott George 168 Smith Henry 169 Sonners
John 171 Saffyn George 173 Smith Thomas 177 Sanford George 178
T.
THurland John 4 Thring Andrew 4 Treby John 5 Tuleston Walter 6 Turbert John 7,
7, 8 Tailor Robert 13 Tantyfer Richard 16, 16, 16, 18, 18, 18, 21 Thorn Michael
18 Troycott Alexander 20, 21 Trecott Henry 30, 32, 32, 33 Turand Michael 33
Tredeyners John 40, 41 Tailor John 44, 78, 142, 151 Tailor Roger 45 Turner
Robert 47, 115 Treseler Roger 51 Treseler Robert 51 Tirling John 56 Trelawny
Nicholas 70, 73, 74 Trelawny John 74 Thring Andrew 75, 76, 76, 78, 82 Troley
John 76 Turner John 83, 84, 85, 85 Thomas John 85, 104, 105, 120 Tybott John
8^, 88 Turner Richard 94 True Robert 108 Tuckfield John 114, 117 Trubody John
114 Tothill William 115 Takle William 117 Tooker John 123 Trosse Peter 127
Thomas Jeffery 129 Trigg Alexander 132 Turbervill Thomas 136 Triggs Paul 140
Tapper Oliver 143, 155 Tirry John 145 Tailor James 146 Tooker Thomas 148 Tucker
James 150, 159 Trobrige Joseph 15^ Trescott Robert 154 Tooker Humphry 155
Tailor Thomas 159 Tuthill George 168 Trype Nicholas 177
V.
VAlteran Richard 15 Voysey Robert 70, 70 Vpton William 74, 77 Vndy Richard 96
Vigures John 103 Verny Richard 111 Vilvain Stephen 127 Vilvain Peter 136
W.
WAy Peter 1 Weyland Jeffery 2 Weily Stephen 3 White Hillary 12 Windsor John 14
16 Well John 26 Wyton Robert 27 Webb John 26, 59 63, 122, 132 W^ll William 29
Wheaten Roger 30, 30, 30 Woan Robert 41 Walleys Alexander 47, 78 Wythom Roger
49 White Walter 50, 51, 148 White John 61 Welland Henry 56 Wilsford Robert 56
W^lby Thomas 57 Whithen Walter 58 Webb Thomas 58, 59 Webb^r Thomas 61, 61
Whit^ow Walter 61 W^scott Henry 62 Whitleigh Baldw^n 63, 63 Wandry Thomas 63,
65, 66, 68, 68 Wilsford William 65 Wyndet Robert 65 Wilsford John 66, 66, 69,
70 Wichehalse Bennet 77 Wichehalse Henry 86 Worth Roger 89 Waggot Richard 89
Weston John 90 Whitlock John 93 Welsh John 96 Winter John 96, 114 Wilkins John
97 Wilkinson William 98 W^lis John 103 Whitwever John 104 Williams John 107
Woolcott John 108, 113 Way John 112 Whithread Robert 115 Walrond Nicholas 118
Walker James 128 Wilsdon Hugh 134 Webber Robert 136 Walker Thomas 137 Wheaton
Richard 140 Waltham Jeffery 141 Wakeman Thomas 144 Willett Henry 146 White
James 150 Walker Robert 151 White Richard 161 Wheeler Edward 164 Walker
^ndymion 171 Warren John 174 Worth Francis 177
Y.
YOrk Walter 82, 95 Yard Philip 130 Yeo Roger 146 Yeo Richard 154
Z.
ZOoch Walter 1 Zooch John 19, 20, 21, 38 Zooch Peter 38
Bishops.
A.
APulia Simon Arundell John Alleigh William
B.
BRewer William Blondy Richard Bronscomb Walter Bitton Thomas Berkley James
Brentingham Thomas Booth John Bradbridge William Babington Gervis Browning
Ralph
C.
CHichester Robert Carry James Courteney Peter Coverdale Miles Cotton William
Carry Valentine
F.
FOx Richard
G.
GRandison John Gauden John
H.
HAll Joseph
I
IScanus Bartholomew John the Chant^r
K.
KIng Oliver Ketirich John
L.
LEofricus Lacy Edmond
M.
MArshall Henry
N.
NEvill George
O.
OSbertus Ouldham Hugh
Q
QVivil Peter
R.
REdman Richard
S.
STapledon Walter Stafford Edmond Sparrow Anthony
T.
TVrbervill James
V.
V^sey John
W.
WArewest William Warewest Robert Wolton John Ward Seth
Almshouses.
ST. Alexis Cell united to St. John's Hospital within the Eastgate page 10 The
Hospitals of St. John and St. Mary Magdalen exchanged, by whom, and on what
occasion page 10, 11 A Toll weekly collected by the Lazar people of St. Mary
Magdalens Hospital page 68, 69 In which Hospital an Alderman infected with the
Leprosy, lived, died, and lies buried page 83 An Alms house built at
Livery-dole, by whom, and the occasion page 116 Governors appointed of sundry
Almshouses page 130, 131 Alms-people are daily to resort unto St. Peter's
Church at the time of divine service page 132 Corn and Fuel provided for the
relief of the Poor page 141, 144, 153, 176 Alms-people expelled their houses
for disobeying the orders thereof page 142, 145, 148 Poor people whose houses
were burnt relieved with money page 142 Money and Land recovered for the Poor
by decrees in Chancery page 154, 155 Wynard's Almshouse rebuilt, and the
Poors pay increased by Decree in Chancery page 162, 168 Hele's Hospital
Founded, and by whom page 175 A Work house erected for the Poor. page 175
Bail.
A Foraign Attachment destroyed by putting in Bail to the Action page 2 What
the Bail forfeits, if the principal be not rendered into Court. page 80 The Form
and Antiquity thereof page 2 Differences touching certain Attachments page 52,
53
Benefactors.
TO St. Peter's Church page 3, 16, 18, 53, 57, 93 To the Vicars Choral page 3,
49, 64, 108 To several Colleges in the University of Oxford page 33, 70, 97,
108, 109, 122 To the Chamber page 136, 176 To St. John's Hospital page 16, 21
To Almshouses page 177
Bishops.
BIshops of the Diocese page 3, 6, 7, 11, 12, 14, 20, 21, 26, 29, 33, 46, 59,
65, 71, 73, 83, 86, 90, 94, 97, 103, 105, 113, 124, 127, 129, 133, 136, 140,
141, 149, 151 157, 167, 168, 170 Epitaphs made on sundry Bishops page 20, 28,
113, 125, 133, 140, 145 Several Bishops in honorable Offices page 9, 33, 46,
50, 61, 62, 65, 94, 96, 97, 113 Bishop Grandison withstood the Archbishops
Visitation page 47 Bishop Brentingham made one of the twelve Peers of the Realm
page 63 The great solemnity of Bishop Stapledon's Instalment page 33, 34, 35
Bishop Fox Godfather to King Henry 8. And Bishop Voysey to Queen Mary page 96,
113 Bishop Turbervill deprived, and committed to Prison page 128 Bishop Gauden
brought hither with great joy and solemnity page 167 The gray Friars harsh
censure of Bishop Quivil's death page 29 The revenue of this Bishopric
alienated, and by whom page 123, 124, 141 A yearly present bestowed on Bishop
Alleigh by the Queen page 129 Bishop Grandison buried in a Coffin of Lead, and
how abused by sacrilegious hands page 59 The Bishop claimed cognizance of Pleas
within his Fee page 77 The Bishops stately Chair in the Quire, when erected,
and by whom page 88 The Archbishop visits the Diocese page 45 Bishop Stapledon
made Custos of London page 45
Churches.
THe number of the Churches herein, and Patrons thereof page 6 A Dean and four
and twenty Prebendaries, by whom appointed and their yearly pension page 9 A
contention in St. Peter's Church about a Burial page 31 How long the Cathedral
was in building, and when finished page 55, 58, 59, 93 When the Chapter house
was built, and by whom page 77, 86 When the Church of Ottery St. Mary was
Founded, and by whom page 49 An Inventory taken of the goods of the Church by
the King's command page 125 The Pulpit in the Quire of the Cathedral, when
erected page 129, 171 The Churches Exchequer robbed page 133 Rent recovered to
St. Marys Church page 69 Money collected to repair St. Mary's and St. Sydwell's
Towers page 133, 143 Monuments of honorable persons erected in the Cathedral
page 44, 59, 60, 135, 151, 152 Churches, Chapels, and Churchyards consecrated
page 85, 155, 170 St. Peter's Churchyard railed in page 164 The great Organ in
the Cathedral erected page 171 A public Fast appointed, and why page 174
Officers in the Church Instituted page 21 A pension demanded by the Pope and
denied page 7 An Excommunication pronounced in the Cathedral page 14 Stoke Wood
given to the Church, when, and by whom page 29 An agreement between the Church
and City for some Land page 30 The death of several Dignitaries of the Church
page 171, 172, 177
City.
THe City Incorporated, its Liberties, and a Fee Farm Rent paid to the Crown
page 1, 10, 15. 48, 49, 60 King Henry the Third gave it to his Brother and his
Heirs, and resumed the Castle into his own hands from the Courteneys page 7, 8
The Earl of Cornwall retires himself here, and why page 12 The City claims the
same Liberties and Customs that London has, and so found by Verdict page 19,
28 The passage, lastage, and Key of Prattished at Exmouth are parcel of the
Fee-Farm of the City page 52, 69 Earls of Devon page 87 Marquess and Dukes of
Exeter page 65, 69, 114 Several Societies here Incorporated page 63, 85, 91,
94, 96, 97, 127 Differences between them and others page 12, 13, 15, 84, 89,
129 Fair houses belonging to the Duke of Exeter page 66 Conduits and Pumps
built and beautified page 85, 127, 136, 139, 151, 174 When the new Calander hay
was built, and by whom page 116 When the City was made a County page 118 The
Streets and Suburbs paved and repaired page 88, 118, 142, 144, 169, 176 Several
Fires happening at midnight page 173, 174 The Guild-ball built and beautified
page 46, 86, 93, 127, 135, 136, 139, 140
Common Council.
THe manner of Election, and number of the Common Council page 30 On due
Summons they are to attend the Mayor, or to be Fined page 74, 84 Common
Council-men dismissed the Chamber, and why page 115, 123 Fined for speaking
slanderous words in the Chamber page 115 Several Presents and Pensions bestowed
by the Chamber page 116, 117, 126, 132, 134, 137, 141, 158, 167, 168 The charge
of the Mayoralty defrayed by the Chamber page 132 A License granted by the
Chamber to send an Orphan beyond the Sea page 150 The Chamber regulated by
virtue of an Act of Parliament page 168
Court.
ON a Nonsuit, Costs to be paid by the Plaintiff before he brings another
Action page 3 The Antiquity of the Records of the Court in Parchment Rolls
extant page 22 Court Rolls taken away page 45, 47, 98, 118 Cognizance of Pleas
here demanded and granted by the Judges of the King's Bench page 46, 54, 97,
135, 138 Privileges in St. Sydwell's Fee demanded by the Lords thereof page 12,
48, 53, 77 Days appointed in Court for the Plaintiff to declare and the
Defendant to answer page 64, 66, 167 Persons admitted to do their Law page 73,
75, 77 Persons present in Court when Judgment is given against them are to be
taken up in execution page 76 Two of the Stewards absenting from Court, fined
page 83 Attorneys sworn, and dismissed from further practice, and disorders
rectified in Court page 90, 111 The Custom for Dominicals held good on a Trial
in Court page 108 Presentiments to be weekly estreated and brought into the
Court by the Sergeants at Mace page 115
Custom.
THe Town Custom duty, and not payable elsewhere page 30, 114 Several Customs
within the said City page 48, 50, 73, 103 The Customer of Devons Account sent
for and controlled page 89 Merchants Fined for abusing the King in his Customs
page 103 Goods seized on for non payment of the Town Custom-duty page 106, 108,
112, 121, 122, 126, 127, 138, 141, 143 The Custom touching Childrens portions
of Freemen page 70, 114 Goods seized on as Foraign bought and sold page 123,
132, 144, 154 License granted by the Mayor to unload Vessels, and to search and
seize goods within the Port page 30, 53, 55, 64, 73, 76, 112 Ancient lights by
the Custom of the City may not be destroyed page 47
Exe-River.
WHen Exe-bridge was built and by whom page 13 Exe-bridge in decay and repaired
page 26, 63 The River of Exe from Exe-bridge to Checkeston belongs to the King
in right of the City page 27, 28 Contention about Goods brought up the River
page 32 No Goods to be unloaden, or put to sale, till the Custom be paid page
32 The Haven destroyed, and by whom page 38, 40 Topsham Key built, and by whom
page 40 The Custom of Wood-hay for all Wood brought over Exe-bridge page 45
Calabar-wear being in decay was new made in a frame of Timber page 133 An
agreement made touching the passage of Exmouth page 16, 88 Free Benevolences
toward the making of the new Haven, and Cowley-bridge page 118, 122 Some
drowned, others strangely preserved in the River of Exe page 119 A Prophecy
fulfilled, that the River of Exe should run under St. Nicholas Church page 120
Sluices and Bridges erected on the new Haven page 137, 145 Several attempts made
to bring the River through the City page 154 The King's Arms erected at the
head of the new Haven page 171 A Sturgeon taken in the River of Exe page 173 An
exemplification of a Decree had out of the Exchequer touching the Fishing in
the River of Exe page 146
Fairs and Markets.
THe Antiquity and Names of several Fairs and Markets herein, and sundry
privileges incident thereunto page 19, 20, 27, 57, 86, 93 Persons fined for
erecting of Standings without License page 32, 108, 115, 122 Forestalling of
the Market prohibited and punished page 61 A great matter about a pot of fish
brought into the Market page 36 Places assigned to Foraign Bakers on Market
days page 38 The Institution of the Markets for Wool, Yarn, and Kersey page
119, 120, 134 Leather brought to the Market unsealed, and therefore seized on
page 106, 121, 138, 142 The duty for erecting and standing of a Booth or
Covering at Fair times page 107 One fined for counterfeiting the seal of
Leather page 121 Where the Cloth-Market is kept page 127, 139, 167 Butchers
committed to Prison for disturbing the Markets page 140 Fairs adjourned, and
why page 132, 143 A new Corn-Market appointed and regulated page 112 The best
Wheat sold for six pence the Bushel page 96
Freemen.
FReemen, and their privileges page 26, 38, 111, 117, 175 How the Freedom of
the City descends page 30, 39, 74, 95, 96, 156 The usual Fees of the Court paid
by every Freeman at the time of his admission page 39 The Mayor is Guardian of
every Freeman's Orphan page 74 Every Inhabitant not free of the City, pays
yearly a duty page 78, 94, 97 Persons dis-franchised, and fined, and why page
108, 110, 111, 112, 115, 120, 124, 126, 128, 129, 130, 143 Every Freeman ought
to Inroll his Apprentices Indentures page 113 Freemen fined for coloring of
Foraigners goods page 111, 139, 168 License given to Freemen to sue each other
at the Common Law page 155
Gates and Walls.
THe Porter of the West-gate turned out of his Office, and why page 46 The
Eastgate fell down, and the Cities Walls, and repaired page 84, 171, 176 A
Tower on the Walls behind the Bishop's Palace taken down page 87 Fines and
Benevolences toward the reparation of the Walls page 110, 1^^ Leathern
Buckets, Ladders, and Crooks provided, and why page 128 Pleasant Walks made on
Northen-hay and Southen-hay, and Trees planted therein page 145, 157, 159, 164,
170, 172
Grants.
BAgavell, Bethugavell and Chippingavell granted to the City page 18 Contention
about the duty page 31 The Pasture of Southen-hay demised page 53 Where and how
the Husband may grant the Wives Lands page 61, 62, 74 No Dower to be made of
Land Entailed page 63 The Passage and Ferry of Exmouth granted page 16 Grants
made for the enclosing of St. Peter's Churchyard page 22, 23 The Farm of
Weapons forfeited, demised page 114 St. Nicholas Fee purchased, and by whom
page 124
Justice.
PErsons Indicted for Assaults and Battery page 21, 30, 53, 62, 65 Persons
executed for Felony, their good forfeited and seized on page 22, 46, 110, 115,
121, 127, 134, 142, 143, 145, 146, 153, 154, 178 Strumpets, Bastards, and
Scolds punished page 29, 40, 42, 49, 75, 79, 113 Bakers punished for light
bread and confederacy page 41, 55, 75, 89 Traitors, some punished, others
pardoned page 41, 42, 66, 102, 119, 120, 126, 128, 144, 146, 147 Butchers
confederating, punished page 77 Justice executed without respect of persons
page 64 The Common Gaol removed hither from Bicton page 110 One opposed from
being a Justice of the Peace page 129 An house of Correction erected page 136
No idle persons are permitted openly to beg page 150 Goods of condemned persons
for Felony restored to the right owners page 153 Persons condemned and executed
for their Loyalty to the King page 162 Several Officers of the Ecclesiastical
Court did penance, and why page 25
King.
DAme Isabella King Henry the Third's Sister married to Frederick the Emperor
page 9 Richard Earl of Cornwall Crowned King of the Romans page 7, 14 Several
Kings, Queens, and Princesses visited this City page 22, 30, 81, 87, 92, 104,
158, 174 Richard and Edmond Earls of Cornwall dying without Issue, the Earldom
reverted to the Crown page 18, 31 The City is parcel of the Duchy of Cornwall,
and under what yearly Rent held page 48, 49 Diverse persons made Lord Deputies
of Ireland page 53, 63 Kings, Queens, and Princesses proclaimed, their Births,
Marriages and Deaths page 5, 10, 18, 33, 34, 61, 69, 69, 73, 91, 104, 106, 120,
122, 126, 127, 128, 143, 153, 154, 158, 166 Queen Mawd's Anniversary abolished
page 111 Governors appointed over the King's person page 63, 73 Subsidies
granted to the Crown page 10, 44, 74 The King in his Writ names the Mayor and
Bailiffs hereof Justices of his Peace page 38 The Manor of Exiland given by
King Edward the Sixth to the City, and why page 123 Charters granted and
renewed to the City page 151 King Charles the Second bestowed his Sisters
Picture on the City, and why page 175
Law.
REliefs due, and from whom page 25, 105, 107, 108 Two Verdicts for the City,
one for Exiland, and the other for the privilege of Lammas Fair page 44 Fines
here levied for passing of Lands, and Inrolment of deeds page 49 What persons
shall serve in Juries and have Actions page 86 None may be sued by an
Excommunicated person page 86 A Jury sued on a Writ of Attaint page 108 The
Punishment of him whose House or Chimney is on Fire page 137 Seats in the
Castle built for the Judges in the Circuit page 144 Deadands seized on to the
Cities use page 62, 121, 143, 144
Learning.
DIverse Learned Men Natives of this City page 4, 13, 38, 156 The Bible
Translated and divided into Chapters page 6, 124 When, and by whom the History
of Guy of Warwick was written page 32 Several Schools herein Founded, and by
whom page 79, 129, 142, 153 155
Mayor.
THe Mayors Antiquity and various appellations of precedent Governors page 1
The day and manner of the Mayors Election page 22, 31, 52, 98, 99 The Mayor
constitutes a deputy by Patent page 47, 160 Mayors dying in their Mayoralty
page 16, 48, 52, 61, 69, 88, 106, 112, 134, 135, 136, 143, 169 Commissions of
Oyer and Terminer sent hither to the Mayor and Justices page 51 The Mayor
brings an Action of Wast page 52 Mayors elected, and refusing are fined, others
by the King's Command accept of the Office page 78, 132, 150, 168 Two Swords
and a Cap of Maintenance bestowed on the Mayor by two Kings page 87, 154 One
five times Mayor, and bore Magistracy in the Reigns of four Princes page 91 The
black Roll delivered from Mayor to Mayor, and how lost page 95 Several persons
of honor entertained by the Mayor page 88, 121, 127, 137, 138, 153 At the
Mayor's Election all Freemen Inhabitants here, are to attend and give their
voices page 122 A Mayor has a numerous Issue page 126 At the Mayor's Election
a Deputy appointed in the Recorders place page 139 Several Mayors Knighted page
144, 158, 174 By whom Aldermen are chosen and the extent of their Jurisdiction
page 26
Nusances.
NUsances complained of and redressed page 26, 40, 41, 117 Countess's Wear
found by Verdict to be a Nuisance page 27 Every Inhabitant is to convey away his
own rainy Water page 70, 75, 105
Observations.
SEven Children born at a Birth, strangely delivered from death page 17 Change
of Weather page 8, 10, 134 Courteneys Pedigree derived from William the
Conqueror page 29, 63 A chaste Virgin page 51 Several persons attempting to
fly, broke their necks page 66, 67 Diverse ominous predictions fulfilled page
92, 93, 120 Sir Thomas Dennys Knight, lived in the Reigns of seven Kings and
Queens of this Realm page 107 Two Hogsheads of Wine carried by a Horse page 135
Comets appeared page 136, 169 At the Assizes, the Judge, five Justices, and
eleven of the Jury died by an ill smell page 137 Two Sparks and their Wives
buried in one day, and one Grave page 173 Several persons died by a damp
arising out of a Well page 160 A strange deliverance of a person and his Wife
from a Well page 161 Persons slain by the fall of an house page 177
Officers.
REcorders, Receivers, Stewards, and Sergeants at Mace page 16, 53, 80 When the
Musical Waits were first entertained page 68, 168 The night Belman appointed,
and why page 88 The Treasurer of the Church made Master of the Rolls in
Chancery page 90 The first Chamberlain of the City page 127 The death of
several Officers page 106, 109, 128, 139, 141, 143, 154, 159, 161, 169 Fees due
to a Sergeant at Mace on an Execution page 115 Fees due to the Sheriff on a
common Process page 122 When the Sheriff is to make up his account page 122 New
Maces made for the Sergeants, and where to be used page 79, 144 Lord High
Stewards of the City page 144, 146, 149, 150, 152, 154, 168 Presents bestowed
on Recorders page 92, 146 Several Offices enjoyed together page 148 Officers
elected, and fined for non-acceptance thereof page 109, 114, 115, 161
Ordinances.
ORdinances made by sundry Bishops of this Church page 5, 6, 26 All Bakers of
the City to grind their Corn at the Cities Mills page 86 Ordinances touching
the Receivers and Stewards of the City page 91
Plague.
THe Plague of Pestilence herein page 9, 51, 61, 62, 64, 90, 104, 118, 133,
138, 150 A Pesthouse provided for the sick page 143, 150, 170 Relief sent
hence to several Towns visited with the Plague page 170, 171, 172
Parliament.
BIshops had anciently their Palaces in London for their habitation in
Parliament time page 10, 41 Bishops learned Speeches made in Parliament for
reformation of the Clergy page 65, 73 An Act of Parliament for ascertaining the
bounds of St. Sydwell's Fee page 77 Another for paving of the Streets of the
City page 87 Another for making of a new Haven page 120 Another for
ascertaining the bounds of the County page 124 Another for the preservation of
the right of Orphans page 129 Another that all Gavel-kind Lands here shall be
Inheritable as Lands at the Common Law page 137 Another for the continuance and
repair of Head-Wear on the River of Exe page 145 Who eligible and elected to
serve in Parliament as Citizens hereof page 87, 96, 126, 127, 135, 155, 166,
176 An exemplification of an Act of Parliament for Trew's-Wear page 145 An
Insurrection made, declaring for a Free Parliament page 164, 165
War.
AN Army sent hence to fight the Infidels in the Holy Land, and their
Conductors page 7, 8 Persons slain in the Barons War page 8, 42, 43 St. Edmond
King of the East Angles shot to death by Pagans page 14 Several Kings supplied
hence with Men, Ships, and Money to War abroad page 41, 54, 62, 80, 85, 93, 94,
95, 107, 136, 138 Queen Isabella sails into France to make Peace between the
two Realms page 45 Bishop Stapledon slain, and his Murderers executed page 45
John the French King brought hither a Prisoner page 54 Combats made by diverse
persons page 71, 82 The Citizens provide Arms by the King's command page 95 The
Citizens besieged page 98, 102, 123, 157, 159 Soldiers taken Prisoners, and
where page 117 Midsomer-watch appointed, and why page 134 Muster-Masters
elected, and their yearly stipend page 138, 153, 167 Post-houses to be here in
readiness for the Queen's service page 141 The Deputy Lieutenant's Commission
page 150 War and Peace between us and Foraign Princes proclaimed page 107 169,
171, 172, 174, 176
Wills.
THe last Wills and Testaments of Freemen here proved, and how their Lands may
be devised page 21, 26, 27, 28, 32, 51, 61, 63, 75, 106, 116, 120 How the
Common Law differs from some Custom herein page 56 Lands devised in special
Tail, the remainder to the Chamber page 106 A special Branch of Bishop Hall's
Will page 157
A perfect Catalogue of all the Sheriffs of the County of Devon, with their
several Coats of Armory described, from the beginning of the Reign of King
Henry the Second, Annoque Domini, 1155.
Henry the Second.
1. GAlfridus de Furnel, bears Argent a bend between six martletts Gules. 2.
Richardus Comes bears Argent a Lion Rampant Gules within a bordure sable
bezanty. 3. Richardus de Rivecoet, bears Or a Lion Rampant Azure. Gulielmus de
Botterell, bears Checky Or and Gules a bend varry. 5. Gulielmus de Botterell,
bears ut Prius, sc. Henry 2. 7. Hugo de Ralega, bears Gules a bend lozengy
Argent, for four years. 11. Robertus filius Bernardi, bears party per pale
Argent and Azure barry of six counterchanged. 12. Robertus filius Bernardi,
bears ut Prius, sc. 11 Henry 2. 13. Hugo de Ralega, bears ut Prius, sc. 7 Henry
2. 14. Robertus filius Bernardi, for four years, who bears ut Prius, sc. 11
Henry 2. 18. Gomes Reginaldus for three years, who bears Gules two Lions
passant gardant Or, a batton sinister Argent. 21. Idem, bears ut Prius, sc. 27
Henry 2. Alanus de Furnell, bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Henry 2. 22. Gulielmus
Ruffus, bears barruly of eight pieces Or and Gules for two years. 24 Hugo de
Gandy, for three years, who bears Gules on a Cheuron Or three cinquefoils of
the first, between three Lions Rampant of the second. 27. Gulielmus Brewer,
bears Gules two bends Wavy Or, for seven years.
Richard the First.
1. Idem, bears ut Prius, sc. 27 Henry 2. 2. Henricus de Furnell, bears ut
Prius, for nine years, sc. 1, Hen. 2.
John.
1. Gulielmus de Wratham; bears Gules a Cheuron between three Lions paws erazed
Ermine. 2. Osbertus filius Gulielmi, bears party per fesse Campayn Argent and
Gules three Curlews heads erazed counterchanged. 3. Radulphus Morin, bears
Argent six martletts 3.2.1. sable, for two years. 5. Gulielmus Brewer, bears ut
Prius, sc. 27 Henry 2. Radulphus Morin, bears ut Prius, sc. 3 Johannis. 6.
Gulielmus Brewer, bears ut Prius, for two years, sc. 27 Hen. 2. 8. Idem, bears
ut Prius, for four years, sc 27 Henry 2. Radulphus Morin, bears ut Prius, for
four years, sc. 3 Johannis 12. Robertus de vetere ponto, bears Gules six
Annulets 2.3.1. Or, for six years. Guido de Bello Campo, bears Gules a Fesse
between three crosses botony Or.
Henry the Third.
1. Robertus de Courteney, bears Or three Torteauxes, for four years. 5. Idem,
bears ut Prius, for three years, sc. 1 Henry 3. Walter de Po^ier, bears party
per pale wavy Argent and Azure for three years. ^. (...) do Tr^vers, bears
Gules three bezants on each o Cheuron (...). Walter de Pohier, bears ut Prius,
sc. 5 Henry 3. 9. Reginald de villa torta, bears bendy of six Argent and Gules
a bordure sable bezanty. 10. William Rawleigh, bears Gules five fusils in bend
Argent. 11. Gulielmus de Boleia, bears Argenta a Frett and three birds in chief
sable, for two years. 13. Rogerus la Zoucb, bears Gules ten bezants and a
Canton Ermin. 14. Thomas de Cirencester, bears Checky Or and Gules a chief
varry. Thomas de la Will, bears Argent three Griffons passant sable, a bordure
engrailed Gules bezanty, for three years. 17. Thomas de la Will, bears ut
Prius, sc. 14 Henry 3. 18. Robertus de Vallibus bears Or a Fesse between three
Flower-de-luces Gules. Richardus de Langford, bears paly of six Or and Gules a
bend Argent. 19. Nicholaus de Molis, bears Argent two bars Gules in chief
three Torteauxes, for two years. Walter de Bada, bears Azure three Cheurons
Argent. 20. Walter de Bada, bears ut Prius, for thirteen years, sc. 19 H 3. 34.
Walter de Bathond, bears Azure a Saltier engrailed Or, for two years. 36.
William de Engleseurs, bears sable a bend between six Martletts Or, for three
years. 39. Ralph de Wilton, bears Gules on a Cheuron Argent three Crosses flurt
fitchy sable. 40. Gervis de Horton, bears Argent three bends engrailed Gules a
Canton Or, for two years. Henry de Horton, bears ut Prius, sc. 40 Henry 3. for
2. years. 42. William de Curcensay, bears barry of six Varry and Gules, for two
years. 44. Ralph Lodescomb; bears Argent a Saltier sable between four Escoils
Gules. 45. Idem, bears ut Prius, sc. 11 Henry 3. Johannes de Mustegros, bears
Argent three Eagles displayed sable. 46. Ralph de Esse, bears Argent two
chevernels sable, for seven years. 53. William de Bik^ls, bears Argent a
Cheuron between three Lions heads erazed Gules, for four years.
Edward the First.
1. Thomas Delphyn, bears Azure three Dolphins neyant in pale Or for four
years. 5. Matthew de Eggleshiel, bears Argent a cross sable and a Flower-de-luce
in the first quarter of the same. 6. Thomas Delphyn, bears ut Prius, for six
years, sc. 1 Edward 1. 7. Warinus de Schevile, bears Azure three Cross-bows
bent with Arrows Argent, for two years. 9. Thomas Delphyn, bears ut Prius, for
six years, sc. 1 Edward 1. 15. William de Monketon, bears Argent three Leopards
heads sable. Roger de Ingepen, bears Gules two bars gemels Or a chief Indented
Ermin. 16. Robert de Wodton, bears Argent a Saltier ingrailed between four
mullets pierced sable. 17. Matthew filius Johannis, bears Azure a chief Indented
Or, for two years. 19. Matthew filius Johannis, bears ut Prius, sc. 17 Edward 1.
for two years. Thomas de Scobhull, bears Argent three Flower-de-luces 2. and 1.
Gules, for two years. 21. Gilbert de Knovill, bears Argent three Mulletts
Gules, for eight years. 29. Thomas de Rawleigh, bears ut Prius, for seven
years, sc. 7 H. 2.
Edward the Second.
1. Idem, bears ut Prius, sc. 7 Henry 2. 2. Nicholas de Kirkham, bears Ermin
three Lions Rampant Gules within a bordure engrailed sable. 3. Nicholas de
Tukesbury, bears Argent a bend between six Lions passant sable, for three
years. 6. Idem, bears ut Prius, sc. 3 Edward 2. Matthew Furneaux, bears Gules a
bend between six cross croslets flory Or. 7. Idem, bears ut Prius, sc. 6 Edward
2. 8. Idem, bears ut Prius, sc. 6 Edward 2. Robert de Horton, bears ut Prius,
sc. 40 Henry 3. 9. Matthew de Clivedon, bears Argent three Escalops Gules within
a bordure engrailed sable, for two years. 11. Idem, bears ut Prius, 9 Edward 2.
Robert de Bendon, bears Azure three mullets 2. and 1. Argent. 12. Idem, bears
ut Prius, sc. 11 Edward 2. John de Bikkebur, bears Azure an Eagle displayed Or,
for two year. 14. Robert Benbon, bears ut Prius, sc. 11 Edward 2. Nicholas
Cheyn, bears Gules five Lozenges in Fesse Argent on each an Escalop sable, for
three years. 17. Matthew de Crowthorne, bears Azure five Cheurons Or alable of
three points Gules, for two years. 19. Idem, bears ut Prius, sc. 17 Edward 2.
Jacobus de Cockington, bears Argent a Cheuron Azure between three Cocks Gules.
20. Idem, bears ut Prius, sc. 19 Edward 2.
Edward the Third.
1. Idem, bears ut Prius, sc. 19 Edward 2. 2. William de Chiverston, bears
Argent a Castle tripple turreted sable set on a hill Vert, for two years. 4.
William de Fawconbridge, bears Argent two bends engrailed sable. 5. Matthew de
Crowthorne, bears ut Prius, for two years, sc. 17 Edward 2. 7. Reginald de
Monte forti, bears bendy of eight pieces Or and Azure. 8. William de Alba marla
bears party per Fesse Gules and Azure three Crescents 2. and 1. Argent, for
three years. 11. John de Rawleigh, bears ut Prius, for five years, sc. 7. Henry
2. 16. William Pupard, bears Geronny of four Or and Azure, for two years. 18.
Edward Dux Cornubiae, bears Argent a Lion Rampant Gules. Walter Horton, bears
ut Prius, sc. 40 Henry 3. 19. Henry Tyrell, bears Azure a Lion Rampant Argent
within a bordure engrailed Or, for two years. John Childston, bears Or on a
Cheuron Gules three Martletts Argent, for two years. 21. Ralph Brett, bears Or
censuly croslet fitchy and a Lion Rampant Gules. Ralph Beaupell, bears Gules a
bend varry between six Escalops Or, for two years. 23. Almaricus Fitz-warren,
bears quarterly the Fesse Indented Ermin and Gules, for two years. 25. Robert
At hach, bears two demi Lions passant gardant Or in a Field Gules. 26. William
Auncell bears Or a Fess sable above two demi Lions, and beneath three Lozenges
Gules, for two years. 28. Richard Chambevon, bears Gules a Saltier varry
between 1^. billets Argent, for three years. 31. John D^ubernon, bears Argent a
cross sarcelle sable on a chief Azure three Stars Or. 32. William Yoo, bears
Argent a Cheuron sable between three Turky-cocks in their pride proper. 33.
Richard Bronscomb, bears Or on a Cheuron sable three cinquefoils of the first
between two keys erect in chief and a Sword of the second, for three years. 36.
Almaricus Fitz-warren, bears ut Prius, sc. 23 Edward 3. 37. Martin Fishacres,
bears sable three Fishes haryant 2. and 1. Argent. 38. William de Brighele,
bears sable three garbs within a bordure engrailed Argent. 39. John Boys,
bears Argent on a Saltier engrailed sable a cinquefoil Or. 40. William de
Servington, bears Ermine on a Cheuron Azure three bucks heads caboused Or, for
two years. 42. Richard Bronscomb, bears ut Prius, for two years, sc. 33 Edward
3. Richard Chambevon, bears ut Prius, for two years, sc 28 Edward 3. 44. Thomas
Chambevon, bears ut Prius, sc. 28 Edward 3. 45. Richard Beamond, bears varr^y
two bars Gules. 46. Nicholas Whiting, bears Argent a bend Wavy cotized sable.
47. Richard Chusden, bears Or on a Cheuron Gules three Martletts Argent. 48.
John Damvarle, bears party per Fesse Gules and Azure three Crescents 2. and 1.
Argent. 49. Richard Bronscomb, bears ut Prius, sc. 33. Edward 3. 50. Nicholas
la Pomeray, bears Or a Lion Rampant Gules within a bordure engrailed sable. 51.
John Rawleigh, bears ut Prius, sc. 7 Henry 2.
Richard the Second.
1. John Damerell, bears party per Fesse Gules and Azure three Crescents 2. and
1. Argent. 2. John Fitz-payn, bears Argent a pair of Falcons Wings conjoined
Gules. 3. John Strech, bears Or three piles Azure. 4. Walter Corn, bears Argent
a Cheuron between three bugle horns garnished sable. 5. Richard Champernoun of
Modbury, bears Gules a Saltier varry between twelve Billets Argent. 6. Richard
Kendall, bears Argent a Cheuron between three Dolphins sable. 7. William de
Hast-horp^, bears Gules three Stars Argent. 8. James Chudleigh, bears Ermin
three Lions Rampant Gules. 9. Richard Whitley bears Azure on a bend Or three
Torteauxes. 10. Richard Champernoun, bears ut Prius, sc. 5 Richard 2. 11. John
Pawlett, bears sable three Swords in pile Argent. 12. Nicholas Kirkham, bears
ut Prius, sc. 2 Edward 2. 13. Wiliam Bonevile bears sable six Mullets Argent
pierced Gules. 14. William Carminow, bears Azure a bend or a label of three
points Gules. 15. John Grenvile of Bideford, Ar. bears Gules three Rests Or.
16. Thomas Rawleigh of Rawleigh, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 7 Henry 2. 17. Thomas
Brook, Ar. bears Or on a Fesse Azure three Escalops of the first. 18. William
Ferers, Ar. bears Argent a bend Gules and a chief Vert. 19. William Maleherb,
Ar. bears Or a Cheuron Gules between three Nettle leaves proper. 20. Thomas
Peverell, Ar. bears Gules a Fesse Argent between six Crosses patee Or. 21.
William Beaumont; Ar bears Azure semi Flower-de-lis Or a Lion Rampant Argent,
for two years.
Henry the Fourth.
1. John Keynes, Ar. bears Azure a bend nebule cotized Argent. 2. Thomas
Pomeroy, Ar. bears ut Prius, 50 Edward 3. 3. Sir John Herle of Ilfarcomb
Knight, bears Argent a Fesse Gules between three Sheldrakes proper. 4. John
Keynes Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Henry 4. 5. John Wise of Northwick, Ar. bears
sable three Cheurons Ermin. 6. John Bevill, Ar. bears Argent a Bull passant
Gules armed and tripped Or. 7. John Cheseldon, Ar. bears Or on a Cheuron Gules
three Martletts of the first. 8. Philip Cole, Ar. bears Argent a Bull passant
sable armed Or within a bordure of the second bezantee. 9. Sir John Herle
Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 3 Henry 4. 10. Edward Pyne bears Gules a Cheuron
Ermin between three pine Apples Or. 11. William Cheney of Pinboo, Ar. bears
Gules on a Fesse of four Lozenges Argent as many Escalops sable. 12. Robert
Champernoun, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 5 Richard 2. 13. Richard Pomeroy of Berry
Pomeroy, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 50 Edward 3. 14. Richard Peverell, Ar. bears
ut Prius, sc. 20 Richard 2.
Henry the Fifth.
1. Thomas Beaumond, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 45 Edward 3. 2. Thomas Pomeroy,
Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 50 Edward 3. 3. John Arundell, Ar. bears sable six
Swallows in pile Argent. 4. John Bevill, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 6 Henry 4. 5.
William Talbott of Talbotsweek, Ar. bears Argent a Cheuron between three
Talbots sable, armed and langued Gules. 6. Stephen Dumeford, Ar. bears sable a
Rams head erazed Argent horned Or. 7. Hugh Courteney of Powderham, Ar. bears ut
Prius, sc. 1. H. 3. 8. Thomas Beaumond, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 45 Edward 3. 9.
Robert Challons, Ar. bears Gules two bars and eight Martletts 3.2. and 3.
Argent. 10. Thomas Beaumond, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 45 Edward 3.
Henry the Sixth.
1. Thomas Beaumond, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 45 Edward 3. Sir William Bonvile
Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 13. Richard 2. 2. Richard Hankford, Ar. bears sable
a Cheuron barry nebule Argent and Gules. 3. Thomas Brook, Ar. bears ut Prius,
sc. 17 Richard 2. 4. William Palton de Vmberly, Ar. bears Argent six Roses,
3.2. and 1. Gules. 5. John Bampfield of Poltymore, Ar. bears Or on a bend Gules
three Mullets Argent. 6. Thomas Beaumond, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 45 Edward 3.
7. Robert Hill, Ar. bears Argent on a Cheuron between three Water Bongets sable
a Mullet Or. 8. James Chudleigh, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 8. Richard 2. 9. John
Bozome, Ar. bears Argent three bolts Gules. 10. Edward Pomeroy, Ar. bears ut
Prius, sc. 50 Edward 3. 11. Edward Pyne, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 10 Henry 4.
12. John Cheny, Ar. bears Gules five Lozenges in Fesse Argent on each an
Escalop sable, ut Prius, sc. 11 Henry 4. 13. Thomas Stowell Ar. bears Gules a
Cross Lozengee Argent. 14. Roger Champernoun, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 5 Richard
2. 15. Thomas Beaumont, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 21 Richard 2. 16. Thomas
Arundell, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 3 Henry 5. 17. James Chudleigh, Ar. bears ut
Prius, sc. 8 Richard 2. 18. William Beauchamp, Ar. bears Gules a Fesse between
six Martletts Or. 19. Robert Burton, Ar. bears Argent three Palmers staves in
Fesse Azure 20. William Wadham, Ar. bears Gules a Cheuron between three Roses
Argent. 21. Richard Yeard, Ar. bears Argent a Cheuron Gules between three Water
bongets sable. 22. John Cheny, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc 12 Henry 6. 23. John
Bluett, Ar. bears Or a Cheuron between three Eagles displayed Vert. 24.
Nicholas Broughton, Ar. bears Argent a Cheuron between three Mullets Gules. 25.
Henry Fortescue, Ar. bears Azure a bend engrailed Argent cotized Or. 26. Thomas
Budeokshed, Ar. bears sable three Lozenges in Fesse between three Bucks heads
cabassed Argent. 27. Thomas Stucley, Ar. bears Azure three pears Or. 28. James
Chudleigh, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 8 Richard 2. 29. John Turbervile, Ar. bears
Ermin a Lion Rampant Gules Crowned Or armed and langued Azure. 30. Edward Hall,
Ar. bears sable three Talbots heads erazed Argent. 31. Henry Fortescue, Ar.
bears ut Prius, sc. 25 Henry 6. 32. John Cheny, Ar. bears ut Prius sc. 12 Henry
6. 33. Richard Hales, Ar. bears Argent a Cheuron between three Griffons heads
erazed sable. 34. Andrew Hillensdon, Ar. bears Argent on a Cheuron sable three
bulls heads cabossed of the first. 35. Edward Landford, Ar. bears Or an Eagle
displayed Gules surmounted of a bend sable 36. John Nanton, Ar. bears sable
three Martletts 2. and 1. Argent. 37. Richard Hales, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 33
Hen. 6. 38. Sir Baldwin Su^ford Knight, bears Argent a bend Gules between three
Lions passant sable. 39. John Denham, Ar. bears Gules four Fusils in Fesse
Ermin.
Edward the Fourth.
1. Walter Dennys of Holcomb, Ar. bears Ermin three Battleaxes Gules. 2. John
Cheny, Ar. bears ut Prius, for two years, sc. 12 Henry 6. 3. John Chichester,
Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 13 Henry 3. 4. John Arundell, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 3
Henry 5. 5. Christopher Wolsey, Ar. bears Or on a Cheuron Azure three garbs of
the first between three Wool-sacks of the second. 6. William Dennys, Ar. bears
ut Prius, sc. 1 Edward 4. 7. Philip Beaumont, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 21
Richard 2. 8. Richard Chichester, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 13 Henry 3. 9.
Nicholas Carew, Ar. bears Or three Lions passant sable armed and langued Gules.
10. Philip Courteney, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Henry 3. 11. Philip C^plesten
of Warley, Ar. bears Argent a Cheuron engrailed Gules betwee three Leopards
heads Azure. 12. John Cheny, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc 12 Henry 6. 13. Richard
Pomeroy, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 50 Edward 3. 14. Richard Chichester, Ar. bears
ut Prius, sc. 13 Henry 3. 15. Otho Gilbert, Ar. bears Argent on a Cheuron sable
three Roses of the Field. 16. Charles Denham, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 39 Henry
6. 17. John Sapeoat, Ar. bears sable three Dove coats Argent. 18. Edward
Courteney, Ar. bears ut Prius, for two years, sc. 1 Henry 3. 20. Robert
Willoughby, Ar. bears Or Fretty Azure. 21. George Grenvile, Ar. bears ut Prius,
sc. 15 Richard 2. 22. Giles Daubney, Ar. bears Gules four Lozenges in Fesse
Argent. 23. William Courteney, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Henry 3.
Edward the Fifth, and Richard the Third.
1. William Courteney, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Henry 3. 2. Hamath Maleverer,
Ar. bears sable three hounds cursant in pale Argent. 3. Thomas Maleverer, Ar.
bears ut Prius, sc. 2 Richard 3. John Maheel, Ar. bears Gules a mule passant
Argent.
Henry the Seventh.
1. Sir John Hawell Knight, bears Or on a bend sable three Goats passant Argent
armed of the Field. 2. Richard Edgecomb of Mount Edgecomb, Ar. bears Gules on a
bend between two cotizes or three boars heads couped Argent. 3. Robert
Willoughby, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 20 Edward 4. 4. Roger Holland, Ar. bears
Azure five Flowers-de-lis, and a Lion Rampant Gardant Argent. 5. John
Halliwell, Ar. bears Or on a bend Gules three Goats passant Argent. 6. Sir
William Stoner Knight, bears Azure two bars and a chief Or. 7. Walter Enderby,
Ar. bears Argent three bars dansetty sable a pale in chief Ermin. 8. Sir
Richard Pomeroy Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 50 Edward 3. 9. Roger Holland, Ar.
bears ut Prius, sc. 4 Henry 7. 10. Sir Peter Edgecomb Knight, bears ut Prius,
sc. 2 Henry 7. 11. John Fortescue, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 25 Henry 6. 12. Sir
William Carew Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 9 Edward 4. 13. Sir Peter Edgecomb
Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 2 Henry 7. 14. Roger Holland, Ar. bears ut Prius,
sc. 4 Henry 7. 15. James Chudleigh, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 8 Richard 2. 16.
Richard Whitley, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 9 Richard 2. 17. Richard Wadham, Ar.
bears ut Prius, sc. 20 Henry 6. 18. Richard Halliwell, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc.
5 Henry 7. 19. John Fortescue, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 2 Edward 2. 20. William
Norwood, Ar. bears Ermin a cross engrailed Gules. 21. John Kirkham, Ar. bears
ut Prius, sc. 5 Henry 6. 22. John Fortescue, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 25 Henry
6. 23. Thomas Dennys, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Edward 4.
Henry the Eighth.
1. Thomas Dennys, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Edward 4. 2. John Crocker of
Lynam, Ar. bears Argent a Cheuron engrailed Gules between three Crows proper.
3. Thomas Goodman, Ar. bear Gerudy of eight Argent and sable an Eagle displayed
Or. 4. Sir Thomas Dennys Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Edward 4. 5. William
Carew, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 9 Edward 4. 6. Nicholas Wadham, Ar. bears ut
Prius, sc. 20 Henry 6. 7. Sir John Clifton Knight, bears sable semi of cinque
foils, 2 Lion Rampant Argent. 8. Sir John Speak Knight, bears Argent two bars
Azure over all an Eagle displayed Gules. 9. Peter Edgecomb, Ar. bears ut Prius,
sc. 2 Henry 7. 10. Sir Thomas Dennys, Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Edward 4.
11. Ralph Paxall, Ar. bears Argent a cross flurt engrailed sable between four
Cornish Choughs proper. 12. Thomas Stucley of Affeton, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc.
27 Hen. 6. 13. William Courteney, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Henry 3. 14. Sir
Thomas Dennys Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Edward 4. 15. Sir John Kirkham
Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 2 Edward 2. 16. Sir John Bassett Knight, bears Or
three bars wavy Gules. 17. Sir William Courteney Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 1
Henry 3. 18. Philip Champernoun, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 5 Richard 2. 19. Sir
Thomas Dennys Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Edward 4. 20. Sir Peter Edgecomb
Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 2 Henry 7. 21. John Chamond, Ar. bears Argent a
Cheuron between three Flower-de-lis Gules. 22. George Saintleger, Ar. bears
Azure frette Argent a chief Gules. 23. Sir Thomas Dennys Knight, bears ut
Prius, for two years, sc. 1 Edward 4. 25. Richard Greenvil, Ar. bears ut Prius,
sc. 15 Richard 2. 26. William Courteney, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Henry 3. 27.
John Fulsford, Ar. bears Gules a Cheuron Argent. 28. Hugh Pollard, Ar. bears
Argent a Cheuron sable between three Escalops Gules. 29. George Carew, Ar.
bears ut Prius, sc. 9 Edward 4. 30. Richard Pollard, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 28
Henry 8. 31. Hugh Chamond, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 21 Henry 8. 32 Hugh Pollard,
Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 28 Henry 8. 33. Sir John Fulford Knight, bears ut
Prius, sc. 27 Henry 8. 34. Sir Hugh Pawlett Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 11
Richard 2. 35. George Carew, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 9 Edward 4. 36. Richard
Edgecomb, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 2 Henry 7. 37. Hugh Stucley, Ar. bears ut
Prius, sc. 27 Henry 6. 38. Hugh Pollard, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 28 Henry 8.
Edward the Sixth.
1. Sir Peter Carew Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 9 Edward 4. 2. Sir Gawyn Carew
Knight, bears ut Prius, sc 9 Edward 4. 3. Peter Courteney, Ar, bears ut Prius,
sc. 1 Henry 3. 4. Sir Thomas Dennys Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Edward 4. 5.
John Chichester, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 13 Henry 3. 6. Richard Chudleigh, Ar.
bears ut Prius, sc. 8 Richard 2.
Philip and Mary.
1. Richard Edgecomb, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 2 Henry 7. 2. Sir Thomas Dennys
Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Edward 4. 3. James Courteney Ar. bears ut Prius,
sc. 1 Henry 3. 4. Robert Carew of Cockington, bears Argent on a bend sable
three Roses of the first. 5. Sir John Fulford Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 27
Henry 8.
Elizabeth.
1. Sir Robert Dennys Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Edward 4. 2. Thomas
Southcott, Ar. bears Argent a Cheuron Gules between three Coots sable. 3.
Arthur Champernoun, Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 5 Richard 2. 4. Sir John Saintleger
Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 22 Henry 8, 5. Christopher Copleston, Esquire bears ut
Prius, sc. 11 Edward 4. 6. Richard Forteseue Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 25 Henry
6. 7. Richard Duke of Otterton Esquire bears party per Fesse Argent and Azure three
chaplets counterchanged. 8. Thomas Monk Esquire bears Gules a Cheuron between
three Lions heads erazed Argent. 9. Peter Edgecomb Esquire bears ut Prius sc. 2
Henry 7. 10. Jews Stucley Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 27 Henry 6. 11. Robert
Dennys Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Edward 4. 12. William Strode Esquire bears Argent
three Conies sable. 13. John Malett Esquire bears three Escalops Or in a Field
Azure. 14. Thomas Southcott Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 2 Elizabeth. 15. John
Parker of Burrington Esquire bears sable a Bucks head caboused between two flanches
Or. 16. Sir John Gilbert Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 15 Edward 4. 17. Thomas
Carew Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 9 Edward 4. 18. Arthur Bassett Esquire bears ut
Prius, sc. 16 Henry 8. 19. Francis Fortescue Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 25 Henry
6. 20. Richard Bampfield Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 5 Henry 6. 21. John Chichester
Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 13 Henry 3. 22. Roger Prydeaux Esquire bears Argent a
Cheuron sable a lable Gules. 23. Sir William Courteney Knight, bears ut Prius,
sc. 1 Henry 3. 24. Sir John Clifton Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 9 Edward 2. 25.
John Fitz Esquire bears Argent a Cross Gules gutte de sang. 26. Hugh Fortescue Esquire
bears ut Prius, sc. 25 Henry 6. 27. Sir Edward Seymour of Berry Castle Baronet,
bears Gules two Angels Wings paleways inverted Or. 28. Richard Reynell Esquire
bears masonry Argent a chief indented sable. 29. Humphry Speccott Esquire bears Or
on a bend Gules three Mill-rounds Argent. 30. William Kirkham Esquire bears ut
Prius, sc. 2 Edward 2. 31. Edward Fulford Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 27 Henry 8.
32. Arthur Bassett Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 16 Henry 8. 33. William Carew Esquire
bears ut Prius, sc. 9 Edward 4. 34. Richard Champernoun Esquire bears ut Prius, sc.
5 Richard 2. 35. William Strode Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 12 Elizabeth. 36. Sir
Thomas Dennys Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Edward 4. 37. Edward Seymour Esquire
bears ut Prius, sc. 27 Elizabeth. 38. William Walrond Esquire bears Argent three
bulls heads caboused sable armed Or. 39. Sir John Copleston Knight, bears ut
Prius, sc. 11 Edward 4. 40. William Fortescue Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 25 Henry
6. 41. Henry Roll Esquire bears Or a Fesse dansetty between three Delfs Azure on
each a Lion Rampant Or. 42. Thomas Rudgway of T^rr Esquire bears sable a pair of
Wings conjoined and elevated Argent. 43. Edmund Parker Esquire bears ut Prius; sc.
15 Elizabeth. 44. (...) Esquire bears Gules a bend Lozengy Ermin. 45. William Pole
of Shut, Ar. bears Azure a Lion Rampant Argent between five semi
Flower-de-luces of the same.
James.
1. Ames Bampfield, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 5 Henry 6. 2. John Drake of Aysh,
Ar. bears Argent a Wyvern with wings displayed and tail nowed Gules. 3. Edward
Seymour, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 27 Elizabeth. 4. John Abbott, Ar. bears Gules
a Cheuron between three Pears Or. 5. Robert Roll, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 41
Elizabeth. 6. Sir John Acland Knight, bears Checky Argent and sable a Fesse
Gules. 7. William Crimes, Ar. bears Or three bars Gules charged with three
Martletts Argent on the first, second, and last, a chief barry nebuly Argent
and Azure. 8. Hugh Acland, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 6 Jacobi. 9. Sir Thomas Wise
of Mountwise Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 5 Henry 4. 10. Sir Edward Giles
Knight, bears per Cheuron Argent and Purple a Lion Rampant counterchanged. 11.
Sir George Smith Knight, bears sable a Fesse and two barrulets between three
Martletts Or. 12. Sir John Speccott Knight bears ut Prius, sc. 29 Elizabeth.
13. John Gifford of Brightley, Ar. bears sable three Lozenges in Fesse Ermin.
14. Sir George Southcott Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 2 Elizabeth. 15. Thomas
Hele, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 44 Elizabeth. 16. Sir Warwick Hele Knight, bears
ut Prius, sc. 44 Elizabeth. 17. Sir Christopher Savery Knight, bears Gules a
Fesse varry between three Unicorns heads couped Argent. 18. Sampson Hele, Ar.
bears ut Prius, sc. 44 Elizabeth. 19. Edmund Parker, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 25
Elizabeth. 20. Edmond Fortescue, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 25 Henry 6. 21. Henry
Tothill of Palmouth, Ar. bears Azure on a bend Argent cotized Or a Lion passant
sable. 22, Sir Simon Leach Knight, bears party per Fesse engrailed Gules and
Ermin, in chief three ducal Crowns Or.
Charles the First.
1. Nicholas Fry of Yorty, Ar. bears Gules three horses in pale cursant Argent.
2. John Northcott, Ar. bears Argent three Croslets bendwayes sable. 3. Walter
Young, Ar. bears Ermin on a bend cotized sable three Griffons heads erazed Or.
4. Sir Henry Rouswell of Ford-abty Knight, bears party per pale Gules and Azure
a Lion Rampant Argent. 5. John Davy, Ar. bears Argent a Cheuron sable between
three Mullets Gules. 6. Henry Ayshford of Ayshford, Ar. bears Argent three pine
Apples vert between two Cheurons sable. 7. Edward Arscott, Ar bears party per
Cheuron Azure and Ermin two stags heads caboused Or. 8. Sir Francis Drake of
Bucland Baronet, bears sable a Fesse wavy between the two Pole stars Argent. 9.
John Bampfield of Poltymore, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 5 Hen. 6. 10. Sir Thomas
Drew Knight, bears Ermin a Lion passant Gules. 11. Sir Thomas Hele of
Fleet-Damorell Baronet, bears ut Prius, sc. 44 Elizabeth. 12. Dennys Roll of
Bicton, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 41 Elizabeth. 13. Thomas Wise, Ar. bears ut
Prius, sc. 5 Henry 4. 14. Sir John Pole of Shut, Baronet, bears ut Prius, sc.
45 Elizabeth. 15. Sir Nicholas Martin of Oxton Knight, bears Argent two bars
Gules. 16. Nicholas Putt of Coomb, Ar. bears Argent a Lion Rampant within a
mascle sable. 17. Richard Culine of Canon-Leigh, Ar. bears Azure a Cheuron
Ermin between three Pelicans vulning themselves Or. Edmond Fortescue of
Vally-pitt, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 25 Henry 6 18. Henry Carry of Cockington,
Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 4 Elizabeth. 19. John Acland of Culme John, Ar. bears
ut Prius, sc. 6 Jacob. 20. Sir Richard Greenvill Knight, bears ut Prius, sc. 15
Richard 2. 21. Sir Francis Drake of Bucland Baronet, bears ut Prius, sc. 8
Caroli. 22. William Bastard, Ar. bears Or a Cheuron Azure. 23. Edmund Parker of
Burrington, Ar. bears ut Prius, sc. 15 Elizabeth. 24. John Clobery Esquire,
bears Argent a bend cotized sable.
Charles the Second.
1. Robert Roll of Heanton Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 41 Elizabeth. 2. William
Putt of Coomb Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 16 Caroli. 3. William Morice Esquire bears
Gules a Lion Rampant Regardant Or. 4. George Southcott Esquire bears ut Prius, sc.
2 Elizabeth. 5. Petor Beavys Esquire bears Azure three Helmets Argent attired Or.
6. Robert Duke of Otterton Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 7 Elizabeth. 7. John
Copleston Esquire bears ut Prius, for three years, sc. 11 Edward 4. 10. John
Blackmore Esquire bears Or a Fesse sable between three Blackamoors heads proper.
11. Matthew Hele Esquire bears ut Prius, sc. 44 Elizabeth. 12. Sir Copleston
Bampfield of Poltymore Baronet, bears ut Prius, 5 Henry 6. 13. Sir Peter
Prydeaux Baronet, bears ut Prius, sc. 22 Elizabeth. 14. Sir John Drake of Aysh
Knight and Baronet, bears ut Prius, sc. 2 Jacobi. 15. John Willoughby Esquire bears
ut Prius, sc. 20 Edward 4. 16. Sir William Courteney of Powderham Baronet,
bears ut Prius, sc. 1 Henry 3. 17. John Kelland Esquire, bears sable a Fesse
and three Flower-de-luces in chief Argent. 18. Henry Northleigh of Palmouth,
Esquire bears Argent a Cheuron sable between three Roses Gules. 19. John Tuckfield
Esquire bears Argent three Fusils in Fess sable. 20. Richard Cabell Esquire bears Vert
fretty Argent a Fesse Gules. 21. James Rodd Esquire, bears Argent two Trefoils
sable, a chief of the second. 22. Sir John Davy Baronet, bears ut Prius, sc. 5
Caroli. 23. Henry Walter Esquire bears Argent gutty Gules a Lion Rampant sable
surmounted of two swords in Saltier of the second. 24. Sir Thomas Putt of Coomb
Baronet, bears ut Prius, sc. 16 Caroli. 25. Sir Peter Leer of Lyndredge,
Baronet, bears Azure a Fess raguly between three Unicorns heads erazed Or. 26.
John Arscott Esquire, bears ut Prius, sc. 7 Caroli, who died in his Sheriffalty
22. of September, whose Kinsman, Heir, and Executor John Arscott Esquire,
succeeded him in the said Office for the residue of the year. 27. The aforesaid
Edmund Parker, sc. 23 Caroli.
FINIS.

