A STOP TO A LYING PAMPHLET Falsely Called Truths Plea for Infants.

Lately Published by Mr. Alexander Kellie, in Answer to a Book lately
published, Entitled, Infants Baptism Disproved.

In which Pamphlet his very many Lies and Eaylings, not becoming a man merely
Civil (much less a Minister of Christ as he pretends) are hereby manifest.

By JER: IVES, Cheesmonger.

The mouth of him that speaks Lies, shall be stopped,

Psalm 63.11. Should thy Lies make men hold their peace? And when thou mockest,
shall no man make thee ashamed?

Job 11.3. The proud have forged a Lie against me,

Psalm 119.69. And the Prophet that speaks Lies he is the tail,

Esaias 9.15. Holding faith and a good conscience, which some have put away, and
concerning faith have made shipwreck, of whom is Hymeneus, and ALEXANDER, etc.

1 Timothy 1.19, 20. LONDON: Printed for the Author. 1656.

TO THE READER.
READER;
THese ensuing lines are sent out after a lying Pamphlet, that so thou might
apprehend it, and bring it to its deserved judgment; and that thou may know
it when thou meetest with it, first take notice of its name, which is, Truths
Plea for Infants. Little would a Book of this name be suspected to have more
Lies in it, then it contains sheets: But herein its much like the Pharisees
Cups, that were clean without, but foul within. And this thou will find it to
be, if thou shall compare my Book and his Answer together, and observe the
places in both to which I shall refer thee, which is all I shall do at this
time. This if I should never do any more, would be enough to keep the
judgment of a wise man from being touched with such an unclean thing. And
truly, if James speaks true, that A good fountain cannot send forth sweet
water and bitter, then the manifest untruths in the Book, do plainly show how
little the Author was inspired with the Spirit of truth, which Christ says,
John 16.13. will lead into ALL truth.

And if this shall not be thought a sufficient Answer to the whole, I do
assure thee, If Mr. Kellie will come in public with his Book in his hand, I
will meet him, if he dares, and show him (before as many Scholars as he pleases
of his own judgment) that there is not any thing in my Book, because he
talks of my not knowing my Accidence (the Printers errors excepted, which his
Book is not free from) but I shall make appear to be according to their own
Rules; and I shall also before the same men at the same time, show him how much
he has swerved from the known Rules of the Schools, and Christianity, as
though he were a stranger to both, as I have in part already done, in diverse
places of my forementioned Book; from which he has not so much as
endeavored to clear himself. Thus hoping thou will take this in good part, I
subscribe my self

Thy Friend, so far as thou art the Truths. Jer: Ives.

A STOP TO A Lying Pamphlet. FALSELY CALLED Truths Plea for Infants.
SINCE my present design is to show the Lies and Scurrilous Language of Mr.
Kellie his book falsely called, Truths Plea for Infants: I shall first begin
with his Lies, and they may be called Legions, for they are many. Among which
take these that follow. The first that I shall mention, is in the latter end of
his Epistle to the Reader, where he excuses his impertinencies by telling his
Reader, that He was to pursue me as a Thief with Hue and Cry over hedge and
ditch. And by this he would make him believe, that I in my Book went out of the
Road, in answering a Paper he sent to my house; which is false, as my whole
Book will declare, wherein I set down all his Arguments impartially in a
different Letter, and Answer them one by one, that the Reader might know what
was mine, and what was his, which he did not do in his Reply: How then went I
out of the Road like a Thief?

Again, Why did not he show me and his Readers in what Page I did break the
bounds of Discourse, that so he might have justified his breaking the hedge to
go after me: Does not this plainly show that I kept the road, and that he
broke over hedge and ditch, because he was afraid to meet with me? I shall
therefore appeal to all men who know what method is, whether my Book in Answer
to his Paper, be not more methodicall then his Reply.

The second Lie I shall mention, is in the 11 line of his Answer to my Epistle,
where he says, that I cast dirt upon the fathers, because I mention in my
Epistle some of their Errors. How can this be casting dirt upon them, unless
they were not guilty of such errors as I charge upon them? Now therefore he
must needs be a Liar in saying I throw dirt upon the fathers, when I say
nothing of them but what he knows to be true, unless he be ignorant of their
Writings.

The third Lie I shall mention is that in the 12 line of his Answer to my
Epistle, where he says, that I do not show in what places to find their
errors; which is false, for except two or three of the Fathers, whose errors
were generally known, I do mention the Books, Chapters, or Pages wherein the
errors I charge them with may be found, as any one may see that reads over the
Epistle to my Book.

The fourth Lie that I shall mention, is that in the 21, 22 line of his Answer
to my Epistle; he says, that I do slander GODLY learned men, as men minding
their profits and credits, more then the truth. This is false, for I dare not
think, much less write any such thing of GODLY learned men, as to think that
they mind their profits and credits, more then truth; no, I have not so learned
Christ: But indeed I said the reason why the learned did not find out the right
way, in the midst of these many ways, was because of their pride on the one
hand, or profit on the other: Now does this slander the GODLY learned, judge I
pray, and see whether I say any such thing in all my Epistle. I always thought
the GODLY learned to be but a few in comparison to the vast number of the
learned; and I likewise believe the GODLY learned are such as would with that
blessed and godly Apostle Paul, count all things dross and dung, that they
might win Christ.

The fifth Lie I shall mention is found about the middle of the 2 page of his
Book, wherein he says, that I cite some Scriptures of all Nations, but therein
(he says) I am no noble Berean as I would make men believe, in the beginning
of my Epistle (His reason is) Because (he says, if you will believe him) that
I do not give one place set down where to find those Scriptures. This is also
a notorious untruth, for both the Chapters and Verses are set down where to
find every Text mentioned upon that occasion, as you may see in my Book, page 2.

Again, A sixth Lie he tells a few lines after, in the same 2 page of his Book,
where he says, that I said Infants could not bless. This is false, for I said
that Infants could not CALL Christ blessed, as you may perceive by what I say
toward the lower end of the third page of my Book; for there is a sense in
which all the works of God bless and praise him, Psalm. 145.10. But does it
follow therefore that all his works CALL him blessed? Therefore to say, I said
Infants could not bless or praise, is false.

A seventh Lie is in page 9. where he supposes me to Interpret Esaias 65.20. as
though Infants should live an hundred years before they dye a natural death,
or else that they must dye in their estate in glory. Both which are falsely
suggested, for I said the contrary, that there should be no infant of days in
the new Jerusalem, and so says the Text; That the child (not an infant in his
sense) should dye an hundred years old. Now Reader how that which I have said
in the 13 page of my Book, can give a man that puts away lying lips, occasion
to suppose that either I must mean that Infants must live a hundred years
before they dye a natural death, or else that they must die after they come to
an estate of glory; judge.

The eighth Untruth that he tells, is page 10 of his Book, where he says, That
I like a base fellow said, in the 16 page of my Book, that God makes but a
bare promise, but is not so good as his word. Indeed if I had said so, I had
been base, but there is no such saying of mine in the whole Book. Sure this man
might have been called Alexander the Coper-Smith, since he can forge Lies to
wrong his Neighbor, with so much confidence, and publish them in Print as he
has done.

The ninth Lie I shall mention is in the 40 page of his Book, toward the lower
end of it, where he says, That I said there was no Antiqnity for Infants
baptism in the first three hundred years after Christ. This is false, I said
not so, as you may see in the 68 page of my Book, where I have these words
(viz.) That Eusebius who wrote the History of the first three hundred years,
does not mention the baptizing of one infant. I also said in the same page,
That the Churches did not receive men to baptism, but upon profession of faith;
and also, That infants baptism was no Apostolical Custom, nor SO MUCH the
Custom of those times, as he did imagine. Does this prove that I said there
was NO Antiquity for Infants baptism in the first three hundred years after
Christ? Nay, does not those words before mentioned, and which are found in the
beginning of the 69 page of my Book, prove the contrary (viz.) That it was not
so MUCH the Custom of those times, etc. Which plainly shows, that this error
was crep in even in the first three hundred years, though it was not so MUCH
their Custom, as it was afterward.

Again, Did not Origin live in the first three hundred years? And do not I
say, page 68, that Origin was thought to favor Infants baptism; and yet this
man dares to tell his Reader, that I say there was no Antiquity for Infants
baptism the first three hundred years; which nothing is more false. However I
have showed, that if some Christian Parents who were eminent lights in the
Churches in those times, did not baptize their infants, it much makes such a
practice questionable; that is all I brought those passages for; for many errors
were crept into the Church at that time, and the being of them then, does not
prove the truth of them.

I shall now give a Catalogue of his unsavory speech, that plainly will show
what spirit did assist him in writing his Book, which because there was a word
Printed in my Epistle to my Book, that was not true Orthography, that is to
say, not truly spelt, that therefore I did no more know what the word meant,
then the heel of an old Cheese. See his Book toward the latter end of his
Answer to my Epistle.
Suppose I had spelt the word false, and that it had not been the Printers
Errata, does this prove what he has spoken, that I do not know the meaning of
it, no more then the heel of an old Cheese. Does it follow that because a man
cannot spell a word, that therefore he does not know what is meant by it? As
for example, Does it follow that though a man should not spell Horse aright,
that he knows no more what a Horse is, then the heel of an old Cheese?

Nay further, whereas he talks of the Mathematics, I know many Seamen that are
better Mathematicians then Mr. Kellie, that do not know how to spell all the
terms of Art belonging to it, and yet do understand them better then the
heel of an old Cheese: By this you may see he matters not what he says.

Again in his Book, page 4. he says, That I would make simple people believe
the Moon was made of green Cheese; but (he says) the Cheesmonger has never a
taster to make them find it so.

Again, page the 6 he says, meaning my self, You are a sweet youth.

Again, page the 9 he calls me, Miserable bold fellow.

In the same page, about the latter end of it, he says, He perceives the
knavery of Heretics. This he applies to me, because of what I answered to his
Argument in my Book, page 17. Which if in that Answer there is any thing that
renders me a knave, read and judge.

Again, page 21 he says, When my Nose is Cheese, the Cats shall eat it.

Again, page 22 he has these words, Up Robin, the Ram's in the Rye.

Again, page 34 he says, I talk like an Ass. If these words savor of the
Spirit which is from above, judge.

Again, he would feign make us whom he calls Anabaptists odious, by telling his
Reader that we are divided among our selves, as you may see in the beginning of
his Answer to my Epistle; and that there be none more contradictious then we,
both to all the godly learned in the world, and likewise to one another. Some
(he says) are for the Glasse-house, some for Paul's, some for Beach-lane, some
for Arminians, some against them: Many that frequent one of our places (he
says) think it abomination to go to another of them. Many of us (he says)
are turned Ranters, and Quakers, etc. The like you shall find in the 36 page of
his Book.

To all which I Answer, That this is as false as the rest, to say that NONE are
more contradictious then those he calls Anabaptists; for first, They that are
for Infants baptism are more contradictious; as for instance, Some are Papists,
some are Lutherans, some are Calvinists, some Arminians, some Arians, some
Athanasians; some for the salvation of all, both men and Devils, as Origin was,
whom he brings as one of the Fathers that held Infants baptism. See page 41 of
his Bo^k. Others against him, and for the salvation of none but the Elect. Some
have been for Episcopacy, some for Presbytery, some for Independancy; some have
been Brownists, and have judged it abomination to come to any of his
Assemblies; some have been for the Cross in baptism; others against it; some
for God fathers and God mothers, others of them have judged it a Popish
Inovatiou; some have been for sports, as May-poles, and dancing upon the Lords
day; others have been zealous against it; for this cause some of you have cut
the ears, and slit the noses, and branded the cheeks; whip't, banished,
pilloried, and imprisoned others, though they have been for Infants baptism
alike zealous.

Again, how have you Poedobaptists studied to destroy one another, and take
away the lives of one another, witness the Gunpowder Treason, the late
Massacre in Savoy? How cruelly did you persecute one another in Queen Mary's
days?

And whereas he talks of turning with the Times, who has been more guilty of
this then the generality of Poedobaptists, who in Queen Mary's days were most
of them papists, in Queen Elizabeth's most were turned Protestants, in the
Bishops time most were for Bishops, and in the Parliament time most were
against Bishops; and over and besides all these, who are for Infants baptism,
and yet are thus divided. Let me add to make full measure, Master Rude
multitude in all parts of the Christian world, who are also very zealous for
infants baptism. And yet this man dares say, None are more contradictious then
Anabaptissts. Can any man that has not sinned away his conscience, say such a
thing without blushing?

And whereas he says, Many of us are turned to be Quakers and Ranters, etc. I
Answer, Who but a man that was minded to tempt his Antagonist to lay open his
weakness, would have opened his mouth so weakly? For do not most of the
Quakers at this day consist of such as came from the Church of England, and
were never of any baptized Church? But suppose they were of us, as it is like
some were, yet they left us, and their baptism too, before they fell into these
strains; and we have by our dealing with them according to Christ's rule, left
them, upon their leaving the truth. But now what multitudes are there at every
Assize and Session, both in City and Country, that are condemned justly to the
Gallows, some for Murder, some for Theft, some for Sodomy, some for Incest,
some for Buggery, some for Witchcraft, some for Treason, who all dye at the
Gallows Members related to the Church of England. I do not mention this as an
Argument to prove the falsenesse of my Opposites Opinion: No, I scorn such
unmanlike Arguments; for there has been, and may be bad men of the best
profession; but to show that my Antagonist had mightily forgot the many Errors
and Vices of the Poedobaptists, while he was blazoning before the world the
Errors of the Anabaptists, by which he would frighten the simple, as though
none were more contradious and unholy then we; whereas nothing in the world is
more false: Though I could wish with my soul, that we were all of us (which he
calls Anabaptists) more holy, that no occasion might be given to the Adversary
to speak reproachfully; who are apt enough to devise evil against us, though
we should give them no occasion, as Mr. Kellie has done against me, laying to
my charge the thing that I never spoke: But this is no new thing, for if they
have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more they of his
household?

I have now done with his new Arguments, by which he confutes my Book; and for
the rest, they are most of them old ones, which he sent in a Paper to my house,
and I have answered them in my Book; and he like a man in a Circle brings the
Arguments denied, as a Reply to my Answers, as you may see by viewing over my
Book, and his Answer to it: How that most of his Reply to me, is but a
repetition of what I have already Answered.

I say again therefore, if Mr. Kellie will meet me in public, let him appoint
time and place, and I shall justify all that is said in my Book, either as
touching the controversy it self, or any other words that have fallen from my
pen, save (as I have said) the Printers Errors, which I had not time to correct
when I sent my Book to him; and I am sure his Book is not without many such
Errors; and therefore he has shown his weakness to carp at such things; as
the mis-citing of some Texts, and the mis-spelling of some words, although his
Conscience could not but tell him they proceeded not from error of Judgment.

I shall now conclude with the words of Christ, Mat. 12.36. But I say unto you,
that for every IDLE WORD men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof
in the day of Judgment.

FINIS.

