Inncency Cleared. OR THE Case and Vindication OF Col. GEORGE GILL: WHEREIN Is
made apparent how the Sentence of Parliament was procured against him, and by
what means the Re-hearing has been delayed. Humbly Presented to the
Parliament, with desires of speedy JUSTICE.

Job 19. 7. Behold, I cry out of wrong, and I am not heard; I cry aloud, but
there is no Judgment. Psalm: 12. 5. I will arise says the Lord, I will set him
in Safety, from him that puffs at him. Mich: 7. 7, 8. Therefore will I look
unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation, my God will hear me.
Rejoice not against me O mine Enemy, when I fall I shall arise. etc. Printed 10
September, 1651.

TO THE Supreme Authority, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND,
Right Honorable,
WIth all due humility that is owing to so High and Great an Assembly and
Authority, I approach once again, after a long, and years attendance at your
Door, begging, that as you have had the favor, and if I may say so, the
indulgence of the Almighty upon your Actions; so you will be pleased to answer
him in doing Justice. The Sentence I lie under is hard and severe, it
dispossesses me of all that is dear to me, which is, my honesty and good
affection to the State, and indeed un-mans me; I am in a manner my own
prosecuter, for how have I sought to have my business re-heard? If it appear
foul in your eyes, I shall sit down under your censure, if I appear a just
man* let me crave justice from you. God has placed you in the highest seat: no
man prays more heartily for you; do then, I beseech you, though it be for a
friend, yet as Judges: delaying of Sentence may be severity. I do not presume
to say any thing of your former Sentence; I know they that could Report the
first business in five days, and hinder Col. Downs's Report nine Months, have
stood in my way and delayed me from being so clearly represented to you, as I
hope it will be made appear I ought to be. For Gods sake let me once have
justice, it is all I beg, and then I shall account my losses, intermission of
Calling, and time spent, a Gain; For truly, if I had not a Confidence of my
innocence, I should not have dared to solicit at your Tribunal, and to that
Supreme Authority, for which I daily send up supplications to Heaven, Being
indeed,

Your Honors most faithful though mis-understood Orator. GEORGE GILL.

A Vindication of Col. GEORGE GILL. Wherein the unjust proceedings of his
Adversaries, both in procuring of the Sentence of Parliament against him; and
keeping of the Re-hearing, is fully manifested.
WHEN I consider the way of my Education, and the course of my life; which has
been wholly strange to publishing of books; I begin to think that as God
Almighty brings into every man's life somewhat unexpected and remarkable, so
that by this cross necessity that at the present lies upon me, he would make
it evident to me in particular, that our lives are but clay in his hands, and
that we scarcely come ever so sensibly to feel his hand as in the day of our
adversity.

And therefore though I bemoan the injustice of men toward me, yet him I
justify and resign my self up to his will, and truly since he has been
pleased to permit affliction to lie upon me, to have my good name, nay my
estate and trust taken away (which nevertheless he will restore in his due
time) I shall not doubt to lay open the whole series and proceedings of my
troubles, the unjust and fraudulent prosecution of my Adversaties, the nature
of my crime freely and clearly laid out, and lastly the sufferings that it has
occasioned to me. For though this be but a private business, and my Wife and
Children seem only to be Sufferers, yet in a Commonwealth, since every man has
interest in justice, and all men are tied to join their Forces against
unrighteousness, I hold it more then private; and come what will, I will lay
it open, cleaving always to the truth, and carrying my self with that duty and
civility, as becomes me to that Power which God has set over me.

I can speak it in the sincery and uprightness of my heart, and I hope
without boasting, my conversation among men, has been such ever since I came
to deal in the world, that I never yet had any man justly mine Enemy; but
either he who was an Enemy to the Cause I embarked in, or else some other, whom
I had opposed in some unjust proceedings, and whom I had kept from oppressing
the weaker: And upon this latter score, I justly fear, That Sir William
Allenson of York, and a Member of this present Parliament, became so sharp and
so eager an Enemy, that for a crime which is no crime at all, or in the most
rigorous interpretation, a mistake, I am Voted incapable of their Service, whom
I had faithfully and diligently served so many years (to the neglect of my
business, and almost ruining of my estate) either as a Soldier or a
Commonwealths man, and my estate ordered to be sold. But of that hereafter.
Now that which has brought all this trouble upon me, is no other then this.

In the second year of the late Charles, Leeds Town and Parish was
Incorporated, and that illegally, by reason that the major consent of the
Inhabitants was wanting, and it was well known by what Courtmeans it was at
that time procured, but however procured it was, and the Governors acted
accordingly, which produced many Suits and Trials at Law between them and the
Clothiers.

At the beginning of these Troubles, nine of the ten Aldermen appeared for the
late King, and thereby became incapable of civil employment, so that the Town
was then at liberty and enjoyed their former right, till these present
Governors illegally and out of course created themselves, and took upon them
to act according to the former Charter. But the Inhabitants being sensible of
the inconveniences they had formerly received by it, and not expecting the
best things from them that so lusted after the power, procured a Commission
under the broad Seal, directed to Sir John Savill Knight, Charles Fairfax,
Henry Goodwick, Esquires, etc. Impowering them to command the High Sheriff to
empanell twenty four honest legal men, to inquire the legallity of the
Charter, and their acting, which was accordingly executed, and it was found by
the Jury, that the Letters Pattents were illegally procured without the major
consent of the Inhabitants, and that it was prejudicial to the Town and
Parish, and not standing with the good of the Commonwealth, and that they had
illegally elected one another contrary to the letter of the Patent, so that the
Inquision was returned, and remains now in the Petty-Bag-Office.

Now Sir William Allanson fearing, as he had good cause, that it might fall
heavy on his Brother, who contrary to his Oath and Trust, had acted so
crookedly, and knowing I had a Charge ready against him, procured an Order of
the Parliament that such Elections as had been made by the well-affected in any
Corporation, though not according to the Letter of the Charter should be good;
by which means the present Governors I dare affirm have oppressed more
within these six years past, and brought greater sufferings upon the poor
Inhabitants, then they had suffered in fourteen years before: I therefore
having been so zealous and forward in this business in behalf of the
Inhabitants as inprocuring the Inquisition, as also by a Petition to the
Northern Committee, signed by me by the consent in the name and in the behalf
of the Inhabitants, and presented by my self in heir behalfes and Mr. Bains in
the behalf of the Aldermen in December 1647.

Sir William Allanson took an enmity to me because I opposed his Brother, and
never since rested from any means that might bring my ruin, though I be
verily of opinion, that if I had not opposed his Brother, or Stillington had
not been too near Crake Castle, we might have been friends to this day; But
because you shall see how justly Sir William affords his Brother this
Patronage, and how much need the other has of it, and how just it is for any
man that loves the Commonwealth to lay open the iniquities of such a man; I
shall quote you one or two of them whereby he broke his Oath and Trust as a
Sequestrator.

After the Rendition of York, this Francis Allanson who is Sir Williams own
Brother, sent some pieces of Cloth belonging to Lancelot Iveson a Malignant,
to Leeds as his own, and then and there demanded of the said Lancelot Iveson
what he would have for them a piece, he answered that such a man whom he
then named gave usually 52 shillings or thereabouts; Mr. Allanson replied, that
if he would let him have them at 30 shillings, well it were, otherwise he would
sequester them to the use of the Commonwealth, whereupon the poor man finding
himself under a necessity of being cheated, consented, and the Commonwealth
lost all the advantage of that Sequestration.

Will you have another of them? some four Aldermen of Leeds, whereof Mr.
Allanson was one, had a Commission or Order for the providing of five or ten
thousand pounds worth of Cloth for the use of the Scotch Army, whereupon they
took men's Clothes (which the Inhabitants remember with complaint to this day)
at what price they pleased, not suffering the Cloathier to sell his Cloth to
others, and paid them in what price and manner they pleased; by which means
they enriched themselves, though it was out of the groans of the poor. But
this and other things if they came to be scanned, would I believe deserve a
sentence severe enough against Mr. Allanson though he be now boyed up by Sir
William his Brother; And truly Sir William for all his pretended zeal to the
Cause, has not wanted Clothes to keep it warm, for upon pretended losses he
had the Hamper-Office given him, and it is known that out of Bishops or Deans
and Chapters Lands hte has raised himself a very large Estate. But as I would
impeach no man upon Rumors or Conjectures (for my self have felt too much of
that) so will I not stand to examine how many men he raised in Yorkshire at the
eruption of Charles Stuart, nor will I say he is a Countenancer of Malignants;
but it is a sign that Sir William has a hollow place in his heart: For soon
after the Death of the late King, in his journey toward Yorkshire, lodging at
the George at Stanford, he there boasted to Malignants how wisely he had
carried himself, viz. That there was but one other and himself of all his
Contrymen that voted for a personal Treaty with the King, and that he could
wash his hands from having any hand in the Kings Blood. And these words are
witnessed by Richard Morris and Mrs. Margaret Dobins, and Rich. Morris did
repeat the abovesaid words in the presence of Captain Matthew Phillips 11th.
August 1650. and he then said he would justify them upon Oath; Thus much for
Sir William.

Another back Friend of mine was Mr. Sikes of Leeds, whom though I esteemed
very much for his affection to the Parliament, yet I think the Nation is not
much obliged by him, by reason of his unworthy discovery of the Mystery of
Clothing in Holland, and his planting of it in Scotland, to the great
prejudice, and if God had not prevented, the inevitable ruin of many thousand
of families. Yet because I opposed him in the behalf of M. Marshall Steward of
the Court of Leeds, whom he endeavored to have sequestered, to the intent that
he might be made incapable of that Office, both by articling against him at the
Committees of York and Indemnity, where he was both times cleared, Mr. Sikes
of a Friend became an Enemy, and with his Son and Sir William Allanson laid
that train which since blew me up.

And truly, my heart bears me witness that I speak not out of malice, but out
of love to the weale-publicke; I envy not that large Estate that Mr. Sikes now
enjoyes, though it be much above the probabilities that he ever could have; but
this in behalf of the Commonwealth I will say, that I am altogether unsatisfied
as to the 4000 li. he had ordered him out of Goldsmiths-Hall, and the 3900 and
odd pounds out of the Excise, both with Interest, after the rate of eight per
cent. for I am confident the Parliament was herein surprised, and that if the
business had been rightly understood, no such sums had ever been allowed.

Upon these hindges of malice was my ruin turned, and truly both how cunningly
and with how high a hand it was brought in, I shall now tell you, and let all
the world judge of me how far I have been unjust to this Commonwealth, and
whether I deserve not pity that have languished above a year under a severe
sentence without any hearing, when the Report and the Sentence was hastened
within a few days.

For any Malignancy, I can in my Conscience say I ought not to be taxed with
it; my prayers, my endeavors, my estate have been all for the Parliament, and
it has been the endeavor of my soul to be serviceable to them in my Station,
nay even some of these men from whose hands I receive now persecution, had bore
witness of it, as may appear by this Certificate.

WE whose Names are underwritten, desire humbly to certify in the behalf of
Major George Gill, that he is a man of known integrity, has extended himself
far beyond his ability in the Publik Service of the Kingdom, in raising of
Forces and otherwise, and has had great losses by the Enemies plundering, all
which will appear by Certificate, his Petition does relate his Case and
Condition; It is our humble request (to all before whom it shall come) that
this our Certificate may be a means to further his proceedings for obtaining
such an answer as may move to the rendering of him some reasonable satisfaction.
March 1. 1648.

John. Thoresbie Alder. John Dawson. Fran: Allanson. John Baynes. Richard
Milner. James Moxon. Martin Isles. William Smithson.

We freely and heartily concur with these Gentlemen in humbly praying that
Major Gill may seasonably receive satisfaction.

Chr: Marshall, Minister. Peter Greatheed.



Now when the Parliament had November. 24. 1642. enabled the Lord Ferdinando
Fairfax to receive Money, Plate, Horse, and Arms upon the Propositions, for
which the Public Faith was to be engaged, I lent 60 li. upon the
Propositions, and timely appeared in raising of a Troop of Horse completely
armed, which with incident charges cost me above 600 li. 450 li. whereof I have
paid Interest for ever since.

I was plundered to the value of a great sum while I was in the Service, I lost
the use of a profitable Calling, which I can with a safe Conscience aver,
brought me in more then the pay of that Command, though it had been fully and
immediately discharged. After the Battle of Namptwich, I was sent by Sir Tho:
Fairfaix to London with a Letter to the E. of Essex and about Moneys, and I may
justly say, I was mainly instrumental in procuring the City by way of loan, to
lay down 10000 li. which in that juncture of time, how acceptable a sum it must
needs be, I leave any man to consider. In this Service we continued till by
Order we disbanded, and my Arrears amounted to 1657 li. 16s. 3d. After this the
Parliament by Ordinance May 22. 1647. provides for the payment of the one third
of the Arreares of the Northern Officers to be accepted by them in full
satisfaction: My self being one of the said Officers, my accounts being
audited, and so stated that the 600 li. which I advanced in Horses and Arms
upon the Public Faith was accounted amongst my Arrears, I was then in a
straight, conceiving that the Parliament intended not to give one third in full
for my Money lent, yet being in necessity for Moneys by reason of my losses in
serving the Parliament, I was willing to accept of one third in full for my
Arreares, and to receive one third of my 600 li. lent, but not for
satisfaction. Therefore upon the 27 of May, before I took any assignment for
any Money, five days after the said Ordinance passed, I Petitioned the
Committee of the Northern Association, showing that I could not accept of one
third for the whole of my 600 li. lent, and that the Ordinance mentioned only
Arrears, and desired that my Case with my losses and sufferings might be
represented to the Parliament; whereupon the Comittee ordered that my Petition
should be reported to the Parliament, and the Lord Fairfax writ Letters to Mr.
Speaker, Sir Henry Vane, M. Brian Stapleton, and Mr. Luke Robinson, desiring
that my Petition might be answered, and I might be satisfied for the said 400
li. and my losses.

Hereupon I received my Petition, and my Account, which was to make good the
Petition, from the Clerk of the Committee, and put them into the hands of Mr.
Bryan Stapleton to report to the Parliament, who as he has already testified
under his hand and seal, had them in his hand one whole year, but after his
withdrawing I put them into the hands of Sir William Allanson, (so confident I
was of my Innocence and Justice in the business) from whom I am to acknowledge
I have received fair words, but that was all.

By this time were two years spent, and I could hear of no reparations for my
losses and sufferings, and the Parliament at that time passing an Act for
doubling upon Deans and Chapters Lands, I thought it but just and in-offensive
to double the forementioned 400 li. being the two remaining thirds of the 600
li. with its allowed interest which made it 600 li. as money due upon the
Public Faith, not discharged by way of Arreares. Now this hole being found in
my Coat, Sir William Allanson and the Corporation of Leeds, Mr. Sikes the
elder, who were my friends as I mentioned before, and Col. Matthew Alured (who
has made it since appear that he thirsted after my Regiment, and I have cause
to fear knew too much of the plot, for to a Friend of his he foretold the
sentence ten days before) put their heads together and endeavored to bring me
into the Penalty provided in the Act, and make me forfeit my Purchase which was
a moat in some bodies eye. So the business was referred to a Committee, before
whom I appeared the 20th of July 1650. to make my defense, but there was
nothing done in it, because Sir William Allanson would not suffer me to make my
defense, and inform Col. Boswell who was in the examination of the business,
as some worthy Members there present can witness; though Sir William Allanson
making it his business, writ into Scotland that I was heard, and Col. Alured
endeavored to persuade the Commanders there the same, the better to weaken me
in their opinions, and to keep back the assistance of my Lord General in case
I should have Petitioned for it.

I went down into the North, to raise my Regiment, and then Sir Will. Allanson
saw it was his time, so that there being the 25th. day of July after, a
Committee, Sir William Allanson, being of the Sub-Committee, drew up a report,
and as I have reason to think, made it be entered into the book as past the
twentieth (when it was known there was nothing done in it that day) and Sir
Will. Allanson the 30th. day after reported it to the House (I being then 150
miles off raising a Regiment for Scotland) which, I not being heard, and some
being surprised, others I fear me not considering the depth of the matter,
produced this Vote.

31 July 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That the Lands purchased by Major George Gill, of
the Lands of the late Deans and Chapters Land, be resumed to the use of the
Commonwealth, in respect of the cousenage done by the said Maj. George Gill to
the State in that purchase, according to the Act of Parliament. And that the
Trustees and Contractors for the sale of the said Lands, be Authorized and
required to resume the same accordingly. And all other Officers within the Acts
are required to take notice thereof.

But this was not enough, there was somebody had a mind to my Command, as well
as others to my estate, and therefore, though I humbly conceive, the Statute
only provided for the forfeitures of lands so purchased, as it was alleged
mine was, I must out of my Command, and be incapable of any other for the
future. This Order was added the same day.

Ordered. That it be referred to the Council of State to take such speedy
course as they shall think fit, for removing Maj. George Gill from his place of
Command, and that he be disabled for ever hereafter from any further employment
or Command in the Service of the Commonwealth.

All this while I was in Yorkshire, and knew nothing, when an unexpected
Letter comes to me from the Council of State, requiring me to give up my
Command to Col. Allured, which I immediately obeyed, and repaired to London to
clear my innocence, writing also to my Lord General, to beseech his favor
that I might be heard, and punished according to the merit of my cause.
Whereupon his Excellency most Nobly (I most humbly acknowledge so great a
favor) writ a Letter to Mr. Speaker, which said thus:

SIR,
COl. George Gill, had a Regiment under my Command, I knew nor heard of any
thing, but what was honest and Christian in the man; until the Parliament was
pleased to pass a sentence upon him; and I commanded to discharge him from his
Regiment: I did yield present obedience to your Commands, as became me. Since
that time, the man has written unto me to desire that I would mediate to some
friends, that he might have liberty to make his innocence to appear. I
persuading my self that nothing would be more welcome to the Parliament, then
to hear and redress Innocence, which is so confidently stood upon by this man,
do in all humility desire he may be heard; and if it be found Impudence in him,
he may have his punishment double. It is not any importunity in the person
occasions this boldness, but because I durst not deny my conscience. Craving
pardon for this trouble I rest,

Sir, Your most humble Servant, Edinburgh 2 October. 1650. O: CROMWELL.


Hereupon after much solicitation and attendance of three months. I got a
Petition read in the House, which procured me this Order.

Die Veneris 8 November. 1650.
The humble Petition of Col. George Gill, was this day read.

ORdered by the Parliament, That the business of Col. George Gill, be referred
to the Committee of the Army, to examine the business and state it to the
House; and the Northern Committee are joined to the Committee of the Army, as
to this purpose, and in the mean time all proceedings against him in sale of
the Lands by him purchased is stayed, and the Trustees, and Contracters and
other Officers for Deanes and Chapters Lands are to take notice hereof, and to
forbear proceeding accordingly.

Hen. Scobell Cler. Parliamenti.

Now by these Committees has my business been considered, and a report put
into the hand of Col. Downs drawn up, but for these nine months, every day
almost whereof, I have attended at the door, could not I get it brought in,
though I have been at great expenses in attendance, had a stop in my calling,
had my lands sequestered, (and still by my adversaries kept under sequestration,
notwithstanding an Order of the Committee for obstructions in the sale of Deans
and Chapters Lands, of the 20th. December. 1650.) my credit ruined, and indeed,
very little of the outward man left me, and truly I do very much suspect that
some of the great ones sitting in the House are afraid the matter should come
in their scanning, least it should fly in their faces.

For I am not ignorant what artifices have been used to keep it back, what by
prepossessing the members (for which I must thank Mr. Henry Darley, though he
has countenance enough for Delinquents as will one day appear) what by
bringing on other business, as Sir John Bowcher brought on a particular
business, of his own, when Wednesday 30th. of July last, was purposely
appointed for mine; so that though it has been often called for, and several
times Ordered to be heard (that worthy Patriot Mr. Luke Robinson having
procured me two or three Orders to that purpose, and having staid one time a
whole week in the Town purposely to bring on the Report,) yet it could never be
heard, though it has pleased God to move the hearts of several Members to
resent me and my condition. For Col. Boswell has confessed to me that he was
surprised in it, and Sir John Bowcher himself told Mr. Speaker one day in the
Parliament House, That his judgment went against the said report, but he could
not help it.

Now (...) the whole Narration and nature of it, be pleased but to direct thy
judgment by these particulars, and first, to peruse this account.

October 8. 1649.
Commonweath of England Debtor to Col. George Gill.
FOr 60 l. lent in Feb. 1642. upon the Propositions of Parliament. li. s. d.
For interest for the said 60 l. from Febr 1642. to the 12 of Oct. 1649. being 6
years, 7 months, 12 days, at 8 l. per cent. -- 31. 15. 7. For 600 l. disbursed
in raising and completing my Troop on the 23 of May, 1643. -- 600. 0. 0 For
Interest for the said 600 l. from the 23 of May 1643. to the 8. of October. 1649.
being 6 years, 4 months, 14 days at 8 l. per cent. -- 305. 15. 6 For my
Arreares for personal pay, (as by my Account appears) -- 1657. 16. 3 Sum
is -- 2655. 7. 3.
Commonwealth of England Creditor.
BY 747 l. 18 s. 1 d. assigned this Accomptant upon the Excise, of which 387 l.
was lost by transferring. -- li. s. d. By Interest for the said 747 l. 18s. 1d.
from 22 May, 1647. till the 30. of April, 1649. being 23 months, and a quarter,
at 8 l. per cent. -- 106. 11. 0 By the two thirds of my Troop, being 400 l.
with Interest for the same, in all 600 l. doubled at Gurney, House, equal to
which sums in Bills might have bin purchased with ready money for 90. l. 600. 0.
0. By 42 l. received by him in June 1647. for one Months pay allowed him, with
other Officers in the same List then in Town -- 42. 0. 0. By Interest for the
said 42 l. from June, 1647. to the 8. of October. 1649. -- 7. 14. 0. By 3 parts
of 1657, l. 16. s. 3. d. discounted for free quarter. -- 1105. 4. 2 Sum is --
2609. 7. 3. Rests due to Geo. Gil from the Commonwealth to balance the
Account -- 46. 0. 1.


Now may thou see my crime, Of 1657 li. 16 s. 3 d. Arrears, and 600 li. laid
out of my purse in raising my Troop, I had of each but a third allowed me,
which made 752 li. 12 s. 1 d. 387 li. whereof was lost by transferring it from
the Excise to Deans and Chapters lands. And yet upon doubling the remaining two
thirds of the 600 li. (which I laid out of my purse, and was a Debt, not an
Arrear) and Interest (a Sum that I could have bought in Bills for 90 li. at
Gurny house.) I am ruined in my fortunes and credit, notwithstanding I pay
Interest for most of the moneys disbursed in that service to this day. And thus
it may appear how much I have gained by the Service of the Commonwealth, that
of one third of my Arrears, and Troop, having lost 387 li. by transferring, and
not suffered to double the remaining 400 li. I have not received the first 660
li. accounting my receipt and doubling at the price current.

Now since the words of the first Report runs thus, for surrepticious taking
his Accounts, I deny it, for I had my Accounts, my Petition, and the Order of
the Committee, (which was the 28th. of May 1647.) delivered me by the Clerk of
the said Committee, as appears by a note under his hand, and have since acted
according to the sense of the Committee in daily soliciting the hearing of the
business; and I am to note, my case is different from all others except Major
Lilburns.

It may be asked indeed, whether by the Ordinance of the 22 of May 1647. I be
tied to accept a third in full of my disbursements? I answer, According to the
letter of the Ordinance, no, because it mentions only Arrears of pay; and
secondly, it is not to be supposed the Parliament intended to pay a principal,
for which their Creditor pays interest (...) part of the principal only. It
may be (...) by accepting the Contract I was tied thereto. Whe^^^^ I answer,
that consequently the Parliament is engaged to perform their Contract, and if
I am bound to return a full value in doubling etc. the Parliament is by the
same Law (as I humbly conceive) to make satisfaction for the loss in
transferring, which is treble the value of doubling, or Public Faith Bills.
And my acceptance of the third part was in regard of the validity of the
security, ( viz. the Excise) sufficient to advance the whole proportioned
sum, and transferred Money would not yield above a moiety, which
consideration inclined the Parliament to give satisfaction to Collonell Alured
and Lieutenant Mason in the same case.

It may be further objected, That I did receive for a Months pay 42 li. which
was to be deducted out of the sum proportioned for my thirds upon Account. I
acknowledge the receipt of the said sum as other Officers in the same List,
for which upon my Account I would have discounted, but never receiving the same
in manner and form as by the Ordinance was appointed, I could not discount for
it as might be expected; (yet in my Account betwixt the Commonwealth and my
self as Debtor and Creditor, I have charged my self with the same.

You may see now how my case stands, and with what power and prosecution it was
carried on, and truly I make any man my Judge, whether if it had been his case
he would not have said, he had drunk of the Cup of Bitterness and tasted of
Affliction, my crime being of that nature I have told you, and (if I (...). But
as Job says, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him; so I may say, though
I perish in this cause, yet must I love it; and therefore I hope God intends
better things to me by this seasonable Affliction, which I willingly take upon
my shoulders, in hope he will in his time remove it. In the mean time I wish
all prosperity to the Commonwealth, a continual succession of a
Representative, ever filled with a Spirit of Counsel, Unity, and
selfe-denyall, which to me would be the most precious sight in the world,
though I found my own ruin in it.

The End.
December 1647.
The Humble Petition of the Aldermen, Burgesses, and Inhabitants of the Town
and Parish of Leeds in the County of YORK.
Shows,
THat the Town and Parish being a place of much Trading in Clothing
heretofore, that is to say, in the second year of His now Majesty's reign,
Letters Pattents were obtained from His Majesty for the Incorporation of the
said Town and Parish, consisting of one Alderman, nine Burgesses, and twenty
Assistants, by whom the said Town and Parish has ever since bin governed. But
so it is, that by reason of many inconveniences that have happened in the
Government by the said Incorporation, many vexatious suits have arisen between
the (...) thiers of the said Town and Parish, which has bin very prejudicial
and hurtful to the common good of that place, and also to the Commonwealth:
For the prevention whereof, and of the many future inconveniences, and for the
better settlement of the said Trade, and for a more stable and sure Government
of the said Town and Parish, and Clothing, your Petitioners having upon mature
deliberation found out the many inconveniences and defects in the former
Incorporation, and Government thereby, and by their mutual consent and
agreement under their hands in writing, bearing date the ninth day of October
last past, which is hereunto annexed, they have conceived ways for redress
and amendment of the same; By which their humble desires are represented unto
your Honors, and shall be ready more particularly, when your Honors please,
to make known the particular defects and inconveniences of the former
Incorporation, and the benefit and advantage of the new Corporation now desired.

Wherefore your Petitioners do humbly desire you would be pleased to take the
matter into your consideration, craving your aid and assistance for the
obtaining an Act or Ordinance from the Honorable House of Parliament, for the
Incorporating of the said Town and Parish into a better way, with such
alterations, additions, and clauses, as shall be thought meet and convenient, to
be in such Act of Incorporation for the better Government of the said Town and
Parish, and of the Clothing there.

And they will ever pray, etc. G: G: J: Baines.

(...)
At the Comm^^^^ of Parliament for removing of Obstructions in the sale of
Deanes and Chapters Lands.
WHereas in the cause upon the Petition of Major George Gill against Tho: Croft
Esquire concerning the sum of 20 li. 16 s. 3 d. claimed by the said Major, for half
a years Rent due by the said Tho: Croft the second of Feb. 1649. issuing out of
the Manor of Stillington in the County of York, unto him the said Maj. as
Purchaser of the present Rent and Reversion of the said Manor, of the Trustees
and Contractors for sale of the said Lands, did the 3 day of May last, order
that the said Tho: Croft should pay unto the said Purchaser the said sum of 20
li. 16 s. 3 d. due for the said half years Rent as aforesaid: And did by
their Order of the 26th. of November last confirm their said former Order; It
is therefore this day, upon motion made by Mr. Sedgewicke of Counsel of the
said Major Gill, Ordered that the said Tho: Croft be (and he is hereby)
enjoined to pay unto the said Maj. Gill the residue of the growing Rents of the
said Manor now due, or shall from henceforth become due and payable to the
said Major Gill by virtue of his Purchase aforesaid.

Cop. ex. Edw: Noell Clerk,
attending the said Committee.
By virtue of this Order I received two Rents, but by reason of Sir W. Allonson
or some others, they are since detained.

GEORGE GILL.


