THE POPE'S Third Breve, Threatening to EXCOMMUNICATE The Most Christian King.
Together with The FRENCH CLERGIES Reply UPON The Subject of that BREVE.

Faithfully Translated from the Originals; giving an exact Account of the grand
Controversy concerning the Regalia.

TO Our dearest Son in Christ, LEWIS The MOST CHRISTIAN King of France,
INNOCENT P. P. xi. Health and Apostolical Benediction.
Most dear Son in Christ,
BY two of our Letters we have already at large clearly shown to your Majesty,
from the unanimous testimony of almost all your own French Authors, and out of
the very Acts and Records of your own Courts, how injurious to the Rights and
Liberty of the Church, and how contrary to the usage and proceedings of all
your most Christian Predecessors, that Edict was, which seven years since being
set forth by you, does order and command, That the Custom of possessing the
fruits of all vacant Benefices (vulgarly called Regalia) shall also extend to
such Churches within your present Dominions, as never before were subjected to
any such Custom.

Now in the aforementioned Letters of ours, according to the duty of our
Pastoral Office, and that Paternal care which we owe to the salvation of your
Soul, we did earnestly beseech your Majesty, that the said Edict, and all other
Acts ensuing thereupon, contrary to the Rights of the Church in general, and to
the immunities of such Churches in particular, might by your Royal Authority be
abrogated and repealed. And truly such is the merit of the Cause it self, and
such is our opinion of your Generosity and Equity, that we did not at all doubt
but that your Majesty would before this have rectified the Abuse, by restoring
things to their former places; and thereby have freed us from any farther
solicitude upon this subject: especially in consideration of our having so many
other cares upon us in our administration and superintendency over the whole
Church of God.

But after our patient attendance of many months, we have received no Answer to
our last Letter; and finding no Redress of past Grievances, that on the
contrary we are informed, that all things tend to greater disorder, and that
under color of these pretended Regalia, Collations of Benefices, and Canonical
Institutions are obstructed, the Episcopal Authority deprest, the
Ecclesiastical Order and Discipline, disturbed; and finally, that a new
Practice is set up by a Secular Power, contrary to the ancient usage of the
Church, and to divine Institution: and this not covertly or in the dark, but at
noonday, and by Regal Authority.

We will not at present repeat how many Scandals and Complaints justly arise
from such proceedings; what inconvenience to the Gallican Clergy, what danger
to the universal Church, may follow from such an Example, with what blemish of
your Honor, and stain upon your Conscience.

These things we have sufficiently laid forth unto you in our former
Monitories; and they sufficiently lay forth themselves: But now our sincere and
Paternal Charity toward your self and your most flourishing Kingdom, will not
suffer us in a matter so injurious to the honor of God, and so perilous to
your Soul, to be longer silent; for we are compelled with a most passionate
affection of heart, and in the bowels of Christ Jesus, to entreat and obsecrate
your Majesty, that, mindful of the words spoken by our said Lord to the
Governors of his Church, He that hears you hears me, you will rather give ear
to us who hold the place of a Father, and of a most loving Father toward you,
telling you things wholesome and true, than to those Sons of Diffidence, who
only savor earthly things, and who by their counsel, profitable indeed in
appearance, but in reality pernicious and destructive, shake the very
foundation of that ancient and glorious Monarchy, whose Fundamentals always
were the maintenance of Christian Religion, nda the conservation of the Rights
and Authority of the Church. Were these men such, as their Office and Dignity,
and your extraordinary favor toward them oblige them to be, they would rather
imitate the Integrity and Loyalty of those, who formerly in their station, (as
it is Recorded in History, and not long since inserted into the Acts of the
Gallican Clergy) did with Christian liberty, in a like case admonish the Kings
(your Predecessors) to remember, how Sacredly they had promised by their
Coronation Oath, to serve and advance the glory of God with all their study and
power; and to be always ready to spend their Blood and lay down their Lives.
They would mind you also, how frail and uncertain the Lives of all Mortals are,
especially of Kings and Princes, who when they are called before our impartial
Judge, must appear without Houshold-Guards or Attendance, without Pomp or
Power, naked and unarmed, to render an Account of their Actions to the Searcher
of Hearts; from whom nothing can be concealed; with whom there is no exception
of Persons; who has power to send into Hellfire, where the Powerful are
Powerful tormented. Nor was there wanting in the former Age a Bishop in
France, who in a full Assembly of Prelates and other Peers of the Realm,
pleading the cause of the Church in the presence of Henry the Third, freely
told the King, how it was observed, that the Race or Line of their Monarchs had
never failed, till such time as they did arrogate to themselves the undue
nomination to Ecclesiastical Benefices, from which the glorious St. Lewis
(great in his Temporal state, but much greater in his Christian humility) did
so religiously abstain, that he refused to meddle even with those Nominations,
which were offered and tendered to him from the Apostolick-See. This was
formerly in France, (and I hope it still continues) the Apostolical liberty of
Speech in the Episcopal Order, who feared and hoped nothing, but from God. And
such their liberty was so far from being distastful to their Sovereigns, that
they both obtained their Suit, and the just commendation of all good men; by
which means the Sanction of the Ecumenical Council of Lions was preserved
Sacred and Inviolate. And some of the Kings themselves (as in the French Annals
does appear) did by their Edicts declare such persons Impious, and
Sacrilegious, who should any ways attempt to extend the Regalia and right of
Nomination to any Churches, where no such usage had formerly been. But this
distemper of our present Age is so much the more grievous to us, in that we
know, your Majesty in your own Royal Inclination prefers above all things the
zeal of Justice, and the honor of God. In maintenance whereof, you have lately
set forth so pious and salutary Edicts, and at present you so vigorously
proceed, to the joy of all good men, and to the immortal honor of your Name,
in destroying those Nests and Receptacles of Heresy: by which means we hope
you will no less raise to your self in Heaven an Eternal Monument of your
Piety, as a Preserver and Propagater of the Christian Faith, than leave behind
you upon Earth the Trophies of your Victories, as a Conqueror over Barbarous
Nations. But still care must be taken, lest what the right hand builds, the
left hand should destroy; lest what your own innate Piety rears up, should be
tumbled down by the subtle and indirect Councels of those who say unto you,
Light is Darkness, and Darkness is Light. Be mindful of the Apostolical Oracle,
which tells us, he that sins in one, is guilty of all. In your own Kingdom
there are not wanting some, amongst our Brethren the Bishops, who are men of
Christian fortitude, and zealous for the honor of God, and the Liberties of
his Church; and who even upon this occasion, with the like courage and
constancy would have transacted this important affair with your Majesty, which
is the common Cause both of your Kingdom of France, and of the whole Church.
And more would not have been wanting to assert the same, but that they are
withheld by a certain timerousness (which seemed to them prudential and just,
but to us vain, and unbecoming the Character of a Bishop, and even injurious to
your Majesty, in the mistrust of your Equity and Generosity) from entering into
the Lists: And so they wait the issue of our humble endeavors, hoping that we
may obtain that in their behalf, by virtue of the filial Obedience, always due,
and always paid by your Majesty to the Apostolic See, which they had not
courage to demand, as due to them in their own right. Therefore in these our
Letters behold the just grief and prayers of them all; and no less the will of
God himself, speaking to you by our mouth, and seriously admonishing you to
retract the aforesaid Edict, and to redress all in pursuance thereof, that has
been done contrary to the Rights and Liberties of the Church. Otherwise we have
great cause to fear, that Gods Judgments and Indignation will fall upon you,
which in our other Letters upon this occasion we have denounced unto you; and
which now again unwillingly (as to the sense of our cordial affection toward
you) but yet in odience to the Holy Spirit, moving us to it,) we this third
time denounce unto you. Nor shall we write any more to you upon this Subject;
nor yet shall we desist from applying such Remedies, according to the power
delivered us from God, which in so great and dangerous a Distemper we cannot
omit, without wounding our own Conscience by a culpable remisness in our
Apostolical Function. Nor do we fear for our selves any loss or danger, nor any
storm, though never so violent, that may hence ensue. To this we are not
called, that we should value our Lives above our Souls: we know full well, that
Tribulation for the sake of Justice is to be sustained, not only with a
courageous, but a willing mind. In which, and in the Cross of our Lord Jesus,
we ought only to glory. It is the Cause of God we act in: nor do we seek the
things that are ours, but the things of Jesus Christ. So that henceforth the
Controversy will no longer be between us two, but between your Majesty and
him, against whom there is no wisdom, there is no Council, there is no power.
Having thus performed the duty of our Ministry, in planting and watering, we
shall attend the good pleasure of Almighty God to give growth to the work: from
whom with earnest Prayers we shall not cease to beg, that he will be pleased to
animate these our words and exhortations with such vigor and spirit, as may
turn the heart of your Majesty to embrace sound and wholesome Councels: that so
you may deserve, and we rejoice to see a growing prosperity upon all your
affairs, and that all your Subjects may enjoy a lasting and flourishing peace;
to you we give our Apostolical Benediction.

Marius Spinola.

A LETTER Written to the French King, by the Lords Spiritual the Archbishops
and the Bishops, together with the other Ecclesiastics appointed by the Clergy
of France, assembled at St. Germains en Lay. With regard to the preceding
Breve of the Pope, upon the Subject of the Regalia.
SIRE,
WE have understood with a great deal of trouble, that our Holy Father the Pope
has writ a Brief to your Majesty, by which he not only Exhorts you not to
Subject some of our Churches to the The Sovereign Patronage of the
Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics, Abbeys, and other Benefices of Royal Foundation,
due unto the King of France, and adherent unto his person, in the right of his
Crown, and therefore not to be transferred, committed, or aliened unto any
other, and hereby he has the Profits of them during vacancy, and the
Provision, Collation, and Presentation of Successors unto them.
Right of Regality, but farther declares, That he will make use of his
Authority, in case your Majesty does not submit to the Fatherly Admonitions
which he has so often repeated on this Subject: We believe it, Sir, our Duty
not to remain silent in so important an occasion, in which we see with an
extraordinary grief the Eldest Son and Protector of the Church threatened, as in
other occasions those Princes which have usurped its Rights have been. Our
design is not to enter into the bottom of this Affair, in which the Assemblies
that have preceded this, have on diverse occasions received very considerable
Marks of your Justice and Piety; but we look upon this extraordinary Proceeding
with great afflict^^^, which far from supporting the Honor of the Religion,
and the Glory of the Holy See, may diminish it, and produce very ill effects.
It is too plain that it would only serve to favor the Malice of some
troublesome and Seditious Spirits, who contrary to the intention of his
Holiness, which we believe to be very good, would make use of his Name and
Authority, as they do daily, in causing several extravagant Reports to be
spread abroad against the honor of your Majesty, and the chief Prelates of
your Kingdom, to revenge their private Resentments. They likewise use their
utmost Endeavors to raise a misunderstanding between the Clergy and the
Crown, in a time that they never had more Cause to be united, by the Protection
which your Majesty gives to the Faith, and the Ecclesiastical Discipline, to
the extirpation of Heresies and Novelties. It is easy for us, being assisted
by your Majesty, to prevent so pernicious an Evil, either by representing our
Sentiments to his Holiness, without failing in the Respect which we owe him, or
by taking such Resolutions as may equal the Prudence of the greatest Prelates
of the Church. Our Predecessors have known in like Conjunctures to maintain
the Liberty of their Churches, without departing from those Measures of
Respect, which their Birth and their Religion has infused in them for their
Kings. And as your Majesty for his Zeal and Aut^hority surpasses all that have
been before him, so are we so fast linked to him that nothing is able to
separate us. This Protestation may serve to elude the vain enterprises of the
Enemies of the Holy See and the State; and therefore we renew it to your
Majesty with all possible Sincerity and Affection, for it is good that all the
World should be informed, That we know how the Love we bear to the Discipline
of the Church, ought to agree with the glorious Quality which we will always
preserve of

Your most humble, most Obedient, most Faithful, and most Obliged Servants and
Subjects; the Archbishops, Bishops, and other the Ecclesiastics appointed by
the Clergy of your Kingdom. The Archbishop of Paris, Duke and Peer of France,
Commander of the Orders of the King; Provisor of Sorbonne, President. De
Grignan, Coadjutor of Arles. Phelippeaux, Patriarch Archbishop of Bourges.
Hyacinte, Archbishop of Alby. Francois, Bishop of Amiens. G. Bishop of
Perigueux. Charles Francois, Bishop of Constance. S. de Guemaduc, Bishop of S.
Malo. L. M. Bishop, Duke of Langres. Jean Louis Bishop of Air. J. B. M.
Colbert, Bishop of Montaubon. Louis Aube, Bishop of Grace. The Bishop of
Cisteron. Poncet de la Riviere, Bishop and Earl of Vzez. Andre, Bishop of
Auxerre. Louis Alphonce, Bishop Dallet, Proctor. De Grance. De Tonnerre. De
Coetlogon. De Villars. De Broglio. Phelippeaux. De Marillas, Dean of S. John de
Lion. De Fleury. De Viens. De Gourives. Cheron. De Ventimille du luc. J. le
Gentil. De Moncassin. De S. Valier. Boucaut. Des Marests, Agent-General of the
Clergy of France. De Besons, Agent-General of the Clergy of France.
By our Lords of the General Assembly.
From S. Germins en Lay, this 10th of July, 1680. The Abbot de Grignan,
nominated by the King to the Bishopric of Eureux, Secretary.



FINIS.

