Inhumane, and Cruel Bloody News from Leeds in Yorkshire.
Being a True Relation of a Young man which Intic't an other Man's Wife from
London, down into the Country; which after some time he most Barbarously
Murdered in a most frightful manner, in a Desert place, near Leeds, Cutting
her Tongue and her Eyes out of her Head, her Throat being Cut from Ear to Ear;
and after all this, being not satisfied, Rips her open, and takes a Child out
of her Womb, laying it down by her side: This being done, he took Horse and was
coming for London; but the Murder being found he was Pursued and Taken, and
sent to York Castle, where he must lie till the next Lent Assizes, and then
receive his due Punishment. This being Written in the mean time for a Warning
Piece to all Young-Women, to be careful how they be Trappan'd by false and
deceitful Young men.

With Allowance, Jan. 4. To. L'Estrange.

The Tune is, The Bleeding Heart, etc.

ALas what times here be,
For men to live so sinfully;
Nothing but wickedness does reign
In peoples hearts, we find it plain;
The Devil prompts men unto sin,
And to amend they will not begin,
Till Justice over takes them straight,
Then they repent when it is too late;
God grant us Grace, and keep us free,
From Murder and Adultery.
But now my Subject to indite,
It does my Muses sore affright;
And forces me to shed a tear,
For me to write what you shall hear:
It Is of a Young Man, I may say,
Which did his Parents not obey;
But like a Crafty, cuning Elf,
Despised his Friends, ruined himself:
God grant us Grace, etc.
This man to Lust was so inclined,
And for to satisfy his mind,
Did covit straight another wife,
For which no doubt he will lose his life:
Her Husband being gone to Sea,
He often kept her company:
And Night and Day was at her still,
His wicked mind for to fulfill:
God give us Grace; etc.
Alas! quoth she, this must not be,
My Husband being now at Sea,
And I but lately Married am,
Pray don't a weak woman Trapan:
quoth. he, my dear there is none shall know
My tender love which I will show;
If thou love me, as I do thee,
Thou ever shall live happily:
God grant us Grace, and keep us free,
From Murder and Adultery.
The Second Part, to the same Tun^
I pray good Sir your suit forbear,
Whence forward come not me near
I would not for Riches great store,
You should come nigh me any more:
Although she often said him nay,
No rest she took for him night nor day,
Until a promise she expressed,
To satisfy his Wickedness;
God grant us grace, and keep us free,
From Murder and Adultery.
Quoth he my dear do not you fear,
Travel with me into Yorkshire;
There I have means for to maintain,
Both thee and I from friends disdain:
For none shall know where we do go,
I will secure thee from grief and woe,
Such flattering words she did not deny
But went with him in a strange country.
Then God grant us grace, etc.
Where they some time lived free from strife,
All took them to be Man and Wife,
The Woman she grew big with child,
By him which had her thus beguiled;
She often charged him to take heed,
Pray don't forsake me in time of need;
Remember now your Oaths to me,
And loving be in my extremity:
Then God grant us grace, etc.
He valli'd not her words that time,
But studied an inhumane crime;
The Devil tempts him night and day,
How for to take her Life away:
He had her to a Private place,
And being void of fear and grace,
Into her Throat he put his Knife,
Which ended this poor woman's life:
Then God grant us grace, etc.
He cuts her mouth from ear to ear,
Not thinking vengeance was so near;
Then out her eyes he straight did bore,
Also her tongue in pieces tore;
Her womb he ripped open so wide,
Then laid the baby by her side;
This wicked wretch having so done,
Takes Horse and speedily was gone,
Then God grant us grace, etc.
But murder which cries loud on high,
For vengeance takes him speedily;
And brings him back at that same time,
To answer for his bloody crime;
Unto a Justice he did confess,
His bloody deed of Wickedness;
Then to York-Castle he was sent,
God give him grace for to repent:
God grant us grace, etc.
Young Maids and Wives I pray ye all,
Take warning by this woman's fall;
Don't yield to flattering speeches fair,
And of lewd young men have a care;
Also you that Husbands have,
Yield to no tongue that comes to crave
You to defile your Marriage Bed,
Take warning here, be not misled;
God grant us grace, and keep us free,
From Murder and Adultery.
FINIS.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.


