Iter Boreale, to the Presbyterian Party. OR, Doctor Wilds Recantation from
his Reformed Study, to Mr Calamy in Aldermanbury.
THis Page I send you, (Good Sir) to rejoice
That from a Grate I heard thy Newgate-voice.
O may all Pulpit-Railers have such places,
To show their Ears in Text, and splay-mouth'd Faces!
Nor need to Steeple upon Steeple set;
But in a string sooner to Heaven get!
I cannot behold you take into your gills
Rebellious doses, as men swallow pills;
Nor let you swim again in Royal Blood,
Whilst Loyal Souls are drowned in a flood
Of briny tears, which fitter deemed are
For your Repentance Stool than Peter's Chair:
If Peter's chains your fury cannot restrain,
Let Judas's halter be your curbing Rein;
Let all your Sermons raise you to such Honors;
And may you feel worse flames than cruel Bonners:
May all your Brethren poor Erraticks be,
And (like fixed Stars) the sacred Bishops see
Immovable within their glorious Spheres,
Who ravish (like the tunefull Orbs) all ears
With their harmonious Doctrines; whilst all stare
At you, as Meteors hanging in the Air:
Or if you're turned out of your House and Home,
To a safe Habitation you may come,
Ycleep'd a Gaol, whilst your shame and disgrace
Rises both from your crime, and from the place.
Although reproach and injury was done
By an Eclipse to the prelatique Sun,
He only by that black upon his brow
Allured Spectators more; but so don't you,
Whose lowering aspect, whose prodigious look,
Clouded with malecontent, cannot Bishop brook,
Nor King; but, like a Comet, does presage
A Monarch's Tragedy on Englands Stage.
May every Rod you feel, a Scorpion prove;
And may you be by Hells black Jailer drove.
Into the deep Abyss. If you are there,
Newgate must needs a Hell on Earth appear.
Indeed the place does for your presence call;
It Is that which makes it Newgate most of all.
Thanks to the Bishop, and his good Lord Mayor,
Who would not let the Church, a House of Prayer,
Be made a Den of Thieves; their Prudence knew
What Cage was fittest for such Birds as you,
Who (like the railing Thief) dare Christ revile,
Slay Gods Anointed, and his Churches spoil.
Now Sir, were I to write your Mittimus,
The world should know soon why you are dealt with thus:
The Jailer, like a Prisoner at the Bar,
Should set thee forth, and what thy offenses are
Proclaim, and prove, That being dead in Law,
(As if you cared not for that death a straw)
You walked, haunted your Church, thinking to scare
Away the Reader and his Common Prayer;
And with your Alphabet of Faces fright
Your Auditors, worse than a Fiend or Spright
Raised from the Shades: Nor did you only walk,
But (like a Puritan) much nonsense talk.
Dead, and yet Faction preach? these Kirk's vile Slaves
Will preach Rebellion in their very Graves.
You said the Ark was lost, and told a story,
That Israel divorced was from its Glory:
The Ark's not safe with you, till Royal Blood
Support it like the waves of Noah's Flood:
You Will not the Dove with the Olive Branch of Peace
Receive, nor from your late Rebellions cease.
Item, you played the Thief, and if it be so,
Good reason (Sir) to Newgate you should go;
And when you're there, none need to swear you are
The greatest Pick-pocket that e're came there.
But your great Theft you acted in your Church:
I do not mean you did your Sermon lurch;
That Is a small crime with you; but you did pray
And preach, that you might steal the hearts away
Of Loyal Subjects, Viper-like, and eat
Your Mother Churches bowels: This strange feat,
This Felony deserved imprisonment.
What? cannot you Non-Conformists be content
Sermons to make, but you must prate them too?
They that your places have do Preach, not you.
Thirdly, it is proved, when you pray most devout,
You leave the (Reverend Fathers) Bishops out:
Well then may Learned Sheldons powerful spell
Conjure, and lay you safe in Newgate Hell;
For (to display my thoughts) there cannot be
Prepared for you better Company
Than Roaring Boys; sure mirth you cannot want,
Whilst they so loud do sing, and you do cant.
But I Am confined too to as bad a place;
Let Us then for Sympathy compare our case:
For if in suffering we do both agree,
Sir, I may challenge you to pity me.
I am the older Gaol-bird; my hard fate
Has kept me twenty years in Cripplegate;
And were all I deserve conferred on me,
Thence had I carried been to the Gallow-tree.
My Limbs with the Presbyterian Gout do ache,
He my fat Body for the Kirk does take,
Where he resides and tortures every Limb
That wont against the Head rebel with him;
And causes me against the Church to prove
So stiff, that I one Article cannot move:
An Enemy to Common Prayer, he
Has from't these twenty years suspended me:
And in my station if he find me painful,
I Am sure to go to the Repentance Stool.
He binds up, loses, sets up, and pulls down,
Pretends he draws the Humors from the Crown:
But I am sure he makes such ado,
His Humors ttouble Head and Members too.
He has me now in hand, and ere he goes,
I fear for Heretics he will burn my Toes.
O I would give all I am worth, a Fee,
That from his Jurisdiction I were free.
Now, Sir, you find our sufferings do agree;
The Bishop clapped up you, the Kirk has me.
But oh! the difference too is very great,
You are allowed to walk, and drink, and eat:
I want them all, and never a penny get,
So much the Preslyter's against me set.
May then bad Angels and worse Women come
To make your Prison Hell, and bring your Doom:
And may it be so, till you do repent
Of that which caused your Imprisonment;
May, for the greater torture of your Lives,
The tortures of your Conscience (than your VVive's
When she lies in) be worse, and may you see
Such bitter Satyrs as now come from me.
I Will now subscribe, and play the Fool no more;
I Will keep my Parsonage e're I Will die poor:
And if by the Kirk I Am ever more beguiled,
Let the whole Universe proclaim me Wild;
For if I don't conform unto the Miter,
I Have made in vain my Boreale iter.
FINIS.
London, Printed in the Year 1663.


