A LETTER to a Gentleman of the Insurance Office, Concerning the CITIES
Insuring Houses.
SIR,
HAving read your Paper Entitled, An Enquiry whether it be the Interest of the
City to Insure Houses from Fire. I am convinced by the strength of your
Arguments, and do think you deserve as great Commendations for so well
defending your Design as for Inventing it. And to show, that I do not flatter,
but that you have made me a real Convert, I will come to the Office and Insure
several Houses in the Liberties, which I intended before to Insure with the
City: Though I must confess, this may be no infallible sign of my Conversion,
because your undeniable Reasons (not to mention the justice of your Cause):
That the Security is better in private hands than in public: That the Profit
of the Design must be uncertain; And that it may be inconvenient for the City,
because of the great Trusts they are engaged in, may have the same Effects on
most Persons, as on Me, and so Disappoint the Cities Undertaking, and then my
Insuring at your Office may be thought to proceed from Force, and not Choice;
Yet that you may not question my Reallity, I have sent you a Reason, which I do
not find amongst yours, though I thought of it by reading your Paper, that is:
If the City should Insure Houses from Fire, it may prove inconvenient to the
Public Safety, and prejudicial to the Reputation of the Governors.

For the Magistrates of the City are entrusted with the preservation of it, and
by the Common Law of the Land, when they judge it necessary, may Blow up, or
pull down any House to stop the Fire, as well as dig Trenches in any man's
Ground in time of War, to defend the City.

Now, if the City Insure Houses from Fire, this great Power will be Interested,
and consequently may be biased; And so the Magistrates no proper Judges when
to make use of it. For when a Fire happens, the Magistrates may command some
Houses not Insured by the City, to be Blown up, only to preserve those that are
Insured. And so on the contrary, may omit the Blowing up some Houses by them
Insured, to prevent Charge to the City, which they ought to have done, to stop
the Fire. By this means, that Power which should be used to prevent Fires, will
be the Occasion of their Increase.

This is an Argument, why those who have Houses in the City, may not Insure
with it; because they would not prejudice that Power which is entrusted for
their Safety: Besides, by Insuring at your Office, they have a Double Security;
they have the Assistance of the Magistrates, and Care and Industry of the
Office for their Protection.

Next, were this great Power (that may destroy any Man's Freehold for
preservation of the Public) used with the same Justice, as if the City were
Unconcerned, which the Wisdom of our Lawmakers thought, never could be; and
therefore, ^uffer no Man to be Judge in his own Cause. Yet it will be
impossible to make those that lose their Houses, believe it: For Losers will
always Complain; and will ^e apt to say, That either the City's Care to
Preserve their Insured Houses, or prejudice to theirs not being Insured, was
the occasion of their Loss.

So that if the City Insure Houses, it will cause reflections on the Reputation
of the Governors, and render their Power for the Public Safety useless;
because it can never be employed without Clamor and Suspicion of Injustice.

Sir, If you judge these Thoughts useful, you may Publish them; I shall be
Required ^y the Satisfaction I take in being Serviceable to so Ingenuous and
Worthy a Design.

SIR, (...)
November 10th (...)

