INFANTS BAPTISM Disproved: AND Believers Baptism proved. OR, An ANSWER To
several Arguments propounded in a paper by Mr. Alexander Kellie, Minister at
Giles Criple-Gate London, and sent to Mr. Jeremiah Ives of the said PARISH. And
is now published for the general information of all, but particularly for the
satifaction of many of the Inhabitants of the said PARISH, who have desired it.
Wherein The ARGUMENTS for Infant Baptism are examined and disproved.

By the said Jeremiah Ives.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his neighbor
comes and searches him.

Job 6.25. How forcible are right words? but what do your arguings reprove?

Prove. 23.23. Buy the truth, but sell it not.

Luke 7.30. But the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against
themselves, not being baptized of him.

Printed at London for Richard Moon, and are to be sold at the seven Stars in
Paul's Churchyard near the great North door, 1655.

To the READER.
Reader,
IF those men of Berea, Act. 17.11. were counted more noble then they of
Thessalonica, because they would take nothing upon trust that the Apostles
said, but searched the Scripture daily to see if what They said were so; How
ignoble should we be in this Age, (wherein men are much more divided in matters
of Religion, then they were in the Apostles times, and wherein our Teachers
themselves are contradictious one to another, in many of the great concernments
of Religion) if we should receive any thing from them without diligent search
into the Word of God, to see if it be true or no? since Solomon makes this a
distinguishing Character between a wise Man and a Fool, Prove. 14.15. The simple
believes every word, but the wise man looks well to his goings. Neither let a
man think that his looking back to the ancient Fathers, and his searching of
them, and reading them, will much help in the midst of these Religious
disorders, because they were in many things as much contradictory to the Truth
and one another, as any in these times, as for instance: Hierome and
Chrysostom deny Original-sin in the sense it is now maintained. Augustine
taught, That the Lord's Supper should be given to Infants, in his fifth Book of
Hpognosticks. Justin Martyr against Triphon, says, God at first gave the Sun
to be adored. Origin held the Salvation of all both wicked men and devils. The
Bishops of the East and West Churches opposed one another in the Doctrine of
the Deity of Christ, in the time of Constantius Son to Constatinus Magius. And
long after, Socrates, Lib. 1. Chap. 29. and Chrysostom, said, That Saint Paul
spoke against Truth and Reason in allowing second Marriages. See Moulin's
Defense, p. 137, 138. By all this you may see that we have great cause to
search the Scripture, and not to follow the Fathers, or any, but wherein they
followed Christ. And we may likewise understand, that that which the World now
calls, The Christian Religion, is like the Weather-beaten Bark at Athens, that
had been so often mended and riged, that it was hard to say, whether it
retained any of its old materials, only it retained its old Name. The like may
be said of Religion, as it is commonly professed in the world by the generality
of men, that it has been so often mended with the new state of ^ens own
inventions that if we look into the Word of God, and compare the state of the
Christian Religion in the Apostles times, to the common Religion that is
professed now in the Nation, and we shall find nothing but the name of it; the
name of Believing, the name of Churches, the name of Baptism, the name of
Ministers of the Gospel, the name of the Lord's Supper, the name of Christians,
etc. How mightily then does it concern us all, to search the Word of God which
is a Light to us in this dark Day, and is able to lead us through all the Mists
of the Mystery of Iniquity, and to set our fee^ in a fair path, where we may
walk without stumbling?

But if you shall say, Have not our learned Men undertaken to reform Religion
by the Word of God, and cannot they as soon hit the right way through these
many ways, as we?

I answer, It Is one thing, what they can do; and another thing, what they will
do: considering, how much the most part of them are taken with the love of this
present World, and the pride of life, which stops them from laying aside any
error that they have preached and practiced, lest it should reflect either upon
their profit on the one hand, or their credit and learning on the other, as
some of the Bishops said in the Council of Trent, That the School men were like
Astronomers, which did feigh Eccentricks, and Epicycles to save the Phenomina,
though they knew there were no such thing. In like manner, as Sir Francis Bacon
well observes in his Essaies of Superstition, p. 97, 98. The Schoolmen (says
he) have framed a number of subtle and intricate Axioms and Theorems to save
the practice of the Church. I shall therefore entreat the Reader, to see if the
Profit of this World, and the Credit of the Learned, does not engage them to do
so in the present controversy of Infants. Baptism, and whether it does not
savor more of the spirit of the forenamed Bishops in the Council of Trent,
then of the self-denying spirit that was Christ and his Apostles. For this end,
that thou may try all things, and hold fast the best, I have put forth that
ensuing Controversy, which at first was in private at Mr. Kellie's own House,
and afterward, according to a promise then made, he did send me in a Paper,
(not only the Arguments that he laid down then, but also some others that he
had not then time to propose) all which are particularly examined, and the
Scriptures relating to them, seriously weighed and considered: and therefore,
if by what is herein written, there be any discovery of the Truth on either
side, receive it and embrace it with readiness of mind; and with the like
readiness let thy heart be lifed to give God the Glory: which is all that is
desired from him that is ready to serve thee in the Gospel of Christ,

Jer. Ives.
From my House in Red-Cross. Street, at the corner of the New. Street, this 16
of August, 1655.
Infants Baptism Disproved.
In ANSWER to Mr ALEXANDER KELLIE His several Arguments levied in Defense of
it. Together with the proof of the lawfullnesse OF Believers-Baptism.
SIR;
I HAVE received a Paper from you, wherein you use your best endeavor to prove
that Infants ought to be Baptized: Which Proposition (you say.) you began to
prove at a Meeting at your house, July 10. 1655. in the forenoone.

Whether you did not at that time, do like the Builder that Christ speaks of,
Luke 14.28, 29, 30. viz. begin to do that that you were never able to finish,
I shall not now determine, but leave it to the Reader to judge, when he shall
survey your Arguments, with the Answers to them.

Your first stone that you lay in this building, or Argument that you bring to
prove Infants ought to be Baptized, is,

Mr. Kellie's first Argument. IF all Nations are commanded to be baptized, then
Infants are commanded to be baptized.

But all Nations are commanded to be baptized.

Ergo, Infants are commanded to be baptized.


Mr. Ive's Answer. I Do first deny the major Proposition, because that in many
places of Scripture, the word all Nations is used, where Infants are not
included; as Psalm. 72.17. All Nations shall call him blessed. Deuteronomy. 29.24. All
Nations shall say, wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this Land? Mark
11.17. Is it not written (says Christ) that my house shall be called of all
Nations, the house of prayer? Psalm. 118.10. All Nations compassed me about, but
in the name of the Lord will I destroy them. And so Mat. 3.12. All Nations
shall call you blessed. And the very place upon which you frame your Argument,
is enough, if there were no more, Mat. 28.19. where Christ bids his Disciples
to Go and teach all Nations, etc. I would ask any man that knows what an
Argument is, whether by your Rule of reasoning (viz. All Nations are commanded
to be baptized, therefore Infants) I may not as well say, The Disciples were
commanded to teach all Nations, therefore they were commanded to teach Infants
of eight days old?

And again, the Disciples were commanded to teach them (to wit, the Nations,
according to our Translation) all things that Christ commanded his Disciples to
do. Now the Disciples were commanded to break bread, and drink wine, in
remembrance of the body and blood of the Lord, Mat. 26.27. And they were
commanded to wash one another feet, John 13.14. and many other things. Now may
I not as well say, That Infants were commanded these things, as well as
baptism, since, as the 19 Verse says, Baptize them, the 20 Verse says,
Teaching them to observe all things that I. ( viz. Christ) have commanded you.

And again, May I not as well say, from the fore cited Scriptures, because the
Psalms says, all Nations shall call Christ blessed, that Infants in the
Cradle, at eight days old, shall call him blessed? And because all Nations
shall say, wherefore has God done this to Israel? therefore Infants of eight
days old shall say so? And because that Christ says that his fathers house
shall be called of all Nations a house of prayer, that therefore Infants of
eight days old are commanded to call it so? And because David says, all
Nations compassed him about, therefore Infants of eight days old compassed him
about? And because it is prophesied that all Nations shall call Israel blessed,
therefore Infants of eight days old shall call them blessed? I say, May I not
as well reason thus, as you may reason, If all Nations may be baptized, Infants
may?

2 I yet Answer further, as before at our meeting, That this Argument pleads as
much for the baptizing of all Turks and Infidells, because, as Turks and
Infidells, they are a part of all Nations, though they never believe in Christ;
and by this rule, the Eunuch, Acts 8. might have desired baptism, although he
had never believed in Christ, because he was of some one Nation, or other;
which is contrary, I presume, to your own opinion, and to the opinion of the
Church of England, who will not baptize a Turk or an Indian, unless he convert
and profess Christ. But may not the Turk or Indian, if he should be denied
baptism, take up your Argument, and say, If all Nations may be baptized, then
we may be baptized: But all Nations may be baptized; Therefore we may. See
therefore how this Argument does interfere with your own practice.

3 Again, You seem to plead for the baptism of believers Children only, but
your Argument pleads for unbelievers Children, as much or more then believers;
for if that believers Children must be baptized because they are a part of
Nations, who sees not but by the same rule unbelievers Children may be
baptized, because they are a greater part of the Nations, then the Children of
believers.

I Answer to your minor Proposition, as before at your house, That it is a
Command for believers and Disciples of Christ, that they should be baptized,
and not for all the Nations, as appears by the Original word, which is (...),
make Disciples, (...), baptizing THEM, and not the Nations, which you could not
deny; which made way for your second Argument, which was to prove that Infants
were Disciples.


Mr. Kellie's second Argument. ALL that are taught of God, are Disciples.

But the Infants of Gods people are taught of God. Ergo.

They are Disciples.


Mr. Ive's Answer. I Answer, first, by distinguishing of the Term Taught, in
the major Proposition. If by Taught you mean as the Prophet Jeremiah does,
Chap. 32.33. where it is said, God taught them, but they refused to receive
Instruction; then I deny the major, for those that refused to receive
instruction, were not Disciples, though they were taught.

But secondly, If by Taught, you mean taught so as to receive instruction, and
learn; then I deny the minor, for that Infants at eight days old are not
taught, neither do they receive instruction, or learn. To prove this, you
bring Isa. 54.13. where it is said, All thy Children shall be taught of God.

Answer, This does no more prove that infants in the Cradle of eight days old,
were taught and learned, then the Command the Disciples had to teach all
Nations, proves that they taught infants of eight days old, and that they
learned instruction.

2 This is a Prophecy that all Isreal's Children should be taught of God, and
not a Prophecy that they should all be taught so as to learn, in your sense,
which is the thing you are to prove; for if they should all be so taught, then
they should all of them be saved.

3 If you shall say the Prophecy respects the believers Children, whether
Jews or Gentiles, that they shall be all taught, etc. yet it does not say they
shall be taught in their Cradle, or at eight days old; which you must prove,
because you say infants are Disciples.

4 How soon do you lose the terms of the Proposition! You are to prove
Infants are taught, and you bring a Text that speaks of Children; as though
there were no Children but infant-children: Whereas indeed, the Scripture tells
us of all Abraham's Children, that were so by believing, and not by virtue of
their carnal descent from Abraham, Gal. 3.7.

You further go on, to prove that this Teaching is to be understood of
infants, and that it is a teaching by which they learn, and are made Disciples,
by the Argument that you used at your house, which is the same in your Paper.


Mr. Kellie. THey that are inwardly and effectually taught, are taught, and
learn:

But infants according to this Scripture (Isa. 54.13.) are inwardly and
effectually taught.

Ergo. They are taught, and learn.


Mr. Ive's. I Answer, by denying the minor, to wit, That infants are inwardly
and effectually taught, according to that Scripture.

For first, The word infants is not in the Text, which is the term of the
minor Proposition.

2 If by all thy Children shall be taught of God, the meaning should be, as you
say, that the natural seed of the believers bodies should be all taught of God
inwardly and effectually in their infancy, then to what purpose do you teach
them to be converted when they come to years?

3 If all the natural Children of believers be inwardly and effectually taught
of God, then you must hold falling from grace totally and finally, or else
conclude that all the natural Children of believers shall be all saved: For
what is it to be inwardly and effectually taught, but to be really and truly
Regenerated?

You go on to prove the minor, (viz.) That all believers infants are inwardly
and effectually taught; thus.


Mr. Kellie. IF infants were not inwardly and effectually taught, (you say)
there were no hope of salvation in their death:

But there is hope (say you) of salvation in their death. Ergo.

They are inwardly and effectually taught.


Mr. Ive's. I Answer, first, You leave out the term ALL, and put your Argument
into indefinite terms: But I presume by infants you mean all the natural seed
of believers, according to your practice in baptizing all of them that you call
so.

2 But I shall answer further, by denying the major, which is, That if infants
were not inwardly and effectually taught, there were no hope of salvation in
their death: For first, there was hope of the salvation of those Children with
whom the Lord had not SPOKEN, nor to whom he had not given his Laws, Deuteronomy.
11.1, 2. But if they had been inwardly and effectually taught, then the Lord
must needs have spoken with them; and if they were taught, it must be in Gods
Law; but it is said of those Children, That God had not spoke with them.

3 Again, We have great hope of the salvation of infants, because they are made
righteous by Jesus Christ, Romans 5.18, 19. though they should not know this by
an inward and effectual Teaching.

Also the Scripture says, That the Child shall not bear the sin of the father,
and it has committed in its infancy no sin of its own, what therefore should
hinder us from hoping that they shall be all said, if they die in their
infancy, although they are not taught inwardly and effectually.

4 But last of all, it is a fiction of your own brain to say, Infants are
inwardly and effectually taught, or else there is no hope of their salvation,
because there is not one word of God for to justify such a saying in the whole
Bible.

But yet you adventure to bring that Text, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. where the Apostle
advises, that the brethren would not sorrow as those that have no hope,
because that there shall be a resurrection, which some did not hope for at the
death of their friends, which made their sorrow the more intemperate. But now
that I may have hope of the salvation of my Children at the resurrection,
although I should not believe that unwritten Proposition, to wit, That in their
infancy they are effectually taught, appears, because of the Text you so much
urge in favor to your Baby-baptism, Mat. 19.14. where Christ bids the
Disciples Suffer little Children to come to him, because of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven. So that the Kingdom of Heaven belonged to infants before
they had so much as been with Christ, or before he had actually blessed them.

But you proceed to prove the minor Proposition, That Children must either be
inwardly and effectually taught, or else there is no hope of salvation in their
death; thus.


Mr. Kellie. WIthout the knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, which is eternal
life, there is no hope of salvation.

But without the inward and effectual teaching of God in infants, there is no
knowledge of God in Christ. Ergo.

Without the inward and effectual teaching of God, there is no hope of the
salvation of infants.


Mr. Ive's. YOu left out the term Infants in your major Proposition, by which
your Argument becomes fallacious, because it is a term that is afterward
inserted, both in your minor, and conclusion: which if you had played the part
of an honest Logician, you should have inserted it in your major, and then it
would have run thus, Without the knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, which is
eternal life, there is no hope of salvation for infants; then I would have
denied the major, and that because there is not one word of God for such a
Proposition.

2 God said he would have pity upon the City of Ninive, because their infants
did not know their right hand from their left. Can any man believe that any
body should be acquainted with the great and sublime matters of Jesus Christ,
and eternal life, that knows not his right hand from his left in nature? and
yet you say thus of children, viz. That they have the knowledge of God in Jesus
Christ, when as yet they have not knowledge to know their right hand from their
left in nature.

3 Again, They that know his name, will trust in him: But you see Children in
their infancy are called upon to do neither.

4 Again, They that know God in Jesus Christ, are always in the Scripture
distinguished from those that know him not: If so, then all Children in their
infancy know God in Jesus Christ, or else you must show how some infants of
eight days old may be judged to know him, and others may be judged to be
ignorant of him. If you say you cannot distinguish, then I say you have as much
reason to baptize a Turks Child at eight days old, as a Christians, since
there appears as much of the knowledge of God in Christ in the one, as in the
other, and then what becomes of your favor you would show to believers
Children?

Again, if they, viz. the infants of believers do know God in Jesus Christ in
their infancy, how comes many of them so wicked when they come to years? Do
you not here strongly smell of Arminianisme, which you so much preach against,
that men may be in the saving knowledge of God to day, and out of it to morrow?

5 Again, the Scripture says, Without says it is impossible to please God,
Heb. 11. and yet this is not to be applied to Children, because James says,
Faith without works is dead, James 2.17. So that if Children have faith in
infancy, it is a dead faith, because it has no works. And faith without works
cannot save, ver. 14. So that you see this Text, Heb. 11. Without faith it is
impossible to please God, must for what James says, be understood of men that
are arived above the stature of intants of eight days old. In the like manner
must we understand Christ, John 17. This is life eternal, that they know thee
the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Or else we must
conclude, that some Children shall be damned dying in their infancy, for not
knowing God in Jesus Christ, when they were no way made capable of such a
knowledge.

Lastly, The Scriptures say, Deuteronomy. 1.39. that Children in their infancy have no
knowledge of good or evil; the like is said of Christ himself in his infancy,
Isa. 7.14, 15, 16. How then can you imagine that infants can know God in Jesus
Christ, and yet not know good, when the knowledge of God in Christ is the
knowledge of the best good of all.

But you go on, and tell us, That infants dying in their infancy are saved.

Which is not the thing denied; but the thing denied, is, That they cannot be
saved without the knowledge of God in Christ; and instead of this, you would
prove that infants shall be saved, which I never denied.

Only let me tell you, That you miserably abuse the Scripture you bring to
prove their salvation, which is Isa. 65.20. from which Text you observe, That
they dye in as good a case, as Disciples of a hundred years standing.

O miserable blindness! the Text says, There shall not be in the New
Jerusalem an infant of days; and yet you bring this in favor to your eight
days infants.

Again, You say, That infants dye in as good a condition, as Disciples of a
hundred years standing; whereas the Text says, The Child shall dye a hundred
years old, I pray how many such infants do you baptize? So that this Text I
believe you urged without Book, for there is not the least word of such infants
as you plead for, nor of such old Disciples to whom you would compare them. But
are you so charitable toward infants, that you believe they shall be saved?
then pray let not the Midwives baptize, for fear they should be damned, which
some of your cloth have allowed, making the sprinkling water upon their face,
a cause of their salvation, rather then the knowledge of God in Christ, that
you now plead for.

But you go on, and tell us.


Mr. Kellie. THat if we judge infants shall be saved, then they should be daily
added to the Church by Baptism. And for this you cite Acts 2. ult.


Mr. Ive's. I Shall first speak to your Argument, and then to the Text.

This is a palpable non sequitor, for by this Argument Moses might have
Circumcised Children the first day they were born; for Moses might have said, I
judge these Children have a right to salvation the first day they are borne,
therefore they have a right to be added to the Church by circumcision the first
day they are born. Upon this account he might have circumcised the females,
because he judged that salvation did belong to them. But if you shall think to
salve this sore, by saying He was commanded to circumcise the eigth day, and to
circumcise the male Children; let me tell you, that he was not forbid either
the one or the other: But if you shall say, that in as much as God commanded
the eighth day, he did forbid doing of it before; and in as much as he did
Command the Circumcising of males, he forbid the circumcising of females: Let
me tell you then, that in as much as God has prescribed believing to be the
time of baptizing, it will be found a sin to do it upon any persons, at any
other time but when they believe with all their hearts, according to Acts 8.37.
And as for that Text which you urge, Acts 2.47. The Lord added to the Church
daily such as should be saved. Compare this but with verse. 41. and you will
find these to be no such Babies as you baptize, and add to your Church; for the
Text says, Then they that gladly received his word, were baptized, and the
same day there was added to them about three thousand souls. And Acts 5.14.
Believers were added to the Lord. What serves this to prove that which you
would have? Does it not strongly carry the contrary, That infants were not
baptized, because they are no where called believers.

You now face about, as though all were not safe in the Rear, and go back to
the Text in Esaias 54. Surely you feared all the hay and stubble that you built
upon that Text, was set on fire by the Answers that I gave to it at your house,
and now you are returning to quench it: But you must know, that your clouds of
Arguments are without water, as I shall make appear upon Examination.

First, You say,


Mr. Kellie. THat teaching must be inward and effectual, in Isa. 54.13.

1 Because it has the great peace of God going along with it.

From whence you Argue thus.

They that have the great peace of God going along with their teaching, are
inwardly and effectually taught:

But all the Children of Gods people have the great peace of God go along with
their teaching;

Therefore they are inwardly and effectually taught.


Mr. Ive's. I Answer this, by denying the major; for all the world gave the
great peace of God going along with their teaching, in as much as God holds
forth life and peace in the Gospel. And yet you will not say that all the world
are inwardly and effectually taught.

2 Again, to your minor, if by all the Children of Gods people, you mean all
their natural Children in their infancy, as you must, or else you say nothing
to your purpose; then I do deny the minor, because it supposes God does
inwardly and effectually preach peace to believers infants, whereas he
preaches nothing at all to them: Neither does the Text say he does, for then
they must (viz.) all the infants of believers, be actually saved, although they
should live to perpetrate never such horrible wickednesses; for if they, to
wit, all the natural Children of believers, are in this condition in their
infancy, what sin can deprive them of eternal life, when they come to years?
unless (as I have said before) you will hold falling from this grace and peace
you speak of, totally and finally; which is an opinion that you do not reckon
among the least of errors.

Again, if believers natural Children, as such, are thus privileged, as you
speak of, with this grace and peace, then the Children of the flesh are the
Children of God. But the Children of the flesh are not the Children of God.
Ergo. They are not as believers natural Children, thus privileged.

You go on to a second Reason, to prove the teaching in Isa. 54. to be inward
and effectual teaching; which what if it were granted, does it prove that this
was to infants in the Cradle of eight days old: But we have before showed the
contrary, that it is not meant of such: But however let us hear your other
Argument, which is.


Mr. Kellie. THat if it were not inward, and effectual teaching, it were
rather a judgment threatened, then a mercy promised.


Mr. Ive's. BElike then by this kind of reason, when God teaches a people, and
they do not learn, his teaching is a judgment, and not a mercy. If this be
true, then they that are under your teaching, and are not inwardly and
effectually taught, do not live under mercies, but judgments; and so they do
not despise a mercy, when they are not inwardly and effectually taught, but a
judgment. The weight of this Reason is lighter then vanity.

Your third Reason that this must needs be inward and effectual teaching, is,


Mr. Kellie. BEcause John brings it in as a proof of effectual Teaching.

From whence you say the Argument may be thus framed.

THey that are drawn to the Father, and come to the Son, are effectually
taught:

But they that are taught according to that Scripture, Isa. 54. are drawn to
the father, and come to the Son. Ergo.

They are inwardly and effectually taught.


Mr. Ive's. HEre the minor is denied, for the Reasons before named (viz.) For
then all believers Children must all be saved, or else they may fall away from
this teaching. And Christ himself does suppose as much, in the place cited by
you, out of John 6.44, 45. where though he says, It Is written, they shall be
all taught of God; here is not the least cry of the teaching of infants of
eight days old.

But secondly, Though he says, They shall be all taught of God, he does not
say, they shall all hear, learn, and come to him.

But he says, Every one that has HEARD, and LEARNED, comes, thereby showing
that more were taught, and more heard, then did learn and come to him.

You go on to a fourth Reason, and say,


Mr. Kellie. CHildren are all taught of God, because all know him from the
least to the greatest, Heb. 8.11.


Mr. Ive's. I Wonder you have forgot the Curse that God pronounces against him
that adds, or takes from his word; which if you had not, you would not have
said, that all know him from the least, to the greatest; when the Text says no
such thing, but that they SHALL all know him from the least to the greatest;
not that they do all know him. But if you say, they do all know him; then
remember that the same Text says, They shall not need to teach their
Neighbors, saying, know the Lord: If this be already fullfilled, what do you
preach for? And if all believers Children both little and great, know the Lord
so as to need none to teach them, then you must find out another Trade, or else
go and teach among the Heathen; for you judge all the Parish of Criplegate
believers, in as much as you baptize all their Children, and refuse none: And
by the same rule you may as well judge all England believers, and if so, then
if that all these believers and their Children know the Lord, according to that
text, so as they need no Teacher, from the greatest to the least, then you must
go to Preach to the Infidells in America, for by your own Text we have no need
of you here. I do therefore charge all men with folly in the Parish of
Criplegate, that shall pay you a farthing for Preaching, till you do repent of
your folly in thus expounding Heb. 8.11. For is it not folly for a man to pay
for that he has no need of?

5 You go on, and tell us.


Mr. Kellie. THat Children trust in God, Psalm. 22.9.

Ergo.


Mr. Ive's. HEre you pervert Scripture, for the text says not that Children
trust in God in their infancy; but it says that David as well as other infants
were made by God to hope upon their mothers breasts; for these words [When I
was] are unnecessarily supplied by the Translater, and are not in the
Original, and therefore we see that as well unbelievers as believers Children
do hope upon their mothers breast. I wonder how any man in his right wits can
say from this Text, that David or any infant in their infancy do trust in God?
Nay, may not a man as rationally conclude, that the whole Creation are inwardly
and effectually taught, and that they trust in God, because Paul says, Romans
8.20. that the Creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by
reason of him that has subjected the same IN HOPE.

6 You go on, and say,


Mr. Kellie. THat infants are most humble, therefore taught.


Mr. Ive's. THe Text that you urge, Luke 9.48. says no such thing, only that
Christ set a little Child before them for example: I would therefore know
whether or no the Text proves the humility of these Children to be by teaching,
or by nature. If by teaching, then the Disciples had no need to learn of
Children, because it cannot reasonably be supposed that infants in the Cradle
should be taught more then those Master Builders that were to go forth to
teach others. If this humility was natural to them, as to all Children before
they come to have knowledge, then it makes nothing for your purpose; and that
it was such, appears by the matter in hand, for the question was, who should be
the greatest, verse. 46. Now he bids them take example of Children in their
infancy, who then have no natural propensity to such kind of ambition, as to
think themselves greater, or more honorable then others. In the like case
Christ bids his Disciples Be wise as Serpents, may not a man as well conclude
that Serpents are inwardly and effectually taught, because Christ sends his
Disciples to learn wisdom of them, as you may conclude infants are inwardly
and effectually taught, because Christ sends his Disciples to learn humility of
them? And Christ bids his Disciples to learn innocence of Doves, does it
therefore follow that Doves are inwardly and effectually taught?

7 You tell us


Mr. Kellie. THat inward and effectual teaching of infants appears from 1 Thessalonians. 4.9, 10. Where he tells the brethren, they were taught of God to love
one another.


Mr. Ive's. WOuld any body that had but common sense conclude that Paul writ
this to infants, when he writes to the Thessalonians, that they are taught of
God to love one another?

8 You tell us,


Mr. Kellie. THat you may say of infants, and their spiritual birth, and
teaching, as Solomon says of the natural, Eccles. 11.5. As thou know not
which is the way of the Spirit, nor how the bones do grow in the womb of her
that is with Child, even so thou know not the works of God that makes all.
Yet this I grant, that the time of Gods teaching is not always in infancy; for
some are called at the last hour, and you baptize some who (possibly) are not
effectually called till afterward.


Mr. Ive's. INdeed you may say so of their spiritual birth, for your tongue is
your own; but the Scripture speaks of no such spiritual birth in infants, as
you do imagine: And you have answered your self, and given a reason why you
may not say of their spiritual birth, as Solomon does of their natural,
because you say that many are not spiritually born in their infancy; but I hope
you cannot say so of any infants, that they have not a natural birth; for
though Solomon says, We do not know how the Children are formed in the womb,
yet he denies not but they are all formed in the womb: But you as you do not
know how, so you confess you do not know who are spiritually thus born. But
is not this strange, that you should spend so many Arguments as you did a
little before, to prove that all infants of believers are inwardly and
effectually taught, drawn, and come to Christ, and that now you should tell us,
that some of them are not called till the last hour: And if you should think
to excuse the matter by saying, that you mean some unbelievers Children are not
called till then; that will not do, because you told me in the beginning of
your paper, that it was for believers infants that you pleaded, and the whole
scope of your paper speaks forth the same thing, and not one word of
unbelievers Children, etc.

You tell us, That some that we baptize are not effectually taught till
afterward.

To this I answer, That it justifies us if they do profess so to be when
they are baptized, For with the heart man does believe, and with the mouth
confession is made to salvation, Romans 10.10. And so it would justify you, if
that there were a confession of faith made at the time you did baptize, and a
life conformable thereunto, which is all that we are to look after, because
it is Gods work to search the heart, and not ours.

You proceed to prove (if you can) that infants are Disciples, thus.


Mr. Kellie. THey to whom we may give a Cup of cold water in the name of
Disciples, are Disciples:

But we may give a Cup of cold water to little Children;

Therefore little Children are Disciples.


Mr. Ive's. I Answer, first, by denying the major; for may I not as well say,
that they to whom we may give a thing in the name of a King, are Kings; and
they to whom we may show favor in the name of God, and Christ, are so many
Gods and Christ's; as you can say, they to whom we may give a cup of cold water
in the name of a Disciple, are Disciples: Who sees not the weakness of this
kind of arguing? But now to the minor Proposition, where you assume that we may
give to little children a cup of cold water in the name of a Disciple. I
answer, If by little Children you mean such as John means, 1 John 2.1. Little
Children, these things I write, that you sin not. And ver. 12. I write unto you
little Children, because your sins are forgiven. I say, if you do mean such, I
do grant the minor Proposition, viz. That to such little ones we may give a
Cup of water in the name of a Disciple: But this I suppose cannot be your
meaning, in as much as you are to prove that infants are Disciples, and there
is nothing to that purpose in the Text: However I take notice of your wandering
up and down, in saying, Sometimes infants are Disciples, not telling us
whether you mean believers or unbelievers infants. Sometimes that all believers
infants are Disciples: And sometimes that some are not called till the last
hour: Only we take for granted what you said at first, that you would
undertake for believers Children; if so, then suppose that the little ones here
in Mat. 10. last. were understood of infants, yet how do you prove that they
were believers infants? But it will be a task too hard for you to do either
the one, or the other.

You go on to tell us,


Mr. Kellie. THat you have five things more to say for infants Disciple-ship.

The first is this, If that infants may be called his servants, though they do
no service, Lev. 21.41, 42.

Then they may be called Disciples, though they do not appear to learn:

But they may be called Gods servants, though they do him no service. Ergo.

They may be called Disciples, though they do not appear to learn.


Mr. Ive's. I Answer, first, by denying the major, for if it be granted that
Children were called his servants, though they did God no service, yet it
follows not that therefore they are Disciples, though they do not learn.

May not a man as well prove the unprofitable servant, Luke 19. by the same
Logic, to be a Disciple? as thus: If one may be called Christ's servant, though
he do him no work, then he may be called Christ's Disciple, though he do not
appear to learn: But the unprofitable servant, Luke 19. was called Christ's
servant, as appears by verse. 13. and Mat. 25.14. and yet he did him no work.
Ergo. He was Christ's Disciple, though he did not appear to learn: And by this
Rule the non sequitor of your major Proposition appears.

But now to your minor, that Children are called Gods servants, though they did
him no service.

I answer, first, That infants of eight days old are not called Gods servants
any where in Scripture. 2 As to the Text urged in favor to this, Lev. 25.41,
42. if you compare it with verse. 39. you will see it was not spoken to prove
infants in the Cradle Gods servants, but rather to show, that because the
Nation of Israel, that he brought out of Egypt, were his servants, therefore
they should not be slaves one to another, and sold as bond men, which they
never did use to do to Children in the Cradle.

3 Again, Cannot God speak many things concerning Children, as that they are
his servants, etc. and yet not speak of Children in their infancy? May not a
man as well say, because Israel was bid to teach their Children, that therefore
they were to teach infants of eight days old? And because Josh. 22.10. it is
said The Children of Gad built an Altar, therefore the infants of Gad were
Masons, and Stone-cutters? And because it is said of the virtuous woman, Prove.
31.20. Her Children rise up, and call her blessed, therefore her little infants
of eight days old did call her blessed? Is not this as good reason as that
which you bring, viz. Because God says, the Israelites children were his
servants, therefore their infants of eight days old were his servants.

2 You go on, and tell us, that


Mr. Kellie. PEter in Acts 15.10. calls infants Disciples.


Mr. Ive's. ARe you not ashamed to speak such a notorious falsity? Does that
Text say, that Peter calls infants Disciples? Oh what a mercy is it that we can
read! surely if we could not, you might as well say, that Peter said you should
have the fifth penny of our estate for preaching, as say he says, Infants are
Disciples.

Now indeed Peter blames them for putting the yoke of Circumcision upon
Disciples; but this does no more prove infants to be Disciples, then if a man
would say, The Clergy are oppressed by Taxes, therefore every one that is oppressed
by Taxes, is a Clergyman; for is it not the same that you bring? The Disciples
were circumcised, therefore all that they circumcised, were Disciples. Now if
you look to the foregoing verses, you shall see that the false Teachers taught
circumcision to the brethren, and not to infants, and told the Disciples, that
if they were not circumcised, they could not be saved. And now if it be
granted, that they would have circumcised infants, as well as old folks, does
this prove infants are old folks? No more does your saying, they would
circumcise Disciples, prove infants to be Disciples.

You proceed to a third Reason why Children should be Disciples, and that is
this, viz.


Mr. Kellie. THat if you should grant they are not learned, but ignorant, yet
ignorance (you say) did not debar from Circumcision, therefore not from baptism.


Mr. Ive's. I Answer, by showing you how willing you are to gather up any thing
to serve your turn, though nothing to purpose; one while they, viz. infants,
are to be baptized, because believers Children, do know the Lord, and are
taught of God, etc. And now you plead, they may be baptized, though ignorant:
What a miserable shuffling is here? What, knowledge the cause all this while,
and now be baptized though they are ignorant, what strange Logic is this?

But to the Consequence, viz. Ignorance (you say) did not hinder from
Circumeision, therefore not from baptism.

I answer, first, ignorance could not hinder infants from that which God
commanded Parents to do unto their Children, while they were infants; so that
if God had commanded parents to baptize their infants, then their ignorance
could not hinder, no more then it could hinder their parents from Circumcising
them, after God had commanded it. But here you do beg the question, by taking
it for granted, that God commanded infants to be baptized, as he did Command
the Children of Abraham to be Circumcised.

2 Again, in Gospel worship whatever is not of faith, is sin. God will (in
Gospel worship) be served in Spirit, which is a service no where required of
infants, therefore ignorance must needs hinder infants from that which God no
where requires, and which they are no way capable to perform.

You go on, and tell us, that


Mr. Kellie. IGnorance did not hinder Peter from his Masters washing his feet,
John 13.7, 8. The 7th verse (you say) shows his ignorance, and the 8th the
necessity of his washing.


Mr. Ive's. WHy do you not conclude somewhat from hence, or else why do you
bring it? If you bring it to prove that therefore ignorance may not hinder
Children from baptism, then pray see whether or no Peter did not know Christ
washed his feet, and whether in reason can you believe that Christ could wash
Peter's feet, and Peter be as ignorant of his washing, as your babies are of
their sprinkling.

Again, it plainly appears that Peter was ignorant, not of the washing it
self, but of somewhat Christ would make known by it, which was to show, That
they whom he washed should learn of him to do so to others; and therefore
Christ asks his Disciples if they knew what he had done to them. Now they
could not but know he had washed them, but they did not know that he had hereby
set them a Copy to write after; and therefore if your Children had as much
knowledge of Christ when you baptize them, as Peter had when Christ washed his
feet, though they might not know all circumstances relating to baptism, then
indeed it were somewhat to your purpose to quote this place.

Again, is it not a strong sign of a weak cause, that you should compare the
ignorance of Peter to the ignorance of your infants? his being but a partial
ignorance in a circumstance, and your Babes are totally ignorant of both
substance and circumstance. Again, this Law of washing the Disciples feet was
never in practice before, till Christ now did it, and commanded it; and
therefore no marvel though the Apostles were ignorant of the end of it, till
it was declared; neither was there any such qualifications required in washing
one another feet, as is required in baptism.

You proceed, and say, that


Mr. Kellie. THe Scripture does not say, None shall be baptized but
understanding Disciples, and if it did (you say) yet that had not excluded
infants; for the Apostle says, He that will not labor, must not eat, and yet
Children (say you) must not starve, though they do not labor.


Mr. Ive's. TO this I answer, first, that the Scripture does not say, you shall
not baptize, bells, nor go a Pilgrimage, why then do not you do these things?

2 Again it did not say (as we have elsewhere observed) that the Children of
Abraham should not be circumcised the sixth or fourth day, why then did not
they do it before? Nor the Scripture does not say, Infants shall not receive
the Sacrament of the bread and wine, why do you then refuse to give it them?
Do you not plainly see that you condemn others in the thing you allow? for you
condemn us that will not baptize our infants, because you say it is no where
forbidden; why may not others as well condemn you for refusing to give the
Lords Supper to infants, by the same rule, because it is no where forbidden.

I but you will say, it is implicitly forbidden, 1 Cor. 11.28. because the Text
says, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat; and Children cannot
examine themselves. In the like manner (say I) infants are denied baptism,
because the Scripture says, He that BELIEVES, and is baptized, etc. Mark 16.
and If thou BELIEVE, thou may be baptized, Acts 8. Do not these in the
judgment of any rational man as plainly exclude infants from baptism, as the
other Scripture does exclude them from the Supper?

But you presume and say, that


Mr. Kellie. IF the Scripture had said, None but understanding Disciples should
be baptized, that had not excluded infants.


Mr. Ive's. IS not this strange that you should say, That they are not to be
excluded, though the Scripture do exclude them? Do you not hereby give us to
understand, that let the word of God say what it will, you will do what you
list? Neither do you think to mend the matter by that place of Scripture, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. If any will not work, he should not eat. Now you seem to conclude
from hence, that though Children do not work, yet they must eat. Ergo. Though
children do not believe, yet they must be baptized. Now see the fallacy; the
Text does not say, He that DOES not work, as you say, when you apply it to
infants; but He that WILL not work. Now if there be any children that WILL not
work, they must not eat, viz. of the Churches Charity; therefore infants, and
they that are impotent, it cannot be said of them that they WILL not work. Now
if God had given you the like Command to baptize Children in their infancy, as
he has done to fathers and mothers to feed them in their infancy, then you had
said something to the purpose, otherwise you had as good have said nothing.


Mr. Kellie. Again, You (say I) brought in the word (...) to prove that the
Command, Mat. 28. reaches only Disciples, not all Nations; my reason (you say)
is, Because (...) is the Neuter, and (...) the Masculine Gender. But this (you
say) is no reason at all, as appears by Mat. 25.32. where the word (...) must
neds have relation to (...), unless there shall not be a separation between
all Nations at the last day. This Enallage generis, where the Masculine Gender
is put with (...), is usual in Scripture, and many times (you say) includes
Children, as Mat. 25.32. Rev. 2.26, 27. and 19.15. Acts 15.17. and 21.25. and
26.17. and 28.28. Ephesians. 2.11. and 4.17.


Mr. Ive's. 1 YOu did agree at your house, that (...) did relate to Disciple,
and accordingly went about to prove that Children were Disciples, as appears by
many of your Arguments.

2 I said not that (...) did no where refer to (...), but that in this
Scripture it ought to refer to (...), which you also granted.

3 Though (...) be referred to (...), yet it does not follow that the infants
in the Nations are included, yea, the contrary is apparent from the latter
clause of the sentence, where it is said, Teaching them, which does
sufficiently intimate, that those of the Nations are hereby only meant, who are
capable of Discipline, and consequently had the use of reason, which agrees
not unto infants, who, as the Scripture shows, together with the attestation
of common sense, have no knowledge between good and evil. Deuteronomy. 1.39.
Moreover, your little ones which you said should be a prey, and your Children
which in that day had no knowledge between good and evil, they shall go in
thither, and unto them will I give it, and they shall possess it. Isai 7.14,
15, 16. Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign, behold a Virgin
shall conceive a Son, and shall call his name Imanuel. Butter and Honey shall
he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good. For before
the Child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the Land that
thou abhorrest, shall be forsaken of both her Kings. Likewise the very instance
you bring out of Mat. 25.32. does refute your opinion, for there such only of
the Nations are understood, as had acted in the world, and done either good or
evil; for they are such as had either relieved Christ in his necessity, or
refused to do so; neither of which agrees to infants; for would it not be
ridiculous to imagine that our Lord Christ should say to the infants, Go ye
cursed into everlasting fire, for I was hungry, and ye fed me not? Besides,
every one of the rest of the places cited by you, where the word (...) is
found, does, if the circumstances be examined, mean them only of the Nations
that had the use of reason, and so are not a whit to your purpose.

4 You go on to another Argument, and tell me, that


Mr. Kellie. THat which God has once commanded, and never repealed, ought
still to be obeyed:

But he did once Command that the Children of his servants, whom he has taken
into Covenant with himself, should have the seal of the rightousnesse of
faith set upon them, which he has never forbidden, only he has taken away the
outward circumcision, therefore we must obey that Command still.


Mr. Ive's. I Do deny this whole Sillogism, because first, there is not one of
the terms of the Propos: in it; which had you argued honestly, you should have
said thus, That which God once commanded, and never repealed, is in force
still: (and then you should have assumed) But God did once Command the
baptizing of infants, and never repealed it; therefore that Command is in force
still. Indeed had you reasoned thus, and proved the minor, a gracious heart
would hardly have denied it: But then

2 This Argument contradicts it self; for you say, He did once Command, and
never afterward forbid that infants should have the seal and token of the
Covenant; and yet you say presently after, That Circumcision was taken away;
then it folowes, that the seal of it was prohibited, and the use of it
forbidden; is not this a palpable contradiction? For what was the seal of
faith that God commanded to Abraham? Was it not Circumcision? Genesis 17.10. Romans
10.11. If so, then when Circumcision was repealed, that Law which commanded
nothing else, must needs be repealed; and if the Law be in force, it must
require some other thing as well as Circumcision, and so be but in part
repealed; if Circumcision be repealed. You might as well have said, that James
Duke Hamilton was a live, after James Earl of Cambridge was beheaded, as say
that that Law given to Abraham, Genesis 17.10. is in force, and yet say
Circumcision was taken away. Who but those are wilfully ignorant, does not see
this empty kind of arguing?

You proceed to another Argument, and tell me, that


Mr. Kellie. THey which had a right to the Ordinance that was profitable every
way, have still a right to baptism:

But the Children of Gods people have a right to that Ordinance that was
profitable every way. Ergo.

The Children of Gods people have a right to baptism.


Mr. Ive's. THis Argument among the rest we met with at your house; and I did
then, and so I do now deny the major; for if you look the text upon which it
is grounded, Rom, 3.1, 2. you will find that this Ordinance you speak of, was
Circumcision; so that then the major Proposition in plain English is this, They
that had had a right to Circumcision, have a right to baptism; if this be a
good Argument, why do you plead for the infants of believers so much? May you
not as well plead for the unbelieving Jews, and their infants by the same
reason, thus, They that had a right to circumcision, have a right to baptism;
but the Jews and their infants had a right to Circumcision, therefore they
have a right to baptism now. If you shall say, so they have, if they convert to
believe in Christ, I say then you have answered your self; and then it
follows not that their right to Circumcision did give them a right to
baptism; but their believing in Christ, for if it did, your must baptize a Jew
though he did never believe.

You now come to scare me with great words, since you cannot do it by
Arguments; and this you endeavor to do, by telling me of fearful and base
Absurdities that will follow upon what I have said in denying infants baptism.

The first Aburdity (you say) is,


Mr. Kellie. THat if baptism be denied to the infants of believers, then the
Children of the Devils servants under the Law, had better means of grace
conferred upon them, then the dearest Children of the best servants of God have
now under the Gospel, thought the Gospel be a better Covenant, established
upon better promises, Heb. 7.22. Heb. 8.6, etc.


Mr. Ive's. I Answer to this, first by denying the Consequence; for it does not
follow they had better priviledg^s then, then we have now, if we deny them
baptism: But the contrary is true, we are, and so are our Children, freed from
those rudiments they were in bondage to, Gal. 4.3, 4. and Verse. 5. it is said,
Christ came to redeem us from the Law. And in Acts 15.10. (your Text that you
did allege for infants Discipleship) Circumcision is there called a yoke that
neither they nor their fathers were able to bear; and yet you presume to call
this a privilege, which the Scripture calls a bondage, and a yoke. But if you
shall say, that in Romans 3.1, 2. the Apostle says, they had advantage by it. I
answer, that proves not but that it was a yoke; for a servant has an advantage
by a Prentiship, does it follow therefore that an Apprentiship is not a state
of bondage? Now if God will freely bestow those things upon our infants without
either Circumcision or baptism, this is so far from Less grace, that it is
more grace then was bestowed upon infants under the Law. And I challenge you
and all the world to show me one Text in all the Bible where God does either
threaten parents or Children with the loss of any favor, either spiritual or
temporal, for not baptizing their infants. If so, then your talking of denying
them favor, by denying them baptism, is but a figment of you own brain.

And whereas you talk of the Children of the Devils servants, that they had
more privilege then we, because they were Circumcised.

I answer, first, the Text that you bring to prove it, Ezekiel. 16.20. says not
so. 2 It says they did offer their Children in the fire; but yet remember,
that this Chapter treats of the whole Nation of Israel, which you spoke so much
in favor of but even now, though you now call them the Children of the Devil;
but be it so, you have heard that their privilege you plead for, was a bondage
that God has freed our infants from, and as long as you confess they are
freed form Circumcision, and you cannot prove any other thing is enjoined to
infants, what is become of your great Absurdity?

Your second Absurdity is like the first, for (you say) that


Mr. Kellie. DEnying infants baptism, shows God is less careful, and his
love is less, and his faithfulness is lessened toward infants now, over it
was of old. And this you would prove from Jer. 30.20. and Mic. 7. last.


Mr. Ive's. IN the first of these Scriptures it is said, that the Children of
Israel shall be as before time; and you say the Children of his people in the
Gospel shall be as the Children of his servants before time; which is altogether
false, for it is a Prophecy of their return from all Nations, to become a
Nation again as before time, as any body may see, that does not wink, at Jer.
30.18. And as for this Text, if by making infants under the Gospel, as the
Jews were under the Law, if that be your notion upon the Text, and the word
before time, then we must circumcise them, or else they cannot be as before time:
Do you not pervert Scripture to make us Judaize? And to that Text, Mic. 7.
last. where God says, He will perform his truth to Jacob, etc. I demand first,
whether ever God swore to Jacob, or the fore fathers, or ever made any promise
to them, that their infants under the Gospel should be baptized; if he did,
show us where; if he did not, then you do but slander God, instead of bringing
the least absurdity upon me, in saying, that he is unfaithful, etc. if infants
are not baptized. And you tell us that Christ, Luke 1.71, 72. Came into the
world for this end; it is true, he came to fulfill what God had promised before
time, but how does this bear hard either upon his love or faithfulness, viz.
Not to baptize infants, unless, as I have said, he had before promised they
should be baptized?

Your third Absurdity, is that


Mr. Kellie. DEnying infants baptism, does dishonor Gods wisdom; because we
look upon it as folly (say you) to administer an Ordinance to infants; but the
wise God did administer an Ordinance upon the infants that did not understand
it.


Mr. Ive's. TO this I answer, That our denying infants baptism does rather
dishonor your wisdom, and the wisdom of this world, then the wisdom of
God, because God never required it at your hands.

And whereas you say, God did administer an Ordinance to ignorant infants, etc.
I demand if this be not horrible presumption for you to administer an Ordinance
upon infants without a Command, because the most high God caused an Ordinance
once to be administered by a Command? And whether now for any one to oppose this
practice of yours, be not much rather a flying in the face of your wisdom,
then Gods? It Is no marvel then that you say, Here is enough to kindle your
spirit against my opinion for ever, because indeed denying infants baptism,
sets as it were a fire the foundation of your Craft, by which you beguile the
simple: And you know this put a fire into the breast of the men of Ephesus,
against the Apostles Doctrine, when they understood that the gain they got by
their Will Worship, was like to be set at naught.

Your fourth and last Absurdity that you say follows upon denying infants
baptism, is, that


Mr. Kellie. IT makes believing parents and their Children, worse then Heathen
and their Children, in whom the Prince of the power of the air ruled, etc.

Yet such (say you) coming into the acknowledgement of the true God, had not
only themselves, but their infants taken into Covenant, and had the token
thereof, which (you say) I deny to Children.


Mr. Ive's. THis is all one with your first Absurdity, and therefore the same
Answer will serve it; for was not this your first Absurdity that you said
followed denying infants baptism, viz. That the Children of the Devils
servants under the Law, had better means of grace conferred upon them, then the
Children of the best servants of God have. And what do you say more now? For
what difference is there between believers, and their infants, and Gods best
servants, and their infants? And what difference is there between the Children
of the Devils servants, and the Children of those in whom the Prince of the
air rules? etc. And what difference is there between circumcising the
Children of the Devils servants under the Law, and circumcising the Children
of those in whom the Prince of the air ruled, etc.

But yet a word to this, though it be one with the former: First, how does my
opinion make them, Viz. believing Parents, and their infants, worse then
Heathens, and their infants under the Law? since by your own confession neither
the Heathen, nor his infant was to be Circumcised, till he, Viz. the Heathen,
had acknowledged the true God, so that then he feased to be a Heathen. In like
manner therefore as the Converts to the Jews Religion, were they and their
children to partake of all the privileges of the Law, upon obedience of all
the Commands of God in the Law: so all Converts to the Christian Religion, and
their Children, upon obedience to all the Commands in the Gospel, shall be made
partakers of the privileges of the Gospel: But now if God has not Commanded
believers infants to be baptized, nor promised any privilege to their baptism
in infany, nor threatened any detriment to those infants that wanted it, as he
did to infants that wanted Circumcision, he told their Parents that that soul
should be cut off from the people. I say, if there be neither Precept for
baptism of infants, nor Promise of Privilege to their infants baptism, nor
detriment threatened to the want of it, then you rather quarrel and find fault
with God (because he did not make a Law for believers infants to be baptized)
then with me; and because he did not promise them some favor that were
baptized in their infancy, and impose some penalty upon those infants that were
not so baptized. Now indeed if you had showed us any such thing, then you had
made good your charge; but till you do so, you (as I have said) rather
quarrel with God for not making such a Law, then with me for not keeping of
it. And whereas you say, I deny infants the seal; You are first to show where
baptism is called a seal, or else to deny them baptism, is not to deny them a
seal. 2 You must show us, if baptism be a seal, whether God did any where
command us to set it upon infants: And 3 in what place of the Child it must be
set; for we know in the Law it was set upon the foreskin of their privy
members. This you must do before you can fasten any Absurdity upon me, in
denying a seal to infants.

You come now to remember me of somewhat that I said at your house, Viz. You
did run in a round when you said Children had a right to the Ordinance that was
profitable every way, and therefore ought to be baptized; and you tell me, that


Mr. Kellie. MY saying you did run in a round, did contradict my self, and
give away my cause.


Mr. Ive's. TO this I answer, that this is sooner said, then proved, Viz. That
I gave away the Cause; but however, I perceive that you would be willing to be
counted a ridiculous Disputant, and so ridiculous as circular disputing is
accounted in Schools, so that I would but give away my cause, which is not
mine, but the Lord Christ's. This appears plainly, for you say that I told you,
you run in a circle; which you do not in the least endeavor to vindicate your
self from, but say by this I gave away my cause. But if you had urged all that
I had faid at that time, it would not so appear; for when you argued, That if
infants had a right to the Ordinance that was profitable every way, then they
had a right to baptism: But they had a right to that Ordinance that was
profitable every way. Ergo. I did then answer, by distinguishing of the terms
of the major Proposition, Viz. What you meant by the Ordinance that was
profitable every way: (I then said) if you meant Circumcision, then you run in
a circle, because that was the thing denied in the former Sillogism, Viz. That
they that had a right to Circumcision, had a right to baptism, which you
endeavored to prove, by saying, They that had a right to the Ordinance
profitable every way, had a right to baptism. If by this you meant
Circumcision, then you did but run round, and no way prove the thing denied,
but in effect said it over again. I further said, That if by the Ordinance that
was profitable every way, you meant baptism, then I denied the Sillogism; for
then it must have run thus, They that have a right to baptism, have a right to
baptism: Indeed I should have had so much respect to your gray hairs, that I
should not have mentioned this your weakness, had you not in your Paper both
mentioned it, and gloried in it, as though thereby you had made me give away my
Cause. And that I did at your house detect your false Logic after this manner,
as I have laid it down. I shall appeal to those Gentlemen that are well
learned in the Rules of discourses, that were then at your house, and to whom I
did then appeal in the same case.

You proceed to more Reasons for infants baptism, if I may so call them without
giving away my canse again. The first is,


Mr. Kellie. BEcause they are in Covenant, which you would prove by Deuteronomy.
29.10. to 15. Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13. Romans 1.7.10.

From hence you argue, that If they are in Covenant, they may be baptized.


Mr. Ive's. I Deny the Consequence, for by this rule Moses might have baptized
as well as circumcised, if a bare being in the Covenant were a reason why they
should baptize; but you must remember; that it is the Command of Christ that we
look at; and if he had not commanded believers to be baptized, their being
believers would not have justified their baptism: So if it were granted that
infants were in the Covenant, what reason is this why they should be baptized,
if God has not commanded it? Do you not here open a door for will worship,
and other Popish fooleries? For may not they say they do them because they are
in Covenant? Further, do you not here sin because grace abounds? For is God so
good as to place our infants in Covenant with himself, must we therefore go
take the holy name of God in vain, and sprinkle water upon their faces for a
seal, as though we doubted whether God would keep his Covenant, unless we
sealed it with a seal of our own making? But to the Text. First, if you look
Deuteronomy. 1.39. you will find the Covenant here is not the same that was made with
them when they came out of Egypt; for he says, It is a Covenant BESIDES the
Covenant he made then. 2 Compare but Verse. 10. to Verse. 12. and you will find
that they stood that day before the Lord, that they MIGHT enter into Covenant,
etc. Now then this could not be the Covenant made with Abraham, because that
was confirmed, and Israel had it sealed to them long before; neither was it the
Covenant made when they came out of Egypt, if so, then it could not be the
Covenant that your seal you talk of did belong unto. 2 It could not be the
Covenant of grace by Jesus Christ, unless you say there was two Covenants of
grace, Viz. one made with them before they went into Egypt, and another after
their coming out of Egypt: Now if this was not a Covenant of grace by Christ,
spoken of Deuteronomy. 29. what does it avail to the matter in hand? unless you say
they that are in any Covenant have a right to baptism. And if you say it was a
Covenant of grace by Jesus Christ, that is here mentioned, then pray consider
what follows, that the Covenant of grace by Jesus Christ was made with them,
that (as the 4 verse says) The Lord had not given a heart to perceive, nor
eyes to see, nor ears to hear unto that day. So that whereas you have been
telling of us a of Covenant with believers and their seed all this while; you
now come to tell us of a Covenant made with unbelievers, and their seed, for so
were these at the time of the making of it: So that if your Logic be good,
Viz. Believers and their infants are in Covenant, therefore they and their
infants must be baptized. And the Text you bring to prove it, says the same of
unbelievers, then by your own Text, infidells and their infants may be
baptized: But the Text you bring says the same of unbelievers. Ergo. That the
Text says, this Covenant was made with unbelievers, compare Deuteronomy. 29.4. with
Romans 11.8. where speaking of the Jews not believing in Christ, he says, God
(as it is written) alluding to this very Text, Deuteronomy. 29.4.) had given them the
spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should
not hear unto this day: And yet these are the believers whom you say are in
Covenant, and therefore their infants must be baptized. But I confess I do
not wonder at this, because most of them whose infants you baptize, are such
believers, if I may so call them, as have not a heart to perceive, nor eyes to
see, to this very day, else they would not receive for doctrine the traditions
of men, and leave the plain way of Christ. You add, though to as little purpose
as before, Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12. and Romans 10.6, 7, 8. where (I confess) the Apostle
alluding to the forecited place of Deuteronomy, says, that the word is nigh
thee, even in thy mouth, and heart, even the word of faith which he preached;
and therefore the righteousness of faith he tells us is this, Verse. 9, 10.
That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with
the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made unto salvation. You bid me compare this Text with Deuteronomy. 29. which I much
wonder at, since I do not know any two Texts in all the Bible that have more
disparity; for in the one place it is said, They had not a heart to believe; and
in the other it is said, With the heart man believes. Again, as this Text has
no affinity with the former, so, it has no affinity to the matter in hand; for
to what purpose do you cite a Text that speaks of believers who profess
Christ with their mouths, and believe him in their hearts, to justify the
baptism of infants, that never opened their mouths for Christ? Truly Sir, were
it not that I am relieved with this saying, Opere in longo fas est obrepere
somnum, I should despair of having any thoughts of charity toward a man that
professes himself (as you do) both a Christian, and a Scholar, and yet reason
at this rate.

You add a second Argument, and say, that


Mr. Kellie. BEcause they are in Covenant, the initiating token of the Covenant
must needs be theirs.


Mr. Ive's. I Answer, That here you have not concluded the terms of the
Question, therefore I may deny the whole Argument.

2 But further, If by the initiating token of the Covenant you mean baptism,
let me see then how you can call this a second Argument, except you tell the
first twice over? For was not this the Argument that went before? Viz. They
that are in the Covenant have a right to baptism; and is not the second the
same word for word, if by the token of the Covenant you mean baptism; therefore
the answer to the first is also an answer to that you call a second. And
whereas you say that the Text, Genesis 17. tells us that every Man-child had the
token of the Covenant, because they were in the Covenant; why I pray had not
the women-children the token of the Covenant? were not they in the Covenant?
Can you deny it? and yet you see they were not circumcised: And were not the
males in the Covenant (as I have said once and again) as soon as they were
born, why were they denied the the token of it till eight days old? they might
have died, as doubtless many of them did in this intervaile of time between
their birth and the eighth day: Therefore you see that infants being in the
Covenant, could be no Argument to prove their Circumcision, till the time God
appointed, though their lives had lain upon it. In the like manner all your
talking of infants being in the Covenant, cannot lawfully justify their
baptism, till the time comes that God commands it: And this kept female infants
from Circumcision, Viz. because God had not commanded it. Although they were in
the Covenant, yet you see they were denied the token of the Covenant.

You urge another Text, which is Ezekiel. 37.25. where God promises by his
Prophet, that The Tribes of Israel shall be joined together, and shall dwell in
their own Land they and their Children, and their Childrens Children for ever,
under the Conduct of Christ their Princee in the latter days. And you say this
proves infants should be baptized. Did ever any body infer thus from a Text?
Israel and their Children shall come to dwell in their own land in the latter
days, and Christ shall be their Prince. Ergo. The infants of believers must be
baptized. This is the substance of the Text from whence you thus infer, as any
body may see that does but read the Chapter. But now, suppose this, that this
were applicable to believing Gentiles, does it not follow, that if the seed of
the righteous, and their Children, and their Childrens Children for ever,
should be baptized, that then we may baptize all the world, since they are all,
and will be for ever, the seed of Noah, who was a faithful man?

You tell us in the third place, that


Mr. Kellie. INfants are included in the Command of baptism, because Christ
says, Luke 9.48. They that receive a little Child, receive Christ.


Mr. Ive's. MIght you not better have said, that this little Child was Christ,
then have concluded that the little Child was included in the Command of
baptism? May we not as well say, That the Converts were Commanded to baptize
the Apostles, rather then the Apostles were commanded to baptize them, because
Christ says to his Apostles, Mat. 10.40. He that receives you, receives me.
May not a man as well upon the other hand say, That he that refused the
Apostles, refused to baptize the Apostles, as you may say the receiving, or non
receiving of infants, is a receiving of them to, or a rejecting them from
baptism.

Again, He that receives an Angel of God, is said to receive God; may not a
man as well plead from hence, Therefore Angels may be baptized, as you may, in
saying, He that receives a little Child, receives Christ? Therefore a little
Child must be baptized. And whereas you say, That a refusing to baptize
infants, is a refusing to receive Christ. How strangely do you contradict your
self? Did not you say in the former part of your paper, That many that we
baptized, were not inwardly and effectually called till afterward? Now does
not this plainly prove, That we that refuse to baptize Children, do yet
notwithstanding receive Christ; for what is it to be inwardly and effectually
called, but to receive Christ?

In the fourth place, you say, that


Mr. Kellie. THey are included in baptism, for whom Christ appears so much, as
we find, Mark 10.13. Luke 18.15. which (you say) Luke says were infants, etc.


Mr. Ive's. I Answer, You take great pains to prove that which nones denies,
That these that Christ took in his arms, were infants: But how do you prove
that which is denied, That these infants were baptized by Christ. You say, That
Christ reproved his Disciples for not suffering the infants to come to him.
Which shows plainly, that baptizing them was no part of their business that
brought them: First, because if it were a Command of Christ to baptize infants,
the Disciples that were his Messengers, were then ignorant of a great part of
their Message, that they were to deliver in their Ministry. Or else 2 If they
did know that it was their work, and Christ's Command to baptize infants, they
were desperately wicked in keeping any from it: This was not only to break a
Command, but to teach men so, and to be guilty of that abominable evil the
Pharisees were guilty of, Viz. Of not entering into Heaven themselves, nor
suffering others. This will follow, if to keep infants from baptism, be to keep
them from Christ, as you would make it.

But that they were not baptized when they came to Christ, appears because the
Text says, John 4.2. that Jesus himself baptized NOT, but his Disciples.

And whereas you say,


Mr. Kellie. HAnds were laid upon them, by which greater things then baptism
was done.


Mr. Ive's. I Answer, By the same rule you may give the bread and wine in the
Sacrament, to infants, because greater things were done by laying on of hands,
then eating bread, and drinking wine: And why do you not by this rule preach
to Children in their Cradles, because greater wonders were wrought by laying on
of hands, then ever were done by Preaching. Who sees not but this Argument is
as strong for Preaching to infants, and giving the Lords Supper to infants, as
it is for baptizing infants? And yet though you allow them baptism, you deny
them both the other Ordinances.

You say, Christ blessed them, as well as laid hands on them, which (say you)
is as much. if not more th^n baptism. And is not his blessing as much, if not
more then your giving the Sacrament of the Supper to them? Why then do you
deny them of it?

You say,


Mr. Kellie. THat was a good reason for Christ to bless them, viz. Because the
Kingdom of Heaven belonged to them, and therefore it must needs be a good
reason for us to baptize them.


Mr. Ive's. I Answer, first, why this was not a good reason for CHRIST to
baptize them, and yet the Scripture says, He baptized none.

2 Does not infants right to the Kingdom of heaven entitle them to all other
Ordinances, as well as baptism, since under the Gospel whoever were found to be
members of a true Church by baptism, had also fellowship of all other
Church Priviledges, except they had (by some scandalous evils) deprived
themselves thereof; so that infants right to the Kingdom of Heaven, serves
nothing for your present purpose.

Your fifth Reason is,


Mr. Kellie. INfants are branches of the true Olive, Romans 11.17. Therefore they
are included in the Command of baptism.


Mr. Ive's. I Answer, first by denying the antecedent; for the infants of
believers are not branches of the Olive in the Text, but only such as did
actually believe, and there is not the least mention made of their infants in
the whole Chapter; for the 20 verse says, That for want of faith the Jews
were broke off, and by faith the Gentiles did stand; which faith is not to be
found in your infants you plead for.

2 To be branches by generation (if that were the sense of the Text) could not
give them a right to baptism, because the Jews were natural branches, and yet
that could not give them a right to baptism without faith.

Your sixth Reason is,


Mr. Kellie. BEcause infants of believers are Abraham's seed, and so
consequently members of Christ, Gal. 3.16. And baptism (you say) is an
Ordinance of our incorporation into Christ, 1 Cor. 12.13. Therefore (you say)
they that are members of Christ should not be denied that Ordinance.


Mr. Ive's. I Cannot but wonder at your presumtion; does the word of God any
where say that the carnal seed of believers are members of Christ? Does it not
say the contrary, that even Abraham's own seed were not the Children of God, as
they were his carnal seed, Romans 9.7. Neither because they are the seed
Abraham, are they Children, which is expounded, Verse. 8. That is (says the
Apostle) they which are the Children of the flesh, they are not the Children of
God.

2 Again, How dare you say that the natural seed of believers in their
infancy, are the seed of Abraham? since that Abraham's own seed were under the
Gospel no otherwise reckoned for his seed, then by believing, Gal. 3.7. Know
ye therefore, that they which are of faith, the same are the Children of
Abraham, v. 9. They which are of says, are blessed with faithful Abraham: And
what ever Abraham's seed, and the Proselites seed were accounted under the Law,
it makes not at all to your purpose, unless you prove God does so account of
them under the Gospel: And therefore the Apostle says not of seeds, as to
many; but to thy seed, which is Christ. So that by this which you cited out of
Gal. 3.16. it appears the Promises were not made to the natural seed of
believers, but unto Christ, or them that were Members of his mystical body by
believing. And the Apostle tells them, That so many of them as had been baptized
into Christ, had put on Christ, which was by making profession of Christ, which
your infants do not; and therefore the same Apostle concludes, That if they
were Christ's, then they were Abraham's seed: Not if they were believers natural
Children, that they upon any such consideration should be Heirs of the Promise.

Your seventh reason is,


Mr. Kellie. THat infants may be baptized, because they are holy: Which you
endeavor to prove from 1 Cor. 7.14.


Mr. Ive's. I Do deny that the holiness of these infants gave a right to
baptism; for by the same rule the believers wife must be baptized, though she
was an unbeliever; for the same Text says, That the believers unbelieving wife
was sanctified: And may I not as well say, That all that are sanctified in any
sense may be baptized; as you may say, Because infants in some sense are holy,
therefore they may be baptized.

You further urge Gal. 2.15. which I believe you did mistake your self in, as
any body may see that shall but compare the Text with the matter in hand. To as
little purpose you urge Dan. 8.24. where the Text says, The King of fierce
countenance should destroy the holy people: Therefore the infants were holy.
May not a man as well say, from Dan. 12.7. where it is said, He shall scatter
the power of the holy people; that therefore the infants had power? The like
answer serves to Dan. 11.8.

8 You say,


Mr. Kellie. THey are included in baptism, to whom all the promises of baptism
belong.

But the promises of baptism belong to infants, Acts 7.38, 39.


Mr. Ive's. I Shall say nothing to this, but leave you to read over Acts 7.38,
39. and consider if the least promise be made relating to baptism, in any of
those verses. But I am apt to think you meant Acts 2.38, 39. which is as little
to your purpose, as the other; where the Apostle bids the Jews, Repent, and be
baptized; where note, That if their being Abraham's natural seed would have
given them a right to baptism, what need had they to have repented, in order to
their baptism? He further says, That the promise is to them, and their
Children. To that I have formerly said, and proved, That in the Scripture
Dialect many things may belong to a man's Children, that has no respect to his
infants, in the state of their infancy; for Christ tells the same people, Mat.
23.27. That he would have gathered their Children together, etc. Can any man
think that Christ here means their infants in the Cradle. In like manner the
Apostle concludes, That the promise was to them, and their Children, he plainly
shows, that he did not mean their infants, but that Gods promises should be
made good to their Children upon the same terms that they were to them, which
was upon their Repentance, Faith, and Baptism; and therefore he afterward
urges, That it was not only to them and their Children, but to all that were
after off, even as many as the Lord our God should call.

And now you conclude, and say,


Mr. Kellie. THus much for the proof of infants baptism from Scripture precept.


Mr. Ives's. WHich if all the Scriptures you have urged, have any one Precept
for infants Baptism, I shall leave to judgment.

You now come in the last place to prove infants baptism from Scripture
practice, and your first, is,


Mr. Kellie. THat they were all, viz. the infants of the Israelites baptized to
Moses, in the cloud, and in the sea, 1 Cor. 10.2. Psalm. 77.17.


Mr. Ive's. 1 What Is this to prove infants were baptized to Christ, if (one
should grant) that in a sense they might be said to be baptized to Moses?

2 How does this saying, They were baptized to Moses, prove that infants were
baptized to Moses? If you say, They were baptized to Moses, because they also
came through the sea with their fathers: Then I demand in

The last place, whether a man may not as well say, That their Cattle were
baptized to Moses, because they also came through the sea with Moses? Let him
that is least among you judge if this Text proves that infants were baptized in
water in the name of Jesus, because that infants came through the red sea with
Moses.

Your second instance for the practice of infants baptism, is laid down in a
down right lame Argument, thus.


Mr. Kellie. THe Apostles practiced what they were to preach: But they were to
preach all that Christ commanded, Mat. ult. ult. But Christ commanded that they
should suffer little Children to come to him, and not to forbid them, that he
might lay his hands on them, and bless them: Therefore the Apostles practiced
this in suffering little Children to come to the Ordinance, and not forbidding
them to that of baptism.


Mr. Ive's. TRuly I could wish that this Argument had been born a little
sooner, that so it might have been at Oxford or Cambridge the last Comencement,
because it is in a new mood and figure that was never heard of before in any of
the Schools; it may be it might have purchased for you the good degree of a
Prevaricator against the next year. But however, I fear a worse thing, that it
is still born, and has no strength in it.

For may you not as well say, That the Apostles in all ages were commanded to
bring Asses to Christ, because when he was upon the earth he did Command them
so to do, because he had need of one, for so says the Text, Mat. 21.2, 3, 6.
as say that because Christ when he was in person upon the earth, did bid his
Disciples to let infants come to him, that therefore this was part of their
Commission when Christ left the earth.

But 2 May you not from hence as well command some of your Parish to go and
fetch you an Ass, and bring him to you, as you may from this Text injoyne them
to bring their Children to you for baptism, because they were enjoined to come
to Christ for a blessing. What Command is this to bring my Children to you,
because Christ commanded them to be brought to him, any more then it is for me
to bring my Horse or my Ass to you, because Christ commanded one should be
brought to him? But if this be a good Argument to justify infants baptism, I
wonder that any Clergy man of your opinion will go one foot.

But more has been spoken to this elsewhere, and fore I shall proceed to your
third instance of the practice of infants baptism, and that is, say you,


Mr. Kellie. WHole Houses, Cities, and Families were baptized. And for proof
hereof you cite Acts 8.12. where the Text says, That when they believed
Phillips preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God, they were
baptized both men and women.


Mr. Ive's. WHat man would urge this Text (but he that was minded to quit the
field of this controversy) to prove the Apostles baptized the Samaritans
infants? You say the whole City of Samaria was baptized, therefore you would
make us believe they baptized infants, when the Text says no such thing, but
that They that RECEIVED THE WORD were baptized, and not the whole City, as you
would have it. Again, you urge.


Mr. Kellie. THat the family of Cornelius and his near kindred were baptized,
Acts 10.24, 44, 48. And the household of Stephanus, 1 Cor. 1.16. The Jailer, and
all his, Acts 2.16.13. And Lydia and her household, Acts 16.15.


Mr. Ive's. TO the first of these I answer, That the Scripture no where says
that Cornelius had any infants baptized, but that those that Heard Peter's word,
and had received the Holy Ghost, and spoke with tongues, and glorified God,
Acts 10.46, 47, 48. were baptized, which Text you urge for infants baptism. I
shall appeal to all that shall seriously mind these words, whether there be
any comparison between the persons baptized in that Text, and the infants that
you baptize.

Next you urge the household of Stephanus, that they were baptized, 1 Cor. 1.16.
Hence you would infer infants were baptized. Now may not a man as well say,
that because the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 16.15. that The house of Stephanus
addicted themselves to the Ministry of the Saints, that therefore infants in
Stephanus house were addicted to minister to the Saints, as you may say,
Stephanus his household were baptized, therefore infants in the house were
baptized?

Your next is Acts 16.33. where it is said, the Jailer and all his were
baptized: Now may not a man as well say, that his infants in the Cradle
believed the Apostles, and that the Apostles preached to infants in the Cradle,
as you may imagine that infants were baptized, because the Jailer and all his
were baptized? For the same Text that says he and all his were baptized, does
also say, That the Apostles spoke unto him the word of the Lord, and to ALL
that were in his house, verse. 32. And Verse. 34. it is said, That he ( Viz. the
Jailer) believed in God with All his house: And yet you presume to call this,
as the rest, Scripture practice for infant baptism.

Your other instance is in the 15 Verse of the forecited Chapter, where we read
that Lydia and her house were baptized, etc. You cannot from hence prove that
Lydia was a married woman; for when women have husbands as the head of their
families, the household is not usually known by the woman's name. 2 If she had
been married, how do you prove she had any Children?

3 If she had had Children, how do you prove she had any alive at this time;
since it often times so falls out, that good people as well as bad may see all
their Children go to the grave before them.

But 4 If she had Children alive, how do you know but that the least of them
were old enough to speak for themselves?

5 And lastly, if she had any infant Children, how can you infer from the Text
that she baptized them? If you say, because her house was baptized; I answer,
That a man may as well say, as I said before, that the infants of Stephanus did
minister to the Saints, because the household of Stephanus did minister to the
Saints. You do urge several Texts to show that oftentimes in Scripture whole
households do include their infants, as Genesis 14.16. Judges 9.16.18. 1 Kings
17.12, 13, 15. 1 Pet. 3.21. I shall not examine these Texts, whether you have
urged them rightly, or no, because I agree with you, that often times in
Scripture, we must from several reasons and circumstances conclude, that when
it speaks of households, it includes infants: But if you cannot prove from any
reason or circumstance in the Texts under debate, that it should here be so
understood, then you have labored all this while for that which satisfies
not; unless you will say, that always when the Scripture speaks of house, or
household, it intends little infants, which you will not say. And again, you may
perceive by what has been said, that in these houses those that were baptized
have enough to distinguish them from being infants, to any that have not put
out the eyes of their understanding.

You proceed, as though your conscience did convince you, that whatever you
have talked of plain Scripture precept, and plain Scripture practice for
infants baptism, that there is no such thing in all the Scripture, because you
say


Mr. Kellie. THat it is not expressed in the Scripture that women were admitted
to breaking of bread, and yet (you say) we never question their right to that
Ordinance, (You hereupon demand) why then should we question Childrens right to
baptism?


Mr. Ive's. I Answer, First, that if we should do a thing that we had no plain
rule for, will this justify you to do evil, because we do evil; and to
walk in the dark without a plain rule, because we do so.

But secondly, we have a plain rule for women's receiving the Lords Supper, 1
Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself; where the word (...) is of the Common
Gender, and Beza renders it quisque Which is as much as if the Apostle had
said, Let EVERY ONE examine themselves, and so let them eat. Where have you such
a plain Text as this for infants baptism?

Lastly, you urge, Col. 2.11, 12. where you say,


Mr. Kellie. IF that place does not give Children a right to baptism, then the
Apostle does not write that which could satisfy either the Colossians, or the
false Prophets that were for Circumcision. Your Reasons are, Because the false
Prophets might have said, That the outward Circumcision of Children, did point
and signify the inward Circumcision of the heart: But if this be taken away,
what have Children now to signify the Circumsion of the heart?


Mr. Ive's. SO then, by this you would give us to understand, that the false
Prophets could no way be answered unless the Apostle had granted baptism of
infants, to signify that which Circumcision did before. To this I answer, That
if Circumcision had signified the Circumcising of infants hearts, then the
false Prophets might have pleaded thus, But I deny that it signified any such
thing to or of infants: And therefore you said well when you said, The FALSE
Prophets might say so, but I am sure no true Prophet ever said so.

And again, If the question had been about infants baptism, he could not have
spoken that which had satisfied either the Colossians, or false Teachers, if he
had not conformed his Answer thereto. But there is not the least noise of such
a thing in the Text, as you or any body else that shall but view it, may
perceive; for the Apostle says, Verse. 11. That they were circumcised with the
circumcision made without hands, by putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, etc. Does not this plainly show, that he does strengthen the Colossians
from returning to the beggarly Rudiments of the world, by the benefit which
they received by putting off the sins of the flesh, which they could not obtain
by cutting their flesh in Circumcision. And now he tells them not only the
Argument of their being converted from sin, and made complete in Christ, should
strengthen them from falling back to the Rudiments of the Law; but also, Verse.
12. their being buried with Christ in baptism, and their rising with him in
baptism, through the faith of the operation of God, should so far engage them
in the Christian Religion, that all the Philosophical deceits of men should
never be able to turn them from it: And where is so much as one word to your
purpose? I must needs say, That out of all the Texts you have pressed, I cannot
see water enough to sprinkle upon the face of one Child.

And whereas you tell me,


Mr. Kellie. I Might have saved you this labor, and my self too, if I had
minded the Books of Dr. Featly, Mr. Marshall, Mr. Gerce, Mr. Church, Mr.
Cobbet, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Cook, Mr. Blake, Mr. Fuller, Mr. Sidenham, besides
many other excellent men who have written in Latin, as Hossius, Calvin, Beza,
Bullinger, and all the best lights in the Christian world full and clear
against me.


Mr. Ive's. TO this I Answer, That you might have saved me a lobour, if you had
found out of all your Observations of these men, but one plain Command or
example for infants baptism, and given it me at your house, or sent it in your
Paper, which makes me think, that either these men have said as little to the
purpose as you, or else that you have minded them but a little, because you
otherwise would have said more to the purpose, then I do perceive you have
done.

But 2 I have not lived without some observations of (if not all, yet) many of
these men's works; for I have not as yet taken up any Opinion wherein I differ
from you, or others, but I have seriously weighed it in the balance of the
Sanctuary: And I have not declined the way of these men you name, nor any
other, but when (I have upon serious examination found) that they have declined
the footsteps of the Primitive Purity, either in Doctrine or Discipline.

And whereas you talk of learned men, and fathers, and best Lights in the
Christian world, that they are all against me; I tell you, that if God and his
word be for me, I care not who is against me: And I tell you further, that I
had rather have one Testimony from the word of God for my practice, then ten
thousand of these Authors without it.

I Shall therefore show you 1 Plain Scripture Proof for believers baptism. 2
Plain Example for it. 3 Plain Command and Example for the manner of the
Administration of it. 4 And lastly, That the footsteps hereof (since you talk
of learned and godly men) was not wholly defaced in the three first Centuries
after the Apostles, nor then neither. Nay, a man may make a shift to know this
was the practice, by those relics of it that remained in the Church of
England, till the memory of man.


That Christ our Lord Commands this, who we must hear in all things, or else we
shall be destroyed, appears first from Mat. 28.19. Teach all Nations, baptizing
them, etc. Which most of your own Authors do acknowledge See Mr. Baxter in his
plain Scripture proof for Infants baptism. p. 15.
(as I have showed) should be read, Make Disciples, baptizing THEM, and not the
Nations, as you would sometimes have it: Though at your house you granted the
Text ought to be so Translated, as I have now rendered it; therefore you
proceeded from hence to prove infants Disciples, which you could not have done,
but by granting what I have said.

The next Text is, Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be
saved, etc. Acts 10 48. And he ( Viz. the Apostle) commanded them to be
baptized with water (who were converted by his Preaching) in the name of the
Lord Jesus. Mark 1.4. John did Preach the baptism of repentance, which could
not be infants baptism, Acts 2.38. Peter said, Repent and be baptized every one
of you. Acts 22.16. Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins.

Secondly, We have plenty of Example of this in the Scripture, Romans 6.4. We (
Viz. believing Romans) are buried with him in baptism. Mat. 3.6. They were all
baptized of John in Jordan, confessing their sins. Mark 1.9. Jesus was baptized
of John in Jordan. Mat. 3.15. Acts 2.41. Then they that gladly received his
word, were baptized, etc. Acts 8.12. When they did believe Philips preaching
the things concerning the Kingdom of God, they were baptized both men and
women. Acts 8.38. when the Eunuch professed faith, Verse. 37. it is said, Verse. 38.
that Phillip baptized him. Acts 9.18. Saul, when he was converted, the Text
says, He arose and was baptized. The Jailer, Acts 16.33. when he and his house
believed, the Text says, He and all his were baptized. Acts 18.8. And Crispus
the chief Buler of the Synagogue believed on the Lord with all his house. And
many of the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were baptized. Acts 19.5. When
they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.

Thirdly, Command and Example in plain words for the manner of it, which was by
dipping the person all over in the water, and not by sprinkling water upon the
face, as the manner of the Nation is; This appears by the Command, Make
Disciples (for so it must be read) of all Nations, dipping them into the name
of the Father, Son, and Spirit; for that is the English signification of the
word: And I desire you to show me where baptizo signifies aspersio in all the
Bible. And the like Command you have, Mark 16.16. But that you may know that
dipping and not sprinkling, was the Command of Christ, and the Practice of the
Primitive times, however it is now laughed at, appears by the Practice of
Christ himself, Mat. 16.3. Jesus when he was baptized went UP OUT of the water,
etc. Mark 1.5. They were all baptized of him in the River Jordan, etc. John
2.23. John was baptized in Aenon near to Salim, because there was Much water
there, and They Came and were baptized. Acts 8.38, 39. it is said, Verse. 38.
that They (viz. Philip and the Eunuch) went both down into the water: And when
Philip had baptized him, it is said, Verse. 39. That they came out of the water.
I shall appeal to all unbiassed men, whether baptizing men and women in
Rivers, upon their professing faith in Christ, does not better accord with
these Scriptures, then sprinkling water upon the face of infants.

Besides, Fourthly, This was the Practice of the Church long after the
Apostles, as appears first by what

Socrates Scholasticus in his Ecclesiastical History reports of Constantine
the Great, That though he was the Son of Hellena a zealous Professor of Christ,
lib. 1. cap. 13. yet he was not baptized till he was 65 years old, which was
after he had left Constantinople, and Helenopolis, and came to Nicomedia, where
dwelling in a Manor without the Town-walls, he was baptized into the faith of
Christ, in which baptism he greatly rejoiced, lib. 1. cap. 26.

Again, the same Author says, That in Alexandria the Holy Sciptures were read
and interpreted by the UNBAPTIZED, which he calls Cathecumenists, as well as by
them that were baptized; which (says he) was contrary to the Custom of other
Countries and Churches, who did not suffer any to do so till they were
baptized, Socrates, lib. 5. cap. 2^. Which plainly shows, that infants baptism
was not a tradition of the Apostles; for if it had, this Church of Alexandria,
that had for the space of some hundred years been converted to the faith of
Christ, would by this time (if all believers had baptized their infants, as the
Church of England, and others do now adays, one Generation after another)
have been without any that were able to read and interpret the Scriptures
before baptism, as we see the Nation of Engl: now is, a few ( Anabaptists
Children so called) excepted, otherwise where are your Oathecumenists, that are
able to read and understand the holy Script: before you baptize them? And that
they in those times did follow the way of Christ in baptizing, and not your
Basin way, appears; for the same Socrates, lib. 7. cap. 4. speaks of a Jew
which was baptized by Soticus, Bishop of Constantinople, who, says he, as soon
as he was [TAKEN OUT OF THE WATER] his Palsy left him. Can it be said so of
any that you baptize, that they are taken out of the water?

The same Author further says, lib. 7. cap. 17. of a Jew that was to be
baptized upon his profession of faith, by Paulus the Novatian Bishop, that all
things were provided for his baptism, among which he says The Bishop did
provide him a linen Garment, which was to no purpose if he had not been to dip
the person in water: And Bellarmiue himself acknowledges, that in old time they
had women in the Church, whom they called to the Office of Deaconnesses, to
attend upon the women that were baptized, with baptizing clothes.

And Jerome Translating the Lamentation of Origin, says, That Origin lamented
and bewailed the Vow that [HE MADE WHEN HE WAS BAPTIZED,] in that he had now by
sin walked contrary to it. However Origin is himself thought to favor this
practice afterward, yet those things are but the supposed works of Origin, and
it is hard to say whether it was his or no.

Again, Eusebius who writ the Ecclesiastical History of the first 300 years
after Christ; though he tells us of all the most observable passages of those
times, yet he does not so much as mention the baptizing of one infant, but does
often times mention things in favor to the baptizing of men, upon profession
of faith; as appears lib. 7. cap. 8. of his Ecclesiastical story, where he
relates of a man that heard the Questions that was by the Minister asked of
persons to be baptized, and [THEIR ANSWERS TO THEM,] fell down and wept at the
Ministers feet, because the baptism that he had received of the Heretics, was
not like the baptism [THAT WAS IN USE THEN,] which plainly shows, That at
this time the Churches did not receive men to baptism, but upon profession of
faith; and also, that it was no Apostolical Custom to baptize infants.
Further, Beza himself upon Acts 17.3. says, That they professed in baptism the
doctrine propounded by John. And besides this, how often have Mr. Tombs, and
Mr. Den, and others, produced sufficient proof that this practice of baptizing
infants, was not so much the Custom of the Primitive times, as you imagine.

That memorable instance of Gregory Nazianzen, whose father was a Bishop, and
his mother a virtuous woman, yet himself was not baptized till he came from
Athens, where (as Socrates says, lib. 4. cap. 21.) he had spent much of his
time in the study of Rhetoric.

Again, That other instance of Mr. Tombs out of Hugo Grotius, in his
Annotations upon Mat. 19.14. That even Chrysostom, though born of Christian
parents, was not baptized till he was 21 years of age. The same Grotius adds,
That the Canon of the Synod of Neosesarea held in the year 315, determined that
a woman with Child might be baptized, because baptism did not reach the fruit
of her womb, because in the confession made in baptism, EVERY ONES FREE CHOICE
IS SHOWED. He adds further, That many of the Greeks to his time did defer the
baptizing little ones, till they could themselves make a confession of their
faith.

Again, Was not the Image of this Custom to be seen in the practice of the
Church of England, when they asked, What was required of persons TO BE
BAPTIZED, and the answer was, Repentance whereby they forsake sin, and Faith
whereby they believe the Promises of God: Which afterward by changing the
Command of God into a Tradition of their own, they did use to ask the
Godfathers, and Godmothers, a conceit that was never heard of till the
Churches had apostatized from their Primitive Purity.

And as for the manner of baptizing, by dipping the Person in the water,
however it is now laughed at, you see it was not only that which as I have
said, Christ and his Apostles Commanded and Practiced but it was used in the
Church for a long time after; and the Church of England did look upon it as a
more commendable way, in as much as they in their Service Book did place
dipping before sprinkling, and therefore they said, the persons DIPPED, or
sprinkled, etc. Now may I not better say, That if you had looked over the
Command of Christ, and the Practice of the Apostle, and traced the footsteps
of the Primitive Practice in this Point, for 300 years after, you might have
saved me a labor, and your self too, then you could say, I might have saved
you a labor if I had looked over the writings of a few men that you have
named, who have not in all their Books cited either a Command or Example for
infants sprinkling, but only some far-fetched non-sequitors, which most of
your Paper is filled withal.

I shall now conclude, leaving what I have said in Answer to your Arguments for
your Practice, and the plain Scripture I have urged for my own Practice, to
your judgment, and the judgment of all to whom this shall come, and desire
that like the Bereans, you and all others that shall peruse this, would search
whether what I have said in the premises, be of God, or no; and if in your
Conscience you or any else do so fied it to be, take heed then what you do in
opposing of it, least you be found sighters against God. And what has fallen
from my pen that is not according to Gods word, I shall desire that you or any
else would show it me, either in word or writing and it shall thankfully be
received as a favor, by


SIR, Your Friend to Serve you. JER: IVES.

FINIS.

