A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAYOR, THE ALDERMEN,
AND Governors of the Hospitals of London; At St. Bridget's Church.

On Wednesday in Easter Week, MDCC

By Z. ISHAM, D. D.

Rectour of S. Botolph Bishopsgate, London.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettleby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCC.

To the Right Honorable Sir RICHARD LEVETT, LORD MAYOR of LONDON; THE
HONORABLE The COURT of ALDERMEN; AND THE GOVERNOVRS of the several Hospitals;
This DISCOURSE is humbly Presented by the AUTHOR: With his Earnest Prayer For
the Peace, and Unity, The Righteousness, and Prosperity Of this IMPERIAL CITY:
And that every Magistrate, and Sharer in the Government of it, May have this
Retribution from the King of Kings;

Because thou have been faithful in a little,
Have thou authority over ten Cities.
Luke 19.17. Levett Mayor.
Martis nono die Aprilis, 1700. Annoque Regni Regis Willielmi Tertii Angliae,
etc. duodecimo.
THIS Court does desire Doctor Isham to Print his Sermon Preached before the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Governors of the several Hospitals of this City, at
the Parish Church of St. Brides, on Wednesday in Easter-Week last.

Goodfellow.

ACTS XX 35. Ye ought to support the weak, and to remember the words of the
Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to give, than to receive.


I. WHEN David, in an Assembly of his Great Men, had encouraged their Oblations
toward the building of the Temple; their extraordinary Munificence filled him
with pious Joy: And Now (says he) O God, 1 Chronicles 29.13, 14, 16.
we thank Thee, and praise thy Glorious Name: But who am I, and what is my
People, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? For all
things come of Thee, and of thine own have we given Thee. Such a Religious
Address may well become this Solemnity; especially from you, that have been
liberal Offerers with your own hands: And we ought to begin with Thanksgivings
to God, for enriching this Great City with so many Structures of Charity; and
to bless him for enabling the Raisers of them to offer so willingly; and to
acknowledge with humble Gratitude, All this store comes of thine hand, and is
all thine own. It Is not for Ostentation, and Pomp, that these Benefactions are
now displayed; (for that would be to offer Violence to Charity it self) but for
the exciting of our Sacrifices to God, who is the chief Donour of all these
Gifts; and for a Memorial of the Righteous, Psalm. 112.6.
that are worthy to be had in Everlasting Remembrance; and for an Incentive to
all those that have hearts to follow them. Let us accordingly answer these
Ends, and pursue this Spiritual Traffic with an Earnestness equal to the
Advantages of it: And let us be assured, that the Strength of a City lies in
God's Protection; and the Riches of it in Works of Piety, and Mercy. To which
effect, Ye ought to support the weak; and to remember the words of the Lord
Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to give, than to receive.

II. The Maxim here mentioned from the Mouth of our Blessed Lord, is not
deposed in any of the Gospels received by the Church; but was transmitted (as I
conceive) by Tradition, and commonly known amongst the Christians; which
therefore they are called upon to remember, as what they had often heard. S.
John tells us, That if all that Jesus did should be set down distinctly in
Writing, even the World it self could not contain the Books that should be
written. Joh. 21.25.
By which hyperbolical Expression, the Evangelist seems to intimate, That the
Intention of his Writing was not out of a Partial Affection to Christ, to set
forth all that he did, and to compile a Volume merely for his Glory; but to
relate only so much as was necessary for the Instruction of the World, in the
Fundamental Principles of the Christian Faith. Whereupon he says before, Joh.
20.30, 31.
Many other Signs truly did Jesus in the Presence of his Disciples, which are
not written in this Book: But these are written, that ye might believe, that
Jesus is the Christ the Son of God; (which was the grand Article for the
Conviction of the Jews, who disclaimed his being the Messiah, and of the
Heretics who then impugned his Divinity) and that believing ye might have life
through his Name. Wherefore as Christ endeavored the Conversion of his own
People, and evinced his being the Promised Redeemer, by innumerable Miracles
which are not conveyed to the Knowledge of Posterity; (the Wisdom of God
ordering it thus, and having given us otherwise sufficient Confirmation of our
Faith) so likewise many of the Heavenly Speeches delivered by him in the Course
of his Preaching, are unrecorded in our Authentic Gospels; and yet some of
them have been occasionally preserved, as also a few Remains of the Apostles;
like Gold washed off from the Mountains, and left upon the Shore. Of this
Nature is a Saying of our Lord, met with in many of the Ancient Origin, Clem.
Alex. Hieron. etc.
Fathers, (...), Be good Exchangers of Money; that is, Distinguish well between
true and counterfeit Doctrine. And so again this is ascribed by De Orat. 2.
Origin to our Savior, Ask for great things, and the little shall be added to
you; ask for heavenly things, and the earthly shall be added. From a like
unknown Source we have, by S. Paul, this excellent Aphorism before us; which
might well be joined to those admirable Beatitudes in the Sermon upon the
Mount. For an equal Blessedness is here declared, and promised to the
charitable Giver, by him who is able to make good his Promise: It is more
blessed to give, than to receive.

III. For the Explication of which Words, as they are applied by the Apostle to
the supporting of the weak, and indigent, I shall endeavor to clear these Four
Points:

First, Upon what grounds we are obliged to Works of Charity; Secondly, In what
proportion our Charity is required by God; Thirdly, Upon what Objects our
Charity is most usefully employed; And Fourthly, Wherein the Blessedness of
being charitable consists.
First, I am to explain the Grounds, upon which we are obliged to Works of
Charity: And these I should not insist upon in a Duty to uncontested, (though
too frequently shifted off) were they not also Enforcements to Alacrity, and
Forwardness herein. And the Grounds which I shall argue from, shall be these
Two; 1st. The Principles of Natural Justice; And 2dly. The Light of Revelation.


1st. Let it be considered, that relieving of the Poor is exacted from us by
the Rules of Natural Justice: Because though they have no particular, and
perfect Right to what any of us possess; yet having a share in God's Donation
of the Earth to Man, they have hereby a general Claim to the Bounty of the
Rich; which is to be actually exhibited, as their Wants are discovered to us.
For our Incitement hereunto, there are natural Motions wrought within us, and
molded into our very Frame: For when we see a miserable Object, Nature it self
moves our Bowels to Compassion, and our Hands to give; and those of the finest
Temper are soonest affected with the Distresses of other Men. So that whereas
the being befriended by our inbred Corruption, is that by which other Sins
prevail; the uncharitable, and unrelenting Niggard does not only stifle his
Reason, but also strive against the Instigations of his own Soul. For in this
Matter every Man may be his own Casuist, Luke 6.31.
and take his Decision from that (...). Isocrat.
Universal Law; As ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them
likewise. In Conformity whereunto, upon the sight of any indigent Neighbor,
it is but turning the Tables, and supposing that thou art in his place. Imagine
thy self to be reduced to Poverty, or to a languishing Condition, and full of
Wants that cry out for speedy help; or to be surrounded with a Stock of
Children, without having Bread to silence their Clamours, and stop their Tears:
And then ask thy Conscience, if thou would not think it very reasonable, that
thy Neighbor who lives in Affluence, and has Stores in Readiness, should
contribute somewhat to thy Relief, and lend a compassionate hand to deliver
thee from Affliction. This undoubtedly would be thy Sense, and justly too: And
consequently deal with thy poor Brethren according to the same Standard. For
though the Necessities of another Man (even upon the Supposition of his being
ready to perish) cannot empower him in strict Justice to take Possession of any
of my Goods, without thy Consent either actually expressed, or justly presumed:
Yet I am obliged to part with them freely for his Benefit, in such Urgencies,
so far as I can spare them And this is no more than what (...) Homer.
Natural Religion discovers; and Reason binds upon us from the implanted
Instincts of our own Frame, and the common Ties of Humanity.

IV. 2dly, This Duty is further enforced from the Light of Revelation: And in
all the Dispensations of Divine Truth we find it our way. Job (who is supposed
with much Probability to have lived before the Law) acquaints us with his early
Practice; Job 31.16, 17, 19.
That he never withheld the poor from their desire, nor caused the eyes of the
widow to fail; that he did never eat his morsel alone, but with the Fatherless;
and that he never saw any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without
covering. Deuteronomy. 15.11, 10.
And Moses is very express from God: The poor shall never cease out of the
land; therefore thou shall open thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy poor,
and needy in thy land: Thou shall surely give him, and thine heart shall not be
grieved when thou give unto him. And this was to be done over and above the
special Deuteronomy. 14.28, 29.
Tithe for the poor, and Exodus 23.11. Levit. 23.22. Is. 58.6, 7.
other Legal Provisions for them. Agreeably hereunto the Prophet declares in
the Name of God, Is not this the Fast that I have chosen, to deal thy bread to
the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? When
thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from
thine own flesh? It seems then that even under the Jewish Economy, (which was
so full of Ritual Observances) there was no true Religion without works of
Mercy, and Charity: So that if this Sacrifice were wanting, neither their
Fasts, nor Devotions, nor Burnt-offerings could be truly acceptable in the
Sight of God. If from hence we pass to the Christian State, the Precepts, and
Example of Christ shine before us with such Brightness, as to convince us that
Charity is one of the Pillars of his Religion. Mat. 5.42.
Give (says he) to him that asks Thee, and from him that would borrow of
thee, turn not thou away: And again, Luke 11.41.
Give alms of such things as you have, (...), according to your ability; and
behold, Luke 12.33.
all things are clean unto you: And again, Sell that you have, and give alms;
provide your selves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that
fails not: And again, Luke 14.13, 14.
When thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind; and
thou shall be blessed; for they cannot recompense thee: For thou shall be
recompensed at the Resurrection of the just. I need not produce what the
Apostles have urged to the same Effect: For their Lessons are known to us at
the Offertory, when (according to the Justin Mart. Apol. Iren. l. 4. c. 34.
Cypr. de Eleem.
ancient Piety) the Oblations of our Substance are joynd' with the Sacrifice of
the Lord's Supper. Nor shall I set before you the Zeal of the Primitive Church,
in relieving the afflicted, and supporting one another under Persecution to
such a degree, that the Flames of their Charity were as eminent, and glorious,
as those of their Martyrdom. For how can any Christian forget his Duty herein,
since Christianity is the Imitation of our Savior's Life? And we all know,
that he was the greatest Pattern of Charity that ever was seen in the World.

V. I come then to the 2d Head, namely to show, In what measure our Charity is
demanded of God: And though the fixing of this may seem difficult, and we have
no settled Standard to go by; (because God is willing to try, what we will do
of our own accord) yet the Two following Rules may very reasonably be allowed.

1st. That we are bound to give in Proportion to the Necessities of the poor:
And as their Numbers, and Wants increase, we are to be more liberal; as they
lessen by being set on work, or provided for otherwise, we are under no
Obligation of scattering unnecessary Relief. The Injunction of Moses was this,
Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8.
Thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother:
But thou shall surely lend him sufficient for his need, in that which he
wants: And this lending (under the Law) was in a manner equivalent to giving.
It Is impossible to cloth a naked Man with a Rag; or to keep a Family from
starving with a Morsel of Bread: And therefore the bestowing of such penurious
Alms (where all their dependence is upon us) is rather to insult over their
misery, than to rescue them from it. Let it be granted, that we are obliged to
relieve the poor; and the Consequence is undeniable, that our Bounty must
extend to such a measure as they cannot subsist without. If the Laws of our
Country would reach to the employing and maintaining of all our poor, then what
we should pay into the public Stock, would be instead of our voluntary Alms;
and might by a free Dedication of it to God, be as much accepted by him. But as
our present Circumstances are, the needy cannot be supported but by our
Free-will-offerings; and consequently (till some National Remedy is procured)
the more numerous they grow, whatever Retrenchments we make upon our selves, we
must not suffer them to be famished. And because our time of doing good is but
short, let not any opportunity slip from us.

VI. The 2d Rule is, That every Man is obliged to give in proportion to his own
Affluence, and stated Income; and between God, and his own Conscience, to allot
such a part of it for Charity, as may answer the General Precepts concerning
it. The Casuists commonly assert, That it is a sin not to distribute amongst the
poor our Superfluities: But how these are to be computed, they are not equally
agreed. Eccl. 35.10.
Give unto the most High (says the Son of Sirach) according as he has
enriched thee; and as thou have gotten, give with a cheerful eye: And one of
greater Authority thus regulates the Collections for the Brethren, 1 Cor. 16.2.
Let every one of you lay by him in store, as God has prosper'd him. Luke 21.3.
A Mite may be applauded by Christ from a poor Widow, Levit. 5.7.
but not from a rich Offerer; and he must not save the best of his Flock, by
bringing a Turtle; he must not shrink at giving, and pretend Inability, when he
can be profuse upon his Vanities, and Pleasures: For God is not mocked; Gal.
6.7.
and all the cheat he puts is upon his own Soul. And let us not forget, that
God is a Creditour to all of us, and we are his Debtors; and there is a Day to
come for the ballancing of the Accounts between us. I will not however pretend
to determine, how much precisely any Man is bound to set aside for Acts of
Mercy; and the Apostle seems to have prevented such an Enquiry by this
Direction, 2 Cor. 9.7.
Every man according as he purposes in his heart, so let him give; not
grudgingly, or of necessity; for God loves a cheerful giver. There was, I
confess, in those early times before the Law, a Notion amongst good Men of
dedicating to God a tenth part of their Increase: And hereupon this was Jacob's
Vow, Of all that thou shall give me, Genesis 28.22.
I will surely give the tenth unto thee: And that he carefully performed this
Vow upon growing rich, we may take for granted. It Is true, these Payments to
God were originally for his Altar; and by Consequence the poor were not
directly concerned in them: But besides that I believe the Priests of God to
have been the common Almoners for the People in those days, as they certainly
were in the Cyprian. Ep. 2. and 5 and 7. Greg. Resp. ad August.
Primitive Church; I only take notice of the Principle they went upon, and
argue from it to the Case before us. For if God's Dominion is to be
acknowledged by a Tenth of what we receive from him; (as those devout Men
anciently thought) we may borrow some Light from hence, to be guided by in
dispersing our Alms; and it is what many charitable Persons have constantly
done. But (as our Savior said in another Case) All men cannot receive this
saying, Mat. 19.11.
save they to whom it is given: And such an Imposition will be rejected by many
as too burdensome; though it is much below the Instance of the wealthy
Publican, Behold, Luke 19.8.
Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor. Allow me then to make a more
easy, and gentle Proposal: And it is a Prescription that has been tried, and
approved. It Is briefly this: That every man, whom God has blessed in his
Calling, would at the end of the year review his income from it, and compute
the accession to his gains; and would then upon his knees humbly offer a
portion of it to God, and set it apart as a private Stock for Charity for the
Year ensuing. This Gift he may dedicate in some such Form, as the honest Jew
did his Basket of Firstfruits; Behold, I have brought the first fruits of the
land, which thou, O Lord, have given me: Deuteronomy. 26.10.
And I am persuaded, such an Offering would cleanse, and sanctify the rest of
the Harvest. And by this Anniversary Oblation he would further have this
Advantage; that he would always give with Alacrity, and seek for occasions to
do it, and delight in exhausting his consecrated Treasure. I add this Caution,
that what a Christian dedicates to God, Non sit Eleemos^na ex injusta aliorum
rapina, sed ex propria, ac probe acquisita facultate. Council. Clovesh. A. D.
747, De justis laboribus facite eleemosynas, ex eo quod recte habetis date. Non
enim corrupturi estis Judicem Christum. Augustine.
must be out of honest Gains: For God accepts no Offering out of Goods ill
gotten, and capable of being restored; by this Mammon of Unrighteousness, there
is no making of friends above; because there is only place for Restitution to
them that have been defrauded. Eccl. 34.20.
Whosoever brings an offering of the goods of the poor, (says a wise Jew) does
as one that kills the Son before his Father's eyes.

VII But to proceed to the 3d Point, let us now consider, upon what Objects our
Charity is most usefully employed: And these I shall briefly mention under the
following Heads.

1st. Such as suffer for the Truth of the Gospel, either against Infidelity, or
against Idolatry, and gross Corruptions: And in them most properly Christ
himself is relieved. This Charity was so remarkable in the Primitive Ages of
Persecution, that it propagated the Christian Faith almost as much as Miracles:
And when the Prisons were filled with Confessors, they were visited, and
refreshed with such Fervency, that it raised an holy Ambition: to put on these
happy Chains. We have not such Trials (God be praised) either of our Fortitude,
or Liberality at home; though it is not long since the Sky was growing black
over us, and we were apprehensive of a Storm. But many from abroad, that have
fled from Antichristian Tyranny, have been zealously succored here: And the
shelter afforded to them has possibly induced God, not to let loose the Spirit
of Persecution upon us. From other quarters we may be likely to hear of it
again; (for no Circle will confine the restless Spirit of Popery:) and then our
Charity must have new Vigor. The Redemption of Captives out of Turkish Slavery
is an Act that has some Affinity hereunto: For since they are oppressed for
bearing the Name of Christ, and may be preserved to him by a speedy
Deliverance; our Forwardness herein will entitle us to this Approbation from
our Lord, Mat. 25.36.
I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

VIII. 2dly, In distinguishing Objects of Mercy let us regard those especially,
that are recommended to it by their own Worth; or by that of their
Progenitors. For if they have a good Testimony for Piety, or Virtue, or
Learning; if they have Endowments overcast with Poverty, that would otherwise
shine; if in the days of their Plenty they have been Relievers of the indigent,
and extended their hands more willingly to give, than now to receive; if their
Modesty restrains their wants from speaking, and hides them from common
Discovery; or if they can plead the Merits of those from whom they are
descended: In all such Cases a Preference is due, and the good that is done is
attended with a peculiar Satisfaction of mind. Discretion in Almsgiving is a
great Improvement of it: And this discriminating Rule we have from the Apostle,
Gal. 6.10.
Let us do good especially unto them who are of the household of faith; and by
consequence to them above others of this Household, that have any Preeminence.
For which reason I cannot but mention with Praise the Noble Hospitals, which we
have for Decayed Gentlemen, and Citizens: And I trust, they will in time excite
the Emulation of others, who shall be disposed to secure their Wealth in the
Bank of Eternity.

IX. 3dly, Such Objects are well qualified for our Compassion, as fall into
distress, or decay, by a sudden Calamity overtaking them; or by the immediate
hand of God: And not by Idleness, or Vice; where the Relief of a Scourge is
generally the fittest. For it is a plain Discouragement to Industry, and
Sobriety, that dissolute Vagabonds, and lazy Beggars should be fed at the
public Charge; and these by howling, and dissembling, should pick up more in
an hour, than an honest Labourer can earn in a day: And as long as they that
resolve not to dig, can thrive by begging in our Streets; this City will be the
common Drain and Harbor of all the unprofitable Drones in the Nation. But when
men are impoverished by accidental Adversities, as by Fire, or Shipwreck, or by
an unaccountable Blast upon their Labors; these we ought to commiserate, and
raise up as much as we can: Remembering that we also are in the body. Heb. 13.3.
and subject to the like Vicissitudes. Who was it that the Samaritan in the
Gospel is commended for taking care of? not a Straggler that would rather
starve, than work; but an unfortunate Traveller that was robbed, Luke 10.30.
and wounded by Thieves. The stuggard (says Solomon) will not plow by reason
of the cold; Prove. 20.4.
therefore shall he beg in harvest, and have nothing; that is, no body will
give him any thing: And so there was a Jewish Proverb, Mercer.
He that will not provide his dinner for the Sabbath upon the Eve of it, shall
eat nothing then: Nay, an Apostle himself has decreed, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
That if any would not work, neither should he eat.

X. 4thly, Such Objects are very fit for our Charity, as will improve what is
given them, and lay it as the Foundation of their future Livelihood: And then
the Bread that we cast upon the Waters, will be found after some days, Eccl.
11.1. 1 King. 16.12, 16.
like the Widow's handful of meal; not only unwasted, but also maintaining
Families by the Increase of it. Accordingly the releasing of Prisoners for
Debt, and restoring them to their Callings, is a very advantageous Charity: and
so is the setting up of young Tradesmen, and helping them to begin the World:
and so especially is the educating of poor Orphans, and putting them out to
honest Professions. This is planting for Posterity, and providing for
Generations to come: and as the neglecting of our Youth is the grand Source of
the Corruption of the Age; so the seasoning of them with good Instructions, and
breeding them up to reputable Employments, is the best service that can be done
to Religion, and to our Country. The Goodness of a Soil is of little profit
without the Husbandman's Labor; the Sweat of his Brows must go along with the
Showers of Heaven; and unless the Land be well cultivated, and the Vineyard
dressed, we can neither have Bread to strengthen us, nor Wine to refresh us.
It Is so with men, as to the forming of them for their appearance in the World:
There must be a diligent Cultivation, as well as a good Capacity; and without
it, though there may be Luxuriancy of Parts, there is seldom Fruit answerable
thereunto: and (which is worse) when the Devil finds any Ground untilled, he is
generally sowing Tares upon it. Wherefore Schools, and Colleges, and Hospitals
for the Education of Children, cannot be too much encouraged by
publick-spirited men: and this being the condition of the First Hospital in
your Roll, I shall set before you this Report from it.

Christ 's Hospital.
Children put forth Apprentices, and discharged out of Christ 's Hospital, the
Year last past 125; ten whereof being instructed in the Mathematics and
Navigation, were placed forth Apprentices to Commanders of Ships, out of the
Mathematical School, Founded by his late Majesty King Charles the Second of
Blessed Memory.

Children buried the Year last past, 7.

Children now remaining under the Care and Charge of the said Hospital, which
are kept in the House and at Nurse elsewhere 309, and 54 newly admitted,
amounting in all to 363.

The Names of all which are Registered in the Books kept in the said Hospital,
and are to be seen, as also when and whence they were admitted.

Which being so many in number, and the charge of keeping them very great, (and
being still depressed by the very great Loss, which was sustained by the late
Dreadful Fire) it is hoped many worthy and good Christians will liberally assist
toward so useful and beneficial a Charity.

For the promoting hereof, I shall only add; that the Institution of young men
in the Art, and Principles of Navigation, deserves all the Countenance that can
be given to it: Because upon this Skill depends both the Security of the
Kingdom, and the spreading of your Commerce; and those whom you now maintain,
may bring home to your doors the Riches of the Universe.

XI. From these who are bred up for the Service of their Country, let us
proceed in the 5th place to those who by serving it are maimed, and disabled
from getting their own Bread: And these certainly are worthy Objects of Public
Charity; and the Provision that has been made, and is making for them with
Princely Magnificence, redounds exceedingly to the Honor of this Great City.
And this will animate men at all times, to offer themselves willingly for the
Defense of their Country, Psalm. 66.12.
and to go through fire, and water; when they are sure of being refreshed at
home, and entitled by their Wounds to an Honorable Maintenance. Let me
therefore upon this Head present you with the Report from Two other Hospitals.

S. Bartholonew 's Hospital.
There have been cured and discharged from the Hospital of St. Bartholomew 's
the Year last past, 2217 of Wounded, Sick and Maimed Soldiers and Seamen, and
other diseased Persons, from several parts of the Dominions of the King's most
Excellent Majesty, and from Foreign parts, many of which have been relieved
with Moneys and other Necessaries at their Departure, though (as it has pleased
God) the greatest part of the Revenue of the said Hospital was consumed by the
late Dreadful Fire.

Buried this Year, after much Charges on them, 109.

Persons remaining under Cure in the said Hospital, 278.

The difficulty of the times being such, and the contingent Charities
exceedingly lessened, the ordinary Revenue is not sufficient to support above a
Moiety of the Charge of the whole, by which means the numbers received in, and
cured this Year, are fewer than the preceding, and without the Charity of well
disposed Persons are not capable of being advanced.

S. Thomas 's Hospital.
There have been cured and discharged from St. Thomas 's Hospital in Southwark,
this last Year, 1952 of Sick, Wounded, and Maimed Soldiers and Seamen, and
other diseased Persons, from several parts of his Majesty's Dominions, and from
Foreign Parts; many of which have been relieved with Money, and other
Necessaries at their Departure; though much of the Revenue of the said Hospital
has been destroyed by several dreadful Fires in London and Southwark; and most
of the Buildings of this Hospital being very old, low, damp and incommodious
for the Reception of sick and wounded Persons; the Governors have rebuilt a
great part thereof, in which they have already laid out of their own free Gift
many thousands of Pounds; and have maintained the same number of Patients for
Cure, whilst the same Building has been carried on. To complete the whole,
there is some part now building, which, without the Assistance of charitable
Persons, cannot well be accomplished: The Yearly Revenue being much less than
will defray the constant Charge.

Buried this Year after much Charge in the time of their Sickness, 148.

Remaining under Cure at the Charge of the said Hospital, 330.

It Is to be hoped, That all these Difficulties will be removed, by God's
diffusing a charitable Spirit amongst us: And where this is imparted, it is a
pleasure to meet with Occasions for the exercising of it.

XII. Lastly, Whenever we are disposed for Acts of Mercy, they that have the
most pressing, and clamorous wants to speak for them, are always fittest for
our present Choice: For Charity looks not barely at the Man, but at his
Necessities. If we could pray Souls out of Purgatory, the rescuing of them from
such Torments as are pretended would be a most Christian Work: But whatever we
are to think of the Ancient Prayers for our departed Brethren, (which our
Consueverat Ecclesia Primitiva offerre, and orare pro Martyribus; quemadmodum
hodie Graeci pro Prophetis, Apostolis, and Patriarchis offerunt; and Latini pro
Parvulis statim a Baptismo discedentibus and orant, and offerunt: quos nemo
tamen in Purgatorii tormentis esse putaverit. Igitur Orationes, and Oblationes
hujusmodi, partim sunt Eucharisticae; partim Pronunciatoriae quietum, ad quas
sancti dormientes perpetuo deducuntur; partim Declarativae divinae voluntatis,
quemadmodum precamur, ut Deus Ecclesiam suam regere, ac defensare dignetur, Ut
ignoscat resipiscentibus; partim Admonitoriae viventium, ad sanctam vitam, ut
feliciter postea perpetuo vivere passint; partim Affectuum, and desideriorum
nostrorum Declarativae, quemadmodum or at Ecclesia. In die judicii libera nos
Domine: quae nihilominus omnia certi sumus, etiam sine nostris precibus, Deum
facturum. Archbishop Cranmer 's Theolog. Collect. MSS.
Reformers were very sensible of) we have reason to believe, that Hospitals for
the Living are much more necessary than Foundations for the Dead. Let us then
be contented with what we can do for the living; and a wise Writer says, Mercy
is seasonable in the time of affliction, as clouds of rain in the time of
drought: Eccl. 35.20. And therefore in the Distribution of our Alms, let us
enquire after the most needy, and helpless, and disconsolate Objects; for a cup
of cold water given to a parched and thirsty Soul, will not be without a
reward. Mat. 10.42. Sickness is of it self very afflictive; but how much
heavier must it be in Conjunction with Poverty? And therefore he that shuts up
his Bowels from Christians in such distress, has lost the common Tenderness of
humane Nature. And so Blindness, and loss of Limbs is to be compensated by us
as much as we can: According to what Job says of himself, I was eyes to the
blind, Job 29.15.
and feet was I to the lame. But no Misery does more command our Pity, than
that of a raving, and distracted, and benighted mind; Mark 5.3.
for it is a kind of dwelling among the tombs, and conversing with Devils: And
the restoring of such to the Use of their Rational Powers, is a Mercy like that
of healing Demoniacks. And therefore though a tender heart cannot easily bear
the sight of such wretched Objects; it cannot but delight in beholding your
Bounty toward them, and the Noble Structure erected for them. Let me then
subjoyn the Account of the Two remaining Hospitals.

Bridewell Hospital.
Received this last Year into the Hospital of Bridewel, Vagrants, and other
indigent and miserable People, 1406, many whereof had both Clothing, and such
other Relief as their Necessities required, being in great Distress, and sent
by Passes into their Native Countries.

Maintained in the said Hospital, and brought up in diverse Arts and Trades, at
the only Charge of the said Hospital, 101 Apprentices; notwithstanding it
pleased God, the Hospital, and all the Houses within the Precinct thereof,
(which was the greater part of its Revenue) were wholly consumed by the late
dreadful Fire; besides the great loss sustained in the Remains of its Revenue
by two terrible Fires, the one in June, 1673. and the other in November, 1682;
which happened in Wapping.

Bethlem Hospital.
The Hospital of Bethlem is of great necessity for the keeping and curing
distracted Persons, whose misery, of all others, is the most deplorable,
because they do not apprehend the same, it disabling the Mind, as well as the
Body.

Brought into the said Hospital the last Year, distracted Men and Women, 60.

Cured of their Lunacy, and discharged thence the said Year, 45.

Distracted Persons buried the last Year, 10.

Now remaining there under Cure, and provided for with Physic, Diet and other
Relief, at the Charge of the said Hospital, 131.

The Charge whereof is great, and the Revenue of the said Hospital so small, as
not to amount to one half part of the yearly Expenses thereof; and the Building
of the old Hospital of Bethlem being Ruinous and not Capacious to receive and
contain the great number of distracted Persons; for the Admission of whom,
daily Applications are made to the Governors thereof.

Upon a Christian and Charitable Consideration of the Premises, the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, did lately grant
sufficient Ground to erect a more commodious House for the keeping and curing
the said Lunaticks, and distracted Persons: In the Building and Finishing
whereof, the Governors of the said Hospital have laid out and disbursed above
Seventeen Thousand Pounds, whereby not only the whole Stock of the said
Hospital is expended, but the Governors thereof have been necessitated to take
up several great Sums of Money, for the finishing the same. And therefore the
said Hospital is a very fit Object of all good Men's Charity, to do as God shall
enable them, toward the Relief of the said poor Lunaticks, and Payment of their
Debts: there having been, and daily are by the Blessing of God, and the Charge
of the said Hospital, and the Care of those that are entrusted therewith,
diverse reduced to their former Senses.

XIII. Thus you have heard A true Report of the great Number of Poor Children,
and other Poor People, maintained in the several Hospitals, under the Pious
Care of the Lord Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, the
Year last past; and from hence you may discern, what Exercise is still left for
Charitable Minds. And now upon reviewing it, I shall briefly annex Five Rules
concerning the Management of our Alms.

1st, Charity which prevents Men from being oppressed with Poverty, is better
than that which only supports them under it. 2dly, Charity which aims at the
Public Service, is better than that which is only for private Relief. 3dly,
Charity which is disposed of into a Perpetual Fund, is better than that which
is immediately melted, and consumed. 4thly, Charity applied to the making of
Men virtuous, is better than that which only refreshes the Body. 5thly,
Charity expended for correcting the Idle, and forcing them to work, is better
than that which gives them a present Ease.
Upon which Grounds, I cannot but take notice of the Glory that will redound to
God, and the Advantages accruing to this City, by the Erection of public
Workhouses: Which as you have begun with good Success, I hope, the Conviction
of their Usefulness will break through the Difficulties that have retarded
them, and secure their Establishment. And therefore I shall lay before you the
present State of the Corporation settled for that End.

The President, and Governors have thought fit to provide several Houses and
parcels of Ground, in the Parish of St. Botolph Bishopsgate, for the Reception
and employing of considerable Numbers of Childrens which they have, and are
still fitting up for that purpose; and have already entertained about 200
Children from several Parishes therein, whom they cloth, feed, employ, and
teach to work, and religiously educate and provide all sorts of Necessaries
for, as well in Sickness as in Health; and as they hope, to the Pleasure and
Satisfaction of every good Man, and the Glory of God: a Specimen whereof they
have this day shown you.

And the Corporation do propose by the Blessing of God, by this and other Means
and Methods, in convenient time to be undertaken, (though they have met with
too much Opposition) to employ all the Poor of the City of London, and the
Liberties thereof, and to keep the City clear, and free from all Beggars,
Vagrants, and other idle and disorderly Persons whatsover.

And the Corporation do also further intend to employ all poor Mechanics in
the several Employments they have been bred to, or shall be capable of; and to
take off all the Work they work, though they should lose thereby, that so they
may prevent any of their Inhabitants from living idly and wanting Work, whereby
many are forced to beg, steal, or to have recourse to other dissolute, vicious
and unlawful Practices.

This is part of the Report that was put into my hands: And for the
recommending of such Nurseries, let us remember the Character of Solomon's
Virtuous Woman, and apply it: She seeks wool, Prove. 31.13, 19, 20, 25.
and flax, and works willingly with her hands: She lays her hands to the
spindle, and her hands hold the distaff: She stretches out her hand to the
poor; yea, she reaches forth her hands to the needy: Strength, and honor are
her clothing; and she shall rejoice in time to come.

XIV. And what need I say more for the Encouragement of all these Charities,
than to repeat the Words of our Lord Jesus; It is more blessed to give, than to
receive? Which Blessedness I am in the 4th place to explain: And as to the
comparative Part, it is evident from hence; because in receiving there is no
Virtue, nor any divine Promise to exalt it; and whatever present Satisfaction
it causes, it has no future Recompense: But in giving to the poor, and
calamitous there is a much better Prospect. For both the Action it self is
highly virtuous, and conformable (as we have seen) to the Dictates of Reason,
and Religion: And there is moreover a great Reward grounded upon the Promises
of God, to excite us to Works of Mercy. If these be considered as to this Life
only, the Performer of them will find his Retribution: But much more if they
be considered with respect to the State of Futurity, which Christians in all
their Actions ought chiefly to regard; as walking by faith, not by sight. 2
Cor. 5.7.
Such Encouragements we have to deeds of Charity; and God has promised not
only the Acceptance of them, but also a full Requital to us: And though we can
deserve nothing at his hand, he graciously represents himself, as if he were
indebted to us for them. And yet how little is it, that we can return to God
for all his Benefits to us? It Is but a drop for an Ocean of Goodness; and it is
but a Sheaf out of his own Field. Let us not then deal ungratefully, and
pinchingly with so bountiful a God, who has made the whole Creation for our
Use; and has also made it instructive to us, in teaching us Lessons of
Beneficence, and Kindness. The Heavens, the Earth, the Sea, the Stars are
always busy in communicating their Light, their Fruits, their Streams, their
Influences through all the Parts of the Universe: And the uncharitable
Worldling meets with the Image of himself no where so plainly as in Hell; which
devours all it can lay hold of, but returns nothing. His Gain will be suitable
hereunto, when the time of Inspection comes: But the Christian that imitates
his Savior, and goes about doing good, Act. 10.38
cannot fail of a blessed Remuneration from him.

XV. For 1st, It Is the Advantage of Works of Charity, that they are usually
attended here with Temporal, Is. 58, 10, 11.
and Spiritual Mercies: If thou satisfy the afflicted soul, the Lord shall
guide thee continually, and make fat thy bones; and thou shall be like a
watered Garden. They sometimes prevail with God for the Oportet justis operibus
incumbere, quibus peccata purgantur; Eleemosynis frequenter insistere, quibus a
morte animae liberentur. Cyprian de Laps. Ea quae possidentur pauperibus divisa
solutionem faciunt praeteritae cupiditatis. Iren. l. 4. c. 26. Alius jejunio
placet, alius vitia Eleemosynis redimit. Hilar.
Pardon of our Iniquities, and prevent his Judgments from falling upon us,
covering in this Sense a multitude of Sins: And sometimes Communities are
enriched, and protected for the Sake of them: And generally they incline God to
repay that with Interest, which any of us have freely given to him. 1 Pet. 4.8.
And since whatever we possess without his Benediction, will certainly vanish
into Smoke; we may perceive what the wisest Ensurance of it is: And if to
escape the bestowing of Alms, we deny our own Abundance; God may justly take it
from us, and turn our Riches into Poverty. But the charitable Man lays up a
Stock in the Bowels of the poor, and may reap the Profits of it at a long
distance: Psalm. 112.9.
He has dispersed, he has given to the poor; his Righteousness endures for
ever; his horn shall be exalted with honor. Nay, besides the Recompense
ascertained to himself, he transmits God's Promise to his Posterity: Psalm.
37.25, 26.
I have not (says the Psalmist) seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed
begging bread: He is ever merciful, and lends; and his seed is blessed. And
if they who are so immoderately solicitous, and laborious in raising Estates
for their Qui studes terreno magis quam Coelesti patrimonio, filios tuos
Diabolo magis commendare quam Christo, duplex crimen admittis: and quod non
praeparas filiis, tuis Dei patris auxilium, and quod doces filios patrimonium
plus amare quam Christum Cyprian.
Children, and in heaping up Treasures for them; and never say, It is enough;
would but once believe this, and act agreeably; we should soon behold Charity
in a more spreading Condition. We all own that the Providence of God makes us
rich, and puts us into a Capacity of relieving others; Prove. 30.15. Prove. 10.22.
and this was acknowledged even by the (...). Homer.
Heathen World: And why then are we backward in answering God's Will, and doing
so; that he may continue his own Gift, and entail it upon those that are
dearest to us?

XVI 2dly, The Blessedness of Charity is yet much greater, in that it secures
an endless Inheritance in the next World: 1 Timothy 6.18, 19.
And they that are rich in good works, and ready to distribute, lay up in store
for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay
hold on Eternal Life; (...), a sure Bond, or Instrument of Contract, (as the
Sam. Petit. Var. Lect. Dr. Hammond.
word has been happily rendered) that will be kept safely, and performed
exactly, God himself engaging to pay us. And is not this a purchase infinitely
beyond all worldly Possessions? And if we could stand upon the Devil's
Mountain, Mat. 4.8.
and overlook all the kingdoms of the Earth, all the Pomp, and Honors, and
Pride, and Pleasures of them; what is there that can possibly enter into
Comparison with the vast, and unconceivable Prize of Eternity? You see the Art
of procuring to your selves (though not of meriting) this Heavenly Patrimony:
And what can we do with this uncertain, and deceitful Mammon, that is equal to
the gaining of Friends, who may receive us into everlasting habitations? Luke
16.9.
Wherefore if Works of Charity are such a strong foundation, as to sustain a
Building no less weighty than that of Eternal Glory; doubtless he is the
skilfullest Architect than can pursue this excellent Model, and expend his
Wealth in raising such a Fabric to himself, as will outlast the Universal
Conflagration.

XVII. And is not this abundant Conviction, That It is more blessed to give,
than to receive? And to confirm us in this Persuasion, I shall strengthen what
has been said with Two Considerations.

The 1st of them is, That God will strictly enquire hereafter, what the Rich
have done with all that Plenty which he bestowed upon them: And therefore it
behooves them to be well prepared for their Answer to him. And they especially
that have been advanced from low Beginnings, that can say with Jacob, Genesis
32.10.
With my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands; must
not forget what proportionable Returns God expects from them. By humane Laws we
have indeed a Property, and are Masters of what we rightfully possess: But
Religion makes it a Trust; and teaches us, that Cur, cum possessores tantum
usufructuarii simus, quod nobiscum auferre non possumus, avertere a
proprietatis domino, atque alienare tentamus? Cur non bona fide datis a Deo
resculis utimur? Salvian.
all this Wealth is put into our hands, not to be squandered away at our
Pleasure, but for certain Uses, which, at the Great Audit, we are to be
responsible for. This is intimated by Christ's calling it (...), Luke 16.12.
that which belongs to another; and more directly in the Parable of the
Talents, Mat. 25.14, etc.
which were distributed to the Servants to trade with; and after a time they
were summoned to a Reckoning, and treated according to their diligence in
Trading: And how heavy was the sentence upon him, that did not wast his Talent
in Riot, but only hide it in the Earth without any Improvement? Again, We are
all Stewards to God, and must expect his Enquiry How his Rent has been
gathered, and disposed of? And there is to be a Period to this Employment, and
God will say to every one of us, Luke 16.2.
Give an account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward. Let
us then suppose God demanding of any one of us, What have thou done with all
that Rent which I entrusted with Thee? How has it been laid out conformably to
my Will? To answer, I have hoarded it up, Luke 19.20.
and it is safe in a Napkin; is to confess, I have done no good at all with it:
And the Doom upon such a withered branch will be accordingly. And again, What
can a Man reply to that Question, that has lavished out his Inheritance, and
Conscience too, in Lewdness, and Gaming, and Revelling; in all the mad Frolicks
of Lust, and Intemperance; and to maintain his Vices, and purchase Damnation?
Doubtless his Guilt will strike him dumb; and having made his bargain, he must
stand to it. But let the Case be more innocent, and such an Answer given as
suits with the Men of Honor and Generosity: This I reckon for my House, and
Gardens; This for my gay Furniture; This for my Table; This for my Apparel;
This for my Coaches, and Equipage; and so on. It will be pleaded, that the
Man's Dignity, and Station required his making of such a splendid Figure; and
it is a Reproach to a Man, not to live up to the height of his Fortune: And let
us in good Manners allow this Plea, as far as we can. But still the Scrutiny
must go on; Where are the Bills for relieving the poor? Where are the Evidences
of honoring God with thy Substance? Prove. 3.9.
For if the (...). Chr^sostom. Orat. 2. in Lazar.
whole Sum committed to thee be swallowed up in those Expenses, how popular
soever; if God, and his Poor have not had an equitable share of this Plenty; if
their Fleece has remained dry, when the Dew has been spread over all the
ground; this Account will never pass with God: and though (as the Psalmist
speaks) Men will praise thee when thou do well to thy self; the Praise of
God, (which is infinitely better) nay, and of wise Men too, Jud. 6.40. Psalm.
49.18.
is only to be obtained by doing good to others.

XVIII. 2dly, Let it be considered, That the only way to make Riches a
Blessing, is to employ, and manage them as God has appointed. For we know that
our Savior is strangely severe upon them; Mat. 19.23.
declaring, That a rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and
denouncing thus, Luke 6.24.
Woe unto you that are rich, for ye have received your Consolation: And his
Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6.9.
They that will be rich fall into temptation, and a snare; and into many
foolish, and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction, and perdition.
Wherefore since there is so much danger in this envied Condition, and it is a
rough Sea full of Shipwracks; (many of which we may see before us) let us not
be seduced by the false Notions of the World; but look upon the true Happiness
of Riches to consist in the Religious Management of them. The way to Heaven is
equally open to the Rich, and to the Poor; but they must go in different Paths:
These by Contentedness, and Patience, and Industry, and Submission to the Will
of God, and Reliance upon him for daily Bread: And those by Gratitude to God,
and Humility, and Gentleness, and Liberality, and Charity. Let them then,
according to the Elevation of their Rank, Exercise these Virtues, and do good,
and communicate what they abound with; let them not be highminded, 1 Timothy 6.17.
or surpercilious; nor look down with Scorn upon those of lower degree, and
higher Graces; nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives
us richly all things to enjoy: Let them be able to produce the Objects of their
own Beneficence, and to evince how rich they have been toward God: Luke 12.21.
And (as the famous Laurent. apud Ambros. Offic. l. 2. c. 28.
Saint of old having the Treasures of his Church demanded from him, set out in
order the poor that were fed constantly by it, and said, Hi sunt thesauri
Ecclesiae;) let them thus marshal their indigent Pensioners, and embrace them,
saying, These are our Treasures, these are they that enrich us, and promote our
Salvation: And then they will have substantial Greatness, and shine with an
untainted Luster; then they will be honorable in the Sight of God, Mat. 5.19.
and great in the Kingdom of Heaven.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 16. for deposed read deposited. p. 7. l. ult. for of r. by. p.
19. These Words, Eccl. 35.20. and Mat. 10.42. are to be put in the Margin.

FINIS.

