Iter Australe Attempting something upon the happy Return of our most Gracious
Sovereign Lord, CHARLES II. FROM BANISHMENT TO HIS THRONE.

By a Loyal Pen.

-- Virum non arma Cano. LONON, Printed by Tho. Leach, in the Year, 1660.

The Por^tal.
I.
We Will no Cronostick numbers here
Compose, to figure out the year
Wherein our Second Charles did make
His Blessed return; lest we mistake.
For Justice breaking from her Iron Cage
Has back again reduced the Golden Age;
That Time no longer will the old style bear
Of The Sixteen Hundredth and the Sixtieth Year.
II.
Nor will we yet presume to join
A Nominal Letter to each Line,
And with our slender Art to frame
Acrosticks on his Sacred Name,
For 'twill be Forgerie to Interline
Those Letters Patents Providence Divine
Has Copyed forth for us in CAPITAL
Out of their Heaven-Inrold Original.
III.
Nor yet to make an Anagram
Dis join the Letters of the same:
(So Ancient Adam had the Honor
Without all doubt to be the donor)
Lest (as those Lawless Traitors did Translate
His Royal Kingdoms to a Rebel State
So) we, whilst we endeavor to enforce
A Better Sense upon it, should make a Worse.
IV.
But yet my Muse would something, she
Might demonstrate her Loyalty;
Plain humble verse she thinks will best
Her Kneeling Reverence Attest.
His Beams are such, were not the Poets Bays
Charms against Lightning, she durst not raise
Her self above the pitch of Prose -- Lest she
Should burn her Plumes, and fall a Scorched fly.
V.
O might she gain Acceptance, this
Would prove her chief, her Masterpiece:
So whilst the Sun withdraws his Light
'Twill seem at least an Eagle flight:
But if his splendour be so great that he
Cannot pluck in his daz'ling Rays, and she
Shall stand Convicted of Praesumption,
She sues the General Act -- Oblivion.
Iter Australe, Attempting something upon the happy return of our most gracious
Sovereign Lord, CHARLES II. From Banishment to his THRONE.
I.
SHoot up thy head my Muse, thy Foes are flown,
Made the retreat to mournful Helicon:
Come dive no longer, now thou need'st not fear
Upon the forked Mountain to appear;
Put thy neglected Buskins on, and shake
Thy watery Pineons, and leave the Lake;
Fly to Pernassus Airy top, and see
What from the high Ascent thou can descry;
And when thou shall discern on Thetis floor,
The royal Navy, wafting Charles to shore,
Go Crown thy gladded brows with flowers whereon
The names of Kings have their Inscription,
To entertain his blessed arrival, and
Carol his welcome to the happy Strand.
In the mean time rehearse those mournful Lays,
Thou erst did dedicate unto the praise
Of Charles the first: Go gather up again,
Those Quills of Porcupines thy high disdain
In a Satirical disguise did cast
At Traitors Heads, (whose Feathers as they past,
Sung their Prophetic Elogies) and now
Shoot, shoot in triumph, for their overthrow.
But stop your ears with black, with mourning wool,
Or send your twice-repeated griefs to School
Amongst the tortured Ghosts, they may from thence
Bring back the Lesson of forced Patience,
To hear my now relapsed Muse relate
The Tyranny of our late Monarchs Fate.
II.
NOw that Prophetic Simile proves true,
England's an Axein shape, and nature too:
Whilst startled Conscience winks, One fatal stroke
Prostrates Great Britains Tutelary Oak;
And reason good; Why cumbers it the Ground?
The Traitors cry, our Providence has found
A better way to Husband it, no more
We Beggars-bushes will, as heretofore,
Stand in the barren paths and ways, since we
To plant our selves on his fat soil agree.
Down with the imperious Cedars too (they cry)
That by their power enfenc'd his Majesty,
From our encroachments; And upon their Land
The brave aspiring Poplars shall stand.
The Briery Soldiery shall have a share
With us, and a Commission to tear
Their Golden Fleeces from the backs of those,
Whose zeal to King, or Conscience, shall expose
Themselves unto our malice; -- They Will dispense
With penance in their Robes of Innocence.
Thus fell our Gracious Sovereign, and they
That owned their Princes cause his Fates obey;
So the Barbarians have a Law that when
The Master yields to Destiny, the Men
That were his most obsequious Servants must
Descend his Grave, to wait upon his Dust.
Which of his virtues did foment their rage
So high, naught but his blood could it assuage?
Was it his Justice? Yes, for they did fear,
Before that high Tribunal to appear.
Was it his mercy? Yes, 'cause he refused
To murder whom they wrongfully accused.
Besides (they say) Religion bade them make
An holy War (forsooth for Conscience sake;
But stay a little, step aside and see
How God himself was wronged as well as he.
III.
IF Christian Reformation that will prove
Wherein the Serpent overcomes the Dove,
Farewell ye silenced Oracles, our Sun
Sets in a Cloud, our happy days are done.
But search and try (my Muse) before you speak,
Turn not a she Phanatick and mistake:
For when their warlike Swords and Muskets drove
Out our holy Church, of the peaceful Dove,
Amphibious Batts did spring up in the night
Of blinded zeal, and played the Hypocrite;
And damned Spirits walked therein, which make
Our Quakers their possessed joints to shake,
And Thou and Thee us all, 'cause they foretell,
They shall find no distinctions in Hell.
The Ignis fatuus of whose lights do bend
Their paths unto perditions, pit and lend
False beams a while unto the fatal Brink,
Then (like the Devil) vanish in a stink.
The harmless pictures of the Apostles must
Out of the Temple windows all be thrust;
(They hate such good examples) that before
Ungodly men their light might shine no more:
And why all this? because the Scriptures speak.
How Eutichus fell thence and br^ke his neck.
Each one ordains himself; Mechanic men
Set in the Temples up their shops again
Which Christ himself drove out; these silly Elves
(Gifted from none that I know but themselves)
Pretend to Prophecy, and why not then
Coblars of Souls, as Fishers er'st of Men?
Dissembling Soldiers this, and worse have wrought,
And Crucified their Christ, but kept his Coat:
And the Rump-Senate set the Tail where we
In vain endeavored, that the Head should be.
IV.
HEre give my pious Muse leave to lament
Great Charles his Crucifixion, which has ront
Our Church into so many Breaches, that
Good are thrust out, bad men thrust in thereat.
And as the Jews astonished at the knell
When the holy Temple rang her Passing Bell;
So when our Faith's Defender Fell, had we
Not cause to write a mournful Elegy?
He was both King and Prophet, that he might
Yield both to subjects, and to God their Right.
And these two Functions did so meet, his Laws
Were on the Decade but a Paraphrase.
How did he brandish the Two-edged Sword
Of God's Soul-piercing, Heart-dividing word?
Nor selfish ends, nor false opinion
Could make him burnish a false Gloss thereon;
Who wrote his name upon it, and his devise
With the strong Aqua Fortis of his Eyes.
Then see his Life, not like Cylennius, whose
Statue did point the ready way to those
Were Pilgrims, amongst the Mountains, and stood still
Whilst they ascended the brow-bending Hill;
But died a Martyr in a Good old Cause,
Defending both Divine and Humane Laws.
Then come, O Loyal Subject, let us raise
A Monumental Trophee to his Praise.
And in succeding ages let it stand
Untouched; and may that Sacrilegious hand
That shall by force attempt to raze it, never
Enjoy the blessing of a Sepulcher.
V.
BUt what though he be murdered, his Son
The Prince of Wales ascends his Royal Throne:
Come, we may mitigate Our Griefs, though we
Can never enough bewail His Destiny.
No it is not so, his Fathers Virtues are
Descended unto him, as lawful Heir;
And it is fit, the Fates do say that He
Should likewise taste of his Extremity
To countermand such Blessings; and be hurled
In wandering mazes up and down the world:
Like to that pious Hero, who did have
From flaming Troy, when as the fire did wast
That Cities stately S^ructures, before he
Attain the place of his Regallitie.
But afer many dereadfull hazards run
'Twix Hope and Fear, at length the Scottish Crown
Is set upon his Brows by those that took
Pole Money for his Fathers Head, and struck
That luckless bargain, sad experience told
Proved loss to them that Bought and them that Sold.
VI.
THe English Rebels hearing this, there comes
Their General with an Army, thundering Drums
Rore naught but Canon-language, Trumpets sound
A Brazen Perseverance, they are bound
That have engaged against their Prince, to be
No more Retreaters to their Loyalty.
Charles hunted out of Scotland by the Crew
Of these pursuing Blood-hell-hounds, he threw
Himself to Worsters Borough to obtain
A shelter more secure, but all in vain:
For they dislodged our Dear, and made him fly
For safer covert to a Hollow Tree:
And now the Ranging Dogs the sent have lost;
But would not yet desist, till having crossed
The Champian ground twice over, they could not find
Their Pray, which thus their Fury had declined.
Thus did his Majesty escape, whose Rays
Heavens Providence designed for better days;
And to a Foreign soil is fled from hence,
Till that Reducing Power recalls him thence.
VII.
ANd now Aspiring Oliver by Force
With the Black Rod whips the Rump out of doors,
And makes himself Protector; Thus we see
Treason amongst Traitors sometimes there may be:
One Interregnum thus encludes its Brother;
Here Is one Parenthesis within another:
Time-servers tongues, Licked (out of Hope or Fear,
Into a Formal Lamb this Savage Bear.
One would have him a David, (cause he went
To Lamberts wife, when he was in his Tent.)
A second, Moses styled him, (for why
His shining Nose made the Synecdoche:)
And Most were so besotted that they found
No grief at all; For hard Opression ground
Their Faces with such cruelty, that there
Did no impressions of dislike appear.
But Providence at last to purge our Air
From this most noisome Vapor, did prepare
A wind to drive him hence, and sent him gone
To his deserved place; and straight his Son
Richard assumes the Load, and all adore
The Ass, (but for the Burden which he bore.)
Some thought he would again our King recall,
But yet the Goose saved not our Capitol.
Lambert Degrades him presently, and then
The Rump let loose, ran to their stools again.
VIII.
BUt they must turn out too, and not repine
But to the Walling fordians resign
Their late acquired power, the Rump again
Is thrust besides the Cushion, may not Reign;
And now great Monk advances over Tweed,
The Privilege of Parliaments to plead,
But his VVhite-powder gave no crack; for he
Wrought not so much by Power as Policy.
All are restored again, nay more then that,
For each Secluded Member takes his seat
Among the rest; I hope we may not fear
To style the King, Monks Privy Counceller.
The Royal Party make it their Resolve.
With all the speed that may be to dissolve
The now Divided House, with an intent
To make room for another Parliament;
Which might the Great Work do, and so agree
To pass a Fine without Recoverie.
Fly then ye restless Furies, fly, begone;
No more the Mazes of Confusion
In Britains Soil; trace out, hence off, make room
For gentle Fayries, their glad feet may come
And Dance the Rings of Everlasting Peace
Ab^ut our Blessed Isle, so that the Seas
Of Violence and Rapine may no more,
Cast their unheard of Monsters on our Shore.
IX.
THe Senate is Assembled, which receives
The Still e'oth Peoples Repesentatives
Now in a downright sense; they are the Glass
Wherein his Subjects may see their Kings Face;
And easily apprehend there does abide,
A Silvered plenty on the other side:
Their Rumpships Breeches now no more shall be
The Impress of our Lawful Coin; But we,
For his Reward who did bring home our King,
Shall have Great George on Horseback ride the Ring.
As when the Earth bewailes in Mourning Weeds
The absence of the long set Sun, and dreads
A Non-repeated Course, the Gray-ey'd Morn
Giving a signal of his blessed Return,
She then puts off her Cypress vayl, that He,
Might wipe her dewy Tears away; so we,
For Charle, his Wains Declension had vowed
Our Souls all Proselites to grief, and bowd
Our necks unto her Altars; Till from far
Unto our Watery eyes there did appear,
Monck in a Scottish Mist, who straight did pour
On English Rebels heads, a drowning shower:
Which having done, the Coast began to clear,
And straight upon our English Hemisphere
We did expect that Star should rise and be
Exlated to its Regal Dignity.
And whilst our King makes ready to Return,
With Zeal inflamed Joys our Hearts do burn.
X.
THe British Seas Fly to a Foreign shore,
With an unwonted speed, to waft Him over,
And make their Inroads on the Continent
That still detain's their Lord, and when they have spent
Their strength in vain, they backward bend their course
They may assayl it with a greater Force:
And having wun the Field, and got their Prize,
Even Rarifi'd with joy, they Skale the Skies
To fetch the Clouds from thence, whose waters may
Send their Assistance to the happy Bay.
Both Heaven and Earth (for naught else yet we see)
Fight for, or yield to CHARLES his Potencie.
Neptune his Trident brings, and will not own
A Scepter suiting to a Triple Crown:
Iris, that stour Virago, thinks it fit
To paint her Bow with Purple, Green, and White
To show whose cause she owns; Heaven would have made
Her straggling Meteors Torch-bearers in the shade
Of wandering Night, the Royal ship might stear
Aright amidst the Waves, but that there were
So many Bonefires on the shore that forced
A day when Tytans Chariot was unhorst.
Now! now he sails in view! but yet no land
Appears unto his sight, the people stand
So thick (like King-Fishers) upon the Coast,
The Inhabitants he found, the Isle he lost.
Some wish themselves Arions Dolphin, they
Might shoot into the Waves and bear away
Their wished King to Land; and some would be
Int' Eagles Metamorphos'd, that from Sea
They might bring Charles the Great, as it is told
That feathered Prince did bear the child of old.
All would be Christophers that they might bring
Unto the happy shore their welcome KING.
How did the people crowd to see him set
His foot on English ground? He scarce could get
Room to Ascend; and thus their very Love
And Loyalty did Petit Treason prove.
XI.
The Guns report his Landing, posting Fame
Rode all the staged Cannons as she came
Quite out of breath, and fainting, short had flown,
But Fleeter Echo lent her Wings to Town.
The Bells racked on their turning wheels Confess
The happy news to all the Parishes,
Whilst to their tuning Cords the Steeples dance
For joy at this their great Deliverance.
The Citizens began to curse the Day
Gave Birth unto our Civil Wars, that they that fell
Could not rebuild great Paul's his Spire,
As an Ill-boading Omen to foretell,
The Ruin of the Church) so that they might
Have now ascended his prodigious Height
To view Charles in his Progress, guarded by
The Quintessence of England Cavalry;
Whilst Loyal-hearted Subjects made a Lane
Fenced with a double Quick-set Hedge, and strain
Their Throats, like merry Birds therein, so sing
The blessed Restoration of their King,
That now at Black Heath makes a stand, to greet
Them Graciously, that at his Royal Feet
Cast themselves down for Pardon, and arise
In his Defense against his Enemies.
Thence They conduct him to his Throne, and He
Assumes his double-staft Suprem^cy.
XII.
Returned! O happy News! Is Charles his Wain
On our Horizon wheeled up once again,
(And drawn with Doves, which tacitly express
This Emblem'd Motto, Conqueror by Peace.)
Go scotch the Orb, ye God's, this Chariot may
Run the Olympic Chase no more, but stay
Till pale-fac't Death sets up the White, which done
May Ariadne's Star be-studded Crown
Enshrine his noble Brows, may he appear
In Cassiopeias High Imperial Chair,
A Star of the first Magnitude, and be
As in his proper Seat and Dignity.
Go scotch the Orb till then, we may no more
His Peregrined Aspects here deplore.
Then let our Joys, O Loyal Subjects, Dance
The Flourishes of our Deliverance
Upon our Ravished Heart Strings, and our Tongues
Sing Consort to them with Bliss-brimmed Songs,
Since Providence our Monarch does Recall
From Miseries Black Heath, to Joys White Hall.
Vivo le Roy.
FINIS.

