To my Honored Friends, and Brethren, the Stewards of the late Meeting of
Clergy-Mens Sons. Mr. Edward Tenison, Mr. Thomas Breamer, Mr. Nudigate Owsley,
Mr. Thomas Pindar, Mr. Jer. Pierce, Mr. Edward Hinton, Mr. Martin Carter, Mr.
Benjamin Howel Mr. Peter Crouch, Mr. William Staresmore, Mr. Samuel Turner, Mr.
Nath. Green.

Honored Brethren,
I Am sensible, I have not done Justice to the Good Samaritan: But what has
been wanting to his Character from the Pulpit, will, I hope, be made up by the
Examples of those that heard it. Toward me, I confess, your Compassion had
been greater, if you had passed by this mean Performance, and only wished me a
better Talent: But since you have taken it up, and are willing it should live,
you have made your selves responsible for it; and in your hands I respectfully
leave it, in Obedience to your Commands, and am,

SIRS, Your most humble Servant, and Affectionate Brother, Z. ISHAM.

LUKE X. 37. -- Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou likewise.


I. AMongst the several Calumnies maliliciously cast upon the Primitive
Christians, and contrived by the Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12.10.
to prevent our Religion from taking root in the World; the most perverse
Imputation was that which was grounded upon their mutual Fraternity, and
eminent Acts of Charity: They revile us, (says a very ancient Tertul. Apol. c.
39.
Father) because we call our selves Brethren to one another; and deride us for
loving one another so well, and being ready to lay down our lives for one
another: And surely it was a most envenomed rancour, that could turn the
highest Virtue into a matter of Reproach. For nothing could redound more to the
Honor of the Church, than to set a Pattern to Mankind of Beneficence, and
Kindness, and unspotted Affection; and that Modicam unusquisque stipem menstrua
die, vel quum velit, apponit. Haec quasi deposita pietatis sunt: Nam inde non
epulis, nec potaculis dispensatur; sed egenis alendis, humandisque and Pueris,
ac Puellis re, ac parentibus destitutis, jamque domesticis senibus; item
Naufragis, and siqui in metallis, and siqui in insulis, vel in cust^diis,
duntaxat ex cansa Dei sectae, alumni Confessionis suae fiunt. Id. Ibid.
the great Body of Christians was one Corporation for Charity, and the Widows,
and Orphans were the Sisters, and Children of the whole Community: And S.
Epist. 398.
Basil tells us, It was the ancient Glory of the Church, That the Christians
who traveled from one end of the World to the other, met every where with
Fathers and Brethren. Accordingly it was this divine Spirit of Love, and Mercy,
animating the Church, that chiefly established our holy Religion, and
surmounted the Persecutions against it: And this was so remarkable, that
Sozomen l. 5. c. 16. Festinabat, ut Pagani Christianorum assuescerent officiis.
Cassiodor. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 29.
Julian the Apostate thought to restore Paganism, by employing the indulgent
Methods of Christianity; and to supplant our Faith, by putting on the Disguise
of our Charity. I wish we had not in the Christian World, a more thriving
Instance of supporting a false Worship by charitable Foundations: But we ought
not to be offended with these, for the Blemishes of the other; nor to despise
an Alms, because the hand is not clean that gives it: And if Deeds of Mercy can
be made the Props of Superstition, they will not be less powerful in upholding
Truth. We do not indeed make use of Apparitions, and frightful Stories from the
dead, to persuade to Charity; nor can we think it so meritorious, as to be a
price for Eternity: But we press as earnestly the Obligation of honoring God
with our Substance; Prove. 3.9. 1 Timothy 6.18.
and of being rich in good Works, ready to distribute, and willing to
communicate; and with such visible Success, that if the public Settlements
erected since the Reformation, (especially within the Precincts of this City)
be compared, as to the Wisdom, and Usefulness of them, with what our Ancestors
did before it, we need not fear the coming to an Account with the Church of
Rome: And our Appearance on this Day, as it is a bright Testimony against one of
her Corruptions; so it is a new Triumph of Charity, for the Security, and
Reputation of our Church. Wherefore, in order to the promoting of that pious
end which brings this Audience together, I shall humbly set before you the good
Samaritan; whose Praise is in the Gospel, for recovering a poor Jew, that was
gasping for Relief, and lay neglected by those that were nearer to him: And
hereupon our Savior propounds his Example, as fit to be imitated by all his
Disciples; though he was himself more worthy to be followed, as being the
noblest Pattern of Goodness, and Compassion, and Benignity, that ever appeared
in the World.

II. The Parable is so well known, that I shall only take notice of the
Occasion of it; which was the putting of this Question to our great Master, Who
was to be counted a Neighbor in the Sense of the Law? For the Law running
thus, Levit. 19.18.
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; and the Lawyer (with whom Christ
was talking) having discreetly mentioned this as a necessary Precept; (though
we are Lightfoot.
told, it was not written in the Schedules of the Jewish Phylacteries) he took
this Opportunity to request our Savior's Opinion, in what seems to have been
then controverted, How far the Relation of a Neighbor extended? The Answer
whereunto is couched in the Parable before us, and the Dignity of a Neighbor
restored to the Original Latitude: For the Jewish Tradition had excluded
Gentiles, and Samaritans from the Privileges of Neighbors; and none but a Jew,
that resorted to the Temple, was presumed to have any Right to this Title, and
to the Benefits resulting from it: And as for Idolaters, and Schismatics, how
could they (as it was objected) be Neighbors to God's People, that were at a
Distance from him? And how could such as oppressed, and hated them, claim the
Advantages of their Love? But our blessed Savior (who came to offer his own
Blood for his Enemies) would not endure any such restraint upon the Law of
Charity: And hereupon to discard that narrow Interpretation of it, he pitcheth
upon a Samaritan relieving a Jew, whom he knew to be an Enemy to him, both upon
a National, and a religious Account; and yet he did not pass by the mangled
Creature, as the Priest, and Levite had done; (though they were his Neighbors
beyond all dispute) he did not leave him with a tender Look, or an unprofitable
Wish; but seeing him in such wretched Circumstances, he falls immediately to
the helping of him, and binds up his Wounds, and mitigates his Anguish, and
continues the Care of him in order to his perfect Recovery. And what could a
Man have done more for his kindest Neighbor, or his dearest Friend? And
therefore our Savior artificially concludes from hence, That every Man is to
be treated as a Neighbor. Eccl. 50.26
For if he had demanded directly, Whether a Samaritan Schismatic (one of that
foolish People dwelling in Sichem) was comprehended within the Verge of the
Precept of Love? the Lawyer would certainly have answered in the Negative: But
when he rehearses the Kindness of a Samaritan toward a Jew, this a Jewish
Zealot could not disapprove of: And by this Circumlocution Christ brings him to
confess, That the Samaritan was Neighbor unto him that fell among the Thieves.
But if a Samaritan was Neighbor to a Jew, and ought to love him as such, and
particularly to relieve him in Distress; why should not a Jew be a Neighbor to
a Samaritan? And accordingly our Savior subjoins, Go, and do thou likewise:
That is, I approve of your Answer; the Samaritan was really such a Neighbor as
the Law requires; and after his Example, you are to look upon every Person that
wants Relief, (though he be upon terms of Separation, and Enmity toward you)
as a fit Object of your Compassion, and Mercy.

III. In prosecuting the Case of this good Samaritan, as it is recommended by
Christ to our Imitation, I shall only desire you to consider these two Heads:
First, The Act of Mercy exhibited to one in Distress: And Secondly, The
peculiar Circumstances of the Object that was relieved. I begin with the First
Point, the Act of Mercy toward one in Distress: And since, it is said to every
one of us, Go, and do thou, as the good Samaritan did; I shall offer some
Considerations for the clearer Enforcement of this Duty. The First of them is,
That the Principles of natural Religion oblige us to the succouring of those
that are in misery: For it supposes a general Cognation between all men, and
engages us in a reciprocal Amity toward one another; and though by
prohibiting Rapine, and Invasion, it secures every man in his Property, and
Possessions; yet it requires us to spare so much out of our Abundance, as is
needful for the cherishing of those that are overtaken by Calamities: And when
the indigent, and afflicted are laid in our way, we cannot pass by them
carelessly, and unconcernedly, without struggling against our own Consciences,
and casting a Reproach upon the Dignity of our Nature. There is a softness, and
tenderness interwoven in our Frames; which men cannot easily wear out, till
they have transformed themselves into Creatures more savage than the Beasts of
the Wilderness; and have defaced those Impressions of Virtue, which were
planted in their minds: And then indeed we see by Experience, that by Lewdness,
and profane Courses, they learn to be cruel, and insolent, and unmerciful. But
this is a Violence upon our own Constitutions, and a Brutality that destroys
the Image of God after which we are created; and man loses himself, when he
puts off the Bowels of Compassion. For where humane Nature is untainted, it
inclines to mercy, and lenity; and the best Dispositions, and purest Souls are
always most communicative of what is good, and most averse to Rigours, and
Inflictions: Which are never eligible, but where Justice cannot be satisfied
without them, nor public Charity maintained. Prove. 12.18.
There is (says Solomon) that speaks like the piercings of a Sword; but the
tongue of the wise is health: His very Words are Antidotes against Evil, and
are refreshing, and healing to those whom he converseth with; and his Actions
are conformable to them, and by doing all the good that lies in his power, he
gives the best Argument of his being wise. For what can be more wisely done,
than to deliver the oppressed, and the miserable; to succor the Necessities of
those that are embarked in the same Vessel with our selves, and to increase the
Satisfactions, and allay the Sorrows of one another; to remove the Thorns and
Briars that are upon the Face of the Earth, and to turn it into a new Paradise?
Every man is a Brother to us, and the help we afford him is given to our own
Flesh: And it is the common Interest of mankind, to unite all their Endeavors
in chasing away the Troubles and Discomforts of humane Life. If we at any time
fall into Calamity, or Oppression, we think all good men are concerned to
assist us; and we justly expect it, so far as they have Opportunity, and
Strength: And then it is evident, how far we are bound to support others in an
afflictive Condition, whose Wants by a charitable Imagination we may transferr
upon our selves; and it will then be legible in our own breasts, in what
proportion we are to reach forth to them the Communications of our Mercy. For
nothing can be more equitable, than to measure our Aid, and Kindnesses to other
men, by our own rational Desires, and just Expectations, if their case should
happen to be ours: And it is a Rule eternally to be practiced, Mat. 7.12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them.

IV. Secondly, Let it be considered, That the Christian Religion does more
earnestly require from us the exercising of Mercy, and Charity: And to this
purpose we have many known Lessons from Christ, and his Apostles; Be merciful,
Luke 6.36. and 11.41.
as your Father is merciful; Give alms of such things as you have; for It is
more blessed to give than to receive: Act. 20.35.
Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love, Romans 12.10, 13, 21.
Distributing to the necessity of Saints; and Be not overcome of evil, but
overcome evil with good: Heb. 13.16. Jam. 1.27. 1 John 3.17.
To do good, and to communicate forget not; for with such sacrifices God is
well pleased: Pure religion, and undefiled before God is this, to visit the
fatherless, and widows in their affliction: But whosoever has this world's good,
and sees his Brother has need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from
him, how dwells the love of God in him? To the like tendency we have many
other Instructions; and all of them very agreeable to that divine Institution
of Love, which came down to us from Heaven: And they are further confirmed by
the unimitable Life of our ever-blessed Redeemer. Act. 10.38.
For he went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the
Devil: His Miracles were Works of Charity; and he was constantly employed in
Kindnesses and merciful Deeds; in reclaiming Sinners, and instructing the
ignorant, and cherishing penitent Souls, and driving away Diseases, and evil
Spirits, and feeding the hungry, and opening the Eyes of the blind, and
rescuing the World from the Slavery of Hell: In one Word, he changed the Order
of the Creation for Wonders of goodness; and to teach us the art of doing those
Offices of Mercy in a natural way, which he did by a supernatural Power. Having
therefore such a glorious Leader, let us follow him as well as we can; and
though we cannot exactly keep pace with him, and what is said of his Disciples
may befit our Weakness; Mar. 10.32.
that as He went before them, they were amazed, and as they followed, they were
afraid; yet by his Grace we may so far resemble him, as that he will own us
hereafter: And it is not above our Christian strength, to form our Behavior
according to the advice of the Apostle; Ephesians. 5.1, 2.
Be ye followers of God, as dear children; and walk in love, as Christ also
has loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to
God.

V. Thirdly, Let it be considered, That Christian Mercy is more especially
exercised in providing for the necessities of the Soul, and taking compassion
upon it; inasmuch as the Soul is nobler than the Body, and all that belongs to
it: And this is coming nearest to the unspeakable Love of Christ, who descended
from the bosom of the Father, for the saving of our immortal Spirits; and If
God so loved us, we ought also to love another. 1 John 4.11.
To refresh men under temporal, and outward Evils, is our certain Duty; and as
it is Solomon's Remark concerning the day of prosperity, Eccl. 7.14.
and the day of adversity, That God has set the one over against the other; so
he has set the plenty of the rich over against the poverty of the indigent,
that the one should be a support for the other. But still to reform Sinners,
and propagate the Fear, and Knowledge of God; to bind up the broken Conscience,
and give light to them that sit in darkness, and proclaim liberty to the
captives of Satan; to rescue men from dangerous Prepossessions, and reconcile
them to one another, or to an offended God; these are such Fruits of Mercy, as
are most acceptable to God, Luke 15.10.
and create a joy in the presence of his holy Angels. Our Savior intimates to
us, That our souls are of greater value than the whole world, Mat. 16.26.
than all the Kingdoms of it, all that Pomp and Glory which he saw, and would
not accept; and so he graciously expressed his Esteem of them, in contemning
the World, and dying for them: And let us be as tender of them, as he was; and
have as just an Opinion of their worth. The custody of our own Souls is
committed to us by our Maker; and they cannot be lost, unless we squander them
away: And we have frequent Opportunities of forwarding the Salvation of our
Brethren; nay, we have several Obligations to it, correspondently to the
distinct relations of Life: And so Pastors, and Magistrates, and Parents, and
Masters of Families have weighty charges of this Nature lying upon them; and it
behooves them to be watchful, Ezekiel. 3.18.
that the blood of others may not be required at their hands. Whereas on the
contrary it will prove hereafter an ineffable pleasure, to see the Harvest of
our Charity, in the Felicity of those whom we pulled out of the Fire, and
rescued from the Entanglements of Vice; or bred up in the Fear of God, and in
virtuous Callings: And it will be an endless rejoicing, if we shall meet in
another World with the Orphans that we took into our Care, and educated in
Piety; and if we have made any accession to the number of Saints, and to the
Praises of Eternity.

VI. The Fourth Consideration is, That there is an ample Reward to encourage
Mercy, and Compassion; and that both upon a moral, and upon a religious
Account. If it be regarded morally, it is attended with the Blessing of inward
Satisfaction and Comfort; and it is an inexpressible Delight to a generous mind,
to mitigate the Sufferings of other men, and to raise up a fallen Brother, and
to vanquish the Evils of Fate: And though there is a secret Grief in partaking
with our Brethren in their miseries, and in turning upon our selves the arrows
that wound them; yet the joy resulting from the Sense of having relieved them
is a lasting Refreshment: And he that can look upon his Works of Mercy, and the
Monuments of his Liberality; and can pass in a mental Reflection through the
Objects of his Charity, surrounded with Prayers, and Benedictions; may have
more solid Reason to rejoice, than a Conqueror passing through a triumphal
Arch. Moreover, the taking Compassion upon others, and succouring their Wants,
is a good shelter against such Afflictions as may befall our selves; and they
that have been of a kind, and bountiful temper, and have not been sparing in
their Seed, nor in their Labor, will be sure to meet with Friends, and
proportionable Supplies in the Day of their Calamity: For it is true in this
sense, as well as in a more spiritual one, that the liberal Soul shall be made
fat; and he that waters shall be watered also himself. Prove. 11.25.
We know not how soon we may be surpised by Crosses, and Decays; and none of
us can plead an Exemption from the common Distresses, and fatal Accidents of
the World: And therefore it is the more fitting for us, to remember them that
are in bonds, Heb. 13.3.
as bound with them; and them which suffer adversity, as being our selves also
in the body. Again, upon a religious account, the recompenses of a charitable
disposition are very manifest; And, Prove. 11.17.
The merciful Man (as Solomon observes) does good to his own Soul; but he that
is cruel troubles his own Flesh: For, as God hates an uncharitable, and
sanguinary Spirit; so he is highly pleased with Works of Mercy, and always
returns them upon the Head of him that performs them. The Beatitude runs thus,
Mat. 5.7.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy; they shall obtain it
from God, whose Distributions are most Valuable; and they shall obtain it in
many Blessings of this Life, but most eminently in those of another World to
their infinite compensation. Eccl. 29.11, 12, 13.
Shut up Alms in thy Storehouses (says the Son of Sirach) and it shall bring
thee more profit than gold; it shall deliver thee from all afflition; it shall
fight for thee against thine Enemies better than a mighty shield, and strong
spear: But the richest Advantage of it is, that it is the laying up of Treasures
in Heaven; and our expenses upon the Poor will be repaid hereafter, beyond all
comparison with earthly gain; for Christ himself has engaged his Word to us,
under the Figure of the good Samaritan; Luke 10.35.
Whatsoever thou spendest, when I come again, I will repay thee. We cannot
forget our Savior's account of the last Judgment; what it is that Men will be
punished for the neglect of, and what it is that they will be rewarded for the
performance of: And this is a singular mark of Favor to acts of Charity, that
amongst all the Christian Graces, they are pitched upon as chiefly instrumental
in procuring Eternal Bliss, and as turning the balance for us in the terrible
day of trial. The reason whereof possibly is, because they are the most natural
Fruits of that Divine Love, which is the Fountain of all true Devotion, and the
Ornament of the blessed Spirits, and is to remain with us for ever in the
highest Heavens: And hereupon, when they proceed from the right Principle, they
imply the conjunction of other Christian Virtues, and a fitness for the Kingdom
of God.

VII. I come now to the Second Point in my Text, namely, the peculiar
Circumstances of the Object that was relieved by our Samaritan: It was a Jew,
and by consequence one that hated him, and his Religion; and yet, Go, and do
thou likewise. Let this therefore be the first Observation from hence; That old
Quarrels and Animosities, must not obstruct the Manifestations of our love; nor
bind our hands from doing good, Mat. 5.44.
when there is a Providential call to it. For Amicos diligere omnium est,
inimicos autem solorum Christianorum. Tertul. ad Scap. c. 1.
it is our Master's Command, Love your Enemies; and therefore when they come in
our way, we are rather to regard the original relation between them, and us;
than any grounds of hatred that have sprung up since, and are of a lower date;
and though I meet with one that is to me, as a Jew to a Samaritan, I must not
be slow in his relief, when I see him weltering in his Blood, and calling out
for my help. Wherefore when Objects of Mercy are presented to us, we are to
separate their personal Qualities from their Wants; and if they are Unworthy in
themselves, or in respect of their Dealings with us; yet there is a Worthiness
in humane Nature, which no Vices can divest a Man of; and there are natural
Bonds of Amity, and an universal Consanguinity, which no baseness can
extinguish: and when our common Nature is oppressed, it has a right to
Tenderness and Assistance from all of the same Race. It was therefore a
wretched perverting of the Law, for the Maimon.
Jews to teach; that if a Gentile were in danger of Death, they were not bound
to deliver him; and if he fell into the Sea, they were not obliged to endeavor
the taking of him out. This is contrary to common Humanity: for the antecedent
Rights of Mankind are not to be defeated by subsequent Distinctions; and every
one in Misery is to be relieved, not in proportion to his Merits, but to his
Distress; let him be Jew, or Gentile, Righteous, or Wicked, Friend, or Enemy.
He that takes pity on an Enemy, has gained the Victory over him; and a noble
Mind would not lose so fair an opportunity: And whatever Discouragements there
may be to his Bounty, it is a sufficient ground for it, that he relieves not the
Enemy, but the Man; and (according to the Prophet's Expression) he hides not
himself from his own flesh. Isa. 58.7.
If a Man is my Enemy, let it be his Fault, and not mine; for why should I be
Unnatural to him, because he has been so to me? And since by Retaliation of
Injuries, I should seem to take him for my Pattern, and that would be
dishonorable for me; it ought to be my Care, that whatever Violence he offers
me, he may neither rob me of my Virtue, nor of my good Name. This therefore is
a rule of both Testaments; Prove. 25.21. and Romans 12.20.
If thine Enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he be thirsty, give
him water to drink.

VIII. Secondly, I shall observe from the Case of our Samaritan, That
differences in Religion ought not to put any stop to our Christian love: for we
find, that one who does not worship at the same Altar with us, may be our
Neighbor; and by consequence be worthy of our love. The chief Contentions
between the Jews and Samaritans were about Religion; and this embitter'd them
mightily against one another, though they agreed in the Substance of it, and
differed only in a Circumstance. For though Mede. Falkner.
some of great Learning tell us, that the Samaritans worshipped God under the
resemblance of a Dove, and Circumcised their Children in the Name of it, I take
this to be a Jewish Calumny: And though others accuse them, not only of owning
no Scripture besides the Books of Moses, but also of Origin. in Joh. p. 327.
and in Matt. p. 486. Epiphan. Is. Voss.
denying the Immortality of the Soul, and the Resurrection, and the World to
come; I do not think this Leaven of the Sadducees, had got much amongst them in
our Savior's days; if we abate Orig. cont. Cells. p. 38. and in Joh. p. 218.
Walton. Proleg. XI.
their receiving of the Pentateuch alone. But the Joseph. l. 11. c. 8. and l.
13. c. 6.
grand Debate between the two Nations was concerning the Credit of their
Temples, and the local Confinement of God's Worship; as it is rightly stated by
that notable Woman in the Gospel, Joh. 4.20. and 9.
Our Fathers worshipped in this Mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the
place where men ought to worship: and yet we see, what a Flame this one
Controversy raised for many Generations, and produced a kind of inveterate
Antipathy between the contending Parties; so that the Jews had no dealings with
the Samaritans, nor have Samaritan. Epist. ad Scalig.
to this every day. It Is so too often amongst Christians; when from slight
Causes of Dispute, their tempers are sour'd by a long tract of Contention: and
Charity (which is of unquestionable Necessity) is lost for Questions that
possibly will not be decided till the second Coming of Christ. But from the
Parable before us, we may learn that the Jews and Samaritans ought to be
Friends to one another: and it is a strange Descant upon their Case, which is
made by a Maldon. in Joan. p. 527.
Learned Jesuit; That the Jews hated the Samaritans the more bitterly, because
these pretended to the same Religion; and so (says he) true Catholics hate
Calvinists, and all other Heretics, worse than they do Infidels. God deliver
us from such true Catholics; I am sure, a true Christian hates no Man
whatever: and therefore instead of returning their hatred, let us follow a much
better Guide; Bless them which persecute you, Romans 12.14.
bless and curse not. It Is so far from Christian Charity, to hate Schismatics,
and Heretics; that it is a peculiar Act of it to reduce, and convert them: And
where our charitable endeavors meet with stubbornness, we are to remember that
it cannot be vanquished but by the Grace of God; and when he is pleased to
cooperate with our zeal, it will certainly be victorious. We are not told,
what return the Jew in this Parable made to his Deliverer: But the mercy had
been well repaid, if he had brought the Samaritan to the Temple which God had
appointed. In Johan. p. 208.
Origin observes, that the Samaritans are the Figure of those that dissent from
the Church; and that their Mount Gerizim is, by the Interpretation of the Word,
Division, or Separation: And then we may conclude, that the best healing for a
wounded Samaritan, is to (...). Basil. T. 1. p. 320.
guide him, and his Sacrifices, to the true Temple of God. It Is no Charity to
flatter men in their mistakes, to encourage their wanderings by mean
Compliances, and to betray them in the affairs of their Souls, under the
appearances of friendship and civility: But it is so, to endeavor the gaining
of them by softness, and forbearance, and gentleness; to beware (as much as we
can) of inflaming and exasperating their minds; to treat them, not as
Adversaries, but as misguided Agnosce me fratrem: agnosco te fratrem: sed,
excepto schismate, excepto errore, excepta dissensione. Augustine. Supplem. p.
86.
Brethren; and to pardon their weaknesses, and hope well of their Salvation.
Many that worship here on this, or that Mountain, may meet us hereafter in the
heavenly Jerusalem; and then we shall be ashamed of our uncharitable discords:
To their own Master they stand, or fall; Romans 14.4.
and God is able to make them stand.

IX. I need not insist longer upon the kindness of the Samaritan respectively
to the Jew: For there is no distance, or enmity between us, and them, whose
wants we come hither to relieve; and in whose Name I am humbly to address my
self, to you that are the Givers or Managers of what is to sustain them.
Wherefore to excite your mercy, and liberality, and care toward them; let this
be the First Encouragement to it, That they are not strangers, or foreigners;
but have a particular alliance to us, and are in a manner of the same Family
with us: And they are not Worshippers on a remote Mountain, but Domestics of
our Communion; and by this are entitled to your present relief. Charity is
impartial, but not undistinguishing; it rejects none that are in want, but it
may give a Preference: And accordingly it is an Apostolical Rule, Gal, 6.10.
As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men; especially unto them who
are of the household of faith. There is a growing Sect in this Nation of dark,
and unaccountable Principles, of an unpopular behavior, and of declared enmity
to the Church, and Magistracy, and Clergy; and yet from despicable beginnings
it is risen to a strange increase, by a compacted policy, and the secret union
of those that enter into it; and in that by mutual assistances, and
correspondencies they keep their poor from appearing publicly, and freely
support the necessities of one another: And let it be no offense, to provoke
you to Emulation, Romans 11.14.
(as S. Paul speaks) and to quicken your charity, by mentioning those who are
continually making work for it. Secondly, Another incitement hereunto may be
this, that the foundation of your wealth, and settlement, was laid out of what
was peculiarly Ego Aethelbertus Rex tradidi Deo aliquam partem terrae juris
mei. Spelm. Council. p. 119. Ego Aethelulphus Rex portionem terrae mea Deo
concedam. Id. p. 350. Ego Adelstanus Rex mando Praepositis meis, ut reddant de
meo proprio decimas Deo. Id. p. 402. Sacerdotes populum instruant de his quae
de jure Deo sunt reddenda, decimae scilicet, and res aliae. Constit. Edgar.
Nemo auferat Deo quod ad Deum pertinet. Leg. Aethelr. Quisque Deo jura rite
persolvito: decimas reddito. Leg. Canut. Decima garba Deo debita est, and ideo
reddenda. Leg. S. Edwar.
consecrated to God: And then it is the more necessary to offer him some
proportionable requital; and to cancel your Debt to the Church, by providing
for her Fatherless Children, and Widows. It was the ancient Notion, That the
Augustine. Ep. L. ad Bonif. Isidor. Pel. l. 1. Ep. 269. Prosper. de Vit. Cont.
l. 2. c. 9. Basil. T. 1. p. 916. and Epist. 69.
Revenues of the Church were the Patrimony of the poor; and they were usually
put into the Hands of the Canon. Apostol. 38, 40, 41. Can. Antioch. 24, 25.
Constitut. Apost. l. 2. c. 25, 27. Aelfrici Canon. 24. Greg. Nyssen. Vit. S.
Macr. Ambros. Offic. l. 1. c. 30. and l. 2. c. 28.
Bishops, that the Surplusage above the decent Maintenance of the Clergy, might
be distributed to charitable uses: And then it cannot be denied, that what has
been built upon the Endowments of the Church, ought to pay a Ground-rent of
Charity. Thirdly, Let us consider, that the more we have prosper'd by God's
special Benediction upon our Industry and Labors; the greater is our
Obligation of making suitable returns in Piety, and Mercy: And he that gave us
our Possessions, did not make us the Proprietours, but the Stewards of them.
God has raised many of you to wealthy and honorable Employments; and there is
scarce any Dignity in Church, or State, any Profession, or Calling, or Rank,
which some of this Body have not advanced the Reputation of: So that we may say
to those of the other Tribes in the Words of Apol^ c. 37.
Tertullian; Vestra omnia implevimus, urbes, municipia, castra, decurias,
palatium, senatum, forum: And this as it confirms God's ancient Promises of
Blessing the Seed of the Righteous; so it reminds us, that since by his kind
Providence our branches are spread so far, it becomes us in all places through
which we pass, to leave some footsteps of our virtuous Education, and of the
Principles instilled into us by our religious Parents: to whose Memory we
cannot dedicate a better Monument, than the Public Fruits of their
Cultivation; and a Life answerable to their Instructions, and Prayers.
Fourthly, Let it be Considered, that we claim a nearer Relation to the Church,
and solemnly call our selves, The Sons of the Church of England: and therefore
we ought, above all Men, not only to be steadfast to her Communion; but to do
every thing that tends to the Honor, and Establishment of it. It Is plain,
nothing can more Conduce hereunto, than the good Works, and Charity, and Love,
and Innocence of those that enter into her Gates: and accordingly let this be
our way of standing up in her Defense; and let us plead for our Communion by
the Goodness of our Lives, and the Tenderness of our Hearts; and by walking
suitably to the Scriptures, which we have had an early Acquaintance with.
Lastly, Since this is the time of commemorating our Savior's Advent; let us be
excited to Charity and Love, by reviewing the wonderful Mercies of it; and by
considering earnestly what he did, in remembering Man, who had forgotten
himself; in visiting the Earth under the Form of a Servant, when it was
overspread with Darkness, and Destruction was marching through all the parts of
the Universe; and in Redeeming us by the Blood of his Cross, when we were his
Enemies, and utterly unworthy of Salvation from him. We cannot say here, Go,
and do thou likewise; we cannot approach to the mysterious height of his
incomprehensible Love: but we can do what is necessary for us; we can adore,
and follow him at an humble distance; and he will accept of our imperfect
Obedience, and enable us for higher Degrees of it, and ensure to us an eternal
Reward; if we live sincerely according to his fundamental Prescription, Joh.
15.12.
This is my Commandment, my great, and distinguishing Commandment, that ye love
one another, as I have loved you. Rev. 1.5, 6.
To him that thus loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood;
together with the Father, and the Holy Ghost; be Glory, and Dominion for ever,
and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

