Iter Oxoniense: OR, The going down of the ASSES to OXENFORD.
SInce Muddiman the gainful Trade laid down,
Of writing a whole Sheet for half a Crown,
A thousand Scriblers have retail'd the Trade,
And News is now the Towns great Staple made.
Now, Giles! the Caduceus shall be thine;
Thou have a specious Title to the Nine.
The Crow or Goose from which thou pull'st thy Quill,
Have gi'n thee Seis^n of Parnassus Hill.
Could thou till May, in Prose and Verse go on,
Thy Purchase would at last be Helicon.
Thou might enlarge thy small Retinue then,
And for thy one poor lousie Boy, keep ten.
Thou at thy Bingo's might resume the Chair,
And be thy self a Speaker there:
Thou might thy Secretaries keep, and give
Orders, how much each one should write, to live.
Thy Bingo's house shall be thy Pen,
To keep thy Porcupines, thy Satyrs den.
From whence, could the poor Scribbling Tribe but still
Continue for to Dart their Quill,
And tender Reputation (if but wounded) Kill,
Thou need'st not be dejected at this Rate,
Nor claw thy head about Affairs of State;
Nor at this dismal Rate lament,
'Cause Oxford's to receive the Parliament.
Thy Porcupines when e're they write,
When they let fly, they hit the White;
When Innocence and Loyaltie's the Mark,
At such bright Buts they can discharge in the dark.
At Rovers let them shoot, no matter why,
Whether the Sheet contain a Truth or Lie,
The News, if false, is more like Mercury.
Thy Satyrs may make bolder Sallies hence,
And Ravish Votes and Speeches thence;
'Faith this will do it, and will return the Pence.
But if the Scholars catch thy Monsters there,
They Will treat 'em with their sharp Pig-market cheer,
And send the Sturdy Vagrants back again,
With the safe Passport of the Birchen train.
Necessity's the Quiver whence they draw,
Which has no more of Conscience than of Law.
Their feathered Shafts their points to Envy owe;
Faction's the twist that strings their Bow.
What, moody Bingo! come, the busy Be
Now Spring comes on, abroad will flee,
And then, with what she gathers up and down,
Supply this greater Hive the Town.
Thy Stock with Drones will Swarm,
It Is such as Coffee-houses warm,
Such as are useful, though they feed,
These cherish and maintain the Breed.
It Is News and Coffee calls in these,
As Sound and Ringing does the Bees,
Alas! they sure our buzzing may forgive;
All that we aim at, is (like Men) to live.
We Car' no stings, nor bags of Honey;
No, Bingo, we are all for ready Money.
And if perhaps sometime we do let fall
One word of the times, O straight we are all gall;
Cotton, Hill, Claypoole, Walden, Mills, and Pike,
Who like unto St. Dunstans Churchmen strike,
As I the greatest Motion, point the time,
It Is by my Trunk such Ivy knows to climb.
There Is Piggot, Madder, Bill, and Mason too,
With Blear-eyed Blackhall, and a hopeful Crew
Of Hawkers, such as do complete my Train,
And never swing my paper-Lure in vain.
These, Bingo, do attend their Monarchs call:
News is my Province, and I Am owned by all.
These bring their Tributes when we please to meet,
Near the Ruins of St. Paul's new shodden feet;
Which we allay, and coin first in our Mint;
We Current make it, by putting it in Print;
It Is but a Penny-Cheat, if nothing's in it.
And why may not Paper go as well at last,
As Leather-Money did in Ages past?
At last, to make the Parliament complete,
(For the whole Nation in that Body meet)
It Is fit that we to Oxford should repair,
'Faith my Camelions choke for want of Air;
And though we halt, yet we still Members are.
Like King-Fishers, they fly along the stream,
But never brood, like them, when it is ferene;
They rather Propus-like in Tempests play,
And show their Head more in the March than May.
But how my Tribe I shall to Oxford bring,
That Canaan, Bingo! that, ay that is the thing!
If you the Royal Caravan provide,
We all are then to our hearts wish supplied.
For at the least, Retainers to the Court
We, shall be thought, and you will get Money for it:
Thou shall to the Crew as frugal Purser go;
I have designed it, and it must be so.
I have already furnished out my House,
It Is the old Hall of the famed Mother Lowse.
They lay a claim to it: as we creep along,
Thou Wilt know we are at least one thousand strong.
Assured of Trade, provide thy self a Room;
My Ants will to their wonted hillock come;
And there our labors shall increase thy heap,
And both a Harvest from the Scholars reap.
For we, like Harlots, when too common grown,
Find Trading quickest where we are most unknown.
Coffee and News can never want a Trade,
Whilst both to Cheat the People can be made.
FINIS.

