In Commemoration of Mr. Christopher Love, who was beheaded on Tower Hill the
22. of August. 1651.
1.
Why should I call the sacred Muses, and
Implore the aid of their assisting hand?
Why should I ask a rapid Eagles quill,
Since with my tears I could whole volumes fill?
Which like a flowing Springtide freely rise
From the exuberous Fountains of mine Eyes.
2.
What do I dream, or are my Senses fled,
Or is it a real truth, that LOVE is dead?
(Oh) too too true, alas, how could it be
LOVE should survive, when men want Charity?
Sion laments, our Joy, our Peace in fled,
All things at variance fall, and LOVE is dead.
3.
What slay a Prophet? that is a Fact indeed,
A Land destroying Sin, London take heed:
For such Prepostrous Courses will undo
The thy Associates, and this Kingdom too;
If once Gods Messengers are abused, we
To stay destruction, have no remedy.
4.
It is no wonder Tigers should pursue
Such harmles Preys, as he who never knew
What Treason meant: Some at the Action smiled,
Herod and Pilate then were reconciled;
They all adjudged him Jointly yet each Cry,
Who is it that condemned him? it is not I.
5.
Are these the Men whose fair pretenses made
The better Sort rejoice, the worse afraid;
Who hold the equal Beam of Justice Scale,
And say ^hey seek naught but the Commonweal?
Me thinks it is strange, that Lambs should Lions prove,
And Saints be at such emnity with LOVE.
6.
Did he not rather choose to Sacrifise
His Life, then wound his Conscience: and despise
A Death for Jesus sake, while he supposes,
Himself called to Mount Nebo, as was Moses:
How little need was there of Armed Troops
To inviron him, whose God was all his hopes.
7.
How willingly he took his Saviors Yoke,
How Boldly and Courageously he Spoak;
With what unmoved constancy he laid,
His Neck upon the Block, no whit dismayed?
Spectators were ashamed that they should be
Far more oppressed with sorrow, then was he.
8.
Passion prevails, I cannot speak the rest,
With such a weight of Grief my heart's oppressed:
However surely 'twas a fatal blow,
And may procure a sudden overthrow
To the chief Actors: Sampsons last fall flew more
Philistians then all his Life before.
9.
Why did not Heaven and E^rth at this agree,
To let us know some strange Catastrophe?
Why did the Sun move, or the Spears not cease
Their furious Motion, at this Saints Decease?
Since Thunder claps, and fable mourning Skies
Did celebrate his Funeral Obsequies.
10.
(Oh) stupid men, Petitions would not save
His Life from Foes, nor yet him from the Grave:
Nor was his Age, or spotles innocence,
Enough to guard him from the violence
Of those whose Will's a Law, and dye he must;
To satisfy some Men's ambitious Lust.
11.
Was not his Accusation high and Large,
Witnesses disagreed about his Charge;
Was there not some suborned hired to swear
Against him falsely, whom for ought I can hear
May hang like Judas, since they could dispense
To sell him though for more then thirty pence.
12.
His Life was made a Prey, to some whose guise
Of Justice would not serve to blind the wife,
Who well perceived the Cause: but it is no News,
Pilate did thus to gratisie the Jews;
Wherefore judge ye, if proud Mars has not driven
With his keen Sword, Astrea unto Heaven.
13.
Come hither Stoic, here is that will make
Thy tears prove passion, for this Martyrs sake;
For such indeed's our loss, that we might borrow
The Copy of an everlasting Sorrow:
Since he is cut off, whose very Name of right
Should not be named without an Epethite.
14.
But stay O Muse, and do not thou disturb
His Sacred Ashes while they sleep, but curb
Passion by reason:Let faith make thee know,
He joys above, while we lament below;
That fair though fatal blow, his Soul has sent
A silent Victim to the Firmament.
15.
Thus one of Sions pillars was betrayed
To Dust and Ashes: thereby happy made;
Was by some envious Critticks taken from
Those hideous troubles which are like to come
Upon the Earth: And now in Heaven he Sings
Melodious Anthems, to the King of Kings.
Exurgat Deus and discipientur inimici. FINIS.

