AN ENQUIRY AFTER RELIGION: OR, A View of the Idolatry, Superstition, Bigottry
and Hypocrisy of all Churches and Sects throughout the World.

Also some Thoughts of a late Ingenious Gentleman of the Royal Society
concerning Religion.

Religion stands on tip-toe in our Land,
Ready to pass to the American strand.
Herbert. Dic quibus in Terris -- and eris mihi magnus Apollo. LICENSED,

April 23. 1691. R. M.



LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane 1691.

SOME Thoughts concerning RELIGION.
THere is nothing in which Mankind have been, in any comparison, so out of
their Wits, as in what they have abusively called by this Sacred Name,
Religion! In all Countries it has been died with Humane Blood, and swollen with
Spoil and Rapine; written on the Heads of Tyrannies and Usurpations, and
pleaded as the Cause, the Cause of prosperous Villainies: It Is divided into
Attoms of Sects, and disputed into Air of Opinions; entitled to all the
Vanities of sick Imagination, and claimed by all the folly of zealous Ignorance.

If we attend to the Zeal and the Confidence, the loud Talk and bold Claims of
each of the Pretenders, all are in the truth, and all mistaken: Every Sect is
in the right, if it may be judged by the fondness of its own assurance; and
every one is out by the sentence of all the rest: Here is Religion, says the
Church of England; nay, but it is here, says the Dissenter; and the Papist
gives the Lie to them both; and then they scuffle and contend 'till they have
talked themselves out of Sense, out of Charity, and out of Breath: And when
they would say on, but know not what, when their Passions are raised, but their
Reasons lost; they fall to pelt each other with hard Names; they squabble and
strive, and damn one another by turns; they gather Parties to help up the cry,
and fill all places with the noise of their quarrels, and triumph and crow
after a Conquest in Imagination: And after all this bustle, and all this ado,
they sit down where they begun; nothing is gained on either side but an
addition of Malice and bitter Zeal, more rancour and more damning sentences,
while they are, for the most part, as far from Truth as from Agreement.

This is the state of the Contending World, nor can we expect it should be
otherwise, while Ignorance and Malice, Interest and Passion inspire the
quarrels. Or if the Controversies should be ended, the Vote would doubtless be
cast on the side of Folly and Falsehood, for their adherents are more numerous,
and most loud, while the friends of Truth and Reason are meek and modest,
thinly scattered among the Herd, and still liable to be overborn and out-nois'd
by the Tumult. But though Religion is thus exposed and scorned, though it is
made ridiculous by some, and laughed at by others, yet it is no Creature of
Melancholy or Design, but a great Reality, and no cunningly devised Fable; no
dream of Imagination, or interest of any lust, but as simple as Innocence, and
as clear as the Virgin Light. Religion is a plain thing, and easy to be
understood; it is no deep subtilty, or highstrain'd Notion; it is nogilded Fancy
or elaborate exercise of the brain; it is not placed in the Clouds of
Imagination, nor wrapped up in mystical clothing; but it is obvious and familiar,
easy and intelligible; first preached by Fishermen and Mechanics, without
pomp of speech, or height of speculation; addressed to Babes and Plebeian
Heads, and intended to govern the Wills of the honest and sincere, and not to
exercise the Wits of the Notional and Curious: So that we need not mount the
Wings of the Wind to fetch Religion from the Stars, nor go down to the Deep to
fetch it up from thence; for it is with us and before us, as open as the Day,
and as familiar as the Light. The great Precepts of the Gospel are clothed in
Sunbeams, and are as visible to the common Eye as to the Eagle upon the
highest perch. It Is no piece of Wit or Subtilty to be a Christian, nor will it
require much Study or learned retirement to understand the Religion we must
practice. That which was to be known of God, was manifest to the very Heathen,
Romans 1.19. The Law is light, says Solomon, Prove. 6.13. And it is not only a
single passing glance on the Eye, but it is put into the Heart, and the Promise
is, That we shall all know him, from the greatest to the least. Our Duty is set
up in open places, and shone upon by a clear Beam; 'twas written of old upon
the plain Tables of Habbakkuk, Hab. 2.2. so that the running Eye might see and
read: And the Religion of the Holy Jesus, like himself, came into the World
with Rays about its head. In fine, Religion is clear and plain, and what is not
so, may concern the Theater, or the Schools; may entertain Men's Wits, and serve
the Interest of Disputes; but it is nothing to Religion, it is nothing to the
Interest of Men's Souls. Those things that we count Mysteries are plainly enough
discovered as to their being such as we believe them, though we cannot
understand the manner how; and it is no part of Religion to enquire into that;
but rather it enjoins us meekly to acquiesce in the plain Declarations of
Faith, without bold scrutiny into hidden things.

The sum is, Religion lies not in Systems of Opinion, but in Faith and
Patience, Innocence and Integrity, in Love to God, and Charity to all the
World. Mica 6.8. He has showed thee, O Man, what is good, and what does the
Lord require of thee, but to do Justice, and to love Mercy, and walk humbly
with thy God? James 1.7. Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father
is this, to visit the Widows and Fatherless in their Affliction, and to keep
himself unspotted from the World.

AN ENQUIRY, etc.
THe, beauteous UNA, True Religion. Vid. Spencers Fairy Queen.
of a Race Divine,
The first, the best of all Heavens Royal Line:
Through the wide World the Muse resolves to seek,
Farther than ever went the wandering Ulysses.
Greek.
The Golden Fleece did Jasons Search employ,
Aeneas sailed to find another Troy:
Not the wild Deserts of the Atlantic Main
Could fright the brave Columbus back again.
Our aim's more high, our Enterprise more bold,
Our search for something more refined than Gold.
Veer the Main-sheet of Fancy, till we are born
To the utmost Chambers of the rising morn:
Where Infant day its blushing Forehead rears,
And either World the Suns kind bounty shares:
Encircled round with a small Troop of Friends,
See where the Goddess from the Ark descends,
On Ararats proud Top they Altars raise,
And with her sing their mighty Saviors praise.
The Good old Man, who knew no guilt or sin,
All white without, and Innocent within;
Noah himself was then the Priest, as he
The King and Father of the Family.
No long distracting Systems then were taught
For Fundamental Truths, no Cobwebs wrought
In thin Scholastic Brains, each morn they rise,
And on the Mountain pray and Sacrifice:
A Turf their Altar, Heaven their Temple then,
Their Congregation all the Race of Men.
Here dwelt Religion long, with all her Train
Of Joys, nor wished to fly to Heaven again.
To Noah's Sons a few short Rules did give,
While his Example taught 'em how to live.
Justice and Prudence, mutual Peace and Love,
Just thoughts of man below, and those above;
Reverence of Parents, whatsoever they be,
Pursuit of Virtue, flight of Cruelty:
But Error soon did this blessed Troop invade,
And in their little Church disturbance made.
'Twas cursed Cham who first began to stray,
No longer he would his Doting Sire obey,
But led one third of all the World away.
Error they for Religion with 'em take,
Their homely Turfs, and Sky-light Roofs forsake,
And glittering Robes, and gaudy Temples make;
By her direction Babels Turrets rise,
And Story after Story pierce the Skies;
Till through calm Ether now the Lab'rers go,
And fearless see the Clouds and Storms below:
The Almighty saw, and with an angry frown
He thunders all their Molehill Labors down,
Compells 'em soon to leave that hated place,
Scattering Confusion round the faithless Race;
Some dreggs remained,
Who in their cursed Fathers footsteps trod,
Their Faith they changed before and now their God,
Their Grandsire The Original of Idolatry.
Belus must be he or none,
He fills the Shrine, who lately filled the Throne.
Still Errors here, although she took her flight,
With every wrangling tongue, and well she might,
For Truth is one, but Error insinite;
Scattered through every Nation, Age and Place,
Or she her self, or her unnumber'd Race,
Yet still Religion's mask adorns their Face.
And while their foul deformities they hide,
They only' are true, and all are cheats beside.
They in a thousand various shapes appear,
A thousand odd fantastic forms they wear.
Those by their Reasons glimmering Light proceed,
These lean on lame Traditions broken Reed,
A third who only Senses aid implore,
The Sun and all his glittering Host adore:
Others, whom conscious Guilt and Fear pursue,
Worship the Devil, that he no harm may do,
Their Idols all an ugly ghastly crew.
Though many monstrous Beasts hot Africa sees,
Asia can boast more monstrous Detites.
Religions of Asia.
Say ancient China what thy Temples hold
Thy Gods of Iron and thy Gods of Gold.
Tremendous Forms whose looks chill Horror bear,
And like true Demons, fright the burdened air.
And well they may, whose hungry Scent and Eyes
The Chinese Priests offer the steam of the Meat to their Gods, and eat it
themselves.
Are only feasted in a Sacrifice.
Since fed with naught but smoke, well may they lowr,
That all the meat their own fat Priests devour;
Nay most unmercifully use the They also whip their Idols when they obtain not
what they desire.
Rod,
And when they please lay on their naughty God.
If well their Shelf of Porcelan, he will not guard,
Nor their Devotion with Rupies A sort of Coin in sue in the Eastern Countries.
reward.
No wonder true Religion will not abide
In Realms so full of Ignorance and Pride;
Yet many you will like the Chinese find,
Who only see, and think all others blind.
Of great Chufu Their great Philosopher called by the Jesuits Confus^^s.
their mouth are ever full,
Though good and prudent he, they lewd and dull.
Should we go on in the track we late began,
And search the Temples of remote Japan,
What Idols ancient India ever knew,
What Malabar, or Ceylon, or Pegu;
What numerous droves of Gods and Monkeys rove
Through each fair Plain, thick Wood, or Sacred Grove;
Of ever getting home we must dospair,
The Sun would first drive round and find us there:
Yet Ganges must we not forget thy fall
Revered by the rich Natives of Bengale;
Not Nile was worshiped by fat Egypt more,
Nor Crete of old could her own Jove adore:
Upon the reedy Banks in vain they pray,
Not all thy waves can wash their guilt away:
How many glit'ring Pagods may be told
By thy wide streams? how daubed with Gems and Gold!
With humane or with brutal victims fed,
While thou for fear shrink'st back thy conscious Head:
While the distracted Faquirs The Indian Priests.
still invent
Themselves by some new methods to torment
What Pains the wretches for Damnation take!
Not half the ado our Western The Romish Priests.
Faquirs make;
Though they so much to mortify pretend,
In what distorted shapes themselves they bend;
What cords, what wounds, what heat, what cold they bear,
Exposed to all the Inclemencies of the Air!
How many years in the same posture stand See Herberts Travels.
,
Nor move though the Mogul himself commands!
This to his Idol vows silence profound,
Half plunged in Lakes, or buried in the ground;
That pearches like a Bird on some tall Tree,
From mortal Conversation to be free,
And wait the whispers of his Deity.
Thus those who once possessed the self same place,
The Predecessors of their foolish Race;
The fond Gyinnosophists Vid. Quint. Curt.
would gazing stand,
Their Eyes the San did burn, their feet the sand:
Thought all their Sense must lose who Reason find,
And none could walk or see till lame and blind.
With these the Squeamish Bramins let us rank,
Who like their Cattle graze on Ganges bank:
They from all Food but milk and herbs abstain,
And think that half the World was made in vain.
Their holy Cows propitious aid implore,
So her kind Udders full they ask no more;
What 'ere their Conscience is, they are not nice,
A blessed Religion it is for Fleas and Lice They make it a piece of their
Religion to Kill nothing.
.
Not a lame Dog whose Cries their Succors call,
But they will relieve and send to the Hospital.
Shame to our World, we Men like Beasts do serve,
While their wide Care will Beasts like Men preserve,
Unless when Error prompts to Cruelty
And makes 'em mad and barbarous The Western Bigots, Papists, etc.
as we:
A false Religion at no mischief stands,
But dies in Blood its Vot'ries guilty hands,
No difference makes, promiscuous Victimgs brings,
Their own, their Friends, their Fathers or their Kings.
Let this Narsing as horrid Rites declare
When the poor Wretch high mounted in the Air,
Raised to the frightful Idols frowning brow,
On dreadful Tenters hung performs his Vow.
Where the proud Pagods Chariot rolls along,
Guarded by an innumerable throng,
Happy they think the Wretch, and Martyr call,
Who to their Devilish gods a Victim fall;
Who coming Death with Joy and Rapture feels,
His Soul orusht out beneath the ponderous Wheels.
Let Us cross the Gulf, my Muse, and hasten over
To search at seven-mouth'd Nile's uncertain shore;
There sure in vain we shall not Religion seek,
As common as the Onion or the Leek.
A goodly stock of gods, a numerous breed!
There lies a Deity in every Seed.
Kinder Divinities the World never saw,
You how you please may eat 'em, boiled or raw.
Some Gods they eat on the soft Banks of Nile,
Others eat them -- the dreadful Crocodile
Whom Egypt serves, as the Indians Fiends revere,
Or Europe Tyrants, not for love but fear.
To some to still their Children they are devout;
Divine Anubis with his ugly snout,
Hounds head, and Ears which to the Earth incline
With humane Trunk; and Apis more divine,
Nay, some wise Towns in zealous Battle join.
Whether the Crocodile or Monkey Vid. Juvenal.
be
All things well weighed the greater Deity:
Their hideous Typhon we'll not here describe,
Nor all their huge unnam'd, unnumber'd Tribe
Of Bugbear Gods, still new and new each morn
As fast as Niles imperfect Mice are born.
But hence we'll to Arabia's Sands repair,
And search if true Religion's wandering there;
Who of her only this pretend to know
-- She that way passed two thousand years ago.
More of the matter how do you expect they should
Who ever since no Trade but Theft pursued,
And rob to get an honest Livelihood.
To fruitful Palestine let us next proceed,
Where by her Track we find she has lived indeed,
Whose very Stones and Hills her Footsteps bear,
Each Field, each River owns she once was there,
But now of an eternal Loss complain;
We Hermon's fragrant top may search in vain,
Or Gilead's neighboring Mount or lovely Plain;
Both that and her once boasted Balm are gone,
Nor dwells she in forsaken Lebanon;
Nor even on ancient Sions sacred brow,
Once sacred, but profane and common now:
Long scorned and injured by that stiff-neckt race
The Dove could bear no more, but left the Place,
Nor more will fix on some peculiar ground,
But far away wings the wide World around.
She scatters Blessings with her where she flies,
An Olive branch she bears, which Peace implies,
The flaming Sword's removed from Paradise.
Clean and Vnclean's no more, the Ark is free,
Whoever comes may now admitted be.
Religion now no longer we'll despair
To find thee out, since thou art every where!
Yes -- we too soon may find her -- see -- she is there:
It Is she, her face all covered with a flood
Of briny Tears, her Garments rolled in Blood:
Circled with Flames and Lions, bound in Chains,
In The midst of Racks, Tormentors, Deaths and Pains,
Yet spite of all her Constancy retains.
Sure Sorrow never looked with better grace --
Celestial Odors fill the happy place;
An Angel comes, and wipes her heavenly Face,
Then lifts the Banner of the Cross on high,
See the bright Signal glittering in the Sky:
See Heaven above which wards each threatening blow,
Heaven there, and generous Constantine below;
With whom the Pagans to their cost did try
The Christians now could fight as well as dye; Cedebant non cedebantur as the
Writer of those times relate it.

With her the Conqu'rer did the World divide,
And placed her close by his triumphant side;
In the Imperial Purple made her shine,
And kissed her Wounds, and bathed in Tears and Wine.
True she was humble still, tho this she allowed
To keep her from Contempt among the Crowd;
But soon her foolish Sons grew vain and proud,
Contend and strive all round the conquered Globe,
And rend and tear their Mothers seamless Robe:
Was it for this the Idol Temples fell,
And every Demon left his Oracle?
They taught and ruled the World almost as well.
Nay, wiser they, and much, much more in the right
Since whatsoever their dreaming Poets write,
They never did against each other fight.
First subtle Heads new Faiths, new Creeds devise,
And threadbare old simplicity despise.
The Apostles had not Metaphysics read,
Their Sense was dull, their Notions cold and dead
And too confused -- Religion's course and plain,
We'll quickly show the World a purer Vein,
And teach her how to reach a loftier strain.
Proud Arrius first begun the fatal Game,
And big with Plagues from Alexandria came;
Confusion, Mischief and Distraction hurled
Before him, scattering Poison round the World:
Against him soon did the warm Saint St. Athana.
arise
With zealous Thunder in his Voice and Eyes;
The Gospel in the Quarrel never were mist,
But Plato grew a fifth Evangelist:
Parties were made, Councils with Councils vy'd,
Unerring Number must the Cause decide.
He that has fewest Hands in Hell he burns,
-- And thus they Vote Damnation round by turns.
So loud, their Mothers Voice they neither mind,
Tho she so sad, so tender and so kind:
Her self she throws between, to part the Fray,
And beggs 'em by her Tears and Wounds to stay:
Deaf as the Winds when struggling Tempests rage,
They Would through her sides each other fain engage,
She Is trampled down by their contending might,
Whilst over her the unnatural Wretches fight:
And when they found that damning would not do,
At last they went to work with killing too:
Empires and Kings engage in the dispute,
Each other banish, vex and persecute;
Religion wounded from the Dust ascends,
No more to reconcile 'em now pretends,
But how it pleased, beggs Heaven to make 'em Friends.
Who from the East the Arrabian Mabomet.
Monster sends
An Abject Slave, who Desolation brings
In his broad Sword, where e're his Arm he flings,
Where e're his Feet he sets he tramples Kings.
Whatever's sacred there before him flies,
Or crushed in miserable ruins lies.
No Faith, no Word he keeps -- ah Wretch accursed,
On Rapine fed, in Blood and Murders nursed.
All the fair Fields of Greece a Desert made,
And every stately Town in ashes laid,
The ancient Nurseries of wit and sense,
The Seats of Learning and of Eloquence.
All his Religion was, to do him right
As others since, only to whore and fight.
Unbounded Liberty to Lust he gave,
Which made the hot-vein'd Saracen his Slave.
A nearer way than Industry he would shown
To wealth, kill the Possessor all is your own.
Seek not Religion there, alas it is fled,
Or else with all good Arts besides it, dead;
Whilst he its ravished vacant place supplies
With Rhapsodies of Nonsense, Folly, Lies.
Conceive a pil'd Confusion he that can,
A heap of Nothings, that is the Alchoran,
A System of flat Incongruities,
And incoherent dull Absurdities,
Supplying want of Reason, Wit and Sense,
With empty pompous bloated Eloquence;
Cunning not wise the wretch himself has shown,
Of all Religions, yet indeed of none;
Of every Sect and Heresy he takes,
Not composition but confusion makes,
Jew, Christian, Heathen jumbles in one Law,
The greatest Monster Nature ever saw.
He placed no Padlock on their Lechery,
All had as many Concubines as he:
The hoped success the Impostor quickly found,
His Doctrine all Luxurious Asia owned.
Persia reveres her Sacred Fire The Persians anciently (and some few at
present) worship the Fire. See Sir John Chardin 's Voyages.
no more,
But this new Ignis Fatuus now adore,
Yet quarrel for his lawful Succeslor.
Homar they bait and damn to endless Fire,
It Is blessed Italy they alone admire.
Through the wide East this Poison creeps along,
And to the Impostors Tomb whole Nations throng:
India, Arabia, Affrick's Deserts wild,
Nay, Europe's fertile Fields more civilized and mild:
Nature it self had fixed 'em bounds in vain,
Nor could the narrow Hellespont contain
Their numerous swarms -- the fatal stream is crossed,
And, Constantine, thy glorious Towers are lost.
The Crescent rises, and the Cross goes down;
And Europe now they reckon all their own.
Not to the Mufti The Pope.
on the Italian side,
Who'd not lose all, but willingly divide:
They need not for their shares keep much ado,
It Is hard, or all the World's enough for two.
It Is true, the Roman Caliph cannot bear
Two holy Cheats at once to fill one Chair,
Preserves his high unrivaled Dignity;
Nor is there other Antichrist but he.
Out-does dull Mahomet and all his Crew,
Contrives a Worship more sublime and new,
Which Christ and his Apostles never knew:
In the old Pagan grafted, more refined,
And some new profitable Doctrines joined,
Convenient Articles, which Service do,
Not only in this world, but the other too;
Tho Pagan Temples now are blessed and crossed,
Not one good serviceable hint was lost,
Which from the Roman Flamins might be learned:
Thus far Panthaeon wisely they discerned.
For every Idol did a Shrine provide,
In whatever Place or Country dignified:
Nor made Enquiry what they were before,
Mercury, or Venus, Thief, or Bawd, or Whore;
Civil to Strangers whenceso'ere they came,
And who'd a piece of such good Nature blame?
No Traveller entered on this happy Coast,
But here might find their Gods where ever lost.
And if with a good Heart and Purse they come.
Might pray and pay as well as if at home.
Thus the old Romans did, and thus new Rome:
It liked the Humor well, and was content
To copy from so fair a President.
An All Saints Church of old Panthaeon made;
Thus the Sign's changed, though the House still keeps the Trade.
Mahomet was a stupid Sot, nor knew
The Feats an Image might be taught to do.
He thought it an unprofitable Sin,
And threw 'em out, Rome wiselier kept 'em in:
Cuts off the Horns which did of old disgrace
Her Gods, and grafted Glories in their place,
Venus and Cupid which the Pagans use
To adore, their Temples cannot a place refuse,
Those pretty Deities they must not loose.
Take Mars from one, and take his Bow from 'tother,
They Will make a very decent Son and Mother.
J^ve needs but little mending, he that will
Find fault! the Thunderer is a Thunderer still.
Castor and Pollux have at Sea the same
Due Reverence paid, only they have chang'dtheir Name,
With Chrism and Holy Water exorcis'd,
Their's into Christianity surpised,
As Indians by a Spanish Priest baptized.
But who in the name of Wonder did prefer
Some lusty Rebel in the Grants War,
To be that Swinger of a Christian Saint,
Whom those at Rome like Polyphemus paint;
Who all the World on his broad Back did bear,
(His Feet the while two Angels held in the Air,)
That huge unmerciful St. Christopher:
If Catholic Religion that we'll call,
Which has the largest Arms, and takes in all;
Rome claims the Title, superstitious, lewd,
Profane, debauched, vain, filly, bad or good;
It welcomes all, or all except the last,
And different Baits throws out for every Taste.
Music and Songs for those that Music crave,
For Women, Children, Fools, they Babbies have;
For traytrous Friars a Halter they provide,
That still hangs gently dangling by their Side.
Poor hungry Mob with heavenly Dishes treat,
Gape, gape, you Rogues! such Food you never did eat,
A muss of Gods -- their taste, no doubt, divine;
Be thankful then -- but not one soop of Wine!
Not one dear drop the thirsty Priest will spare,
Poor Wretch -- his Lips must needs be dry with Prayer.
Will Not all this do? then the other trick begin,
You Have warrant for it -- compel 'em to come in:
Goad all the restive Souls, who fondly wait
Without, and will not pass the Church's Gate;
Torment and worry them into Salvation,
Rack, hang, or damn to save 'em from Damnation.
This Rome's Religion was, and is so still,
This did of old our great Forefathers feel
Her Arguments, the Whip, the Fire, the Wheel;
To all dare'd true Religion entertain,
Who fled for aid to the cold Alps The Country of the Piemontois, etc.
in vain:
In vain she hoped in safety there to dwell
'Midst Hills and Valleys inaccessible;
Error pursues, now only does not stray,
But to those deep Recesses where she lay,
Like Hannibal did make, or find a way:
Devotion and true Zeal her high pretense,
And often torn and wounded, forced her thence;
Tho in those Rocks she left a sacred Race,
And Monuments, which Rome shall never deface.
From place to place she like her Master fled,
Like him she knew not where to hide her head.
With Wickliff here did for a while sojourn,
Or over brave Cobham's valiant Ashes mourn,
Till following Error forced her to return:
Amongst devoted Albigenses straid,
Or in Bohemian Villa's wept and prayed.
With Huss and Prague to Constance did repair,
The Emp'rors Royal Word her safeguard there:
But Error quickly had found out 'twas she,
And with her Friends Falsehood and Perjury,
Voted all Faith to Heretics null and void,
Made only to be taken and destroyed.
Hereby she scapes, her dear Companions lost
In Martyrs Flames; by various Tempests tossed;
Till with brave Zisca and his Favorites
Residing, she not only prays, but fights:
Till the bold German Monk Luther.
, who long inquired
For her abode, found her at last retired
From the rude World and places of Resort,
Found her, and brought her to the German Court,
The Princes kissed her Wounds, her wrongs deplore,
And her to Thrones and high Tribunals bore,
Scarce could her first loved Constantine do more:
Loved and caressed by these illustrious Friends,
By their kind aid new Collomes she sends
Throughout the World, the stubborn North obey,
Throw off Rome's Iron Yoke for her more gentle sway.
With these rich Albion sees with glad surprise
Her Idol-Temples fall, and Churches rise.
The helpless rotten Rood a Bonfire makes,
Each cheating Fiend his Oracle forsakes,
Their Miracles are lying wonders found,
Their sacred Ducks-blood Vid. Fox of the Dissolution of Abbys.
scattered on the ground:
From the Familiar Samuel's Mantle fell,
And back he fled again to Rome and Hell.
Learning and all good Arts with speed revive,
And by Religions kind Protection live:
The Golden Age returns, and who'd admire
The Dross should be removed by Martyrs Fire?
Nay Jove himself, it is said, had Orders given
That blessed Astraea should return from Heaven:
But ah, some Seeds of ancient Fraud remain,
Which made the wondrous Change almost in vain;
And when old Arts would now no longer do,
Too -- fruitful Error soon invented new;
Demands Recruits from Hell, the Fiends obey;
The Enchantress waves her Wand, they have away
From baleful Caves, and intercept the Day:
See in what Troops they to her aid advance,
Malice and Discord, Pride and Ignorance.
Black, foul-mouthed Blasphemy, whose forked tongue
Hisses at Heaven, and thinks its Thunder long
Before it strikes, Injustice, Rapine, Wrong,
Oppression on the Hearts of Orphans fed,
Tyrannick-Rule, by Will, not Justice led,
And foul Rebellion with her Hydra-head:
New fangled-Faith, and worse than all the rest
Hypocrisy, in Sheeps-fair-Cloathing dressed
Within a Wolve's ficrce Paws, a Tygar's Breast.
The hellish Train she views with barbarous Joy,
And doubts not to disgrace, if not destroy
Religions Colonies, to blast their Fruit,
If not prevail against the stubborn Root.
Go then, she said, my loved Companions go,
Act what may Envy raise in those you leave below:
Haunt all the Enemies to us and you,
If they will reform, be you Reformers too!
She said -- like Locusts round the World they flew,
And each fair Field through which their Armies passed,
Not only with their odious weight lay waste,
But striving to perpetuate their kind,
They leave a fruitful numerous Spawn behind;
No Place, no Age, from their Vexation free,
No Church or Sect, from spacious Germany,
To thee, O wretched Albion! tortured more
With this than all thy other Plagues before.
The Bigotts first, who if their Cause is right,
No thanks to them, they only blindfold fight
The largest Catholic Church that e're was found,
Wide stretched through all the universal Round;
But none to a greater height of madness come
(They Would have you call it Zeal) than ours at home:
A foul black humor which not all the Flood
Of Thames can wash away, still sowrs their Blood.
The poisonous Juice still grumbles in their Veins,
And as the Moon directs it, turns their Brains:
Then like mad Indians, rambling through the Street
They run-a-muck, and murder all they meet.
Thus Aetna's horrid Caverns ever glow
With sullen subterranean Fires below;
But when contending winds through some sinall chink
Or cranny rush, or its hot Intrails drink,
Trinacrian Waves, it rises to the brink,
And liquid Flames in dreadful Currents fall,
Loud bellowing on Catania's neighboring Wall.
What Strife, what Jars, what an impetuous Flood,
Wide rolling down, of Mischief, Wars and Blood
Derive their Origin and Spring from thee
Firebrand of England, hated Bigottrie?
Practiced by all, and yet by all decry'd,
Hated by all -- but still of the other side:
As Tradesmen will their cheating Neighbors blame,
Who only Occasion want to do the same.
Was not the last sad Age thy Vengeance cloyed,
Three flourishing Kingdoms more than half destroyed
By thy wild Fury, that the same disgrace
Thou striv'st to entail on their unhappy Race?
But that we know thou do unjustly bear
Religious Name, the World would that forswear,
And turn mere Atheists in despite of thee;
Even a more silly Sect if that can be.
Fools leave one Vice, and choose its contrary.
And such thy Followers are, still on they run,
Nor value where, so they each other shun:
In towering Top-knots these Religion dress,
Those even her Hair pull off, and some confess
They like her best in Rags or Nakedness.
This Fate uneasy Scotland ever mourns,
Where every Sect each other plagues by turns:
Bonnet or Mitre be it that fills the Chair,
Woe to the Wretch whose Lot it is to bear:
They never knew what 'twas a Friend to spare;
Or Church or Kirk when once they get astride,
While Arms and Whip, and Leather hold they ride:
The Malice even of Fables they will outdo
And for their Foes one Eye they will forfeit two.
Not that at home we much behind 'em fall,
Rather than fail, we will forfeit Head and all.
Each Sect pretends Infallibility,
They only true, the rest a Cheat and Lie.
Maggots which in Religion's Carcass breed,
When in the last sad Age she lost her head;
Whence numerous swarms of various Insects rise,
Deafen the Air, and fill the darkened Skies;
Of different casts, of different shape and wing,
A warlike Race, all armed with claws and sting,
Like Earth-born Brethren, meet with equal spite
And rage, for they no sooner live but fight.
Some came from Foreign Shores, which we'd be loath
To wrong, (but most of our own natural growth;)
Hungry and lean they came, though since it is clear
They Are very much improved and batten'd here.
For such a crop but little Labor needs,
It Is a rank Soil, and wondrous kind to weeds:
From distant Poland came the fruitful Seeds
Long since by sly Socin^s scattered there,
Which but too soon a large increase did bear.
They rose to Plants, which to our Fields conveyed,
And rooted here by monstrous Biddle's aid,
Projected far away their deadly shade.
Socinus is believed instead of Christ,
And Crellius makes a Fifth Evangelist.
For true Religion they false Reason take,
Of Man a God, of God a Man they make:
Idolaters Idolatry to shun
Two Gods adore, while they believe but one:
Forsaken by that Savior they abuse,
Left by that sacred Guide they scorn to use,
Their boasted Reason in wild Nonsense loose;
So vain is Man, so gross his Errors be,
Who more than him who gave him Eyes would see
And boast to comprehend the Deity!
But tho so loud they Persecution blame,
If bad their Faith, their Charity's the same:
Witness Cracovian Fields, and that wild Flood
Which conquered all, of Error mixed with Blood.
O had the spreading Poison there remained,
Or in one Age, if not one Place contained
Its hated growth, we that had neither had
Nor Antidotes which are almost as bad.
Orthodox Zeal where it too warmly burns,
Seizes the Brain and a Vertigo turns;
Christ's Doctrines would like Antichrist defend,
The Gospel plant by Writ of Comburend':
Or Books or Men the same; nay, more unkind,
They in Repentance scarce relief shall find,
But must be burnt while they 're in a good mind.
'Twixt these Extremes Religion tortured stands,
Weeps Tears of Blood, her Side, her Feet, her Hands
Torn, wounded, pierced, yet pierced with shame far more,
As was her Master 'twixt two Thieves before.
All madness some with the Socinian Race
Would tolerate, all Blasphemies embrace;
Others Infallibility defend,
Yet rail at Rome's, and since too good to mend,
Would neither Tolerate, nor Comprehend.
By each his Adversaries Face is shown
So ugly that they never mind their own.
These Moderation hate, and these no less
Immoderately for Moderation press:
Some Honor at a distance keeps, some fear
Their Cheats should be descried if viewed too near;
Some think the Breach too great, and some too small
To' admit or need a Cure, some loudly bawl
That Interest, Interest is the Cause of all:
Whether men pass for Moralists or Saints
It Is true -- perhaps, too of their own Complaints.
What makes two Combatants stand off, but Fear
Each should the advantage get if once too near?
Yet sure they would unite, though never so loath
Should a third man come in to kill 'em both.
Even the mad Jews awhile adjourned their Hate
When they the Romans saw before the Gate;
But madder we keep up our Rage and Spite,
And leave our Enemies with our Friends to fight:
Fall out upon the Breach, and to pull down
Our Neighbors House will gladly fire our awn.
Ah grieved Religion whither art thou fled?
Or say what Desert hides thy blushing Heed;
Blushing for thy lewd Sons, with conscious shame,
That they 'll not leave their Folly or their Name?
Shall we with those whofe Race from Munster Anabaptists.
came
Seek in the Waves for thy secure abode,
Where like some Water-Nymph or River-God
They say thou thy Majestic Court do hold,
And for thy Treasures dive like Shipwrack't Gold?
Pretend Heavens Patent to engross the Trade,
And all besides have Interlopers made;
Upon that Coast they nothing have to do,
And therefore them with Fire and Sword pursue:
To these let us reckon Venners hot-brained crew,
Who like an Amazon Religion dressed
Armed Cap-a-pe in Helmet, Back and Breast:
Each knotty point decide with their broad Sword,
And murder all they meet 'ith' name of the Lord.
But though all Sects their headlong madness blame,
Show me another would not do the same,
That safely might -- not even the trembling Quakers.
Race,
With whom an Ague -- fit's a mark of Grace;
But if too heavy on their Toes you tread,
Or chance to break their Shins -- will break your Head.
The Flesh is strong, they Vow by Yea and Nay,
Twill sometimes with the Spirit run away.
Though that too has its turn; and the new Light
Leaves Sense and Reason often out of sight,
And mounts, like Lanthorns with a paper Kite.
They Have God himself within 'em -- tell not them
Orh' Man that suffered at Jerusalem!
Bull and mouth Gospels only Orthodox,
They no Aposties own like Pen and Fox.
All their Religion, (such as please their Trade
May called) of mere Antipathies is made:
Timon of Athens, if alive, would be
A Doctor in their sour Divinity:
And snarling Aphemantus make another,
As right as their lost Pensylvanian Brother.
But most commend me to that jovial Crew
Who think Mankind has nothing else to do,
Formed for no nobler, higher Undertaking,
Than singing Doggrel Psalms Sweet-singers
of their own making.
With open mouth they Dame Religion paint,
And ever choose a Songster for a Saint;
By that their strength of Judgment you may guess,
We know a Singing-man is seldom less:
But why themselves sweet Singers would they call?
Creaking of Wheels is Music when they bawl:
The Shrieks of Owls, the Inish-man's O-hone,
Toads when they croak, or Quakers when they groan,
If to their cursed Yells compared they be,
Are little less than heavenly Harmony.
What should we any further venture on,
Or lose a Thought on doting Muggleton?
Dull, sordid Nonsense, senseless Blasphemy,
A heap of Filth the Ranters both and He.
With these the Adamites may find a Place
Those Goats erect, a barbarous brutal Race,
Their own, and all Humanity's disgrace.
Fit Planters for the Californian Cannibals.
States,
For Bridewell and for Bedlam Candidates.
Tired with my search, upon a Mossy Bed
I threw me careless down, and leaned my Head
All pensive, on a gentle rising there
Regretting the expense of Time and Care;
Sunk deep in Thought, a Spark comes by the while,
And proudly viewed me with a scornful smile:
'For what, nor is, nor ever was, he cries
'Th' Enquiry, O how grave, the search how wise?
'For his vain Toil you the fond Chemist blame,
'Who scatters real Gold in Smoke and Flame
'To find a fancied mine -- yet do the same;
'A Shadow for a solid Substance choose,
' Religion Court, and Pleasures Charms refuse,
'For future idle Tales true present Joys you loose.
'What now here is, is not, direct me right
'To find her, and you make a Proselyte:
''Tis all a Cheat -- and then I think he swore,
'Where or what is she? -- I could hear no more.
But rising thus -- you Sir in vain pretend
To censure what you cannot comprehend;
Strifes for Religion rather do imply
There Is something in it, than the contrary.
Who would contend if neither side were right.
Or for imaginary Kingdoms fight?
We Will take a short Review, nor need despair
To find some Footsteeps of it every where.
Natural Religion, which perhaps may do
For those who never any better knew.
Far off we need not seek, it is plain impressed,
E're blotted out by Vice on every Breast:
By this we all that is fair and just approve,
Honor and Virtue, Honesty and Love:
By this, although too weak, while it is concealed
To find it out, we judge of Truth revealed:
This by it self examines all the rest,
And justly Votes the Christian Faith the best.
E're knotty Metaphysics spoiled the Creed,
Plain, simple, easy, those that ran might read:
Believe what Truth reveals, do good to all!
With pious Prayers on the first Being call!
Relieve the Poor, the Innocent defend,
Forgive your Enemy, and love your Friend,
Your Country more, nor think your Life too dear,
Frankly to sacrifice to Heaven or Her.
This is Religion, this alone can save,
And this you will find in the few Wise and Brave.
FINIS.

