Momus Elencticus
Or a light Come-off upon that serious piece of Drollerie presented by the Vice
Chancellor of Oxon in the name of all his Mirmidons at Whitehall, to expel the
Melancholy of the court, and to tickle its gizzard with a Landscape of dancing
Friars to their own Music and Numbers.
STrike up my dull Muse, and twang me a dity,
In the elephant strain of the Vniver -- sitty,
It Is a tuneable age, and all Trades grow witty,
Room for Cuckolds.
The Heads of all Houses with their privy Members,
Have woond up their Fancies long raked in the embers,
To drown all the squibs of our blazing Novembers
Whip Sr. Davy
But wot you for what this clutter was made?
'Twas all to be praise the success that we had
The Spirit so spurred that it almost turned Jade
Tytere tu boys.
So up they pickpack'd in a long checkred crew,
In several dresses of several hue,
Old Coventry Doctors and Masters as blue
Hap at a venture
Some Latin, some Greek, but they strein'd hard,
Till they were out-thrown by the old British Bard,
The French (with a pox) had almost all mart'd
Stand at your distance.
The rest in plain English brought each man his hymn,
As his fancy godsnig: drew up to the brim,
There Is scarce an old Ballad but has lost a limb,
March on Tailors.
The first of the Artillery that did give fire
Was a great Gun of Christ-Church the bigg'st of the Quire,
A welsh man I wi^ by his gate and attire
Well a go to then
The Vice Chencellor (bear back) a word still in fashion,
A Doctor at least of the latest Creation,
The cutted Analysis of Reformation
Pandite Pie crust.
He gaped, and he voyded a tedious Epistle,
Wherein if you find one grain of salt, whistle,
But 'twas (suo more) an Ass mumbling a thistle.
Salve tu quoque.
Up last the Steepl his Deanship did climb,
In a Hogen Mogen pitiful Rythme,
Like the Chimes of Carfax without tune or time
Caesare fultus.
Had his wit been at the University charge,
As well as his journey to Whitehall in a Barge,
The expense of his brain had been much more large,
Friend in a corner
He closed them at last with a great deal of do
With much rubbling and reaching and bodgelling too,
A thanksgiving Sermon we expect to be due
Aglogh whee Reglous
The next that offered to proffer was Hoyl,
A transplanted root from the low Country soil,
That at Rome's proud gates would never turn tail,
Hold a blow Jenkin.
The Pope, and his Crown, and Catholical glory
He killed, and laid out in ashes before you,
Nay and more, he set fire on Purgatory
Country man quarter
Altitonant Wall next sadles Peg-Assus,
And fetched blood in three tongues from the shins of Parnassus:
He frisk'd as a man would say God bless us
Enter praesentor
The distillations of rain and peace
Had like to have melted Johannes his grease,
For joy that his Stipend was like to increase
(...)
Then Langley the Master of Pembrok College
Pricked up his ears full of heavenlified knowledge,
This was the spare wit almost of his whole Age
Parce tyroni.
And he will revenge the Saints on the Pope
Though this valor in him were past all our hope;
And threatens no less than blood faggot and rope
Have amongst you blind harpers
Next Roberts of Jesus that doubty good Card,
The principallity of her Country to ward
Tunes up her pipes in a double regard
O puddere he vaw!
First her Latinity takes up a Page
To as little purpose as the Scots did engage,
At last the welsh plood in her veins did assuage
Welsa whee humble Be
But I leave you, Learned Sir, and your mountanious Song,
Lest I do you (as you your College) much wrong,
To the Devil, the Father and founder of the tongue
Vale Tom piper.
Next Savage and Zouch small streins did conceive,
And their Muses and mountains did seem much to heave,
The Peace they says made, and so they took leave
Green goose and cheese-cake.
Next Button and Say, and G.O. did meet
In Hebrew well englished and lattin shod feet,
And made a hard shift to bedawb a half sheet
Nicholas Nemo.
In Heroical Buskins J. Maplet appears,
In hard phrases and axioms dressed up to the ears,
As though he would mount over the tops of the spears,
Lingua quo vadis.
The sight of his Doctorship in black and white
Put all the ships and their thunder to flight,
His Opium has wrapped up the wars in long night
Valde probatum.
Jo. Harmarus then comes in by the teeth,
O had his theme been a good chine of beef,
He had cours'd him the field past any relief!
Mount Cabal boys
The next that pursued the tragical Doctor,
Was Hexameter S.C. the New College Proctor,
Had not Belgia been quiet it is doubt he would have knocked her
Ritu Bocardo
Thom. Lockey of Christ-Church, and Terrent likewise
Their wishes and sighs propound to our eyes,
And Bathurst of Trinity seems to advise
Gently good Joan th^^
Jones and Everard, E. H. and Quin,
Dick Bryan and ^agshaw god give you good din,
Thom. Cole and J. Ward come ambling all in
Hey for our Town!
Will. Carpenter too a Master of Art,
Whence his Greek proceeded it puzles my heart,
But he writ a good hand and his Author was smart
Inde praetereo.
The Students and Commoners like horse and foot,
Advanced in their ranks and came bodily to it,
For the youngsters alas knew their Tutors could do it
Jure divino.
Much pumping there was and a great deal of puther
And many in zeal rode ore one another,
But more gave false fire and their valor did smother
Causa malignans.
In couples they tied the two Nations at last
And bound up the Amnesty in shackles fast,
And the Hollanders home to their Harbors they chased
Fadingdo dincktido.
Only L. Atterbury to heighten his strein
(And there I confess he tickled the vein)
Thanks the Protector instead of God for the rein
Ritu v^catum.
Some fellows there were, though they thought they had none,
To save their bacon penned many a smooth song
Which I hope they have repented or will do ere long
Cave Caveto.
Hary Berkhead (pox on it) what make thou in the pack?
With a Comment like a Pedlar tru^^'d up at thy back?
Their sma^l drink will never agree with thy Sack
Paribus Impar.
In stone-dead English the rest did advance,
Only one packet brought letters from France;
And two in welsh measures the morris did dance
Tallerie whisko.
And first R.B. of Trinity muttered
In old fashion Syllables some what was sputter'd
He called him Augustus and away he fluttered
Lank^ri down dilly.
Next Brooks the Principle of Saint Mary Hall,
Made my Lord start, though he had never a fall,
But he quickly pul^'d in his Muse, brows, horns and all
Mouse in a cheese-vate.
Next Gorges of John's his Thalia did reel,
Put his hand in his pocket and swore blood and steel,
But thanks be given his fist no man did feel.
Merciful Atropos;
Ned Bagshaw again upon the foe fell,
And like Corrector of the Press compare'd it so well,
That he left his Highness without parallel,
What can a man do?
Next Stanly brought what his friends could indite,
And Humbarston added, though it were but a mite,
And Hatley inflamed called him Mars his huge knight,
Con^ter me that verse.
But now my Cleavelandified Matthew trowls in
With a mouth full of draggons that poisoned his skin,
But 'twas said his bumbast Muse was on the pin
Rousty Ca^ousty.
In whirlwindes and earth quakes he punn'd and made faces,
In Porcupine's quils and Cyclopick traces,
He frisk'd and he winced in the tribe of Many-Asses
Mouncy Irouncy.
He so smoked and so stunck in his furious gears,
Till the Alderman's fur flew over his ears,
If he catch him he will give him a penniworth of pears
Hares head and Jibblets
Some Readers have construed this gallant I trow
For the dainty fine snip snap should fore run the show,
Though the worthies have tipp'd him quite out of their row
Plangite Make sport
Next Hodges dares promise the age shall be gold,
But I prithee good Student do hear? Say and hold.
For the dread of that Prophecy makes my heart cold
Salve sound taxes.
Dick Page with Levies and Subsidies next,
And the Public faith tortures the text,
But these for long time have the people sore vexed
No more of that string.
The rest are not worth the continuing the chase,
Only Jo. Ford forced smiles in my face,
For instead of rythming he fell to say grace
Farewell good tokens.
Len. Leichfield too ventures to flame in the rear,
Yet how he turned poet pray hold a blow there,
But he quickly found friends, being Beadle Esquire
Plaudite fat gut.
Thus their subject was high and their eloquence mighty,
Pray Gentiles draw nigh here shall nothing affright you,
The Squib's at an end, and so Mounsiers good night to you
Domine E^s.

