The Instability of the Quakers pretended Infallibility.
(...) whom is recommended, another Broad Sheet, entitled, A small Reply to a
Letter to Mr. Robert Bridgman's pretended Answer to his Reasons (...) for
leaving the Quakers; wherein the Quakers are plainly proved by Quotations taken
out of their most celebrated Authors, that they are (...) not only Ignorant of
the Fundamental Principles of the Christian Religion, but obstinately to deny
them.

A Short Dialogue between W. Penn and G. Whitehead.
W. Penn. Brother Whitehead, I desire thy Assistance in this weighty Occasion;
thou know, if I build again those things (that are quoted on the Right side)
which I have (by my several Books quoted on the left side) destroyed, then
shall I make my self a Transgressor; O do not thou behold how our
Infallibility lies at stake? I am afraid our otherwise wording the matter
(seeing thou know that we are the same now as in the beginning) then
formerly, will not now do; I therefore declare again, and again in public and
private, that the Lord will confound and bring our Adversaries to nothing, and
that with Power and Authority in the name of the Lord.


Geo. Whitehead. Ah Brother William, my Spirit droops, I am afraid that our
Infallibility must now fall, seeing the Adversaries of our Truth and Light,
have attacked us both in the Rear, and the Flank, and Front; I have told them I
now otherwise word the matter than formerly, and that my Intentions are still
the same as ever, see p. 72. Of Counter. Convert, and yet for all this they
will not leave off troubling of us; but tell me that they believe me, that all
my Positions of Faith are but as before expressed; Well, let them go on in their
Work, let us go on blinding the Peoples Eyes; and as for them, I have told them
that they shall come to nothing, and that was the Word of the Lord to them.


The Quakers otherwise wording the matter than formerly.
1. Concerning the Blessed Trinity. The Christianity of the Quakers asserted.
School, p. 3.
OUR Belief is, that in the Unity of the Godhead, there is Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, being those Three Divine Witnesses that bare Record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit; and that these Three are one, according
to Holy Scripture Testimony.

Gospel Truths by W. Pen and 3 more Belief the 2d.
It is our Belief, that there are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the Spirit, and these Three are really one, 1 John 5.7.

2. Concerning the Light Within. W. P. Chr. Qr. p. 91.
We do not say that the Light in every Man is Christ, but of Christ.

3. Concerning the Divinity and Humanity of Jesus Christ. The Christianity of
the Quakers asserted p. 4.
We verily believe that Jesus Christ is truly God and Man, according as Holy
Scripture testifies of him. God over all blessed for ever, the true God and
Eternal Life. The one Mediator between God and Man, even the Man Christ Jesus.

4. Concerning Salvation and Justification. Ibid. p. 4.
We expect Salvation and Justification by Jesus Christ his Righteousness, Merits
and Works, and not by our own; God is not indebted to us for our Deservings,
but we to him for his free Grace in Christ Jesus, whereby we are saved through
Faith in him (not of our selves) and by his Grace enabled truly and acceptably
to serve and follow him as he requires: He is our all in all, who works all
in us that is well pleasing to God.

Gospel Truths by W. P. and 3 more Belief the 4th.
That as we are only justified from the Guilt of Sin by Christ the Propitiation,
and not by Works of Righteousness that we have done, so there is an absolute
necessity that we receive and obey to unfeigned Repentance and amendment of
Life, the holy Light and Spirit of Jesus Christ, in order to obtain that
Remission and Justification from Sin: Since no Man can be justified by Christ,
who walks after the Flesh but after the Spirit, for whom he sanctifies them he
also justifies; and if we walk in the Light as he is in the Light, his precious
Blood cleanses us from all Sin, as well from the Pollution as Guilt of Sin.

5. Concerning Remission of Sin and Redemption. The Christianit^ of the Quakers
assert. p. 5.
We do believe the Remission of Sin, and Redemption through Faith in Christ as
he suffered and died for all Men, gave himself a Ra^^^^^ (...) all and his
Blood being shed for the Remission of Sins; so all they (...) ^^lieve and obey
him, receive the Benefits and blessed E^^ec^ (...) and dying for them, they by
Faith in his Name, receive (...) that Eternal Redemption, which he has
obtained for us, who (...) for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity:
He died for (...) and rose again for our Justification, and if we walk in the
Light, as (...) the Light, we have fellowship one with another, and the Blood
of (...) Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin, 1 John 1.7.

6. Concerning the Holy Scriptures. The Christianity of the Quakers assert. p.
14.
We do believe and own the holy Scriptures contained in the Books of the Old and
new Testament, to be given by divine Inspiration, and to contain all matters of
Doctrine and Testimony, etc. necessary to be believed and practiced in order to
Salvation and Peace with God, and always desire to live in the Faith,
Knowledge, and Practice of them, in all things appertaining to Life and
Godliness. Holy Scripture being given by divine Inspiration, is profitable for
Doctrine, Correction and Instruction, that the Man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto every good Work, ab^^ to make the Man of God wise unto
Salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus.

7. Concerning the Resurrection. ^he Christianity of the Quakers assert. p. 15.
We sincerely believe and confess the Doctrine of the Resurrection from the
Dead, and of Eternal Judgment according to Holy Scripture, Heb. 6.2. That God
will raise the dead, and judge the world in righteousness by his Son Jesus
Christ, in the day appointed, even in the great day of judgment, and that
Harvest which is the end of the World.


What the Quakers held formerly
1. Concerning the Blessed Trinity. G. Whitehead to Mr. Townsend, The Three
Persons which thou dreamest of, Ishmael and his ^^ther cast out, p. 10.
which thou would divide out of one, like a Conjurer, are all denied, and
thou shut up with them in perpetual Darkness, for the Lake and Pit, for thou
have no Scripture that mentions any such things.

The Scriptures do not tell People of a Trinity, nor Three Persons, but the
Common prayer, Mass Book, speaks of three Persons brought in by the Father the
Pope. G. F. Gr. Mist. p. ^46


2. Concerning the Light Within. The Light that shows to every Man his evil
deeds, is Christ. G. F. Catch. p. 2.


3. Concerning the Divinity and Humanity of Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ God Man
not Scripture language. G W. Dipper Pl^ng'd p. 13.

C. A. Sword of the Lord drawn. p. 5.

G. W. Light and Life, p. 17.




Your Imagined God beyond the Stars and your carnal Christ, is utterly denied.
To say Christ is God and Man in one Person is a Lie.

The Flesh and Body which Christ took was not Christ.

4. Concerning Salvation and Justification. This we deny, viz. Justification by
the Righteousness which Christ has fulfilled in his own Person for us, Serious
Apol. p. 1^8.
(wholly without us) and boldly affirm it in the name of the Lord to be the
Doctrine of Devils, and an Arm of the Sea of Corruption, which do now deluge
the whole World. Observe. the Words (wholly without us) relate to the
meritorious Cause of Men's Justification before God, which is the Righteousness
of Christ's Person, by his most holy and perfect obedience unto Death, and
shedding of his most precious Blood, and that was wholly without us, which is
here denied by W. Penn. Death came by actual Sin, not Imputative, Ibid p. 148.
therefore Justification unto Life, came by actual Righteousness, not
Imputative.

The Quakers see no need of directing Men to Jesus Christ or his Blood, G. W.
Light and Life, p. 38.
as it was outwardly shed at Jerusalem for Justification.

We are not justified by the shedding of Christ's Blood that was let out by the
Spear. Ibid. p. 41. Ibid. p. 64.


The shedding of that Blood to lay the meritorious cause or stress of
Justification upon, is false Doctrine.

5. Concerning Remission of Sin and Redemption. The Devil was in thee, thou
say thou art saved by Christ without thee, G. F. Gr. M^st. p. 25^
and so (...).

If there be a^ (...) Christ, (...) in his Light and Life. p. 44.
a passage (...) great (...)

Christ in us (...) the Wrath of God (...) by G. Whitehead.

And this (...) thou art enlightened, is the life of Jesus, Step. Crisp 's
Collect. p. 160.
John 1, (...) has given a ransom for Man, that was not natural as some (...)
imagine, for if it were natural it could not be a ransom for (...) of Sin.

They that are turned to the Light ought solely to depend on it.

6. Concerning the Holy Scriptures. Christ. Quak. p. 59.
You are in the Witchcraft who observe Commands from without, the Letter. E.
B's Works, p. 105. G. F. News out of the North, p. 14.
So Dust is the Serpents Meat, their Original is but Dust, which is but the
Letter which is Death, so these Serpents feed upon Dust, which feed upon all
these carnal things, and their Gospel is Dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John,
which is the Letter, the cursed Serpent is in the Letter, Truths Defen. p 1^2.
R. Huberthorn's Words.

That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, G. W. and W. P. Serious
Apology p 49.
is of as great Authority, as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater.

How can or dare any say, without the highest Blasphemy, G. B. Me^e ^ek p 22.
that the Scriptures is the Word of God. Note they count it not Blasphemy to
call their own Writings the Word of God.

7. Concerning the Resurrection. Is the Joy of the Ancients, now in Glory
imperfect, Reason against R^iling, by W. P. p. 138.
or are they in Heaven but by halves, but why must the Felicity of the Soul
depend upon that of the Body, is it not to make the Soul a kind of a Widow to
be without its beloved Body, a better sort of Purgatory.

The deceased Saints look not for the Resurrection of their dead Bodies.
Christ. Quak. p. 353.





POSTSCRIPT.
Thus you see plainly the Confusion of Babel's Builders, confusedly
contradicting themselves and one another, in wavering to and fro, between so
and no, and no and so, sometimes this, and sometimes that, and sometimes
neither this nor that, and sometimes no body knows what, surely he who can
reconcile and render consistant, the above mentioned Passages, fairly collected
out of their Books, (and many more that might be collected,) can reconcile the
greatest real Contradictories, Truth and Error, Light and Darkness, Christ and
Antichrist. But G. Whitehead (in his Counterfeit Convert, Page 72.) thinks to
save his (and his Brethrens) Infallibility, by telling the World, he (and they)
sees cause otherwise (now) to word the matter, though he and his Brethren have
the same Intentions, so that whatever their seeming Belief now is, yet their
Sense is the same as is expressed in all their former Books, and in the Passages
on the right side quoted. Therefore all who be honest minded, depart I pray you
from the Tents of these wicked Men, (Foxonians) least you be consumed in their
Sins.

By one Reformed from Quakerism.

London, Printed for A. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, 1700.


