AN ACT For Granting TALES on TRIALS, to be had in the Court of the County
Palatine of TIPPERARY, before the Seneschall.

royal blazon or coat of arms W R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE IE MEINTIENDRAI

DVBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
on Ormonde-Key, 1695.

An Act for Granting Tales on Trials, to be had in the Court of the County
Palatine of Tipperary, before the Seneschall.
CHAP. XIX.
WHEREAS it has been found by Experience that the Nonappearance of Jurors has
been a Great Delay to the Doing Justice, and by Consequence very prejudicial to
His Majesty's Subjects. For the Remedy whereof, in Cases to be Tried by Nisi
prius, a Good Law has been Enacted in this Kingdom in the Tenth Year of the
Reign of Charles the First, Late King of England, etc. And Entitled, An Act
concerning the Appearance of Jurors in the Nisi prius. And whereas all Trials
in the County Palatine Court of Tipperary are had at the Bar of the said Court,
and can only be Tried by Jurors Returned in the Venire, which has been found
to be very Grievous to all such Persons as have Right to Demand, or Recover any
Lands, Tenements* or Hereditaments, or other thing whatsoever within the said
County Palatine. For Remedy whereof,

Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, with the Assent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament,
Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That on all Trials hereafter to be had
in any Cause whatsoever in the said Court of the said County Palatine, to be
held before the Seneschall thereof, upon the Jurors Nonappearance, it shall
and may be Lawful for either Party, Plantiff or Defendant, to Demand a Tales de
Circumstantibus, which shall be granted by the Court, and Returned by the
proper Officer and Officers in such Manner and Form: And to such Effect and
Purpose as by the said Statute, made the Tenth Year of the Reign of the Late
King CHARLES the First, Entitled, An Act concerning the Appearance of Jurors
in the Nisi prius, is Provided upon Trials of Nisi prius: And that all Trials
so had, shall for ever hereafter be Adjudged, Construed, and taken to be Valid
and Sufficient in Law, Notwithstanding any Exception that may or shall be
Taken, by Reason such Trial or Trials was or were had by Person or Persons
Returned upon the Tales, as aforesaid.

FINIS.

