I Father a Child that is none of my own, BEING The SEAMANS Complaint,
Who took a Whore instead of a Saint.

Showing, That whilst he was Trading Seven Years from Port to Port at Sea, and
brought home great Wealth; his Wife in the mean time by Trading in the Low
Countries, got a Mischance, fell down and broke her -- Elbow: above all
praising the Innocence of a Country Life.

To the Tune of, Cook Laurel: Or, Give me the Lass, etc.


IF every Woman was served in her kind,
and every Man had his just desert,
The Rooms in Bridewel would be so well lined,
that a Coach could not pass in the street for a Cart.
Full seven long years have I crossed the Seas,
mean time I Have been crossed as much on the Land,
My Wife still at home did live at her ease,
I Am sure she had all things at her command.
She needed not her fingers to wet,
yet she keeps her Gallant, she was so high flown
But sure I must lose by the Stake or the Bett,
If I Father a Child that is none of my own.
I that have escaped the Rocks and the Sand,
and climed the Biltows when storms they have blown
At last am come to be Ship-wrack'd on Land,
To Father a Child that is none of my own.


I Have Traded abroad to bring home some Wealth,
from Port unto Port in far Countries unknown,
Mean while my Wife has been trading by stealth,
And got me a Child, though it is none of my own
My Nei^^bours all they do laugh me to scorn,
and point their fingers at me and my Joan,
Saying, that I ^ust drink out of a Horn,
and Father a Child that is none of my own.
Though I cannot Pocket my Horns as some can,
by good Women's Tattles they are so o're-grown;
Yet it is the hard case of many a Man,
all you that hear me look home to your own.
For Gallants are dainty and seek in the Throng,
and love for to pick on another Man's Bone,
So many an honest good Fellow has wrong,
to Father a Child that is none of his own.
In Cities and Towns of greatest request,
this slye sort of Pilfering Trade is much known,
If a man has a beautiful Wife he cannot rest,
for fear to keep Children that is none of his own.
But well fare the Country, they live at their ease,
their innocence all their Actions does Crown,
they may go, they may stay, they may do what they please
and fear not to keep any more than their own.
The Plowman that works far a Field all the day,
and Shepherd that keeps his Sheep all alone,
At night when at home with their wives they may play
and fear not to Father what is none of their own
Now I must Rock the Cradle, beside
dry Clours on my Horns by the fire at home,
When I look abroad my Neighbors deride,
'cause I Father a Child that is none of my own.
And is not this most damnable strange,
to be led by every Strumpets moan,
I may sit and sell Horns at the Royal Exchange,
when I Father a Child that is none of my own.
A man may be made a Cuckold by chance,
and put another man's Child to Nurse,
And Hood-wink his Horns through Ignorance,
but he that is a Wittal is ten times worse.
But i will never grieve, but let it all pass,
by Woman there is many a Man over-thrown,
Although I Am an Ox, i will never be an Ass,
to Father a Child that is none of my own.
Neither did I spring out of that Race,
to call that my Seed which another has sown,
Then never let me look King Charles in the face,
if I Father a Child that is none of my own*
Printed for P. Brooksby, near the Hospital-gate, in West-smithfield.


