June the second 1642.

A New Remonstrance of IRELAND.

OR, A CONTINVED DIURNALL Of the most remarkable passages from the fifth of
May to this present.

By C. I. an eyewitness of them.

London, Printed by A. N. for Ed. Blackmore, at the sign of the Angel in
Paul's Churchyard.

1642.

May 5.
We had certain news of the taking the Newry by the Lord Conway on the one
side, and Sir Henry Tichborne, where were released some Prisoners of note, as
Sir Arthur Trevor, Sir Charles Poynes, and diverse other Prisoners since the
beginning of this rebellion, not many Rebels were killed for they fled.

Also, that Carlneigford was taken from the Rebels by one of our Ships coming
in with French Colors: the Enemy thinking it to be some Ship of Munster, for
the chiefest came aboard and so were kept, and the ship entered further and
took the Town.

We had news that young Sir Charles Coote had done good service about James
town in killing some Rebels, and releeving some Castles.

That day the Lord Loyer came with his Troop from him to hasten more relief
to Sir Charles Coot that was there.

The sixth day Colonel Craford went out some twelve miles with 300 foot toward
a place called Kilcocke to forage.

The 7. day, 1200 men were sent to Trim to Sir Charles, but many of them threw
down their Arms, and refused and mutined for want of pay, and when one was
taken out to be hanged for example, the rest rescued him, and with much a do
this Mutiny was alayed, and they went, but we are in much fear of such a
rising, here being no money to pay them.

News also that the Lord Mongarrat had gathered his forces to the number of
10000 and was marching again to the Naase, where we have a garrison, two
Troops were sent to strengthen the Garrison.

8. Day Colonel Craford returned home, having fallen upon the enemy the day
before at Kilkocke, and killed some 50, the rest run a way, and he brought a
way from them 300 Cowes, and 600 sheep, a great service as things go now.

The ninth day was most unhappy news to us, for news came that Sir Charles
Coot being at Trim, some, or all the Lords of the Pale had on the Sunday
(before those forces of ours were come to Sir Charles) gathered a multitude of
3000. or more, intending to take Trim from Sir Charles, who was at that time
but weak, having but 120. horse, and 200 foot; in the morning they set on the
Town, and Sir Charles rushed out against them, because his men were not so
quick in making them ready, Sir Charles entered the thickest of them with but
17 Horse and himself, and routed the whole body of the enemies Army, a wonder;
and the rest came in and they fell to execution, and the enemy to running. Some
200 of the enemies were killed, but most unhappily was Sir Charles Coot shot
and killed by one of our men, whether wilfully by some Papist or otherwise, it
is not known, but the glory of our battle is gone, every one is beclouded:
the most unhappie day ever befell the Protestants: and such joy to Papists that
no other thing was desired of them more then this, whose name was their
terror: for he with 100 men could do more against them then others with a
1000. often have the enemies confessed they could not hold up their heads to fight
against him; who know not what we have lost in him, a Caesar for his valor,
and a Gate for honesty to his Country, a father to us all; that sought not so
much as for plunder, for his Countries good, a man so well read in the nature
and course of the Irish men and Country none like him left us, every day
bemoaning him, and the enemy rejoicing; Never to much can be said of him, such
wonders he has done since these times, for under God he has been the
instrument of our delivery.

10. Day a Garrison departed to Butoke of 50. to keep a Castle there; Also, a
Lieutenant was shot to death with us for killing a woman.

Also, news that Sir William Coules had done very good service, Who in the
middle of the Enemy has held out since the first of this, and now had burnt
all 13. miles about him in the North; Also, that the Scots were gone to releeve
Coulreain and Derry besieged by the enemy.

This 11 day we had news that the Lord Mongarral advanced nearer the Naase
being encouraged by Sir Charles his death, but little fear they him there.
Also, certain news that the Earl of Fingall was killed by Sir Charles, the
day before his death, and Gormiston a Lord wounded.

Also, news that the forenamed 1200 were got well into Trim, and had made out
against the enemy six miles beyond and killed many.

May 12. 1642.
This day we had news from the North, that the Scots bent themselves for to
releeve Couleraine besieged by the Rebels, and that Sir Sit Philem O'Neall had
burnt Armagh to the ground Church and all, also Charlemont and Castle Blanny,
and fled to the woods and bogges for fear of the English and Scots forces in
the North.

From Trim we heard that Colonel Gibson, in Sir Simon Harcourts time had broke
upon the enemy, killed 200. and more, chased them to a bay four miles, they
run and burnt the Naven for fear, and other places some 7. miles from Trim,
and departed further into the North. We lost none of note.

13. News from the Naas, that the Rebels had raised many alarms and fired some
houses by stealth, but were still beat and run, and every day our men killed
for six days more or less of them with no loss, Captain Rochford guiding
all.

14. Day, Sir Charles Coote was buried with much lamentation to Protestants,
and much joy to Papists.

Also a Troop went to the Naas.

That day one Captain Sterling a Scot, being in Garrison at a plain called
Kilsh^^in; and as some say invited out to dinner to a protected Papists house,
was betrayed and killed, he and his Lieutenant and a Minister such mischief we
have daily by the protection of Papists.

That day Colonel Craford went out to recover his body, and did so, and killed
of all sorts in revenge near a 100. even protected and all, and justly.

15. Day being Sunday, every Pulpit was filled with funeral Sermons and
Prayers, For Sir Charles was buried the day before, for he is not to us like
other dead men, which dying are forgot, but still more daily remembered, and
justly our want of him calls for it.

16. Day we heard some scattering news of a Ba^^ell between the Scots and
Irish in the North at Coulerane, but as yet it remains uncertain how true.

That day some few Horse went out for us to plunder and were some of them lost,
about two and not more.

About 12. a clock that night on the North part of this City being on the
other side of the River, was an alarm by some of the enemies horsemen, some say
more then a 100. which charged our Sentinel, but our men charging them again
with a few foot they set spurs and run without loss on any side, but some
cattle they drove away from a place called Tilow, some two miles from us, that
were the Bishop of Dublins.

17. Day were a 100. Horse sent under the command of Captain Armstrong to
seek after the fore night troublers.

Also a Troop went to Tredagh, and another Convoy to the Naas to fetch some
Wagons home, and brought them safe and left all quiet in the Naas, but brought
home Captain Rochford sick, a Captain of Sir Charles Cootes Regiment, a
valiant man; I think Sir Charles his death troubles the hearts of his
Regiment much with sorrow.

Also, that day Captain Stering was buried.

News also came, that in most part of the County of Earmanagh the Rebels have
burnt, as they do every where, an evil prognostic to belly business near
Winter, but all must be burnt, that is not by one side or other.

Also, we had news that the Lord Mongarat had besieged Carlow Castle with 3000.
men, in which, and in the Church adjoining are a great number of distressed
English Families of that County, which if the Castle be taken, will be all put
to the sword, and hard it is to releeve it, Sir Charles being the only man for
such purchases, that knew all passages, and very hardly can they hold out, much
fear is of it. This day some 300. foot landed from England.

18. Day news came from the County of Cavan that Sir Francis Hamilton, and Sir
James Crage having kept their cattell-from the beginning, and done good service
against the Rebels daily, they hearing that great store of Gentlemen of the
sept of Master Dering were met at Cavan, at a kind of a Session some 7 miles
from their two Castles that are near together, Sir Francis Hamilton's is
called Kilsandry. Sir James Carge, Croshan; they both upon this report made,
what strength they could, and came upon this Master Doring unexpected, and cut
them all off, being the chief of that sect, not less then 20. or more
Gentlemen the chief of that name, and having so done, they took away a great
part of their cattle, and returned to their Castles; This was good service the
truth was averred: by men of trust to the State.

19. Day news from Trim Colonel Gibson who came to Dublin, and brought two
prisoners of note, the one Wesly of Dangod and his Son, a man of 18 hundred
par annum, many Alarmes they have had in Trim, but the Rebels never stood to
it, but still run

Much discontent is here among the Soldiers for want of pay, and little hopes
of living in place for want of it there is not less due to them then 100000.
besides all strange taxes one the City.

News that the President of Munster had taken Kilkenny, but this remains some
what doubtful, because it is the only strength the Enemy has but it is
reported very confidently that the President has for certain recovered his
health, and done some great thing.

That night we had Horse and Foot went out to a place called New Castle, where
was intelligence that there were a company of Rebels; but though our men went
out very privately, yet they had intelligence from the City papists as usually
they have, and while our Army went that way, all the cattle on the South side
of our City were carried away by the Rebels without resistance.

That day the Army returned home again, and brought home prey of Cattle, and
killed as is reported 50. that were scattering, but the maine upon intelligence
given were gone.

Also, that day the Rebels attempted to stop the water that belonged to some
Mills in the City, but it was unstopt again by us.

20. Day, news came that the Earl of Clanrickhard had releeved the Fort of
Galloway very well, and had blockt up the Town round.

Also, news from Limricke that one of our Ships had taken a French Ship laden
with Arms for the Rebels, and intended to land at the foresaid Port, but was
taken by us with much Arms in it.

That day also in the morning Rebels came even into the Suburbs and stole
Cattle very desperately.

21. Day, Sir Henry Titchborne, and Sir Thomas Lucas were elected Privy
Councellers.

That morning we had an Alarm on the North side of our City, such strange
boldness they have, since we lost him whose name was their terror, some
Cattle they drove away.

23. Day news from Naas, that great store of Cattle they had taken from the
Rebels, and other goods, but being taken from the Soldiers by the Captain, a
mutiny began, and much ado to stop it, their pillage was feign to be restored.

24 Day was searching for strangers that had lodged themselves in our City,
such boldness they had taken since Sir Charles his death, when as before no
Papist durst show himself almost. Now begin to creep into the City, Country
Papists, besides what are City Papists, to give intelligence, and other
mischief; indeed things bie strangely still, for want of some such warlike man
as he was; This day also landed 400. men from England, so a whole Regimentare
landed, but no money, which makes our Soldiers mad. Also, a Troop went to
Trim to day.

FINIS.

