IO CAROLE: OR An Extract of a Letter sent from PARNASSUS, WHEREIN Are
contained several EPIGRAMES, ODES, etc. upon His Maiesty's Coronation.

Printed in the Year 1661.

Superscrib'd, To the Reverend and Learned Dr Jasper Main, England.
Sir,
UNderstanding how deservedly you are numbered among the Virtuoso's of the Age,
I have been emboldened upon that account, to single you out for the Person whom
I should certify of the most signal occurrences which have happened lately in
this place; Perhaps this sheet or two may prove troublesome to the perusers of
Books in general, and something uncivil toward you in particular; why, if
they do, yet as to the first the admirablenesse of their Subject Matter will
abundantly excuse them, which was the cause of their comeing forth at all; and
as to the second, your Fame will shelter them under her capacious wings, which
was the cause of their comeing thus Superscrib'd: The truth is, when I found
how acceptable the Ragguagli di Parnasso (published by my predecessor) was to
the ingenious part of mankind, me thoughts I could not but do the present and
future generation a very great injury should I have concealed what now I hope
may have the good fortune to pass through your hands farther into the World:
Know therefore, Sir, that yesterday morning His Majesty Apollo discarded a
Theologo of great note, who was discovered to have been first a Tremulist, then
a Lacu-Lemanian, then a Theist, next an Arnheimian, and now last of all a
complete Orthodoxo only for fashion sake; Three days before that he had
cashiered Mercurio Europaeo his Gazett-writer for publishing that for true,
which was not so, neither was it at all like to be so, viz: that at the great
solemnity of the Coronation of your invincible Archon CHARLES the II, the Prior
of St Trinity took his place as Alderman of the great City: This morning the
Ambassadors from Almaine, whose errand hither was to be informed what those
Fires, Crosses, Turbants, which they had seen at home in the air might
portend, received this Answer in His Majesty's name from the Procurator of the
Oracle, Presbitery is better than Independency, Episcopacy is better than
Presbytery, but Quakerisme is better than Trentisme: Just now at Dinnertime
this present day, being (if I calculate aright) your first of May, there was
much joy all over the Court by reason of a certa^n great benefit which is
shortly to redownd upon the whole Universe as Apollo out of his certain
foreknowledge of things told a near Favorite; the particulars are not known,
but it is to be by a Marriage betwixt two Mighty Princes both living near the
Atlantic: Our Agents abroad send us not much news, by reason of the late happy
General peace in Europe; only from what we have by private intelligence, we
hope shortly to see from the double top of our Sacred Hill the Christian
Princes of the West join forces against their common Mahumetan enemy upon a
better account than the determination of a blind Council at Clermont, that so
by the help of their successful arms our proud Ottoman oppressors power may
be abated, and he no more raise armies able to besiedge Austria; it being more
than time for us to be freed from his Tyranny, and date our letters not from
the Flight of an Impostor, but from the comeing of the true Prophet: In order
to the improvement of Learning his Majesty has referred the care of new
Experimental Philosophy to the honorable R.B. his Hermeticall Esquire R:H,
and the rest of the Right Knowing Verulamians; of Platonicall Philosophy to H.
M; of ingenuous writings to J. H. Esquire; And as for Poetry (to omit the rest
at present) he resolves to be himself still the vigilant overseer thereof, and
to keep it up in its height; and he has already made good progress in his
design by well improving so sublime a Theme offered as your April 22 and 23;
for, being informed of the almost unutterable glory of those two days, of the
Magnificent process of that sacred person to his Throne, and his more
magnificent seating there-on, he presently summoned all the Poetts, told 'um
what he had heard, required them to exercise every one their several Fancys on
so extraordinary a subject, and appointed Fam. Strada Master of the Ceremonies;
but the silly, whymsicall Jesuit was under a firm resolution not to accept of
any place either of profit or honor out of I know not what strange conceit,
for fear (forsooth) lest he should be taken by some Virtuoso's for a Fanatic;
where-upon his Majesty himself without any demur undertook that charge and
beckoned to Homer to lead; where-at the noble Greek immediately stood forth,
and expressed himself to this effect, (...),
(...):
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...):
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...):
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...):
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).


Which Apollo himself partly out of respect to his Firstborn son, and
partly to honor the English tongue, was pleased taking upon him the person of
Homer thus to translate, MUse tell the World of that late exiled King,
And not his Sufferings but his Glory sing;
He once indeed did heavens wrath incurr,
And found Jove nothing but a Thunderer;
While he was feign to fly through unknown ways,
Ledd by his Stars then seeming all to blaze;
And this sore plague was on poor England sent,
That she should play the fool in Government,
Her mighty Monarchy turned piddling State,
Masculine Government Effaeminate;
But Heaven now her Miserere's hears,
And toward her Great Lord compass'on bears,
Gives him his Golden wand and Azure ball
To seem and be a glorious Prince withal:
Never shall this year its room in Story want,
Now Priams son sitts Crowned in Troynovant:
Oh! what a flood of light from him does flow!
How like the midday-Sunn it makes him show!
Such clothes of Gold and Silver kill my brain,
My Optics fail and I grow blind again:
This Earthly Jove all sorts of men does please;
Inlanders leave their homes, Seamen their Seas,
Both English born, and they that Neighbors are
A part in singing and in shouting bear;
You may the like in those fair gardens see
Where Thousands buzz about one Royall-Bee:
Should nature give me now a dozen tongues
And half as many pair of lusty lungs,
And those made of the lately sheathed steel,
I could not word the joy three nations feel.


Next Virgil was called upon to say something in relation to the present
affairs of the renowned Western Isle, who so quickly took the summons that
ever any of the company were aware he was in the middle of a verse, and thus
(as to what we could hear) he begann, -- Fractus bello fatisque repulsus
CAROLIDES, cujus tria regna Wigornia secum
Traxit in exitium, tot jam labentibus annis
(Nam non sunt aeternae animis coelestibus irae,)
Sceptra manu vibrans solioque potitus avito
Ex alto populos videt atque videtur ab ipsis:
Phoebe (fatebor enim) cum se post nubila Clarum
CAROLUS exhibeat, Majestatemque serenus
Induat antiquam, subito haec Parnassea sordent
Culmina, quaerendumque Tibi est in numine numen;
Ille coma meliore diem lucemque deaurat
Imbellem, radiosque T'uos fugat astra fugantes;
Imo Tibi, occiduus Talem siquando videres,
Eclipsin patienti esset nova causa ruboris:
Clarus ubi (audivi) regis fraterque sororque
Majoresque jacent and avi tumulantur avorum,
Spinea cum nondum turgesceret Insula tectis,
Cum nondum in sacram tua moles surgeret Aedem,
Te rude vulgus ibi coluit, numenque vocavit
Et Phoebum docuere refer altaria Mystae;
Qui modo Te lucemque Tuam coluere pusillam,
Hoc quid crediderim facturos principe viso?
Quod si quid poterit splendenti luminis addi
Stat juxta miscetque jubar Dux iuclytus armis;
Nempe avulso uno non deficit alter and alter
CAROLUS, and gemina stirps regia fronde triumphat;
Fortunati ambo! nisi me praesagia fallunt
Vestra novi condent ingentia facta Poetae,
CAROLIDUMque domus Longa dominabitur Alba
Dum rotet astra polus, feriant dum littora venti.


With how great applause this was received I shall not rehearse; Apollo (to
continue my bare Relation) thought none so fit to render the divine Maro into
English as the Author of the Heroical Epistles, M. D; him therefore by a beck
he designed to that office, who thus performed it, GReat CHARLES by war, and
adverse Fate undone,
From whom three Nations in one field were won,
At last (for heaven does not always frown)
Handles his Scepter, and putts on his Crown;
And from the highest seat of Majesty
Sees his good people thronging him to see:
Sir, I must tell you, now that HE is freed
From those thick clouds, and shines as King indeed,
I see no glory in this glorious place,
And Majesty is setting in your face;
He guilds your gold, and makes a double day;
Stars fly from yours, from his your feebler ray;
Should your when setting see the like, you would find
More cause to blush in being so out-shin'd:
In that rich Minster, where (as I have heard)
Lie CHARLES's kinn and Ancestors interred,
Ever stately houses covered Thorny Isle,
Ever your profaner Mosque turned sacred Pile,
There in that place men owned you for Divine,
Sung hymns unto you, worshipped at your shrine;
They who adored beholding petty you
Should they have a sight of Him what would they do?
Now if such glory augmentable seems
The Warlike Duke stands by, and mixes beams;
See, two for one! if CHARLES the Martyr bleeds
Another and another still suceeds:
Partners in bliss! never shall there want a verse
(If I know ought) your Actions to rehearse,
And your great Fam'ly in White Hall shall Reign
As long as Isles have shores, or Charles a Waine.


The Esquire had no sooner done but up stood Ovid, and very well understanding
himself to be the next to Virgill both in ability and renown, as also plainly
foreseeing how ill it would be resented if he should be silent in such a case
prevented the invitation, and of his hwn accord sweetly smiled out these
ensuing lines, DII Maris and Terrae! nam (quae sunt saecula nobis)
Et Maris and Terrae discimus esse Deos;
Eia, bonum factum! supero quod Carolus anno
In sua sit placidis regna revectus aquis;
Eia, bonum factum! quod and hoc modo Carolus anno
Ad sua sit nitidis tecta revectus equis:
Naso Tomitanae notissimus incola terrae
Ah! scio quid patrio sit caruisse solo;
Non tamen id vatem quod sum grave passus adurit,
Sed quod sustinuit Carolus exilium;
Nempe cadunt arbusta, jacent pro more myricae;
Aegre procumbit celsior ulmus humi:
Me miserum! quantos viduata Britannia luctus,
Quanta diu rapto Principe damna tulit!
Sive Scotos aliquis Dominum non rite tuentes
Narrarit, Scoticum corda tulere gelu;
Seu quis in Angliacum Gallorum murmura Regem
Innuerit, miserae Gallia luctus erat;
Seu quis pugnantes Dunkerkae dixerit Anglos,
Et Dunkirka novi causa doloris erat;
Plura ego non memoro; quid enim memorasse juvabit?
Praeteritus minuet gaudia tanta dolor:
Tam tarde adveniens lachrymas expressit Aprilis,
Atque omnis plane mensis Aprilis erat;
Hic istas oriens Sol siccat lumine guttas,
Alter ut ille Orbis Caesaris ora videt:
Ergo ego Saturnum, Martemque Jovemque silebo,
Implentemque libros Amphitryoniadem;
Namque quid Alcides? regnavit sanguine multo,
Gessit bella, hominum corpora stravit humi;
Sed pacem revocare, animasque domare rebels
Herculis est decimus tertius iste Labor.


What he expressed in Latin was as elegantly rendered into English by Mr
Sands, in this manner; YE Powers upon the Land, and Powers by Sea,
For (as things go) both sorts of Powers there be,
Thanks for your last-years courtesy before
In setting CHARLES upon his native shore;
Thanks for your this-years favor to him show'n
In bringing him in triumph to his Throne:
Forced my self to Scythia's ice and snow
What it is to suffer Banishment I know;
Thither I went, and well could tarry there,
But CHARLES's banishment I could not bear:
The ground is fit for such poor shrubbs as I;
But Elmes and Oaks are'nt used so low to ly:
Ah me! what fears did headless England seize!
How the Great Widow wept her self new Seas!
How amongst the Scotts he fared if any told,
Her heart soon imitated Scotlands cold;
Hearing the French against him murmured,
Those murmurings in her new troubles breed;
Being informed of Dunkirk's bloody fight
The name of Dunkirk put her in a fright;
I Will not relate the rest; it will do no good,
It Would spoil these present triumphs if I should;
For want of such an April 23.
Each month a showry April seemed to be;
That Sun now riseing dryes up every tear,
While he does there to the other World appear:
Then farewell Saturn, Jove, and Mars, all three;
And Hercules that fills up History;
For what did he? he in his furious mood
Conquered men's bodies, spilt in war their blood;
But to make peace, and quell men's passions too,
This the other Hercules could never do.


Martial was under a clowd at this time, and Apollo made a demurr whether he
should be employed or not; but for fear of discouraging his grand Epigrammatist
whom such a slight would quite undo, and a little time might chance to reform,
he set him on work, and this was the whole almost of what he produce't;

Ad Lyoolitam.
Attend, Loyolita, te velim paucis,
Tam grande ne placeat tibi nimis Dictum;
Modo verte Splendores Britannicos versus,
Citra tuam Monarchiam Vniversalem
Potes videre Solemn in Occidente Ortum.
Ad Phoebum.
QVaero ubi sit CAROLUS; respondes (Phoebe) roganti,
Ante Palatinas concidit ille fores,
Concidit? ah, misere tua nos oracula fallunt
Falsum (Phoebe) canis Tuque, Tripusque tuus;
Concidit? Eccum ipsum! vivum, diademate cinctum!
Quam par men's, similis gloria, nomen idem!
Credimus Assyrios renovant incendia nidos,
Fabellae faciunt gesta hodiurna fidem;
Jam frustra in Dominos plebs ferrea saeviet; in se
Regius en regni semina sanguis habet.
Ad Rotatorem Fanaticum.
HArringtone, rotae faber jocosae,
Nonnullus (fateor) tui Rotundi
Vsus nuper erat, nec ipse multum
Errabas Carolo jacente nostro;
Postquam advenerit alma Lux Georgi
Istam Machinulamque teque tollas;
Scis versatilis ut potentiorum
Fortunam Rota Principum figurat;
Scis quisnam radius (perite rerum)
Ad terras humili situ jacebat;
Ille ut debuerat, volente Fato,
Ascendens propiora cernit astra,
Atque Illo Rota culminante tandem
Stat nunc fixa nec amplius movetur.
There wanted a fit person to be employed in the translation of Martial, but
for want of a better Sylvester did him thus into English,

To B. the Jesuit.
COme, Jesuit, and let me thee advise,
Do'nt thou thy known proud Motto too much prize;
On Englands present glory cast thy eyes,
A sleep thy Universal Monarch lies,
Yet see the Sunn there in the West arise.
To Apollo.
Where Is mighty CHARLES? Apollo, where? relate;
He Is murdered, answear'st thou, at his own gate;
Murdered? no, surely you are mistaken there,
Deceived art thou, and Fallible thy Chair;
Murdered? no, there he sitts, alive, and Crowned,
With th'same high soul; same name, and luster found:
The Phaenix in the fire is borne anew,
These passages do prove that story true:
Rebels, no more rejoice to see Kings dye;
Their blood, you find, 's the seed of Monarchy.
To him that spoke last at the Rota.
STate-wheel-wright, I must needs allow
Thy whimm was useful once and thou;
Thou seemedst orthodox of late
Whilst CHARLES was yet unfortunate;
Now there has been a Georges-day
Engine and Engineer away;
The Wheel thou know was found long since
To show the Fortunes of a Prince;
Neither can thou well but know
What spoke did lately down-ward go;
That Is Culminant (Fate turning round)
As nigh the stars as once the ground,
And now that to the topp has runn
The Weel must fix, its Motion's done.
The Latin Poetts having pretty well played their parts, his Majesty and the
whole company looked all steadfastly now upon Du Bartas, now upon T. Tasso, which
was a sufficient sign what was expected from those two, hereupon they both
stood forth, but instead of falling to the business in hand enterr'd into a
dispute concerning their precedence one before the other, and appealed to
Apollo which side of the Mountain was the more fertile soil for wits, and
whither had more right to begin first the Frenchman or the Italian; his
Majesty bade them both sit down again for the present, and come again for
judgment an 100 years hence; then turning toward the English Poetts, he
thought to have brought old Jeffery upon the stage, but considering how little
difference there is both as to matter and style between him and Spencer, he
pitched upon the last, who entertained us with this Dialogue betwixt one Thenot
an honest Shepherd and one Hobbinol a Fanatic Goatheard.

Thenot. Hobbinol. The. HObbin, to me a read what garrs thee greet?
What maken thee so Melancholy?

Hob. Thenot, much is y done that is not meet,
I sigh at London peeples folly;

The. Mischief on sighs; what art the bett for thy?
Rise and with me to Cotswold go;
Thither our bonny ladds apace do hie,
Dover been there again, I trow;
Come, Hobbin, let us frisk it o'r the plain
We will frisk it merrily;

Hob. Tho thou would have me be a dancer, Swain;
Nay, I may not dance with thee;

The. But thou may frisk it when y bidd by Pan,
Who will have us end our woe;

Hob. How do I know that Pan commands it? Man;

Then. The lit within us twinckles so;
Tho, as thou art a ladd, do ne yshend
Our roundells fresh with ruthful lay;
To eek our jollity we all intend,
Our King maken thilk holy day:

Hob. I ken not why there should be any King,
Nature ordained parity;

The. Tho congy to thy boy this evening,
He was born as good as thee:

Hob. Is not a Knit of Bath an uncouth thing?
Many a one before him went;

Then. Religious Knits fit a Religious King,
And their Order is most decent:
O it would be a lawful dignity
Were a redd ribbond sent to you;

Hob. At, but those habitts come from Rome City;

The. So did the Evangel too;
Is wine the worse for being Laterane
When from Italy sent hither?
Does holy Bible strait turn Alcoran
Because y bound in Turkey leather?

Hob. The others eke I hate as cruelly
Those buxom Knits of the Round Garter,
Who, I am taught, founded were by -- by -- by
That Popish King our British Arter;

Then. Ah seely Hobbin! hott cole on thy tongue;
Thus chatten folk they know not what;
It is a fashion Christian Kings among,
What Answer give ye unto that?
Such decency all sorts of peeple use,
And all rejoice thilke day to see
But only you whom fowl leasings abuse,
And robben of your whilome glee:

Hob. Then I Will be blithe (so pleases me) and sing;
I Will dance about as I were wood,
And drinken healths unto our gracious King,

Then. You're moved thereto, therefore it is good:

Hob. Il'l hang his picture every wall upon,
Cut C's and R's in all my box;
Certes James Naylor is a very son,
Georg Fox (I ween)s very Fox.

Next Quarles succeeded, and knowing his excellency to lie in Illustration of
Emblemes spoke to the present purpose by way of allusion to the frontispeice of
that Sacred piece, which we have here written in Letters of Gold, (...), Which
I reckon would be in vain to describe, seeing there are none who have seen any
thing but they have seen that; thus the ingenuous Gentleman descanted upon it,

1.
HOw does the table suite with what is been done,
That cut with what we see!
How well the Father's Mottoe's fitts the Son!
How both their lives agree!
His Sire through sufferings did in triumph runn,
And thorough them runns he;
Grammercy they who ever this Emblem drew;
This will the business fully show;
I knew not where to borrow any else would do.
2.
Though tumults raged against the King as high
As against the rock the Sea,
Though a dark night all overcast his sky
As dark as dark can be,
Though there did heavier burdens on him lie
Than on the patient tree,
The Rock had learned (like Terminus) to stay,
The night has turned a glorious Day,
The Palme-tree's glory has anticipated May.
3.
Never let loyal Rock fear boisterous Fate,
Since CHARLES unshook has been;
Nor England's Day ever dread a night in state,
Since CHARLES's is serene;
Never let Royal Palm fear any weight
Since CHARLES's is so green;
And may that sure-fixt Rock no motion know,
That Sunn may he still brighter show;
May that Great Palm Tree greener still and greener grow.
In the next place there were presented to his Majesty diverse Coronation
Poems, (as they were called,) to the number of 17, 16 whereof wereof were never
looked into, Apollo having enough and too too much of the first, a Tetrastick
whereof be pleased to take in the Authors own words, (Twelve months ago our
Royal Sove'reigne land-
Ed at the Dover cliffs in safety and
Enterr'd his Kingdom; now, behold! he sitts
Enthroned, and they whose rebellious fitts; etc.)


And from thence judge how justly the inditer thereof and his brethren were
honorably dismissed each of them with a wreath of Absinthium Umbelliferum
tenuisolium, and a nosegay of Atriplex ollida:

These Pamphletteers being departed, his Majesty by way of divertisement
cursorily perused an Heroic Poem entitled CAROLEIS, which was written by a
Virtuoso of your own nation, (some say a Theologo) but came hither to beg an
Imprimatur; I may not send you a complete copy thereof until it be Licensed,
but (if your patience be not quite tired out) you may take a taste of the whole
in these few Stanza's: 1.
NOw had our Royal Eagle for some time
Been forced through Air none of his own to fly,
While paltry rookes into his Throne did climb
Feather themselves and set their nests on high.
2.
When that Great Monarch on whom Myriads wait,
Who wisely rules the World he wisely made,
Summoned his flameing Ministers of State,
And in the amidst of them sat down, and said;
3.
"Who of you minds my World's more Western part?
"Who Will place the English King on English ground?
"Who Will counter-work Hell's plotts with Heavenly art,
"And so procure the Royal Exile Crowned?
4.
" There is a time for wrath, a time for love;
"I can no longer now forbear my smiles;
"If I am Monarch, if I reign above
"He shall be King below, and rule those Isles:
5.
Englands unseen Protector then arose,
Or, if that word has been too much profaned,
The Spirit which for Britains Guardian goes
Boldly took heart, and openly complained;
6.
"Sole Conservator of the Universe,
"I would presume at length to make my moan;
"But (ah!) what tongue is able to rehearse
"What my poor Province there has undergone?
7.
"My Albion long since had changed her name,
"But never lost till now her Happiness;
"She Is nor in Church, nor yet in State the same,
"By your permission Priestlesse, Monarch-lesse.
8.
"By your Permission we are sure it is so,
"But should that your Permission last too long
"It Would seem your Will, and men would think below
"You're like themselves and do delight in wrong:
9.
"Then, oh, both Court and Clergy now restore,
"And that brave land in unity maintain,
"Least what my dearest Ina joined before
"Fall into more then Heptarchy again.
10.
"And those who so audaciously of late
"Voted down Service Book and Monarchy
"Disturb, distract, confound, infatuate,
"Or else they will next vote down your Deity:
11.
"CHARLES ripe for hundreds wants one Diadem
"Robbed of his treasures, country, friends and all;
"Oh might I steal from Flanders such a gem!
"Oh might I be his Guide unto White-halt!
12.
"Say but the word, I runn, I fly, I Am there;
"My have no medium nor distance checks;
"I Will soon unroost the Rump from Westminster,
"And fix the Hydra's heads on other necks:
13.
"I Will Him in his Great Loyal City set,
"And bring him in such state unto his throne,
"That people shall all former pomps forgett,
"And History not mention that of Scone.
14.
"And so thou shall (was Answear'd) I decree,
"But let us take advice, my Faithful one;
"How may this business best effected be?
"Which course do you steer, and what must first be done? etc.


His Majesty having given his verdict of and commands about this Heroic Poem
laid it by, and desired the Virtuoso which brought him the joyful news, and
had not yet left the Court, to conclude the day, who recollecting such thoughts
as he had in the street before, in the Abbey at, and at home after the
Coronation putt them all into this following Ode.

ODE.
It Is He; oh! I shall view him o'r and o'r!
That is the Duke which comes before;
And this, it is the Abby-doore;
Open thy door, thou house divine,
Thou art not makebate Janus shrine,
Open, in thee to day our CHARLES will shine:
Thou one continued Monument have been
To show that Prince, and King, and Queen
High persons dye as well as mean;
Thou have been of'ts Mortality,
Now thou shall a witness be
Of th'Resurrection of Majesty:
Peter, thy keys; let in our Sovereign
Into thy Illustrious Fane,
Pounds not Pence shall be thy gain;
Though wee're not Antichristian,
Nor think the King more than a man,
Thy Abbey shall out-pomp thy Vatican:
Rich Vestments make the Lords Spiritual gay,
Coronets adorn the Lay,
Then I Will put on my wreath of Bay,
And for a kind of Poet go,
(Worser then I have do'nt I know,)
And bear my petty part in this great show:
Arch-Angells (sure) leaving their glorious sphere
Themselves have bodyfied here
English Nobles to appear;
And Earthly, gross, corporeal we
Crowding so thick our King to see
Use their laid-by Penetrability:
Men used to be waited on can wait,
Nor does their Pomp there-by abate,
Since here to bows to sit in state,
And now may CHARLES's luster be
The Proto-type of Majesty,
The Emperor's not King of Kings, but He:
The newly-found Egyptian Anubis
But a dull Hieroglyphick is
Of our Kings glory, Kingdoms bliss;
Italy, though high she sings,
Here-of no full resemblance brings
Consular triumphs were such puny things.
The Father now would slight Victorious Paul,
His entrance, person, name and all,
To see these Peers this Prince install;
He Would find when Rome subdued her foes
She came as short of us in shows
As now her modern Glories do of those;
Of all the Objects which sight-worthy be
If he might have his choice of three
What would he choose? what would he see?
He Would see the Man with Godhead filled,
See the Tent maker Churches build,
See CHARLES's beams this OEta-Minster guild:
That speck of Majesty, I should say spott,
Though we with souls esteemed him not,
Some of the many's honor got;
Though they saw Noll headlong runn
And set all in combustion,
Yet Phaethon with them went for a Sunn;
Minutest things which to our eye do come
Through a watery Medium
Seem to be great and fill much room;
Thus Cromwell's lowness high appears,
His narrowness a great breadth bears,
While men oppressed look on him thorough tears;
But now the Scepter's sweeter for his sword,
That Caytiffe does this good afford
The foil setts off our native Lord;
So Diamonds do for Diamonds pass
When confronted by dimm glass,
So Silver shines the more when placed by brass?
White Hall and Lambeth-house since one CHARLES died
With small delight themselves have spied
In th'waters which betwixt 'um glide;
They saw themselves turned upside down,
Gone was the Miter and the Crown,
Fallen were their propps King's robe and Bishop's gown;
But all things now 're again serene and clear,
Now they like themselves appear,
Now their stately topps they rear;
Yonder sitts he in our view
Who Will give both Church and State their due,
King long ago, at last anointed too.
Were It not for the Io-Paeans of the town,
The depths of nature I would sound,
Into my self I would go down
And seriously ruminate
What 'twas could cause his so hard fate,
What is the reason he is Crowned so late;
Did redd-coat Mars into rebellion runn,
And confront the King his Sunn,
Presageing what should here be done?
Did Iron-side in former days
Eclipse the gold which Sol displays
And make a new spott in's Meridian rays?
Did Charles's waine fling its bright rider down?
Or did the stars of either Crown
Look something dull, and seem to frown,
As Thummin-stones their shine would loose
And prognosticate sadd news
When God to bless a design did refuse?
Was it because that he was rule to bear
Over the British Tribes that are
All Judah and none Issachar,
To deal with spirits bold and free?
But we for ever have been we,
Yet when was English Prince so used as he?
I must confess even in the open street
Not to my Priest but t'all I meet,
And do penance in this street;
Religion it tottering stood,
Philosophy it would do no good,
Reason was at a loss do what it could;
These things seemed that, or something like unto't
Which, though it do'nt his temper suite,
Yet malice would to CHARLES impute;
They like to Tyranny did look,
And I did want a Construing book,
Was with a fit of Lucianisme took;
I could not brook in Fate such uncouth Laws,
I could not salve in her such flaws,
I could not solve such Aenigma's;
But that I knew the Queen of Kings,
Mistress of Persons and of Things
Fortune does stand upon a ball with wings;
I knew the Fire Gold-Reall too must prove,
That CHARLES was dear to him above
With whom to chastise is to Love;
That what is slowly's surely done,
And whom heaven will fix fast in's throne.
It is the longer setting him there-on:
Then (Mighty Sir) at length ascend your Throne,
Possess the seat long since your own,
And fill't with your Great-Selfe alone;
Assume your Scepter and your Mound,
Your (ah! but) gold- and pearl- set Round,
Till better jewels, better mettall's found;
He mounts, h' ascends, h'assumes his Diadem,
Whose every ounce of gold and gemm
Take worth from him, not he from them;
A sight which will not be done when done,
But still and still be thought upon,
And thought on even convert Rebellion:
Mars thus would shine, and such a presence bear
If, what a Comett once did dare,
He Would sit in Cassiopea's chair;
Apollo would look with such state
If when he does culminate
His fore-head-beams were taught t'incorporate:
This day Triumphant George does claim as his;
Indeed such glory a prospect is
Only for such a time as this;
Nor is there the Solemnity
In the least with this can vie
But yesterday's Proaem'all bravery:
How London was with the whole Nation lined!
How was Lumbard-street outshin'd,
The Sunn to his own Sphere confined!
How the rich mettalls did abound,
As if the King returned had found
Rio de Plata flowing through his town!
How the first curious Arch was beautified,
Yet both its cheeks in purple died,
Blushing that CHARLES should through it ride!
What reverence Thames to him did show!
How Neptune waving's Trident too
Did from his stately Cabine homage do!
How did the Temple ovally ascend,
And by it is figure round portend
This peace and joy should have no end!
How did Flora's fruits revive,
How did they grow a fresh and thrive
To see Great Pan Great Pan again alive!
How sensible the houses were it was HE!
How London would not Majesty
But in her gown of Arras see!
How long hours seemed a little while
Whilst he giv'ing every street a smile
Shot th'Huge, the Navall, Rural, Sacred pile!
Yet why do I one only Sacred call?
Coesar has consecrated all
In's Royal journey to White Hall:
May they outlive like piles of stone;
May they (at least) be let alone
Till Livia too pass through them to the Throne:
Go, sheath thy Dagger London; jarrings cease;
Have for thy pains an endless peace,
While CHARLES makes love and trade increase,
The World (or Poets guess amiss)
The World is in reversion his,
And thou designed that World's Metropolis.
You may a little wonder at the length of the Ode, but the Author being a
native of England his Apology is made to his hand; whom when Loyalty had
suffered to make an end, Apollo arose from his seat, and thanked him and all
the rest in a pitthy speech, where-in he showed himself as much the Lord of
Oratory as he is owned to be of Poetry, and then dismissed the assembly: So, Sir,
craveing pardon for the trouble I shall have put you to by that time you are
come thus far in the perusal of these papers, and presuming upon the grant,
I make have to subscribe my self,

Sir, Your unknown but real humble Servant Bocalini Jun.


