AN ACT FOR Granting a Supply TO HIS MAJESTY, BY Raising Money by way of a POLL.

royal blazon or coat of arms

DVBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
on Cork-Hill, near Copper-Alley. MDCXCVII.

An ACT for Granting a supply to His Majesty, by raising Money by way of a
POLL. CHAP. XXXIII.
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons of IRELAD in
Parliament Assembled, having a grateful sense of the Benefits we enjoy under
the Auspicious Reign of our great Deliverer and Defender, with all Thankfulness
and Humility, own Your Majesty's Goodness toward us, and Your Indefatigable
Pains and Care for our Safety: And taking into our Consideration, that many
Debts Contracted by Your Majesty for our Security and Preservation, remain
unpaid, through a Deficiency of Your Majesty's Established and Settled Revenue
to discharge the same. As a further Acknowledgment of the Sincerity and Loyalty
of our Hearts, Do most humbly Present Your Majesty a Free Gift of the several
Sums hereafter following, to be Levied in manner herein-after expressed; for,
and toward the payment and discharge of the Debts and other Ends hereafter
particularly mentioned: And do veseech Your Majesty to accept thereof, And that
it may be Enacted,

And be it Enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all and
every person and persons of what Age, Sex, or Degree soever, that shall be in
this Kingdom at the time of executing this Act, shall pay unto His Majesty Two
shillings, sterling. per ann. To commence from the Sixth day of November, in the
Year of Our Lord God. One thousand Six hundred Ninety seven, except the Wives
and Daughters of Day-Labourers, living with their Parents, and the Sons of
Day-Labourers who have not attained their Age of Eighteen Years; and also
except Widows, who by reason of their poverty, are discharged from paying
Hearth-money, and all persons living on Alms.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
person and persons, who at the time of the execution of this Act, shall be of
the several Qualities, Ranks, Orders and Degrees hereafter mentioned, shall
Annually pay unto His Majesty the several Sums hereafter in this Act set down
and appointed, beside, and over and above their said Annual Poll of Two
shillings, sterling. (That is to say) Every Archbishop of this Kingdom, shall pay
the Sum of Fifty pounds, sterling. Every Bishop of this Kingdom, shall pay the
Sum of Twenty pounds, sterling. Every Dean of this Kingdom, shall pay the Sum of
Ten pounds, sterling. Every Archdeacon of this Kingdom, shall pay the Sum of
Five pounds, sterling. Every Cannon, or Prebendary of this Kingdom shall severally
pay the Sum of Fifty shillings, sterling. Every Doctor of Divinity, Law, or
Physic, shall pay the Sum of Five pounds, sterling. Every Person having two or
more Benefices, with Eure of Souls, making together One hundred pounds, sterling.
or upwards, shall pay Five pounds, sterling. Every person having one Benefice,
with Cure of Souls, of the Yearly Value of One hundred pounds, sterling. shall pay
Three pounds, sterling. Every person having one or more Benefice or Benefices,
with Cure of Souls, of the Yearly Value of Fifty pounds, sterling. and under a
hundred pounds, Yearly Value, shall pay the sum of One pound, sterling. and no
more. Every person having a Sine Cure, or Benefice, without Cure of Souls, of
the Yearly Value of One hundred pounds, sterling. shall pay the sum of Ten
pounds, sterling. and so after the Rate proportionably for any greater or lesser
Sine Cure, or Benefice without Cure of Souls, being under or above the Yearly
Value of One hundred pounds, sterling. Every Parson or Incumbent, having but one
Benefice with Cure of Souls, and not residing thereon, or having more Benefices
then one, with Cure of Souls, and not residing on any one of them, shall pay
for every such Benefice of the Yearly Value of One hundred pounds, ster. the
sum of Ten pounds, ster. and after that Rate proportionably for every greater
or lesser Benefice. And every Parson, or Vicar, having any Benefice or
Benefices, with Cure of Souls, under the Yearly Value of Fifty pounds ster.
shall pay the sum of Ten shillings. Every Chancellor of a Diocese, or
Vicar General, shall pay Five pounds ster. Every Register of a Diocese, shall
pay the sum of Two pounds ten shillings ster. Every Chancellor of a Cathedral,
shall pay two pound ten shillings, ster. Every Dignitary, of what nature or
kind soever, shall pay Two pounds ten shillings, sterling. Every Curate having no
Benefice, shall pay Ten shillings, and no more.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person and
persons, who at the time of the execution of this Act, shall be of the several
Ranks and Degrees hereafter mentioned, and shall be then within this Kingdom,
or that has any Estate in Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments in the same,
shall pay unto His Majesty the several Sums of Money hereafter in this Act set
down and appointed. (That is to say) Every person of the Degree of a Duke, of
this Kingdom, shall pay the sum of Fifty pounds, sterling. Every person of the
Degree of a Marquess, having any Estate in this Kingdom, shall pay Forty
pounds. Every person of the Degree of an Earl, inhabiting, or resideing in this
Kingdom at the time of the execution of this Act, or having any Estate in the
same, shall pay the sum of Thirty pounds, sterling. Every person of the Degree of
a Viscount, that shall be in this Kingdom at the time of the execution of this
Act, or that has any Estate in the same, shall pay the sum of Twenty five
pounds, sterling. And that every person being of the Degree of a Baron, of this
Kingdom, who shall be in the same at the time of the execution of this Act, or
that has any Estate in this Kingdom, shall pay the sum of Twenty pounds,
sterling. And that every person being eldest Son of such Duke, who is Charged
Fifty pounds, as aforesaid, shall pay Thirty pounds, sterling. Every younger Son
of such Duke, so Charged as aforesaid, shall pay the sum of Twenty five
pounds, sterling. Every eldest Son of such Marquess, as is before Charged, shall
pay the sum of Twenty five pounds. Every younger Son of such Marquess, shall
pay the sum of Twenty pounds, sterling. Every eldest Son of such Earl, as is
before Charged with Thirty pounds sterling. shall pay the sum of Twenty pounds
sterling. Every younger son of such Earl as is Charged as aforesaid, the sum of
Fifteen pounds sterling. Every eldest son of such Viscount, Charged by this Act
with the payment of Twenty five pounds sterling. shall pay the sum of Seaventeen
pounds ten shillings sterling. Every younger son of such Viscount, so Charged as
aforesaid, shall pay the sum of Thirteen pounds six shillings and eight pence.
Every eldest son of such Baron, as is before Charged by this Act with the
payment of the sum of Twenty pounds sterling. shall pay the sum of Fifteen
pounds sterling. Every younger son of such Baron, so Charged as aforesaid, shall
pay the sum of Twelve pounds sterling. Every woman having the Title of a Peeress
of this Kingdom, or who takes place as such by Descent, or by any Grant from
His Majesty, or any of his Predecessors, having any Estate in Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, or otherwise in this Kingdom, or that shall be in this Kingdom
at the time of the execution of this Act, shall pay equal with any Peer of the
same Degree. Every Widow of a Noble man, though Married to a Commoner, shall
pay one full third part of what her former Husband, whose Relict she was,
should or ought to have paid, had he been living. Every Baronet of England,
Scotland, or Ireland, or Nova Scotia, and every Knight of the Bath, residing in
this Kingdom at the time of the execution of this Act, or having any Estate in
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments in this Kingdom, shall pay he sum of
Fifteen pounds sterling. Every person of the Degree of a Knight Batchellor, shall
pay Ten pounds sterling. Every person of the Degree of an Esquire, or so reputed,
or owning, or writing himself such (other then such as are reputed Esquires for
having been, or being Mayor, or Sheriffs, or Members of any Corporation) and
every person that is, or has been a Member of the House of Commons, or born,
or does bear the Office of a Sheriff, or Justice of the Peace, or Deputy
Lieutenant, residing in this Kingdom at the time of the execution of this Act,
or having any Estate in Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments within this Kingdom,
shall pay the sum of Five pounds sterling. Every reputed Knight, Baronet, Baron,
Viscount and Earl, or who shall call or style themselves so, shall pay the same
sum as they should have been liable to pay if they really were of that
Quality. Every Gentleman, or reputed Gentleman, or owning himself, or writing
himself such, inhabiting, or residing in this Kingdom, or having any Estate in
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments in this Kingdom, shall pay the sum of Five
and twenty shillings sterling. Except Gentlemen who shall not be worth Twenty
pounds sterling. at the execution of this Act, shall pay Five shillings sterling. and
no more. Every Widow respectively residing in this Kingdom, or having any
Estate within the same, shall pay One third part Rated by this Act on that
Degree of which the Husband of such Widow was in his lifetime.

And be it further Enacted, That every Person under the Degree of a Baron,
being worth One hundred pounds in Goods, Chattels, or other Personal Estate,
shall pay Five shillings; and that every Person as aforesaid, worth in Personal
Estate of any kind, Two hundred pounds Sterling, shall pay Ten Shillings; and
every Person worth Three hundred pounds in Personal Estate, as aforesaid, shall
pay Fifteen Shillings; and every person worth Four hundred pounds in personal
Estate as aforesaid, shall pay One pound Sterling. and every Person worth Five
hundred pounds in Personal Estate as aforesaid, shall pay One pound Five
shillings; every Person having in Personal Estate as aforesaid, to the Value of
One thousand pounds, or upwards, shall pay the sum of Five pounds sterling. Every
Tenant, or Farmer of this Kingdom, who pays not a greater Rent then Ten
pounds sterling. per ann. and every Shopkeeper Tradesman, or Artificer, not
worth Ten pounds in Substance, shall pay for no more Children under the Age of
Sixteen years, then two. Every Tenant, or Farmer, paying above Ten pounds per
ann. Rent, shall pay the sum of Two shillings and Six pence. Every Tenant, or
Farmer, paying above Twenty pounds, per ann. Rent, shall pay the sum of Five
shillings. Every Tenant, or Farmer, paying above Forty pounds Rent, per ann.
shall pay the sum of Ten shillings. Every Tenant, or Farmer, paying above
Sixty pounds per ann. Rent, shall pay the sum of Fifteen shillings. Every
Farmer, or Tenant paying One hundred pounds per ann. Rent, or upward, shall pay
the sum of One pound. Every Tradesman or Shopkeeper, that is worth Twenty
pounds, or upwards, in Personal Estate, shall pay the sum of Two shillings and
Six pence. Every Tradesman, or Shopkeeper worth Fifty pounds, or upwards, in
Personal Estate, shall pay Five shillings. Every Shopkeeper, or Tradesman,
worth One hundred pounds, or upwards, in Personal Estate, shall pay Ten
shillings. Every Tradesman or Shopkeeper, worth Two hundred pounds in
Personal Estate, shall pay Fifteen shillings. Every Tradesman or Shopkeeper,
worth Three hundred pounds, shall pay One pound. Every Tradesman, or
Shopkeeper, worth Four hundred pounds in Personal Estate, shall pay One pound
Five shillings. Every Gray-Merchant, Merchant-Traveller, or Peddler, who usually
Travels with an Horse, shall pay One pound. Every Gray-Merchant,
Merchant-Traveller, or Peddler, who usually Travels without an Horse, shall pay
Ten shillings. Every Person in Orders of the Romish Religion, shall pay Twelve
shillings and Six pence. And that all and every Person, except Women, Children
under the Age of Sixteen, and such as pay Two shillings, and no more, who have
not already taken the Oaths, and Subscribed the Declaration herein-after
mentioned to His Majesty: And who shall not voluntarily appear before the
Commissioners, or any two or more of them, and take the said Oaths, and make,
and subscribe the Declaration herein-after mentioned; which Oath, any two or
more of the Commissioners in this Act named, are hereby Empowered and Required
to Administer, and make an Entry or Memorandum thereof, and of making and
Subscribing the said Declaration in some Book, to be kept for that purpose:
Every such Person who shall neglect to appear, or shall not take the Oath, and
make, and Subscribe the Declaration as aforesaid, shall be charged with, and
shall pay to His Majesty double the sums, which by Force or Virtue of any
Clause in this Act, he should or ought to pay, or be charged with; to be
Levied, Collected, Answered, Recovered and paid, in such manner, and by such
ways and means, as are in this Act expressed and appointed, for, and concerning
the Rates and sums hereby intended to be Doubled as aforesaid.

Provided, nevertheless, That whereas certain Persons, Dissenters from the
Church of England, commonly called Quakers, and now known to be such, do
scruple the taking any Oath, it shall be sufficient for every such Person to
make and subscribe the following Declaration.

I A. B. do Sincerely Promise, and Solemnly Declare, before God and the World,
That I will be True and Faithful to King WILLIAM.

And I Solemnly Profess and Declare, That I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest, and
Renounce, as Impious and Heretical, that Damnable Doctrine and Position that
Princes Excommunicated, or Deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of
ROME, may be Deposed or Murdered by their Subjects, or any other person
whatsoever. And I do Declare that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or
Potentate, has, or ought to have any Power, Jurisdiction, Superiority,
Pre-eminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm.

Which Declaration, any two or more of the Commissioners appointed for the
Execution of this Act, are hereby Empowered and Required to take: And such
Person making, and Subscribing the Declaration, shall not be Liable to, or
chargable with any of the Double Rates aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the several Sums
of Money, so as aforesaid, Limited and Appointed to be paid, shall be Due and
Payable for Two Years, Commencing the First Day of November, One thousand Six
hundred Ninety seven, and be Collected Quarterly by Four equal Payments; the
First Payment to be made on the Second Day of February, in the Year of our
Lord, One thousand Six hundred Ninety seven; the Second Payment to be made on
the Second Day of May, in the Year of our Lord, One thousand Six hundred Ninety
eight; the Third Payment to be made on the Second Day of August, in the Year of
our Lord, One thousand Six hundred Ninety eight; and the Fourth Payment to be
made on the Second Day of November, which will be in the Year of our Lord God,
One thousand Six hundred and Ninety eight; the Fifth Payment to be made on the
Second Day of February, which will be in the Year One thousand Six hundred and
Ninety eight; and Sixth Payment on the Second Day of May, in the Year One
thousand Six hundred and Ninety nine; the Seventh Payment to be made on the
Second Day of August, in the Year One thousand Six hundred and Ninety nine; and
Eighth and Last Payment to be made on the Second Day of November, in the said
Year, One thousand Six hundred and Ninety nine.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
Assessing, Ordering, and Levying of the several Sums of Money, so as aforesaid
Limited and Appointed to be paid, and for the more effectual putting this Act
in Execution, all, and every the Persons hereafter named, shall be
Commissioners of, and for the several and respective Counties, Cities, Towns,
and Places, hereafter named, for putting in Execution this present Act, and the
Powers therein contained, in the Counties, Cities, Towns, and Places, (That is
to say)

For the County of Armagh.
The High Sheriff for the time being, Sir Nicholas Acheson, Bar. Sir Henry
Yichburne, Knight. Arthur Brownlow, Marmaduke Coghill, Samuel Doppin, Stephen
Ludlow, Edward Reyly, William Richardson, William Mollineux, Hamlet Obins,
Downham Cope, Edward Harrison, John Hamilton, Rich Chapel, William Blacker,
Henry Richardson, Walter Dawson, Roger Hall, Henry Hunter, Hans Hamilton, James
Maxwell, Richard Whaley, Esquires, The Sovereign of Armagh, for the time being,
the Portreeve of Charlemont, for the time being, Rath Jones, Thomas Clarck of
Ardress, Daniel Madden, Thomas Bond, James mc. Kean, George Maxwell, John
Hamilton of Hamiltons Bawn, Gentlemen, Captain James Manson, Francis Nevill,
Esquire William Scott, John Ball, Abraham Ball, Thomas Clarck of Portadown,
Gentlemen, John Holtrige, Esquire

For the County of Antrim.
Sir Arthur Longford, Bar. Captain John Chichester, Sir Robert Adaire, Arthur
Upton, Hugh Colvill, James mc. Cartney, Edward Harrison, Godfrey Walker,
Hercules Davis, Henry Davis, Charles o Neal, Edward Stafford, Thomas Dawson,
Robert Dalway, Alexander Dalway, Esquires. The Sovereign of Belfast for the
time being, Robert Leasly, George mc. Cartney, Esquires, Edward Brice,
Gentleman, Clothworthy Upton, Esquire Arthur mc. Cartney, Edward Clements, Gent.
Richard Dob, Junior, Edward Ellis, William Shaw of Ganavay, John o Neal, Henry
mc. Collagh, Robert Dovil, Esquires, Doctor John Peacock, Henry Shaw, William
Shaw of Balligally, Gentlemen, William Laftly, Benjamin Gallant, Charles
Stewart William Shaw of Bush, John Donelson, George Buttle, Esquires, William
Crawford and Thomas Crawford, William Thompson, Robert Haran, James Tanas,
James Johnston, Cornelius Crumble, John Pierse, John Charlton, William Close,
Richard Harrisson, Thomas Cornwall, Gentlemen; John Latham, Warham Jemmet,
Esquires; James Harston, Benjamin Adaire, Gentlemen; Samuel Sincly, Edmond
Reynolds, John Reynolds, Esquires; James Crawford, Robert Harper, Richard
Nuton, Bryan mc. Manus, Patrick Hamilton of Belfast, William Adaire, John
Dobbin, William Dobin, James mc. Collagh, James Boyd, Neal Boy mc. Neal of the
Henry Andrew, Hugh mc. Cullam, Henry Willoughby, Henry Sheads, Francis Andrew,
Andrew mc. Calvey, William Boyd, John Delap, William Boyd, John Michall,
Alexander mc. Kay, Alexander Watson, and John Walkinton, Gentlemen.

For the County of the Town of Carickfergus.
The Mayor of Carickfergus for the time being, the Sheriffs of the same for the
time being, Hercules Davis, Henry Davis, Esquires; and Marmaduke Newton,
Gentleman:

For the County of Catherlaugh.
The High Sheriff for the time being, Sir Thomas Butler, John Allen, Philip
Savage, Wentworth Harman, John Tench, Thomas Burdett, Richard Wolessy, Urban
Vigors, Edmond Jones, John Beauchamp, John Brown, Esquires; John Dolway, John
Bernard, James Cox, Archdeacon, Robert Harris, and Thomas Fox, Clerks.

For the County of Cavan.
The Honorable Mr. Justice Coot, Sir Francis Hamilton, Baronet; Francis White,
Thomas Ash, Robert Saunders, Francis Butler, John Warburton, Samuel Townly,
Thomas Townly, Joseph Pratt, John Maxwell, John Coin, Robert Clements, Daniel
French, Arnold Cosby, Henry Palmer, Charles Hampson, Alexander Sanderson,
Edward Davenport, Walter Pollard, Esquires; Dean Enoch Rider, William Handson,
Robert Maxwell, Anthony lvison, Clerks; Robert Craige, Esquire Brockhill Newburgh,
Henry Guillyms, Thomas Hemming, Thomas Humes, George Russell, Samuel Wilson,
John Robinson, John Price, and Patrick Everey, Gentlemen.

For the County of Clare.
Sir Henry Ingoldsby, Sir Donat o Brian, Baronets; Francis Burton, Esquire Francis
Gore, and James Hamilton of Tullymore, the Honorable John o Brian, Simon
Purden, Henry Bridgeman, Edmond Perry, Thomas Spaight, Esquires; John Roan,
John Cusack. Gentlemen; Mountifort Westrop, William Smith, Esquires; John
Hawkins, Clerk: William Butler, Esquire George Calpoys, Patrick Connel, Gentlemen;
Samuel Burton, Thomas Hickman, George Stammer, David Bendon, Nicholas Westby,
Esquires; Patrick Fitz-Simmons, Clerk; Henry Lee, Walter Hickman, James Mac
Donnell, Esquires; William Smith, Richard Lee, Henry Hickman, George Hickman of
Ballickett, Gentlemen; Augustine Fitzgerald, Esquire William Fitzgerald,
Gentleman; Neptune Blood, Dean of Kilfenoragh, and Timothy o Brien of
Smithstowne.

For the City of Cork.
Colonel Theobald Purcell, Allen Broderick, His Majesty's Solicitor General,
Alderman Robert Rogers, Doctor ^alter Neale, Mr. Edward Sing, the Mayor and
Sheriffs of Cork for the time being, Thomas Piggot, Esquire Alderman Newenham,
Alderman Howell, William Newstead, Esquire Alderman Hoar, Alderman Crofts, Alderman
Crow, Alderman Charters, John Speed, Merchant, Captain William Dunscomb,
Captain Epenetus Cross, and Captain John Traverse.

For the County of Cork.
Sir St. John Broderick, Knight, Thomas Broderick, Esquire, Allan Broderick,
Esquire, His Majesty's Solicitor General; Henry Boil, Robert Fitzgerald,
Edward Southwell, James Walter, Edward Riggs, Francis Bernard, William Jepson,
Laurence Clayton, Edward Denny, John Hayes, Charles Boil, John Ormsby, Francis
Brewster, Charles Oliver, James Barry, Robert Foulks, Piercy Freake, Brian
Townsend, Thomas Beecher, Edward Richardson, Samuel Maurice, and Robert Pooly,
Esquires; Sir John Mead, Knight; Francis Hodder, George Symmes, William Carr,
John Davis, John Baily, Junior, Thomas Crook, Edward Worth, Richard Traverse,
Richard Hutchins, Daniel Beanish and John Lee, Esquires; the Mayor of Youghall,
the Sovereign of Kinsale, the Provost of Bandon, the Sovereign of Middleton,
and the Sovereign of Charlevill for the time being; Sir Matthew Dean, Knight,
John Cook, Richard Yeats, John Luther, Edward Nicholas, and Jasper Lucas,
Merchants; William Bollard, Nicholas Brumby, Richard Wakeham, William Wakeham,
Peter Bettsworth, Thomas Piggott, John Traverse, John Bowls, John Wakeham,
William Supple, Samuel Maynard, John Montgomery, Stephen Moore, Boil Aldworth,
Emanuel Moore, Henry Tonson, Joseph Jervis, Henry Beecher, Anthony Butler,
Samuel Pomroy, Thomas Purdun, Arthur Hyde, Captain Elwell, Jonas Stowell,
Senior, Jonas Stowell, Junior, and Robert Gookin, Esquires; Arthur Keefe,
Gabriel Solden, Mr. Mountiford, Thomas Burrowes, and Thomas Chidleigh,
Gentlemen; William Newstead, Robert Couran, Thomas Hyde, Edward Dodsworth, and
Henry Rice, Esquires; John Brailsford, Apollos Morris, Barrachias Wallis,
Walter Croker, Henry Wallis, Charles Newman, George Chinery, James Mauserge,
William Babington, John Silver, Richard Bettesworth, William Thornhill, George
Rogers, Francis Smith, John Watkins, and Henry Boreman, Esquires, Epenetus
Cross, John Baily, Senior, John Gilman, John Wallis, and Nicholas Lysaght;
Arthur Bernard, and William Warner, Esquires, and Edward House, Gentleman.

For the County of the City of Dublin.
The Lord Mayor, Recorder and Sheriffs for the time being. Master Chancellor of
the Exchequor, Mr. Attorney General, Mr. Sollicitor-General, the Commissioners
of his Majesty's Revenue of Ireland for the time being, Sir William Billington,
Sir Francis Brewster, Sir Humphery Jervis, Sir John Rogerson, Adlermen John
Smith, Alderman George Blackhall, Alderman William Watts, Alderman Bartholomew,
Vanhumrigh Alderman Thomas Quin, Alderman Anthony Percy, Alderman Marks
Ransford, Alderman Samuel Walton, Alderman John Page, Alerman Charles
Thompson, Alderman Francis Stoite, Sr John Coghill, Sir Patrick Dunne, Stephen
Ludlow, Marmaduke Coghill, Thomas Tilson, Standish Hartstonge, Elnathan Lumm,
Edward Wingfield, Robert Molesworth, Edmund Rennell, Edward Richardson,
Wentworth Harman, John Redding William Mollineux, Doctor Thomas Mollyneux,
Robert Peppard, Gideon Delaune, James Mac Cartney, William Handcock the Elder,
John Allen, Anderson Saunders, Robert Saunders, Roger Moore, George Warburton,
John Warburton, Anthony Towers, James Tisdell, Daniel Wibrants, Benjamin
Burton, Charles Delane, Edward Deane, Christopher Usher, John Usher, James
Hamilton, of Tullamore and Stephen Stanley, Esquires; Colonel John Lovett,
Colonel Robert Ecklin, William Connelly, Colonel Henry Cunningham, Samuel
Dopping, Sir Arthur Cole, Abel Ram, Charles Cambell Sir Francis Blundell, Sir
Henry Ingoldsby, William Neave, Edward Reyly, Herculus Davis, St. Ledger
Gilbert, Esquires; Sir Patrick Dun, Knight, Robert Ormsby, John Ormsby, Richard
Thompson, Charles Deering, Edward Wingfield, Thomas Brodrick, and William
Robinson, Esqs William Cairnes, Ralph Gore, Faustin Cuppaidge, Thomas Twigg,
Richard Cook, William Keating, Daniel Miles, Robert King, John Rotten,
Gentlemen; Robert Curtis, and Joseph Budden, Esquires; and all the Members of
the House of Commons in and about Dublin.

For the County of Dublin.
Robert Rochford, Esquire Sir Richard Bulckely, Sir Arthur Cole, Sir Richard
Bellingham, and Sir Thomas Domvile, Baronets, Sir John Coghill, Sir William
Domvile and Sir Walter Plunket, Knights; Allan Broderick, Robert Mouldsworth,
Edward Deane, John Redding, Thomas Ash, John Tench, Thomas Pooly, John Allen,
Denny Muschamp, Richard Forster, Joseph Deane, Senr. George Wallis, Daniel
Redding, Senr. John Stepny, Robert Peppard, Thomas Keightly, John South,
Christopher Carlton, Marmaduke Coghil, Richard Thompson, William Neave, Henry
Fernly, Joseph Deane, Iunr. Joseph Stepny, Richard Morris, Thomas Stepeny,
Dixie Coddington, Christopher Usher, John Price, Isaac Dobson, Bernard Brown,
George Warburton, Joseph Budden, and Agmundishham Vesy, Esquires; Daniel
Reading Iunr. Gent. Henry Cooly, William Malineux, Robert Curtis, James Grace
and Edward Corker, Esqs

For the County of Donnegall.
The High Sheriff for the time being, Sir William Gore Baronet; Colonel
Gustavus Hamilton Colonel Henry Cuningham, Charles Hamilton, Andrew Knox, John
Forward, John Hamilton, Hugh Hamill, John Montgomery, Francis Folliot, William
Gore, William Connely, Charles Melvin, Henry Langford, Humphry May, William
Stewart, William Wray, Henry Heart, George Vaghan, Patrick Hamilton and Edward
Harison, Esqs Capt. William Hamilton, Capt. William Cuningham, Capt. Francis
Hamilton, Capt. Robert Baird, Ralph Gore, William Sampson, Esquire Thomas Mac
Casland, Alexander Cunningham of Aghen; William Knox, Gentlemen, the Warden of
Lifford, for the time being, the Provost of Donegall, Killeybeggs,
Ballishannon, and St. Johnston, for the time being, Henry Brook, Andrew Knox,
William Cairy, Robert Mortimer, James Vaughan, Michael Huetson, Robert Spence,
Thomas Adkinson, Tristram Swetenham, John Cowan, Charles Colhoone, William
Walker, Alexander Nisbit, James Nisbett, Andrew Lindsey, John Evans, Edward
Cairy, and John Henderson, Gentlemen.

For the County of the Town of Drogheda.
The Mayor and Sheriffs for the time being, Charles Lord Moore, Sir Henry
Tichburn, John Stoker, Edward Singelton, Richard Jackson, Thomas Percivall,
William Elwood, Henry Nicholass, Joseph Tomlinson, William Newton, James
Mead, John Graham, Richard Pitts, Aldermen; Caleb Gay, and Richard VVhaly,
Esquires.

For the County of Down.
Sir John Trever. Sir John Maghill. Nicholas Bagnoll, James Hamilton, of
Tallymore, Nicholas Price, Matthew Ford, William Shaw, Edward Harrison, Fredrick
Porter, Robert Ecklin, Patrick Savage, James Montgomery, John Ecklin, Gowin
Hamilton, William Hamilton, John Hawkins, Henry Hunter, John Norice, John
Gibbons, James Bail, John Ellsmeer, John Latham, The Honorable Michael Hill,
Esquire, James Hamilton, of Bangor, Francis Annesly, Hans Hamilton, James
Slone, Clotworthy Upton, Charles Campbell, David Campbell, Francis Hall, Hugh
Muntgomery, George Rosse, of Portavo, Arthur Maxwell, Samuel Warring, John
Haltridge, Roger Hall, Captain Alexander Steward, Vere Ward, Thomas Knox,
Richard Johnston and John Montomery, Esquires; John Latham, Francis Allen,
Patrick Hamilton, Matthew Stothard, John Smith, James Hewson, John Saunders,
William Catherwood, Henry Maxwell, Capt. Evan Humphries, William Neaven, Hugh
Maxwell, Robert Hawkens, Philip Wilkison, James Hamilton, of Derryboy, Roger
Bristo, Alexander Brown, John Blackwood, Junior, and Alexander Hamilton, and
George Rosse, of Carny, Gentlemen.

For the County of Fermanagh.
The Sheriff of the said County for the time being, Sir Gustavus Hume, Baronet,
Sir James Caldwell, Baronet, Sir Michael Cole, Knight, Colonel Abraham
Creighton, Colonel James Corry, Doctor Christopher Irwin, Charles Balfour,
Hugh Montgomery, of Carow, William Archdale, Charles Wallis, Hugh Montgomery,
of Derrygonelly, William Balfour, Esquires; Captain James Creighton, Captain
John Corry, Gilbert Eccles, David Rynde, Jason Hassart, Edward Davis, Esqs The
Provost of Enniskilling, for the time being, James Aghenlect, Walter Johnston,
Gentlemen, Captain John Irwin, Captain Robert Clarke, Sir William Gore, Sir
Tristram Berrisford, and Sir Henry Tichburne, Baronets.

For the County of Galway.
Sir George St. George, Knight, John Air, Esquire, Sir George St. George
Baronet, Colonel Richard St. George, Gilbert Ormsby, William Caulfield,
Frederick Trench, Henry Pierce, John Ormsby, John Morgan, John Neyland, Richard
Whaly, Robert Mason, Thomas Crossdale, Samuel Air, John Lopdell, Edward Air,
Esquires; the High Sheriff for the time being, Thomas Stanton, Edward Crow,
Esquire, Robert Shaw, John Carter, Oliver Carter, John Tailor, Thomas Cunys,
Edward Blackney, Jeremy Morgan, Jacob Spike, Thomas Crookshanke, William
Gunter, Richard Warren, John Broughton Iunr. Lodowick Pringle, Francis Muxley,
Conn Mitchell, William Davis, and Edward Wilson, Gentlemen.

For the County of the Town of Gallway.
The Mayor and Recorder for the time being or their respective Deputy's, the
Sheriffs of the said Town for the time being, Thomas Revett, Thomas Simcocks,
Thomas Cartwright, Thomas Yeeden, John Gerry, Aldermen, Sir George St. George,
Baronet, Sir George St. George, Knight, Colonel Richard St. George, Robert
Ormsby, John Air, Edward Air, John Ormsby, John Ravett, Esquires; Robert
Shaw, Robert Witherington, Gentlemen, James Rivettvigie, Merchant.

For the County of Kerry.
Lord Baron of Kerry, the Honorable Captain William Fitz-Maurice, the
Honorable James Fitz-Maurice, Edward Denny, Senior, Esqs. the Sheriff for the
time being, the Honorable Henry Petty, William Sands, John Hassett, Edward
Denny, Junior, Barry Denny, Samuel Maurice, James Waller, Frederick Mullins,
David Crosby, VVhittall Brown, Theobald Purcell, Andrew Young, Thomas Ponsenby,
John Hasset of Killorglin, Samuel Raymond, Patrick Crosby, Rowland Bateman,
John Bateman, William Crosby, Robert Hassett, Thomas Shortcliffe, John
Walker, Richard Brown, Joseph Morris, Charles VVrenn, Henry Staughton, Timothy
Euraghty, Charles Monk, Dean John Richards, Richard Burch, Lancelot Glanville,
James Comor, Samuel Wilson, James Bland, Thomas Palmer, Josias Kenington,
Richard Orpin, John Rawlins, Jasper Morris, Richard Burch, John Sands and
Francis Downs.

For the County of Kilkenny.
Sir Christopher Wandesford, Baronet; Sir John Mead, Sir Henry Weymes, Knights;
Colonel William Ponsonby, Agmundisham Cuffe, Ebenezer Warren, Arthur Bush,
Blaney Sandford, Edward Worth, Christopher Huetson, Edward May, Samuel Booth,
Robert Stopford, Balthazer Cramer, Arthur Webb, John Eaton, Amias Bush, John
Langrish, George Read, John Baker, Thomas Crawford, Edward Deane, Arthur St.
George, Joseph Bradshaw, Esquires; Thomas Scurfield, Edward Brisco, Ralph Rell,
Joseph Rell, Pierce Brian of Bawnemore, Paul Gore, John Warring, Richard
Connell, John Jones, Nathaniel Boyse and Darby Egan, Esqs Abel Butler, Charles
Gore, James Agar, Jonathan Whitby, William Headen, Patrick Welsh, Joseph
Wheeler, Thomas Mansell, William Deys, John Bishop, John Villers, John Barnes,
Daniel Mansergh, William Hawkins and Joseph Lodge, Gentlemen.

For the City of Kilkenny.
The Mayor, Recorder, and Sheriffs for the time being; Sir Christopher
Wandesford, Baronet; Standish Hartstongue, Esquire Recorder, Ebenezer Warren,
Richard Connel, Joshua Helsham, John Pape, Isaac Muckins, Esquires; Josias
Haydock, Patrick Connell, Albert Butler, John Garnet and John Warring, Aldermen.

For the County of Kildare.
The Lord Viscount Ely, the Honorable Robert Fitzgerald Esquire Sir Francis
Blundel, Sir Kildare Burrows, Baronets; Sir John Eustace, Knight; George
Fitzgerald, James Barry, Richard Nevil, Thomas Medlicot, John Davis, Maurice
Keating, Richard Lock, Francis VVeymes, Robert Graydon, Paul Davis, Robert
Dixon, John Allen, Wentworth Harman, Francis Annesly, Maurice Annesly, John
Annesly, Edward Stratford, Agmundisham Vezy, William Mollineux, Garret
VVeisely, Richard Meredith, Henry Warren, Charles Rickeseis, Dudly Cooly, Henry
Cooly, Raphael Hunt, Ieffery Paul, John Ailmer, James White, William
Bruerton, John Aylmer, Junior, Richard VVibrow, Walter White, Francis Spring,
Thomas Twigg, Theobald Bourk, William Chavinor, Benjamin Fish, George Medlicot,
William Harbourne, and William Southerby, Esquires, William Knight, Clerk,
Alexander Graydon, William Wright, Bartholomew Rigg, and Henry Doyle,
Gentlemen. The several Sovereigns for the time being, of the Naas, Kildare,
Athy, and Haristown.

For the Kings County.
Sir Francis Blundell, Baronet, Sir Lawrence Parsons, Baronet, Sir George
Harbert, Baronet, William Parsons, Duke Gifford, John Air, Thomas Lestrange
Richard Warburton, Senior, William Sprigg, John Weaver, John Moore, Samuel
Rolls, Hector Vaghan, John Baldwin, Seinor, John Baldwin, Junior, Richard
Hansard, Robert Lestrange, John Wakely, Albert Nesbit, Jeffry Lions, Thomas
Moore, Jonathan Darby, Samuel Moss, Martin Baldwin, Richard Warburton, Junior,
George Warburton, Henry Westonray, Esqs. William Nelson, Clerk, Daniel
Tomlinson, Clerk, George Lowther, Clerk, Medhop Loyd, Richard Luther, John
Seymer, Anthony Carroll, Humphry Minchin, William Witherill, Peter Holmes,
Maurice Keating, Capt. Oliver Bingly, Phillip Moore, James Sterling, Edward
Baggot, Miles Baggot, Charles Wenman, Esquires; Captain Charles Steward,
Francis Lambert, George Fryssel, Archibald Armstrong, Nathaniel Tailor, John
Ridgway, John Tarlton, John Cradock, William, Minchin Randall Cook, Bigo Honsy,
William Armstrong Francis Clarke, Philip Wenman, and William Vaughan, Gentlemen.

For the County of Leytrim.
Sir George St. George, Sir William Gore, Sir Robert Gore, and Sir Francis
Hamilton, Baronets, John Renolds, Theophilus Jones, Gilbert King, William
Lander, William Gore, Morgan Cunigam, Thomas Crafton, Robert Galbrath, John
French, Arthur Cooper, John Mahon, Edward Reynell, Ralph Gore, William Smith,
and William Parks, Esqs Capt. Edward Johnston, Capt. William Parsons, William
Lander, Junior, John Peyton, William Ellis, and John Crofton, Gentlemen,
William Cuningham, and VVhitelaw, Clerks, the Sovereign of James Town, and the
Provost of Carrick, for the time being.

For the County of Limerick.
Sir Edward Crofton, Baronet, Sir Thomas Southell, Baronet, and Sir Standish
Hartstonge, Baronet, Sir William King, Knight, George Evans, the Younger,
Chichester Phillips, Standish Hartstonge, the Younger, Chidley Coot, Standish
Hartstonge, the Elder, Charles Oliver, John Ormsby, Joseph Stephny, William
Trenchard, John Piggott, George Evans. Senior* Ralph Wilson, John Odell,
Michael Serl, Henry Widdenham, Richard Stephens, David Wilson, Robert Tailor,
Thomas Monsell, William Blackney John Croker, Richard Waller, James Waller,
Thomas Holmes, George King, John Parker, Henry Johnson, Hugh Massey Thomas
Rose, Henry Ailmer, William Ryvers, John Bury, William Langford, the Younger,
Esquires; Sampson Cox, Edward Blenerhasett John Bailey, Edward Croker, Thomas
Fitzgerald,, John Gabbot, Owen Cutbert, Gentlemen, Nicholas Wesby, and Edward
May, Esquires.

For the City of Limerick.
The Mayor for the time being, Sir Joseph Williamson, and Sir William King,
Knights, Joseph Coghlan, Esquire, Recorder; Dean Ezekiel Webb, Ralph Wilson,
and Edmond Perry, Esquires; William Gribble Robert Smith, George Roch, John
Craven, John Ford, Edward Weight and Simon White, Aldermen.

For the County of Longford.
Sir Robert Newcomen, Baronet, Sir John Edgworth, Knight, Sir Walter Plunket,
Knight, The Honorable William VVolsely, Ambrose Auger, Wentworth Harman,
Esquires, John Kerr, Dean of Ardagh, Charles Fox, Anthony Shepherd, Arthur
Aghmooty, Senior, Arthur Newcomen, Francis Edgworth, John Percivall, John
Ahmooty, Theophilus Jones, Samuel Forth, Frake Sandys, Matthew Wilder, Robert
Edgworth, Arthur Aghmooty, Junior, William Hide, Francis Wilson, John Kenedy,
Richard Gardener, and Thomas Handcock, Esquires; John Wilson, Clerk, John
Green, Clerk, The Sovereign of Longford, for the time being, The Sovereign of
Lanesburrough, for the time being, the Sovereign of St. Johnstown, for the time
being, and the Sovereign of Granard, for the time being.

For the City and County of Londonderry.
The Mayors and Recorders of Londonderry and Colraine, for the time being, the
Sheriffs of the City and County of Londonderry, for the time being; Sir
Tristram Berrisford, Sir Arthur Langford, Sir Robert Staples, Baronets; William
Jackson, David Cairnes, Bartholomew Vanhomrigh, Henry Langford and William
Connelly, Esquires, William Smith, Jervis Squire, Alexander Lecky, James Lenox,
Henry Long, Henry Ash, Horace Kenedy, Thomas Moncrefie, all Aldermen of the
City of Londonderry; Alexander Skipton, Charles Norman, John Mogridge, John
Corran and John Harvey, Gentlemen. Edward Brooks, Merchant, Hugh Rowly, William
Cuningham, Thomas Dawson, and Nicholas Downing, Esquires; Hugh Rainey, Thomas
Ash, Adam Downing, William Palmer, Samuel Right and John Howey, Senior,
Gentlemen. Edward Carey and William Gage, Esqs The Provost of Newtown for the
time being; George Carey, George Church, William Bacon, Edward Bacon, Robert
Bacon, Robert Dent, George Thornton and Henry Brown, Gentlemen. George Cunning
and Thomas Church, Esquires. Colonel Thomas Blaire, George Canning, Charles
Church, Junior; John Hodgson and Dominick Heyland, Gentlemen. Tristram
Beresford and William Godfrey, Esquires. Arthur Church, John Galt and Edward
Barwick, Aldermen of Colerain. Michael Berrisford, Arthur Carey, Thomas Spaight
and Thomas Lance, Gentlemen. Nicholas Averall, John Thompson, Junior, and John
Galt, Junior, Merchants. Richard Lynham, James Buoy, and John Oliver, Gentlemen.

For the County of Louth.
The High Sheriff for the time being; Sir John Hanmore, Sir Henry Tichborne,
Knights and Baronets; Sir Thomas Fortescue, Knight, Thomas Bellingham, James
Tisdale, John Pepper, Norman Garstin, Blaney Townley, Edward Singleton, Arthur
Brownlowe, William Barton, Timothy Armitage, Brabazon Moor, Robert Always, and
Kilnor Brazier, Esquires; John Ruxton, Anthony Barry, James Leigh, John Smith,
Gent. Alderman John Graham, Roger Bury, Thomas Clarke, Gentlemen; Caleb Gay,
Jeremiah Smith, Esquires, Philip Vincent, Senior, the Portreeves of Atherdee
for the time being; the Bailiff of Dundalk for the time being; the Sovereign of
Carlingford for the time being; the Sovereign of Dumleer for the time being.

For the County of Mayo.
Sir Henry Bingham, Sir Arthur Shane, Baronets; John Byngham, Willam Gore,
Gyles Vanderlure, William Palmer, Edward Air, Robert Miller, Thomas Bell, John
Matthew, Thomas Burditt, Robert Miller, Junior, Robert Bell, Francis Palmer,
Esquires; Thomas Brown, Thomas Jones, Samuel Lindsey, Robert Ormsby, Matthew
Bell, John Sheridan, Robert Ormsby, Junior, and Thomas Cuffe, Gentlemen.

For the County of Mead.
The Right Honorable the Lord Moore, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Oliver
Lambert, Esquire; Sir Arthur Langford, Sir Henry Ingoldsby, Baronets; Sir Henry
Tichburne, Knight and Baronet; Sir John Dillon, Knight, Thomas Blithe, Esquire,
Sir Charles Fielding, Knight; Andrew Ram, William Napper, Robert Johnson,
Arthur Meredith, Francis Osburne, Thomas Tailor, Charles Meredith, Garret
Wesley, James Napper, Esquires, Doctor Molineux, Edward Corker, Edward Forth,
Michael Shields, Samuel Bull, Henry Langford, Robert Hopford, Lancelot Dowdall,
Joseph Deane, Anthony Towers, Charles Lambert, Henry Osburne of Dardistown,
Stephen Ludlow, John Warburton, Esquires, Major George Pepper, Simon Pepper,
Hugh Mervyn, John Leigh, John Grimes, Edward Singleton, William Elwood, Esqs
Nathaniel Elwood, Anthony Berry, Gentlemen. Charles Campbell, Esquire; Richard
Shinton, Henry Osbourne of Knowth, Thomas Garret, Gentlemen. Joseph Woodward,
William Williams, Samuel Jackson, Esquires, Thomas Nicholson, Gentleman, Henry
Meredith, Esquire; Major John Pepper, Henry Codogan, Esquire. Alexander Kent,
Joseph Dean, Junior, Gentlemen. Darcy Wentworth, George Wentworth, Nathaniel
Bull, John Wade, Esquires. Charles Wade of Clonebray, Gentleman, John Wood,
John Wood, Robert Always, John Percival, Samuel Dopping, Thomas Loftus, Joseph
Pratt, Benjamin Pratt, Esquires; John Pratt, Gentleman. William Conelly,
Richard Jones, John Jones of Fresan, Isaac Holdwright, John Hawkshaw, Esquires.
Portreeve of Trim for the time being; Sovereign of Kells for the time being;
Portreeve of Navan for the time being; Duke Iefford, James Tisdall, Edward
Swan, Esquires. Alderman James Vanbobbart, Captain William Ingoldsby, Marmaduke
Coghill, Oliver Moore, Thomas Ash, Esquires. Samuel Gwithers, Gentleman.
William Palmer, Esquire. Sir John Coghill, Knight. Robert Smith, Robert
Molesworth, Hugh Morgan, Richard Willet, Esquires. Samuel Gibbons, Francis
Tuke, Gentlemen, James White of Moyglaire, Esquire.

For the County of Monaghan.
The Honorable Master Justice Coote, the High Sheriff for the time being,
William Barton, Henry Tenison, Robert Ecklin, Charles Deering Hugh Montgomery,
John Usher, James Curry, James Moore Arthur Brownlow, James Tisdall, Edward
Davys, Richard Johnston, Francis Lucas, Senior, Francis Lucas, Junior, Bryan
Norbury, William Wyshart, Blayney Owens, Henry Richardson, John Corry George
Buchannon, Alexander Montgomery, Richard Pockrich, Gilbert Eccles, Richard
Liegh, Joseph Johnston, Timothy Armitage, Walter Dawson Thomas Wildman, and
Thomas Chapel, Esquires; Captain Francis Butler, Captain Robert Stephenson,
Captain Hans Stephenson, John Leslie, Dean of Dromore, John Smith, Archdeacon
of Clogher, William Smith, John Law, John Foster, Ralph Barloe, John Knox,
Andrew Montgomery, and William Pockrick, Clerks, the Provost of Monaghan, for
the time being, Charles Congreve, Robert Maxwell, John Barlow, Francis Rose,
Benjamin Rose, Dudley Tenison, Henry Evet, John Forster, James Stanees, Richard
Allen, John Graham, Richard Fitch, Francis Dobb, William Johnston, David Jones,
Thomas Jones, Gentlemen.

For the Queens County.
The High Sheriff for the time being, The Honorable Robert Fitzgerald,
Esquire, Sir John Mead, Knight, Sir Edward Massey, Knight, John Weaver,
Senior, John Weaver, Junior, Robert Warneford, Walter Weldon, Thomas Pigott,
St. Ledger Gilbert, George Waburton, Richard VVarburton Senior, Richard
Warburton, Junior, William Hartpole, Thomas Carr, Gilbert Rawson, Richard
Hansard, John Spranger, John Barrington, Periam Pole, Richard Priar, Dudly
Cosby Esquires. Andrew Nisbitt, Clerk, Abraham May, Lancelott Sands, John
Stringer, Gentlemen, Richard Seager, Denny Muschampe, Thomas Ueasey, Phillip
Wheeler, Wentworth Harman, Esquires; Doctor Charles Crow, Robert Piggot, of
Cappard, William Brereton, George Mervin, Stephen Fitzgerald, Oliver, Welsh,
Edward Stubbers, Esquires; William Gray, Thomas Starkey, William Despard,
Stanley, Starkey Roger Allen, Dennis Dugan, Josaph Partridge, Hopton Harris,
Samuel Whitshedd, Gentlemen, Maurice Kannely, and Richard Hall, Clerks, Robert
Finn, Lemuell Wagstaffe, William Rigway, James Wall, John Short, Gentlemen,
Nicholas Carleton, William Newstead, Esquires.

For the County of Roscomon.
Sir Robert King, Baronet, Sir George St. George, Baronet, Sir Edward Crofton,
Baronet, John King, William Caulfield Esquires, Sir Arthur Cole, Baronet,
Henry Sandford, Esquire, Master Sergeant Neave, Arthur St. George, William
Handcock, Gilbert King, Henry St. George, Andrew Blackburne, John Dogherty,
John French, John Mahon, Robert Sandys, Esquires; George Digby, Clerk, Edward
Madden, John Reynolds Theophilus Jones Esquires; Master Gilbert Gardener, Toby
Molloy, Gilbert Ormsby, Edward Ormsby, Gilbert Donellan, George Crofton, Henry
Dodwell, Esquires; Master Bryan Cummin, Master Thomas Walker, Master Alexander
Erwin, Master Henry Erwin, Master Humberston VVestby* Master Lewis Hawks,
Colonel Daniel Hudson, Master Robert Goldsmith, Master Dennis Delany, Master
Edward Kelly, Master Dean Cope, Master Thomas Headen, Master Jeremiah Law,
Clerk, Master John Drury, Master Edward Drury, the Sovereigns of Athlone,
Roscomon and Tulske, for the time being; the Burgomaster of Boil for the time
being.

For the County of Sligoe.
Sir Robert King, Baronet, Edward Wingfield, Hugh Morgan, John King, Piercy
Gethin, Roger Smith, Arthur Cooper, William Griffith, Matthew Ormsby, Jeremiah
Jones, Lewis Jones, Adam Ormsby, William Ormsby, George Wood, Charles Hara,
Benjamin Burton, Keane Hara, Thomas Griffith, Robert Follyott, Christopher
Jones, Esqs William Smith, Philip Cox, James Barrett, Stephen Ormsby, William
Fibbs, James Devitt, Gentlemen.

For the County Palatine of Tipperary.
Sir John Meade, Knight, Lord Viscount Ikeryne, Thomas Sadler, James Harrison,
John Ottway, John Bailey, Esquires; Sir Thomas Osburne, Knight, Charles Allcock,
Stephen Moore, Thomas Moore, Richard Moore, Samuel Green, John Buckworth,
Robert Blenerhassit, Thomas Carter, John Perry, William Vaughan, Esquires;
Robert Bredon, Patrick Hackett, Clerks; William Armestrong, John Pike, Simon
Broadstreet, Robert Stopford, Anthony Cheamley, John Cook, Oliver Latham,
Kingsmell Pennefather, Esquires. Andrew Roe, John Cooley, Gentlemen, William
Jarvin, Thomas Clear, Senior, James Dawson, Esquires. The High Sheriff for the
time being; the Mayor of Cashell for the time being; the Mayor of Clonmell for
the time being; the Sovereign of Fethard for the time being. David Low and
William Lane, George Burdett, Charles Laugley, John Hunt, Phan. Cook, Junior,
Gentlemen. George Read, Esquire. Thomas Salmon, William Latham, Charles
Robinson, Joseph Tudkins, Michael Stanley, Gentlemen. Admundisham Cuffe, Esquire
Philip Carleton, Gent. Humphry Minchin, Hector Vaughan, Esquires. John Minchin
of Annagh, John Minchin of Shangarry, Gentlemen. Thomas Batty, John White of
Abbey, John White of Ardfinane, Philip Carleton of Clonmell, Richard Dennison
of the same, Richard Newport of the Abbey, Robert Boreman of Nenagh, Gentlemen;
Richard Whaley, Joseph Lloyd, Robert Cole of Ballymach, Esquires; Robert Minute
of Gentleman; Daniel Gahan, Junior, Joseph Damer, Anthony Carrol, William
Worth, Richard Walter, Nicholas Southcoate, Esquires; William Minchin, Isaac
Hales, and Richard Baker, Gentlemen.

For the County of Tyrone.
The High Sheriff for the time being, Henry Mervin and James Hamilton,
Esquires, Knights of the Shire; Thomas Knox, John Hamilton, Audley Mervin,
Oliver Mc. Causland, Esquires: Sir Robert Staples, Baronet, Richard Johnston,
Esquire, Sir Thomas Packenham, Knight, and David Creighton, Esquire, Burgesses
of the said County, Colonel Theobald Cawlfield, Colonel John Cawlfield, Sir
Tristram Beresford, Baronet, Hugh Hamell, James Moore, of Anacloy, Archibald
Robinson, James Murray, Patrick Hamilton, William Stewart, of Killymoon George
Buchannan, Thomas Morris, John Leslie, William Hamilton, of Mayagh, William
Latham, Charles Eccles, John Houston, Andrew Stewart, of Irey, James Moore, of
Desertereagh, George Stewart, Francis Nevill, Esquires; Thomas Edwards, David
Mac Clenaghan, of Strabane, William Maxwell, of the same William Hamilton, of
Mountalony, James Hamilton, of Tilidony, William Cairns, Allen Moore, William
Moore, Stewart Blacker, Robert Lowry, Charles Young, John Dowglasse, Thomas
Cooper, William Goodlett, Gentlemen, Warham Jemmett, Nicholas Carleton, John
Latham Esquires.

For the City of Waterford.
The Mayor and Sheriffs for the time being; Anthony Suxbury, Esquire; Recorder,
Richard Christmasse John Mason, Joseph Ivy, John Hallam, and John Head,
Esquires; Alderman, William Dennis, Alderman, Abraham Smith, Alderman,
Benjamin Boston, Master Samuel Frith, Merchant.

For the County of Waterford.
The High Sheriff for the time being, Sir Thomas Osburne, Knight, The
Honorable Henry Petty, John Mason, Esquire, John Dalton, Clerk, Dean of
Waterford, Richard Christmasse, James Mutlow, William Dobbin, Henry Nichell,
and John Otherington, Esquires; John Eccles, Clerk, Arch Dean of Lismore,
William Bucknore, Edward May, Joseph Ivy, Timothy Wall, Robert Carew, John
Nettles, Roger Power, William Greatracks, Andrew Bagg, William Browning,
William Congreue, Edward Hibbert, and Thomas Croker, Esquires; Beverly Usher,
Samuel Frith, Edward Cranwell, Ralph Green, Michael Carew, and Richard Bagg,
Gentlemen, Simon Ratcliffe, Clerk, Francis Beecher, Clerk.

For the County of Westmeath.
Robert Rochfort, Esquire; His Majesty's Attorney General, and Speaker to the
Honorable House of Commons, Oliver Lambert, Esquire Sir Thomas Packenham, Knight,
George Peyton, William Handcock, Charles Lambert, Esqrs Sir John Rogerson,
Knight, Walter Pollard, Thomas Smith, Thomas Handcock, John Cook, James
Nugent, Robert Packenham, Henry Dodwell, Henry St. George, John Wood, Junior,
John Adams Barachias Low, Richard Pilkington, Lewis Meares, Senior, Lewis
Meares, Junior, Edward Bertles Alexander Murry, John Percivall, Christopher
Nugent, Esquires; Arthur Judge Gentleman, Henry Humphreys, Esquire, Thomas
Magan, Edmond Branchwaite, James Pollard, Gentlemen, Robert Smith' Clerk Thomas
Smith, of Killtoome, William Chapman, Gentlemen, Hugh Bowen, Caleb Gay, William
Gay, Esquires; Robert Temple, Gentleman, Mungo Campbell, Esquire; Dominick
French, Gentleman, John Darby, Esquire.

For the County of Wexford.
The Right Honorable Phillip Savage, Matthew Forde, Daniel Wibrants, John
Harvey, Francis Annesley, Thomas Crawford, John Seymoure, Richard Barry,
Esquires; Sir Richard Bulckley, Sir Nicholas Loftus, John Chichester, Abell
Ram, Esqrs Robert Wolesley, Anderson Saunders, John Cliffe, Nathaniel Boyse,
Maurice Annesley Henry Loftus, Cadwallider Edwards, John VVintworth, Thomas
Dulter, Thomas Milling, Joshua Tench, Anthony Cliffe, Samuel Tench, Henry
Jeford, Charles Buggs, Andrew Ram, William Cole, Roger Lindon, William Anslow,
James Stopford, Jeremy Simms, Edward Rogers, Lawrence Davys, John Grogan, James
White, Henry Archer, John Shapland, Thomas Ivory, Thomas Phillipps, William
Hoar, Sovereign of Rosse, for the time being, Mayor of Wexford, for the time
being, Sovereign of Newborrough, alias Gory, Richard Nixon, Henry Hutton, John
Smith, John White, Heygate Boyd John Bunburry, Nathaniel Stephens, John
Napper, John Fenn, Samuel Pit, Henry Napper, Simon Young, John Grogan
Portreeve Eniscorthy, for the time being.

For the County of VVicklow.
John Price, Richard Edwards, Esquires, Sir Richard Buckley, Baronet, Willam
Hoey, Esquire, Senior, William Mathews, Thomas Keightly, William Robinson,
Christopher Carlton, Robert Stratford, Richard Thompson, Evan Price, Owen
Jones, Thomas Burrows, Christopher Collwell, William Fownes, Tichburne West,
Peter Craddock, William Hoey, Junior, Abram Nickson, Thomas Phillipps, Charles
Ferrers, John Hackett, Esquires, Talbott Keane, Gentleman, Anthony Archer,
Robert Graydon, and Richard Gardener Esquires.

And the said Commissioners, in Order to a speedy Execution of this Act, shall,
and are hereby Required in their respective Counties, Cities, Buroughs, Towns,
Baronies and Places, to meet together at the most usual, and common place of
Meeting, within such of the said Counties, Cities, Buroughs, Towns, Baronies
and Places, respectively, on the Ninth Day of December, in the Year of our
Lord, One thousand Six hundred Ninety seven; and the said Commissioners, or so
many of them as shall be present at the First General Meeting, or the major
part of them, may by their Consents and Agreements, devide as well themselves
as other the Commissioners not then present for the Execution of this Act, into
Baronies, Hundreds, Wards, Towns, Villages, and other places within their
Limits, Privileged or Vnpriviledged, in such Manner and Form, as to them shall
seem Expedient; and shall Direct their several, or joint Precept, or Precepts,
to such Inhabitants, High-Constables, Petty-Constables, Bailiffs, and other
such the Officers and Ministers, and such Number of them, as they in their
Discretion shall think most convenient to be Presentors and Assessors,
requiring them to appear before the said Commissioners at such time and place,
as they shall appoint, not exceeding Eight days, and at such their appearing,
the Commissioners, or so many of them as shall be thereunto Appointed, shall
openly Read, or cause to be Read unto them, the Rates in this Act mentioned,
and openly Declare the Effect of their Charge unto them, and how, and in what
manner they ought, and should make their Certificates according to the Rates
aforesaid; and then, and there, prefix another day to the said Persons to
appear before the said Commissioners, and bring in their Certificates of the
Names, and Sir-names, Qualities, Degrees, Titles, Estates, Professions,
Employments and Trades, of all and every the Persons Dwelling, or Residing
within the Limits of those places, with which they shall be Charged, and of all
other things in Respect whereof any Person is, or may be Chargeable by this
Act; together with the Assessments of the Respective Rates hereby Imposed on
each particular Person, according to the Rules and Directions hereof, without
Concealment, Love, Favor, Dread, or Malice, upon pain of Forfeiture of any
Sum not exceeding Five Pounds, to be Levied as by this Act is Appointed; and
shall also then Return the Names of Two or more able, and sufficient Persons
within the Bounds and Limits of those Parishes or Places, where they shall be
Appointed Respectively, as aforesaid, to be Collectors of the Money due to His
Majesty by this Act, for whose Collecting and Paying unto the Receiver, or
Receivers, to be Appointed by the said Commissioners for the Respective
Baronies in manner following: Such Money as they shall be Charged withal, the
Parish or Place by whom they shall be Employed, shall be Answerable; which
Certificate and Assessments, shall be Assertained, and Returned unto the
Commissioners, at, or before the Tenth Day of January, in the Year of Our Lord,
One thousand Six hundred Ninety seven, and upon the Delivery, or Returning in
of such Certificates, or Assessments, unto the said Commissioners, they or any
Two or more of them, shall forthwith Issue out, and Deliver their Warrants of
Estreats to such Collectors, as aforesaid, for the speedy Collecting and
Levying of the said Assessments, and all Moneys and Rates due thereupon,
according to the Intent and Directions of this Act, of which the said
Collectors are hereby Required to make Demand of the Parties themselves, or at
the places of their last Abode, within Six days after the Receipt of such
Warrants or Estrates; and to Levy and Pay in at such place, as the
Commissioners shall appoint unto the respective Barony Collector or Receiver,
and the respective Receivers are hereby Empowered and Required to call upon,
and hasten the Collectors to the said Payments; and in Default thereof, to Levy
by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of any Two or more of the Commissioners,
upon the respective Collectors by Distress, such Sum and Sums of Money as
they have Received, and as ought to have by them been paid, and are not paid,
by Reason of their Failure in doing their Duty respectively, according to the
Direction of this Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That a true Duplicate of
the whole Sum charged within every Barony, Hundred, Parish, Ward, Village and
place, Rated and Assessed pursuant to this Act, without naming the persons,
shall under the Hands and Seals of two or more of the Commissioners thereunto
appointed, be returned into His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, before the Eight
and Twentieth Day of February, One thousand Six hundred Ninety seven all
Appeals being first determined; and in like manner within Thirty days after
each of the days of the said Quarterly Payments; and the like Duplicates be
also in convenient time made out and delivered unto the Receiver-General, so as
every of them may be duly Charged to answer their respective Collections and
Receipts: And that the said several sums be paid in each County, to such
person or persons as shall be appointed by the Chief Governor, or Governors
of this Kingdom, for the time being, to that Purpose, Pursuant to this Act, of
which Appointment notice is to be given in Ten Days before the payment thereof
by Public Proclamation, to be Issued by such Chief Governor or Governors,
and that the payment of such sums in each County, to such person or persons so
to be appointed, and the Receipt under the Hands of such person or persons so
Authorized by such Chief Governor, or Governors, owning the Receipt of such
sum, shall be a sufficient Discharge to the County, or place from which the
same is Received; and as sufficient as any Exchequer Acquittance: And upon
return of any such Certificate or Assessment, the said Commissioners, or any
two or more of them, shall, and may (if they see cause) Examine the Presenters
thereof; and if the said Commissioners, or any two or more of them within their
several Limits, shall at the time of the Delivery of the said Certificates, or
within Twelve days after, have knowledge, or reasonable cause of suspicion,
that any person or persons who ought to be mentioned in the said Certificate,
is, or are omitted, or that any person or persons in the said Certificates
mentioned, is not, or are not fully and duly Charged according to the true
intent of this Act, the said Commissioners, or any two or more of them, shall
have Power to warn such person or persons to appear before them at a day and
place prefixed to be examined touching the premises or any matter which may
any-wife concern the same; and if the person or persons warned to be examined,
shall neglect to appear, not having a reasonable Excuse for such his Default,
every person so making Default, shall pay unto His Majesty double the Sum or
Rate he should, or ought to have been set at. And moreover, the said
Commissioners, or any two or more of them, shall have Power by any Lawful ways
and Means, to Examine and Enquire into all matters and things for, or by Reason
of which any persons are Chargeable by this Act, and to set such Rate or Rates
upon such persons, as shall be according to the true intent and meaning of this
Act. That the Collectors for each Parish, shall have Six pence in the Pound for
what Money, they shall pay to the Receiver of each Barony* or Hundred; and that
the Receiver, or Receivers for each Barony, or Hundred, shall have Four pence
in the Pound for what Money he or they shall pay to the Person or persons to be
appointed by the Chief Governor, or Governors, of this Kingdom, for the time
being, as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority foresaid, That the Presenters and
Assessors for each Parish within this Kingdom, for their Labor and Pains, and
performing their respective Duties in the due execution of this Act, shall
have, and receive Six pence for every Twenty shillings Sterling, they shall
Assess, and which shall be received by the Receiver, or Receivers of each
Barony, for which such Assessors, or Presenters shall be respectively appointed
as such in pursuance of this Act; to be paid by the several and respective
Receivers of the several Baronies: Which said payment of Six pence per pound,
as aforesaid, shall by the Receiver, or Receivers of the Barony, or County, be
allowed unto such Collectors, respectively, as good payment for so much; and
the said Collectors respectively, are hereby discharged from any Claim of His
Majesty touching the said Sum of Six pence, per pound. And to the end the said
Assessors, or Presenters may have the more regard to the due execution of their
Office, as Assessors, or Presenters, according to the true intent and meaning
of this present Act.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
before-named for the execution of this Act, or any Two of them, shall, and are
hereby Empowered and Required to Administer an Oath, to the respective
Assessors or Presenters of the several Parishes, respectively appointed them to
Assess in pursuance of this Act, That they will according to the best of their
understanding, truly perform the Office of Assessors, or Presenters, to them
respectively committed, without Concealment, Love, Favor, Partiality,
Expectation of Reward, Dread, Hatred, or Malice, according to the true intent
and meaning of this Act, And the said Assessors, or Presenters are hereby
Required before they enter into, or upon the execution of their Office, to take
the said Oath accordingly. And for the careful Writing and Transcribing the
said Warrants, Estreats and Duplicates in due time, and for making Certificates
upon Appeals.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
Clerks who shall respectively perform the same, shall by Warrant under three or
more of the Commissioners Hands, have and receive from the respective Person or
Persons who shall be appointed in each County, by the Chief Governor, or
Governors of this Kingdom, for the time being, as aforesaid, to Receive the
several Sums pursuant to this Act, three Pence in the pound, of all such
Moneys as they shall have received by Virtue of such Warrants and Estreats, who
are hereby appointed to pay the same accordingly.

And if any Person or Persons shall refuse to pay the several Sum and Sums,
and proportions appointed by this Act, for such Persons to pay, within the
space of Ten Days after Demand, or Notice left at the place of Residence, or
Dwelling of such Persons, by the Officer or Collector of the place, according
to the Precepts, or Estreats, to him Delivered by the said Commissioners; it
shall be Lawful to, and for such Officer, or Collector, who is hereby thereunto
Authorized and Required for Non-payment thereof to Distrain the Goods or
Chattles of such Person or Persons, and the Distress so taken, to keep by the
space of Eight days, at the Costs and Charges of the Owners thereof; and if the
said Owner does not pay the Sum of Money Due by this Act, within the said
Eight days, then the said Distress to be Apprai^^^ ^y Two or mo^e of the
Inhabitants, where the said Distress ^s Taken, and the^e to be Sold by the said
Officer, for payment of the said Money, and the Overplus coming by the said
Sale (if any be) over and above the Charges of Taking and Keeping the said
Distress to be immediately restored to the Owner thereof; And if any Person or
Persons Assessed by this Act, shall Refuse, or Neglect to pay the sum or sums
so Assessed, by the space of Ten Days after Demand, as aforesaid, where no
sufficient Distress can, or may be found, whereby the same may be Levied; in
every such Case, Three of the Commissiones by this Act appointed, for any such
City, County, or place, are hereby Authorized by Warrants under their Hands and
Seals, to commit such person or persons to the Common Goal, there to be kept
without Bail or Mainprize, until payment shall be made. And if any Person
certified Assessed, or Rated, find him, or herself agrieved with such
Assessing, or Rating, and do within Five Days after Demand thereof, make
Complaint to the said Commissioners, they, or any Three or more of them,
(whereof two shall be of the Commissioners who Signed, or Allowed, his, or her
Rate) shall, and may within Seven Days next after such Complaint, particularly
Examine the Party so Complaining, upon his, or her Oath, touching the same; and
upon due Examination, or Knowledge thereof, Abate, Defaulk, Increase, or
Enlarge the said Assessments; and the same so Abated, Increased, or Enlarged,
shall be Estreated by them into the Exchequer, in manner aforesaid. And to that
end, the said Commissioners are hereby Required to Meet together, for the
Determining such Complaints, and Appeals accordingly.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Person to be
Rated by this Act, shall be Rated at such place where he, or she, with his, or
her Family shall be Resident, at the time of the Execution of this Act. And
that every person not being a Householder, nor having a certain place for Abode;
and all Servants shall be Taxed at the place where they are Resident at the
time of the Execution of this Act. The Tax upon such Servants to be paid by
their respective Masters or Mistresses, and to be Deducted out of their Wages;
which Deduction the said Master or Mistress, is hereby Empowered to make.

Provided always, That if any person having several Mansion-Houses, or places
of Residence, shall be double Charged, by Virtue of this Act, that upon
Certificate made by Two or more of the Commissioners for the County, City, or
Place, which Certificate, the said Commissioners are hereby Required to give
without Delay, Fee, or Reward, of his, or her Personal Residence, under their
Hands and Seals, of the Sum or Sums there charged, upon him, or them, or in
what Capacity, or Respect, he or they were so Charged, and upon Oath made of
such Certificate, before any Justice of the Peace of the County, or place where
such Certificate shall be made; which Oath the said Justice of the Peace is
hereby Authorized to Administer; then the Person or Persons so doubly Charged,
shall for so much as shall be certified, be Discharged in every other County,
City or Place. And if any Person at the time of the Assessing, shall be out of
the Realm, such person shall be Rated where such person was last abiding within
the Realm; And if any person that ought to be Taxed by Virtue of this Act, by
changing his place of Residence, or by Fraud, or Covin, shall Escape from the
Taxation, and not be Taxed, and the same be proved before the Commissioners, or
any Two of them, or two Justices of the Peace of the County where such person
Dwells, or Resideth, at any time within Twelve Months next ensuing after such
Taxation made; every person that shall so Escape from the said Taxation, and
Payment, shall be Charged upon proof thereof, at the double Value of so much as
he should, or ought to have been Taxed by this Act, the said double Value upon
Certificate thereof made into the Exchequer, by the Commissioners, or Justices,
before whom such proof shall be made, to be Levied of the Goods, Chattles,
Lands and Tenements of such persons, toward the Supply aforesaid.

Provided always, That the Commissioners within any County, or place within
their respective Limits, or the major part of them, shall Tax, and Assess every
other Commissioner joined with them: And the Commissioners within their
Division, shall Assess every Assessor within their Division; and as well all
Sums upon every of the said Commissioners and Assessors, as the Assessments
Made and Presented by the Presenters, as aforesaid, shall be Written,
Estreated, Levied, and Gathered, as the same should, and ought to have been, if
the said Commissioners had not been Named Commissioners.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Assessor,
Collector, Receiver, or any other Person appointed by the Commissioners, shall
wilfully neglect, or refuse to perform his Duty in the due and speedy Execution
of this present Act, the said respective Commissioners, or any two or more of
them, may, and shall by virtue of this Act, have Power and Authority to commit
such Assessor, Collector, or Receiver to Goal, till he or they have done his,
or their Duty according to this Act; or to impose on such person or persons so
refusing or neglecting their Duties, any Fine not exceeding Twenty pounds for
any one Offense, at their Discretion; the same to be Levied and Certified as
aforesaid, into His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, and Charged upon the
respective Receivers amongst the rest of the rates aforesaid. And the said
Commissioners, or any two or more of them, may, or shall from time to time call
for, and require an Account from the respective Receivers, of all the Moneys
received by them, of the said Collectors, and of the payment thereof, according
to the direction of this Act; and in case of any failure in the premises, the
said Commissioners, or any two or more of them, are hereby required to cause
the same to be forthwith Levied and paid according to the true intent and
meaning of this Act: And in case of any Controversy arising between the said
Commissioners, concerning the said Rates or Assessments, the Commissioners that
shall be concerned therein, shall have no Voice, but shall withdraw during the
Debate of such Controversy, until it be determined by the rest of the
Commissioners; and in default thereof, that the Commissioners then present,
shall have power, and are hereby required to impose such Fine or Fines, as to
them shall be thought fit, upon such Commissioners so refusing to withdraw, not
exceeding Twenty pounds, and to cause the same to be Levied and Paid, as other
Fines to be imposed by virtue of this Act, are to be Levied and Paid; and all
Questions and Differences that shall arise touching any of the said Rates,
Taxes, Assessments, or Levies, and the Collecting thereof shall be heard and
finally determined by Three or more of the Commissioners, upon Complaint
thereof to them made by any person or persons thereby grieved, without further
Trouble or Suit in Law: And the said Receiver-General, his Deputy, or Deputies,
shall give acquittances Gratis, to the said Barony-Receivers, who shall
likewise give Acquittances Gratis, to the said Parish-Collectors, for all
Moneys of them respectively Received, in pursuance of this Act; which
Acquittances, shall be a full Discharge to said Collectors respectively: And
the said Collectors shall make, and deliver to the said Receivers-General,
their Deputy, or Deputies, a perfect Schedule, fairly written in Parchment,
under their Hands and Seals, Signed and Allowed by any two or more of the
respective Commissioners, containing the Names and Surnames and places of
abode, of every person within their respective Collection, that shall make
default of payment of any the Sums that shall be Rated or Assessed on such
person by virtue of this Act; and the Sum and Sums charged on every such
person, the same to be returned by him into His Majesty's Exchequer, whereupon
every such person making default of Payment, may be charged by Process of the
said Court according to the Course thereof in that behalf.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Letters Patents
Granted by the King, or late Queen's Majesty's, or any of their Royal
Predecessors, or to be Granted by His Majesty to any person or persons, Cities,
Buroughs, or Towns Corporate within this Realm, or any manner of Liberties,
Privileges, or Exemptions from Subsidies, Tolls, Taxes, Assessments, or Aids,
shall be construed, or taken to exempt any person or persons, City, Burough, or
Town Corporate, or any of the Inhabitants of the same from the Burden or
Charge of any Sum or Sums of Money Granted by this Act; and all Non-Obstantes
in such Letters Patents for any such purpose or intent, are declared to be void
and of none effect.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Constables,
Head-Buroughs, and other His Majesty's Officers, shall, and are hereby Required
and Enjoined to be respectively Aiding and Assisting in the execution of this
Act, and to obey and execute such Precepts, or Warrants as shall be to them
Directed in that behalf, by the respective Commissioners hereby appointed, or
to any two or more of them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action,
Plaint, Suit, or Information, shall be Commenced or Prosecuted against any
person or persons for what he or they shall do in pursuance, or in Execution of
this Act, such person or persons so Sued in any Court whatsoever, shall, or may
plead the General Issue, not Guilty, and upon any Issue joined, may give this
Act, and the Special Matter in Evidence, and if the Plantiff or Prosecutor
shall become Non-Sute, or forbear further Prosecution, or suffer
Discontinuance, or if a Verdict pass against him, the Defendant and Defendants
shall recover Treble Costs, for which they shall have the like remedy, as in
case where Costs by Law are given to the Defendant.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the respective
Parents, Guardians and Tutors of every person under the age of One and twenty
Years, shall upon Default of payment of such person, and upon demand pay what
is due, and payable by this Act, for every such person Residing in their
Family, or under their Tuition, as before herein is mentioned.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Money due, and
payable by this Act, shall be paid by the particular Collectors of the
respective Counties, Cities, Buroughs, Towns, Parishes and places, who shall
Collect the same unto the respective Barony Receivers, who shall pay the same
unto such Receiver, or Receivers as shall by their Excellencies the Lords
Justices, or other Chief Governor, for the time being, be appointed, as before
is mentioned.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the particular
Collectors for payment of any Sums by them received unto such Barony-Receiver
or Receivers, shall not be oblidged to Travel above Twenty Miles from the place
of their Habitation.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Receiver of
any Hundred, Barony, or Division, from time to time within the space of one
Month next after he shall have received the full Sum that shall be Charged
upon any Hundred, Barony, or Division, for each particular Quarterly Payments
that is to be made to such Receiver, by Virtue of this Act, shall give the
Commissioners who shall act in such Hundred, Barony, or Division, a Receipt
under his Hand and Seal, acknowledging his Receipt of the full sum Charged
upon such Hundred, Barony, or Division, for such particular payment; and the
Receipt of such Receiver, or Receivers, as shall be appointed by the Lords
Justices of this Kingdom, or other Chief Governor or Governors of this Realm,
for the time being, as aforesaid, to every Collector of any Barony, Hundred, or
Division, for so much of the said Assessments as shall be contained in such
Receipt, shall be a full Discharge to such Barony, Hundred, or Division,
against His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors. And for preventing such
Vexations, as might be occasioned by such Persons as shall be appointed to make
Returns of such person and persons as make default of payment of the sum or
sums on him, or them, Assessed by this Act. And to the intent, such person or
persons may Return true Account or Accounts into His Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, of such sum of Money as shall not be Received by them, and every of
them, their, and every of their Deputy, and Deputies.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any such person shall
Return, or Certify into the said Court, any Sum or Sums of Money to be in
Arrear, or Unpaid, after the same has been Received; such person or persons so
making such Return or Returns, or shall cause any person or persons to be Set
Insuper in the said Court, for any Sum or Sums of Money that has been so
Received, that then every such person or persons making such Returns. shall
forfeit to every person or persons that shall be Molested, Vexed or Damaged, by
reason of such unjust Certificate, return, or setting Insuper, treble Damages
that shall be thereby occasioned, the said Damages to be recovered by Action of
Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, in which no Essoin, Protection, or Wager of
Law shall be allowed, nor any more then one Imparlance; and shall also Forfeit
unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, double the Sum that shall be so
unjustly certified or returned, or caused to be set Insuper.

Provided always, That all Penalties and Forfeitures to be incurred for any
Offenses against this Act, for which there is no way for Levying herein before
Prescribed or Appointed, shall be Levied by Warrant of any Two or more of the
respective Commissioners of the Division or place, where any such Offense was,
or shall be committed, by Distress, and Sale of the Goods of the Offenders,
rendering the Overplus to the Owner thereof, after Deduction of reasonable
Charges for Distraining the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
in every County, at the General Meeting to be by them appointed, after all
Appeals shall be first determined, shall cause Duplicates of the whole sums
Charged within every Hundred, Barony, Ward, or place, Rated and Assessed in
such County, in pursuance of this Act, without naming the persons, to be fairly
Written in Parchment, and Assertained under Three or more of their Hands,
respectively to each Duplicate; and the same so by them Subscribed, and
Assertained, shall be jointly, and together delivered to the Sheriff of such
County, and be by him Transmitted to the Exchequer, at, or before the Twenty
eighth Day of February, in the Year of our Lord, One thousand Six hundred
Ninety seven.

Provided always, That no person shall be capable of Acting as a Commissioner
in the Execution of this Act, before he shall take the Oaths, and Subscribe the
Declaration appointed by this Act, (viz.)

YOU shall Swear, That you will duly Execute the Act, Entitled, An Act for
Granting a Supply to His Majesty, by Raising Money, by way of a Poll, as a
Commissioner according to your best Skill and Knowledge, without Favor or
Affection.

So help you God.
I A. B. do Sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful, and bear True
Allegiance to His Majesty King WILLIAM.

So help me God.
I A. B. do Swear, That I do from my Heart, Abhor, Detest, and Abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, that Damnable Doctrine, and Position, that Princes
Excommunicated, or Deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of ROME,
may be Deposed or Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do
Declare that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has or
ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence, or Authority
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm.

So help me God.
I A. B Do Solemnly and Sincerely in the presence of God, Profess, Testify and
Declare, that I do believe that in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, there is
not any Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and Wine, into the Body and
Blood of Christ, at, or after the Consecration thereof, by any Person
whatsoever: And that the Invocation, and Adoration of the Virgin MARY, or any
other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are now Used in the Church
of ROME, are Superstitious and Idolatrous. And I do Solemnly in the presence of
God, Profess, Testify and Declare, That I do make this Declaration, and every
part thereof in the Plain and Ordinary Sense of the Words Read unto me, as they
are commonly understood by Protestants, without any Evasion, Equivocation, or
Mental Reservation whatsoever; and without any Dispensation already Granted me
for this purpose, by the Pope, or any other Authority, or Person whatsoever, or
without Dispensation from any Person, or Authority whatsoever, or without
believing that I am, or can be Acquitted before God or Man, or Absolved of this
Declaration, or any part thereof, although the Pope, or any other Person or
Persons, or Power whatsoever should Dispense with, or Annul the same, or
Declare that it was Null and Void from the Beginning.

Which said Two last Oaths and Declarations, are the same Oaths and Declaration
intended also to be Administered to, and be Made and Subscribed by such (not
being Quakers) as already have not taken the said Oaths, and Subscribed the
said Declaration, to Excuse them from paying double, as aforesaid: Which Oaths
and Declaration, it shall, and may be Lawful for any Two, or more of the
Commissioners, to Administer, and take. And they are hereby Authorized and
Required to Administer, and take the same, to, and from any other Commissioner.
And in Case any Person Named a Commissioner, for putting in Execution this Act,
shall presume to act as a Commissioner before he shall have taken the said
Oaths, and Made, and Subscribed the said Declaration, he shall Forfeit to His
Majesty, the Sum of Two hundred pounds.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Householder
shall upon demand of the respective Assessors of the several Parishes, or
Places, give an Account of the Names and Qualities of such persons as shall
Sojourne or Lodge in their respective Houses, under the Penalty of forfeiting
to His Majesty the Sum of Ten pounds to be Levied and Recovered in such manner
as other Penalties in this Act mentioned, are to be Levied and Recovered.

And be it further Enacted, and Declared that wherever any person or persons
shall, or may be liable to be Taxed by virtue of this Act, in two or more
Qualifications or Capacities, and shall also be so Taxed, that such person
shall only pay in one of the said Capacities, or Qualifications, that is in
such Capacity, or Qualification, which is most Beneficial for His Majesty.

And be it further Enacted. That whereas there are several Sums of Money due
to the People of this Kingdom, for Debts Stated and unstated, due by the Army
for Quarters, before the Four and Twentieth of June, One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety Two, that whatsoever Sum or Sums of Money shall be raised, Levied or
Collected by virtue of this Act, over and above One Hundred Thousand Pounds,
Sterling, payable in the first place unto His Majesty, shall and may be Paid
and applied toward the Discharge of the said Country Debts, Stated and
Vnstated, in just and equal proportions, as the several Debts so due bear
proportion to the whole of the said Debts.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted That no Foreign Protestant
Refugee, nor any person who served as a Private Soldier in Londonderry, or
Eneskillen, during the late Seige of Londonderry, and all Common Soldiers in
His Majesty's Army, and Seamen in His Majesty's Fleet, all Matrosses in the
Train of Artillery, and all Protestants who shall come into this Kingdom after
the Sixth Day of November, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Seven, who have not
now any Estate, or Interest in this Kingdom, shall be wholly exempt from paying
any Sum whatsoever toward this present Poll.

And for as much great Abuses have formerly been Committed to the prejudice of
His Majesty in the execution of the former Poll Act, under pretense of
appealing against Assessments made, which Appeals having been once heard, and
the Commissioners not having relived the party. Appealing, but judging him not
to be Reliveable within the intention of the said Act, the said parties have
notwithstanding, been afterward Relived by other Commissioners of Appeals, who
have taken on them to reexamine the said Appeal formerly heard and determined.

Be it further Enacted, That no Appeal being once heard and determined, shall
be re-heard or Re-examined, nor any new Appeal be received for any matter, upon
which, or upon any part of which the said party has formerly Lodged his
Appeal, and been heard to the same.

FINIS.

