BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE CONFEDERATE CATHOLICS OF IRELAND.
IT is ordered, that any Commander, Captain or Officer whatsoever, that shall
(unless thereunto licenced of his or their Commander in Chief) refuse or
decline the service for the present supply of his Majesty into England, being
for the same designed or appointed, shall be for ever hereafter deemed
incapable of any employment from the public, and a man of no repute or
esteem in the kingdom: and shall be further committed to be punished
according to the Law of Arms. And all Soldiers now designed, and inlisted
under any Command for that expedition, shall not withdraw or run from such
their colors upon pain of death. Tertio Martij, 1645.

NICHOLAS PLVNCKET.

FInding not only the great care and sense expressed in the order here above
(which sufficiently demonstrates how zealous the assembly was to promote his
Majesty's service, and to preserve the honor of this Nation:) But that also,
in prosecution thereof, the Right Honorable the Supreme Council, resolved to
have the same printed: I asked leave in the same paper to subscribe this
addition, whereby it may under my hand appear, that by the providence of
Almighty God, there is now sufficient shipping not only already preparing to
carry above six thousand men (whereof five or six of the Ships are well stored
with Ammunition and Ordinance) but I also daily expect seven or eight (if not
ten) Frigots for a Convoy; the least of them Carrying eighteen pieces of
Ordinance, and one Ship of thirty six. And to the further, honor and praise of
God Almighties goodness and providence, there came yesterday several letters,
that Chester holds out yet gallantly, having beaten their enemy out of their
nearest works; and those parts together with it, expects only the Countenance
of this Army to beat the Enemies to King and Religion out of that Country:
Besides the same letters import that the Marquess of Montrosse has gotten a
great victory, and has taken and slain 400. of their horse, and that also a
certain expectation of an Army out of France to land in the other parts of
England, has caused the stoppage of men and shipping designed for this
kingdom. And it evidently appears that the three ships of burden and
strength which are now come into Waterford, occasioned the report that many of
the Enemies Ships appeared upon the Coast, threatening Duncanon: the falsehood of
which News makes it clearly evident, that the great noise was only bruited
by such who desired to deter those, whose Gallantry transports them to this
service, to the end that their pusilanimities might the less appear: But to
conclude, the above printed order does not threaten greater infamy or
punishment, then I in his Majesty's Name dare in England promise honor and
reward: and that if the great expenses I have already been at before I came
into this kingdom, and the incessant pains I have and do take in order to
the King my Masters service may gain favor at his hands, it shall be employed
in encouraging, securing, and advancing this Army: Esteeming their reward my
own, which (God willing) hereafter shall more appear by my actions then I
will now set forth by words: And avoiding further prolixity I will only attest
the verity of what is here set down by subscribing my name,

GLAMORGAN.

BY THE SVPREME COUNCIL.
It is ordered, that the above Order and Declaration, shall be forthwith
printed and published.

By command of the Council, R. Bellings.
Kilkenny 9. March 1645.

