DIEV ^ ET ^ MON ^ DROIT
CR
royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ESSEX.

COMPLAINT having been made at this Board, That diverse of His Majesty's good
Subjects have been very much grieved and molested, by reason of illegal
Warrants issued against them by some of his Majesty's Sheriffs and Justices of
Peace in this Kingdom, who sometimes have granted Warrants for apprehending the
Persons whose names are therein underwritten, by means whereof it has been in
the power of other persons, to add whose names they please thereunto, and to
give them trouble under color thereof, whereas all persons names, against whom
such Warrants are granted, ought to be expressed in the body thereof; and other
Warrants have been sometimes granted for bringing the persons against whom the
same are issued, before that Justice of Peace only who granted the Warrant who
lives often far, remote from the place where the persons are apprehended, in
cases where such Warrants may as well be granted for bringing such persons,
either before the Justice of Peace who granted the Warrant, or any other of His
Majesty's Justices of Peace of such County, and in some cases, Warrants have
also been issued by Justices of Peace only on pretente of debts, or other
duties pretended to be owing to the persons who desire such Warrants from them,
whereas the Justices of Peace have not by their Commission any Cognizance of
such Matters.

We the Lord Leiutenant and Council, for prevention of such trouble, as does or
may arise to His Majesty's Subjects by such illegal proceedings, do think fit
hereby to require and Command all His Majesty's Sheriffs and Justices of Peace
in this Kingdom, that they do from henceforth forbear the granting or issuing
any such Warrants. And we do hereby further declare, that in case any persons
shall find themselves aggrieved by any such illegal Actings of any of ^is
Majesty's Sheriffs or Justices of Peace in this Kingdom in their Office, that
they may for redress herein apply themselves either to this Board, or else to
His Majesty's Justices of Assize in their respective (...)ies from whom we
shall expect a particular account of such (...)ts and Justices of the Peace,
who shall appear (...)aded themselves in their respective Offic^^.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the 26th. day of April 1677. Ja:
Armachanus. Mich: Dublin. Canc. Thomond. Blesinton. Lanesborough. Hen Midensis.
R: Coote. Ca: Dillon: Cha^: Mered^^^ J: Poey. To: Booth. John Colc. Ja: Cuffe
VVm: Flow^^^ Abrah: Yarner.

God Save the King.
DUBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took Printer to the King's Most Excellent
Majesty; and are to be sold by Joseph Wild Bookseller in Castle-street. 1677.


