THE IMMORTALITY OF Man's Soul, PROVED BOTH BY SCRIPTVRE and REASON.

Contrary to the Fancy of R. O. In his Book Entitled Man's Mortality; wherein
he (vainly) affirms he has proved Theologically, and Philosophically,
that whole man is a compound wholly mortal, and that the present going of the
soul into Heaven or Hell is a mere fiction, and that at the Resurrection is
the beginning of our Immortality, and then actual Damnation or Salvation, and
not before.

LONDON, Printed by Peter Cole at the sign of the Printing-presse in
Cornehill, near the Royall-Exchange. 1645.

THE IMMORTALITY OF MAN'S SOVLE. Proved both by Scripture and Reason.
CHAP. 1. That Man consists of two parts, Soul and Body.
COncerning GOD, we are acknowledge him to be a Spirit, as touching the world,
we are to conceive of it as a body, in man we have an abridgment of both, of
God in respect of the Soul, of the world in composition of the Body, as though
the Creator on purpose to set forth a mirror of all his works, intended to
bring into one little compass, both the infiniteness of his own nature; and
also the hugeness of the whole world together, after his own Image in respect
of his soul, after his other creatures in respect of life, sense and moving,
mortal so far as he holds forth the Image of the creature, immortal so
far as he holds forth the Image of GOD his Creator.

This

1 No creature can work out of his own proper sphere, how can man if totally
mortal conceive of immortality, can mortality comprehend immortality? as
probably as a man may throw a stone and knock down the sun which is far
above his sphere. The beasts mind altogether the earth they eat when they are
hungry drink when they are dry and go when they are beaten and regard their
Creator no more then they do the clock when it strikes. The fish live in the
water as the beasts upon the earth because they are aqueall the other terrene,
neither rational and therefore cannot work above their sphere, but man
conceives not only the things of this world, but also of a better, immortality,
glory eternity, therefore must needs have something in him that is immortal. Who
is he that desires not to be immortal? how can he desire it unless he know
what it is? how can he know what it is unless he have something in him
immortal? none of us covers to be beginninglesse, bcause none of us are so,
neither can be so and because we are not so, we can not comprehend what it is,
for who can conceive of eternity without beginning, but he will end his Wits
before his desires? but on the contrary there is not so base a mind upon earth
which coveteth not to live for ever, in so much that whereas we look not for
it by nature we seek to obtain it by skill and policy, some by books, some
by images, and some by other devices, and even the ignorantest sort of people
can well imagine in themselves what immortality is, and are able both to
conceive it and believe it; but the wisest and learnedest man alive, should he
live as long as Mathusalah, and study what it is to be with out beginning all
his life time, he must at last yield to death without fulfilling or filling
full his desires; whence comes this? but that our souls being created, cannot
conceive an everlastingnesse without beginning yet being created immortal can
well conceive an everlastingnesse or immortality without end.

Let us yet wade a little deeper, who can dispute, or once so much as doubt
whether the soul be Immortal or no, but he that is capable of Immortality? or
who can understand a difference between mortal and immortal but he that is
immortal? Though they shall rise again as well as man, says R O. treat of
Mortality. page 50.
can a * horse, an ox, a dog? no, why? because thy are mortal, and can reach
no higher than mortality Immortality is out of their Sphere, out of their
Element, as the Proverb is, Man is able to conceive what is reason, and what
is not; and by that we term him rational, Man knows a difference betwixt
Mortality, and Immortality; and therefore must needs be immortal: for to what
end should God teach Immortality to a mortal wight.

If a man should hold an argument, that man is not rational, and dispute it,
he needs other confutation then his own arguments: so he that disputes that
the soul is mortal, his own reasoning of it, shall to a wise man prove it
immortal.

Secondly, it is plainly proved, Constantinople, then at Rome, at Paris, at
Lions, in America, in Afric, and dispatch all these journies in a trice,
look wheresoever thou directest it, there it is, and before thou call it
back, it is at home, while the body all this time is at home at work, or
perhaps in bed; therefore the soul and body are two different parts: nay, the
soul may, and often does mind and desire good, when the body is acting sin,
Romans 7.23.24, 25 I find a law in my members warring against the law of my mind
(or soul) and bringing me into captivity, to the law of my members, but was
it his body that warred against his mind, and brought it into captivity? read
the next verse, you shall see, O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? or this body of death, as the margin more truly
has it, this mortal body. So then (says he) with my mind I will serve the
Lord, but with my flesh the law of sin: thus it plainly appears, the soul and
body are two different parts.

Thirdly, decay of the body, by growing of the soul I mean, (mistake me not)
not that it increases or diminishes, it is capable of neither, but its
profiting in power and virtue; again, if the soul were the body or any part
of it, it would languish with the body: he that is wounded in his body, would
be wounded in his understanding, as well as in his members: he that is sick of
any disease, should also be sick in his reason: he that limpeth or halteth,
should halt in his reason also; the blind man's soul should be blind, and the
lame man's lame; but the contrary appears, the maimed, the sick, the cripples,
the blind, have their understanding clear sighted, their reason sound, their
discourse vigorous, and their soul safe and sound; on the other side, many a
man dies, whose body is sound, and differs not a whit in any part, from what
it was when he was living, anatomize him, the quickest eyed Chyrurgian shall
see, nor perceive no cause of his death, outward nor inward, nor failing of any
particular, to cause it, and yet life, motion, sense, and understanding, are
out of it, we may say then (if we are not wilfully blind, for none so blind as
he that will not see) that there was something in the body, that was not of the
body, that was a far other thing then the body.



I answer, it cannot be said, that a Child's soul grows, or is strengthened by
time, but rather his nerves, or sinews are hardened and strengthened, which the
soul uses as strings and instruments to move withal, R O. treat of
Mortality, p. 19. where he pleases himself with the merry conceits of his
own fancy, which he does in many other places of that treat.
or or act by; and therefore when age weakneth them, a man uses a staff to
help them with, though he have as good a will to run, as he had when he was
young, you may often hear a decrepid old man boast and talk of the valorous
acts of his youth, he desires to be doing the same then, for out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: The soul then which moves all at
one beck, has the self same power in infancy, that it has in age, and the
same in old age, that it has in the flower of youth, the fault is only in the
instrument, which is unable to execute the operation thereof, the skilfulnesse
of a Musician is not diminished by the slacknesse, hardness, or moystnesse of
his Lutestrings, nor increased by the goodness, curious setting or straining
of them, only in the one he cannot show his cunning, in the other he may show
it more or less.

Likewise, the speech of Children comes with their teeth, howbeit the speech
does manifestly utter it self first, in that they prattle many things, which
they cannot pronounce, and in old men it goes again with their teeth, and yet
their eloquence is not abated thereby, as in Demosthenes, though he surmounted
all the Orators of his time, yet there was some Letters he could not pronounce,
give unto old age, or infancy the same sinews and teeth, and as lusty and
able limbs, and members as youth has, and the actions which the soul does
with the body, and by the body, (I mean so far forth as concern the
abilities of sense and liveliness) shall be performed, as well in one age, as
in another: Be but as impartial in judging of the force and power of thy own
soul, as of the skilfulnesse of a Lute-player, (I say not by the nimblenesse
of his fingers, which may perchance be knotted with the Gout, but by the
sweetness of his Harmony, which plainly shows, that he has cunning in his
head, though he can show it no more with his hands) so as thou would
consider how thou have in thy self a desire to go, though thy feet are not
able to bear thee, a discretion to judge of things that are spoken, though
thine ears cannot convey it to thee, a sound eloquence though for want of
teeth (or any other impediment) thou art not able to express it; and which is
above all, a substantial, quick and heavenly reason, even when thy body is
most debile, infirm, weak, crazie, earthly, sick and drooping: Thou would
soon conclude, that the force and power, of quickening, moving, and perceiving,
is whole and sound in thy soul, and that the default is only, and altogether
in thy body: in so much, that if thy soul had a new body, and new instruments
given to her, it would be as lusty, and as cheerful as ever it was, and the
more it perceives the body to decay, the more it retireth, or labors to
retire to it self, the more active the thoughts are of another being, of a
better being, of an eternal being, which is a plain proof that it is not the
body, nor any part of the body, but the very life, and inworker of the body.

Fourthly, unless man have in him a soul (or something else) that is
immortal, there can be no resurrection: This I shall prove by solid reason,
though R. O. hale in the contrary, to make up the number of his absurdities:
for if the soul dye with the body, or if there be no soul at all, and man all
body, and so reduced to the prima materia, how can there be a resurrection?
there may be a new Creation, if you please; the first was a Creation, the
matter is the very same, that it was before the Creation: Ergo, the work the
very same, viz. a new Creation, see it by the example of the Creation of the
world, a fit parallel for R. O. 2 Pet. 3.10. The day of the Lord will come as a
Theife in the night, in which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise,
and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also, and the works
that are therein shall be burnt up, and verse. 13. nevertheless, we according
to his promise look for a new heaven and a new earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness. What? will God raise up the Heaven and Earth, Sun, Moon, and
Stars again out of the Chaos? will he make a Resurrection of the world? no,
no, man, they are brought, to the prima materia, this is work for a Creation,
not a Resurrection, Esaias 65.17. Behold, I create new Heavens, and a new Earth,
etc.

See it by the Apostle Paul's own Comparison, 1 Cor. 15.36, 37. Thou fool that
which thou sowest is not quickened, except it dye, and that which thou sowest,
thou sowest not that body which shall be, but bare grain, etc. If this grain
have not in it a vital spirit, a growing a spirit, a resuscitative spirit, a
spirit of life, it cannot grow, it is true, the terrene part of it dies, but
the vital part lives, and give a Resurrection (if I may so call it) to another
Plant of the same kind: Take an Oak Tree that is dead and rotten, set in the
ground, it will not grow while the world stands. Take an A corn, set that in
the ground, it will grow: why will that, and not the other? because there is
spirit in that which dies not, but causes life to the terrene part of it,
which dies, and consumes; whereas the other has none. So if man have no
immortal spirit in him, here is no place for a Resurrection, it must be an
absolute Creation (if any thing) that gives him life again, but the whole
current of Scripture, hold forth a Resurrection and therefore man has something
in him immortal.

In the fifth place I might prove that man has an immortal spirit, incapable
of death, by the testimony of the ancient Heathen, far ancienter (many of them)
then Plato, which also is a rational proof of a point; for what the God of
nature has taught to all men by nature, is, and must needs be a truth.

But the God of nature has taught all men by nature, that there is a God, that
they have an immortal spirit, therefore it is a truth.

I do not say he has taught it some one man, or some one nation, but the
whole world, the Universality of it shows it to be of God: The Devil teaches
not all nations, one and the same particular sin, but different according to
the constitution of the climate they live in, else he would loose his labor,
and that he knows well enough, he has taught it by nature: for those nations
that never heard what grace was, hold and confess, and leave to posterity this
truth: all men universally, and particularly have learned it in one School
from the mouth of one Teacher, and he perfect, therefore a truth.

The holy Scripture which teaches us our salvation, uses no Schoole-arguments
to make us believe there is a God, and why so? because we find him present in
his works, neither to prove this point, which shines so clear in nature.

Both Greek and Latin Authors have plentifully left it to posterity.

Phocylides.
(...).
The soul is immortal, and lives perpetually; and never waxes old. And
again, (...).
(...).


The remainder of dead men, remains void of death.

If you ask him the cause of this, he will answer you in another verse, thus
(for he was a rational man) (...).


Sybilla.
The soul is Gods Instrument, and Image in mortal men. Hitherto comes that of
the Sybill.

(...).
Man by all reason is endued with the Image of God; of the same opinion also
were Orpheus, Theognis.

Piadar. in the second song of his Olympiads. Homer in the funerals of his
Iliads Herm. in his Paenander. ^ page 10.
Homer, Hesiod, Pindarus, and all the Poets of old time, which may answer for
themselves, and their Countries, and for the residue of their ages.

Hermes says, the soul is the garment of the mind, and the garment of the
soul, is a certain spirit whereby it is united to the body, and this mind is
that which we call properly the man, that is, a heavenly wight, not to be
compared to the beasts, but rather to the gods of heaven, if it be not yet more
then they, the heavenly cannot come down to the earth without leaving the
heaven, but man measures the heaven without removng from the earth: to be
short, his conclusion is that man is double, mortal as touching his body,
immortal as touching his soul, which soul is the very man, and created of God
(says he) as the light is bred immediately of the sun.

And Chalcidins says, that at his death he spoke these words, I go home
again into mine own country where my better Forefathers and kindred be.

Zoroastres, who is of more antiquity then Hermes, this article is reported to
be one of his, that men's souls are immortal, and that one day, there shall be
a general rising again of their bodies, and the answer of the wise men of
Chaldea (Who were the heirs of his doctrine) do answer sufficiently for him.

There is one that exhorts men to return with speed to their heavenly
father: Who has sent them a soul endued with much understanding.

Another exhorts them to seek Paradise, as the peculiar dwelling place of
the soul.

A third says, that the soul has God as it were shut up in it, and that it
has not any mortality therein, for (says he) the soul is as it were drunken
with God, and shows forth his wonders in the harmony of this mortal body.

A fourth says it is a clear fire proceeding from the power of the heavenly
father, an incorruptible substance, and the maintainer of life, containing
almost all the whole world with the full plenty thereof in his bosom.

But one of them proseedeth yet further, affirming that he that sets his
mind upon Godliness, shall save even his body, though it be never so frail:
and by those words he acknowledges the very glorifying of the body.

All these are reported by Psellus, and he confesses that Plato and Pythagoras
learned the doctrine of the souls Immortality of the Caldeans, in so much that
some think the Caldeans are those that Plato speaks of, Lil. Legum 11. ep. 2.
when he says, that the ancient and holy Oracles are to be believed, which
affirm men's souls to be immortal, and that in another life, they must come
before a Judge that will require an account of all their doings, the result
whereof comes to this, that the soul of man proceeds immediately from God,
that is to say; that the father of the body is one, and the father of the soul
is another; that the soul is not a bodily substance, but a spirit and a light,
that at the departure thereof from hence, it is to go to a Paradise, and
therefore ought to make haste unto death and that it is so far from mortality,
that it makes even the body Immortal: what can we say more at this day, even
in the time of light wherein we live of the same opoinion was Hordelitus, as is
reported by Philolaus.

Clement. of Alexandria.
Of Epicharmus we have this saying, if thou be a good man in thy heart, death
can do thee noe harm, for thy soul shall live happily in heaven:

It were endless to recite all the words of the ancient about this subject,
conifiming this truth, for of this opinion were Thales, Anaxagoras, Diogenes,
and Zeno, Lucretius, Socrates, Xenophon, read Plato his Timaeus, his
commonwealth, his Phadon, his Politics, his laws, Aristotle his books of
living things, of the soul his morralls, Michael of Ephesus upon his morrals,
Cicero his Tusculaves, his Comforts, his nature of the gods; his first book of
laws, his Scipios dream, Seneca to Gallio, to Lucillius, concerning the Lady
Martiaes son, the shortness of his life, his book of comforts, Prophririus 4.
book of abstinence, Plutarke, these ancient.

For modern Philosophers, Epictetus, Simplicius, Plotinus, lib. 1. Aenead. 4.
concerning the being of the soul lib. 2. Chapter 1. lib. 3. Chapter 18. 14.
20. 21. 23. lib. 4. Chapter 11. and the 7. Book throughout, his book of the
senses and memory, his Bk. of doubts concerning the soul, these and thousands
more confirm the point though they differ in circumstance, that man consists
of two parts, viz. a body and a reasonable and immortal soul, and where they
had this notion I showed before

CHAP. 2. Of the Abilities; Or Faculties of the Soul,
IN the inward man, we have a sum of whatsoever life, sense, moving, is in
all creatures and moreover a shadow of the godhead it self, and that is the
thing we have to examine in this Chapter.

In plants we perceive that besides the bodies which we see, there is also an
inward virtue which we see not, whereby they live, grow, bud, and bear fruit,
which we call the quickening virtue and it makes them to differ from stones,
and mettalls, which have it not.

In sensitive things, we find the very same virtue, whch works while they
sleep, and are after a sort as plants, and there withal we find another sort
of virtue or power, which sees, hears, smells, tastes and feelleth, which
also in many of them does hord up the things brought in by the senses, which
manner of power the plants are void of; this we call the sensitive virtue,
because the effects there of are discerned and executed by the senses.

In man we have both the quickening and sensitive the former uttering it self
in the nourishing and increasing of him and the latter in the subtilty of
sense, and imagination, through which he has both quickening and sensitive
life together: but moreover he has a mind, which reapeth profit by the things
brought in by the senses, which by his seeing conceives the things it sees
not; which of that which is not, gathers that which is, which elevateth the
thoughts from the earth and earthly things, yea, and after a sort from himself
too, this we call the reasonable soul, and it is the thing that makes man to
be man, and not a plant or a bruit beast as the other two do.

But by the way, whereas I say, that the inward man has a quickening power as a
plant has, a sensitve qower as a beast has, and a powe of understanding
whereby he is man, my meaning is not that he has three souls but only one
soul, that like as in a bruit beast the sensitive soul comprehends the
quickening soul; so in man the reasonable soul comprehends both sensitive, and
quickening, and excecuteth the offices of them all three, all at one and the
same time, it both hears, sees, smells, reasons, at one and the same
time: the mind of a man will intend his own household affairs, the affairs of
the commonwealth, and heavenly things all at once.

Or to speak more fitly, these three degrees are three degrees of life,
whereof the second exceeds and contains the first, the third exceeds and
contains both the other two, the one, without which the body cannot live, is
the vegetable, and is so tied to the body that it shows not it self in any
wise out of it, the second which cannot live without the body is the life of a
beast, a sensitive life, which does well manifest its power abroad, but yet
not otherwise, but by the members and instruments of the body, whereto it is
tied, the third which can of it self live without the body; but not the boby
without it, is the rational soul of man, which gives life inwardly to all
his parts, and deliniaments, shows forth his life abroad in perceiving all
things, subject to sense, and retains still his force (as we showed before)
yea and increases it, even when the strength of the body: yea and the very
livelynesse thereof does fail, you shall see a man forgo all his senses one
after another, as the instruments of them decay, and yet still have life
untovched and reason qvick, the reason is, the instruments of life fail, but
life it self which quickens them fails not, whereby its aparent that in this
soul of man (which notwithstanding is but one) there are diversities of power,
abilityes and faculties, the quickening power, does nourish, increase, and
maintain us, and reason nor sense meddle not with it, neither have they power
to impeach the working thereof: the truth of this appears, in that these things
are best done when our mind is at rest, and our senses a sleep, in so much that
oftentimes we forgo the sense and moving of some parts, by some rhume, or some
palsy, and yet some parts cease not to be nourished still, also the sensitive
life sees and perceives a far off, yea often times without setting the mind
thereupon, or without considering what the sense conceives, some men which have
but weak senses, have very quick understandings, and on the contrary, again
some fall into a consumption, which want not the parfect use of their senses,
sometimes the reasonable part is so bent and occupied, about the things that it
likes of, that by the increasing of it self, it hurts and diminishes, the
part of it quickneth: Also it stands in argument against the senses, and
reproves them of falsehood, and concludes contrary to their information, and
it may be the man that has his digestion good, and his senses sound, not his
wit and reason, sound in like Case, now were the soul but only one faculty it
could not be, so but now it is divided manifestly into wit, or understanding,
and will, the one serving to device, the other to execute, for we understand
many things which we will not, and we will diverse things which we understand
not, which conttary operations, cannot be atributed to one power,
nevertheless the uniting of these powers is with that distincknesse, and the
distinguishing of them with that union, that ordinarily they meet altogether in
one and the same action, the one of them (in all liklyhood) as readily as the
other, howbeit every one of them does his own proper work severally by
himself, and one before another in respect of their objects.

CHAP. 3. Of the Essence of the Soul.
IT is not enough to know we have a soul, say some, whereby we live, feel,
and understand, etc. and which being but one, has in it self alone, so many
powers, faculties, and abilities, but it will be demanded, what this soul is:
and truly, if I should say I cannot tell what it is, I should not belly my
self, I should but confess mine own ignorance, as many learned men have done
before me, and I should do no wrong at all to the soul it self, since we
cannot deny the effects of it; and truly, in my opinion, the less we are able
to define the nature, and being thereof, the more does the Excellency thereof
shine forth, and appear, the dullness of the understanding is such by the fall
of man in Adam, that it cannot conceive of the nature of spirits affirmatively,
but by the effects, or negatively, and those that went about to define it, ran
into many errors and absurdities; yet it follows not, that man has no soul;
were it not a worthy and learned Argument, for a man to reason thus: I know not
what the soul is, therefore there is none, or the learned differ in the
definition of it; therefore there is none: its just, as if a man should say, I
know not where the Indies are; therefore there are none; since it is so then,
it needs no long scanning, 1 Soul not a quality but a substance.
whether it be a substance or a quality; for qualities have no being but in
another thing then themselves; the soul which causes another thing to be,
cannot be a quality; for as much as the soul makes man to be man, who
otherwise were but a carkeis, or carrion; therefore we must needs grant, that
the soul is a forming substance, and substantial form; yea, and a most
excellent substance, infinitely passing the outward man, which by the power and
virtue thereof, causes another thing to have being, and perfecteth the bodily
substance, which seems inwardly to have so many perfections.

Secondly, as the soul is a substance, not a quality, 2 Vnbodily.
so it is a substance unbodily, incorporiall. 1. If we consider if they be
greater then it, without annoying one another, to be short if the thing be
less then the body that contains it, the whole body shall not contain it,
but some part of it only, and if it be greater, some part must needs be out,
for there is no measuring of bodies but by quantity, but we see our soul
comprehends heaven and earth, without annoying either other, and also time
past, present and to come, without troubling one another: and also innumerable
places, persons and towns, without cumbering our understanding, great things
are there in their full bigness, and small things in their utmost smalnesse,
both of them whole and sound, in the soul whole and sound, and not by
peice-meale, or only in part of it: Moreover the fuller it is, the more it is
able to receive; the more things are couched in it, the more it still coveteth,
and the greater the things be, the fitter is it to receive it, even when they
be at the greatest. It follows therefore, that the soul (which after a sort
is infinite) cannot be a body, and so much the less can it be so, for that,
whereas it harbors so many and so great

Secondly, a body cannot be in diverse places at once, nor cannot pass without
removing, but the soul as a thousand places may be in it, without occupying
any places, so is the mind in a thousand places without changing place, and
that not by succession of times, nor by turns, but often times altogether at
one instant, as we showed in the first chapter, now there is not a body, that
is or can be ubiquitary, or in diverse places at once, it is against the nature
of a body, all bodily motion requires time, yea and such time, as within a
little over or under is proportioned both to its place, and to the length of
its way it has to go, then it is certain that our soul is not a bodily
substance, which thing appears so much the more plainly, that it being
lodged within this body, which is so movable, it removes not with the body.

3 Also it is a sure ground, that two bodies cannot mutually

Fourth. That the soul is no bodily substance is manifest, it is requisite that
it be clear of all shape, of all color, of all savor of its own, and that a
thing may in understanding, know and conceive all bodies, as our soul does,
it is requisite that it be altogether bodilesse it self, for had it any
bodilinesse in it, it could not receive any body into it, without marring or
altering it self or the other, for if you look nearly into the nature of a
body, you shall find that no body receives into it the substantial form of a
another body without altering or loosing its own, or the other, neither can
pass from one form to another, without marring the first, as is plainly to be
seen in wood, when it receives fire, in seeds, when they spring forth into
buds, and so in other things, what is to be said, then of man's soul which
receives, and conceives the forms and shapes of all things, with out
corrupting its own, and morover becomes the perfecter by the more receiving,
for the more it receives, the more it understands, and the more it
understands, the more

Fifthly, if it be a bodily substance, from whence is it, or of what mixture is
it; if of any, then of the Elements, if of the Elements, how can that give
life, which has none in it self; how can that give understanding, that has
no sense; that diverse things that have no being of themselves, should give
being to another, or be made a thing that has a being? that of diverse
outsides should be made one body, or of diverse bodies, one soul; or of
diverse darknesses one light, of diverse deaths one life; surely this one
absurdity is able to countervail and outweigh all those 69. in R. O. his
treaties of man's Mortality, by this it plainly appears, that he which made the
mixture of these bodies, has for the perfecting our body (beyond nature)
breathed a soul into it, to be short, the property of a body is to suffer, the
property of a soul is to do, and if the body be not put forth, by some other
thing then it self, it is a very block, whereas the soul which is in our
body, cease not to stir up and down, though it have nothing to move it from
without, therefore it is to be concluded fom these reasons (and the like that
might be alleged) that the soul is a substance incorporeall, unbodily,
notwithstanding it be united to our bodies.

Thirdly, as our soul, is a substance unbodily, 3 Immateriall.
so is it unmateriall, likewise, and that appears, first because matter
receives not any form or shape, but according

Secondly, no matter receives contrary forms at once, but our soul
comprehends and receives them together, as fire and water, heat and cold,
white and black, and not only together, but also better by laying and matching
of them together.

Lastly, to be short, it appears, that the soul is not material, seeing the
more we depart from matter, the more we understand, surely there is nothing
more contrary to the substance of the soul then the nature of matter, then is
this reasonable soul of ours neither a bodily nor a material thing, nor
depending upon matter in the best action thereof, then must needs be of it
self, and not proceed from body, or matter, for what can a body bring forth
but a body, and matter but matter, and materials but materials; and therefore
the soul is an unmateriall substance, which has being of it self.

4 Imomrtall and incorruptible. Plutarke, de sera ^uminis vindicta tractat.
Fourthly, the soul as it is a substance, incorporeall, immateriall, so is it
incorruptible, and immortal, Plutarke says, it is in vain to dispute
thereof: for says he, the doctrine of Gods providence and that of the
immortallity of the soul are so lincked together, that take away the one the
other follows, (God grant that experience prove not Plutarkes words true, in
some now living) for, says he, to what purpose was the world created, if there
were no body to behold it? or to what end, behold we the creatures in the world
but to serve him? and why should we serve upon no hope? and to what end has
he endewed us with these rare gifts of his, which for the most part do but put
us to pain and trouble in this life, if we perish like the bruit beasts, which
know not God.

But because all are not of Plutarkes mind, we will see if we can satisfy the
contrary minded, by reason, for the better satisfying of those who take not so
much pains as to enter into themselves, I shall endeavor to paint out to
them, their right shapes, by lively reason, which they have defaced by
ignorance, and therefore now to the purpose.

is the mind, why then should we think that the thing which becomes the
stronger, by the weakness of the body, and which is advanced by the decay of
the body, should perish to dust with the body? a man's seeing fails, because his
eyes fail, but the blind man's understanding increases, because his eyes are
not busied, and the old man's reason becomes more perfect, by the loss of his
sight, and therefore why say we not, that the body failleth the soul, but the
soul fails not the body, that the glasses are out of the spectacles, but the
eyes good still.

Man's mortality page 13.
says R.O. the part or member is endowed with the faculty, and so seeing is in
the eye naturally, and really, and not the soul sees by the eye, and hearing
locally in the ear, and so common sense, judgment and memory locally adherent
to, and inherent in their places, and he proves it, with this frigid
argument: because if the member be perished the sense falls.



Also I pproved before, that the soul is not the body, nor any part of the
body, seeing then it is so, why measure we that by the body, which measures al
bodies, or make that to dye with the body, whereby the bodies that died many
hundred years ago, do after a certain manner live still, or who can hurt
that thing, whom nothing hurts or hinders in that body? though a man loose
an arm, yet does his soul remain whole still, let a man forgo the one half
of his body, yet is his soul as sound as before, for it is united in its own
substance, and by the force and power of its self, it sheddeth it self into
all parts of the body, though the body rot a way by piece meal, yet abides
the soul whole and undiminished, let the blood drain out, the moving wax
weak, the strength perish, yet abides the mind sound, and lively, it never
forsakes its lodging, till there be no room left for it to lodge in, when our
senses are overcome by death, then it does most labor to surmount it self,
working as goodly and Godly actions at that time when the body is at point to
fail it, yea and oftentimes more godly too, then ever it did while the body
was in health, as for example, it takes order for it self, for our household,
for the commonwealth, for a whole kingdom, and that with more uprightness,
goodness, wisdom and modration, then ever it did before, yea and perchance
in a body so far spent, so bare, so consumed, so withered without, and so
putrified within, that he that looks upon him sees nothing but earth, and yet
to hear him speak would ravish a man up to heaven, now when a man sees so
lively a soul in so weak and wretched a body, may he not from reason
conclude, as is said in hatching of chickens, the shell is broken, but there
comes forth a chicken.

Secondly, for proof that the soul is immortal, see what is the ordinary
cause that things perish; fire either goes out for want of nourishment, or is
quenched by his contrary water: water is resolved into air by fire, which is
his contrary: the cause why the Plant dies, is extremity of cold, or drought,
or unseasonable cutting, or violent plucking up; also man's body dies by
increasing, or diminishing the humors called complexion, or by violence; of
all these causes which can we choose to have any power against our soul? I say
against the soul of man, which (notwithstanding it be united to matter to a
body) is it self a substance unbodily, unmateriall, and only conceivable in
understanding; nay, what can be contrary to that which lodges contraries
equally in it self? which understands the one of them by the other, which
coucheth them all under one skill; and to be short, in which the contrarieties
themselves abandon their contrariety; so as they do not pursue, but ensue one
another.

Fire is hot, and water is cold, Contrarieties cannot kill the soul.
our bodies mislike these contraries, and are grieved by them, our mind linketh
them together, without either burning or cooling it self, and it sets the
one of them against the other to know them the better, the things which destroy
one another throughout the world, maintain one another in our minds, nothing
is more contrary to peace then war; and yet man's mind can maintain peace by
preparing for war, and lay earnestly for war in seeking for peace; even death
it self which dispatcheth our life cannot be contrary to the life of the
soul; for the soul seeks life by death; what can the soul meet withal, in
the whole world that can be contrary to it? which can enjoyne obedience to
things most contrary; contrarieties then cannot do it.

Nor want of food.
What then, can want of food? How can that want food in the world, which can
feed on the whole world, or how can that forsake food, which the fuller it is,
the hungrier it is; the more that it has digested, the better able it is to
digest; the more it has, the more it desires; take from it the sensible
things, and the things of understanding abide with it still; bereave it of
earthly things, and the heavenly remain with it the more abundantly: to be
short, a bridge it of al worldly things; yea, and of the world it self, and
even then does it feed with greatest ease, and makes cheer agreeable to its
own nature.

Also, the body fills it self to a certain measure, and delights in some
certain things; but what can fill the mind? fill it as full as you can with
the knowledge of things, and it is the more eager, and sharper set to receive
more; the more it takes in, the more it still craveth; and yet for all that it
never feels any rawnesse, it never catches a surfit for want of concoction;
what shall I say more, discharge your understanding from minding it self, and
then does it live in him, and of him, in whom all things do live; again, fill
it with the knowledge of it self, and then does it feel it self most empty,
and sharpest set upon the desire of the other; now then can that die for want
of food, which cannot be glutted with any thing, which is nourished and
maintained with all things; and which (in very deed) lives upon him, by whom
all the things which we wonder at here beneath are upheld. Nor violence.


Well, violence (you will say) perhaps may do the deed; what is violence, but
a justling of two bodies together, but the soul is no body, nor bodily
substance, as I proved before, can there be any violence between a bodily, and
spiritual substance or between two sprituall substances; seeing that
oftentimes when they would destroy one another, they uphold one another; and if
the soul cannot be pushed at; neither inwardly, nor outwardly; is there any
thing in nature, that can naturally hurt it?

No! will some say?

I omit that in most of these, you would say reach us the hand, to draw us to
the attainment thereof; as for them that are dim-sighted, we forbid them to
look upon the things that are over-bright; but for them of rawest capacity,
we offer them the things that are most intelligible; when the sense begins
to perceive most sharply, then is it feign to give over; as if it felt the
very death of it self, contrary wise, where the mind begins to understand,
then is it most desirous to hold on still; and whence arises this, but that
our senses work by bodily Instruments, our mind works by a bodilesse
substance, which needs not the help of the body; and seeing that the nature,
the nourishment, and the actions of the soul are far different, not only
from the nature, nourishment and actions of the body, but also from all that
either is done, or wrought by the body: can there be any thing more childish,
then for us to demee our souls to be mortal, by the abating and decaying of
our senses, or by the mortality of our bodies? nay, contrariwise, it may be
most soundly, and substantially concluded thereupon, that man's soul is of its
own immortal; seeing that all death as well violent, as natural, comes of
the body, and by the body.

Thirdly,

We have already proved the soul to be the form, and the body must needs be
the matter then, and the separation of the soul from the body, is commonly
called death: now then what death can there be of the soul, seeing it is
immateriall, death must work upon a matter, or nothing; for (as one says) a
man may take away the roundnesse, or squarnesse of a table of copper, because
they have no abiding, but in the matter, but had that or any thing else, such a
round, or square form, as might have abiding without matter, or stuff wherein
to be; out of all doubt, such a form or shape should continue for ever; nay,
which is more, how can that be the corrupter, of a thing, which is the
perfection thereof? the less our minds are tied to these bodily things, the
more lively, and cheerful they be, at a word, the full and perfect life
thereof, is the full and perfect withdrawing thereof from the body, and
whatsoever the body is made of, and this follow by direct consequence from the
former. All these things are so clear that they need no proof; for we know
that every thing works according to the proper being thereof; and that same
which perfecteth the operations of a thing, perfecteth the being thereof also;
it follows therefore, that seeing the separation of the body from the soul,
and of the form from the matter, perfecteth the operation, or working of the
soul, (as I said before) it does also make perfect, and strengthen the very
being thereof; and therefore cannot in any wise corrupt it, and what else is
dying but to be corrupted? and what else is corrupting, but suffering? and
what else is suffering, but receiving? and how can that which receives all
things without suffering, receive corruption by any thing? fire corrupts and
marreth our bodies, and we suffer in receiving it: so also does extreme cold;
but if we suffered nothing by it, it could not freeze us, our senses likewise
are marred, by the successive force of the things that they light upon; and
that is because they receive, and perceive the thing that grieveth them; and
for the manner of their behaving themselves, toward their objects, is subject
to suffering; but as the reasonable soul which receives al things after one
manner, that is by the way of understanding, by which it always works, and is
never wrought into; how is it possible for it, to corrupt or mar it self.

For what is the thing whereof our Soul suffers ought in the substance
thereof, I mean where by the substance of our soul is any way impaired or
hurt, by minding, or conceiving the same in understanding? as little does the
fire hurt it, as the air, and the air, as the fire, as little hurt receives
it, from the frozen Ice of Groenland, as from the scorching sands of Africa, as
little also, does vice annoy it as virtue; for vice and virtue are so far off
from incumbring the substance of the soul, that our mind does never conceive,
or understand them better, then by setting together one against the other, that
thing therefore, which does no whit impair it self, but takes the ground of
perfecting it self by all things, cannot be marred or hurt by any thing.

In the Second place, I said, death is the uttermost point of moving, and the
uttermost point of this life, for even in living we dye, and in dying we live,
and there is not that step that we make in this life, but we step forward unto
death, after the manner of a dial or a clock which ends its moving, in
moving from minut to minut, take a way moving from a bod, and it lives no
longer; now let us see if the soul also, be carried with the same moving, if it
be, it may die with the body, if not it cannot, but we see it moves not with the
body, nay we see the contrary, a man may have his mind as free as an Emperor,
though his body be in prison, whether the mind rest, or whether it be busied,
bout the proper operations thereof, it is not perceived, either by the panting
of the heart, or by the beating of the pulses, or by the breathing of the
lunges, the body carries the soul about like a ship, the sticking fast thereof,
or the tying of it to a post, hinders not our going up and down in it still.

Fourthly, if the soul be subject to the final coruption of the body, it must
needs be subject to the alteration

Fifth. It appears that the soul is immortal and incorruptible, them, as for
example, beasts live by herbs, men by beasts, both by corrupting them turn
them to nourishment, of their nature, and therefore things that live by
incorruptible things, and can so disgist them as to turn them into the
nourishment of their nature, and yet not corrupt them, are incorruptible
themselves too. Now the reason able soul or mind of man, conceives reason and
truth, and is fed, and strengthened with them, and reason and truth, are things
unchangable, not subject to time place or alteration, or any thing else that
may or can breed corruption, but are stedy, unchangable and everlasting, for
that twice two is fowr, that there is the same reason in the proportion, of
eight to six, that there is from four to three, or that in a triangle, the
three inner angles are equal to the two right angles, and truths that neither
years nor thousands of years can chang, as true at this day as they were when
Euclid first spoke them, as true in our schools as in his, it follows then
that the Soul comprehending reason and truth, which are things free from
coruption., cannot it self in any wise, be subject to corruption.

And Chap. viz. if all that is in us were mortal and transitory, we should
never question what immortality is, for of contraryes the skill is all one, if
a man had no actual life or had it only by promise, (were it only a mortal
life) he could not dispute of it, till he had it actually, neither by the same
argument, could he speak of immortallity, were he not immortal, but of this
more before, therefore I Pass it here.

CHAP. 4. Objections against the Souls. immortality answered.
ANd first for the objection and argument of R. O. whom I suposse to be an
ingenious man, I desie him, to look into him self, take a little notice, of
the dementions and parts thereof, let him tell me the reason of the continual
motion of the heart, the breathing of the lungues, and not the effects of it,
but the motive cause of it, if he cannot, then let him confess he has
something in himself, which far transcends himself, and the weakness of
his capacity, which out of ignorance he reasons against, though he know not
what it is, and therefore I reject all his arguments, ob Jgnorantiam Elenchi,
and pass to other things objected to me.

Says one,

I answare, self, for if thy eye sight saw it self, it were not a power or
abillity of seeing, but a visible thing, likewise if thy soul saw it self it
were no more a soul, that is the worker in, and quickner of the body, but a
very body unable to do any thing it self, a massy substance, subject to
suffering, for we can see nothing but bodies, and bodily substances, because
the organ of our sight is corporal; but seeing thou conceivest so many
divercities of bodies at once in thy imagination, needs must thou have a Power
in thee which is not a body.

But be it (say some) that we have a Power of sense, yet have we not a power of
reason, for that we call the power of reason or understanding, is nothing but
an excellency or rather a consequence of sense, in so much that when sense
dies, the residue dies with it.

In this of that which the sense conceives, is another thing, the like may be
said of smelling, tasting, and feeling, our smelling of sents, our tasting of
savours, and our feeling of substances, is indeed the six work of our senses,
but our judgment of the inward virtue of a thing by the outward sent, or of the
wholsomnesse or unwholsomenesse of food by the taste, or of the hotnesse or
vehemence of a fever, by feeling the pulse, yea and our proceeding even unto
the very bowels of a man, whither the eye being the quickest of all senses is
not able to attain, surely it is the work of a more mighty power then the
sense is, and indeed R. O. says true on that, there are Beasts, which do
hear, see, smell, taste and feell, much better and quicker then man does, yet
none of them confereth the contraries of sounds, colors, sents and savours;
none sorteth them out, to serving one of another or to the serving of
themselves; Job. 39.20. Psalm. 49.20. Read Plinies not. hist. Elephants
the reason is (as God says of the Ostrich) the Lord have given them no
understanding, and ar David says, the man without understanbing, dies like a
Beast, showing that a Beast has none, but often times, man concludes contrary
to his senses, our eye tells us there are noe stares up at noone day, but
reason tells us there are, or the ends of lines in a long walk, meet in a
point, whereas reason certifies us that they run direct upon equal distances,
one from the other, for want of this discretion certain Elephants says
vetillio (though the wisest of all Beasts) which were passing over a long
bridge, turned back, being deceived, and yet they wanted fight no more then we
do, yet they that lead them were not deceived, their leaders then, had in them
another power or virtue besides their eye sight, which corrected there sight,
and therefore ought to be of higher estimation, in like manner is it with the
other senses, our hearing tells us that the thunderclap is after the
lightening, but reason assures us that they are both together, for there is a
certain power in us, that is able to discern, what proportion is between
hearing and seeing, also the taste of one troubled with a disease of choler,
bears him in hand that even sugar it self is bitter, which notwithstanding
he knows by reason to be untrue. To be short, those that have their senses
most quick and lively, be not of the greatest wisdom, and understanding, a man
then differs from a beast, and excels them by some other power then sense,
a man rides a great way to learn experience, the man perhaps comes home the
wiser, but his horse which perhaps saw as much as he, comes home just as he
went out.

Now you see then, there is a great difference between the sense and the power
that governs the sense; like as the report of a Spy is one thing, and the Spy
himself another, and the wisdom of the Captain which receives the report,
and judges of it, is a third: nay, who can deny, but sense and reason are
diverse things, or rather, who will not grant, that in many things they are
clean contrary? Sense bid deny, shun, and eschew grief: whereas reason
bids sometimes, proffer our leg to the Chyrurgion to be cut off. He that
should see Scevola, or Archbishop, Cranmer of late times, burn off their own
hands without once gnashing their teeth, would he not think they were utterly
void of sense, so mightily does reason overruled sense. To be short, sense has
his peculiar inclination, which is appetite, and reason likewise has his,
which is will, and like as reason does oftentimes overruled sense, and is
contrary to it, so will corrects the apetite, or lust that is in us, and
warrath against it for in Agues and fevers we covet to drink, in Apoplexies,
and Bethargies to sleep, and in hunger to eat, yet from all these things does
our will restrain us: the more a man follows his lust, the less is he led by
his will (for no man wills to be miserable, which lust leads him too) and the
more he stands upon pleasing of his senses, the less reason ordinarily uses
he.

Secondly, let us consider that bruit beasts which nothing but the bare
effects, so that he that denies, that besides the common sense, there is a
reason, or understanding in Man, distinct and severed from sense, is void both
of understanding and sense.

Yea,

Another says, if dead men's souls live still, why do none of them come to
tell us so?

And Luke 16. ult. yet we will see a little the rationality, or rather the
irrationality of it viz. of the objection.

What intercourse I pray is there between things that have bodies, and things
that have none? we see there is small, or no intercourse between some
Kingdoms under the Sun. But we would have God send us souls from Heaven to
make us believe, as who should say, it stood God greatly in hand to make us
believe, more then it did us that we should believe, in effect, what else is
all this, but a desiring that some man might return again into his Mothers
womb, to encourage young babes against the bitter pinches and pains which
they abide in the birth, which he would no less abhor then we do death, if
he had the knowledge of them.

But they will still bear us in hand, that seeing the vegetive, and sensitive
powers be corrupted and perish, the understanding, or reasonable part must
needs perish by the same rule: also,

To this (in a word) I answer, this is all one, power, the vegative power in
man, restore to it a good stomach, a sound Liver, and a perfect heart: it shall
execute its function, as well as ever it did before.

The power which works of it self without the body, is the power of reason
and understanding, which if we will, we may call the mind, but if you still
doubt thereof, consider when thou mindest a thing earnestly, what thy body
furthereth thy mind therein? and thou shall perceive, that the more fixedly
thou think upon it, the less thou mindest the things before thee, in so
much, that many times, the earnestness of his thoughts drives a man (that is
going) out of his way, as who should say, that the workings of the body are the
greatest impediments that can be, to the peculiar acts of the mind: nay, which
is more, this understanding part, grows so much the stronger and greater, the
less it is occupied and busied about these base and contemptible things, and
is altogether drawn home, wholly to it self, as is plainly seen in those
that want their eyes, whose minds are commonly most apt to understand, and most
firm to remember, do we debate of a thing in our selves? neither our bodies
nor senses are busied about it, do we will the same? as little do they stir
for that too: to understand, and to will, which are the operations of the mind,
the soul has no need of the body, as for working and being, they accompany
one another, says Aristotle. Therefore to continue still in being, the soul
has not to do with the body, nor any need of the body: therefore for the
soul to act well, or to be well, it had need be quite freed from the body.

But fools and melancholy persons, and seeing it is forgone, it may also be
corrupted, and if corrupted, it may also die, for what is death, but an utter
and full corruption?

Nay, thou should say rather, I have seen diverse, who have seemed to have
lost their right wits, have recovered them again by good diet and medicinable
drinks, but had they been utterly lost and gone; no physic could have
restored them again; therefore of necessity the soul was as sound as before:
it was but like an ecclypse of the Sun, it seems be dimmed; but it is but by
the coming of the Moon between him and us, in his light there is no
abatement at all, but only quoad nos, likewise our eye conceives things
according to the spectacles through which it looks upon them: take away the
Moon or clouds and the Sun shines clear: take away the impediments, the eye
sees clear, purge away the humors, our imaginations shall be pure, and our
understanding as bright as ever, it fares not with our souls, as it does with
our bodies, which after a long sickness retain still, either a hardness of
the spleen, or a shortness of the breath, weakness of body, or a falling
down of Rheum upon the lungs; nor as a wound that retains a scarre which
cannot be worn out, for neither in their understanding, nor in their wills do
our souls feel any abatement: and this appears in lunatic folks, and
others, who have their wits troubled at times, and by fits, for they be not
vexed but at the stirring of their humor, being at other times sober and well
enough staid in their wits: the like is seen in them that have the falling
sickness, their understanding seems only to be ecclipsed, during the time of
their fits, but afterward they be as discreet as though they ayled nothing, you
shall never see any body out of his wits, in whom the Physician may not
manifestly perceive, either some default of tht instruments, or some
overflowing of some melancholy humor, that troubled and marred his body,
before it troubled or impaired his mind. To be short, whosoever says, that
man's soul perishes with the body, because it is troubled by the
distemperature, or indisposition of the body, may as well uphold and maintain,
that the Child in his mothers womb dies with his mother, because he moves
with her, and is partaker with her in her harms, and throws, by reason of the
straight conjunction that is between them, and yet we see many children have
lived safe and sound, notwithstanding their mothers have died: yea, and some of
them have come into the world,

Lastly, whereas some say, that our minds cannot conceive any thing here but by
the help of the imagination: and therefore when the imagination is gone, with
the instruments whereto it is tied, the soul can not work, nor consequently
be.

To this I answer, that it is all one, as if they should say, that because the
child being in his mothers womb takes nourishment of her blood, by his navill,
therefore he cannot live when he is come out of her womb, and his navill
strings cut off, when we see that then is the time that the mouth, and the
tongue, and the other parts of the Child do their duty, which served before
to no purpose, saving that they were prepared for the time to come: even so the
soul being escaped out of the body, as a Child out of the womb, shall begin to
perform his operations by himself, and that more certainly, for that it
shall not be subject to false reports, neither to the senses inward or
outward, but to the very things themselves, which it shall have seen and
learned in it self: To be short, it shall live, but not in prison, it shall
see, but not through spectacles; it shall understand, but not by reports; it
shall will, but not by the way of lusting: the infirmities which the body
casts upon it now shall then be done away.

Let us conclude then, that our soul is an understanding, reasonable power,
over which death or corruption have no power: If any man yet doubt thereof, let
him but examine himself: for even his own doubts will prove it to him: If he
stand in contention still, let him fall to reasoning with himself, for by
concluding his Arguments to prove his soul mortal, he shall give judgment
himself, that it is immortal. If I have left out any thing that might be
alleged, (for who is able to allege all in justification of any point) let it
suffice that here is sufficient for the satisfaction of the ingenuous: If any
be otherwise minded, let him see how they can answer these my aforesaid
Arguments: Consider what I have written, and the Lord give you a right
understanding.

Scriptures to prove the being of the Soul, after it is separated from the
Body, and before the Resurrection.
I Am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart and to be with Christ
which is far better, nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for
you, Phil. 1.23.24. heers a being with Christ after a departure.

And to abide in the flesh, why is this added, if there were not an abiding out
of the flesh, before the resurrection.

Math, 10.28. Fear not them that kill the body but are not able to kill the
soul but rather fear him that is able to cast both body and Soul into Hell.

Here Is a body that may be killed, a soul that cannot be killed but to evade
these R: O, makes a great puzle to prove noe hell, till the resurrection, a
lusty strong, superlogicall argument, there is noe hell till the resurrection,
Ergo man has noe Immortal soul Risum teneatis amici? might not his
Dromodoticall argument be rightly retorted back here upon himself?

2. Cor, 5.6.8. Therefore we are alwais confident, knowing that whilst we are
at home in the body we are absent from the Lord we are confident I say, and
willing rather to be absent from the body and to be present with the Lord.

The words are so plain they need noe explanation but hold forth the
immortallity of the soul as clear as the snnne at no one day.

Luke: 23.43. Verile I say unto thee, this day thou shall be with me in
paradise.

Is this the word of God? may a man build his faith upon it? then both Christ
and the penitential theife were that day in parradice, there bodies were not
there then their souls must; unlsse any should say parradice is in the grave,
which is as rediculous as false.

Eccles: 12.7. Then shall dust return to the earth as it was and the spirit
shall return to God who gave it.

A scripture beyond exception, here is soul and body described by their
original, by their pedigree, the one taken from the earth, to it, it must
return, the other comes from Jehovah and to him it shall return who is not
the God of the dead but of the living.

FINIS.

