A PR(...)LAMATION OF THE General Convention of Ireland, For the Proclaiming
his SACRED ROYAL MAJESTY King CHARLES the Second.
WHereas by the death of Our late Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, of Blessed
Memory, the Imperial Crowns of England, Scotland, France, and ^reland did then
immediately, solely and rightfully by inherent Birthright, and lawful and
undoubted Succession, descend and come to his Most Excellent Majesty, Charles
the Second, as being Lineally, Justly, and Lawfully next Heir of the
Blood Royal of these Realms; and although it can no way be doubted, but that
his Majesty's Right and Title to his Crowns and Kingdoms, was, and is every way
completed by the Death of his most Royal Father of Glorious Memory, without
the Ceremony of Solemnity of a Proclamation: Yet seeing Proclamations in such
Cases have been always used, to the end all good Subjects might upon such
occasions testify their Duty and Respect; And considering that the armed
Violence, and other Calamities of many Years last past, have hitherto deprived
us of any such Opportunity, wherein We might Express Our Loyalty and
Allegiance to his Majesty: We therefore the General Convention of Ireland,
together with the Lords Commissioners for Government and Management of the
affairs in Ireland, and the Commissioners for Government of the Army, and
diverse of the Nobility of this Kingdom now present, and the Mayor, Aldermen,
Sheriffs and Commons of the City of Dublin, and the Officers and Soldiers of
the Army in and about the said City, and other Freemen of this Kingdom now
present, do according unto our Duty and Allegiance, heartily, joyfully and
unanimously acknowledge, publish, declare and Proclaim, That the said high and
mighty Prince Charles the Second, immediately from and after the death of his
said Royal Father of happy Memory, was and is become our only, Lawful, Lineal,
and Rightful liege Lord, CHARLES by the Grace of God the most Potent, Mighty
and Undoubted King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, etc. To whom We do acknowledge all Faith and constant Obedience with all
hearty and humble Affections, and to whom We do most faithfully and humbly
Submit and Oblige Our selves, Our heirs and posterities for Ever: Beseeching
God by whom Kings do reign to bless his Royal Majesty with long and happy
years to Reign over us.

J. Barry Chairman.
God Save the King.
May the 14, 1660.
ORdered by the General Convention of Ireland, That this Proclamation be
forthwith Printed and Published.

MA. BARRY Clerk of the General Convention of IRELAND.

Dublin Printed by William Bladen, and Reprinted at London by Daniel Pakeman
at the Rainbow


