The Humble DECLARATION AND PETITION Of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and
Commons in PARLIAMENT assembled in IRELAND.

To the Kings most excellent MAJESTY, and the PARLIAMENT of England now
assembled, 1642.

For putting the Laws in execution against Papists and Recusants.

Copia vera.

Ex per Phill. Ferneley, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.



LONDON: Printed for Hum. Blunden, 12. July. 1642.

A DECLARATION FROM THE PARLIAMENT IN IRELAND.
Humbly declares,
THat the Religion now professed by the Church of Rome (which in fundamental
points is Antichristian) has of late years extraordinarily overspread this
Kingdom, and has the more increased by the forbearing to put in execution the
wholesome Laws and Statutes of force in this Kingdom against Recusants and
others of the Romish Religion, who have of late time more than formerly
extremely swarmed in this Kingdom: And whereas it evidently appears, that the
laid Antichristian and heretical religion, and the not putting of the said
Laws in execution, has as the fruits and effects thereof produced a general
confederacy of the Papists in this Kingdom to destroy and extirpe the
Protestant Religion, and all English, Irish and Scottish in this Kingdom
professing the same; wherein they have actually proceeded to execrable
cruelties without any provocation given them by his sacred Majesty, by the
State and Government, or any acts of Protestants or any others) the intending
utterly to cast off the English government and most royal Authority of our
Sovereign Lord the King; And where diverse of the Romish Religion, have in all
parts of this Kingdom since the 22th. day of October last, inhumanely used most
bloody and unheard of barbarous actions against the persons as well of the
Clergy as of most of the Protestant Religion within their power, not only
while life lasted, but even after death, digging some of them out of their
graves, cutting them in pieces, and casting them into ditches, defiling of
Churches, and setting up of the abominable Idol of the Mass, instead of Gods
true worship and service, and in scornful and reproachful manner, trampling
under foot the holy Bible, and disdainfully burning it, and have by their said
cruelty already destroyed many thousand Protestants, and of those that remain
and escaped their fury, most of them have been enforced to fly into England or
Scotland for relief, or to beg the charity of well-disposed people here.

The said Lords and Commons duly considering the premises, and the great
dishonor done to his Majesty, to the English Nation, and indeed to all his
Majesty's Kingdoms by the said most wicked rebellion, plotted and enacted by
titular Bishops, Abbots, Jesuits, Friars, Priests, Monks, and others of the
Romish Religion, do humbly express their detestation thereof, and their humble
desire of a through Reformation of Religion may be had in this Kingdom to the
glory of God, and the honor of his sacred Majesty; and to that end humbly
pray, that present and effectual course may be taken for putting in execution
the Laws and Statutes of force in this Kingdom against Recusants and all others
of the Popish pretended Religion in all parts of this Kingdom, where the Laws
do or may run; and for suppressing the usurped power and jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome, and particularly in the City of Dublin, which is now the City of
refuge for most of the distressed and dispoiled Protestants of this Kingdom;
who yet are not without just fears of imminent dangers by reason of the
multitude of Popish Inhabitants; and they do pray that it may be given in
charge to all his Majesty's Offices whom it may concern, faithfully and without
delay to proceed therein, and that monthly Sessions be held for that purpose
in the said City of Dublin.

That Bills may be forthwith transmitted into England containing all such Laws
as are now of force against all Jesuits, Priests, Friars, Monks, and others
superstitious Orders and societies of the Popish pretended Clergy, and their
Relievers, and against Recusants and other Papists to be enacted in this
Kingdom.

And such further Laws as are or shall be needful in that behalf, and that
such necessary expressions and provisions may be therein made as may be
agreeable with the constitution of this Kingdom, and may give hopeful and
comfortable assurance to your suppliants and their posterity, and to all other
of the Protestant Religion, who are or shall be in this Kingdom.

That it may not be in the power of any Governor or Governors of this Kingdom
to suspend, inhibite, or connive at the execution of the said Laws, or any of
them. And to this end that your Lordships who are entrusted by his Majesty
with the Government of this Kingdom, and must one day give an account thereof
before the tribunal of Gods Justice, will give present order for performing
your suppliants requests herein expressed. And although since this most tedious
and bloody rebellion begun we have had some succors out of England, which we
ascribe to the great mercy of God, in the great wisdom and piety of his
sacred Majesty, and in the careful and chargeable endeavors of the
Parliament and Kingdom of England which his Majesty's grace and goodness, we
with the duty and loyalty of faithful Subjects do most humbly and
thankfully acknowledge to his royal Majesty, and do also render to his
Parliament of England hearty thanks for their said care and endeavor for us:
yet we find with inward sorrow and grief of heart, that for want of such
powerful and speedy succors of men, money, victual, clothes, arms, and
ammunition, and other requisites of War necessary to be sent hither out of
England this war for Gods cause, and the cause of his servants in this Kingdom,
has hitherto had but a slow proceeding. They therefore most humbly beseech
your Lordships to represent to his sacred Majesty their humble desires and
supplications, that it may stand with his Princely pleasure, That an effectual
and speedy course may be taken by his Majesty's high wisdom, and the care of
the Parliament, for hasting these needful succors which the said Lords and
Commons humbly conceive have been hitherto retarded; longer they doubt and fear
can well consist with the safety of this his ancient rightful Crown and
Kingdom, and so by the high wisdom and great goodness of his Majesty, our
great grief and sorrows converted into joy and gladness, Gods true Religion
may be the more firmly established, his Majesty in wisdom and power magnified,
his good Subjects comforted, and his enemies and the enemies of Gods truth
disappointed.

And they shall pray, etc.
FINIS.

