CR
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By Lords Justices and Council.
W. Parsons. Io-Burlase.


WHereas We the Lords^ Justices and Council upon the Proposition, and the
humble suit of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of the City of Dublin, have
consented and given directions, that Fortification should be immediately made
about this City, and the Suburbs thereof, for the safety and the conservation
of the said City and Suburbs, and his Majesty's loyal Subjects therein.

And for that it is requisite and reasonable, that all those that are involved
in a common danger, should engage their persons and contribute some part of
their Estates in a common defense, and for that it is necessary that works of
that nature and consequence be effected with all expedition. We do therefore in
his Majesty's name require and command all and every person and persons of what
quality or condition soever, as well Citizens as Soldiers, and others, from
the age of seventeen years and upwards, now dwelling, inhabiting, and residing
within this City, or Suburbs thereof, within twelve hours after Publication
hereof, to give their personal Assistances and Attendance (with all such
shovels, spades, spittles, pick-axes, and other instruments and engines fitting
for that work, as they have, or can procure) to such Officers and Engineers,
and other persons as are, or shall be employed by Authority, for raising and
making the said Fortification, and to perform such labor and duties therein,
as the said Officers, Enginieers, and persons employed, shall direct; and to
continue in the said service, until the work be fully perfected. And if any
such person or persons by reason of infirmity, or for other reasonable cause
cannot, or shall not attend the said service, for every day for each person so
absent, shall be contributed and paid (the sum of six pence toward the
Fortifications aforesaid, by each person for himself, and his servant or
servants, attendant or attendants) to the hands of the Alderman of the Ward, or
Seneschall, or other chief Officer of the Liberties respectively, who shall
give an account thereof to the chief Governor and Governors, and Council
here for the time being, requiring the same; Nevertheless, We leave all
persons well-disposed to this service to make such voluntary contribution and
benevolence thereunto, as they shall think fit, and whosoevet shall not by
himself, and his servants attend this service, or contribute thereunto as
aforesaid, such person may justly be esteemed ill-affected, and shall suffer
such punishment, as the Lieutenant General and Council of War shall think
fit to inflict.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of DUBLIN the 22. of November. 1641. Ormond
Ossory. R. Dillon. Cha. Lambert. Ad. Loftus. Geo. Shurley. I. Temple. Cha.
Coote. P. Crosbie. Ja. Ware* Rob. Meredith.

God save the King.
Imprinted first at Dublin, and reimprinted at London, and are to be sold by
Henry Walker in Buttlers alley in Moor-lane. 1641.


