HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

A PROCLAMATION BY THE LORD LIEUTENANT AND COUNCIL, FOR AN IMPOSITION upon
diverse Commodities, for the raising of moneys for His Majesty's Army,
expressed in the BOOK following.

DVBLIN, Printed by WILLIAM BLADEN, Anno Dom. 1644.

By the Lord Lieutenant and Council.
ORMONDE.

WE having taken into Our serious consideration the present state and
condition of this Kingdom, do by this Our Proclamation in pursuance of an Act
of Council made at this Board, bearing date the 4th day of December, 1644.
Publish and declare, that for the reasons in the said Act of Council
contained, and for the raising of a sum of money weekly toward the
maintenance of the Army for six months next ensuing, that there be during the
time aforesaid (if the necessities of the Army be not in the interim otherwise
relieved) a rate and Imposition set upon the particulars hereafter mentioned,
in manner and form hereafter expressed, to be duly paid unto Thomas Leigh,
Daniell Foster, and Thomas Cuffe, gentlemen, upon whom WE have for the present
conferred the Office of Impostmasters, or to such as shall be lawfully
Authorized to be the Impostmasters, and at the Office appointed to be kept at
the House of Henry King in Castle street, or elsewhere, for the Impost Office,
by such persons, and in such manner, as hereafter is declared: and that the
moneys arising thereupon, be weekly paid by the said Impostmasters, unto His
Majesty's Vice Treasurer and Treasurer at Wars, or to whom he shall appoint,
to be by him issued from time to time, as this Board shall direct.

The Rate or Imposition upon Ale or Beer, Beer.
to be retailed in the City or Suburbs of Dublin, or in any part of the County
of Dublin, by them that brew it, viz. All manner of Ale or beer, to be sold
at three pence the quart to pay ten shillings Imposition per barrel, and so
rateably for other gages.

Ale or Beer to be sold at two pence the quart, to pay six shillings eight
pence per barrel and so rateably for other gages.

Ale or Beer to be sold at one penny the quart to pay three shillings four
pence per barrel, and so rateably for other gages.

The rate or Imposition upon Ale or Beer, bought of the brewer, to be retailed
or Imported, or brought from foreign parts, and bought here to be retailed,
viz. Ale or Beer to be sold at three pence the quart, to pay eight shillings
Imposition per burrell, and so rateably for other gages.

Ale or Beer to be sold at two pence the quart, to pay five shillings per
barrel and so rateably for other gages.

Ale or Beer to be sold at one penny the quart, to pay three shillings per
barrel, and so rateably for other gages.

The rate or Imposition upon Ale or Beer spent in any private house, ^use.
in the City or Suburbs of Dublin, or in any the liberties adjoining to the
said City, whether the same be brewed by the persons themselves that spend it,
or bought from the brewers, or foreign parts, viz.

Ale or beer of sixteen shillings and upwards per barrel, to pay four
shillings Imposition per barrel, and so rateably for other gages.

Ale or Beer of eight shillings per barrel, and upward to sixteen shillings
per barrel, to pay two shillings per barrel, and so rateably for other gages.

Ale or Beer of five shillings per barrel, and upward to eight shillings per
barrel, to pay twelve pence per barrel, and so rateably for other gages.

And WE hereby declare that it is meant and intended by this Proclamation that
housekeepers in the Country, not selling or retayling Ale or Beer, shall not
pay any Imposition by virtue of this Proclamation for or by reason of the Ale
or Beer they shall brew and spend in their own houses for themselves and
their families.

The rate or Imposition upon Aquavitae and all manner of hot waters, Aquav^
Hotwa^
in the City or Suburbs of Dublin, or any part of the County of Dublin, viz.

Aquavitae and all hotwaters bought or sold to be retailed again, to pay one
shilling and four pence Imposition per gallon.

Aquavitae and all Hotwaters bought or sold by or to any that shall not
retaile the same again, to pay eight pence Imposition per gallon. Wines.


The rate or Imposition upon Wines bought to be sold again by retaile in the
City or Suburbs of Dublin, or County of Dublin, viz.

All manner of French Wines rackt or unrackt, to pay six pounds Imposition per
Tonne, accounting four Hogsheads to the Tonne, and all other gages rateably,
and allowed to be retailed at eight pence per quart.

All Wines of the Spanish growth, rackt or unrackt, to pay six pounds
Imposition per Pipe or Butte, and all other gages rateably, and allowed to be
retailed at one shilling four pence per quart.

The rate or Imposition upon Wines, bought or brought into private Houses for
their own uses, viz.

All manner of French Wines, rackt or unrackt, to pay three pounds Imposition
per Tonne accounting four Hogsheads to the Tonne, and all other gages
rateably.

All Wines of the Spanish growth, rackt or unrackt to pay three pounds
Imposition per Pipe or Butte, and all other gages rateably.

The rate or Imposition upon Herrings, in the City or Suburbs of Dublin, or
County of Dublin, viz.

All sorts of Herrings, whether full, shotters, or swimmers, Herring^
be they pickeled or smoaked, to be spent within this Kingdom, and to be
sold, to pay twelve pence Imposition per barrel, and so rateably for other
quantities.

The rate or Imposition upon all sorts of Vinegar, Perry, Cydar, Vinegar etc.
Alegar, and Verjuice, in the City or Suburbs of Dublin, or County of Dublin,
viz.

All sorts of Vinegar, Perry, Cydar, Alegar, and Verjuice, that shall be
brought or made within the said limmits, to pay five shillings Imposition per
Hogshead, and so rateably for other quantities.

The rate or Imposition upon Salt, in the City or Suburbs of Dublin, Sale.
or County of Dublin, viz.

All sorts of Salt, to pay twelve pence Imposition per barrel, water measure,
and so rateably for other quantities.

The rate or Imposition upon Tobaccoe, ^oe.
in the City or Suburbs of Dublin, or County of Dublin, viz.

All sorts of Tobaccoe in Roll, leaf or Sneesing, to pay three pence
Imposition le pound.

All Tobaccoe stalks, to pay one penny half penny Imposition le pound.

The rate or Imposition upon Corn in the City or Suburbs of Dublin, or
liberties adjoining, viz.

All Wheat and Misceline, to pay two shillings Imposition per pocke heap; or
barrel strike measure, and so rateably for other measures.

All Rye, Bear, Barley, Pease, Beans and Buckwheat, to pay eighteen pence
Imposition per pecke heap, or barrel strike measure, and so rateably for
other measures.

All sorts of Meal, Flower, Grotts, Bread and Biscuit, brought either by Sea,
to the Port of Dublin, or any the Creeks or members of the said Port, or
brought by Land from other parts, into the City or Suburbs of Dublin, or
liberties adjoining to pay twelve pence Imposition the hundred weight, and so
rateably for other quantities.

And all Malt to be ground, shall be entered in the Impost Office, without
paying any Impost for the grinding.

The rate or Imposition upon Candles, ^s.
in the City or Suburbs of Dublin, or County of Dublin, viz.

All sorts of Candles, to pay six pence Imposition per dozen pounds, and so
rateably for other quantities.

The rate or Imposition upon Hydes and Skins, ^ and Skins
in the City or Suburbs of Dublin, or County of Dublin, viz.

All sorts of tanned Hydes, weighing (before currying) ten pounds or upward, to
pay twelve pence le piece Imposition.

All sorts of tanned Hydes or Skins, weighing six pounds or upward ^o ten
pounds, to pay six pence le piece Imposition.

All other sorts of tanned Hydes or Skins whatsoever, weighing under six
pounds le piece, to pay six pence Imposition per dozen.

All Goats Skins or other Skins, tanned and dressed as Spanish

Leather, and all Buckskinnes and Stagskinnes, to pay six pence le piece
Imposition.

All Goatskinnes dressed otherwise, to pay two shillings Imposition per dozen.

All Kidskinnes, Lambskinnes, Sheepskinnes, and Slinkskines, tanned or dressed,
to pay three pence Imposition per dozen.

All Buffeskinnes, and all other Hydes and skins dressed after the manner of
Buffe, to pay two shillings le piece Imposition.

The rate or Imposition upon Cattle slaughtered, Cattle.
to be sold in the City or Suburbs of Dublin, or County of Dublin, viz.

All manner of Oxen, Bulls, Cowes, Steeres, and Bullocks, to pay four
shillings le piece Imposition.

All Calves, to pay two shillings le piece Imposition.

All Swine above six weeks old, and all Sheep and Goats to pay 12 pence le
piece Imposition. And all Lambs and Kids, to pay six pence le piece Imposition.

The rate or Imposition upon Cattle, slaughtered by any to salt up for their
own uses, or to eat or spend fresh in their own Houses, viz. Private ^


All manner of Oxen, Bulls, Cowes, Steeres and Bullocks, to pay two shillings
le piece Imposition.

All Calves to pay twelve pence le piece Imposition.

All Swine above six weeks old, and all Sheep and Goats, to pay six pence le
piece Imposition.

All Lambs and Kids, to pay three pence le piece Imposition.

And WE hereby declare, that it is meant and intended by this Proclamation,
that Housekeepers in the Country shall not pay any Imposition, by virtue of
this Proclam^tion, for or by reason of any Cattle they shall slaughter and
spend in their own Houses for themselves and their families.

All Boots, Shoes, Slippers, Broages, Shoes, S^pers, etc.
and all other commodities made of Hydes and Skins tanned or dressed, that
shall be brought into the City and Suburbs of Dublin, or County of Dublin, to
pay Impost according to the discretion of the Commissioners.

The rate or Imposition upon commodities hereafter to be Imported into the City
or Suburbs of Dublin, or County of Dublin, Commod^ Imported.
viz.

All commodities to be Imported or brought into the limmits aforesaid, either
by Sea or Land, to pay twelve pence per pound to be rated according the Book
of Rates in His Majesty's Custom House at Dublin, except Victuals, and such
other commodities as are mentioned in a Proclamation bearing date, the fourth
of December, 1644.

^modities ^ed.
The rate or Imposition upon Broad-Cloath, and all other commodities, that
shall be exported or carried by Land out of the City or Suburbs of Dublin, or
County of Dublin, viz.

All Broad-Cloath; and other commodities not having paid formerly Custom and
Impost in the said Custom House, by Importation to pay such Impost as is laid
on them in the Custom House, being exported And all commodities not charged in
the Custom House with any such Impost, to pay Impost according the Book of
Rates in the said Custom. House.

The rate or Imposition upon fire wood, ^wood.
viz.

All sorts of fire wood, piled or laid up in yards or other places within the
City or Suburbs of Dublin, or liberties adjoining to the said City to be sold,
to pay two shillings Imposition per cord, and so rateably for other quantities.

^coale and ^e.
The rate or Imposition upon Seacoale and Coome, in the said City and Suburbs
of Dublin, or County of Dublin, viz.

All sorts of Seacoale and Coome, that shall be sold after Landing, to pay two
shillings Imposition per tonne, and so rateably for other quantities.

The rate or Imposition upon brewers, ^ers.
in the City or Suburbs of Dublin, or County of Dublin, viz.

All brewers of Ale or Beer that do not retaile the same, to pay two pence
Imposition per barrel for every barrel of Ale and Beer strong or small they
shall sell.

The rate or Imposition upon Maulsters, ^sters.
in the City or Suburbs of Dublin, or County of Dublin, viz.

All Maulsters and others to pay four pence Jmposition for every barrel of
Wheat, Pease, Beans, Barley, or Bear Malt. And two pence Jmposition for
every barrel of Oate Malt they shall sell.

Entering o^ names.
either for sale, retaile or private use, or distill, sell or retaile, Aquavit
or any sort of Hotwaters, or sell either by wholesale or retaile any sort of
Wine, foreign Beer, Herrings, Vinegar, Perry, Cydar, Alegar, Verjuice, Salt,
Tobaccoe, Sneesing or Tobaccoe stalks, or any sort of Meal, Flower, Grotts,
Bread or Biskett, or any sort of Sea coal, or Fire wood; or make any Candles,
or Malt, either for sale or private use, or sell or retaile the same, or any
way deal or trade in any kind of Hydes or Skins tanned, curryed or dressed,
or any commodities made thereof, or any other commodity mentioned in this
Proclamation, or use or exercise any kind of Mill or Mills, for grinding of
any sort of Corn, or slaughter any Cattle for sa^e, until such time as he or
they first enter his and their names and dwelling places, in the Impost Office,
and these receive admittance, to deal in the said several kinds respectively,
upon pain of five pounds for every one that shall so neglect to enter his name.

Dublin, or County of Dublin, either by Land or water. Aquavitae or any sort of
Hotwaters, Wine, Beer, Herrings, Vinegar, Perry, Cydar, Alegar, Verjuice,
Salt, Tobaccoe, Sneesing or Tobaccoe stalks, or any sort of Meal, Flower,
Grotts, Bread, or Biscuit, or any Candles, Hydes, or Skins tanned, curryed or
dressed, or any Boots, Shoes, Slippers, Broages, or other commodities made of
Hydes, or Skins tanned, curryed or dressed, or any Broadcloath, or other
commodities particularly, Merchant^ enter their names and commodit^
mentioned or not mentioned in this Proclamation, shall before the Landing,
Housing or Cellaring thereof, enter their names in the Impost Office, and
deliver into the hands of the Impostmasters a true note of the quality and
quantity of all the several commodities they intend to Land, or bring within
the limmits aforesaid, and to Land or bring in no more then they shall so
certify, And not sell or any dispose of any part thereof, without Ticquet from
the Impostmasters first delivered him or them, or his or their servants, upon
pain of forfeiture of the commodities so Landed or brought in, and not
certified or sold or disposed of without Ticquet as aforesaid.

^ng of ^.
Verjuice, Salt, Tobaccoe, Sneesing or Tobaccoe stalks, or any sort of Meal,
Flower, Grotts, Bread or Biscuit, or shall make any Candles, or Malt for sale
or private use, or shall tanne or dress any sort of Hydes or Skins, or
receive for sale ready tanned or dressed, any Hydes or Skins, or any
commodities made thereof, or receive for sale any other commodity mentioned in
this Proclamation, or shall use or exercise any kind of Mill or Mills for
grinding of any sort of Corn, or slaughter any Cattle for sale, from and
immediately after the publishing of this Proclamation, shall keep or cause to be
kept a true account in a Book plainly written, of the quality and quantity of
all the Ale, Beer, Aquavitae and Hotwaters he or they shall brew or distill
from time to time, of all the Wine, foreign Beer, Vinegar, Perry, Cydar,
Alegar, Verjuice, Salt, Tobaccoe, Sneesing or Tobaccoe stalks, Meal, Flower,
Grotts, Bread or Biscuit, he or they shall sell or retaile, of all the Malt and
Candles he or they shall make for sale or private use, of all the Hydes, or
Skins he or they shall tanne or dress, or shall receive for sale ready
tanned or dressed, or other commodity made of the same, or any other commodity
mentioned in this Proclamation, of the quantity and kind of all such Corn
(either Maulted or not Maulted) as he or they shall daily grind, either for
themselves ^or others, with the names and dwelling places of all those for whom
they shall so grind, and of all the Beasts and kinds of Cattle, he or they
shall weekly slaughter for sale, of which account they and every of them are to
deliver unto the Commissioners of the Impost a true copy as often as they
shall be thereunto required, upon pain of forty shillings for every neglect
thereof.

None to d^ver witho^ Ticquet.
or any commodity made thereof, or any other commodity mentioned in this
Proclamation, shall dispose sell or suffer to go forth of his House Cellar
Storehouse or possession, any of the above named, or other commodities
mentioned in this Proclamation before a Ticquet thereof from the Impost masters
first delivered him or them, or his or their servant, upon pain of five pounds
for every default.

None to r^^eive with Ticquet.
or other commodities mentioned in this Proclamation, by way of wholesale
without Ticquet for the same, first obtained from the Impost masters, and
Impost paid upon pain as above is expressed, and as well the seller as buyer
of any of the above named or other commodities mentioned in this Proclamation,
Quantity wholesale.
are to take notice that by wholesale is meant no less weight, measure or
number of the said several kinds then hereafter is expressed. That is to say
Aquavitae and all Hotwaters a gallon, Wine one Hogshead, foreign Beer a
quarter of a barrel, Herrings half a barrel, Vinegar, Perry, Cydar, Alegar
and Verjuice, half a barrel, Salt half a barrel, Tobaccoe Sneesing or
Tobaccoe stalks fifty pounds, Meal, Flower, Grotts Bread or Biskett a hundred
weight, Candles ten dozen pounds, Hydes and Skins of all sorts tanned curryed
or dressed, as is before in the rates expressed.

Brewers n^ deliver wi^out Ticqu^
of the true quality and quantity of the said Ale or Beer first delivered him
or them, or his or their clarke and not to deliver any other or more Ale or
Beer then he or they shall receive Ticquet for, upon pain of three pounds for
every barrel so delivered for the first offense, and six pounds for every
barrel for the second offense, and ten pounds for every barrel for the third
offense.

^to re^ Ale or without ^ct.
of the true quality and quantity of the said Ale or Beer, upon pain of three
pounds for every barrel so received for the first offense, and six pounds a
barrel so received for the sec^nd offense, and ten pounds a barrel so received
for the third offense.

That all manner of person or persons whatsoever, within the City or Suburbs of
Dublin or liberties adjoining, that shall brew any Ale or Beer, in his or
their or any other house either for retaile or private use, ^g of Ale ^eere ^
twenty ^oures ^uning.
do within twenty four hour, after the tunning of his or their Ale or Beer,
enter or cause to be entered the quality and full quantity thereof in the Impost
Office, and th^re pay the Impost, and take out Ticquet for the same, and shall
not from henceforth presume to tun or cause to be tunned any Ale or Beer, in
any caske whatsoever, ^ity of ^es.
save in Butts, Pip^s, Hogsheads, barrells, half barrells and quarter
barrells, of thirty two gallons the barrel. And every Butt or Pipe to be
accounted and entered for four whole barrells, and every Hogshead for two whole
barrells, and no less upon pain of three pounds for every offense.

Dublin, or County of Dublin, that retailes the same, do sell reta^le or any
ways dispose of any part of such Ale or Beer as they shall brew, ^s that ^.
either in guile or otherwise, before entry thereof made as aforesaid, upon
pain of ten shillings for every gallon so sold, retailed or disposed of, and
so rateably for other quantities.

^ of old ^ew.
shall mix or cause to be mixed any old with new, without license first
obtained from the Commissioners of the Impost, upon the like penalty.

Brewers ^ two pen^ barrel.
shall pay two pence per barrel for all the Ale and Beer strong and small
which they shall weekly fell the same, to be paid as the Commissioners of the
Impost shall appoint, upon pain of five shillings for every barrel not paid
for.

Aquavi^ the gall^
by way of merchandise, until the Impost thereof be p^id, and a Ticquet
obtained from the Impost masters for the payment thereof, upon pain of payment
of ten shillings for every gallon of Aquavitae or Hotwaters so bought.

Dublin, or liberties adjoining, that have now in their possession any
Aquavitae, Hotwaters, Wines, for eigne Beer, Herrings, Vinegar, Perry, Cydar,
Al^gar, Verjuice, Salt, Tobaccoe, Sneesing or Tobaccoe stalks* Meal, ^lower,
Grots, Bread, or Biscuit, Candles, Malt, Entering ^ commodi^
Hydes or Skins, tanned curryed or dressed, or any Commodities made thereof,
Fire wood, ^^ac^l^, Smith^oale, or Coome, for sal^, or any other commodity
mentioned in this Proclamation, within the limmits asore said, shall forthwith
after publishing of this Proclamation, make true entryes of the full weight,
number and measure thereof, in the Impost Office, and shall l^kew^se from
henceforth before the Landing, Houseing or Cellaring of any of the above
mentioned, or any oth^^ commodities in this Proclamation c^^teyned hereafter,
to be received from time to time, make true entryes of the full weight, number
and measure thereof in the said Impost Office, and shall not sell o^ any ways
dispose of any part thereof, before such entry made, and license obtained for
all such commodities no^ rated in this Proclamation, from the Commissioners of
the Impost, Impost by ^ position.
who are hereby authorized to compound with them for the Impost thereof
according to their discretions, upon pain of five pounds for every one that
shall neglect to make such entry, or sell or any way dispose of any of the
aforesaid commodities before such composition made.

Dublin, or County of Dublin, that tradeth in Salt, both by whole sale and
retaile, shall from henceforth presume to bring or cause to be brought from his
Cellar storehouse or any other place into his shop or elsewhere, ^an^ ^etaile
any Salt to retaile before he have paid Impost, and obtained Ticquet from the
Impost masters for such quantity as he intends to bring there for retaile,
and a wayter from the Impost Office appointed to see the said quantity so
brought into his shop or elsewhere as aforesaid, upon pain of forty shillings
for every barrel of Salt brought without Ticquet and a wayter present.

^hants ^te ex^.
Grotts, Bread, Biskett or Candles, shall be rated and considered of by the
Commissioners of the Impost Office, for the Herrings, Vinegar, Perry, Cydar,
Alegar, Verjuice, Salt, Meal, Flower, Grotts, Bread, Biskett or Candles, they
shall spend in their private Housekeeping, according to the discretion of the
said Commissioners.

^ners pri^ expense.
according to the discretion of the Commissioners of the Impost.

^ of Mills ^ used.
do use or exercise any kind of Mill or Mills, for grinding of any sort of
Corn, other then Horsemills, Windmills and Water mills, upon pain of twenty
pounds.

That any Miller or other person whatsoever, ^ within ^mmits.
using or exercising the Mill of Templeogue, or any the Mills upon the River of
Dodder, from thence downwards to the Sea, or the Mils of Rathfarnam, Miltown,
Clonskeagh, or Dunabrooke, or the Mills of Drumnagh, or any the Mills upon any
stream issuing out of the River of Dodder, from Templeogue, to Dublin, or the
Mill of Palmerstown, or any the Mills from thence to the Sea upon the River of
Liffie, or any stream issuing from thence, or the Mills of Kilmaniam, or the
Mills of Finglasse, or any the Mills upon the River of Tolky, or the Windmill
of Cloxtarffe; or any other Mills in or about the City or Suburbs of Dublin,
do not receive or cause to be received into his or their Mill or Mils, either
for themselves or any other, any manner of Corn, either maulted or not maulted
to be ground, No Mille^ receive a^ grain wi^ ticquet.
or upon any other pretense whatsoever, without a Ticquet from the Impost
Office first delivered him or them, or his or their servant, expressing the
quantity and kind of such Corn, and to receive no more or other Corn or
Malt then for which a Ticquet shall be delivered unto him or them or his or
their servant, upon pain of twenty shillings for every peck or barrel he or
they shall so receive and so rateably for greater or lesser quantities.

Non to s^ any grain^ grind wit^ ticquet.
in any Mill or Mills other then Horsemills, Windmills, and Watermills, nor
shall send or cause to be sent to any such Mill or Mills, any kind of Corn to
be ground, or upon any other pretense whatsoever until the Impost thereof be
paid or a Ticquet obtained from the Impost Masters, expressing the quantity and
kind of such Corn, and not to send any other or more Corn, then they shall
so take Ticquet for, upon pain of twenty shillings for every pecke or barrel
so sent. No Mill^ dispose o^ toll, with ticquet. ^ bake bre^ for his fa^ and
that ^ consider^ the Com^oners.


That no Miller of any the said Mills in this Proclamation formerly named, or
other person whatsoever, using or exercising any kinds of Mils, shall sell or
any ways dispose of their tole corn without ticquet first obtained from the
Impost masters, nor shall bake any Bread other then to spend in his own family,
for which he shall be considered of, by the Commissioners of the Impost, upon
pain of twenty shillings for every of the said offenses.

Entering ^ Leather ^ sealing ^
or deal in any of the kinds of Hydes or Skins before mentioned, shall from
henceforth enter in the Impost Office, the full number and kind of all such
Hydes and Skins as they shall tanne or dress, or shall receive ready tanned
or dressed from time to time, and shall not sell use or any way dispose of any
of the said Hydes or Skins, before the same be thoroughly dried and sealed by
a seal of the Impost Office (without any fee to be paid for the same) and
Impost paid for the said Hydes or Skins according to the rates before
expressed, and a Ticquet obtained from the Impost masters, upon pain of
forfeiture of six times the Impost set upon the said Hydes or Skins by this
Proclamation.

^ receive ^ealing ^me.
from any Merchant, Tanner, Curryer, Skinner or other, before the same be
thoroughly dried and sealed as aforesaid, and Impost paid, and a Ticquet
obtained from the Impost masters, upon the like pain as above.

^ of ^
or that shall hereafter come into their hands from time to time, upon pain of
five shillings for every dozen pound so neglected to be entered.

^ ac^
and pay the Impost set upon the same and obtain a Ticquet from the Impost
masters, upon pain of forty shillings, for every dozen pound of Candles sold
and not entered and paid for.

Dublin, or two miles thereof, that shall slaughter any kind or sort of Cattle
before mentioned to sell, ^o ^es.
do before he or they slaughter any Beast, enter in the said Impost Office,
the number and kinds of Cattle or Beasts that he or they intend to slaughter,
and pay the Impost set upon the same, and obtain Ticquet thereof from the
Impost masters, upon pain of five pounds for every Ox, Bull, Cow, Steer and
Bullock, and upon pain of three pounds for every Calfe, and twenty shillings
for every Sheep, Swine, Goat, Lamb and Kid, so slaughtered.

Suburbs of Dublin, or County of Dublin, Entry o^ tell for p^vate use.
(by whom any Impost is by this Proclamation to be paid) shall slaughter any of
the said kinds of Cattle or Beasts before mentioned, either to salt up for his
or their own use, or to spend or eat fresh in his or their own Houses, until
such time as the number and kinds of such Cattle or Beasts as he or they
intend to slaughter, be first entered in the Impost Office, and the Impost set
upon the same paid, and a Ticquet thereof obtained from the said Office, upon
pain as aforesaid.

Dublin, or County of Dublin, Butchers ^ City, Sub^ or Count^ enter and ^
Impost.
that shall slaughter any of the kinds of Cattle or Beasts before mentioned to
sell, or that shall bring or send any of the said kinds of Cattle or beasts
into this City or Suburbs, ready slaughtered to be sold or salted up, do
before they offer to sale, or dispose of any of the said Cattle or Beasts,
enter in the Impost Office the number and kinds of the same, and pay Impost
after the same rate as is hereby appointed to be paid for Cattle slaughtered
to be sold, and obtain a Ticquet from the Impost Office for the same, upon
pain as above is expressed.

Cattle sl^tered for ^ Majesty's ^ or Navy ^ pay Impo^
Navy or otherwise, without Ticquet first obtained from the Impost masters for
the same, and Impost paid, upon pain as before is expressed.

No Mals^ sell or dis^ without t^ and Impos^
for which any Imposition is by this Proclamation to be paid, shall deliver or
any ways dispose of any Malt which he or they shall make, until they pay the
Impost set upon the same, and obtain a Ticquet from the Impost masters, upon
pain of five shillings for every barrel of Malt delivered or disposed of
without Ticquet as aforesaid.

^road^ to be ex^ without ^ paid.
presume to send or export by Land, out of the limmits aforesaid, any
Broadcloath or other commodity (not having formerly paid Custom and Impost in
the Customehouse by importation) without a ticquet from the Impost masters
first obtained, and impost paid for the same, according the rates before
expressed, upon pain as aforesaid.

^g to be ^.
any sort of fire wood, Seacoale or Coome, for sale, for which impost is by
this Proclamation to be paid, shall forthwith after publishing of this
Proclamation, enter their names and dwelling places in the Impost Office, with
the full quantity of all the fire wood, Seacoale and Coome, they have in their
respective possessions, and not sell or any ways dispose of any part thereof,
without Ticquet from the said impost Office, upon pain of forty shillings for
every such default.

^o receive ^g before ^e.
any sort of fire wood, Seacoale or Coome, being already Landed, or hereafter
to be Landed for sale, before the impost thereof be paid, and a Ticquet
obtained from the impost masters for the same, upon the like pain.

Dublin, or County of Dublin, ^ers and ^iers to ^position ^ers.
brewing either for their own use, or retaile any Ale or Beer, or slaughtering
Cattle, or committing any act contrary to this Proclamation, be compelled to
conform themselves as well as others, to the said Proclamation. And to that
end the Commissioners herein entrusted, are hereby Authorized to proceed with
them, as they do with others that are no Soldiers; Wherein also We pray and
require the Governor of His Majesty's Forces, in the City and Suburbs of
Dublin, or the time being, as also all Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers
within the County of Dublin, to be ayding and assisting to the said
Commissioners, or any by them authorized, from time to time as there may be
occasion.

None t^ resistan^ any imp^ment to ^ Officer^ Impost ^
shall give any impediment or resistance to any of the wayters, or other
Officers belonging to the impost Office, or any other authorized by the
Commissioners thereof, for searching any part of his or their houses, shops,
Cellars or storehouses, for and about His Majesty's Service, in the execution
of this Proclamation, upon pain of five pounds for every time he or they shall
so offend.

Penalt^ levied ^ the goo^ the offe^
be levied upon the goods and chattles of the offenders, and to be paid to the
Impost masters, and the one moiety thereof, by them given to the informer, and
the other to be paid to his Majesty's Vice-Treasurer and Treasurer at wars,
or to whom he shall appoint, to be by him issued out and accounted for, in
manner and form aforesaid. And WE require all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of
Peace, and all other His MAJESTY'S Officers, Ministers, and loving Subjects,
whom it may concern, and particularly all Colonels, All to ^ the ex^ of this
^clama^
Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers, of His MAJESTY'S Army, to be helping
ayding and assisting in the due execution of this Proclamation, from time to
time as there shall be occasion. And WE Require the Major, and Sherriffes, of
the City of Dublin, to cause this Proclamation, to be forthwith published and
Proclaimed, throughout this City and Suburbs of Dublin* As WE also Require the
Sherriffe of the County of Dublin, to cause the same to be forthwith published
and Proclaimed, throughout the said County of Dublin.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, 9. December, 1644. R. Bolton Canc.
Roscomon. Ant. Midensis. Cha. Lambart. Fr. Willoughby. Tho. Lucas. G.
Wentworth.


God save the King.

