AN ASSESMENT for IRELAND For three Months; at Ten Thousand Pounds by the Month.
Commencing the 12th. day of January 1654. and Determining the 12th. of April
following.

Dublin this 1. of January 1654.

ORdered by the Lord Deputy and Council, That this Order and Commission for the
Assesment, be forthwith Printed and Published.

Signed by Order of the said Lord Deputy and Council. THO: HERBERY. Clerk of
the Council.

DVBLIN, Printed by WILLIAM BLADEN, Anno Dom. 1654.

IRELAND BY THE LORD DEPVTY AND COUNCIL.
WHereas by an Ordinance of his Highness the Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland. and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, with the advice of his Council, bearing date the 23th. of June,
1654. Entitled, An Ordinance for the further encouragement of the Adventurers
for Lands in Ireland, and of the Soldiers, and other Planters there. It is,
Ordained (amongst other things) that from and after the 24th. day of June 1654
For and during the space of two years, then next ensuing, there shall be Taxed,
Assessed, and (...), upon all the Counties, Towns, and places in Ireland, and
all the Estates real and personal therein, the (...) of (...) thousand pounds
by the month, for every month, during the said two years: It is therefore
hereby Ordered, and Declared, that toward the pay of the forces of the
Commonwealth in Ireland, and other public charges, the Counties, Cities, and
places, be charged for three months, with the sums hereafter named,
respectively, by the several sums, and according to the several Rates, and
proportions, and in manner and form hereafter expresed, viz.

The County of Dublin, the sum of thirteen hundred and eighty pounds for three
months, being four hundred and sixty pounds each month.

The City and County of the City of Dublin, the sum of six hundred and ninety
pounds, for three months, being two hundred and thirty pounds each month.

The County of Kildare, the sum of six hundred and sixty pounds, for three
months, being two hundred and twenty pounds each month.

The County of Catherlagh, the sum of two hundred sixty four pounds, for three
months, being eighty eight pounds each month.

The Kings County, the sum of two hundred and forty pounds, for three months,
being eighty pounds each month.

The Queens County, the sum of three hundred and ninety pounds, for three
months, being one hundred and thirty pounds each month.

The County of Longford, the sum of sixty nine pounds, for three months, being
twenty three pounds each month.

The County of East-Meath, with the Town of Dioghedah, the sum of two thousand
three hundred twenty and two pounds, for three (...), being seven hundred
twenty four pounds each month.

The County of West-Meath, the sum of three hundred and ninety pounds for three
months, being one hundred and thirty pounds each month.

The County of Kilkenny, with the Town thereof, the sum of one thousand seven
hundred eighty five pounds, for three months, being five hundred ninety five
pounds each month.

The Town and County of Wexford, the sum of eight hundred and forty pounds, for
three months, being two hundred and eighty pounds each month.

The County of Wicklo, the sum of eighteen pounds, for three months, bing six
pounds each month.

The County of Limerick, with the City and County thereof the sum of nine
hundred forty five pounds, for three months, being three hundred fifteen pounds
each month.

The County of Cork, with the City and County thereof, the sum of four
thousand one hundred eighty and eight pounds, for three months, being one
thousand three hundred ninety six pounds each month.

The County of Waterford, with the City and County thereof, the sum of one
thousand one hundred twenty two pounds, for three months, being three hundred
seventy four pounds each month.

The County of Kerry, the sum of two hundred fifty five pounds, for three
months being eighty five pounds each month.

The County of Tipperary, including Holicross, the sum of two thousand three
hundred and forty pounds, for three months, being seven hundred and eighty
pounds each month.

The County of Donegal or Tirconel, the sum of thirteen hundred and fifty
pounds, for three months, being four hundred and fifty pounds each month.

The County of Tirone, including upper and nether Tirone, the sum of four
hundred seventy and one pound, for three months, being one hundred fifty seven
pounds each month.

The County of Fermanath, the sum of four hundred forty seven pounds, for three
months, being one hundred forty nine pounds each month.

The County of Cavan, the sum of seventy two pounds for three months, being
twenty four pounds each month.

The County of Monaghan, the sum of ninety pounds, for three months, being
thirty pounds each month.

The County of Antrim, with the Town and County of Carrickfergus, the sum of
two thousand and seventie pounds, for three months being six hundred and
ninety pounds each month.

The County of Down, the sum of seventeen hundred and forty pounds, for three
months, being five hundred and eighty pounds each month.

The County of Ardmagh, the sum of two hundred twenty five pounds for three
months, being seventie five pounds each month.

The County of Londonderry, with the City and County thereof, and the Town
and Barony of Colerane, the sum of one thousand and fifty pounds; for three
months; being three hundred and fifty pounds each month.

The County of Lowth, the sum of six hundred and eighteen pounds, for three
months, being two hundred and six pounds each month.

The County of Clare, the sum of four hundred thirty five pounds, for three
months, being one hundred forty five pounds each month.

The County of Rolcomon, the sum of five hundred and ten pounds, for three
months, being one hundred and seventy pounds each month.

The County of Mayo, the sum of three hundred and thirty pounds, for three
months, being one hundred and ten pounds each month.

The County of Sligoe, the sum of two hundred and seventy pounds, for three
months, being ninety pounds each month.

The County of Letrim, The sum of eighty four pounds, for three months, being
twenty eight pounds each month.

The County of Gallway, with the Town thereof, the sum of two thousand three
hundred and forty pounds, for three months, being seven hundred and eighty
pounds each month.

And it is further Ordered and Declared, That the persons hereafter named,
shall be Commissioners of the several and respective Counties and places
hereafter nominated; for the Assessing Leavying and Collecting the Assesment
aforesaid.

Viz.

For the County of Dublin, with the City and County of the City of Dublin.]
Charles Lord Lambert Sir Hardress Waller, Sir Ger^ard Lowther, Sir Edward
Bolton, Sir William Vssher, Sir William Parsons, Sir John Temple, Sir Robert
Meredith, Sir Robert King Knights, John Reynolds, John Hewson, Hierom Sankey,
Richard Lawrence, Philip Ferheley, John Blackwel, John Vernon, Theophilus
Jones, Nicholas Bolton Junior of Brasill, the Mayor of Dublin for the time
being, Doctor Henry Jones, Dudley Loftus, Isaac Dobson, Thomas Richardson,
Henry Porter, Raphael Hunt, Richard Tigh, Daniel Hutchinson, John Price,
Timothy Avery, Robert Moulsworth, James Standish, Thomas Boles, John Preston,
William Franklin, William Gottington, John Smith of Drumconra, William Arnop,
John Percival, Chidley Coote, Arthur Anslow, John Bysse, Ralph Wallis, Henry
Jones, Thomas Walcor, William Blackwell (...) Tailor, John Blewet, Robert
Hasles, John Swan, William Ivory, Henry Johnson, Robert Percival, John Gay
Esquires.

For the County of Kildare.] Sir John Temple, Sir Paul Davis, Sir Robert
Meredith, Sir John Hoey Knights, John Hewson, John Perceval, James Peisley,
Edward Davis; Henry Alland, Henry Sankey, Robert Warnefore, John Blackwell,
John Hewerson, Henry Pretty, Richard Andrews William Meredith, Ioshuah
Carpenter, John Ponsonby, Daniel Hutchinson, Richard Tigh. John Hughes,
Theophilus Jones, John Iordon, William Dixon, William Walker, Henry Crookhorn,
Hugh Chamberlane, Thomas Richardson, Joseph Wray, William Smith, William Sands,
Raphael Hunt, Brian Jones; Thomas Cheek, Philip Fern Iey Esquires.

For the County of Catherlogh.] Sir John Temple, Knight, Henry Prittie,
Oliver Jones, James Peisley, Henry Sankey, Richard Andrews, William Skinner,
Sir John Hoey Knight, John Benner, Daniel Hutchinson, William Walker, James
Stopford, Henry Nichols, Henry Crookhorn, William Bolton, Sampson Twogood,
James Shepherd, John Iordon, William Huler, Francis Bolton, Raphael Hunt
Esquires.

For the Kings Countie] Sir William Parsons, Sir George Blundel Knights, Henry
Owen, John Bysse, William Duckenfield, Henry Sankey, Edward Birtles, Edward
Herbert, William Hamilton, Henry le Strange, John Warren, Randolph Sparrow,
Alexander Staples, (...) Bishop, Henry Waddington, James Shaen, Carry Dillon,
Alexander Brayfield Esquires, Charles Lord Lambert, William Handcock, Peter
Stubbard, Francis Hurd, Thomas Davies Esquires.

For the Queens County.] Sir Charles Coot Knight, Daniel Axtel, Henry Pretty,
Richard Stephens, Henry Owen, Thomas Rawlins, Thomas Adams, Edward Feak,
Oliver Wheeler, (...) Farrer, Henry Gilbert, John Weaver Junior, Richard
Laghlin, Martin Iubbs, Francis Barrington, Philip Bigo, Thomas, Evans, Henry
Baker, Thomas Newmen, William Walker, William Scot, Vincent Kidder, Francis
Bolton, Robert Busbridge, Gilbert Rawson, William Bolton, William Burges, Ben.
Woodward, Samuel Gardner, William Walker Junior, William Whaley, Henry E^ans,
William Skinner, Peter Stubbar, Francis Hurd, Thomas Davies, Raphael Hunt
Esquires.

For the County of Longford.] Adam Molineux, Henry Packenham, William Pelham,
John Tench, John Kennedy, Samuel Price, John Edgworth, Henry Waddington, James
Shaen, Henry Sankey, Alexander Brayfield, Patrick Carry, William Handcock
Esquires.

For the County of East-Meath, with the Town of Droghedah.] Sir Charles Coot,
Knight, Doctor Henry Jones, John Fowk, William Cadogan, Cadwallader Win Simon
Crane, Thomas Stanley, Iosceline Usher, Thomas^ Ash, Henry Puckenham, Robert
Cusack, Alexander Iephson, William Summers, Thomas Vincent, John Baxter, Thomas
Cook, Richard Edmunds, Bartholomew Fowk, James Mortimer, John Edgworth, Thomas
Blood, Arthur Purefoy, William Markham, Joseph Fox, Patrick Carry, Edward
Martin, Rowland Trolly, Edmund Hoyl, Thomas Fugil, Doctor Jonathan Edwards,
John Pierce, James Smalwood, William Parkinson, William Web Esquires.

For the County of West Mead.] Charles Lord Lambert, John Reynolds, Richard
Edmunds, Ridgely Hatfield; William Handcock, Alexander Iephson, Henry Baker,
Robert Smith, Henry Jones, Henry Pierce, Walter Staplehill, Peter Stern, Denis
Brown, Alexander Brayfield, James Shaen, Henry Waddington, Sebastian Brigham,
Patrick Carry, Peter Stub-Francis Hurd, Thomas Davies, William Parkinson, Arthur
Purefoy Esquires.

For the County of Kilkenny with the Town of Kilkennie.] John Reynolds, Daniel
Axcel, Richard Stephens, Henry Owen, Thomas Rawlins, Thomas Adams, Thomas
Evans, Thomas Wilson, Abel Warren, William Burges Esquires. Sir H^^dress
Waller, Sir Patrick Wemys Knights. Richard Smith, Thomas Butler, Marmaduke
Tailor, John Brawn, (...) Ridgeway, Thomas Newman, William Bolton, Henry
Pretty, Edward Fe^^^ William Whaley, Hicrom Sankey, Ben Wor^^^y, Philip Peak,
Oliver Wheeler, (...) Farrar, William Warden, John Woodcock, Thomas Squthwell,
William Halsey, Thomas Fog, Henry Baker, Thomas Chesshire, Stephen Squib,
Arthur Swanwick, John Campbel Esquires.

For the County of W^rford] Sir Charles Coote Knight, Thomas Sadler, Arthur
Anslow, John Overstreet, John Padle, William Halsey, William Moo^, Bartholomew
Hussy, Edward Tomlins, Ambrose Andrew^, (...) o^ ^^^by, John Win^worth, Thomas
Brereton, Thomas Danc^r, Sampson Twogood, Matthew (...), Edward With^^^, (...),
William Walker Iu^^i^^, Thomas (...), ^bell Warren, William Cleburn,
Christopher Dobson, Peter Wallis, Thomas Betts, Samuel Sheir^, Whomas
Richardson (...) Murph^y, Henry Pretty, Nicholas Loftus, Nicholas ^odd, Richard
VVilbore, (...) of Kilbride, Nicholas Dever^ox, Edward Brading, John Kett,
William Wood^ald, Constantine Neal, Thomas Low, Robert Wilkinson Esquires.

For the County of Widow.] John Hewson, Richard Lawrence, Thomas Brereton,
William Arnop, John Iecpel, John Boswell, George Phillips, Edward Hoar, Robert
Kennedy, John Ponsonby, Divid Fleetwood, Henry Jones, Edward Carter, Thomas
Richardson, Bartholomew Hussy, Richard Neale Esquires.

For the County of Limerick, and the City and County of the City of Limerick.]
Sir (...) Waller Knight, Henry Ingoldsby, William Purefoy, Thomas Southwell,
William Piggot^, Edward Southwell, Francis Courtney, Robert Cox, Samuel Clerk,
Thomas Iackson, Walter Waller, Ralph Wilson, William Hartwell, Robert
Wilkinson, John Tailor, Richard (...), William Yarwell, James Harrison,
William King, John Friend, Robert Sta^^ard, Benjamin Lucas, Edward Warren,
William VVood, Robert (...), Joseph Bennet, Daniel Bowman, Jeremiah Howard,
John Parkinson, William Riall, (...) Robinson Esquires.

For the County of Cork, and the City and County of the City of Cork.] Roger
Lord Broghill, Sir Hardress Waller, Sir William Fenton Knights, John
Brodrick, Maurice Fenton, Robert Phayre, Richard Hodden, Tristram VVhitcomb,
Walter Waller, Abraham Savage, John Baker, Peter Wallis, Robert Sanders,
Robert Southwell, Joseph D^^an, Vincent Go^ki^, John Perceval, John Hoddar,
William Hall, Joseph Murdock, Nicholas Purd^^, John VVidenham, Francis Fowk,
Simon Eaton, Esaias Thomas, Thomas Wood^^^, Richard (...), John (...), Peter
Carey, Robert Gookin, (...) Bu^nell, John Iephson, Thomas (...), John Dennison,
Samuel (...), Benjamin Croft^, Charles (...), William Iephson, Philip (...),
John (...), John Harding, Thomas C^^l^y, Thomas Moss, Henry (...), Robert
Hedges, Robert Cuppage, Peter (...), John (...), Valentine (...), Esquires.

For the County of Waterford, with the Town of Waterford.] Richard Lawrence,
Thomas Sadler, William Leigh, William Halsey, Samuel Wade, Thomas VVatts,
Robert Fawcett, Thomas Bolton, Andrew Rickard, George Cawdron, John Ve^^on,
John Williams, Samuel Sheers, Henry Slade, John Cook, Henry Smithwick,
Richard Osborn, Nicholas Osborn, Francis Foulke Esquires.

For the County of Kerry.] Sir Charles Coot Knight, John Nelson, Richard
Ousley, John Carrick, White Hall Brown, Arthur Denny, John Hasser, Thomas
Barrington, Thomas Holmes, Henry Whittle, Peter Purefoy, John Perceval Esquires.

For the County of Tiperary, including Holy-cross.] Sir William Fenton Knight;
John Reynolds, Hierom Sankey, Daniel Abbot, Solomon Richards Senior, Solomon
Richards Junior, John Godfrey, Elias Green, Richard Le-hunt, Charles Blunt,
Robert Thornhill. John Perceval, Henry Paris, Thomas Batty. (...) Folio, John
Booker, John Ioyner, William Walters of Cu^^in, Walter Waller, Maurice Fenton,
William Halsey, Walter Carwardin, Martin Dix, Francis Vaughan, John Blackwel,
George Clarke Esquires Sir Thomas Meredith Knight.

For the County of Donegall.] Sir Robert Ma^n^y, Sir George Atcheson, Sir Paul
Davis Knights, William Basil Attorney General, Thomas Newbrough, Henry Brooks,
Arthur Gore, James Linsey, Archibald Sprowle, Ralph King, Hugh Edwards, Owen
Winn, Charles Hamilton, Edward Husset, John Folliot, George Carry, Richard
Perkins, John Hill, Francis Zachery, John Zachery, William Squire, Richard Ask,
John Ba^^e^, Francis Bolton, John Galland, John Salt, Henry Skevington, John
Wilton, Henry Alland, Francis Leg, William Dutten, Thomas Dutten Alexander
Staples Esquires.

For the County of Tirone, including upper and nether Tirone.] William Lord
Gawfield, Sir Henry T^^chburne, Sir George Atcheson Knights, Ralph King, Owen
Winn, Thomas Newbourgh Senior, Christopher C^pley, Nicholas (...), Edward Hill,
Francis Zachery, John Zachery, Oliver An^^l, John Foster, William Moore, (...)
Young, William Squire, Richard Ask, John Barret, Francis Bolton, John Galland,
John Salt, Henry Skevington, George Wilton, Francis Leg, Samuel Hill Alexander
Staples Esquires.

For the County of Fermanagh.] Samuel Batteley Lewis Northcort, Richard Nun,
Francis Cole, John Cole, Stephen Allin, Arnold Cosby, Henry Brook, Hugh Ross,
Adam Rathcart, John Cheslin, Robert Cole, Henry Langford, Samuel Powel, John
Read, Thomas Seagrave, Ralph Fenwick, Cadwallader Win, James Gerrard, John
Hardier, Chidley Coote, Nicholas Willoughby, Edward Philpot, Oliver Anctil,
(...) Gilbert, William VVinckworth, John Carmich Esquires.

For the County of Cavan.] Charles Lord Lambert, Sir Charles Coote, Sir George
Atcheson Knights, John Read, William Morris, John Winckworth, Edward Philpot,
Thomas White, William Moore, Thomas Seagrave, Charles Hamilton, Thomas Coote,
William Kempson, Ralph Fenwick, James Gerrard, John Hardier, Chidley Coote,
Lewis Northcot, Richard Nun, John Matthews, Tobias Peak, Francis Brereton,
Thomas Burton, Richard Lewis, Richard Aylet, (...) Gun, Thomas Guilliams,
Thomas Richardson, Thomas Heart, John Bernard, Samuel Townly Esquires.

For the County of Monaghan.] Alderman Vincent, Ralph Fenwick, William Sands,
John Matthews, Henry Ponsonby, Robert Aldridge, Robert Barclay, John Read,
William Morris, Thomas Coot, Hugh Barclay, Robert Sanderson, Thomas Seagrave,
Cadwallader Win, Lewis Northcot, Richard Nun, James Gerrard, John Hardier,
Chidley Coote, Edward Carry, Francis Cole, (...) Lane, John Iackson, Walter Carry
Esquires.

For the County of Antrim, including the Towns and County of Carigfergus.]
Lord Chichester, Sir John Clotworthy Knight, Arthur Hill, Robert Venables,
Daniel Redman, Thomas C^^^, Alexander Colvil, Robert Colvil, Roger Lyndon,
Henry Flower, Brian Smith, John Barret, Philip Ebzury, Richard A^k, Edward
Conway, Robert Cusack. George Rawdon, James Trayle, Thomas Wal^^t, Francis
Meek, Richard Bickerstaff, the (...) of Carigfergus for the time being, Arthur
Lipton, Hercules Langford, John Dalway Philip Pinchon, Henry Ellis, John
Duckenfield, John Reading, Richard Done, Samuel Bonnel, William Williams,
William Lo, George Talbot, Thomas Harpar, Richard Pierce, Michael Harrison,
Alexander Cornwall, Francis Richardson, John Frank, Robert Preston, Richard
Franklin, Joseph Stroud, John Matthews, John Collins, William Disney, Samuel
Powell, William Kuningham, Archibald Stewart, John Clerk, James Shaw, John
Donnaldson, Alexander Donnaldson, Adam Boyd, Thomas Church, William Huetson,
Henry Marsh, Thomas Howard, John Orpin, Edmund Davis, James Adaire, John (...)
Dowel of Six-Mile-Water, the Sovereign of Belfast, Thomas Warning, John Bush,
William Lees, (...) Haddington, John Waring, William Waring, Alexander Staples
Esquires.

For the County of Down.] Sir George Blundell Knight, Robert Venables, Philip
Pinchon, Arthur Hill, Robert Barrow, Robert Cusack, Roger West, James Trayle,
Tobias Norris, William Bingley, John Lucas, James Shaen, Hugh Savage, George
Rawden, (...) Perrot, Tobias Pointz, Andrew Graham, Alexander Slowan, Fergus
Kennedy, Francis Keyth, William Hawkins, Colin Maxwell, Hans Hamilton, Francis
Bolton, John Duckenfield, John Reading, Richard Done, Samuel Bonnel, William
Williams, William Lo, George Talbot, John Frank, Robert Preston, Richard
Franklin, Joseph Stroud, John Matthews, John Collins, William Disney, Samuel
Powel, John Person, George Augustine, John Baily, John Turner, Provost of New
Town, (...) Matthews, (...) Bagnal, John Waring, (...) Preston, John Verner,
William Hamilton of Rowbane, George Rol^, Alexander Stuart, Robert Maxwel,
Robert Fenwick, Miles Ienkinson, John Dob, Thomas Williams, George Low,
Alexander Staples John Barret Esquires.

For the County of Ardmagh.] William Lord Cawfield, Sir William Brownlow, Sir
George A^cheson, Knights, Robert Venables, Hans Hamilton, Thomas Chambers,
Arthur Annesley, Henry Dillon, Anthony Cope, Robert Cusack, Roger West, Tobias
Points, Edward Richardson, James Trail, John Duckenfield, John Reading, Richard
Done, Samuel Bonnel, William Williams, William Lo, George Talbot, John Frank,
Robert Preston, Richard Franklin, Joseph Stroud, John Matthews, John (...),
William Disney, Samuel Powel, George Blacker; John Erp, William Arthur, John
Jones, Francis Richardson, John Lord, John R^y, William W^^^ey, Edward
Atcheson, Alexander Gill, (...) Richardson, Robert Fonwick Esquires.

For the County of Londonderry, and the City and County of the City of
Londonderry.] Sir Charles Coot, Sir Robert (...) Knights, The several Mayors of
Londonderry and Colerane for the time being, Du^dey Phillips, George Phillips,
Ralph King, Hugh Edwards, Philip (...), Henry ^lower, Bryan Smith, John Barret,
Richard (...) ^worthy, Robert (...), Owen Win, Thomas Newbourgh, Henry Finch,
Tristram Berisford, George Carry, Robert Smith, Thomas Mu^cree^e, Francis Bolton
Francis Zechery, John Zechery, William Squire, John Galland, John Salt, (...)
Shevingto^, George Wilton, Francis Leg, Michael Berisford, William Cuningham
Esquires.

For the County of Lowth.] John Fowl, William Aston, Robert Win, William
Armitage, John (...), Samuel Stanbridge, Rowland Trolly, Edward Martin, William
Cadogan, Thomas Stanly, Henry Gilbert, Joseph Fox, Thomas Fugill, Simon Crane,
Cadwallader Win, Henry Ponsonby, Henry Bellingham, VVolstan Dix^y, Samuel
Law^on, Samuel Ireland, William Neve, William Shaw, Patrick Carry, William
Disney, Richard Coote, Robert Boil, William Low, Thomas Fugill, Doctor
Jonathan Edwards, John Pierce, (...) ^^^^wood, John Bernard, Samuel Townely.
Esquires.

For the County of Clare.] Sir Hardress Waller Knight, William Purefoy, John
Cooper, Thomas Southwell, Francis Courtney, Robert Cox, Samuel Clerk, Thomas
Iackson, Walter Waller, Ralph Wilson William Hartwell, Robert Wilkinson,
John Tailor, Richard Heart, William Yarwell, (...) Harrison, William King,
John Friend, Robert Stan^^^^, Philip (...), Benjamin Lucas, Edward Warren,
William VVood, Robert Cha^e, Joseph Benner, Daniel (...), Jeremiah Howard,
Henry Greenway, William (...), William Piggot, Edmund Southwell, William
Rumsey, Robert S^ear^, George Pur^^^, Thomas Cullen, Thomas Battington, Thomas
Graham, George Rosse, Thomas (...), John (...) Esquires.

For the County of Roscomon.] Arthur Lord Rannelagh, Sir Charles Coote, Sir
George St. George, Knights, Alexander Brayfield, John King, Henry Waddington,
James Shaen, Richard St. George, Robert Ormsby, John Disbrow, John Boswell,
Theophilus Sandford, James Synnock, Richard Crac^on, Edward Crofton, James
King, John Nelson, Sebastian Brigham, Charles Coot, William Handcock Esquires.
Charles Lord Lambert, Oliver St. George, Arthur Ormsby, Charles Ormsby, George
Ormsby, Charles Car^^et (...) Esquires.

For the County of Mayo.] Sir Charles Coote, Sir George B^^gham, Sir Robert
H^^n^y, Knights, John Reynolds, Peter Stubber, John Swanwic^, James (...),
Charles Ormsby, Arthur Ormsby, Robert Boil, Robert Oliver, Robert Ormsby, John
Bolwell, Thomas Heart, Thomas Bring^^^^, John Air, Arthur Swanwick, Philip
Bowen, William Edwards, Charles Holcroft, Henry Waddington, Stephen Squib, Henry
Greenway, Gabriel King, Esquires.

For the County of Sligo.] Sir Charles Coote, Sir Robert King, Knight, Samuel
Shepherd, Richard Coote, Robert Park, Arthur Gore, John Bo^well, Owen Vaughan,
Owen Floyd, Edward Crofton, Thomas Crofton, John King, William Ormsby, Robert
Ormsby, Thomas Ormsby, Henry Wadington, Philip Ormsby, Anthony Ormsby, Gilbert
C^rre^, Thomas Cartwright, Lewis Jones, Robert Oliver, Francis Iackson, Francis
King, William Boswell, Lewis Winkfield, Richard Woods, Edward (...), John Lang,
Robert Boil, Esquires.

For the County of (...).] Sir Charles Coot, Sir George (...) Sir George St.
George Knights, Richard Coot, Owen Winn, Robert Park, William St. George,
Nathaniel Evanson, Henry Crofton of Moghil, William Handcock, Charles carte^^^,
Oliver St. George, Henry ^^^fold, Owen (...), Henry Waddington (...) Jones,
James Shaen Esquires.

For the County of Galway with the Town of Galway] Sir Charles Coot Knights,
John Reynolds, (...), William Edward, Francis (...), Francis ^ores, William
Moore, Oliver St. George, Thomas Davis, Henry Greenway, John Boswel, James
Cuff, Stephen Squib, Robert ^ac^^e^^, Charles Holcroft, John Air, John Winn,
Robert Clerk, John Desbrough, Philip Bigo, Robert Clerk, Robert Ormsby, Henry
Wadington, Gilbert Carter Esquires.

And it is further Ordered and Declared, that the several and respective
Commissioners hereby appointed for the several and respective Counties and
Cities aforesaid, shall within eight days or sooner (if it may be) next
ensuing the publication hereof, meet together in the chief Towns in each of the
said Counties or some other convenient place by the said Commissioners for that
purpose to be appointed, or any two or more of them giving notice to the rest,
of the time and place of such their meeting which said Commissioners are hereby
required, and authorized in Order to the effectual and timely putting in
execution of the contents hereof, to divide and apportion the said Assesments,
in as equal and impartial manner as they can, according to the manner and form
hereafter expressed, that is to say; The said Assesment is to be Raised,
Assessed, and Leavied, for three months aforesaid commencing the twelfth day of
January instant, and determining the twelfth day of April next, and shall be
forthwith Taxed and Assessed by a pound rate equally on the several Divisions,
Baronies, and Parishes, in the respective Counties, Cities, and Places
aforesaid, for all and every the Lands. Tenements, and Hereditaments, Goods,
Chattels, Moneys, Stock or Estate, yiedling any profit or increase according to
the value thereof, that is to say as much upon every twenty shillings Rent or
yearly value of Land and real Estate, as upon Money Stock and other personal
Estate by an equal Rate wherein every six pound in Money, Stock or other
personal Estate shall bear the like charge as shall be said upon every twenty
shillings yearly Rent, or yearly value of Land as will raise the Monthly sum or
sums charged upon the respective Counties or Places aforesaid; for the better
effecting whereof.

It is hereby further Ordered and Declared, that the several (...)
Commissioners hereby appointed in the several and respective Counties and
Cities shall meet together as occasion shall be, from time to time once every
week, or fourteen days at least at the chief Town in each County, or some
convenient place as aforesaid, And the said Commissioners or any three or more
of them shall (after the public reading hereof) there choose, nominate, and
appoint, two or three, or more if they shall think fit, of the honest and able
Protestant English inhabitants (if it may be) in ye several and respective
Baronies, Towns, Parishes, or Cities aforesaid, and them to appoint to take a
particular and exact enquiry, Survey, or Estimate, of each man's Land, Tenement,
rent, and stocks, in every respective City, Town, Vilage, or place, together
with the yearly value and profits of the same, and to return the said inquiry,
Survey, or Estimate, under their hands in writing to the said Commissioners, or
to such Person, or Persons of them, as shall be by the said Commissioners
appointed, to receive the same.

And to the end an equal rate throughout the whole Coun^^y and every part
thereof, may be obtained, the said Commissioners, or any two or more of them,
may and are hereby authorized, to administer an Oath, (if they see cause) to
the respective Persons aforesaid, for their faithful discharge of the trust
reposed in them, and for their just and impartial dealing in the same, such
Enquiries, Surveys, or Estimates, to be delivered in writing, within one and
twenty days after the said day of the said Commissioners first meeting and the
said Commissioners or any three, or more of them then pre^^^ after the said
return, upon the view, and perusal of the said several inquiries, Surveys, or
Estimates, shall truly cast up the total Revenue, and yearly profits of the
whole Counties Cities and Towns aforesaid to the (...) equal pound rate may be
apportioned upon every Baronie, City, Township, or Parish according to the
proportion and sum of money charged upon the said County by virtue of this
present Order (if the said Commissioners shall not see just cause to alter the
said returns) and the said Commissioners or any three or more of them assembled
are by virtue hereof authorized and appointed to apportion each man's share or
proportion due according to the said return, or as they shall judge most equal
and indifferent and shall forthwith send forth their Warrants to the several
Con^^al^^es, or other Person or Persons (...) each Barony or Parish (...) they
shall ^ee (...) requiring them forthwith to collect the several and respective
sums of Money, to each man's Name annexed, which sums are to be expressed not in
(...) but in words at length, for which purpose the said Commissioners are with
the said Warrants likewise required to send a particular of what each man's Se^s
(under the charge of the said Constable or other Person or Persons in each
Baronie appointed as aforesaid) is, rateable to his Land, Tenement, Rent, or
Stock, etc. returned as aforesaid, requiring the said Constable, (...) other
Person or Persons so entrusted, to make payment of the Moneys so Collected,
into the hands of the Receivers for th^^ purpose appointed, or to be appointed,
and in Order to the writing the Duplicates aforesaid, the said Receivers
Clerks, are, for that purpose from time to time to attend on the said
Commissioners at the time and place of their meeting, and the said
Commissioners are likewise to cause the said Assesments to be fairly Written
and Subscribed by them, and delivered to the respective Receivers aforesaid,
and to certify (...) Writing the true State thereof, together with the total,
both of the Profits of Land, Houses, Rent and Stock, etc. in each County and
Baronie, and what respectively is charged on every twenty shillings (...) in
Land. Tenements, Rent, and on every expound Stack unto Henry Markham, Edward
Roberts, and Richard Kingdon Esquires, Commissioners General for the public
Revenue Stores of Ireland, their Office in Dublin.

And it is hereby further Ordered, That if any Person or Persons shall refuse
or neglect to pay the respective sums of Money on him or them Taxed, that it
shall and may be lawful for the said Constable, or other Person or Persons
appointed as aforesaid, to Collect the (...), to break open any House, Chest,
Trunk or Box, and to Leavy by distress of Goods or other wise, the said Tax,
bringing the said Goods so distrained unto the respective (...) aforesaid, or
the next Commissioners herein for such County (...), or Justice of the Peace
for such County, and in case the said Owner (...) shall neglect to pay his or
their Tax, (...) or their Goods ((...) distrained) within four days after such
distress (...) the said Respective (...) or Justices of the Peace, are too
(...) the (...) distress to be sold by public canting, or otherwise in some
public Market, causing such Persons Assesments to be paid there out, and the
overplus to be return to the Owner, allowing the Constable reasonable
consideration (not exceeding two shillings in the pound) for his destraining
for the said Tax, And the said Constable or other Person or Persons appointed
for Collecting the same; are hereby authorized to call to his or their
Assistance any Officer or Soldier of the Army or any other Person or Persons
whatsoever in the due prosecution of the premises, which Assistance the said
Person or Persons so required are not to refuse at their peril.

And if the said Constable or other Person or Persons appointed as aforesaid
shall neglect the duty hereby required from them, and shall suffer the said
Assesment to run in Arrear after the same shall grow due; having received
Warrant for Collecting the same as aforesaid; then the said Commissioners, or
any two of them, receiving certificate hereof in writing from the aforesaid
respective Receivers, may and are hereby anthorized (if they see cause) to give
Order and Direction to any Officers or Soldiers of the Army to Quarter upon
such Person or Persons so neglecting his or their duty to Collect the Assesment
as aforesaid or to impose such Fine or Fines under the said Constable, or
Person, or Persons appointed as aforesaid; as they shall think fit, not
exceeding for any one Offense five pounds, Leavying the same by distress of
Goods or otherwise (as is before directed) and causing the same for (...) to be
paid into the hands of said respective Receivers for the use of the
Commonwealth, and if any Person, or Persons, employed or required to take a
particular and exact enquiry Survey, or Estimate, of the profits of Lands,
Tenements, Rents and Stock as aforesaid, shall neglect or refuse to make his or
their returns without the time, and according to the manner as is before
diverted, or (...) knowingly or willingly make any false or short return of the
real or personal Estate of any Person or Persons, the said Commissioners for
the Assesment or any three (...) of them being fully satisfied of the (...)
thereof; are hereby (...) to impose such fine or fines on small Offender as
they shall think fit not exceeding for any the (...) Ten Pounds, causing one
Moiety of the same to be paid into the hands of the respective Receivers for
the use of the Commonwealth, and the other Moiety to the Discoverer or
Discoverers, to be Leavied by distress of Goods as is before directed.

And to the end no obstruction may be in the timely paying in of the aforesaid
Assesment: It is hereby further Ordered, That the Goods and Stock of each
respective Tenant or Holder shall be ^^able to be Taxed, as well for any Rent
or Profit due, which ought to be paid by the Farmer, Tenant or Occupier, to the
Landlord, or any other person or persons whatsoever claiming the same; as for
his own Stock or Holding. And the said Assesment to paid by the Farmer, Tenant
or Occupier of Land by virtue of this Order, for any in respective of such
Rents and Profits, and which in (...) ought to be paid by the Landlord; the
said Farmer, Tenant or Occupier of the said Land shall be acquitted and
discharged for so much thereof as the said Tax or Assesment shall amount unto,
as effectually to all intents and purposes as if the same had been actually
paid unto his Landlord, or any other person or persons, unto whom his Rent
shall become due and payable. And if any person or persons shall refuse or
neglect to pay his or their Assesment, and convey away his or their Goods or
other personal Estate, whereby the sum of Money Assessed on him cannot be
Leavied as is before expressed, that then the aforesaid Commissioners or any
two or more of them, are hereby authorized to imprison the said persons and
sequester the Estate of every such person to the use the Commonwealth; or if
any person or persons shall conceal his or their goods, or remove their Goods
or Cattle from one County to the other, or any part of them, thereby
endeavoring to avoid the hearing a due proportion of the aforesaid Assesment.
Upon the discovery thereof, and due proof made before any two or more of the
aforesaid Commissioners, it shall and may be lawful for them to sequester such
Goods or Cattle, and to cause the same to be Canted or Sold (...) some Public
Market, paying one Moiety of what Money shall be raised by Sale of the said
Goods or Cattle into the hands of the respective Receivers abating the same out
of the Applotment of the Monthly Sess of the Barony in which the said Goods or
Cattle ought to have paid: and the other Moiety to pay or cause to be paid unto
the Owners of such Goods or Cattle; and the said Commissioners of the Assesment
in the respective Counties, are to cause due and Public Notice hereof to be
given.

And it is also further Ordered, That if it shall so happen that any of the
aforesaid Tax be laid on any insolvent person that is not able to pay the same,
so much as shall be so charged shall be re-Applotted by the said Commissioners
equally on the Barony wherein such insolvency shall happen.

And it is further hereby Ordered, That if any question or difference shall
arise for or concerning the aforesaid Assesments that the aforesaid
Commissioners are hereby authorized to hear and determine the same, and to do
thereinto the relief of the party grieved, according to (...) and Justice. And
if any difference shall be between any of the said Commissioners concerning the
execution of the Trust to them committed, they are (in such cases) to have
recourse to the aforesaid Commissioners General for the Public Revenue, who
are hereby authorized and empowered to hear and determine the same, or to Report
the state thereof unto Us.

And whereas several complaints have been made against several Commissioners of
Applotment, alleging that they have raised other and greater sums of Money
(under pretense of the power and Trust reposed in them by the late
Commissioners of the Revenue) than of right they ought to have raised, or have
been paid into the Public Treasury, to the great wrong and oppression of the
Country: It is therefore further Ordered and Declared, That the said
Commissioners for Assesment or any three or more of them shall have Power and
Authority to examine upon Oath all such matters as shall be objected against the
said Commissioners of Applotment, and upon full hearing of both Parties, if by
clear and good proof it shall appear, That the said Commissioners of Applotment
have (under pretense of their Authority aforesaid) raised more Moneys, than by
Instructions from the said Commissioners of Revenue, they were empowered to
raise, they are to cause such Commissioners forthwith to pay all such Money (as
they or any of them have so raised and not paid into the Treasury) into the
hand of the respective Receivers, as (...) the present three (...) the same but
of the County or Barony out of which such Moneys by the said Commissioners of
applotment was so raised; Except the said County or Barony be in Arrear of
former Assesments; and in (...) Moneys are to be paid and (...) as so (...)
paid toward discharge of (...) Arrears (...) the said Commissioners for the
Assesment are also to certify from time to time their proceedings herein past
(...) to the (...) Commissioners General, that such Offenders may be further
proceeded against according to the nature of their offense.

And to the end all Arrears of former Assesments may be timely paid into the
hand of the aforesaid respective Receivers, in order to the supply of the
(...), and other public Charges: The said respective Receivers are hereby
(...) to summon all Commissioners of Applotment, or other persons formerly
entrusted or employed by the Commissioners of the Revenue for the Assesing and
Leavying the said Assesments, requiring them forthwith to pay into the (...)
all such Arrears, and in default thereof, the said respective Receivers are to
assign those Arrears for (...) pay of the Forces, according to such (...) they
shall, for that purpose (...) from Our (...), or the aforesaid Commissioners
General for the Public Revenue.

And it is further hereby Ordered and Declared, That no other sum or sums of
Money, be by any person or persons whatsoever charge^ (...) any County or
place in Ireland, in consideration of any Public (...) or Assesment
whatsoever, either for (...), ^ree-Quarter of any sort, Ca^^^age, (...)-Money,
Salt, (...), Small (...), Bedding, Bed Clothes, or other Charge whatsoever. And
if any Officer or Soldier shall offend herein, the person or persons (...) are
to make their (...) to the Officer (...) fo the respective Precincts, or to the
Authority-General (...) the Army or his (...) at the (...) Quarters; who are
(...) to proceed against such Offenders according to Martial Law* Provided
nevertheless, That no Rents for Moneys, (...), Tenements and Hereditaments, or
Revenues belonging to Colleges, Hospitals, Almshouses or given to any
charitable or pious use be charged toward the payment of the several sums and
proportions aforesaid, save only for so much as the said Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, are, and shall be respectively worth by the year,
over and above the Rent and Revenue thereof, respectively due and payable to
the said Colleges, Hospitals, Almshouses, Charitable and pious use, and every
of them respectively.

Provided also, And it is hereby further Ordered and Declared, That no waste
Houses, or Lands unplanted, unimployed or unmanured, shall, during their being
unplanted, unimployed, or unmanured, be charged to pay any part or proportion
of the said Monthly Tax and Assesment.

Provided further, That where any person has taken any Estate at a certain
yearly Rent, to be paid for the same in liew of Assesments, and other Public
Taxes, and the said Grant to such persons continues in being, pursuant to such
Orders, Rules, and Instructions as have been given by the late Commissioners of
the Commonwealth for the setting and letting of Lands, such person or persons
are to enjoy the benefit of his or their said Grant, and the proportions of
Assesments, falling of right upon such Lands so let, is to be supplied out of
the Rents of the said Lands; and the Baronie or place in which the said Lands
do lie, is to be freed and discharged from so much of the said Assesments, as
shall be supplied or discharged out of the Rents of the Lands aforesaid, and
the remainder of Rent due to the Commonwealth, above the said Conte^^^tion, is
to be paid into the hands of the respective Receivers aforesaid.

Provided notwithstanding, That if any person or persons have taken any Lease
from the Commonwealth, at a certain yearly Rent, and the Rents reserved upon
the same, fall short of the present Contribution said upon Lands of equal value
in the same Baronie, Town-ship, Will, or Parish by virtue of this Order; all
such Lands, are hereby Ordered and Declared, to be liable and subject to the
payment of Contribution, for the Stock and Tillage upon the same, equal in
proportion to the rest of the Inhabitants of the Country respectively
according to Justice and equity: And in such case the aforesaid person or
persons, who have taken Land at a certainty as aforesaid, shall be and are
hereby discharged from the Rents payable in pursuance of such Contracts made
with the Commonwealth as aforesaid, Yet so as to have the Benefit of such
Lands, (...) contribution falling due for the same, during the term of their
aforesaid Leases, according to the Instructions given for making such Leases.

Provided also, That none of the Commissioners herein nominated, shall in any
thing relating to their own Estates, or the Estates of any of their Fathers,
Brothers, Tenant or Tenants give their votes therein, or shall (...) or
apportion the respective Sum or Sums of Money, payable for his or their Tax in
(...) hereof.

And all Officers, Civil and Military, and all other persons whatsoever, are
hereby strictly required to be aiding and assisting in the due execution of the
Power and Trust hereby granted, as they shall be thereunto required.

Dated at Dublin, January the first 1654. Tho. Herbert, Clerk of the Council:

ORdered by the Lord Deputy and Council, That this Order and Commission for the
Assesment, be forthwith Printed and Published.

Signed by Order of the said Lord Deputy and Council. THO. HERBERT, Clerk of
the Council.

By the Lord Deputy and Council.
ORdered, That the several persons hereunder named, be and are hereby added to
the Commissioners for Assesment in the several Counties to their names annexed;
and are hereby empowered to act as Commissioners as fully to all intents and
purposes, as any the Commissioners named in an Order and Commission of the 12o
instant.

For the Kings County.] John Air. Esquire For the Barony at D^li^k, and County of
Meath] John Hetch, Esquire For the County of Derry.] John Barret, Alexander
Staples, Esqs For the County of Kerry.] Thomas Herbert, Esquire For the County of
Typerary.] Robert Knight, Matthew Jacob, Esquires. For the County of Waterford]
Edward Hi^gate, Robert Thornhill, John Ioy^^ John Houghton John Pike, Senior,
Esquires.
Dated at Dublin, Jan. 18o 1654. THOMAS HERBERT, Clerk of the Council.


