By the Lord Lieutenant and Council.
ORMONDE.

Upon consideration of the annexed Instrument, whereby it is concluded and
accorded that there be a further continuation of the Cessation of Arms, and of
all Acts of Hostility in this Kingdom, until the fifteenth day of August,
1645. at the hour of twelve of the clock the same day. ME the Lord Lieutenant
and Council do by this Proclamation in His Majesty's Name, Ratify, confirm,
and publish the same, And do Require all His Majesty's Subjects whom it may
concern by Sea and by Land to take notice thereof, and yield all due obedience
thereunto in all ^e parts thereof.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, XXIX. July, 1645. ^i. Bolton Canc.
Ant. Midensis. Geo. Cloyne. Cha. Lambart. Arthur Chichester. Gerrard Lowther.
Fr. Willoughby. Tho. Lucas. Robert Forth. G. Wentworth.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
WHEREAS Articles of Cessation of Arms were agreed and concluded on at
Sigginstowne in the County of Kildare, the fifteenth day of September, in the
nineteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, By and between Us the Lord Lieutenant
by the name of James Marquis of Ormonde, Lieute^nt General of His Majesty's
Army in the Kingdom of Ireland, For and in the Name of our Gracious Sovereign
Lord CHARLES by the grace of God, (...) of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, etc. By virtue of His Majesty's Commission bearing date at Dublin, the
last day of August, in the said nineteenth (...) of His Majesty's Reign, of the
one part, And Donogh Lord Viscount Muskery, and others authorized by His
Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects (...) in Arms in the said Kingdom, etc.
of the other part: Which Cessation of Arms was by the said Articles to
continue for one whole year, beginning (...). of September, 1643. at the hour
of twelve of the clock of the said day. And whereas by his Majesty's Commission
under His Great Seal of England, ^d the four and twentieth day of June 1644.
We the Lord Lieutenant are authorized to Treat concerning the settling and
establishing of a firm and perfect (...) within this Kingdom. And whereas We
the Lord Lieutenant by virtue of His Majesty's Authority entrusted with Us as
His Lieutenant General, (...) General Governor of this His Kingdom, and by
advice of the Council, and For and in the Name of His Majesty on the one part,
And the said Lord (...), Muskery, and others deputed and Authorized in that
behalf by His Majesty's said Subjects now or late in Arms in this Kingdom, of
the other part, ^n the fifth day of September last conclude, and accord that
there should be a further Cessation of Arms, and of all Acts of Hostility in
this Kingdom, until ^rst day of December then next, at the hour of twelve of
the clock of the said day. And whereas We the Lord Lieutenant by virtue of His
Majesty's ^nty entrusted with Us as His Lieutenant General and General
Governor of this his Kingdom, and by advice of the Council, and For, and in
the ^e of His Majesty of the one part, And the said Lord Viscount Muskery, and
others Deputed and authorized in that behalf by His Majesty's said ^eets now,
or late in Arms in this Kingdom of the other part, did on the 11 day of
November last, conclude and accord that there should be a further ^inuation of
the said Cessation of Arms and of all Acts of Hostility in this Kingdom,
until the last day of January, then next, at the hour of twelve of the (...)
of the same day. And whereas We the Lord Lieutenant by virtue of His Majesty's
authority entrusted with Us, as His Lieutenant General and ^rall Governor of
this his Kingdom and by advice of the Counsel and for and in the Name of his
Majesty of the one part, and the said Lord Viscount ^ery and others deputed and
authorized in that behalf by his Majesty's said Subjects now or late in Arms
in this Kingdom, of the other part, did on (...) last day of December last
conclude and accord that there should be a further continuation of the said
Cessation of Arms and of all Acts of Hostility in this ^ingdome until the
last day of March then next at the hour of twelve of the clock of the said
day. And whereas We the Lord Lieutenant by virtue of His ^iesties authority
entrusted with Us as his Lieutenant General and General Governor of this His
Kingdom and by advice of the Council and (...) and in the Name of his Majesty
on the one part, And the said Lord viscount Muskery and others deputed and
authorized in that behalf by His Majesty's (...) Subjects now or late in Arms
in this Kingdom on the other part, did on the first day of March last,
conclude and accord that there should be a further ^tinuation of the said
Cessation of Arms and of all acts of Hostility in this Kingdom until the
last day of April then next, at the hour of twelve of the (...) of the same
day. And whereas We the Lord Lieutenant, by virtue of His Majesty's Authority
entrusted with Us, as His Lieutenant General and ^enerall Governor of this
His Kingdom, and by advice of the Council, and For and in the Name of His
Majesty of the one part, and the said Lord ^nt Muskery, and others deputed and
authorized in that behalf, by His Majesty's said Subjects now or late in Arms
in this Kingdom of the other (...) on the one and twentieth day of April last
conclude and accord, that there should be a further continuation of the said
Cessation of Arms and of all ^ct of hostility in this Kingdom, until the
twentieth day of May then next, at the hour of twelve of the clock the same
day. And whereas We the Lord ^tenant by virtue of his Majesty's Authority
entrusted with Us as his Lieutenant General and General Governor of this his
Kingdom and by advice the Council, and for and in the name of his Majesty of
the one part, and the said Lord Visc. Muskery, and others deputed and
authorized in that behalf, by (...) Majesty's said Subjects now or late in
Arms in this Kingdom of the other part, did on the sixteenth day of May 1645.
conclude and accord that there sho^ be a further continuation of the said
Cessation of Arms and of all Acts of hostility in this Kingdom until the
fourth day of June then next, at the hour of 12 ^f the clock the same day. And
whereas We the Lord Lieutenant by virtue of His Majesty's Authority entrusted
with Us as his Lieutenant General and ^nerall Governor of this his Kingdom,
and by advice of the Council, and for and in the Name of his Majesty of the
one part, And the said Lord (...) Muskery, and others deputed and authorized in
that behalf, by his Majesty's said Subjects now or late in arms in this
Kingdom of the other part, (...) on the first day of June 1645. conclude and
accord that there should be a further continuation of the said Cessation of
Arms and of all Acts of Hostility in this Kingdom until the eighteenth day
of June 1645. at the hour of twelve of the clock the same day. And whereas We
the Lord Lieutenant by virtue of his Majesty's authority entrusted with Us as
his Lieutenant General and General Governor of this his Kingdom and by advice
of the Council, and for and in the name of His Majesty of the one part and the
said Lord Viscount Muskery and others deputed and authorized in that behalf by
his Majesty's said subjects now or late in arms in this Kingdom of the other
part, did on the fourteenth day of June 1645. conclude and accord that there
should be a further continuation of the said Cessation of Arms and of all acts
of hostility in this Kingdom, until the fourth day of July 1645. at the hour
of 12 of the clock the same day. And whereas We the Lord Lieutenant by virtue
of His Majesty's Authority entrusted with Us as his Lieutenant General and
General Governor of this his Kingdom, and by advice of the Council, And For
and in the Name of his Majesty of the one part, And Patrick Darcy, and
Geffrey Brown, Esquires, deputed and authorized by his Majesty's said Subjects
now or late in Arms in this Kingdom of the other part, did on the thirtieth
day of June, 1645. conclude and accord that there should be a further
continuation of the said Cessation of Arms, and of all Acts of hostility in
this Kingdom, until the 18. day of July, 1645. at the hour of 12 of the
clock the same day. And whereas We the Lord Lieutenant by virtue of his
Majesty's Authority entrusted with Us as His Lieutenant General and General
Governor of this His Kingdom, and by advice of the Council, and for and in
the name of his Majesty of ^e ^ne part, and the said Lord visc. Muskery, and
others deputed and authorized in that behalf by his Majesty's said subjects,
now or late in Arnes in this Lingdome, etc. of the other part, did on the
fifteenth day of July, 1645. conclude and accord that there should be a further
continuation of the said Cessation of Arms, and of all Acts of hostility in
this Kingdom, until the last day of July, 1645. at the hour of twelve of the
clock the same day. And in regard We desire to prevent any inconvenience that
may happen by a too late continung of the present Cessation for such a longer
time as may in likelihood give the (...) and better opportunity toward
facilitating the expected peace. We ^he Lord Lieutenant by virtue of his
Majesty's authority entrusted with Us as his Lieutenant General and General
Governor of this his Kingdom, and by advice of the Council, and For and in
the Name of his Majesty of the one part, and we the said Lord visc. Muskery,
Nicolas Plunket, Esquire. Sir Rob. Talbot Barronet. Dermot o Bryen, Patrick Darcy,
and Geffrey Brown, Esquires. Deputed and Authorized in that behalf by his
Majesty's said subjects now or late in Arms in this Kingdom, etc. of the other
part, have concluded and accorded, and it is accordingly hereby concluded and
accorded that there be a further continuation of the said Cessation of Arms
and of all Acts of Hostility in this Kingdom, until the fifteenth day of
August, 1645. at the hour of twel^e of the clock the same day, upon the like
Articles and agreements, to all intents and purposes as are expressed in the
said former Articles of Cessation, concluded on at Sigginstown, on the 15 of
September, 1643. And as if the said Cessation first agreed on had continuance
until the said fifteenth day of August, 1645 at the hour of twelve of the
clock the same day. In witness whereof, the said Lord Lieutenant to that part
of this agreement which remains with the said Lord visc. Muskery, Nicholas
Plunket, Sir Rob. Talbot, Dermot o Bryen, Patrick Darcy, and Geffrey Brown,
has put his hand and seal, and the said Lord visc. Muskery, Nicholas Plunket,
Sir Robert Talbot, Dermot o Bryen, Patrick Darcy. and Geffrey Brown, to that
part of this agreement which remains with be said Lord Lieutenant, have put
their hands and seals the 28 day of July, 1645. and in the one and twentieth
year of His Majesty's Reign.

Muskery. N. Plunket. Rob. Talbot. Dermot o Bryen. Patr. Darcy. Geffr. Brown.


