CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Knights, Citizens and Burgesses ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT.
August the 3d 1666.
ORdered upon Question ( Nemine contradicente) That this House do agree to the
Report of their Committee, containing their several Objections against the
Bill, entitled, An Act of Free and General Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion;
and that the same be presented by Richard Reynells Esquire accompanied with the
rest of the persons undernamed, or any five or more of them, to his Grace the
Lord Lieutenant, with the humble desires of this House, That his Grace will be
pleased to cause the said Bill to be altered and amended, in the several
particulars mentioned in the said Report, and then to be transmitted into
England, according to Poynings Law, and the said Mr. Reynells is likewise to
acquaint his Grace with such other Reasons, as further induced this House to
agree to the said Objections: And inasmuch as the said Bill cannot, for the
grounds and reasons expressed in the said Report, pass this present Session;
and for that the House conceive it necessary, something should be published for
the satisfaction of such persons, who are not yet indempnified, but would have
been, in case the said Bill had passed into a Law, it is further Ordered, That
the said Committee do likewise humbly desire his Grace, That by an Act of
State, or otherwise, as his Grace shall think fit, it may be declared, that no
proceedings shall be had or made against any person or persons for any Crimes
or Offenses, which by the said Bill they were to have been pardoned or
indempnified for: The said Committee are to attend his Grace in this business
tomorrow morning at eight of the clock.

Master of the Rolls. Sir Hen. Tichborn. Lord Annesley. Capt. Nicholl. Sir Hugh
Middleton. Col. Dillon. Mr. Meredith Capt. Evans. Sir Geo. Lane. Mr. Weaver.
Dr. Margetson. Sir Peter Pett. Sir George St. George. Sir William Petty. Mr.
Bridges. Sir Dan. Treswell. Capt. Colvill. Phil. Ferneley, Cler. Parl.


Dublin, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer in Castlestreet. 1666.


