CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

MONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A DECLARATION Of the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament of IRELAND assembled, concerning Ecclesiastical Government,
and the Book of COMMON PRAYER.
WE the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons assembled in Parliament,
observing that although the Government of the Church by Archbishops and
Bishops, and the Book of Common Prayer, are both settled and established by the
Laws of the Land; Yet diverse Fanatics, and other persons given to change, do
take the boldness not only to deprave the one, and to speak irreverently of
the other: but do obstinately refuse to submit to that Government, and to use
that form of Prayer, in high contempt, and derogation of those Laws, (which
because in some it may proceed from ignorance of the Law, for which there is
some pretense, by reason of the long intermission of Justice, occasioned by the
late confusions.) We do therefore Publish and Declare, that those Laws are
still in force, and that We are fully resolved, by all fair and lawful ways and
means to countenance and support the same; and in order thereunto, We do hereby
require all persons whatsoever, to give due obedience to the said
Ecclesiastical Government, and to conform themselves to the said Book of
Common Prayer, and to the practice thereof, as the only public form of
serving God, established and allowed to be in this Realm; And we do further
require all Magistrates Ecclesiastical and Civil, and all other Officers and
Ministers of Justice to proceed with all just severity against the contemners
of the said Government or Common Prayer Book, either by disobedience, by
reproachful words, or otherwise, as they will answer the contrary at their
utmost perils.

May the 17. 1661.
ORdered that the several Ministers in and about this City, do read the said
Declaration, the next Sunday after its coming from the Press, publicly in
their Congregations before Sermon; And that all Ministers throughout this
Kingdom, do read the same the next Sunday after its coming into their hands,
in their respective Congregations; And that the several Reverend BISHOPS of
this House do take care that there be a convenient number of the said
Declarations sent into their several Diocesses, and that it be duly put in
execution in their said Diocesses.

John Keating, Cler. Parl.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
Imprinted at Dublin by William Bladen, by special Order, Anno Dom. 1661.


