AN IDYLL ON THE PEACE.

Deus nobis haec Otia fecit.
Virg. Eclog. LONDON, Printed for R. Parker, at the Unicorn under Piazza of the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil; Peter Buck, at the Sign of the Temple at the
Middle-Temple-Gate in Eleetstreet; and are to be sold by R. Baldwin in Warwick
lane. 1697.

AN IDYLL ON THE PEACE.
THe Shepherd Thyrsis sitting by a Stream,
Which with soft murmurs glided through the Plain,
Called sage Menalcas from his Flocks, which grazed
On the green banks of the delicious brook,
And speaking, thus persuaded him to sing.
Thyr. Have you not heard, Menalcas, that our Prince
Has sheathed his Sword, and given the Nations Peace?
That we shall now no more with trembling meet,
To know if Caesar has escaped the Foe,
When fighting for the freedom of the world,
In fields of Blood amidst a thousand Deaths,
He used to combat with Contending Kings,
For Empire and insulted Monarchs rights.
Have you not heard, Menalcas, that his arms?
Victorious still whenever he appeared,
Have forced the Realms which long opposed his might,
To sue for Peace, and beg him to be Calm:
Why then so long before you take your Pipe?
And in the notes which you of Phoebus learnt,
Make the Woods echo with his praise. Begin,
Extend thy Voice, and let the air be still:
Silence ye Winds, that nothing may be heard,
Through all the Forests, but the Victors name.

Men. The Winds are silent and the Air is still,
And every Ear expects the Victors name,
But who, oh Thyrsis. can attempt the Song?
Which, like his deeds, is worthy of a God.
Then why shall I, who have of Phoebus learnt
To sing, presume to venture on a Theme
So much above my notes, so fit for his.
Yet it is but just that we who shall enjoy
The best, the sweetest blessings of the Peace,
Should pay to him who gave us this repose,
The grateful tribute of our Praise: To him
Who, mighty as he is, will not refuse
To hear our Songs, the homage of the Plains.
Sing, Shepherds sing, let every Muse be heard,
Caesar returns, and in his smiles we see
His Mercy is triumphant over his Rage.
Caesar and Peace returns, to make us blessed.
Peace, the fair favorite Daughter of the Skys,
Joy of the Earth, and mother of delights,
Descends from Heaven, and terror disappears.
Peace to the fearful Parents gives their Son,
And the young Bridegroom to the longing Bride;
The Labourer now goes gladly to his Toil,
And dreads no foreign hand to spoil the Crop
Which he has sown, and quickly hopes to reap.
Our Music and our Sports will be restored;
The Swains will now no more afflict our Shades
With sighs and Plaints, but fill 'em all with Songs,
With Hymns of Joy, for Caesar brings us Peace.
Our Virgins now will quit the Sacred Groves,
Where their pure vows were still addressed to Heaven,
For him who saved their Innocence from wrong,
To meet the Hero and adorn his way
With Myrtles, Roses, and our rural sweets.
Even those who from our Hills we often have seen
Skud by our Rocks, and tempt the dangerous Shore,
To reach with privacy their wished for Port,
And save their Treasures from the Pyrat's lust;
Will now, as we remember they have done,
Let their gay Streamers wanton in the Wind,
And fearless of the Robbers watchful Eye,
Sail proudly by the Coasts they lately shunned.
Peace shines abroad: But say again, O Muse,
Say if thou can, in a sublimer note,
What Power has forced her now to visit Earth;
What God, propitious to our Vows, has hurled
The meagre Rout of Discord to the Deep:
Nassau! his peoples Darling and their Pride,
The Wonder and Delight of all Mankind,
Has sheathed his Sword, and given the Nations Peace.
His Enemies, for such there are on Earth,
Who hate the Virtue which they cannot excel,
Grew angry at his Glory, and opposed,
With impious Arms, The Justice he required:
But soon forgot their boasts, and prayed him to be friends;
He heard their Prayers, and laid his Thunder by,
Too loud for such as had provoked his wrath;
Forgave their insolence, and called 'em friends.
Nassau! to whom the Masters of the World
Come from their distant Empires to behold;
The Valor which has long employed the mouths
Of Fame, and been the wonder of their Courts,
Has sheathed his Sword, and given the Nations Peace.
Nassau! who loves the rigours of a Camp,
Who smiles at Danger when his Glory calls;
Who then too often forgets the is a Man,
To do the Miracles so like a God,
That none could think him less, but by their fears;
And fears were needless, if the Deaths he meets
Would always fly his Presence like his foes.
Nassau! whose Councils wise as they are bold,
Make him as terrible in Courts as Camps;
And now are busied for the Worlds repose;
Has sheathed his Sword, and given the Nations Peace.
Sing, Shepherds sing, let every Muse repeat
Nassau, and at his name let every Soul be glad:
Oh Thyrsis, how will the malignant rout
Who with vile pleasure said a thousand things
Injurious to the name we sing? Behold
The Hero come in Peace, and see him thronged
With all the pomp of Loyalty and Love,
Their Breasts must burst with Envy, and their Eyes
Glare with the baleful malice of their hearts;
Or else perhaps with counterfeited zeal,
For none more ready to dissemble Love.
They Will wait upon his Chariot and unite
Their shouts, with such as bless him from their Souls,
But sure their Cries will be distinguished soon,
These Sons of Discord quickly be perceived,
Their hollow notes discover what they think;
And Caesar's goodness only make 'em safe.
Oh, may that goodness sweeten their despair,
Lest madly they attempt again on things
Too black to think on in this hour of Joy,
When Caesar lives, returns and reigns in Peace.
Long may he reign, and triumph over his Foes,
Be always blessed with Victory or Peace;
May his years roll as pleasant and as long
As this clear Stream continues in its course,
Long may he reign and triumph over his Foes,
And may his Life be lasting as his Fame.

Thus sung Menalcas, Thyrsis sitting by,
Who felt a portion of the heavenly fire,
Which warmed the Shepherds breast, and made him sing,
In notes which seemed too lofty for the woods,
And yet too humble for the wondrous Theme.
FINIS.

