Orders made and established by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
rest of the general Assembly of the Kingdom of Ireland, met at the City of
Kilkenny, the four and tvventith day of October Anno Domini 1642. and in the
18. year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles, by the Grace of
God King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland etc.
INPRIMIS, that the Roman Catholic Church in Ireland, shall have and enjoy its
privileges and immunities according to the Great Charter, enacted, or declared
within the Realm of England, in the ninth year of the reign of King Henry
the third, sometimes King of England, and Lord of Ireland, and afterward
enacted, and confirmed in this Realm of Ireland; and that the common Law of
England, and all the Statutes of force in this Kingdom, which are not against
the Catholic Roman Religion, or the liberty of the Natives, and other subjects
of this Kingdom, shall be observed throughout the whole Kingdom: and that all
proceedings in Civil, or Criminal causes shall be according to the said Laws.

2. Item, that all, and every person and persons within this Realm shall bear
faith and true Alleagiance unto our said Sovereign Lord King Charles, by the
grace of God King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, his Heirs and
lawful Successors; and shall vphould and maintain his and their rights, and
lawful prerogatives, with the uttermost skill, and power of every such person
and persons, against all manner of persons whatsoever.

3. Item, that the Common Laws of England and Ireland, and the said Statute
called the Great Charter, and every clause, branch, and article thereof, and
all other Statutes confirming, expounding, or declaring the same, shall be
punctually observed within this Realm (so farforth as the condition of the
present times during this war can by possibility give way thereunto,) and
after the war is ended, the same to be observed without any limitation, or
restriction whatsoever.

4. Item, For as much as the City of Dublin, the usual and principal seat
of sustice of this Kingdom, where the Parliaments, and ordinary Courts were
held, and some other places where the Provincial Councels were sometimes kept,
are as yet possessed, and commanded by the malignant Party, who are enemies to
God, their King, and all his Majesty's well affected subjects; this Assembly is
necessitated, during this war, in some formalities and circumstances, to
deuiate from the proceedings prescribed by the said Laws and Statutes, yet
nevertheless retayning the substance, and essence thereof, so farforth as the
endless malice and cruelty of their Enemies, the said malignant Party, does
permit, who shut up the said places, and all other passages and ways to his
Majesty's justice and mercy, from his Majesty's well affected subjects of this
Kingdom: For the exaltation therefore of the Holy Roman Catholic Church, for
the advancement of his Majesty's service, and the preservation of the lives,
estates, and liberties of his Majesty's true subjects of this Kingdom, against
the injustice murders, massacres, rapes, depredations, robberies, burnings,
frequent breaches of public faith and quarter, and destruction, daily acted
and perpetrated upon his Majesty's said subjects, and advised, contrived, and
continually executed by the said malignant Party, some of them managing the
Government, and affairs of Estate in Dublin, and in some other parts of this
Kingdom, to his Highness greatest disseruice, and complying with their
confederats the malignant Party in England, and elsewhere, who as it is manifest
to all the world, do complot and practice to dishonor, and destroy his
Majesty, his Royal Consort the Queen, their Children, and Monarchicke
Government, which is of most dangerous consequence to all the Monarckes, and
Princes of Christendom: The said Assembly does order, and establish a
Council, by the name of Supreme Council, of the confederate Catholics of
Ireland, who are to consist of the number of four and twenty, to be forthwith
named by this Assembly, whereof twelve at the least, to be forthwith named, shall
reside in this City, or where else within this Kingdom they shall think
expedient; and the members of the said Council are to have equal votes, and
two parts of three, or more concurring present votes, to conclude; and no
fewer to sit in Council then nine, whereof seven at the least are to concur.
And of the four and twenty a President shall be named by this Assembly, who is
to be one of the said twelve resident, and in case of his death, absence, or
sickness the rest of those who shall be resident may name a Vice President of the
four and twenty; and this Assembly is forthwith to name a Secretary, and
Clarke of the said Council, the Secretary to be of the said four and twenty;
and the said Council shall have the powers and preheminences following (vz.)
That Lords-Generalls, and all other Commanders of Armies, and Civil
Magistrates and Officers, in the several Provinces, shall observe their Orders
and Decrees, and shall do nothing contrary to their directions, and shall give
them speedy aduertisment, and account of their proceedings and actions, with as
much expedition as may be. That the said Council shall have power to order,
and determine all such matters, as by this Assembly shall be left undetermined,
and shall be recommended unto them; and their orders therein to be of force until
the next Assembly, and after, until the same be revoked. That the said
Council shall have power and Authority to question, and inflict condign
punishment upon all Commanders of Armies exempted from the powers of
Generals, and upon the Generals themselves, and upon all Governors,
Magistrates, and other persons, of what degree or quality soever, and upon any
of themselves, in case of delinquency. That the said Council shall have Power
and Authority to do, and execute all manner of acts, and things conducing to
the advancement of the Catholic Cause, and Good of this Kingdom, and
concerning this war as if done by this Assembly; and shall have power to
hear, and determine all matters Capital, Criminal, or Civil, excepting the
right or Title of Land. That the Generals and other Commanders of Armies, and
all Governors and Civil Magistrates, and all other person within this Realm,
shall obey the orders and decrees of the said Council, touching the present
service. That the said Council shall have for their guarde the number of five
hundred foot, and two hundred horse, to be equally extracted out of the Armies
of the four Provinces.

5. It is further ordered, and established, that in every Province of this
Kingdom, there shall be a Provincial Council, and in every County a
County-Councell, the Provincial Council to be composed of the number of two
of each County, and the said Provincial Council shall choose a President of
themselves.

6. That the Provincial Council shall sit four times a year, and oftener if
there be cause for it: That they shall have power and authority to reuiew, or
reuerse the Judgments or Decrees of the County-Councells, the party complaining
entering security de adiudicaris soluendis: And shall during the troubles, have
power to hear, and determine all matters of the Crown, as Judges of Oyer, and
Terminer, and Goale-deliuery were wont to do, so that no Spiritual person be
present at the determining of matters of blood. And shall have power to hear
and determine all Civil Causes, and to establish recent possessions, so they
meddle not with title of Land, other then in case of Dower, or Ioyntures. And
the Sheriffs, Provincial Generals, and all Commanders of Armies in case of
disobedience, are respectively required to execute their decrees and orders;
and in case of debts and accounts great consideration is to be had of the
disability of Creditours occasioned by the war.

7. Item, in every County, there shall be a County-Councell consisting of the
number of one, or two of each Barony, at the election of the County; and where
there are no Baronies, the Council of such County to be of the number of
twelve; and the said County-Councell, shall have power and authority, in all
points as Justices of Peace, to hear and determine all matters concerning the
office of Justice of Peace, and all matters of the Crown happening within
every such County, and the delinquent being a Freehoulder, may if he please
have his trial in the Province; and to hear and determine debts, trespasses,
and personal demands, and to do all things as Justices of Peace were
accustomed to do; and to restore and establish possessions, taken by force or
fraud since these troubles; and likewise to take especial care, that Tenants
and Farmers be kept to their Farms where they were used, and be preserved from
extortion and oppression; and that Trade, Tradesmen, Manufactories,
Agriculture, and Husbandry be maintained, and Markets duly kept.

8. Item, that in every County there shall be Coroners, high Sheriffs, high
Constables, petty Constables, and Goalers, who are to do their respective
offices as accustomed; the high Sheriff to be confirmed, or nominated by the
supreme Council, out of three to be presented by the County-Councell; and the
High Sheriff is required to execute the Commands, Orders, and Decrees of the
Provincial, and County-Councell.

9. Item, in Cittyes, and Towns corporate; Justice is to be done, and the Law
executed as accustomed.

10. Item, in every County the high Sheriff shall be Prouost-Marshall, and shall
have power to execute a Layman not worth five pounds, and none other, for
murder, manslaughter, burglary, theft, robbery, or other capital offense:
Provided the person to be executed, may have four and twenty hours time to
prepare his soul; and that the supreme Council, or Provincial Council,
shall, and may name more Prouost-Marshalls, as they shall think expedient,
qualified with the like authority.

11. Item, it is further ordered and agreed, that no temporal Government, or
jurisdiction shall be assumed, kept, or exercised within this Kingdom, or within
any Province or County thereof, during these troubles, other then as before is
expressed, excepting such Jurisdiction and Government, as is, or shall be approved
or instituted by this general Assembly, or the supreme Council.

12. Item, it is further ordered, that whosoever has entered since the first
day of October 1641. or shall herafter during the continuance of the war in
this Kingdom, enter into the Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of any person,
or persons who have been in possession of such Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, at, or immediately before the said first of October, either by
himself or his under tenants, or by receiving of the rents, issues, or profits
thereof, shall immediately upon demand restore the said possession to the party,
or parties so put out, with such reasonable domages as the County, Provincial,
or supreme Council shall think fit: and if the party refuse to restore the
said possession, so gained as aforesaid, upon demand of the party so put out,
his Heirs, or Assigns made to the said possessor, his servants, or adherents
in the premises, or publication of this order within the Parish, where such
Land lies, that upon his, or their denial thereof, or default therein, he, his
heirs, and Assigns shall for ever after be debarred and secluded from all and
every right, title, interest, or demand which he, or they may make, or pretend
to all, or any the said Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments: and if after such
denial or default made, the said party, his Heirs or Assigns, shall not
immediately restore the possession of the said Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments so gained, to the party grieved, his Heirs or Assigns; that
then he, and they, and his, and their adherents in the Premises, shall be
declared, and proceeded with as enemies. Provided, and so it is meant, that if
any of the said parties so put out, be declared a Newter, or Enemy by the
supreme, or Provincial Council, to the general Cause; that then the party
who gained the possession as aforesaid, shall give up the possession to such
person, or persons as shall be named either by the said County, Provincial, or
supreme Council, to be disposed of toward the maintenance of the general
Cause, upon the pain and penalty aforesaid. And as for the Rents, and maine
Profits of the said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, and all kind of Rents,
Goods, or Chattles taken or detained from any Catholic as aforesaid, due
satisfaction is to be made for the same, to the parties from whom the same
Rents, Goods, or Chattles were, or shall be taken or detained, since these
troubles began, as the Provincial Council, or County-Councell shall
respectively order.

13. Item, it is further ordered and established, for the remouall of all
Civil disorder and enimity, and to the end all men may bend their thoughts and
actions to the common Cause, that all possessions of Lands and Hereditaments
shall continue, and remain unto such as have already joined in this union, as
they have been for three years past; next before the beginning of these
troubles; and that no title of Land shall be drawn into any debate or question
until the next Assembly, other then in case of Morgages, Leases, and
particular estates de facto determined, or determinable by effluxion, or other
determination thereof.

14. Item, for the avoiding of National distinction between the subjects of
his Majesty's Dominions, which this Assembly does utterly detest and abhor,
and which ought not to be endured in a well governed Commonwealth: It is
ordered, and established, that on pain of the highest Punishment which may be
inflicted by authority of this Assembly, that every Roman Catholic as well
English, as Welsh, and Scottish, who was of that profession before these
troubles, and who will come, and please to reside in this Kingdom, and join
in the present union, shall be preserved, and cherished in his life, goods and
estate, by the power and authority, and force if need require it, of all the
Catholics of Ireland, as fully and freely, as any Native borne therein, and
shall be acquitted, and eased of one third part in three parts to be divided, of
public charges and leuyes raised, or to be raised for the maintenance of this
Holy war.

15. And it is further ordered, and established, that there shall be no
distinction, nor comparison betwixt old Irish, and old or new English, or
betwixt septs and families, or betwixt Citizens or Townsmen, and Contrymen
joining in this union, on pain of the highest punishment that can be inflicted
by any of the Counsels aforesaid, according to the nature and quality of the
offense, and division like to spring, and arise from thence.

16. Item, it is further ordered and established, that all new Conuerts, borne
in any of his Majesty's dominions, or elsewhere (without manifest occasion
given) those persons converted to the contrary, and joining in this cause,
shall be accounted as Catholic Natives, to all intents and purposes.

17. Item, it is further ordered and established, that all Artificers,
Artizans, Nauigators and Mariners not being denizens, who shall please to
reside in this Kingdom, shall during their residence in this kingdom, after
such time as they, and their families shall be here settled, have and enjoy the
free liberties and privileges of Natives in all respects.

18. Item, it is further ordered and established, that whereas, in regard of
the present estate, and condition of the Kingdom of England, no Native of this
Kingdom, especially if he be a Catholic, or any other Catholic, is there
admitted of, or permitted to continue in the Innes of Court; and to the end the
laudable laws of England, and Ireland may not dye amidst the disasters of the
times; that one Inn of Court shall be erected in such place of this Kingdom, as
the supreme Council shall think fit, for the trayning up of the Gentry of the
Kingdom to the knowledge of those Laws.

19. Item, it is further ordered and established for the advancement of
learning, that in every Province of this Kingdom, Free-Schooles shall be erected
and maintained, so many, and in such places, and in such manner and form, as
to the Metropolitan, and Ordinary of the Diocese, in the respective Provinces,
shall be thought fit.

20 Item, it is further ordered and established, that no Lords, Gentlemen, or
other persons shall raise, or keep any Companyes of soldiers, or troops of
horse, but such as shall be authorized by the supreme Council, Provincial
Council, or County-Councell, or Magistrate within their own Corporate Town:
and that the Statuts against Cesse and Conye or Livery, be duly put, in
execution: And that no company, or soldiers whatsoever shall be paid, or
relieved by the County excepting such as are, or shall be enrolled in the
Marshalls list, and none shall be billetted but by the Constables.

21. Item, it is further ordered and established, that Church Lands and Tithes
impropriate in the hands of Catholic owners before these troubles and joining
in this cause, may be left to them according to their several estates, until
the same be disposed of by Parlame^t; they in the interim answering their rents
as accustomed.

22. Item, it is further ordered and established, that the Kings Customs,
Rents, Revenues, Arreares, and Duties, and the rents, issues, and profits of
Lands, and Hereditaments, and Goods and Chart^es of Enemies and Newters, which
are, or shall be declared by the Provincial or supreme Council, or by the
general Assembly, be received and collected, and be disposed for his Majesty's
use and service.

23. Item, it is further ordered and established, that in every County, there
be Collectours, and Receauers to be appointed by the County-Councell, and that
they be accountable unto the said County-Councell for the same, which
County-Councell shall be accountable to the Provincial Council therein half
yearly, and the Prouincial Council to the supreme Council yearly, to the
end the same may not be co^cealed, or misapplied.

24. Item, it is ordered and agreed, that where any Archbishops, Bishops, or
other Dignitarie, or any person, or persons whatsoever, has, or enjoys any
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, Tithes, or Church-liuings, in one County or
Province, or has, or shall keep his, or their Reside^ce in another County or
Province, that in all such cases the profits accrewing out of such Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments, tithes, or Church-liuings to the general use,
shall be employed within the said County or Province, where the said Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments tithes or Church-liuings do lie, as by the
several County-Councells respectively shall be thought fit, for the public
cause.

25. Item, it is ordered and established by the said general Assembly, that
any woman being a Roman Catholic, and wife to any Protestant, or Catholic,
that has forsaken his house, estate, and wife, and adheres unto the Enemy,
that every such wife may enter into her loynture, if any be conveyed unto her,
or may recover the thirds of her said husbands estate, as if her said husband
were actually dead; and that every such wife shall be in such condition and
capacity to sue, and to be impleaded, as if her said husband had been exiled,
or abiured the Realm by judgment of Law, except the Provincial, or supreme
Council in particular cases, order the contrary.

26. Item, it is ordered and established, that the possessions of the
Protestant Archbishops, or Bishops, Deanes, Dignitaries, and Pastors in the
right of their respective Churches, or their Tenants, in the beginning of these
troubles, shall be deemed taken, and construed as the then possessions of the
Catholic Archbishops, Deanes, Dignitaries, Pastors, and their tenants
respectively, to all intents and purposes, and that those possessions are
intended within the precedent order for setlement of possessions.

27. Item, it is ordered and established, that no man being prisoner by
authority of any of the Counsels aforesaid, shall be enlarged without the order
of the said Counsels respectively, and that no protection be given to
servants, or other men of the Enemies party, without the like order of the
chief Commander of the Army, in the several Provinces, or Countyes.

28. Item, that whereas abuses have been committed in some parts of this
Kingdom in taking of Arms, Ammunition, or other Merchandises, from Merchants
arrived in Creekes, or Harbors, far from their intended Port, by reason of
tempest, or the danger of the Enemy, to the greatest discouragement of the
merchant: It is therefore ordered and established, that where any ship, or
ships, or other vessel shall come, or arrive in any Harbor, Bay, or Creek
within this Kingdom, laden with Arms, Ammunition, or other merchandises, that
in such ease, all those that are, or shall be in Command in the adjacent
Countyes respectively, shall protect, and defend the said merchants, their
goods, and servants, and shall at the charges of the said merchants, procure
carriage for the said goods, and safely convey the same to the said Merchants
intended Port, and not to suffer any of the same, under color of paying for
the same, or otherwise to be disposed of, or taken, before the same come unto
the intended Port, and be entered into the list of the Commissioners, by the
express direction in writing of the said Commissioners: and that any who shall
rob, steal, or violently take any of the said goods, contrary to this order,
shall be deemed, and punished as Enemies to the public good of this Kingdom,
and suffer death therefore.

29. That certain Commissioners shall be appointed in every Port-towne, of the
Freemen, and Residents therein, by the Provincial, or supreme Council, for the
viewing of all the arms, and ammunition that shall be hereafter imported into
this Realm from beyond Seas, and to certify the same to the supreme Council
with all speed; and to prevent abuses in the sale, or issuing, or disposing of
them.

30. Item, it is ordered and established, that where Soldiers do run from
their Garrisons, or Commanders, unto other Counties, or Provinces, that the
Commander, or chief Governor of the said County or Province, upon complaint
made thereof, shall send back the said fugitive Soldiers to their Commanders,
to be dealt with, according to lustice.

31. Item, it is ordered and established, that the debts, and other duties
owing to creditors of this union, by Newters, and Enemies, shall be paid out of
the goods, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of the said Newters, and Enemies
respectively, before any other public charge be answered therout.

32. Item, it is ordered and established, that no Soldier, or other person,
without Command from the County-Councell, shall meddle with the Goods, or
Lands of Newters, or Enemies.

33. Item, it is ordered and established, that to prevent the springing up of
all National distinctions, the Oath of Association, or Union be taken
solemnly, after Confession and receiving of the Sacrament, in the Parish
Churches throughout the Kingdom; and the names of all Persons of rank and
quality in every parish, who takes the same, be enrolled in Parchment, and be
returned, signed and sealed by the Parish Priest, to the Ordinary of every
Diocese, who is to keep the same in his Treasury, and to certify a copy
thereof under seal to the Metropolitan, who is to keep that, and to certify a
true copy thereof under his Metropolitan Seal to the Rolls of the Kingdom,
where the same is to be enrolled.

Exam. per Richard She: supr. Conc. Cler.

FINIS.

