English version of royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom HONI SOIT QVI MAL
Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ESSEX.
WHEREAS Redmond O Hanlon of Tondergee in the County of Armagh yeoman, and
several other persons named in a Proclamation issued from this Board, dated
the 14th of December 1674. were for the reasons in the said Proclamation
expressed, proclaimed Rebels and Traitors; And it was also by the said
Proclamation declared, that whatsoever person or persons should comfort,
relieve, or a bet the said Redmond O Hanlon, or the said other persons, should
likewise be reputed, deemed and adjudged Traitors and Rebels, and be proceeded
against according to Law. And whereas it appears by Certificate of several
Justices of the Peace of the County of Mead, that Patrick Fleming late of
Siddan in the said County, has been guilty of several felonies, and other
misdemeanors, and that he keeps Company with the said Redmond O Hanlon and
other loose persons, doing and watching opportunities to do mischief, not being
to be apprehended by the ordinary Course of Justice. We therefore by
Proclamation dated the 23th of August 1676. thought fit thereby to Charge and
Command the said Patrick Fleming upon his allegiance, and duty to His Majesty,
that he should before the 26th day of September last, render his person to the
Lord Chief Justice, or any other the Justices of the Kings Bench in Ireland,
and submit himself to His Majesty's Justice, to be tried for his Offenses
according to Law, and thereof he was not to fail at his peril. And whereas the
said Patrick Fleming has failed to appear accordingly: and he and the said
Redmond O Hanlon with other malefactors, are fled to the woods and mountains
where they stand upon their keeping, so as they are not answerable or
ameasonable to the Law, but wilful contemners of the same, and cannot as yet
be apprehended, whereby they may be punished according to the Ordinary course
of Law. We therefore do hereby Declare, that they the said Patrick Fleming and
Redmond O Hanlon, shall henceforth be called, reputed and taken for notorious
Rebels and Traitors against His Majesty, and accordingly to be prosecuted by
all His Majesty's loving and good Subjects in all hostile manner. And we
further declare, that whatsoever person or persons shall comfort, relieve or
abet them, or either of them, they are and shall be reputed, deemed and
adjudged Traitors in like degree with the forenamed Traitors and Rebels
themselves, and to be proceeded against according to Law. And we do in His
Majesty's name straightly Charge and Command all his Majesty's loyal Subjects
upon their duty of allegiance to His Majesty, not only to forbear to receive
or relieve the persons aforesaid, or any of them, but also to make diligent
search and inquiry in what place or places the said persons shall from time to
time lurk or be relieved, and by all means possible to prosecute, apprehend
and take the bodies of them, and them to bring or cause to be brought under
safe custody unto the high Sheriff of the re^pective Counties, where any of
them shall be apprehended, to be by such Sheriffs kept in strict and safe
custody, until we upon notice thereof shall give further direction concerning
them; or resisting or refusing to be taken, to kill them or either of them; And
we do hereby publicquely declare, that whosoever shall bring unto any Sheriff,
the bodies of the said Redmond O Hanlon and Patrick Fleming, or either of them
alive, or kill any of them and bring His Head to the Sheriff of the County
where he shall be killed, to be by such Sheriff set up in some public place
in that County, shall have for his reward for each of them so brought in or
his Head, Twenty pounds for payment, whereof we will give sufficient warrant as
occasion shall require, and will take care that the same shall be Immediately
paid accordingly, And toward the speedy effecting of this service, all
Commanders of Horse and Foot, and all other His Majesty's Officers and loving
subjects are to be aiding and assisting, as they and every of them will answer
the contrary at their peril. Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 16th
day of October 1676.

Arran: Blefinton. Ca: Dillon. Cher: Meridith. To: Booth. Jo: Bysse. Ja: Cuffe.
Ric: Gethin. Tho: Newcomen.

GOD SAVE THE KING
Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty; and are to be sold by Joseph Wild Book seller in Castlestreet. 1676


