DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMONDE.

WHEREAS the Process of His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, are issued out to
several Sheriffs, Collectors, and Receivers of the respective Counties, Towns,
and Places of this Kingdom; for diverse Arrears of Rents, Debts, and other sums
of Money, due to the Kings Majesty, at or before the Twenty fifth. day of
December, One Thousand six hundred sixty Eight. And for other Branches of His
Majesty's Casual, or other Revenue not in Farm to the late Farmers, and due at
or before the Twenty fifth. day of December, One Thousand six hundred seventy
five. Which by contract with the King's Majesty, are to be applied to certain
Payments undertaken by Richard, then Lord Viscount, now Earl of Ranelagh, and
others his Partners. And forasmuch as We are informed, That several doubtful
and uncertain Charges have issued in such Process, and that several of such
Sheriffs, and Collectors have been dilatory, or negligent in the Collection of
such Charges as are clear and undoubted, and remiss in the due payment of what
has been Collected. We the Lord Lieutenant and Council, being desirous, That
his Majesty's good Subjects, that stand unduly charged in such Process, may be
freed from all trouble and vexation concerning the same; And that the Arrears
and Debts of all others that stand duly Charged, and are able and responsible
to pay the same, may be put into some speedy and easy way of Collection, have
thought fit, at the humble desire of John Stepney, one of the Partners Party to
the said Contract, and John Hayes Esquire Acting and Entrusted for others of them,
and accordingly do Order and Require by this our Proclamation, That all and
singular such Sheriffs, Collectors, and Receivers, do from and after the Tenth
day of May next, forbear to Collect, Levy, or Receive any Rents, Debts or
Sums of Money, by virtue or color of such Process; And that they and every
of them do at or before the last day of May next, account in His Majesty's
Court of Exchequer, for all Moneys by them received by virtue of such Processs,
and pay the same into His Majesty's Receipt of His Exchequer. And we do also
hereby require all Sheriffs, and Collectors, that have accounted and not taken
out their Quietus est, at or before the said last day of May next, to clear
their accounts.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the 27th, day of April 1678. Ja:
Armachanus. Mich: Dublin Canc. Donegall. Longford. Strafforde. Massereene.
Blesinton. Granard. Lanesborough. Hen: Midensis. Ca: Dillon. Char: Meredith.
Jo: Bysse. Ol: St. George. Hans Hamilton, Ja: Cuffe.

God Save the King.
DUBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty; And are to be sold by Joseph Wild Book:seller in Castle-street,
1678.


