CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant and Council.
ORMONDE.

WHEREAS Dualtagh alias Dudly Costelo, Edmund Nangle commonly called Cornet
Nangle, Christopher Hill, Thomas Plunket, Cahel alias Charles Mac Cawell and
Neil o Neil and their Accomplices have in the Counties of Mead, Tyrone,
Monaghan, Fermanagh, Longford, Leitrim, Cavan and other places appeared in
Arms against His Majesty's Authority and several of them have committed sundry
Murders, Burglaries, Robberies and Stealthes, besides diverse other outrages to
the terror and annoyance of his Majesty's Loyal and good Subjects, and to the
disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdom, upon which misdemeanors and Crimes
being pursued by some of His Majesty's good Subjects, assisted by some of His
Majesty's Army, they the said Dualtagh alias Dudly Costelo, Edmund Nangle,
Christopher Hill, Thomas Plunket, Cahel alias Charles Mac Cawel and Neil o
Neil, and their accomplices are fled to the Woods and Mountains where they stand
upon their keeping so as they are not ansuerable to law, but wilful contemners
of the same; And forasmuch as the actors of those disorders and offenses cannot
as yet be apprehended, whereby they may be punished by the ordinary course of
law, whence we might justly be moved, according to the former usage and custom
in this Kingdom in cases of like nature, to cause them to be forthwith
proclaimed Rebels and Traitors, yet in mercy to them we think fit hereby to
charge and command them upon their duty of alleigeance to his Majesty that
they lay down Arms, and before the Seaventeenth day of July next render their
Persons to any of his Majesty's Justices of Peace, and submit themselves to his
Majesty's Justice to be tried for their offenses according to the laws of the
Land* wherein if they or any of them shall fail, we do hereby publish and
declare that he or they so failing, and such as shall accompany or adhere to
them after the publication of this Proclamation, and every of them are from and
immediately after the said Seaventeenth day of July next to be called, reputed,
and taken for notorious Rebels and Tray^^^s against his Majesty, and
accordingly to be prose^^ted by all his Majesty's loving and good ^bjects in
all hostile manner. Declaring further that whatsoever Person or Persons shall
comfort, relieve or abett them, or any of them, or any of their Confederats or
adherents, they are and shall be reputed, deemed and adjudged Traitors in like
degree with the forenamed Traitors and Rebels themselves; And we do in his
Majesty's name straighly charge and command all his Majesty's loyal Subjects
upon their duty of allegiance to his Majesty not only to forbear to receive
or relieve them the said Dualtagh alias Dud^y Costelo, Edmund Nangle,
Christopher Hill, Thomas Plunket, Cahel alias Charles Mac Cawell and Neil o
Neil or any of them, or any of their Confederates or adherents, but also to
make diligent search and inquiry in what place or places the said Dualtagh
a^ias Dudly Costelo, Edmund Nang^e, Christopher Hill, Thomas Plunket, Cahell
alias Charles Mac Cawell and Neil o Neil, or their said Confederates shall from
time to time lurk or be releived, and by all means possible to prosecute
apprehend and take the Bodies of them the said Dualtagh alias D^dly Costelo,
Edmund Nangle, Christopher Hill, Thomas Plunket, Cahel alias Charles Mac Cawell
and Neil o Neil and their adherents, and them to bring or cause to be brought
under safe custody unto the high Sheriffs of the respective Counties, where
any of them shall be apprehended, to be by such Sheriff kept in strict and safe
custody, till we upon notice thereof shall give further direction concerning
them, or resisting and refusing to be taken, to kill them or any of them; And
we do hereby declare that whosoever shall after the said Seaventeenth day of
July next bring unto any Sheriff the Body of the said Dualtagh alias Dudly
Costelo, Edmund Nangle, Christ^pher Hill, Thomas Plunket, Cahell alias Charles
Mac Cawell, or Neil o Neil or any of than alive, or kill any of them, and bring
his Head to the Sheriff of the County where he shall be killed (to be by such
Sheriff set up in some publicque place in that County) shall have for his
Reward for each Person so brought in, or his Head Twenty pounds to be paid him
by such Sheriff, and to be allowed by such Sheriff upon his account to be
rendered in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, and whosoever of the Accomplices of
the said proclaimed Persons shall after the said Seaventeenth day of July next
apprehend or kill as aforesaid, any of the said Reb^lls and Traitors
particularly named, he shall together with the said Reward receive his pardon;
And toward the speedy effecting of this service all Commanders and Officers of
Horse and Foot, and all other his Majesty's Officers and loving Subjects are to
be aiding and assisting, as they and every of them will answer the contrary at
their perils.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the Eighth day of June, 1666. Mead.
Roscomon. Arran. Anglesey. Dungannon. Henry Tichborne. J. Temple. Paul Davys.
Robert Forth. Ja. Ware. Rob. Meredith. Theo. Jones.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Dublin, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer in Castlestreet. 1666.


