royal blazon or coat of arms DIEV ET MON DROIT


BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND Council of Ireland.
ESSEX.

WHEREAS his Majesty by his Gracious Letters, bearing Date the two and
twentieth day of September last to us the Lord Lieutenant directed, taking
notice, that the late Commissioners for executing the Acts of settlement and
explanation, did not by virtue of their Commission proceed to the adjudication
of any the Claims of the transplanted persons in the Province of Connaught, or
county of Clare, or to the settlement of anytheir estates or interests, except
only the interests of such Protestants, who before the first day of September
1663, purchased Lands in Connaught or Clare from the said transplanted persons,
so that the estates of the said transplanted persons which continued in their
own hands, and were not within that time purchased by Protestants, remain
subject to much doubt and uncertainty, whereby the Improvements of the said
lands are very much hindered, and such of the said transplanted persons, as have
been dispossessed of the lands set out unto them, have not yet been reprized
for the same, according to his Majesty's Declaration of the thirtieth of
November in the year (1660) for the settlement of this Kingdom of Ireland,
which has been since Confirmed by Act of Parliament in this Kingdom; For
Remedy whereof his Majesty has been Graciously pleased by his said Letters,
to authorize us the Lord Lieutenant of this Kingdom, to Cause a Commission to
be issued under the great Seal of this Kingdom, directed to such
Commissioners, as we the Lord Lieutenant with the advice of the privy Council
in this Kingdom, should think fit to nominiate and appoint, authorizing them or
any three of them, to be his Majesty's Commissioners, to hear and determine the
claims of all transplanted persons in the said Province of Connaught and
County of Clare, touching the decrees they had, or the Lands set out to them in
Lieu of their former Estates, Except only such Lands as have been already
disposed of, by his Majesty's late Commissioners for Executing the Acts of
settlement and Explanation, and to state the Quit-rents due to his Majesty out
of the said Lands, and to Exammine what Irregularities have been in the setting
out and disposal of the said Lands, and to confirm the just part thereof, and
to enquire of all Lands forfeited to His Majesty by the said Acts in the said
Province and County, and to dispose of all or any such forfeited Lands, as are
or shall be found to be in His Majesty's disposal, toward the satisfaction
and Reprizall of such transplanted Interests, as remain yet unsatisfied or
deficient, and to grant Certificates thereof, in order to the passing Letters
Patents thereupon, in such manner, as certificats were granted by the late
Commissioners for Executing the said Acts of settlement and Explanation, to any
persons whose Claims were adjudged before them, and to observe such
Instractions, as we the Lord Lieutenant and Council, shall think fit to give
unto them, from time to time, for the better Execution of the said Commission,
and His Majesty by his said Letters has also authorized us the Lord
Lieutenant, without any further warrant, to pass letters Patents under the
great Seal of this Kingdom, upon the said certificates, to the persons therein
Concerned, according to such Estates, as shall be thereby adjudged to belong to
them, in such manner and as fully to all intents and purposes, as Letters
Patents have been usually passed upon Certificates of his Majesty's late
Commissioners for executing the said Acts of Setlement and explanation, and his
Majesty's has also thereby further declared, that the said Commissioners, and
all Officers and Ministers to be Employed by them, shall and may receive such
fees and allowances to be paid by the Parties whose Claims shall be heard
before them, as we the Lord Lieutenant and Council shall think fit to appoint,
so as the same do not exceed one Moiety of the several fees allowed to his
Majesty's late Commissioners, for putting in Execution the said Acts of
settlement, and Explanation, and their Officers and Ministers. And we the Lord
Lieutenant and Council in pursuance of his Majesty's said Letters, having
Nominated and appointed Sir Robert Booth Knight, Lord Chief Justice of his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, Sir Charles Meredith Knight, Chancellor of his
Majesty's Court of Exchequer, Thomas Ratcliff Esquire Henry Henn Esquire one of the
Barons of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, and Sir Richard Reynell Knight, one
of the Justices of his Majesty's Court of Chiefplace, to be his Majesty's
Commissioners, for hearing and determining the Claims of all Transplanted
persons in the said Province of Connaught and County of Clare, and to execute
all other the matters contained in his Majesty's said Letters, and a Commission
being since past unto them under the great Seal of this Kingdom to that
purpose. We have thought fit to give this public notice thereof to all
persons concerned in any of the said Transplanted Lands, and that the said
Commissioners will begin to sit pupliquely upon the Execution of the said
Commission, on the one and twentieth day of August next, at the place where the
late Court of Claims sat in the Kings Inns, Dublin. And we do hereby require
all persons concerned in any of the said Lands, that by themselves or their
Agents, they do put in their Claims before the said Commissioners at the Office
of their Register in the Kings-Inns, Dublin, before the said one and twentieth
day of August next. And that they do with all convenient speed apply themselves
to the said Commissioners for the hearing and determining of their said Claims,
and prosecute the same with effect in such manner and at such time, as by his
Majesty's said Commissioners shall be directed, whereof public notice will be
given by the said Commissioners, as soon as they shall have agreed upon the
order and method of their proceedings.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 26th day of June, one thousand six
hundred seventy six. Ja: Armachanus. Art: Granard. Hen: Midensis. R: Coote.
Heugh: Glenaully. Rob: Fitzgerald. J: Povey. Jo: Bysse. J: Temple. Wm: Gore.
Ol: St. George. Hans: Hamilton. Wm: Flower. Ran: Clayton.

GOD SAVE THE KING
Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty; and are to be sold by Joseph Wild Bookeseller in Castlestreet. 1676.


