CR
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
DIEV ^ ET ^ MON ^ DROIT
royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ESSEX.

WHEREAS by a Clause contained in the Act, entitled, an Act for the explaining
of some doubts arising upon an Act, entitled, an Act for the better execution
of his Majesty's gracious declaration for the settlement of his Kingdom of
Ireland, and satisfaction of the several interests of Adventurers, soldiers,
and other his subjects there, and for making some alterations of, and additions
unto the said Act, for the more speedy and effectual settlement of the said
Kingdom. It was enacted, that it should and might be lawful to and for the Lord
Lieutenant, and other Chief Governor or Governors, and Council of Ireland for
the time being, to assess and impose upon all and every the Lands, Tenements
and hereditaments, which by virtue of the said Act should be restored or
confirmed to any former Proprietors of the Popish Religion, or granted to any
the Roman Catholics of Ireland, such sums of money as they should think fit,
for the raising and leavying of thirty thousand pounds sterling. in the most equal
and indifferent way that might be, in lieu and recompense for the money commonly
called lapsed money, which is thereby discharged. And whereas in pursuance of
the said Act, His Majesty by his Royal Letters, bearing date the first day of
Feberuary 1674. did require and authorize us the Lord Lieutenant, or other
Chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, and Council, to give order for
the assessing, raising and leavying of the said sum of thirty thousand pounds,
to be paid by such Installments as should be adjudged most convenient. And
whereas the late Lords Justices and Council in pursuance of the said Act, and
His Majesty's said Letters by their Act in Council, bearing date the seventh
day of April 1676. did assess and impose upon the several Lands, tenements and
hereditaments in a particular thereunto annexed, contained, that have been by
virtue of the said Act restored or confirmed to any former Proprietors of the
Popish Religion, or granted to any the Roman Catholics of this Kingdom, the
several and respective sums of money in the said particular set down; toward
raising of the aforesaid sum of thirty thousand pounds, the same to be paid
by the said Proprietors and Roman Catholics, their heirs and asignes
respectively, or to the Receiver by the said Act appointed for that purpose, or
their Deputy or Deputies, in such manner as by the said Act of Council does
appear.

And whereas the said assessment does now remain in the hands of the Clerk of
the Council of this Kingdom, and is ordered to be returned into his Majesty's
Court of Exchequer, there to remain as a charge upon the several Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments therein mentioned, to the intent that process may
issue there upon for such sums of money as shall not be paid at the days and
times therein mentioned, which may prove inconvenient to several of his
Majesty's Subjects, in case timely notice be not given thereof, to the several
persons whose Lands are charged with the said payments, we have thought fit,
therefore hereby to give this public notice to all persons therein concerned,
that the aforesaid sum of thirty thousand pounds is to be leavied and raised,
according to such rates and proportions as in the said Act of Council, and
particular thereunto annexed, are mentioned and contained, and to be paid by
the said former Proprietors and Roman Catholics, their Heirs and assigns
respectively, unto John Bence Esquire the surviving Receiver by the said Act
appointed, or his Deputy, by four equal portions; the first payment thereof to
be at or upon the 29th day of September, in this present year one thousand six
hundred seventy six; the second payment thereof, to be at or upon the 25th, day
of March, which shall be in the year one thousand six hundred s^venty seven,
the third payment thereof to be at or upon the 29th day of September, which
shall be in the year one thousand six hundred seventy seven; and the last
payment thereof to be at or upon the 25th day of March, which shall be in the
year one thousand six hundred seventy eight, whereof all persons concerned are
to take notice.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the xxxth. day of June, one thousand
six hundred seventy six. Art: Granard. Hen: Midensis. R. Coote. J: Povey. R:
Booth, Jo: Bysse. J: Temple. Wm: Gore. Ol: St. George. John Cole. Hans:
Hamilton. Tho: Ratcliffe.

GOD SAVE THE KING
Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty; and are to be sold by Joseph Wild Book seller in Castlestreet. 1676.


