C2 R
(...) (...) royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMOND.

WHEREAS by the good and wholesome Laws of this Realm; It has been ordained
and Enacted, That for the more surety of the Country, Night-watches should be
kept from the day of Ascension, unto the day of St. Michael, and from
Michaelmas unto the Feast of Easter yearly in manner following (that is to say)
In every City Six Men at every Gate; In every Borough Twelve Men; and in every
Town six or four, according to the Number of Inhabitants of the Town, And that
they should Watch the Town continually all Night, from the Sun setting, unto
the Sun riseing; And if any stranger do pass by them, and no suspicion be
found, He shall go Quitt; But if they find cause of suspicion, Then they shall
deliver him to the Sheriff, and the Sheriff to receive him without damage,
and shall keep him safely until he shall be Acquitted in due manner; And if
such person or person 3 will not Obey the Arrest, the Watchmen shall Leavy Hue,
and Cry upon them, and such as keep the Town shall follow with Hue and Cry,
with all the Town and the Towns Near; And so Hue and Cry shall be made from
Town to Town, until that they be taken, and delivered to the Sheriff, in
manner as aforesaid; And that for the Arrestment of such Strangers, None should
be punished: And whereas many Burglaries, Thefts, Robberies, Felonies, and
Murders have been of Late Committed in diverse Cities, Burroughes, Towns and
Villages of this Kingdom, And the person and persons who Committed the same,
have made their Estapes, and could not be then apprehended by any Endeavors
that have been used, which yet in all probability they might have been, if the
aforesaid Laws had been duly Observed in all Places throughout this Realm.

Now We the Lord Lieutenant and Council taking the same into our
Consideration, and minding by all ways possible we can, to presarve, and keep
all his Majesty's good Subjects, their goods, and Persons in Peace, and safety,
as well by night, as by day, and to secure them against the like Mischiefs for
the time to come; have thought fit by this our Proclamation to Publish and
Revive the Execution, and Observance of the aforesaid good, and wholesome Laws.
and therefore We do hereby will and require, and in his Majesty's name
straightly Charge, and command all, and every the Magistrates and Officers in
the several and respective Cities, Burroughes, Towns, and villages of this
Kingdom, That they do forthwith cause the aforesaid Laws, and Statutes to be
put in Execution, and duly observed: And we do likewise require the several
Justices of the Peace in the respectiv^ Coun^i^s of this Kingdom, that they
take special Care that Night-Watches be duly kept in the several Towns and
Villages, within the respective Counties wherein they dwell. And we command and
require, That all and every His Majesty's good Subjects in their respective
Townships, and dwellings, be ready, and forward to pursue the (...) Execution
of the said Laws by Hue, and Cry, from Town to Town as often as occasion
shall require; As they will answer the contrary at their utmost Perils.

Given at the Council-Chamberin Dublin, the 19th day of December.1677. Ja:
Armachanus. Mich: Dublin Cane, Barrymore. Arran. Strafforde. Blesinton.
Lanesborough. R: Fitzgerald. Char: Meredith. Jo: Bysse. Ol. St. George. Ja:
Cuffe. Walter Plunkett.


Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty's and are to he sold by Joseph Wilds Bookseller in Castle-street. 1677.


