BY THE LORD LIEUTENANT AND COUNCIL
Jo. BERKELEY,
WHEREAS we are highly sensible of the many and great inconveniences, which His
Majesty's good Subjects in this Kingdom are too frequently brought under by
the multitude of causeless presentiments and Indictments, which are usually
prosecuted at the Assizes and Sessions, rather out of malice or revenge than
for the furtherance of justice; as also by the immoderate exaction of Fees in
Clerks of the Crown, Clerks of the peace, Sheriffs and Gaolers, which do not
only disturb the peace and quiet of this Kingdom by the continual creating of
animosities, and vexations, but do also very much impoverish and disable the
Subjects by exposing them to unnecessary and excessive charges. For the
preventing and remedying of which mischiefs, we have thought fit, and
accordingly do by this our Proclamation direct and require His Majesty's Judges
in their respective Circuits, and also His Majesty's justices of peace in their
respective Counties, that they do take care at the respective Assizes and
Sessions hereafter to be held, that no Grand jury shall offer, nor any Clerk of
the Crown, or Clerk of the peace shall receive any indictment, except for
Felony, or Treason, or any presentment hereafter to be made, without the name
of the prosecutor, with the addition of his quality and place of abode
thereunto annexed, to the end that if upon trial it shall appear to the Court,
that the said indictment or presentment was malicious, the said prosecutor may
be punished according to Law for such prosecution. And whereas the ascertaining
and publishing of the Fees of the above named Officers may tend much to the
ease and quiet of His Majesty's Subjects, and to the preventing of all undue
exactions upon them; We have thought fit herewith to publish the establishment
made of Fees due to the said Officers in the time of the Lord Uice-count
Grandisons Government in this Kingdom and hereunder mentioned, which
Establishment We do strictly require to be observed, and that the same be
affixed in some public place at every Assizes and quarter Sessions, and that
no Clerk of the Crown, Clerk of the peace, Sheriff or Jailer under the pain
and penalty of extortion do take other, or greater Fees than are therein
Established, except only in such cases, where by any Statute other Fees are
allowed to the said Officers; And whereas there has been a Fee of Ten
shillings usually taken by His Majesty's Justices of Assize, upon the tender of
any Travers to such Indictments or Presentiments as have been found before them,
which does occasion an increase of charge to His Majesty's Subjects, who are
often found innocent upon their Trials, and does hinder many persons from
traversing such Indictments and Presentiments as are causelessly prosecuted
against them, the charge of being acquitted upon such traverses being commonly
so great, that it is usually more easy to submit to a small fine for such
offenses, whereof they are really not guilty, than to traverse such
Indictments; And we having conferred with His Majesty's Judges herein, they
have freely and unanimously offered for the further ease of His Majesty's
Subjects to remit the said Fee of Ten shillings, which has been formerly taken
by them upon the tendering of such traverses, whereof we have thought fit to
give this public notice to all persons, who shall be hereafter concerned
therein.

And whereas we are informed that the Offices of Clerk of the Crown, and
Clerk of the peace are often let to Farm in several Counties of this
Kingdom, which is not only illegal, but also very inconvenient, and by reason
thereof the execution of the said offices is often committed to insufficient
persons, Indictments and Presentiments are multiplied, and undue Fees are
exacted, We have thought fit hereby to require His Majesty's Judges of Assize,
and Justices of the peace of the respective Counties of this Kingdom to take
care, that none of the said offices be let to farm, or executed by any
persons, who do farm the same, but that the same be executed either by the
respective Patentees of the said Offices, or by such able and sufficient sworn
Deputies, as shall be approved and allowed of by the said judges and justices.
And in all cases where it shall appear to the said judges or justices, that any
Indictments or Presentiments are maliciously prosecuted before them, they are
hereby required to proceed with all the severity that the law will admit
against such prosecutors, and also to certify unto Us the names of such
persons, who shall so maliciously prosecute any such Presentiments or
Indictments, to the end they may be proceeded against and punished, as
disturbers of the public peace of this Kingdom; And the said judges and
justices are also from time to time to certify unto Us the names of such
Clerks of the Crown, and Clerks of the Peace, as shall continue contrary to
this our Proclamation to let to Farm their said Offices, or shall neglect or
refuse to execute their said Offices themselves, or by such able and sufficient
Deputies, as by the said Judges and Justices shall be approved and allowed of:
And His Majesty's Judges of Assize in the several Counties of their respective
Circuits, are to cause this Proclamation and the said Establishment of Fees, to
be openly read in the hearing of the Country at the public Assizes in every
County, and the justices of the Peace in every County are to do the like at the
Quarter Sessions.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the 22th day of June 1670.
The Table of Fees.
Sheriffs Fees.
For all Capias at the Suite of the King, for Trespass or Contempt, as also for
all Capias of Debt, Trespass or Demand at the Suite of the Subject, that the
Sheriff shall have for every such Capias in causes as aforesaid. viz. Twelve
pence sterling. For his Warrant Four pence For a Bond of bailement Four pence
To the Bailiff that makes the arest 4 d. For every summons, or scire facias at
the Suite of the party as well upon the original process as upon judicial
Record. Six pence For the return and copy of any panel. Four pence For
returning a venire facias duodecem juratores. Eight pence For returning a
habeas corp. Nine pence For a distringas jurator: with a tales Sixteen pence
For writs of Proclamations containing five persons, or under for every
Proclamation. Three pence And if it contain more for every Proclamation. Four
pence F^r writs of execution, for debts or damages for every pound sterling
under fifty Memorand. th^s 50l. by S^atute decimo Caroli primi is made 100l.
Twelve pence And if it exceed in every pound Six pence For an Inquisition to
inquire for damage or value of lands or goods Three shillings four pence For
writs of Seisin or possession, for all the lands contained in the writ. Ten
shillings And further consideration to be had of him by the Judges of the Court
out of which the writ does issue, if they shall find his pains to deserve it.
For writs of restitution of goods under the value of Twenty pounds. Five
shillings And if it be above Twenty pounds. Ten shillings For proceeding and
executing ^f and upon a writ of Justicies. Three shillings nine pence For
entering a supersedeas and the return thereof before Judgment. Eighteen pence
For a supersedeas after Judgment Twelve pence For extents upon Statute Staples
Statut. Merchants or recognizance if it exceed not one hundred pounds for every
pound Twelve pence If above one hundred pounds, six pence in the pound, until
you come to two hundred Six pence And for every pound above two hundred three
pence in the pound, after that he receive the twelve pence in the first, and
six pence in the second. Three pence And these fees to be paid by the party
upon the liberate and not before. Fees for the Clerk of the Crown etc.
continued.
For every acquittal of treason by verdict Eight shillings For every acquittal
of Felony by verdict Five shillings For every one pleading a pardon to an
Indictment of Felony and for entering the plea, and making up the Record Five
shillings For enrolling the pardon thereon Five shillings For every one
discharged (by pleading a pardon) of Treason Eight shillings For enrolling the
pardon of Treason and making up the Record Ten shillings If any be indicted of
Treason and is to be discharged by Warrant, for entering the Warrant, judgment,
and Record Ten shillings If of Felony Five shillings If of Trespass Eighteen
pence For every one allowed the benefit of clergy, for making up the Record
Five shillings For a writ of Restitution of goods upon Felony or forcible entry
and for the Seal Four shillings

Fees in the Sheriffs Courts.
For a Replevin Eighteen pence For a withernam Eighteen pence For a writ or
precept de proprietat. proband. Eighteen pence For the Inquisition and verdict
thereupon. Two shillings For the return of a Recordare and plaint Eighteen
pence For entering a plaint Two pence For every summons, attachment, or distress
before appearance Three pence For every default after Summons, attachment or
distress before appearance by way of issue, to the King for the first default
Three pence For the second default Six pence For the third default Nine pence
And so beginning at three pence, six pence, nine pence as aforesaid, and so to
renew and continue ad infinitum until appearance For entering the Defend.
appearance. Three pence For entering the Declaration Three pence For the Copy
thereof Three pence For entering every plea or general issue Three pence For
entering the verdict and judgment Three pence For every process to summon a Jury
to try the issue Three pence For a precept of execution Twelve pence For an
Atturneys fee during the suit Twelve pence For bloodshed Five shillings For
Battery Two shillings six pence

Fees for the Clerk of the Crown and Assizes in the Circuits.
For every one that appears upon any Capias upon an Indictment or presentment
Twelve pence For every one appearing upon an alias Capias Two shillings six
pence For every one appearing upon the Exigent Four shillings For every one
appearing upon a plur. Cap. Three shillings four pence For every one appearing
upon a Capias utlagat Five shillings For every name in a supersedeas to such a
writ Eighteen pence For taking any Recognizance of the Peace, or for
appearance at the next Assizes or Quarter Sessions, or within ten days or such
like Two shillings For entering appearance upon such a Recognizance Twelve
pence For taking a Recognizance of the good behavior for ever Three shillings
four pence For cancelling such a Recognizance Twelve pence For every de die in
diem Four pence For every person that appears to find Sureties on his pardon
Five shillings For every one that is bound to the King for appearance, and
dies before the day of appearance and his suerties plead his death, for
entering the plea and allowance thereof Three shillings four pence For every
person returned into the King's Bench. wherein the party is to have advantage,
if the Certiorari be for one person Five shillings If the Certiorari be for
more than one then for every one Two shillings For a dismissal upon an
Indictment of Trespass, if it be insufficient in Law Two shillings For every
one committed by the Court for a contempt, or otherwise, and being not fined,
is discharged, then for his discharge Twelve pence. But if he be discharged
presently, then to pay but Six pence For searching for a Record at the suite of
the party, who suggesteth that he has been formerly discharged, if it be
within a year Four pence For every one discharged by Proclamation in Treason,
if it be upon an Indictment Three shillings four pence If without Indictment
Two shillings If of Felony, and bill be preferred, and Ignoramus found by the
grand Jury Two shillings If without bill Indictment preferred Twelve pence For
every venire facias Nine pence For every one Submitting himself to the grace of
the Court upon an Indictment of Trespass, for entering the submission,
protestation, and discharge Two shillings six pence If no more then four be
contained in the Indictment Eighteen pence If more than four for every one
Fifteen pence If for Recusancie Two shillings For entering the traverse to every
such Indictment of trespass, and for the bonds to traverse, if four and no more
be contained in the Indictment Three shillings four pence If above four, every
one of them Two shillings If for Recusancie Two shillings six pence If the
Traverse do go for them, they are to pay for the Judgment and discharge being
four and no more Three shillings four pence If above four, for every one of
them Two shillings For making an Indictment of Treason Six pence For making an
Indictment of Felony Six pence For making an Indictment of Trespass Six pence
For every one that has a Copy of an Indictment of Trespass Twelve pence Fees
for the Clerk of the Peace continued.
For a discharge of an Indictment of Trespass, if it be not sufficient in Law
Twelve pence If the traverse be found for the party, he is to pay for entering
the judgment and discharge, if there be not above three Two shillings If above
three, for every one Twelve pence For every person that submits himself to
the grace of the Court, for entering his appearance and submission, and giving a
discharge Two shillings For every person returned into the King's Bench upon a
Certiorari, wherein the party is to have advantage, if the number exceed
three, for every one Eighteen pence If it be for one alone Three shillings For
every man's acquittal of Trespass, and giving discharge Three shillings four
pence For every year back-ward, that such search is made Four pence For the
copy of an Indictment upon a Statute Two shillings For the copy of an Attainder
of Felony, if the Clerk have goo^ warrant to give it Five shillings For the
copy of an Attainder, of Treason if the Clerk have good warrant to give Ten
shillings For the copy of a Recognizance with a condition Nine pence For
entering the plea and enrolling of a charter being pleaded, and whereof
allowance is required Thirteen shillings four pence For every one that pleads
Auterfoites acquit to an Indictment of Felony Five shillings For the like plea
to an Indictment of Treason Ten shillings If any one be fined and afterward be
Remitted, for discharging the Fine Eighteen pence For release of the Peace
Twelve pence

Fees for the Clerk of the Peace.
For a copy of an Indictment of Trespass Twelve pence For entering the plea to
every Indictment of Felony or Trespass Two shillings For a copy of an
Indictment, if it be upon a Statute Three shillings four pence

Gaolers Fees.
For a Committal Twelve pence For the enlargement of a Prisoner for Treason and
acquitted Six shillings Eight pence For the enlargement of a Prisoner for
Felony and acquitted Three shillings four pence For strikeing off the Irons of
any Prisoner Blanck For a Prisoners Lodging, every night, he having a good bed
clean sheets etc. Four pence For a Prisoners Diet per diem Six pence For a
Prisoner acquitted by Proclamation Nine pence For the enlargement of a Servant
for misdeameanor toward his master or mistress Four pence Item it shall not be
lawful for any Jailer to take from any Prisoner any part of his Clothes, or
money that the Prisoner shall have about him at the time of his Commitment, nor
of any Clothes, meat or money, that shall be sent unto him by charitable
people.

Ja. Armachanus. Mich. Dublin. Canc. Donegall. R. Ranelagh. Shannon.
Massereene. Henry Midensis. Kingston. R. Booth. Jo. Bysse. J. Temple. Rob.
Byron. Paul Davys. Tho. Pigott.

GOD Save the King.
Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and are to be sold by Mary Crook, in Castlestreet, 1670.


