CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lords Justices AND COUNCIL:
Mich: Dublin. C. Art: Forbese.


WHereas Information is given unto Us the Lords Justices and Council, That
diverse great sums of Money have been of late secretly conveyed, and
transported out of this Kingdom, contrary to the Laws and Statutes now in force
prohibiting the same, to the great impoverishing of the Realm, and final
consumption of the Treasure thereof, if not speedily prevented: Now We the Lords
Justices, and Council, taking the same into our consideration, have thought fit
to will and require, and do hereby strictly charge and command, That all and
every the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances heretofore made for keeping the Coyns
of this Realm within the same, be from henceforth duly and inviolably
observed, according to the Tenor of them, And that no person or persons
whatsoever, shall hereafter attempt to convey, carry, or send, or cause to be
conveyed, carried, or sent out of this Realm any Moneys whatsoever current
within this Realm, nor any Plate, Bullion, Gold or Silver wrought or unwrought,
without the License of Us the Lords Justices, and Council, excepting only so
much as shall be necessary for his, and their reasonable expenses, which he,
and they shall be bound to confess and discover, whenever they shall be
thereunto warned or charged by any of His Majesty's Searchers, under pain of
incurring the forfeitures in, and by the said Laws and Statutes, limited and
appointed, the same being the forfeiture of the value of the Money so carried
out of the Realm, whereof the Discoverer is by the said Statutes to have one
Fourth part in such manner, as in the said Statutes is expressed, which we
shall take care for their encouragement, shall be duly satisfied accordingly:
And We do hereby further require, and strictly charge and command all Searchers
of His Majesty's Ports in this Realm, and all others His Majesty's Officers and
Ministers to whom it shall appertain, That they and every of them be careful
and vigilant in, and about the full and due execution of all and singular the
Laws, and Statutes, now in force in this Kingdom, against such as shall export
any Gold or Silver out of this Realm, against the purport and Tenor of the said
Statutes, and that they endeavor to bring them to condign punishment for the
same, as they tender their duty to His Majesty, and will answer the contrary at
their utmost peril.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the Six and twentieth day of July,
1675. Donegall. Arran. Blesinton. Hen: Midensis. R: Fitz. Gerald R: Booth. J:
Temple. Wm Gore. Theo: Jones. Wm Flower.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
DVBLIN; Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the KING's most Excellent
Majesty; And are to be Sold by Joseph Wild Bookseller in Castle-street, 1675.


