CR
DIEV ET MON DROIT
royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ESSEX.

WHEREAS by our Proclamation, bearing date the twenty sixth day of June last,
all persons concerned in any of the transplanted Lands in the Province of
Connaght, and County of Clare, were required to put in their Claims thereunto
before his Majesty's Commissioners, for hearing and determining the said Claims
before the first day of August last, and that they should with all convenient
speed apply themselves to the said Commissioners for hearing and determining
the said Claims, and prosecute the same with effect. And whereas in pursuance
of his Majesty's letters on that behalf, We have amongst other Instructions to
the said Commissioners directed, That an exact survey, be made of all the Lands
within the extent of their Commission, which shall not be adjudged to the
several persons in possession thereof; And after a due Calculation of all the
just demands, which shall be made out of that stock, and before any
distribution thereof toward satisfaction of such deficiencies or Reprisalls,
to compare both together, that so right measures may be taken in the
application thereof, and such further Instructions given, as the nature of the
affair shall require; To the intent therefore that the ascertaining of the
said Stock, and the distribution thereof, may not be delayed longer than the
necessity of the said Stock does require, and that no person may be surprised
in having his Land cast into the said stock, nor any person who is Justly
entitled to any deficiencie or Reprisall, disapointed of his Just Satisfaction
for want of a due and timely prosecution of their Claims thereunto: We have
thought fit hereby again to require all persons concerned in any of the said
Claims, or that are entitled to any of the said Lands, or Deficiencies. That
they forthwith apply themselves to the said Commissioners, and prosecute the
same with effect, and take out Certificate for the said Lands before the first
day of April next, as they desire to avoid the inconvenience aforesaid, which
may fall upon them through their neglect herein; And we do hereby require the
said Commissioners, that forthwith after the said first day of April, they
proceed to the making up of the Books of the stock of such Lands which shall
not be past by certificate to the several persons in possession thereof.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the 19th day of February 1676. Ja:
Armachanus. Mich: Dublin Canc. Thomond: Lanesborough: Hen: Midensis: R: Coote.
Robt:Fitz: Gerald. Ca: Dillon. Char: Meredith. Jo: Povey. To: Booth. Jo: Bysse.
Ric: Gethin. Ja: Cuffe. VVm: Flower.

God Save the King.
Dublin Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent M(...)
and are to be sold by Joseph Wild Bookeseller in (...)


