royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT
By the Lord Lieutenant and Council.
ORMOND,
WHEREAS We are informed, That several Collectors of the several Pole-monies
lately raised in this Kingdom for His Majesty's service, have not as yet
accounted into the Receipt of His Majesty's Exchequer, for the Moneys so
received by them, the Names of which Collectors are as follows, viz.

For the single Pole Money.
Thomas Ash for the County of Mead. Captain William Hartwel for the County of
Clare. Francis Brent for the County of Mayo. Will. Smith for the County of
Monaghan. Humphrey Evat for the County of Tyrone.
For the first double Pole Money.
Christopher Oliver for the City and County of Cork. Sir Arthur Denny for the
County of Kerry. Captain Thomas Cullen for the County of Clare. Henry Crofton
for the County of Leytrim. Thomas Crofton for the County of Sligoe. Owen
Vaughan for the County of Mayo. Henry Waddington for the County of Galway.
Thomas Picken for the County of Fermanagh. Thomas Chambers for the County of
Armagh. John Nisebite for the County of Donegal. James Hamilton for the County
of Down. Humphrey Evat for the County of Tyrone.
For the second double Pole Money.
Christopher Watkins for the County of Wickloe. Thomas Heart for the County of
Wexford. John Clark for the County of Catherlagh. Henry Bren for the County of
Kildare. James Wire for the Kings County. Gilbert Rawson for the Queens County.
Thomas Ask for the County of Mead. Henry Townley for the County of Louth. Sir
John Broddrick for the County of Cork. Sir Arthur Denny for the County of
Kerry. Captain William Hibbart for the County of Tipperary, Paid to 1 shill. 10
d. if Insolvences of 266 lib. 7 shill. 6 d. be allowed him. Thomas Picken for
the County of Fermanagh, Alexander Knox for the County of Donegal, paid the
full, if insolvencies be allowed. John Wright for the City of Waterford.
Captain Thomas Cullen for the County of Clare. Henry Waddington for the County
of Galway. Henry Crofton for the County of Leytrim. Thomas Crofton for the
County of Sligoe. Owen Vaughan for the County of Mayo. Thomas Chambers for the
County of Armagh. James Hamilton for the County of Down. Hugh Smith for the
County of Antrim, paid the full according to an Abstract, but for want of an
Estreate could not account. John Hintch for Carrigfergus. Humphrey Evat for the
County of Tyrone. William Smith for the County of Monaghan. Paul Brasier for
the County of Londonderry.
The Persons under-named have not discharged their Accounts of the second
Pole Money.
County Tipperary, James Halsey Esquire collector. County Mayo, Francis Brent,
collector. County Down, James Hamilton Esquire collector. Kings County, Richard
Warberton, coll. County Clare, William Hartwel Esquire coll. City Cork, Christopher
Oliver, coll. County of Cork the same. City of Lymerick, William Hartwel Esquire
coll. County of Lymerick the same. County of Donegal, John Mourstian collector.
County of Kerry, Sir Arthur Denny collector. County of Mead, Thomas Ash Esquire
collector. County of Galway, Henry Waddington collector.
The first double Pole in the Province of LEINSTER not accounted for by
County of Catherlagh, Abraham Highmore coll. County of Louth, Henry Townsly
collector.
And whereas the Commissioners of some Counties have not returned to His
Majesty's Vice-Treasurer and Receiver General, or His Deputy, the Extreats of
the said Pole-Monies, as they ought to have done: And whereas the persons
under-named, being by several Proclamations of the late Lords Justices and
Council, appointed Collectors of Quit-rents, due and payable to His Majesty,
have not as yet accounted into the Receipt of His Majesty's Exchequer, for the
Moneys so received by them: And whereas His Majesty's Service, as well in
payment of His Army, maintained in this Kingdom, for the necessary defense
thereof, as otherwise, is thereby much hindered, although those persons might be
forthwith justly proceeded against, for the neglect of their Duties in those
Trusts committed to them; yet in Favor to them, We are pleased by this
Proclamation to give them this pre-monition, hereby charging and commanding the
said several Collectors, and all other Collectors of those Moneys, who have not
as yet accounted for their Receipts into the Receipt of His Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, that they, and every of them, do at, or before, the last day of this
Month of August, perfect their Accounts of those their Receipts before Arthur
Earl of Anglesey, His Majesty's Vice-Treasurer, the Lord chief Baron of His
Majesty's Court of Exchequer, and His Majesty's Auditor General, or failing
therein, to appear personally before Us at this Board to answer their neglects
herein.

And We do also charge and command the Commissioners of every County, who have
not as yet returned extreats of the said Pole-monies to His Majesty's
Vice-Treasurer and Receiver General, or His Deputy, that at, or before the
Twentieth day of this Month of August, they do return the said extreats to His
Majesty's said Vice-Treasurer and General Receiver, or His Deputy: And of this
Proclamation all persons concerned are required to take notice at their perils.

The Names of Collectors of Quit-Rents, who have not Accounted, viz.
Arthur Dillon for the County of Mead for one Year, ended at Easter, 1662.
John Wakely for the Kings County for one Year, ended at Easter, 1662. John
Gilbert for the Queens County for two Years, ended at Easter, 1662. Joseph
Wheeler for the County of Kilkenny for two Years, ended at Easter, 1662. two
Years, ended at Easter, 1662. William Dutton for the County of Donegal for one
Year, ended at Easter, 1661. and George Carey for the Year ended at Easter,
1662. George Stack for the County of Fermannagh for one Year, ended at Easter,
1662. Paul Brasier for the County of Londonderry for one John Tench for the
County of Wexford for one Year, ended Easter, 1662. William Toxteth for the
County of Lowth for two Years, ended at Easter, 1662. Lord Castle Coote, and
Lord Coloony for the Province of Connaght and County of Clare for one Year,
ended at Easter, 1662. Francis Chambers for the County of Ardmagh for Year,
ended at Easter, 1662. Carrol Bolton for the County of Down for one Year,
ended at Easter, 1662. Tristram Carey for the County of Monaghan for one Year,
ended at Easter, 1662. Humphrey Evat for the County of Tyrone for one Year,
ended at Easter, 1662.
Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin, the fourth Day of August, 1662. J.
Armachanus, Mau. Eustace, Canc. Ja. Dublin, Ossory, Drogheda, Anglesey,
Mount-Alexander, Falkland, Massereene, Hen. Tichborne, Tho. Pigot, R. Coote,
Fra. Hamilton, J. Ware, J. Temple, Robert Forth, Theo. Jones, Mar. Trevor.

God save the King.
DVBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty;
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer Bookseller, in Castle-street, 1662.


