CR
DIEV ET MON DROIT
royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ESSEX.

WHEREAS application has been made to His Majesty by John Forth, and other
the late Farmers of his Majesty's Revenue in this Kingdom, setting forth, That
there are still due and owing to them several great Arreares and other sums of
money for several branches of the said Revenue to them demised, and therefore
humbly praying, that the Commissions formerly Granted by His Majesty at their
desire to John Stone, Samuel Richardson, Richard Bucknall, Dr. Robert Wood, and
Thomas Breedon, for manageing the said Farm, and collecting the several sums
of money due to the said late Farmers by virtue thereof, might be superseded:
And that a new Commission might be granted to John Stone, Thomas Breedon, and
Daniel Burg^ss, Esqrs whereby they or any two of them might be authorized in
the behalf of the said late Farmers, to Collect and gather in all such Arrears
and other sums of money, as remain yet due to the said late Farmers on account
of their said Farm.

And whereas a Commission is since Issued under the Great Seal (...) this
Kingdom, bearing date the Eighth day of this instant May; Whereby the said John
Stone, Thomas Breedon, and Daniel Burgess, are authorized and empowered to sue
for, levyand receive the said Arrears, and other sums of money so due to the
said late Farmers, and the said former Commissions granted by His Majesty to
the said John Stone, Samuel Richardson, Richard Bucknall, Dr. Robert Wood, and
Thomas Breedon, are thereby superseded and determined.

To the end therefore that all Persons who owe any debts, arrears or other
sums of money to the said John Forth, and other the said late Farmers of His
Majesty's Revenue in this Kingdom, may know to whose hands the same ought to be
paid. We have thought fit hereby to give this notice of the passing of the
said Commission under the Great Seal of this Kingdom, to the said John Stone,
Thomas Breedon, and Daniel Burgess, whereby they or any two of them, their
Deputies, Agents, Substitutes and Officers are Empowered to Collect and receive
such arrears, debts and other sums, as remain due to the said late Farmers.
And we do hereby require all His Majesty's Officers, Ministers and ot^^r loving
Subjects, that to the said John Stone, Thomas Breedon, and Daniel Burgess,
their Agents, Offi^ers, Deputies, Collectors and Receivers in the due Execution
of the said Commission, they be ayding and assisting as becomes.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 21th. of May 1677. Mic: Dublin
Canc. Blesinton. Lanesborough. R: Coote. Robt: Fitzgerald. Ca: Dillon: Char:
Meredith. To: Booth. Jo: Bysse. John Cole. Hans Hamilton Ric: Gethin. Theo:
Jones. VVm: Flower. Ja: Cuffe. Walter Plunket. Abrah: Yarner. Tho: Newcomen.

God Save the King.
Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty and are to be sold by Joseph Wild Book seller in Castle-street. 1677.


