CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
J. ROBERTS.

WHereas the Commissioners appointed for rating and assessing the several
Subsidies granted to His Majesty by the Parliament, lately sitting in this
Kingdom, have in several Counties neglected to make returns of the Estreates
of the said Subsidies His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, accordingly, as by the
several Acts for granting the said Subsidies they were required; And whereas
also several Collectors of the said Subsidies, have likewise failed in
finishing their accounts of the said Subsidies and in paying into His Majesty's
Treasury the several sums of money that have grown due within the limits of
their Collection although the time limited for the payment of the last of the
said Subsidies be long since elapsed; We have therefore thought fit by this our
Proclamation to require the Commissioners appointed for the rating and
assessing the said Subsidies in such Counties where there has been any failer
in returning into the Exchequer the Estreates of any of the said Subsidies,
that they make returns of such Estreates before the twentieth day of November
next; And we do also strictly charge and command all persons who have been at
any time employed as High Collectors of any of the said Subsidies within any of
the Counties of this Kingdom, that they complete their accounts of the several
sums grown due for any of the said Subsidies within the respective limits of
their Collection, and do also pay into His Majesty's Treasury such sums of
money as upon their respective accounts shall appear to be due and owing from
them before the third day of December next. And the Barons of His Majesty's
Court of Exchequer are hereby required as soon as the said several days shall
be elapsed, forthwith to issue out the usual process of that Court against such
of the said Commissioners and High Collectors as shall be negligent, or shall
make default in what is hereby required from them.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 29th day of October 1669. Ja.
Armachanus. Mich. Dublin Canc. Roscomon. Drogheda. Conway and Kilulta.
Ranelagh. Dungannon. R. Coote. Jo. Bysse. Paul Davys.

God Save the King.
Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer Bookseller in Castlestreet.


