AN Impartial Account Of the SURRENDER of CHARLEROY With the several ARTICLES,
etc.
Licensed, October 13, 1693.

October 13, 1693
OUR Letters yesterday from Brussels dated the 14 th instant, give an account,
That on Sunday, the I st instant, Don Francisco de C^strillo, Governor of
Charleroy, caused a Chamade to be beaten; whereupon the fiting seized on both
sides, and 3 Officers, were sent into the French Camp, and the Duke de Villeroy
sent 3 Officers into the Town; the Capitulation lasted till 4 in the afternoon,
at which time the Articles signed; which are as follows, viz

1. That one Gate shall be immediately delivered into the hands of the French:
2. That the Garrison shall march out through the Breach with Arms and Baggage,
Drums beating, Colors flying, Bullets in mouth, and Match lighted, with all
other Ensigns of Honor usual on such Occasions, and to be conducted to
Brussels. 3. That they shall carry out 5 Pieces of Cannon and 2 Mortars. 4.
That 100 persons masked shall march out, and that they shall be allowed 20
covered Wagons. 5. That they shall have 300 Wagons to carry their Baggage,
which the French are to provide them. 6. That the Prisoners on both sides,
which were taken since the beginning of the Seige, b^ returned as they march
out. 7. That such of the Inhabitants as are desirous to stay, may do it without
molestation, and to enjoy their Rights and Privileges, as they did under his
Catholic Majesty. 8. That the Garrrison march our on the 3 d, which
accordingly they did about 10 in the mo^ning, through the French Army, who
stood in B^ttal^a and were conducted to Genape, by 100 French Horse.
The Govern^ur came out at the Brussels Gate in hss Coach, and was complem^nted
by the Duke de Villeroy, and other General Officers, who highly applauded his
Conduct and Gallantry, during the Seige. The Garrison were this Night at
Waterlo, and to morrow Night they will be in the Suburbs of this City, from
whence they will march to Guelderland, to Quarters of Refreshments. The
Governor is gone to the Consederate Army to give the Elector of Bavaria an
account of what passed during the Siege, which lasted 27 days. This Fortress is
situated in the Earldom of Namur, was built in 1666 by the Spaniards,
Bombarded by the French in 1692. it stands on the Rivers Sambre, and Pieton, 14
miles West of Namur, 21 East of Mons, and 26 South of Brussels.

London, Pr^ted for A. Roper, at the Mitre near Temple Bar. 1693.


