DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
By the Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMONDE,

WHEREAS the sins of profane swearing and cursing are offenses forbidden by
the word of God, and do highly provoke his wrath, not only against the persons
that are guilty thereof, but also against the place where such crimes are
permitted to pass unpunished; And although there be a good provision made for
punishing the said crimes, by An Act of Parliament made in this Kingdom, in the
tenth year of the Reign of his late Majesty King CHARLES the first, entitled,
An Act to prevent, and reform prohane Swearing and Cursing; which if it were
duly put in execution would quickly suppress, and restrain the liberty that
wicked persons take to themselves to transgress the said Law, as now they do
without fear of punishment; and for that the Justices of the Peace, and such
others as are entrusted with the punishment of these offenses, do in a manner
totally neglect their duty herein, whereby the said offenses do daily increase
to the offense of Almightly God, and scandal of the Government, and does
endanger the drawing down the wrath of God on this people, if Speedy course be
not taken for the punishing of so great and crying offenses: We therefore the
Lord Lieutenant and Council do by this our Proclamation require and command all
Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, Head-officers, and all and every other
person and persons entrusted by the said Act, to see the same put in Execution
with all diligence and impartiality. And to the end the same may be the more
duly effected, We the Lord Lieutenant will Nominate such persons, as We shall
think fit in every County of this Kingdom to inform against, apprehend, and
bring before the said Justi^^s of Peace, Head-Officers, and other persons by
the said Act authorized to see the same put in Execution, the persons of all,
and every such person and persons who shall offend contrary to the said Act,
And assign them such allowances out of the forfeitures as shall be fit. And
whereas by the said Act it is provided that the same shall be read in every
Parish Church by the Minister thereof upon the Sunday after the Evening Prayer
twice every year, which has been of late neglected; We do therefore by this
Proclamation require and Command the Ministers of all and every the respective
Parishes in this Kingdom, that they cause the said Act to be publicquely read
as by the Statute is required, on the first Sunday after the publication
hereof, and after publicquely to read the same yearly in such manner as by the
said Act is prescribed.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 8th day of February, 1665. Ja.
Armachanus. Mich. Dublin. Canc. Donegall. Arran. Anglesey. Kingston. Jo. Bysse.
Rob. Byron. Rob. Forth. Tho. Pigott.


DVBLIN: Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer in Castlestreet. 1665.


