royal blazon or coat of arms C2 R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT
By the Lord Deputy AND COUNCIL.
OSSORY,

Whereas the Kings Most Excellent Majesty has lately published a Declaration,
entitled, His Majesty's Declaration for encouragement of Seamen and Mariners
employed in the present service: Which Declaration, and the Order of his
Majesty in Council, do follow in these words;

At the Court at Whitehall, the 28 of October, 1664.
Present
The KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY. His Royal Highness the Duke of York. Lora
Chancellor. Lord Treasurer. Duke of Albemarle. Duke of Ormond. Lora
Chamberlain. Earl of Anglesey. Earl of Landerlail. Earl of Middleton. Lord
Bishop of London. Lord Ashley. Mr. Vice Chamberlain. Mr. Secretary Morice. Mr.
Secretary Bennet. Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy. Sir Edward Nicholas.
It was this day ordered, His Majesty present in Council, That His Majesty's
Declaration for encouragement of Seamen and Mariners employed in the present
service, be forthwith printed by His Majesty's Printer: And that so many Copies
thereof, as shall be commanded by His Royal. Highness the Duke of York, Lord
High Admiral of England, be disposed of as His Royal Highness shall think fit
and direct: And so many also to the principal Officers and Commissioners of His
Majesty's Navy Royal, by them to be distributed to such persons and places, as
in their judgments shall seem convenient; some of them also, to the principal
Secretaries of State, and for the Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy
Council.

Richard Brown.

His Majesty's Declaration for Encouragement of Seamen and Mariners employed in
the present Service.
London, Printed by John Bill, and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
Most Excellent Majesty, 1664.

Cum Privilegio.

His Majesty's Declaration for Encouragement of Seamen and Mariners employed in
the present Service.
HIs Majesty, with much Satisfaction, taking notice of the great resolution
and cheerful forwardness of the Seamen and Mariners in the present service,
necessarily undertaken for the Hon^r and Defense of His Dominions, and the
Commerce and Trade of His Subjects; and resolving to give d^e rewa^d and
encouragement to their Va^our and Faithfulness, has thought fit (by the advice
of His Council) to publish and declare:

That all Captains, Seamen and others, that do or shall serve in any of his
Majesty's Own, or merchants Ships, employed in his service, shall (for time to
come, in lieu of all Prizes) have and receive from His Majesty, for every Ship
or Prize they shall lawfully take, whether Merchantmen, or Men of War, laden
or light, the sum of Ten shillings for every Tun the said ship shall measure,
according to the ordina^y rule of Ship-Wrights Hall, and Six pounds thirteen
shillings and four pence for every piece of Ordnance, whether Iron or Brass;
the same to be paid by the Collector for Prize Goods, within ten days after the
payment of the wages of such Seamen (in case Adjudication be made of the Ship
in the Admiralty Court) to be shared and divided amongst them proportionably,
according to the respective places and offices in the ship in which they
served, and according to the customs of the Seas in that case.

And further, That it be lawful for all Captains, Seamen and others, serving as
aforesaid, to take and have to themselves as Pillage, without further, or other
account to be given for the same, all such Goods and Merchandise, as shall be
found by them, or any of them, in any ship (they shall take in fight as prize)
upon or above the G^n-deck of the said ship, and not otherwise. And for every
Man of War sunk or destroyed by firing, or otherwise, to have Ten pounds a Gun,
only to be divided as aforesaid, to be paid by the C^mmissioners for Prize
Goods, within ten days after the payment of the ship as aforesaid, upon
Certificate of the matter of fact stated by the Council of War.

That care shall be taken for defraying the charges of sick and wounded men as
aforesaid, and for the relief of Widows, Children, and impotent Parents of such
as shall be slain in the service at Sea; and for Meddals or other rewards to
such Officers and Seamen of the Fleet, as shall be found to have done any
eminent or extraordinary service.

And that for supplying of necessary provisions for sick and wounded men on
Board, there shall be allowed by His Majesty Five pounds for six months
service for every hundred men.

That upon the d^scharge of sick and wounded men from the ships in His
Majesty's service, care shall be taken for the payment of their Tickets and
Conduct money.

That directions shall be given to all Majo^s, Bailiffs, or other Magistrates
in any Port Towns, to take care for all necessary accommodations at the charge
of His Majesty, for the relief and cure of such sick and wounded men as shall
be sent on shore.

That the moyetie of all Hospitals in England, employed for the cure of wounded
and sick people, be reserved during the time of War at Sea, for such as shall
be wounded in the service of the Navy, as they shall become void, from and
after the first of November.

Richard Brown Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by John Bill, and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
Most Excellent Majesty. 1664.

We therefore have caused the said Order and Declaration to be reprinted: And
we hereby recuire, That the same be published and proclaimed throughout this
Kingdom, that so all persons concerned therein, or that may expect to gather
the fruits of His Majesty's gracious favor thereby intended them, may have
notice thereof.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the seventh day of Jan. 1664. Ja.
Armachanus. Mau. Eustace Canc. Mich. Dublin. Massereen. Dungannon. Joh.
Cloghor. Paul Davys. Fra. Hamilton. Robert Forth. G. Wentworth. Rob. Meredith.

GOD Save the KING.
DVBLIN, Reprinted by John Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer in Castle-Street. 1664.


