C2 R
DIEV^ET MON^DROIT
HONI^SOIT^QVI^MAL^Y^PENSE^


By the Lords Justices and Council.
MAU. EUSTACE Canc. ORRERY.

WHereas Robert Brown Vicar of Castle-Lyons, Oliver Parr, Henry Parr, Edward
Morly, Dennis Kearny, and John Patt, petitioned us in the behalf of themselves,
and several other Inhabitants of the Town of Castle-Lyons in the Country of
Cork; setting forth, That on Wednesday the eleventh of June last, 1662. there
happened in the Town of Castle-Lyons a sudden and violent fire, which through the
height of the wind, and by reason of the absence of the men inhabiting, the
said Town (who were most of them that day about their necessary traffic and
employments, at the fair of Fermoy, within two miles of the said Town) did in
the space of half an hour or thereabouts, burn and consume to the ground, one
and thirty dwelling houses of the Petitioners, besides many Outhouses, Barns,
Stables, and Mault-houses, together with most of the household stuff, and other
goods of many of the Petitioners, and all the household stuff, and other goods
of some of them, to the value of One thousand, five hundred pounds: The truth
of which Allegations has been made to appear unto us by certificate under the
hands of several of the Justices of peace for the Country of CORK, at the
general Sessions of peace held at Bandonbridge the 25 of June, 1662. Upon due
consideration whereof, we have thought fit, and do hereby pray and require all
Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of peace, Portriffs, Bailiffs, and all other his
Majesty's Officers, Ministers, and loving Subjects whatsoever, within this
Kingdom of Ireland, not only to permit and suffer the Petitioners by
themselves and their Substitutes, quietly and peaceably to pass and repass by
them, without any their lets or molestation, they behaving themselves as
becomes dutiful Subjects to his Majesty, but also to be aiding and assisting
unto them and their Substitutes herein, that the Petitioners and their
Substitutes may repair to all Churches, Fairs, Markets, and other public
places of meeting within this Kingdom, to entreat and receive the charitable
benevolence of all well disposed people; to whose pity and consideration in
such a deplorable condition the Petitioners are hereby very heartily
recommended. And we do further hereby pray and require all Deans, Archdeacons,
Ministers and Preachers of the Word, within their several and respective
Parishes in this Kingdom, that they do upon the Sabbath, and other Holy days,
signify and read publicly the contents hereof, unto their several
Congregations there gathered together. Provided, That this our License shall
continue and be of force no longer, then for the space of nine months next
ensuing the date hereof, Any former Proclamation, or general Restriction to the
contrary notwithstanding

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the 16 day of July, 1662. Jo.
ARMACHANUS. JA. DUBLIN. ROBERT FORTH. ROB. MEREDITH. THEO. JONES. ARTHUR HILL.


DVBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
An. Dom. 1662.


