Die Martis scilicet xvjo. die November. Anno Dom. 1641. Annoque Regni Regis Dom.
nostri Caroli, xvijo.
WHereas the present Condition and Danger of this Kingdoem does require from
all his Majesty's good and faithful Subjects of the same, a speedy Levy of
Forces, as well for the Defense of His Majesty's Crown and Dignity, and the
persons and estates of His Majesty's faithful people of this Realm, as for
the opposing and suppressing of the now rebellious Disturbers of the general
peace and quite of this land. It is therefore this day ordered by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in Parliament assembled, that it shall and
may be lawful for such Counties of this Kingdom, as His most Excellent
Majesty, or the chief Governor, or Governors, and Council of this Realm
shall appoint, to raise and continue such a convenient number of Armed men of
Horse and Foot, during the present troubles and distempers of this Realm, as
the said Counties respectively shall think fit, and that it shall be lawful
for every such County by license of His Majesty, or his chief Governor or
Governors of this Kingdom to provide and import Arms and Ammunition for the
said men, and the said Counties respectively at their Election to appoint
Commanders over the said Forces for the defense of each of the said Counties,
and for His Majesty's further Service in this Kingdom. And to assesse, collect
and levy, as equally as they can, money for providing Arms and Ammunition, and
for such competent Maintenance for the support of the said Horse and Foot in
every of the said Counties respectively, and in such manner and form as every
of the said Counties in their discretions respectively shall think fit, while
they shall continue in their proper Counties respectively. And it is further
ordered that the Sheriff of every such County shall assemble the Lords,
Gentlemen and Freeholders thereof after timely and convenient notice unto them
given of the time and place of meeting, for the speedy accomplishment of the
premises, and of all other things thereunto conducing, as often as the Service
shall require the same.

Copia vera Exam. per Phil. Percivall Cleric. Parliament.



Imprinted at Dublin, 1641.


