C^

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lord Deputy AND COUNCIL.
OSSORY.

WHEREAS by Proclamation, bearing date the Nineteenth day of June last, it was
declared and appointed, That the First Payment of the Years Rent, payable by
the Act of Explanation, out of all the Lands in this Kingdom, which were
returned by the Civil Survey to beong to any Irish Papist, Popish Recusant, or
Roman Catholic, and out of all other the Lands wherein any Adventurer or
Soldier, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, has any benefit of Settlement or
Confirmation by virtue of the said Act, should be made on or before the First
day of August then next ensuing, according to the Valuation which is made of
the several Lands liable to the said payment by His Majesty's Commissioners,
appointed for ascertaining the said Years Rent, now remaining in the hands of
Matthew Barry Esquire Secretary to the said Commissioners. And whereas,
notwithstanding the favor by the said Proclamation, extended to the several
persons concerned in the payment of the said Years Rent (the first payment
whereof, by the Act of Explanation, was appointed to have been made on the
First day of February, in the Year, One thousand six hund^ed sixty five) yet
diverse persons liable to the payment of the said Years Rent, have failed in
making their first payment thereof, according to the said Proclamation. We
therefore for the more speedy levying thereof, have thought fit hereby to
require His Majesty's Commissioners, appointed for ascertaining the said Years
Rent, to return a Duplicate of the Books of Valuation made by them, into His
Majesty's Court of Exchequer, on the tenth day of November next ensuing, there
to remain on Record, to the end process may issue thereupon out of the said
Court, according to the said Act, against such persons as shall make default in
their said First payment: And hereof we have thought fit by this Our
Proclamation, to give public notice, to the end that all persons concerned,
who are desirous to be freed from the process of the said Court of Exchequer,
may before the Return of the said Duplicates into the said Court, complete the
First payment of the said Years Rent due from them, and obtain Acquittances for
the same, from the persons by the said Act appointed for the Receipt thereof.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the 14th day of September. 1668. Mich.
Dublin. Canc. Edw. Smythe. A. Ranelaugh. G. Carteret. Paul Davis.


DUBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer in Castle-street. 1668.


