royal blazon or coat of armsBY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMONDE.

WWhereas by several Proclamations Issued from this Board, all persons of the
Popish Religion in this Kingdom, who had or kept any Halberts, Pikes, Muskets,
Calivers, Fowling pieces, carbins, pistols, or other Guns whatsoever without
License from the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors of this
Kingdom, were required within a time therein limited, to bring or cause to be
brought all such Arms into one of his Majesty's stores of Ordnance and
munition, or deliver the same to such persons in the several Counties of this
Kingdom as were by Us Authorized to receive the same* And all and every the
Sheriffs and Justices of the Peace of the several counties of this Kingdom, and
all and every the Officers of his Majesty's Army, were also thereby required to
Search for, and seize upon, and secure all such Arms as after the days therein
Limited for bringing in the same, should be in the possession of, or belonging
to any person or persons of the Popish Religion who, had no such Licenses to
keep the same.

And whereas We are informed that several such Arms do now remain in the hands
of diverse persons of the Popish Religion in this Kingdom, either without any
such Lycences or under pretense of such Lycences as have been granted to some
persons for keeping the same, We have thought fit hereby to revoke and
determine all such Lycences, as have been at any time heretofore granted by Us
the said Lieutenant or other Chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, to
any person or persons whatsoever of the Popish Religion in this Kingdom, to
ride with, carry, buy, or keep in his or their house or houses, or else where
any such Arms.

And We do hereby require all and every such person and Persons of the Popish
Religion, to whom any such Lycences have been granted, that within twenty days
after the date of this Proclamation, upon pain of his Majesty's High
displeasure, they do bring or cause to be brought all such Arms for which they
have any such Lycences into one of his Majesty's Stores of Ordnance and
Munition in this Kingdom, or deliver the same to such Persons in the several
Counties of this Kingdom, as are by Us Authorized to receive the same, and at
the same time do produce their said Licenses or true Coppies of them. And for
the better Convenience of such of His Majesty's subjects who are hereby
required to bring in their said Arms, the several persons undernamed, or any of
them are appointed by Us, in the several Counties of this Kingdom, to receive
such Arms, as in pursuance of this Proclamation, shall be brought in or
delivered to them, who as well at the Clerks of his Majesty's several Stores of
Ordnance, and munition, are to give acknowledgements under their hands of such
Arms as shall be brought to them, or any of them, expressing therein, the kind,
qualities, and condition thereof, And also to mark the names of such persons
upon the said Arms, within six weeks from the date hereof, and from time to
time, after to give Us an Exact account of the Number and kind of Arms,
expressed in the said Licenses of what Arms they shall receive from the persons
to whom such Licenses were granted viz

For the County and City of Dublin Sir Thomas Worsopp Knight, Captain Robert
Moulsworth, and Phillip Castelton, Esquires. For the County of Kildare, Robert
Meredith, John Aylmer, and Maurice Keating, Esquires. For the County of Mead,
Arthur Dillon, James Stopsord, Arthur Meredith, and Stafford Lightborne,
Esquires. For the County of Wicklow, William Hoey, William Mathews, Henry
Temple and Phillip Packenham, Esquires. For the County of Catherlogh, Sir
Thomas Butler Baronet, Henry Smithwick, and Henry Barkeley, Esquires. For the
Kings County, Sir Francis Blundell Baronet, John Weaver, and Richard Warburton
Esquires. For the Queens County, William Bowen, Henry Gilbert, and Robert
Hodges Esquires. For the County of Longford, Sir Thomas Newcomen Baronet,
Nicholas Dowdall, and Robert Choppin, Esquires. For the County of Westmeath,
William Peirse, William Murry, James Leigh, and Robert Cook, Esquires, For the
County and City of Kilkenny, Sir Henry Weymes, Sir Henry Ponsonby, Captain John
Baxter, and Bryan Manser, Esquires. For the County and Town of Wexford, Sir
Nicholas Loftus, John Tench, and William Ivory Esquires. For the County of
Lowth, and Town of Drogheda, Sir William Titchburn, Richard Bolton, Thomas
Bellingham, Thomas Moore, Esquires, and Alderman Edward Singleton. For the
County of Clare, Giles Vandelure, Samuel Burton, Donnoch O Bryen, of Lineneagh,
and Henry Leigh Esquires. For the County and City of Cork, Sir Richard Kerle,
Sir Richard Hull, Emanuell Moore, Redmond Barry, Alexander Pigott, and Arthur
Hide Esquires, For the County and City of Waterford, Nicholas Osborn, James
Mutlow, and Andrew Lynn, Esquires. For the County of Kerry, Sir Thomas, Crosby
Sir Francis Brewster, Anthony Reymond, Frederick Mullins, and Robert
Blene^hassett, Esquires. For the County and City of Lymerick, Sir George
Ingoldsby, Sir William King, Simon Eaton, and Richard Magwire Esquire. For the
County of Tipperary, Sir Robert Cole, Simon Finch, Bartholomew Fowkes, Stephen
Moore, and Francis Leg, Esquires. For the County and Town of Gallway, Sir
Henry Waddington, Charles Holcroft, Edward Eyres John Eyres Junior, and Adam
Purdon Esquires. For the County of Mayo, Sir George Bingham, Sir Arthur Gore,
Gilbert Ormsby and John Crofton, Esquires. For the County of Sligoe, Charles
Collis, Robert Gore, and Roger Smith, Esquires. For the County of Roscomon,
Thomas Caulfeild, James King, and Edward Donollan Esquires. For the County of
Leitrim, Bryan Connigham, Robert Galbraith, and Benjamin Fletcher Esquires. For
the County of Down, William Hamilton, William Brett, and James Lesley,
Esquires. For the County of Antrym, and Town of Carrickfergus, Francis
Stafford, Arthur Uppton and William Lesley Esquires. For the County of Armagh,
Sir George Atcheson, Arthur Brownlow, Edward Richardson, and Francis Chambers,
Esquires. For the County of Tyrone, William Moore, Henry Mervin, and Matthew
Combs Esquires. For the City and County of Londonderry, Collonell William
Scicill, George Phillips, and Thomas Dawson Esquires. For the County of
Donegall, George King, William Dutton and Charles Hamilton Esquires. For the
County of Monaghan, Thomas Cook, Michaell Pockerdge, William Barton and James
Curry, Esquires. For the County of Cavan, Humphry Perrott, Samuel Townely,
Thomas Gwilliams Esquires and Captain Francis Hamilton. For the County of
Fermanagh, Sir Michaell Cole, Sir Gerrard Erwin, Captain William Cos^y and Hugh
Mountgomery, Esquires.
And We do hereby also in his Majesty's Name ^^ar^e and require all and every
the Sheriffs and Justices of the Peace of the several and respective Counties
in this Kingdom and also all and every the Commissioned Officers of His
Majesty's Army, That they do forthwith search for, seize upon and secure all
such Arms as they shall find reason to suspect, to be in the possession of or
belonging unto any person or persons of the Popish Religion who have had no
Licenses from the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors of this
Kingdom, to keep or carry the same, and that from and after the expiration of
the said Twenty days next ensuing the date hereof, they do also search for,
seize upon and secure all such Arms as they shall find reason to suspect, to be
in the possession of, or belonging unto any person or persons of the Popish
Religion, who at any time heretofore have obtained any such Licenses, and that
they do also take care to have such persons in whose custody any such Arms
shall be found contrary to this Proclamation, to be bound over with sufficient
sureties to appear at the next Assizes or Sessions to be held for such County
wherein such Arms shall be found, and there to be prosecuted for their said
offense, and do also return the names of such persons to Us or the Clerk of the
Council, and that all such Arms as shall be so seized upon or secured by them,
be also brought into one of His Majesty's S^eres of Or^nance and Munition in
this Kingdom, or delivered to some of the (...) herein above mentioned,
together with the names of such persons (...) whom such Arms were taken.

(...) We are informed, that diverse Arms belonging to persons of the Popish
Religion, have been taken away, seized or secured ^n pursuance of the said
former Proclamations by several persons w^o have not sent up any account
thereof to Us accordingly, as by the said former Proclamations they were
required. We do hereby strictly charge and command all Sheriffs, Justices of
peace, Officers of the Army, Store keepers, and all other persons whatsoever,
who have received, seized upon, taken or secured, or shall at any time
hereafter receive, seize upon, take or secure any Arms by virtue of this or any
former Proclamation, and have not yet sent up any account thereof, that they do
within Thirty days from the date hereof, send up or deliver to Us, or the Clerk
of the Council, an exact account of all such Arms as they or any of them have
already so received or taken, and that they do also send up the like account of
all such Arms as they or any of them shall at any time hereafter receive or
take by virtue of this Proclamation within fourteen days after the receiving or
taking thereof, together with the names of the persons from whom such Arms have
been or shall be so received or taken, and the kind, quality and condition of
such Arms, and the places where the same shall be kept at the time offending up
such account; And hereof they are not to fail, as they will answer the contrary
at their perils.

And whereas we are also informed that some Protestants contrary to our former
Proclamations have kept and concealed arms belonging to persons of the Popish
Religion, We do hereby require all Protestants within this Kingdom, to forbear
the keeping or concealing* any such Arms as do, or shall belong to any such
persons of the Popish Religion, and to deliver the same up to the persons
hereby appointed to Receive the same, as they will answer the contrary at their
Perils.

And whereas We are informed, that diverse quantities of Gunpowder are now
remaining in the hands and possession of diverse Merchants, Shopkeepers, and
other persons in this Kingdom; We do hereby likewise Charge and Command all
persons of the Popish Religion, and all Merchants, Shopkeepers and Retailers
whatsoever, as well Protestants as Papists, who have any quantity of above one
pound of Gunpowder in their possession, That within twenty days after the date
of this Proclamation, they do send unto Us or to the Clerk of the Council, a
true, exact and particular account of what quantities of Gunpowder they or any
of them have in their several hands or possessions, or in the hands of any
others for their use or by their privity, and that they do also from time to
time, in like manner, when any Gunpowder shall hereafter come to their hands,
or be bought by them, send up likewise a particular account thereof, and in
case any person or persons shall neglect or refuse to send up such an account
as is hereby required of all such Gunpowder, as already is or hereafter shall
come to their hands, We shall take a most strict and severe course for the
seizeing, and securing, all such Gunpowder as shall be so concealed from Us;
And We do hereby further declare, that We shall look upon all such persons who
shall neglect or refuse to conform themselves to this Proclamation, and to
yield Obedience thereunto, or who contrary to the Tenor thereof, shall keep or
carry any Arms, or conceal any Gunpowder from Us, both as contemners of his
Majesty's Royal Authority, and also as persons designing the disturbance of the
public Peace of this Kingdom.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the 29th, day of November, 1680. Mich.
Armach. C. Jo: D^bli^. Bl^sinton. Grara^d. Lanesborough* Hen. Midensis. R.
Coote. Rob. Fitz Gerald. Ca Dillon. Char. Meredith. Wm. Gore. John Keatinge.
He. Hene. Will. Stewart. Ol. St. George. John Cole. Theo. Jones. Walter
Plu^ket. John Air.

God save the King.
Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took and John Crook, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty; and are to be sold by Mary Crook at His Majesty's
Printing House in Skinner-row. 1680.


