CR
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
DIEV ET MON DROIT
royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND Council of Ireland.
ESSEX.

WHereas his Majesty was graciously pleased by a Commission under the Great
Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster on or about the Tenth day of
December last past, to constitute and appoint Sir Charles Meredith Knight, and
Chancellor of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer in this Kingdom, Sir James Cuffe
Knight, John Stone Esquire Robert Wood Dr. of Laws, Thomas Tailor Esquire Robert Gorges
Dr. of Laws. Thomas Sheridan, William Hanway, Edward Wigg, Thomas Waller, and
Murtogh Dowling Esqs to be his chief Commissioners, and Governors for managing
of all and every the Rates, Duties sum, and sums of money, and other his
Majesty's Revenues and In^omes in this Kingdom, during his Majesty's pleasure.
And whereas his Majesty has been since graciously pleased by an Indenture
under the Great Seal of England, bearing Late the Eighth day of April last to
demise Grant, and to Farm let unto Sir James Shaen Knight and Baronet, William
Hill, William Rider, Thomas Hoar, Francis Soane, William Muschamp, Edward
Richbill, Stanhop Mill, Lawrence Stannyan, John Gourney, and Thomas Sheridan
Esqs all his Majesty's Revenues, profits and Incomes in this Kingdom, which
upon the 26th day of December last 1675, and until the 25th day of December,
which shall be in the year of our Lord 1682 inclusive, are or shall be due,
answerable or payable unto his Majesty, his Heirs or successors (new Ai^es,
or increase of his Majesty's Revenue by Acts of Parliament to be hereafter
past, only excepted) with full power and authority, to govern, improve, let,
set, receive, collect, levy and manage the same, by themselves, their Deputies,
Agents, Substitutes and servants at and under the Rents, Covenants, Conditions,
Savings, Limitations and Restrictions therein mentioned, as in and by the said
Letters Patents (relation thereunto being had) does more fully and at large
appear. And whereas some of the said Farmers are since arrived in this Kingdom,
who have produced before us the Lord Lieutenant and Council, his Majesty's said
Letters Patents of the said Farm, bearing date the aforesaid Eighth day of
April last, as also a sufficient power and authority from the rest of the said
Farmers, to take upon them the care and management of the said Farm, and of his
Majesty's Revenue, thereby demised to them. And whereas his Majesty by his
Letters under his signet and sign manual, bearing date at his Court at
White Hall the 18th day of this instant May, has signified his Royal Will and
Pleasure, that a Proclamation should issue for superseding, annulling and
vacating the aforesaid Commission and all Powers and authorities therein and
thereby Granted, which upon the perfecting and sight of the Patent of the said
Farm are by his Majesty's said Letters declared to be actually superseded, We
the Lord Lieutenant and Council in obedience to his Majesty's said Letters, do
therefore by this our Proclamation publish and declare, that the aforesaid
Commission granted to the said Sir Charles Merideth, Sir James Cuff, John
Stone, Robert Wood, Thomas Tailor, Robert Gorges, Thomas Sheridan, William
Hanway, Edward Wigg, Thomas Waller, and Murtogh Dowling, and all the powers and
authorities thereby granted, are suspended, annulled and vacated, and shall
from henceforth cease and determine. And we do hereby require and command the
aforesaid Commissioners, the chief Treasurer, and all other Receivours,
Collectors, and Ministers, which are or have been employed under them, to be
answerable and accountable only to his Majesty's said Farmers of his Revenue,
for their respective receipts, proceedings and Actings, in, by and under the
said Commission, and for preventing any inconvenience which may happen unto, or
befall his Majesty's said Revenue, by the revoking or superseding the said
Commission, we do hereby further require and Command all and every th apersons
employed immediately under the said Commisioners at the head Office or general
Office of the Revenue at Dublin, and likewise the Receivers, Collectors, and
other Officers and ministers who are now employed in and about the said Revenue
elsewhere, to continue and act in their several and respective employments and
stations, during the time they shall be continued and authorized, or until
they be removed dismissed or discharged, by the said Farmers or the greater
Number of them, or such as they or the greater Number of them have constituted
and appointed, or shall hereafter constitute and appoint. And in the mean time,
they are to observe and follow such Rules, Orders and Instructions, as they
shall from time to time receive from the said Farmers, or the major part of
them, or those authorized and appointed by the major part of them. And we do
hereby require all his Majesty's Officers and ministers in this Kingdom, to be
aiding and asisting unto the said Farmers, and such as they shall from time to
time associate unto or appoint, or employ under them in and for the execution
of the trust committed to them by the said grant and demise, whereof all Persons
concerned are hereby required to take notice

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 26th day of May, 1676 Ja:
Armachanus. Mich: Dublin Canc. Massereene. FitzHarding. Heugh.Glenaully: J:
Povey. Jo: Bysse. Will: Steward. Ol: St: George. Hans* Hamilton. Wm: Flower Ri:
Gethin. John Cole.

God save the King.
DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the KING's most Excellent
Majesty; and are to be sold by Joseph Wild, Bookseller in Castle-street. 1676.


