I Do hereby License this Book to be Printed and Published.

White Hall, March 6th. 1687-88. SVNDERLAND, Pr.

An Impartial VINDICATION OF THE English East-India-Company, FROM THE Unjust
and Slanderous IMPUTATIONS Cast upon Them in a TREATISE ENTITLED, A
Justification of the Directors of the Netherlands East-India-Company; As it was
delivered over unto the High and Mighty Lords the States General of the United
Provinces.

Translated out of Dutch, and Feigned to be Printed at London, in the Year
1687. But Supposed to be Printed at Amsterdam, as well in English as in French
and Dutch.

LONDON, Printed by J. Richardson, for Samuel Tidmarsh, at the King 's Head in
Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange, MDCLXXXVIII.

THE whole Treatise is such a tedious Rhapsody of Fictitious, Fallacious
Inferences and Arguments confusedly mixed with some distorted Truths spun out to
an unnecessary prodigious length, that it would be tiresome to the Reader to
trace all the Prevarications, Mis-Recitals, and Sophistry contained in it. By
which the design of the Author seems to be not only to impose a false belief
upon the vulgar-well-meaning Subjects of those Provinces; but even upon the
Lords States General Themselves if it were possible.

Whether we have truly characterized the said Treatise, we shall leave to the
Judgment of the unbiassed Reader; and have therefore caused it to be Reprinted
after the Amsterdam Copy, and Annexed hereunto. And that we may not be guilty
of framing a long Story without Coherence, Verity or Proof, of which we accuse
the Author; we shall in the first place expose to public View and Censure true
Copies of those Original Papers which passed between the Commissioners of both
Companies at London, Anno 1685. which will give sufficient Light and
Confutation unto the Authors prolix and Erroneous History of those Transactions
concerning the Affairs of Bantam: And shall then proceed to detect his willful
mistakes in other matters, and his ill-grounded Arguments by which he
endeavors to Honest many Injurious and Insolent Violations of Right done by
the Dutch toward the English in India, directly contrary to the Articles of
Peace. In all which we do profess the most Religious sincerity, and to write
nothing but what we know to be really true or believe in our Consciences so to
be upon very sufficient Evidence, without using that common Liberty which
Advocates think they may innocently do, viz. To put the best face they can upon
their Clients Cause how bad soever it be, which plea we shall be content may be
admitted for the Authors Indemnity.

To omit Credentials and Speeches of Ceremony, it was agreed that the Treaty
should be managed in French, and Sir John Chardin was the Interpreter.

The Lords Commissioners Decisors for His Majesty, were For the States General
of the United Provinces. The Earl of Sunderland. Lord Anth. Heinsius Councellor
and Pensionary of the City of Delf. Earl of Clarendon. John Goes Lord of
Absmade Consul of the City of Leyden. Earl of Rochester. Isaac Vanden Heuvell,
Councellor. Earl of Middleton. Adryan de Borssele Vander Hoge, Senator of the
Supreme Court of Holland. The Commissioners Instructors for the
English-East-India-Company, were The Commissioners Instructors for the Dutch
East-India-Company. Sir Joseph Ash, Baronet; Governor. The Here. Gerrard
Hooft of the Council of Amster. Sir Josia Child, Baronet; Deputy Governor.
Jacob Van Hoorn of the Council of Flushing. Sir Benj. Bathurst, and Sir Jeremy
Sambrook, Kts Solom. Van de Blocquerii and Adrian Paets of the Council of
Rotterdam.

The First Paper of Business which the aforesaid English Commissioners Received
from the said Dutch Commissioners Instructors; which was Translated into
English in the following words, Viz.
To the Honorable Seigniours, Sir Joseph Ash Barronet, Governor of the
English East India Company; Sir Josia Child Baronet, Deputy Governor; Sir
Benjamin Bathurst, and Sir Jeremy Sambrooke, Knights; all Deputies of the said
Company for Bantam Affairs.
WHereas the Directors of the Dutch East-India-Company, do desire nothing more
earnestly than a good Intelligence between them, and the Royal
East-India-Company of this Kingdom: They also desire nothing more earnestly,
than to see an end of the differences which would trouble that Intelligence, in
case it was not from both sides endeavored with all imaginable care to
suppress, in the very beginning, the seeds of a quarrel, of which the progress
(though short) should be able to produce an Evil, which after having taken
root, it would not be easy to dissipate.

Now forasmuch as the Late King of Great Britain, of Glorious Memory, and my
Lords the States General of the United Provinces, being desirous to provide the
differences that should arise between both Companies should have no bad
consequences, have thought fit to Order the Remedy, contained in the Treaty of
the Year, 1674-75. Upon which ground the underwritten Deputies of the said
East-India-Company of the said Provinces, desiring that the differences about
Bantam should be determined: They do desire your Lordships to concur with
them, and proceed upon that Foundation; and to deliver to them a Copy of all
the pretensions of the English Company touching the Bantam Affairs; and also of
the justificative Proofs and Deeds upon which they pretend to ground their said
pretensions. The underwritten Deputies being resolved to pursue all the Forms
required by Equity and natural Right. And because they have been informed, that
in the Conference of Monday last, there were some mistakes; they have thought
fit to express their mind by Writing, and to desire your Honors to give Answer
in the same manner.

Dated at Westminster 27 May, 1685. Signed, G. Hooft Jacob Van Hoorne. S. V.
Blocquery. A. Paets.


The English Commissioners Instructors, their Answer, in haec Verba.
To the Honorable Seigniours, Gerard Hooft, Jacob van Hoorn, Solomon vande
Blocquery, and Adriaen Paets, Commissioners Deputed by the Netherlands
East-India-Company, touching the Affairs of Bantam.
IN Answer to your Honors Memorial of the 27th. of May, it is impossible for
the Commissioners of the Netherland East-India-Company, to desire a more speedy
end of the Affair of Bantam, than the English East-India-Company; who has
layen under the Oppression of the want of their Residence and Trade there, now
for above three years; besides the great Loss and Spoil sustained at the
surprise thereof. And the said English Company by us their Commissioners, have
humbly besought the Lords Commissioners Decisors, appointed by His Majesty, Our
Sovereign Lord the King, that the matter of the Restitution of Bantam to His
Majesty's Subjects may be first Discoursed and Adjusted: It having been already
consented to by the High and Mighty Lords the States General, and the
Netherlands East-India-Company, that Restitution should be made thereof; as
appears by the Answer to the Memorial presented by Sir John Chardin at the
Hague, the 21th. of May, Anno 1683. And the only difference then remaining upon
that subject was, the manner of the Restitution. So that to enter into proof or
any long Debate concerning the manner of the surprise of that Place, and of His
Majesty's Subjects Expulsion therefrom, instead of making a short end of that
difference would but retard it. Which being once determined to mutual
satisfaction, we are ready immediately to produce to your Honors a List of our
damages, incurred by reason of those Violences offered to our Trade, Estate
and Servants at Bantam, with our Proofs to justify our said Demands.

Dated at London first of June 1685. Signed Joseph Ash, Governor. Josia
Child, Deputy. Benj. Bathurst. Jer. Sambrooke.


The Second Paper received from the Dutch Commissioners Instructors.
To the Honorable Sir Joseph Ash Governor of the English East India Company,
Sir Josia Child Deputie-Governour, Sir Benjamin Bathurst, and Sir Jeremy
Sambrook, Knights; Deputies of the said Company for Bantam Affairs.
THE underwritten Deputies of the Dutch East India Company, having observed in
the Answer of your Honors to their Memorial of the 27 th of the last Month,
that your Honors do persist in the same Opinion you did maintain in the
Conference about the discussion of the business of Bantam, having only altered
the ground of the said Opinion: They the said Deputies cannot but conjure your
Honors to call seriously in to your minds all that has been done as well in
Holland as here, about the said Affair; they being sure that in case your
Honors do reflect upon it advisedly, and considering that in all the Affair
nothing is concluded nor settled; your Honors will agree, that all the
Articles debated and questioned, about which Sir John Chardin, did demand two
Years ago in Holland in the Name of the English Company, (though without any
ground) Justice and Satisfaction; ought now without any difference or
distinction to be judged and determined by the Lords Commissioners Decisors,
according to the Treaty of the Year 1674-75, which in this present Affair is a
Rule and a Law to both Companies.

Dated at Westminster 5th June, 1685. Signed G. Hooft. Jacob Van Hoorne. S. V.
Blocquery. A. Paets.


The English Commissioners Instructors, their Answer to the Paper last
beforegoing.
To the Honorable Seigniours Gerard Hooft, Jacob Van Hoorne, Solomon Van
Blocquery, and Adriaen Paets, Deputies for the Honorable Netherlands
East India Company in the Affair of Bantam.
THE underwritten Deputies for the English East India Company having well
considered your Honors Replication of the 5 th Instant to their Answer of the
27 th May last, say, That they cannot now require less of your Honors, than
what was upon very good and justifiable grounds demanded by Sir John Chardin
two Years since at the Hague, in the Name of our Sovereign Lord the King then
Reigning, as well as in the Name of His Majesty's East India Company; and which
was then consented to by the High and Mighty Lords, the States General of the
United Netherlands, viz. The entire withdrawing of all the Dutch Forces from
all the Ports and Territories of both, or either of the late Kings of Bantam,
and Restitution of that Place unto His Majesty; it ^eing of more important
concern to His Majesty, and His Kingdoms in General, than it is to His
Majesty's East India Company. We have lately, and for a long time past, humbly
supplicated His Deceased Majesty of Glorious Memory, and Our Sovereign the King
now Reigning, that the withdrawing the Dutch Forces and Restitution of Bantam
as aforesaid, may be first finally adjusted before any Treaty be entered into
concerning the English East India Company's Damages; which we shall always
insist upon: And in regard the Netherlands East India Companies Commissaries
and Servants in India (not satiated with the late Violences they did at Bantam,
and formerly at Macassar) are at this time by the very same injurious Methods
(as they deprived us of our Factories and Trade of Macassar and Bantam)
endeavoring to deprive us of the Trade of all places on the Coast of Malabarr,
to engross to the Netherland's East India Company the sole and entire Trade of
Pepper; (which would be intolerable to the interested Great Kings of Europe.)
We must therefore further demand of your Honors, That the Fort of Bantam,
which was built with the English East India Companies Money, may be surrendered
to His Majesty undemolished: The recent Injuries and Hostilities of the
Netherland's East India Companies Commissaries and Servants upon the Coast of
Malabar having created to His Majesty an absolute necessity of securing part of
the Pepper Trade to his Subjects; which we apprehend cannot be done without a
strong English Garrison in the South Seas, and at no place so well, as at
Bantam aforesaid.

Signed Joseph Ash, Governor. Josia Child, Deputy. Benjamin Bathurst. Jer.
Sambrooke.
Dated at London June 10th 1685.
The Third Paper received from the Dutch Commissioners Instructors.
To the Honorable Sir Joseph Ash, Governor of the English East India
Company; Sir Josia Child, Deputy Governor; Sir Benjamin Bathurst, and Sir
Jeremy Sambrooke, Knights; Deputies of the said Company for Bantam Affairs.
WHereas the underwritten Deputies from the Dutch East India Company in all
that has passed between them and your Honors about the Bantam business since
their arrival in London, have had no other Scope but to agree with your Honors
in the Method of discussing the said Affair: They did expect, that in regard of
sparing time, and saving to the Lords Commissioners Decisors the trouble and
tediousness of hearing Debates about the Method of proceeding abovesaid, your
Honors would have consented to it without any further mention of the Affair in
it self. But since your Honors proceeding, and chiefly your last Paper, does
give to the said Deputies a just Subject to fear it should be the design to
treat the said Affair as Negotiators, rather than Instructors of a Cause:
(though the last Quality be the only proper to both, and that only conform to
their Commission.) They the underwritten must declare to your Honors, That
since their Power is only to bring the Differences to an Issue by the Method of
the Treaty of the Year 1674-75, they likewise will not go from that way in any
manner whatsoever; as they will more fully expose it in the presence of the
Lords Commissioners Decisors.

Signed G. Hooft. Jacob Van Hoorne. S. V. Blockquery. A. Paets.

Dated at Westminster, June 11th 1685.
The English Commissioners Instructors, their Answer to the foregoing.
To the Honorable Gerard Hooft, Jacob Van Hoorne, Solomon Van Blocquery, and
Adriaen Paets, Commissioners deputed by the Netherland East India Company,
touching the Affairs of Bantam.
THE underwritten Deputies of the English East India Company understand not
what ground your Honors can find in their last Memorial, or otherwise to
suspect they design to avoid the Method of the Treaty of the Year 1673-75, or
that they pretend to be Commissioners Decisors; which the said Deputies do not,
but only to be Advisers in this great Affair; professing to pursue with all
sincerity, the Method of that Treaty; desiring nothing more than to be the
happy Instruments of procuring a right Understanding between the two Companies;
although considering the constant Inclination, and late Proceedings of the
Netherland East India Companyes Commissaries and Servants in India, to engross
the whole Trade of Pepper; which if attained, will consequently destroy the
English Navigation; and carry with it the Universal Trade of India, in all
other Commodities as well as Pepper. The said Deputies therefore have been
obliged in duty to inform His Most Sacred Majesty and the Lords Commissioners
Decisors (as they intimated to Your Honors in their last Paper) what they
judged to be the only means to preserve any part of the English Trade in India,
and to lay the foundation of an Everlasting Peace between the two Companies.
Which opinion the said Deputies are ready not only to Defend and Submit to the
Lords Commissioners Decisors, according to the Treaty of the Year, 1674-75, but
to demonstrate to their Lordships that all other tedious circumstantial
discourses tend only to protract time.

Signed, Joseph Ash, Governor. Josia Child, Deputy. Benj. Bathurst. Jer.
Sambrooke.

Dated at London 17 June, 1685.
The Fourth Paper Received from the Dutch Commissioners Instructors.
To the Honorable Gentlemen Sir Joseph Ash Baronet, Governor of English
East-India-Company; Sir Josia Child Baronet, Deputy Governor; Sir Benjamin
Bathurst and Sir Jeremy Sambrooke, Knights; Deputies of the said Company for
the Affairs of Bantam.
ALthough the underwritten Deputies of the East-India-Company of the United
Provinces, cannot assure themselves well to understand the true sense of the
Memorial that they received from your Honors; yet they find themselves obliged
to Witness how much they are satisfied with the protestation they have made not
long to defer the discussion of the Controversies about Bantam, in the form
prescribed by the meeting in the Year, 1674-75. To which seeing the
underwritten Deputies have been a long time conformable; they shall be very
glad that the said controversies may be debated as soon as possible, according
to the same Form, before the Lords Commissioners that must decide it.

Signed, G. Hooft Jacob Van Hoorne S. V. Bloquery. A. Paets.

Dated at Westminster 19th. June, 1685.
Whereupon the English Commissioners Instructors did present unto the Lords
Commissioners Decisors the following Paper; Together with their Demands for
Damages sustained by the surprise of Bantam.
To the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners for determination of
Differences, between the English and Dutch East-India-Companies, occasioned by
the late surprise of Bantam.
1. IN Obedience to Your Lordships commands intimated to us in the Robes
Chamber at White Hall the 17th. Instant; We do humbly present your Lordships
with Copies of all Papers that have passed between the Dutch Commissioners
Instructors and our Selves since their Arrival in England.

We do humbly offer it to your Lordships as our Opinion, and the Opinion of all
English Men, that have any knowledge of the Affairs of India; That nothing less
than the withdrawing of all the Dutch Forces from Bantam, and the Territories
thereof, belonging to both or either of the late Kings of Bantam, on the 14th.
day of March, 1681-82. and the surrender of the Fort of Bantam unto His Majesty
undemolished; can prevent the Dutch from being immediately Masters of the
entire Trade of Pepper. And what fatal consequences to His Majesty and His
Kingdoms do depend upon such their Engrossing of that Trade, we have
Demonstrated in Writing to His late Majesty of Blessed Memory: And the Memorial
relating thereunto, now remains in the hands of the Clerks of His Majesty's
Most Honorable Privy Council. And although His late Majesty did only demand
from the Dutch, the withdrawing of all their Forces from Bantam, etc. and the
satisfying the East-India-Company for the damages sustained, by reason of the
unjust surprisal thereof; Our later advices from India have given us sufficient
Reasons to justify our further Demand of having the Fort of Bantam delivered
to His Majesty undemolished, for the following Reasons.

1. Because (as we foresaw when we humbly presented our Memorial aforesaid to
His late Majesty.) The Dutch have since not only obstructed but Hostilely
invaded our Trade, and shot at our Servants with Bullets on the Coast of
Mallabar, to deter and beat them off from that little remainder we had there of
the Pepper Trade.

2. We since understand that the Dutch have so miserably enthralled and
improverished both the late Kings of Bantam, that they are not now both able to
pay us 5 l. of that vast Debt they owe us, otherwise than by that Fort of
Bantam, which was built with the Money the young King owed us, and the Guns
mounted on the said Fort are our own Guns, for which we were never paid.

3. Because the Young King (as we have been credibly informed, and do believe)
assassinated formerly our Agent and Factors (though for what Cause, or who
instigated them thereunto we know not.) And now the Dutch say, it was He the
said Young King and not They, that commanded us away from Bantam: And therefore
we dare not without a strong Garrison to defend us, trust our Servants and
Estates in his Dominions; neither will any go thither that are worth sending,
without such security be provided for their Lives.

4. Because if the Old King of Bantam had a right to Bantam, and to the
Territories thereof. They are now His Majesty's by His Donation of them to the
late King of ever Blessed Memory. If the Right thereof lies (as the Dutch say)
in the Young King, He has been so inhumane, ungrateful, and bloody an Enemy to
His Majesty's Subjects confessedly, without the least Cause or Provocation on
their part, that we humbly conceive His Majesty's Honor cannot be repaired
without invading his City and Country: And the rather because though he be
called a King, he is in truth none, but a perfect Slave to the Batavians, and
an Executioner of their will and pleasure.

5. If the Dutch say the Young King is their Allie, and they are bound in
honor to protect him: We say, by that Rule there can never be Peace between
the English and the Dutch in India: And they may be as good Right easily make a
Quarrel between any other Indian Princes and their Neighbors, or their own
Sons or Brothers; and then take a side; and condition with the prevailing side
to turn us and all other Europeans out of their Countries, and we must not
revenge our Selves because they will protect such injured and injurious Princes
as their Allies: Whereas by the Articles of Peace, the English and Dutch ought
mutually to assist and help each other.

6. This is an old practice of the Dutch: So they made a quarrel with the
Macassars, and when the differing Princes were equally matched, they assisted
one side which turned the balance, and they conditioned with the prevailing
side to turn the English ( Nominatim) and all other Europeans out of their
Country.

7. The Dutch were doing the same thing again between two Kings or Rajas on the
Coast of Mallabar, when our last Letters came from that Coast.

8. If the Dutch say, the old King was assisted by the English against his Son
the Young King, and therefore he turned the English out of his Country: We
Answer, That that is so false a suggestion, that we cannot think the Dutch
themselves believe it: And that it is as manifest as the Sun at noon day, That
the Dutch having beguiled the young King into their power, to compass to
themselves the entire Trade of that place, compelled him to force the English
out of his Dominions: Otherwise why did he at the same time force away the
French, Danes, Portuguez, Moguls, Gentues, and other Nations against whom no
such pretense was or could be made.

On the whole matter, and out of a true and real sense of our bounden Duty and
Allegiance to His Majesty, and the vast Concernment Bantam is (not to us) but
to His Majesty's Honor and Interest: We humbly propose that this Affair of the
Restitution may be fully adjusted before any Treaty be entered upon concerning
the Damages sustained by His Majesty's East India Company; of which
notwithstanding we herewith present your Lordships the best Account we can,
until we receive Copies of those Batavia Books which were lost in the Ship,
Surrat Merchant.

Signed, Josia Child, Deputy Govern. Benjamin Bathurst. Jeremy Sambrook.

Dated 24th June, 1685.
The English East India Companies Demands from and upon the Dutch East India
Company, for Damages sustained by them, by reason of the surprise of Bantam.
1 THE English East India Company have thereby lost their Factory, and all the
buildings thereon depending, which they value at -- l. 25000. 2 They have lost
all their Privileges purchased by many great Presents given to the Kings, and
the Great Men, which they value at -- l. 20000. l. 45000 3 The Trade of that
place is invaluable to the King and Kingdom; though we estimate it here for the
Five Years we have been out of possession but at -- 80000. 4 For Loss upon the
Sale of several Ships used and appropriated to the Trade of Bantam. VIZ. Pieces
of Eight. On the Return -- 8000 Formosa -- 4000 Tywan -- 2600 Bantam Pink 3000
Pieces of Eight 17600 at 5s.
4400. 5 For Losses on our Slaves, (being forced to give away several of them)
their Diet at Batavia, their Passage to, and Diet at Surrat, Pieces of Eight
1500 -- 375. 6 For our Factors Charge at Batavia (after they were forced from
Bantam) when they could not manage the Companyes Trade, Pieces of Eight 16000
-- 4000. 7 For several Goods lost in our Removal from Bantam to Batavia; and
loss on several sent from thence, We estimate at -- 10000. 8 For several Debts
owing to us by both the Kings and other Great Men, the Principal -- 50000. l.
193775 9 For Demorage of several Ships kept at Batavia, as the Emoy Merchant,
Kempthorne, Return, Formosa, and Tywan, which otherwise would have been laden
from Bantam. -- 10000. 10 The Loss of the Ship Surrat Merchant being detained
so long at Batavia, that she was forced to go to Sillebar for Pepper; being
kept so long in the Country, that she was never heard of. -- 40000. 11 The
Charge of our Removal from Bantam to Batavia, and thence to Surrat; and Loss of
Goods, of which we have no Account for want of our Books not yet received, we
cannot be exact in, but estimate at -- 12000. The Loss of Bantam for the Pepper
Trade there for England, and the China and South Seas Trade driven from thence,
is to the King and Kingdom invaluable. -- The Charge of a Fleet of 23 Sail of
great Ships prepared for the Recovery of Bantam; and after they were ready to
Sail, were diverted by His late Majesty's Command, upon the Dutch Ambassadors
solicitation, to the Company's Damage, at least -- 100000. Total 355775.

When the Company shall return to the Possession of Bantam, it will cost them
in Ships, Soldiers, Ammunition, and Fortifications, before they are fully
settled, above 100000 Pounds.

Signed Josia Child, Deputy Govern. Benjamin Bathurst. Jeremy Sambrook.

Dated 24th June 1685.
Another Paper presented (in French) by the English Commissioners Instructers
to the Lords Commissioners Decisors (with the Copies of the several Vouchers,
making good our Demands.)
To the Most Honorable the Lords Commissioners appointed by the King's Most
Excellent Majesty for determining the differences between the English and
Dutch East India Companies, according to the Treaty of 1674-75.
May it please Your Lordships,
THE Deputies for the Netherlands East-India-Company having on the 10 th of
this Instant September, requested before your Lordships to have Copies of what
the English East India Company do complain against them, and sight of the
Proofs. The said East India Company do herewith humbly present your Lordships
with the Companies just complaints, and the Proofs thereof put into French by
Sir John Chardin, which most of the Witnesses are in Town ready to confirm. The
said Company do insist upon that Memorial that was first presented to His
Majesty; (of which the Copy is hereunto annexed) and that (with His Majesty's
leave) the matter of the Restitution of Bantam to His Majesty's Subjects, may
be first discussed and adjusted. It having been already consented to by the
High and Mighty Lords, the States General, and the Netherlands East India
Company, that Restitution should be made thereof, as appears by their Answer to
the Memorial presented by Sir John Chardin at the Hague the 21. May, 1683. And
although His late Majesty upon the humble Petition of His Majesty's East India
Company did formerly only demand from the Dutch the withdrawing of all their
Forces from Bantam, and the Territories thereunto belonging, or which did
belong to both, or either of the late Kings of Bantam on the 14 th day of
March, 1681-82. And the satisfying the East India Company for the Damages
sustained by reason of the unjust surprizal thereof: Our later advices from
India have given us sufficient reason to justify our further demand of
surrendering the Fort of Bantam undemolished, before any Treaty be entered upon
concerning the particular Damages sustained by the Company: For which increase
of our Demands we humbly offer to your Lordships the following Reasons.

Eight of these Reasons were the same as in the foregoing Paper of the 24 th of
June, with this Addition.

9ly. We are well assured, and hope to produce convincing proofs to your
Lordships, that the Dutch of Batavia since they betrayed the young King of
Bantam into their Power, have compelled him to sign Articles in prejudice of
the English Nation, and agreeable to those in print which they made with the
King of Macassar; the business of Bantam being but exactly the same Game played
over again iutirely, which they formerly acted at Macassar; and may do as many
times more as they please: And we have reason to believe will, till they are
possessed of all the East India Trade exclusive to the other European Nations,
if they be not forced by his Majesty out of that Plea, by compelling them to
make a just Restitution of Bantam.

And although we humbly conceive the notoriety of the Fact at Bantam, is
sufficient to convince all indifferent Judges of the Justice of our Complaint
and Demands; and that to add any further proofs to those we now exhibit to your
Lordships, would be an idle interruption and wasting of your Lordships time,
and as needless in this case as giving light to the Sun; yet if more proof
shall be desired, We have other sufficient credible Witnesses to produce to
your Lordships to prove any part of our Charge, if your Lordships will require
it.

We are My Lords, Your Lordships most Dutiful, and most Obedient Servants,
Joseph Ash, Governor. Josia Child, Deputy. Benjamin Bathurst. Jeremy
Sambrooke.

Dated 15th September. 1685.
A List of the Papers delivered to the Lords Commissioners Decisors, attending
the said Paper of the 15 th September, 1685. (the Copies whereof do hereafter
follow.)

No. 2 EXtract of Captain Vtbert's Letter. 3 Extract of Bantam Consultation
Book. Deposition of William Smith, and James Jeffcoate. Also of James Harrison.
And of Geo. Gosnell, Ric. Knipe, and John Burdet. 4 Deposition of Captain John
Fisher. 5 Deposition of Mr. Charles Sweeting. 6 Deposition of Mr. Nic. Wait. 7
Deposition of Mr. Ambrose Moody.
Extract of Captain John Vtbert's Letter to Mr. Edward Rudge Merchant in London.
Most Honored Sir,
HAving an opportunity by the so sudden return of the Amoy Merchant, I have
made bold to trouble you not only with the tediousness of our passage,
(notwithstanding we were the first Ship that arrived) but of some passages
which have happened since my Arrival.

The 7 th of May I came into Bantam Road, having two of your Factors come on
Board with an Order to Sail directly for Batavia, where your Agent and Council
was, and of the Destruction of Bantam, how it was in possession of the Dutch,
and all burnt down. I having not Fourteen Gallons of Water in my Ship, was
forced to go ashore for a Boat load of Water, where I was Spectator of what I
was told by the Factors: The young King hearing of my being ashore, would have
spoke with me, but he that was Chief of the Dutch would not permit him; so that
the young King sent me word, that if the Company had put in any Agent but a
Madman and a Fool, he had never sent for the Dutch; and the rest of your
Council so inferior, being not in Power as an Agent to treat upon State
Affairs: Having this from the King, I went aboard, and sailed directly for
Batavia; where I found the Agent and Council: And as the King had sent me word,
so I found the Agent, for he would not speak one word to me, but sometimes nod
his Head, but eat and drink as well as the best; so that I delivered the
Packet to the Council, whom I think are worthy Gentlemen, etc.

Signed, John Vtber.
Dated from Polofe the 20th June, 1682.
Extract out of the Consultation Books received from Bantam.
THese are to certify whom it may concern, That this day, about Three or Four
of the Clock in the Afternoon, Jacob De Roy entered our Factory with a File of
Dutch Musketeers, accompanied with Pengran Natta Negana, and many of his Army
Attendants; and after a strict search into every of our individual Godongs (or
Warehouses) and Apartments for Goods as they pretended lost out of the Dutch
Factory, did put a Lock upon one of the Honorable Companies Godongs Doors; and
for the more security of the same, the said Jacob De Roy, put his Seal thereon.
To the truth whereof, we are ready on Oath when required, and subscribe our
Names in Bantam this 1. April, 1682.

Signed, George Gosnall. William Hodges. John Burdet. John Fisher.


The Deposition of William Smith, and James Jeffcott.
WE the Subscribers, William Smith, Commander of the Honorable Companies Ship
the Return; and James Jeffcott, Commander of the Formosa Frigate, do Declare and
Certify, That about six of the Clock in the Evening we went off from the shore
in the Returns Pinnace, to go on Board each of our Ships, and at the Rivers
Mouth were detained as Prisoners aboard a Dutch Sampan, by order as they told
us, of the Captain of the Ship Europa, that now rides Admiral in this Road. We
desired the Steerman of the Sampan, to send aboard the Admiral, for permission
to go on board our Ships, which after two or three hours stay, the Captain of
the said Admiral sent us word by the aforesaid Messenger, That the Dutch
Commissioners Major St. Martin, and Captain Tack had given them Orders that no
English Boats should pass without License from them; but it being late, and the
first time, he did grant us liberty to go on Board our Ships, although he was
assured he should be severely checked by the aforesaid Commissioners. To the
Truth whereof we are ready to depose Our Oaths when thereunto required; as
Witness our hands this first of April, 1682. in Bantam.

Signed, William Smith. James Jeffcott.


The Deposition of James Harrison.
I James Harrison Cooper of the Honorable Companies Ship Return, do Attest and
Certify, That about one of the Clock this Afternoon, going off in our
Long-Boot from the Factory, Laden with Sales of Long Cloth, to carry on Board
the Tywan Frigate; the Tide being low, lay upon the Bar until four or five of
the Clock; the water then flowing we got off, and Rowing without the River, met
with Jacob de Roy a Dutch Lieutenant, who called to us, and bid us go back; and
being out of the River came a small Boat from the Dutch Sampan that lay to
command the river, and likewise told us that we must go in again; which
refusing to do, came the Admiral's Longboat which lay at the Rivers mouth in
call of the Sampan, being Manned and Gun'd came to us, commanding us also to go
in, saying, that if we made any opposition they would kill my self and all the
Las^ars in the Boat: and immediately thereupon took hold of the Painter, and
Towed us from thence, and went with our Boat to the Factory, where she was this
night unladen. To the Truth whereof I am ready to depose my Oath when thereunto
required;

as Witness my Hand this first of April, 1682. in Bantam. Signed, James
Harrison.

The Deposition of George Gosnall, Richard Knipe, and John Burdet.
WE the subscribers do Declare and Certify to all whom it does or may Concern,
That this Morning about 9 of the Clock the Young Sultan came with his own and
several Dutch Guards to the Hollands Factory; from whence after some small
stay, they passed by our Factory, and enquired of the Health of our Agent Mr.
Francis Bowyer; and then called Pengran Juda Ningrat, who after some discourse
had between them, came unto our Gate, and told Mr. Nicholas Wait, and Mr.
George Gosfright, that the Young King sent him to know how long it would be
before all the Companies Servants went off: To which was answered that we were
in daily expectation of a Ship from Batavia, which when arrived should with all
expedition Lade with the Honorable Companies Goods, which in their Godongs
were considerable, and then give compliance to His Majesty's commands in
withfrawing from hence, so he departed, and within a quarter of an hour after
came to our Factory Pengran Nata Negana. who acquainted us the Kings pleasure
was, that without delay all English and other Servants belonging to the
Honorable Company, should this day depart and go aboard; but had liberty to
seal up all their Godongs wherein any Goods were housed, and when they had
Shipping might Export them. And within half an hour after this message, we had
notice of the Sultan's coming from the Pavian, and passing through Chinarow to
the Danes Garden, who making some short stay there, returned and came in at the
back Gate of our Factory, where Mr. Nicholas Wait, and Mr. George Gosfright
with sundry others of the Companies Servants met him, and the said Mr. Nicholas
Wait, and Mr. George Gosfright desired His Majesty's permission to reside upon
the place till they had Shipping to Export our Honorable Masters Estate and
although moved twice, yet responded nothing to that point, saying only, That he
had Ordered Pengran Natta Negana to Live in the Factory, and so marched out
without admitting any further Reply: And within an hour after, the said
Pengran's people and the said Pengran came into the Factory, and took
possession of all the Chambers, except only wherein Mr. Nicholas Wait, and
Mr. George Gosfright resided; who some time after went to Monsieur Martin, and
Mr. Tack the Dutch Commissioners in the Fort, and in their absence entered our
Factory sundry Dutch and other Soldiers belonging to them, and plundered most
of the Chambers. The Truth whereof we are ready to confirm by Oath when
required. Witness our Hands in Bantam, this 11th. day of April 1682.

Signed George Gosnal. Richard Knipe. John Burdet.


The Deposition of Captain John Fisher.
I Hada house in Bantam which had been in possession of several English Men for
about 13 years; In which House I kept Servants, and several Goods, for the most
part Liquors; which I bought and sold. The day after the Dutch Landed in
Bantam, being the 29th. of March. 1682. I stood on a Platform in our Factory,
and saw the Soldiers (under the Command of De Roy the Lieutenant of the Majors
Company, pull down a silk Flagg, commonly called St. George's Flagg; which I
had by permission and Order of the Council put upon my House) seeing which I
went with speed toward my House; near the entrance whereof, I saw the
abovesaid De Roy with part of the Flagg in his hand, which he had torn and
given to his soldiers for Scarfs; who espying me, ordered his soldiers to stand
upon their Guard, and keep me out of my house; two whereof knocked me down with
the but-end of their Muskets, telling me I now had nothing to do with the
house, nor any thing therein; and so took out my Goods being Household Goods,
four chests of Claret, four barrels of Mum, etc. and broke open some of the
chests, and took out the heads of some of the barrels, and drank out part; the
remainder by Jacob's Order was carried away: First, having put some Batavia
Blacks in possession of my house. After which seeing no remedy, I returned back
to the Factory. The nearest value of my Goods (besides house) was about 600
Dollers.

At our Exclusion and departure from Bantam, the Council Ordered the Halyardes
of our Flag, being St. George's, to be cut off close to the foot of the flag,
and nailed to the Flag-staff, and leave the Flag flying; and one English Man by
name ( Daniel Quick^) to remain upon the place, to acquaint the Commanders of
our Ships which might arrive from Europe, etc. of departure of the Companies
servants to Batavia, for which Port they were to proceed with their ships.
About five days after our departure from Bantam, the Dutch soldiers went into
our Factory, and Ordered their black servants to go up our Flag-staff and pull
down the Flag. This information we had from some of the eminentest China
Merchants in Bantam, particularly Concho Chooancho Sankee, and Abdool Hallim,
the last whereof was a Chinese turned Javee.

Signed, John Fisher.
Dated the 4th. of April, 1683.
Memorial of the late Transactions at Bantam, Extracted from the Companies
General Letters, Received by the Emoy Merchant, Dated from Batavia the 23th. of
September, 1682. And from Mr. Charles Sweeting's of the 17th. ditto, with the
said Sweeting's Deposition thereupon.
1. THat upon a difference depending, and a War broken out, between the old
Sultan of Bantam and the Young Sultan his Son; the Dutch Government at Batavia
pretending to assist the Young King, came with a Fleet of Ships and Prows, and
attempted to Land at Bantam, on the 14th. of March 1681-82. but were beaten off
by the Old Kings Forces, and forced to retreat with their Fleet to a greater
distance from the Town, till further recruits might be had from Batavia; which
arriving the 23th. of the same month of March; The Dutch General (the sieur
Martin) Landed his Men at Bantam the 28th. who forced their way through the Old
Kings Guards, which were placed between the Castle (in which the Young King was
besieged by His Father) and the shore, and were immediately let in by the Young
King into the Castle, where they set up their Dutch colors, and so they did
upon all other principal parts of the Town.

2. The next day being the 29th. the sieur Caeffe the Dutch Resident, with a
File of Soldiers and several Carpenters, came into the back yard of the English
Factory, and commanded the English Agent to pull down the Balconies, and to
nail up all the windows; a Dutchman in his Company adding by way of threat,
that if the Factory did not cause it immediately to be done, he would himself
do it; and he accordingly did cause it immediately to be done.

3. The next day but one being the last day of the month of March, 1682. One of
the Young Kings chief Officers called Pengran Deepa Paneratt, came to the
English Factory with a Paper Writ in the Mallay Language, and said to be sent
from the King, being an Order to the English with all possible speed to get
their Goods and Effects on Board their ships and depart his Country: The said
Pengran urged the English Agent and Factors to comply speedily with the said
Order, as they tendered the said Kings displeasure, But the English Agent and
Factors are assured that no such Order was given voluntarily by the King; the
Agent and Council when they were the day before to attend the King (to
represent to him how they had been perfectly Neuters in the differences between
him and the King His Father, and had given him no cause at all to be offended
with them,) having perceived nothing by his words or actions toward them, of
any intent in him to drive the English out of his Country. And it is certain
there was a great dispute between the Young King and the Dutch Major, before he
could be brought to give any such Order, but being himself under the power of
the Dutch he was forced to do it.

4. When the English saw themselves in such danger, and not only their Houses
and other Goods on shoer forcibly taken from them, but their Powder also from
on Board their ships, commanded to shore; (as was done out of the ship Return
on the 3d. of April,) they Laded what Goods and Effects they could in that
hurry get together, in the Country Boats, in Order to put them on Board the
English ships then near at hand. Whilst this was doing they met with no
hindrance from the Young Kings subjects or soldiers that were on shore; but
when they came up to the Dutch Guards at Sea, they were stopped and told that
they (the Guards) were ordered not to suffer any Goods to be brought from the
shore to the English ships, and that if the English did attempt further, to get
on Board their ships, they would fire upon them; upon which the English and
their Boats were forced to return back.

5. Of this the English made their complaint to the Dutch Major; who in a
smiling manner told them, all was by Order of the Young King, (though none of
the Natives, or the Kings soldiers, had any hand in these violences; all being
directed by Dutch Officers, and executed by Dutch soldiers. And this is the
more notorious, in that the Young King himself told the French Chief in the
presence of the Dutch Commissioners, (when the said Chief addressed himself to
him to have four chests of Treasure, that had been taken from him restored;)
That he (the said King) knew nothing of the cause of his complaint; for that he
neither had nor would prejudice him, nor the English, nor the Danes, nor any
other Strangers that were Trading in His Country: Therefore if he (the French
Chief) had any wrong done him since the Landing of the Dutch at Bantam, (the
King told him) he must apply himself to the said Dutch Commissioners, or to the
General at Batavia, for Reparation.

6. On the 11th. of April the Dutch soldiers entered and ran-sackt all the
Chambers in the English Factory, carrying away whatsoever they found there; but
the Java's (that is the Natives) did not deal so unjustly with them, permitting
the Factors to seal the Companies Warehouses, and promising to secure them.

7. On the 12th. of April the English left Bantam; and to save themselves, and
what they could of their Masters Goods and Effects, imbarqued upon their ships;
leaving the English Flag (commonly called St. George's Flag) flying upon the
Factory where it had stood for so many years before; but this Flag was soon
taken down by the Dutch, and their Flag set up in the stead of it; and so had
another Flag of St. George's set up upon another House in Bantam, being pulled
down by One Jacob de Roy Leiutenant of the aforesaid Majors Company, on the
29th. of March, (that was the very next day after the Dutch Landed there.) And
the said Flag being taken down was by the said de Roy, with his own hands torn
in pieces, and given among the soldiers to wear for Scarffs.

Charles Sweeting Merchant, late Factor, and one of the Council for the English
East India Company at Bantam; and afterward residing with the rest of the said
Council at Batavia, makes Oath: That the matters contained in the two first
Paragraphs of the Memorial aforegoing is certainly true, to this Deponents own
knowledge. And that the other five following Paragraphs he beleives to be True,
having heard the same from diverse credible Witnesses in that Country. And that
four of the five last Paragraphs of the Memorial, are truly Extracted from the
English East India Companies Letters from their Agent and Council at Batavia,
dated the 17th. and 23th. of September, 1682. The last Paragraph is proved by
Captain Fisher's Affidavit, to which he refers, and verily beleives the same to
be true, as therein set down.

Signed, Charles Sweeting.
Sworn the 31th. of May 1683. before Sir Will. Beversham Master in Chancery.
The Deposition of Mr. Nicholas Wait.
NIcholas Wait late of Bantam in the East Indies, Merchant; makes Oath as
follows.

1. That upon a difference depending, and a War broken out, between the Old
Sultan of Bantam, and the young Sultan his Son; The Dutch Government at Batavia
pretending to assist the young King, came with a Fleet of Ships and Prowes, and
attempted to land at Bantam on the 14 th. March, 1681-82. but were obliged to
retreat at some distance from the Town, till further Recruits might be had from
Batavia; which arriving the 23. of the same Month of March, the Dutch General
Sieur Martin landed his Men at Bantam the 28 th, who forced their way through
the old King's Guards, which were placed between the Castle (in which the young
King was besieged by his Father) and the shore, and were immediately let in by
the young King into the Castle, where they set up their Dutch Colors, and so
they did upon all other principal parts of the Town.

2. The next day being the 29 th, the Seignior Caeffe, the Dutch Resident, with
a File of Soldiers, and several Workmen, came on the back side of the English
Factory, and commanded the English Agent to pull down the Balconyes, and to
nail up all the Windows looking that way: An Officer in his Company adding by
way of Threat, that if the Factory did not cause it immediately to be done, he
would himself do it; and it was caused immediately to be done.

3. The next day but one, the last day of the Month of March, 1682. One of the
young Kings Chief Officers called Pengran Deepa Panneratt, came to the English
Factory, with a Paper writ in the Mallay Language, and said to be sent from the
King, being an Order to the English, with all possible speed, to be gone with
their Effects aboard their Ships; the said Pengran urged the English Agent and
Factors to comply speedily with the said Order, as they tendered their own
Lives, and the King's Displeasure: But the English Factors are assured, that
the King used to put his Seal to all Orders sent to them, and to that said
Paper was neither Hand nor Seal: And the Agent and Council when they were the
day before to attend the King, (to represent to him how they had been perfectly
Neuters in the difference between him, and the King his Father; and had given
him no cause at all to be offended with them:) Having perceived nothing by his
Words or Actions toward them, of any intent in him, to drive the English out
of his Country; but on the contrary, declared in presence of several Dutch
Officers, that he always did and would still believe, that the English were
his Friends: And it is certain, that after the said Paper was brought to the
English Factory, that the Council could have no admittance to the King, though
several times they went into the Castle, and desired leave of the Dutch
Commissioners.

4. When the English saw themselves in much danger, especially when some of
their Officers made it their business to suborn Witnesses, as was told the
Factors by the very Persons that they endeavored to corrupt, and that a Dutch
Lieutenant with a File of Soldiers sealed up a Warehouse in the Factory; and
not only their Horses and other Goods on shore forcibly taken from them, but
their Powder also from on board their Ships commanded to shore (as was done out
of the Ship Return on the 3 d April.) They loaded what Goods and Effects they
could in that hurry get together, in the Companies Boats, in order to put them
on board the English Ships then in Bantam Road. Whilst this was doing they met
with no hindrance from the young King's Subjects or Soldiers; but when they
came up to the Dutch Guards at the Mouth of the River, they were stopped, and
told that the Guards were ordered not to suffer any Goods to be brought from
the shore to the English Ships, and that if the English Men in the said Boats
did attempt further to get on Board their Ships, they would fire upon them:
Upon which the English and their Boats returned to the Factory Gate.

5. Of this the English made their complaint to the Dutch Commissioners, who
told them, all was by Order of the King; though none of the Natives, or the
King's Soldiers appeared (to the knowledge of the English) in these violences,
all being executed by Dutch Soldiers. And this is the more notorious, in that
the young King himself told the French Chief, (as the said Chief acquainted the
English Factors) that in the presence of the Dutch Commissioners, when the said
Chief addressed to him to have some Chests of Treasure restored, that had been
taken from him; That he the said King knew nothing of the Cause of his
Complaint, and that he neither had nor would prejudice him; nor the English,
nor the Danes, nor any other Strangers that were Trading in his Country.
Therefore if he (the said Chief) had any wrong done him since the landing of
the Dutch at Bantam, the King told him he must apply himself to the said Dutch
Commissioners or to the General of Batavia for Reparation.

6. On the 11 th April, the Dutch Soldiers entered and ransackt all the Chambers
of the young men in the Factory; but the Javaes (that is, the Natives) did not
deal so with them; they permitting the Factors to seal the Companies
Warehouses, and promising to secure them.

Sworn the 16th Sept. 1685. before Sir John Moore. Signed, Ni Wait.

The Relation and Deposition of Ambrose Moody, who lived in Bantam five years,
and was there a Prisoner Seven Months by the Dutch.
SOme few days after the Dutch landed in Bantam, in the Month of April, 1682.
several Dutch Soldiers came into the English Factory, and stole out several
things; and Twelve of them broke open the Chamber Door of the aforesaid Ambrose
Moody, and carried away all that was therein, viz. Three Pecul of Aggula-wood,
Sixty Muskets, One Chest of fine Tea-Pots, One Barrel of Mum, and Fifteen
dozen of Pottle Bottles, and Two dozen of Wine, and several Cloths, Books and
Bedding, and one Canister of China-Tobacco, etc.

The English being all ordered to leave Bantam, the said Moody went to Batavia
with the Agent, etc. where he spent above Four Months time; and being informed
that one Nynahassin a Moor-man, and others who were indebted to the said Moody,
was gone to Terrytyassa, (the Palace of the old King of Bantam,) he having an
opportunity, went thither to demand his Debts: And upon his arrival, he
requested the favor of the King, that the said Nynahassin might be summoned to
Court to give an account why he did not pay the said Moody: But when he came,
he told the King, that in the time of the Wars of Bantam, he had delivered to
the said Moody, and Mr. William Hodges to the value of 7000 Rs. 8/8 in Goods;
upon which the old King advised the said Moody to write to the Council of the
English East India Company in Batavia, and desire them to send word to the
Sultan, what was the real value of the said Goods; They being in their
possession, were able to give an account of their true value; and if they would
not satisfy the said Nynahassins Debt, then he would give him order to seize
upon all his Concerns. So the said Moody wrote to Batavia, and waited in
Terrytyassy about two Months for an Answer: But it being troublesome times,
could get none: So he resolved to return to Batavia himself, but the King
advised him not to go directly for Batavia, for fear of being cut off; but to
go to Cherringyen, and stay till arrival of an English Ship; which he did, but
could meet with none, until the latter end of December, the Surrat Merchant
bring in sight, the said Moody could not procure a Boat to go on board; it
being ordered by the Java's, that none should go on board of an English Ship.
So he resolved to go to Bantam in a Java Prow, to take his passage for Batavia:
But upon his arrival at the Boome in Bantam, the Dutch ordered him to come
ashore, and immediately stopped him as Prisoner, and the next day put about
Twenty Five pound weight of Iron upon his legs; the said Moody demanded the
reason of their unjust Action; and had for Answer, that he must confess that he
was sent by the Agent and Council of the English Nation, to assist the old King
of Bantam against them, and then he should be discharged, but not before: He
replied, that if he should confess that, it would be false, and would rather
dye in Prison than confess it.

In the time of the said Moody's Imprisonment in Bantam, one David Oorly, and
William Harmenson, with one Christian Inson, and Phillip Aldes, and several
other Dutch Soldiers, did declare, they met with but little plunder in Bantam,
except what they had out of the English Factory; which by their own confession,
was considerable. Some part of the said Plunder the aforesaid Moody did see in
the hands of the Dutch, viz. Pepper, and small Arms, and Armourers Tools; some
of the Surgeons Instruments and Medicines, and Bottles, (which they said had
been full of Wine) and part of the Mallay Library, and Books of Accounts, and
other Writings of the English East India Company; which supplied the Dutch
Soldiers for six Months time, for Cartridges. The aforesaid Dutch Soldiers at
the Boome did declare, that some of them had played away to the value of One
Thousand Rs. 8/8 a Man in a days time, of those Goods which were plundered out
of the English Factory.

The said Moody being in the old King's Palace, the 5 th of November 1682. did
hear him say, that he had nothing in his Territories but what he had received
from the English, and to them he would give it again, with the possession of
all his Forces, upon the arrival of the first English Ships; and Pengran
Probaya the General of all his Forces, did likewise declare, that he would
surrender up his Charge.

The Dutch being landed at Tancoratt, the Javans all left Terrytyassy, except
the Sultan, two Pengrans, and two English men which were employed as Gunners;
at sight whereof the King being troubled, set fire to the Palace himself, and
fled up the Hills; and about a Month after, the young King sent to his Father,
and promised him his Freedom and Liberty, if he would come and live with him in
the Fort; who consented to it upon the following terms, viz. (as he was
informed.) That the English French and Danes might have the same liberty that
they had formerly; and that the Dutch Renegado should be turned out of the
Fort; and that when he came in, no Dutchman should stir from his Quarters;
which was consented to. But three days after he was in the Castle, the Dutch
desired the Son to demand his Father's Treasure; who told him that he had given
it all to his Son Pengran Probaya, who is gone up the Hills with Four Thousand
Macassars and Mallayans.

The 18 th July 1683, all the English being going from Batavia for Surrat, the
Dutch Council in Bantam sent for the aforesaid Ambrose Moody, and after
Examination discharged him, and ordered him to take his passage to Batavia in a
Dutch Ship.

When the two English Men which had been with the old King came down the Hills,
the Javans carried them before the Chief of the Dutch, who ordered them to go
before the young King; who when he saw them, gave them their liberty to go
where they pleased: But three days after the Dutch sent to the Pengran (who
lives in the English Factory) and ordered him to keep the English Gunners close
Prisoners; All which was told and affirmed to him by the Brother of the said
Pengran.

The 22th. of August 1683. The Agent and Council of the English Nation set sail
from Batavia for Surat; at which time the Dutch had Wars with the King of
Jambee, and the King of Jehore; and on the West Coast of Sumatra, and with
Rogia Pelatta the King of Macassar, who formerly served the Dutch, but is now
fled from them with his Forces, and daily Mallayans and Macassars go from
Batavia and Bantam to his assistance. The Dutch at Ambonia sent this year (as
he has heard several of them confess) Fifty Dutchmen to Batavia in Irons
because they began to Revolt.

Sometime before the English left Batavia, the Dutch had been a fitting of nine
ships and a Fleet of Prowes to go against Macassar; but finding they had not
men sufficient to man them, were forced to forbear till next year.

Now they suffer no Java to wear either Lance or Crease, or any other Weapon;
and the best Java that is in Bantam, must pull off his Cap to any Dutchman.
Although the Dutch have not above Three or Four Hundred Men in Bantam, yet the
Young King has not power to act any Thing; and all Javans pay to the Dutch at
their Marriage Ten Rs. 8/8 and Two Rs. 8/8 per month for each Fishing Prow, and
Two Ditto a year Head-money; and several other Taxes which makes the Javans
daily run from Bantam to Pengran Probaya: So that now he has about Ten
Thousand Men in the Field, and is in expectation that the English will send to
His assistance.

The Dutch Received the Letters which were sent by the Ambassadors, and
interpreted them as they pleased: And would not suffer the Ambassadors, nor no
Java to speak to the Young King, but by their Linguester.

The Young King with his own Hands did crease his Uncle Pengran Coloone, and
keeps his Brothers which came in, fast in irons: Pengran Keedull did come in
with the Old King; but finding how severe the Young King was, made his escape
with several other great Men.

The Dutch could not persuade the Young King to sign to their Articles; at
which they are much troubled.

The Dutch have persuaded the Young King to turn out of Bantam all Europeans,
the Moors, Banyans, and the Chinese,

In January, 168 2/3, Ambrose Moody did see in Bantam the Two great brass Guns
which came from Tonqueen; which (he thinks) the Company have not charged to
account.

The Young King of Bantam must pay to the Dutch for every White Man that they
lose in the Wars, or by sickness, Thirty Rs. 8/8 and Twenty for each Black.
They have lost already by their own confession Fifteen Hundred Europeans by
sickness and by the Wars, since the 18th. of July, 1683. the Chief of the
Dutch was poisoned in Bantam; and very often as the soldiers go to Market, they
are killed with Clubs.

The Young King, by instigation of the Dutch, keeps His Father close prisoner;
and suffers only one slave-Woman to bring him Victuals, which she puts in at a
Window, and keeps Sentinel always at the door.

In the time of the aforesaid Moody's imprisonment, there was sent to him in
Bantam, from Mr. Gurney which did belong to the Kempthorne, a Letter by the
Hands of Nicholas Dios; which he did ask leave of the Dutch to deliver, and had
consent; but within two days after, the Dutch put the said Dios in prison, and
would not discharge him before the English came from Batavia, which was about
five months time after his first imprisonment.

Signed, Ambrose Moody.
I Ambrose Moody abovenamed do own the foregoing Relation or Narrative to
which my name is subscribed, to be drawn by my self, and of my own
Handwriting; And I do make Oath that all and every particular therein is true,
according to what I have heard from very credible persons, or been my self an
Eyewitness of, as the same is expressed by me in the said Narrative.

Sworn the 25th. of June, 1684. before Sir John Moore. Signed, Ambrose Moody.



The Dutch Commissioners Instructors their First Paper presented to the Lords
Commissioners Decisors.
To the most Honorable Lords my Lords the Commissioners appointed by the King
of Great Britain, and the Gentlemen appointed Commissioners by the Lords the
States General of the United Provinces, for the Decision of Differences arisen
between the East-India-Company of England and that of the said Provinces, upon
the Subject Matter of Bantam.
Most Honorable Lords,
AS the Directors of the East-India-Company of the United Provinces have been
very sensibly moved to see that the differences of Bantam have been able to
cause a difference between the two Companies, whose interest is so much never
to be dis-united; so they have been very glad to understand, that it has
pleased his Majesty to name four Lords as Illustrious by the Qualities of their
minds, as of their birth and office, to labor jointly with the Deputies of the
Lords the States General of the United Provinces, in the decision of the said
differences; and to prevent by the ways of Justice and Equity, this coldness
from ever being capable of sowing seeds of bitterness, which might be able to
destroy the remainder of this brotherly love which ought to be the Bond of
Union, and good Intelligence between the two Companies.

The underwritten Deputies of the Company of the said Provinces, who have the
honor to defend before your Excellencies, the Right and the Innocence of their
Company; to spare your Excellencies the trouble of an obscure and perplexed
discourse, will endeavor as much as it is possible for them, to unfold the
matter, and to govern their Defense by the order of nature, which enlightens
with its clearness, the subject proposed to be treated of: and deviding, for
this reason, their answer into two principal parts; they will consider in the
first place, the nature of the demand of the English Company in its proper
scope; and will afterward examine upon what it is founded.

As to the first point, since the demand ought to be the Basis and foundation
of a Judicial Decision; the underwritten Deputies could have wished that the
Commissioners of the English Company, in relation to the point of their
Re-establishment in Bantam, would have explained with more clearness than they
have done in their Memorial which they exhibit instead of a demand; for
although there be there mentioned the Restitution of Bantam, and the delivery
of the Fort of the said Town, and lastly the recalling of the Dutch forces from
Bantam, and out of all the Territories which depend upon the said Town, and
that whole Kingdom almost, in the same terms with the Memorial of the said
Commissioners of the English Company, of the Tenth and of the Seventeenth of
June; wherein, besides the re-calling of the Hollanders Forces, they pretend
that the Town of Bantam should be restored (as they word it) into the hands of
His Majesty: The underwritten Deputies could never without difficulty, nor can
yet believe, that the expression concerning the Restitution of Bantam could be
expected to be understood literally. For since before the last War of Bantam,
the English Company had in the Capital City but a house and Residence, without
having had there, or pretended to, any Right or Territory; it is unconceivable
with what appearance of Justice it can pretend to that which it never possessed,
and to what it has never had any real pretense founded upon propriety (
Dominion) which not only according to the Civil Law, but also according to that
of Nature, ought to be the ground of a real action ( Rei vindicatio:) besides
that it is not to be comprehended, to demand more than it has lost, viz. The
City and Fort of Bantam instead of a House which the Company there possessed, and
of which the King of Bantam has driven the English out of Bantam: and from
whom does the English Company demand the City and Fort of Bantam? From the
Company of Holland which enjoys there only a bare Residence, without any Right
of Territory or Authority, which is entirely inherent in the person of the
King. But how should they dispose of the City of Bantam? And in what manner
shall they put it into the Hands of the English? shall they drive away the King
of Bantam from it? Whom notwithstanding the Honor which the late King of Great
Britain (of glorious Memory) did him by the Reception of his Ambassadors, and
the great respects which the English Company showed to him in the Letter they
Writ to him in the Year, 1682, They would now make pass for a pitiful fellow
and a slave to Batavia. But it may be they would have the Dutch Company make
the King of Bantam, yield up the said Town to the English; But in what manner?
Probably by threatening the Indian Prince to leave him to the mercy of his
Enemies, by withdrawing the Dutch. Troops from Bantam. But if the government of
Batavia be obliged to maintain and protect the King against his Enemies, (as it
is really and effectually engaged to do) must they break their word and
falsify their faith to accommodate the English Company in Bantam? This would
be unjust, and by consequence morally impossible, as are all things which
cannot be compassed with Justice and public Faith; which there is as much
obligation to keep with an Indian Prince, as there is with the most
considerable and most potent King of the whole Earth.

Against which, the politic remark of the Commissioners of the English Company
in the 5th. Paragraph of their demand, signifies nothing; where the say, That
to allege the obligation of protecting an Allye, is but a politic artifice to
Banish for ever peace between the English and the Dutch in India; because there
will be nothing more easy than to make War by these means between any other
Princes and their Neighbors, or their Sons or Brothers; and then take a side,
and condition with the prevailing side, to exclude the English and all other
Europeans.

For although it would be a very base and Criminal action, to make quarrels
between Indian Princes, especially with an intention to make advantage of them
against the Europeans; yet no man in his Right senses can doubt, but that
according to the Law of Nations, it is Lawful for any Europeans to make
Treaties and Alliances with Indian Princes, which make a very considerable part
of mankind; and that the abuse which may be made of this, is no more able to
take away this liberty, than evil usage which European Princes may make, and do
very often, of their Alliances, can deprive them of their Right of making them
when they think fit.

That the Artifice, of which the English Commissioners speak, viz. of making a
War between the Indian Princes, to exclude the English from the Trade, (as they
say in the Sixth and Seventh Paragraphs of their demands) is an old and
discovered trick of the Dutch, they will never prove: But it will be seen on
the contrary, in the sequel of this Answer, that the Government of Batavia
cannot be accused to having either kindled or fomented the War of Bantam (of
which is now treated) or perfidiously drawing the young King under their Yoke;
but by want of Charity, and a passionate Spirit, which discovers it self in the
End of their Demands; wherein they seem to wish, His Majesty would decide by
force of Arms, an Affair upon which on each part, we ought with a Spirit of
Submission and Acquiescency, to wait for the judgment of your Excellencies.

As to the second point, viz. The Justice of the Demand, and the Ground upon
which it is founded; which ought to be the truth of the Complaints of the
English Company against that of Holland upon the matter of Bantam; the
underwritten Persons cannot doubt, but that your Excellencies will think fit and
proper, before the matter be entered into, that it be examined if it be true,
that on the parts of the High and Mighty Lords the States General, and on that
of the Dutch Company, it has been agreed (as the Commissioners of the English
Company do allege) that Restitution should be made of Bantam; the discussion
of which Affair as a preliminary ( Question prejudicialis) ought to precede the
examination of the truth of the Complaints, in which consists the principal
cause; for, in Effect, the English Commissioners would have reason, if the
Affair concerning the Restitution of Bantam were determined by their High and
Mightinesses, and the Company of Holland not to engage themselves in a long
Suit, being able to make an end of the Affair, without breaking their Heads
with so many Disputes; but as these Gentlemen have been mistaken in writing of
a few Lines, as it appears by their Answer of 27 th July to the Memorial of us
the underwritten, of the 19 th of the same Month, where the word of Decisors,
at which they are so angry, is not to be found; but that of Negotiators is
used; it is not much to be wondered at, that they should be mistaken in the
Explication of the Answer of the States General to the Memorial of Sir John
Chardin, to which they refer in their Demand.

Their High and Mightinesses love justice too much, to have been willing to
dispose of a Town that did not belong to them, and to which they had no right:
It is true, that they offered not only, not to hinder the resettlement of the
English in Bantam, from being obstructed either by the Dutch Company, or any of
their Subjects, but also to further it themselves, and to make the said Company
to assist them in it; which is far from that which the Deputies of the English
Company say in their Demands.

But it being important to prove here, that the English Company cannot, at this
time, take hold of the Answer of their High and Mightinesses, no more than of
the advances which the Company of Holland made in the year 1683, toward the
accommodating the Differences which the War of Bantam had made to arise between
the two Companies; who must have recourse to what passed between Sir John
Chardin and the Deputies of the Dutch Company on the subject of the said
Differences.

It is certain, that at that time it was not known in what condition the
Affairs of Bantam were; Whether the War between the King of Bantam yet lasted,
or whether it was ended; and if it were determined, whether it were done by a
treaty, or by force of Arms; if by Arms which of the two the Father or the Son,
remained Conqueror, and Master of the Kingdom.

It being also less known whether the Son, (in case that by the Auxiliary Arms
he was resettled in his Throne) had not granted to the Company of Holland, in
recompense of their Assistance, some right in Bantam; by virtue of which they
might have been able to dispose of the reestablishment of the English in their
former Residence. Besides, that the Dutch Company might reasonably promise
themselves, that the King of Bantam who owed his Deliverance from the
Oppression in which he was, to the Auxiliary Arms of the Company, would not be
displeased, that to be assured that the English would never assist his Father
against him, they had engaged to cause the English to be resettled, in their
former Habitation; which Consideration would not have place any more, after
that the Father was reduced under the Power of his Son.

In these uncertainties the Dutch Company made some Advances, and Sir John
Chardin drew up a project of Accommodation between the two Companyes, wherein
it is spoken of the withdrawing the Dutch Forces from Bantam, and of what each
of the Companyes should be obliged to do in the Cases therein specifyed. But it
having pleased Mr. Chudleigh and Sir John Chardin to break up (somewhat
abruptly) the Negotiation which was already very far advanced, and that it
pleased the English Company to refuse all the Offers as well of the States
General, as those which the Ambassador Citters made here in London in the Name
and on the behalf of the Company of the United Provinces; after the return of
the said Sir John Chardin, the last Company did not think it proper to follow
the Negotiation, with which my Lord Ambassador Citters was charged, upon the
foot of those offers which had been despised, and by which they were, by
consequence, no more tied, especially when in the latter end of the year 1683,
they understood by Letters from India, that the War of Bantam was ended, with
advantage to the Son, who remained in possession of the Kingdom of Bantam, the
Father being made Prisoner, and the Rebels Power overcome; without (however)
having granted to the Dutch Company any Right, by virtue of which they might be
able to settle the English again in Bantam.

To what purpose is it then to allege at this time, the Answer of the States
General to the Memorial of Sir John Chardin, after that they have publicly
refused their offers, and proposed new Conditions, which appeared to their High
and Mightinesses so much out of all reason, that they would not so much as
allow them to give so much as an Ear to them, as it appears by the Resolution
of their High and Mightinesses quoted B. How can the English Company then
imagine, that excepting at present the offers which they refused two years ago,
the Dutch Company should think themselves obliged to it, after the change of
Affairs which has happened at Bantam.

Have not they declared that after the said change the Treaty could not
continue any longer, upon the foot of the Offers which they had rejected, with
so much disdain? And although they had not declared it, was it not a thing
visible and evident of it self, to conclude a project, which supposing a
perfect uncertainty of the Affairs of Bantam, contain causes which at present
cannot happen: Besides, it is not to be conceived how the English Company after
having chosen themselves the way of decision in pursuance of the year 1674, and
1675, and pressed for this Effect, the Nomination of the deciding Commissioners,
can at present make use of the offers and projects of Accommodation, which they
themselves caused to be broken off; and which besides has nothing of Common,
with a judicial discussion, in which the two Companyes are at present engaged;
and from which they cannot dismiss themselves, to return to the Treaty, but by a
Common Consent: the underwritten Deputies of the Company of Holland having
proved at present, that neither from the offers of their High and Mightinesses,
nor those of the said Company of Holland, the English Company can infer any
thing which is capable of making good their Demands; we will now pass to the
second point, which is, that of the justice of the Complaints of the English
Company, and will Examine in them, first their Nature, and in what they
consist, and will consider in the second place, the strength of the proofs
which have been delivered to the underwritten, to make them good.

As to the first point, the English Company had represented to the King of
Great Britain of Glorious Memory, as it appears by the Letter his Majesty
wrote to the aforesaid Lords the States General, dated the 23th. April 1683,
that the Sieur St. Martin Commander in Chief of the Dutch Forces and Ships,
(which the Government of Battavia had sent to the assistance of the King of
Bantam) had committed great violences upon the Factors, Servants and Effects,
of the English Company at Bantam, even to the dispossessing them of, and
driving them from, their ancient residence; and Mr. Chudleigh then Envoy from
his said Majesty to the States General, says in the Memorial, which he
presented to them in the Month of May of the said Year 1683, that the King of
Great Britain his Master, having understood by the complaints of his Company
of Merchants Trading into the East Indies, in what an extraordinary manner
those of Battavia had affronted and drove away from Bantam all those of the
English Nation, which had been settled there for so many years; his Majesty
could not avoid being sensible of such a proceeding; without the Companies ever
troubling themselves with verifying so black an accusation, with which they
have filled all Europe, to prepossess it to the disadvantage of the Company of
the United Provinces.

Sir John Chardin, who in the year 1683 was deputed in the behalf of the
English Company into Holland, for the Affair of Bantam, endeavoring to risco
the said Company from the plunge into which the want of proofs had cast them,
thought of changeing the Byafs, and instead of accusing the Government of
Batavia for having drove the English from Bantam, contented himself with
imputing their going out of the Town to the suggestion and advice of the said
Sieur St. Martin, who it is said, had inclined the King of Bantam, to turn the
English out of his Country; making use for proof of an Affirmative so ill
founded, but on a bare conjecture grounded only upon want of Charity, which we
shall prove upon the Examination of the principal cause; it being enough to
observe here by the by, that the Circumstances upon which Sir John Chardin
grounded his suspicion, are so little considerable that there is reason to
wonder, a Man of Parts should pretend to make use of them, in a public manner.

The Deputies of the English Company holding at present the same Language, say
in their Memorial, which they have annexed to their demand, that the Hollanders
at Batavia have made and fomented the quarrels between the Old and the Young
King of Bantam; and in their demand that those of Batavia having made the young
King fall into their Snares, and drawn him perfidiously under their Yoke, to
compass to themselves the entire Trade of that Place, exclusive to all others;
compelled him to put the English out of his Dominions.

These Complaints are very terrible, and at the same time, very just if they
are true: but they are very black Calumnies, and very unjust reproaches, if
they are false, as they will be proved to be in the sequel of this Answer; It Is
not that the Subscribers think that the Directors of the English Company are
the Inventers of it, (God forbid) but that they have only too easily suffered
themselves to be led away by Reports ill grounded and sown every where; with a
design to blacken the Dutch Company, and to render it odious: But these
Reports, although they have no other Grounds but Lies and Scandals, have
insinuated themselves into the minds of several Persons, and especially of the
Parties concerned, by the means of Credulity, Jealousy, and Mistrust.

The Subscribers, although they might entrench themselves in a bare Negative,
and keep solely upon the Defensive, without advancing of any Affirmative, which
may oblige them to Justification and Proofs; have notwithstanding proposed to
themselves, before the discussion of the Justificative Papers of the English
Company be entered into, to give your Excellencies a true Idea of the Affair of
Bantam, but not intending to leave their hold, which is the Negative; but only
with a prospect of making their Defense the stronger, as it will appear
supported by the truth of Facts, which are indisputable, and which destroy and
overthrow, from top to bottom, all that the Commissioners of the English
Company have advanced.

Sultan Agan King of Bantam, and Father to the present King, finding himself
too weak, by reason of his great Age, to continue to bear the weight of the
Government, yielded up the Kingdom of Bantam to his Eldest Son, retiring to
Turchaser, a charming and delightful place, about six Leagues from the Town of
Bantam, and about a League from the Sea, to enjoy there an agreeable Repose,
and to finish there the remainder of his Life in quiet, and out of the troubles
of the Affairs of the Kingdom: The Son having ascended the Throne, sent
Ambassadors to those of Batavia, as to his nearest Neighbors, to signify to
them, his accession to the Empire; as he also dispatched others, afterward to
the late King of Great Britain, of Glorious Memory; who acknowledging their
Character, gave them such a Reception, that the Gentlemen of the English
Company themselves, exaggerating the Honors which were turned to the said
Ambassadors here at London, saying in the Letter which they wrote to the King of
Bantam in the Month of June, in the Year 1682, and by consequence two years
after his coming to the Crown, that they had treated his Ambassadors in as
magnificent a manner, as if they had come from the greatest Prince of the
Earth; adding in the same Letter, that they had heard that God with the consent
of his Father, had established and settled him on the Throne of the Kingdom of
Surosoan, that is to say Bantam.

But the People being accustomed, under the Reign of the old King, to a looser
Government then that of the young King, who kept them in subjection; they began
to murmur, and at length took up Arms to throw off the Yoke; having engaged in
their Party by evil Impressions and Importunities, the old King of Bantam, whom
they had taken out of his Retirement, and prevailed with him to make himself
Master of the Town, and afterward to besiege the Fort, into which the young
King had retired to save his Life; who seeing himself upon the brink of the
Precipice, and within two fingers breadth of his Ruin, dispatched Letters and
Servants to those of the Government of Batavia, to represent to them the sad
Condition of his Affairs, and to pray their Succors: But the Gentlemen of the
Government of Batavia, being too prudent and too circumspect, to embarque
themselves in an Affair of this importance, they thought it fit before they
resolved upon any thing, upon the solicitations and instances of the Indian
Prince, to inform themselves of the Condition of his Affairs; and even after
having found that they were very bad, and almost desperate, would not resolve
upon any thing notwithstanding in his Favor, until they had interposed their
good Offices for Peace: which being despised by the Father, who made no Answer
to them, they at length took up their Resolution of assisting the Son against
the Rebels, and to deliver him from the Oppression wherein he was; which they
had the happiness to Effect, and to Re-establish him upon his Throne, whereon
being settled, he made the English go from Bantam being satisfied (as he was)
that they had assisted his Enemies.

This is the true History of the last War of Bantam, and of what passed there
from the beginning of it to the end; in which the government of Batavia had no
other share, then the bare assisting of a Prince against his Rebellious
subjects; wherewith the Gentlemen of the English Company cannot be
dis-satisfied, if they are pleased to divest themselves of their proposition,
and to make a serious reflection upon the following considerations.

I. That the Old King of Bantam having resigned his Empire to his Eldest son,
he by this concession, became lawful King, and that he was acknowledged as such
by the late King of Great Britain of glorious Memory; and by those of the
English Company, as it may be proved as well by His said Majesty's Letter to
the Young King of Bantam, as by those of the English Company to the said King.

II. That he being lawful King His subjects taking up arms to dethrone him are
Rebels.

III. That according to the Law of Nature, and that of Nations, it is not only
lawful to assist a King, oppressed by his subjects, but that this assistance
ought also to be looked upon as a work of Charity.

IV. That it is also contrary to the same Law, to impute the unhappy
consequences of an allowed and just occasion, to the person who is Author of
the action, and not of the consequences.

V. And by consequence that there is nothing more contrary to Reason, then to
charge the Government of Batavia, and their Auxiliary Arms, with their
expelling the English from Bantam, since it is evident, that the sending away
the English from Bantam, was not a necessary consequence of it, but only a
consequence by accident; the Indian Prince having sent them away not because he
was victorious (for he had suffered them to enjoy their Habitation peaceably
from his coming to the crown, until the War, that is to say, almost two years
together,) but only because he was persuaded that they had assisted His Enemies.

The under-signed Deputies of the Dutch Company having by what they have urged
hitherto, cleared the way to a true understanding of the controversy, which is
now under consideration between the two Companies; do not at all doubt but that
the Gentlemen of the English Company themselves, comparing the state of the
question, and that which they ought to prove; will perceive the weakness of
their own proofs, which in effect do either prove nothing at all, or at least
that which is in dispute, and from which can be inferred that which they
infer from it.

The subscribers therefore, now passing to the Examination of the proofs of the
English Company, (which is the second point of this discussion) will separate
the Facts of importance from those that are not so, and which signify nothing,
or which are of no other use, at most, but to blacken and increase Distrust,
Jealousy and Suspicion.

The Important Facts are these, viz. That those of Batavia have made and
fomented the quarrels between the Old and Young Kings of Bantam.

And that having beguiled the Young King into their power, to appropriate to
themselves the entire Trade of that place exclusive from all others, compelled
him to force the English out of his Dominions.

These are the Facts which the Commissioners of the English Company set down in
their Memorial, and in their demand, after having represented two years ago to
the late King of great Britain of glorious Memory, what can be immagined of
blackest, that the Sieur St. Martin Commander in Chief of the forces and Ships,
which the Government of Batavia had sent to the King of Bantam, had used and
committed great violences upon the Factors servants and effects of the English
Company at Bantam, to the having deposed and forced them from their ancient
residence.

The underwritten after having given themselves the trouble of Reading over
and over, examining and studying with great application, all the proofs of the
English Company; do protest sincerely, that they cannot find in them any thing
which is capable of directly or indirectly, by consequences, to make good the
enormity of the said Facts; and although that by consequence, they might excuse
themselves from saying any more of it, they not being any way obliged to prove
a Negative, which is not always possible, and can never be done but indirectly,
since it is against reason to prove in a direct manner, that which is not: But
yet to make appear the innocence of the Government of Batavia, in the affair of
Bantam, and place them in a right light, they will show the moral impossibility
of the said Facts, viz. That the government of Batavia, compelled the Young
King to force the English from Bantam.

As to the first Fact, it is certain that every rational man that does not do
any thing hand over head, proposes to himself naturally always some end in his
actions, at least in those which are important, or may have considerable
consequences: from hence comes it, that in an inquisition, when a man is
accused of any crime, (for Example of Murder, the author of which being
undiscovered) though he be really guilty, it is always inquired, cui bono, that
is, why he should have done it, and when the reason of it cannot be discovered,
the Judges are naturally inclined to believe, that the accusation is void of
all likelihood of Truth, especially if the accused person can make it appear
that it was his interest to preserve the Life of the person Murdered.

The underwritten (to apply this maxim to the government of Batavia, which
they accuse for having made and fomented the quarrel between the Old and the
Young King of Bantam) desire the Commissioners of the English Company to
explain to them ( cui bono) and with what design those of Batavia should give
themselves the trouble, to put the Father at odds with the Son, and to animate
the one against the other? What good could this do to them, and what advantage
could they reap from it? The Son had by his Ambassadors to the government of
Batavia, (which he sent so soon as he was ascended on the Throne) signified to
them, that he desired to live well with them, and desired to keep a good
correspondence with them, and to use them more favorably then his Father had
done in his Reign, and in Effect those of Batavia had no reason to complain of
His behavior toward them: And why should they then be willing to engage him
in a War against his Father, and his own subjects, and expose him to the danger
and hazard of losing his Crown, and of seeing his Father re-ascend the Throne,
or his Younger Brother made King; and although the War should end to his
advantage, what could he hope from it, he who was already upon the Throne, and
who could not become greater, and what likelihood was there, that a man in his
right senses should give ear to an advice so extravagant, and so dangerous? An
advice that no body could relish, unless he were a man fit to be shut up: From
whence we must conclude, That there were some people which not being able to
endure the government of the Young King, who did not suffer himself to be nosed
by his subjects, as his Father who was too soft and too indulgent, did without
doubt make the subjects rise, and rebel against their Prince, to throw off the
yoke, and to set up another in his place, which might be more to their minds,
and who would easily suffer an Anarchy, as they did effectually afterward take
up Arms against the King, to execute the criminal design, which they had
brought to the point, that the King had like to lose his Crown, and his Life.
But it may be it was the government of Batavia, which enflamed the Father and
the subjects of the Young King against their Prince, and that afterward
persuaded them, to take Arms and to throw off the Yoke: But why and with what
design may it be asked? Only with the prospect of making an advantage by the
War: For as those of the said government were Divines and Prophets, and that by
a spirit of prophecy they were able to penetrate into the secrets of futurity;
they knew that the War would be determining to the advantage of the Son; that
the English would take part in it, and that they would assist the Young Kings
Enemies, or at least they would be persuaded they did; and that upon this score
he would turn the English out of his Kingdom: Thus far must we carry the
Vision, and the extravagance, to make the Gentlemen of the government of
Batavia pass for head strong Mad people, fit to be put into an Hospital for mad
Men: To which also it must yet be added, that those of Batavia (for in fine we
must believe every thing, though never so far from any likelihood of Truth) had
the Old King in their power, and possessed the subjects of the Young Prince.

But although the arguments by which the adverse parties are reduced to
absurdities, that they would never confess themselves, but which are natural
and necessary consequences to be drawn from their positions, are (it may be)
strong enough to convince them of the falsity, of what they advance in matters
of Fact.

The underwritten will notwithstanding give themselves the trouble to
demonstrate, not only the little likelihood which there is in the said
accusations, but also the moral impossibility of that which the government of
Batavia is charged with in this matter.

The Young King being besieged in His Fort, gave notice of it to those of
Batavia, and desired their assistance; representing to them his miserable
condition, and reiterating the said requests diverse times; this is proved by
the Letters marked D.

The government of Batavia inquired into the condition of his affairs, and
after having understood the Truth of his complaints, would not however
determine any thing in favor of him, before they had offered their mediation
both to him, and his Father; as it appears, as well by the Letters that they
sent to each, quoted E and F. as by the relation of Mr. Saint Martin marked G.
and having in vain used all peaceable ways for ten whole days, as it appears
by the said relation; they resolved at last to send succors, which if they had
defferred to do but one day longer, it had come too late, and after the
destruction of the Young King, who was then upon the point of yiedling.

The underwritten desire the Gentlemen of the English Company to divest
themselves for a moment of all their prejudices, and then to tell them
sincerely, if they can possibly imagine, that if the government of Batavia had
made and fomented the War between the Father and the Son, they would have
suffered the Young King to languish in his Fort, sighing after the succors
which he had requested so often, and so vehemently, if before the arrival of
the Dutch Forces, the Old King and the Rebels had made themselves Masters of
the Fort, and that they had killed the Young King, would not the succors have
come too late? and those of Batavia, could they have been able to hinder the
Old King, or save others from seizing upon the whole Kingdom? From whence it
must be concluded, that it is morally impossible that those of Batavia, should
have concerned themselves to make a quarrel between the Old and the Young King,
and to raise and foment a War.

As to the Second of the said Facts, Viz. That the Hollanders of Batavia,
having beguiled the Young King into their power had compelled him to force the
English out of Bantam: It must be confessed it is a very bold thing to urge
Facts of this nature, without justifying them with the least proofs; there is
not so much as one witness of all those which the English Commissioners, have
produced, who has spoken the least word of it; Or that speaks of any snares
into which those of Batavia led the Young King; Or of the Yoke under which they
had perfidiously brought him. There is only Mr. Wait, (whose deposition is
marked number 6) who speaking of the driving away of the English from Bantam by
the Kings Order, adds, that the English Agent and Servants were assured, that
such an Order was not voluntarily given by the King, because the day before,
the Agent and Council waiting upon the King to represent to him that they had
been Neuters between the Father and the Son, and that they had given him no
manner of Reason to be displeased with them; they could not perceive in him,
either by his Words or Actions, any thing which showed an intention of
banishing the English from his Country; and it is certain, there was a dispute
between the Young King and the Dutch Major, before the said Order could be
obtained from him; but he being himself wholly under the power of the Dutch,
was forced to grant it.

Upon which it is to be observed in the first place, that it is not a Testimony
founded upon the Witnesses own knowledge, but only a Deposition grounded upon
what he believes to be true, and which he heard related by several credible
Persons, as he says himself at the end of his Depositions; having only made
Oath of the two first Articles of his Depositions; whereof the first speaks of
the landing of the Dutch Commander at Bantam; and the second of the Galleries
of the English House, which the Resident and the Dutch Soldiers caused to be
thrown down, and of the Windows of the said House, which they ordered to be
dammed up (of which more hereafter) All which was true to his own knowledge;
and he believed the rest to be true, relying upon the credit of credible
Persons.

But supposing that the English Agent and Council being to wait upon the King
to persuade him of their neutrality, could not discover his Animosity against
them, nor the design which he had formed of driving them out of Bantam; and
even that they found him much less (this much less ought to be observed) angry
with them, than the Dutch had published, he was: And suppose also, that there
was a great contest between the King and Mr. St. Martin, to what can be reduced
the Proofs urged at the Hague, or here, in an Affair of this Importance? Was
there ever such a pitiful Argument as this?

We allow that the English did not observe either in the words of the King, nor
in his gestures, the least thing which showed any resentment against them, and
that he even pretended the contrary: But can one ever trust to the mien,
gesture, nay, to the words of a Person? Is it so difficult (especially among
the Indians) for a person to conceal his Resentment, and to constrain himself
for a while, and afterward suffer his Indignation to break forth with the more
fury? But suppose that all the time of his Audience the King did not design to
revenge himself upon the English; Could not he form this design the next day
without being inspired by the Hollanders And although he should never have had
that design, the sole consideration of his security for the future, was it not
enough to incline him to force the English out of Bantam? He being persuaded
that they had assisted his Enemies, and in the apprehension wherein he might
be, That they being knowing, in the Art of War, and their House near to the
Fort, they should still encourage the Rebels; and that after having been
recruited with Soldiers, they would assist his Father. But why should one
trouble his Head with conjectures? It can be proved, (and that effectually)
that the persuasion whereof the King of Bantam was, that the English had
assisted his Enemies, had so sowred and animated him against them, That from
that time he had meditated so terrible a Revenge against them, that if the said
Mr. Martin and the other Agents of the Dutch Company had not prevailed, the
English would have felt as much in their Persons as in their Goods, the
horrible Effects of his Anger; as it is proved by an Abstract out of the
Consideration of Mr. St. Martin marked G, and the Deposition of Mounsieur
Heinsius marked personal mark, and to which tended particularly the Discourse
which the said St. Martin held with the King; which that it might not languish
(for warmth and zeal was required to overcome the animosity of this Prince)
pass for a Conversation full of Contest; which is presumed (contrary to the
Spirit of Charity, which is never apt to suspect) that the intention of it was
to incline the young King to force the English from Bantam, although it was, as
says Mounsieur St. Martin in the Abstract marked G. to sweeten the mind of
this Prince toward them; which they acknowledged themselves when they thanked
the Agents of the Dutch Company for their protection; as it appears by an
Abstract of the Report of Commander Tack marked O.

The underwritten passing at present to the discussion of the Proofs which the
Commissioners of the English Company have produced to justify the Facts which
they have heaped up one upon another, without remarking the Conclusion which
they pretended to make from them, will follow no other Method than this; That
is of the numbers wherewith the Papers are marked.

The first marked Number 2. is an Abstract of a Letter from Captain John Vtber
to Mr. Edward Rudge Director of the English East India Company. In the which
the said Vtber giving an Account of what he met with in his Voyages, says, that
being arrived in the Road of Bantam, two of the Factors of the English Company
came on board to command him to sail for Batavia, where were the English Agent
and Council; informing him at the same time, of the Destruction of Bantam, the
Possession which the Hollanders had taken of it: That going in his long Boat
ashore, to fetch fresh Water, he there saw with his Eyes that which had been
related to him by the Factors; that the young King hearing he was ashore,
desired to speak with him, but that the Dutch Chief would not allow him to do
it. These are the Contents of the Letter which contain these three points, viz.

The Story of the English Factors. The Confirmation of the Truth of this Story
by his Eyes. The Desire which the young King had to speak with him, but that
the Dutch Chief would not allow him to do it.
As to the Story of the Factors, it cannot be doubted that the Town of Bantam
was very much ruined, both by the War and the Fire, which the Rebels (according
to their Relation) of the young King and his Party, had kindled there before:
But it is false that this Desolation was caused by the Possession of the
Hollanders; for it was the young King (and not the Hollanders) who retook the
Possession of it, having reduced it to their Obedience with the Assistance of
the Government of Batavia.

As to the Confirmation of the said Story, it is a strange thing, that the said
Captain Vtber seeing the Desolation of Bantam, should be able to discern by
whom and how it was caused, and that he should be able to find out by the
Ruins, the Author of its Destruction: But although the Hollanders should even
have contributed by their Auxilliary Arms, to disfigure the Town (as there is
great likelihood they did) this ought to be imputed solely to the Chance of
War, since no Body is obliged to answer for the Calamities which commonly are
its Consequences: But this ought to be understood only of a just War, as this
without doubt was, undertaken for the Assistance of a Prince oppressed by his
Rebellious Subjects.

As to the third point of the said Letter, viz. That the young King desired to
speak with Captain Vtber; but that the Dutch Chief would never allow him to do
it: This good man ought to be ask't, how he knew that the King had a mind to
speak with him? Had he signified it only to himself? Or did he know it only by
Relation? For he does not say that the King had seen him, but only that he had
heard that he was ashore; and by consequence, he could not be assured, that
That which was told him was true: But in fine, what would they infer from all
this? Would they infer that the King of Bantam had submitted himself to those
of Batavia? That he was under their Yoke? (Oh the pitiful consequence!) For
although the Dutch Chief should have dissuaded the King of Bantam from his
design of seeing an unknown person, for fear that in the condition wherein he
was encompassed by his Enemies, there should be Snares laid for him, into which
he might fall; could this show the least slavery? (trifles!) The most powerful
Princes, sometimes suffer themselves to be governed by the wholesome Counsels
of their Ministers, and with much more reason ought those of their Alyes to be
a wholesome constraint upon them.

The Abstract of the Consultations, without Book, of Bantam marked No. 3.
contains nothing which deserves Refutation; for that which in the first place,
Mr. Gosnall, Mr. Hodges, and Mr. Fisher Witness, viz. That James De Roy entered
into the English Factory with a Company of Dutch Musketeers, accompanied by
Pengran Nata Nagaa, with some of his Forces also, and that after a strict
search in every one of the Warehouses, upon pretense of searching for some
Goods, which had been carried out of the Dutch Factories; and that the same
Deroy had sealed it with his own Seal; what does this prove against the Dutch
Company? The presence of the King's two Servants Pengran Nata Negaa, and James
De Roy (who far from ever having been Lieutenant to Mounsieur St. Martin, had
been in the service of the young Sultan, sometime before the War) shows enough
that this Action was done by Public Authority, that is to say, by that of the
Prince; and not being possible to know by the said Deposition whether the
search was made by the desire of the Servants of the Dutch Company; the
Subscribers do also think they need say nothing of it, adding only, that
however it was not an Affair of great Importance, since the English themselves
don't complain that they then lost any thing.

As to the Depositions of Mr. Smith, and Mr. Jeffcott, and that of Harrison,
cannot be wondered at; the King having recovered the Town of Bantam from his
Enemies, by whom he was yet encompast; had caused the Behavior of the English
to be watched, as also the entering and going out of their Ships, considering
the apprehension which he had of their plotting some new and ill design against
his Person, and Estate; and that in the confusion wherein Affairs then were,
the Goods of other Men were taken away, which the Directors of the English
Companies Affairs of Bantam themselves could not have prevented, no more than
they were able to hinder (in the time when the old King made himself Master of
the Town of Bantam, that the Dutch Resident Caeff was forced to take flight,
and to shelter himself from the violence of the Bantamites) some English
(probably without the knowledge of their Masters) from robbing the Dutch House,
as it is proved from the Deposition marked S.

And as for the Depositions of Gosnal, Knipe, and Burditt, also contained in
the same Abstract; the Subscribers will pass it over without Remark, as being
far from being prejudicial, but rather advantageous to the Cause which they
defend; because by them it appears, that the King's Edicts and Order for the
sending away of the English from Bantam, were irrevocable, and the Prince was
inexorable, as to that point, it not appearing that the Hollanders contributed
any thing to it.

The Affidavit of Captain John Fisher marked No. 4. contains three things.
1 THat the next day after the Landing of the Hollanders, he saw Soldiers under
the Command of James De Roy, throw down a Taffaty Flagg called by the name of
St. Georges Flagg, which he had upon his House, by Permission and Order of the
Council; and that running immediately to his House, he found the said De Roy
with part of the said Colors in his Hand, of which he had torn the rest, and
given pieces of it to his soldiers to make Scarfs of it.

2. That the said soldiers drank part of his Liquors, and that they carried
away the rest with his Goods, abusing him, and putting Blacks into his house.

3. That five days after the departure of the English from Bantam, the Dutch
soldiers went to the house of the English Company, and that they sent some of
their Blacks, to throw down the Flag, which was upon their House.

This is a terrible Action, and with which they have made so much clutter, that
it was thought fit two years ago, to insert it into a Memorial, which was
presented to the Lords the States General upon the subject of Bantam: But was
there ever in Truth any thing more weak and pitiful? For in the first place
suppose the History were true, and that the Deposition of one man alone might
be credited; and that also in his own case; the author of the action however
was a man in the Kings service, and by consequence the Soldiers were Bantamites.

Secondly, The first Flag (for two are mentioned) though it were St. Georges
Flag, could not raise the House of a particular, above those of other
Inhabitants, nor give him any Right to respects which were capable of freeing
him from the disorders of War, more then any other: And as to the Flagg, and
the use that was made of it, (according to the deposition of the said Captain)
is there any reason to wonder, that a Captain and Soldiers belonging to the
King, should have taken off from the House of a private man, the English
Colors, after that the King had looked upon the whole Nation as Enemies to his
person and State?

As to the second part, viz. That the Soldiers had drank up part of his Wines
and Liquors, and that they had carried away the rest with his Goods, and that
they had thereby caused him a considerable loss, which he makes amount to 600
Crowns, if he says the Truth he is certainly to be pityed very much, but he
can accuse no body but the Kings Servants, and the disorders of War for it.

As to the last point of the said Deposition, viz. That five days after the
departure of the English from Bantam, the Dutch soldiers went into the English
Companies House; and that they had sent some of their black servants, to throw
down their Colors: As all this is justified but by the Relation and Advices of
some Chinese, (who it is not said whether they were present or not) it may be
looked upon as a story, or a Tale invented to blacken the Hollanders; for in
fine how could these Chinese know, that these Blacks were servants to the
Dutch soldiers, and not to the King? Of which there was much more likelihood,
since it is very rare for common soldiers to have servants. But after all,
suppose the Dutch soldiers had executed the Kings Orders, to whom the right of
taking down the English Flagg cannot be disputed, after having banished the
whole Nation from Bantam, and could they blame him for it? Not at all: But
though the soldiers should have done it without the Kings Order, (which cannot
be believed) it was only at most but a Military affront which ought to be
pardoned in the disorders of War, wherein the Laws of Modesty and Decency are
little to be regarded; and however it cannot be imputed to those who represented
the Government of Batavia in the time of the War, which have never failed in
the respect which they owe to Crowned heads.

Mr. Sweetings deposition marked No. 5. contains seven Articles, whereof he
swears only the two first; the five others being only grounded upon the
relation of credible persons, as he says himself at the end of his deposition:
But to what purpose is it to have recourse to conjectures, after that the
deposition Marked K: Which tells us that it was the Young King who caused the
colors which was upon the English house to be taken away.

In the first Article it is said, that upon the differences arising between the
Old Sultan and the Young Sultan his Son, the War being declared between them;
those of the Dutch Government of Batavia, upon pretense of assisting the Young
King, came with a Fleet of Ships and Boats; and that endeavoring to Land the
14th. of March, 1681-82. they were beaten back by the Old Kings Forces, and
forced to retreat with their Fleet to a greater distance from the Town,
expecting reinforcement from Batavia, which being arrived the 23th. Monsieur
St. Martin, General of the Hollanders landed his Men the 28th. and beating the
Old Kings Guards, which were posted between the Seaside, and the Fort, where
the Young King was besieged by his Father, was there immediately received by
the Young King, and set up their Dutch Colors, doing the same upon the other
principal places of the Town.

He sets out at first, with somewhat a malicious suspicion, saying, That those
of the Dutch government of Batavia, upon pretense of assisting the Young King
came with a Fleet of Ships and Boats, and he afterward mistakes when he adds
that it was the 14th. of March, when the Dutch Fleet came thither to put this
design in Execution.

What means this word of pretense? Would he insinuate thereby that the
Hollanders came thither upon any other pretense but to assist the Young King,
he has reason if he means the 19th. of March for they had then no other design,
but that of pacification, but if he speaks of the 28th. when they Landed, he
wrongs those of the government of Batavia, to suspect them for having assisted
the King, with any other prospect then that of delivering him from the
oppression of his Rebellious subjects, which without the highest injustice
cannot be said of those who did not offer themselves to do this service of the
King, but who on the contrary granted their succors only to the importunity,
and earnestness of his requests; after having endeavored in vain an
Accommodation. But as Mr. Sweeting mistook when he believed that the design
which the Dutch had the 19th. of March, was the same which they put in
execution the 28th. of the same month; it is necessary to undeceive him, and the
Gentlemen of the English Company to take the thing a little higher.

The government of Batavia after having well considered of the affairs of the
Young King of Bantam, offered themselves to mediate between the Old Sultan Agan
and his Son, writing to this effect, two Letters in obliging and civil terms,
by which they showed not only the trouble which it gave them to see the
dissension between the Father and the son; but also the design which they had
to endeavor to make a friendly end of their differences, and with this
prospect they sent to Bantam Plenipotentiaries with their Letters to the two
Kings, convoyed only but by one Vessel, three others having been sent thither
before. But these Plenipotentiaries going to a place where all were in Arms,
and that they did not know whether they should meet Friends or Enemies, they
thought it was necessary for their safety to put themselves in a posture of
defense, and to arm themselves sufficiently to be able to resist those who
forgetting the Law of Nations, and the respect due to public persons, should
undertake to attacque them: And this is that Fleet of Ships and of Boats, which
is pretended was sent to Bantam, there to Land their Forces. The Hollanders
having waited some days for the answer of Sultan Agan, without receiving it;
and not knowing well enough what were the inclinations of the Javans toward
them, they re-tacked some Commanders with a Party to inform themselves more
exactly of the posture of affairs: But after having advanced a little, they met
with some Europeans, who asked them by the mouth of an English Man, why they
intermedled with the differences between the two Kings? To which having
answered that they came in the quality of Friends, to procure Peace between a
divided Father and Son; they were not long without perceiving the design which
was formed against them; since the Javans drew together in those parts a body
of Forces; and sending out some fire Ships, and some men of War, they made as
if they would attacque the Hollanders, who were of too small a number of having
any thoughts to undertake any thing against an Enemy so powerful as that that
threatened them. The Javans proceeded from Threats to Effects, fired upon the
Hollanders; and the Canon (of which the English had the management) having very
much gauled the Dutch Ships, they were sensible that they were resolved, not
only not to accept of their mediation, but that they looked upon them also as
Enemies; which afterward determined the government of Batavia to free the
Young King from his misery by force of Arms, which notwithstanding was not done
until the 28the of March.

As to the Dutch Colors which they say the Hollanders set up after the Victory
upon the Fort, and every where else in the Town, (of which the Subscribers are
notwithstanding really ignorant) deserves no answer, since it is certain that
the Hollanders never having pretended any right to the Town of Bantam, the
Colors could be of no other use than the service of the Dutch Forces, which
after the siege of the Dutch Forces was raised, were posted in all the
principal places of the Town; the Dutch Colors having been set up by the Kings
Order, in honor to the Auxiliary Arms of the Government of Batavia, but they
did always fly underneath the Kings Colors.

The second Article of the said Sweetings Deposition, though there has been a
great deal of noise made of it, is notwithstanding, to take it rightly, the
innocentest thing in the World. Mr. Sweeting swears that the Dutch Resident
Caeffe came with a Company of Soldiers, and several Carpenters, into the
English Companies back Court; commanding the English Agent to cause his
Galleries to be beat down, and to dam (that is to say, nail up) the Windows, to
which an Hollander who was in the Company added, threatening him, that if he did
not do it immediately he would do it himself, and that he did cause it to be
done immediately.

In reading this Article, in the Terms wherein it is couched, one would
imagine, without doubt, that there was a great outrage committed by the
Hollanders; but those who have any knowledge of this afair will judge quite
otherwise of it, this being the true Relation of it. The Hollanders not being
willing to cause any inconvenience to any person in Bantam, chose their own
House to keep their Magazine of Ammunition and Victuals; but the Wall of their
House touching in a little place the English Habitation, and that heretofore
there came no light but through the Lettice; where sometime after the English
by the Old Kings Permission, who sought all occasions to trouble the
Hollanders, had made great and large open Windows, and which was made a
Gallery or Balcony, which leaning 4 or 5 foot over the Dutch House, which is
raised but 12 or 13, gave them opportunity of hearing and seeing all that ever
past in the Dutch Residents House: The Young King seeing that the Dutch House
was like to be (in time of a War) the great Magazine in the Garrison, foresaw
the dangerous consequences of such Inlets into a place where was Powder and
other Ammunitions of War: Wherefore knowing that the English would not cause
his Windows to be shut up, nor take away the Balcony, He himself sent thither
his people with a Dutch Renegado, (who is here called barely a Hollander) who
having lived several years amongst the Javans, had gained the favor of the
Prince, and had been raised by him to the Dignity of a Pengran: As to what is
said that their Resident Caeff was present there, that might very well be,
because this happened at his door, and his duty was to take care of the
Magazine.

This is the true History of this affair, which contains nothing in it of ill,
and which besides was done by the Kings Authority, as it was proved by the
fifth Abstract of Mounsieur St. Martins Considerations, marked G.

As to the first Article of the said Depositions which Mr. Sweeting believes to
be true upon the credit of credible persons; (which is much to be wondered at).
It contains but two things; First, the intimation which the Kings Officer gave
to those of the English house, containing a peremptory order from his Master to
make us leave Bantam, and this is confessed. Secondly, That the English Agent
and Council were assured that such an Order was not voluntarily given by the
King, of whose opinion of them, although we have before examined the Reasons,
we ought here to convince the English of the wrong which they do the Hollanders
in accusing them of having been the cause of their expulsion from Bantam: It is
confessed by both sides, that there was command given by the King to the
English to go out of Bantam; but the dispute is, whether the King gave it of
himself, or at the instigation of the Hollanders: The Hollanders protest that
they do them great injustice to believe them capable of an action of the nature
of this: Are not the English obliged to prove so uncharitable a fact? But have
they any proofs of it? Surely none at all. They ground their opinions upon ill
grounded jealousies, and say, that at the audience which the King of Bantam had
granted to them immediately after his Victory, they could not remark his
resentment or indignation, and that between him and Mounsieur St. Martin,
Commander of the Dutch Forces, there was a very warm conversation: But how do
they prove these things of this importance? Can we trust to the looks of a Man
who hides his animosity? Is there any one that heard Mounsieur St. Martin
inspire the King with the design of driving away the English? Has there been
any proofs produced of it? No certainly; Mounsieur St. Martin, does not he wipe
away all suspicion which the most jealous of men could have of him? In
protesting as he is a Man of Honor, that the Discourse which he had with the
King was designed only to dissuade him from his design of Massacring all the
English: But it may be the Hollanders are suspected because the impossibility
of guessing at the reason of the Kings displeasure, gave occasion to the
conjectures. But how can it be said, after that the King had complained to all
the world that the English had assisted his Enemies, and after a cloud of
Witnesses had confirmed the same thing, that the English themselves will not be
able to deny, if they will be pleased to give any heed to what one of their own
people has written in a Book Printed here in London; where giving an account of
all that happened at Bantam in the time of the War, and whereof he had himself
been an Eyewitness, who says, he believed that the greatest part of the Cannon
shot which were shot against the English at Bantam, were shot by the
Hollanders: But in this he was very much mistaken, for the Hollanders had
posted themselves then before the Town only to wait for an Answer from the Old
King to the offer of the Mediation of the Government of Batavia, and not in the
least to hurt any one; because they knew that those of the English Nation
(those are the very words) had furnished the King with almost all his
Ammunition of War, and that they had animated the Javans against them, viz.
(against the Hollanders) from whence it is easy, adds he, to conclude that we
cannot much reckon upon their Friendship if they land. This is a sincere
Confession of what is so much denied at present.

The fourth Article of the said Mr. Sweetings Deposition contains two things:
First, That there was taken from the English their Horses and other Goods, and
that they were forced to unlade their Powder, and to carry it on shore.
Secondly, That the Hollanders which kept guard on the Port hindered them from
going out.

As to the first, since it is not said, much less proved, that the Hollanders
took away the Horses and other Goods from the English, nor that they had forced
them to land their Powder; the Subscribers will spare themselves the pains of
making remarks upon what does not concern them; and of which the Hollanders are
discharged by the Memorial annexed to the Demand; which Memorial charges with
this (expressly) the Young King of Bantams Chief Officers: Only in relation to
the Powder, they say, that if it be true that the English were forced by the
Kings Order to dispose of it, it was not because the King had need of it, but
because he feared they would have furnished his Enemies with Ammunition.

As to the second, viz. That the Hollanders hindered the English from going out
of Bantam; There is no likely hood that the Hollanders should have hindered the
going out of the English, since they were invited there with their Ships to
transport their Persons and Goods from Bantam to Batavia. Let it be added, that
the English made their complaint to the Dutch Major, and that he had answered,
(mocking them, as it is said in the fifth Article of the aforesaid Deposition)
that all this was done by the Kings Order, and it signifies nothing. For
although the said Major (we not granting he did) should answer, (not to mock
them but seriously) that however they must require satisfaction from the King,
though his Orders should be put in Execution by Dutch Soldiers (but this he has
always firmly denied, and whereof there are no proofs) All this however makes
nothing against the Hollanders; who, let the Case be how it would, were not
responsible for the King's Orders.

That which is added in the same Article, viz. That the French Chief demanding
of the King the Restitution of two Chests of Silver which had been taken from
him: The King answered that he knew nothing of that of which they complained:
And that afterward he sent him to those of Batavia to have Reparation, makes
nothing against those of the Government of Batavia, since the King did thus, it
may be to rid himself of the trouble of the French Agent's Complaints, who
notwithstanding knew very well himself (as it appears by the Relation of
Commander Tack, and by the Letter which is inserted in it,) That it was one of
the King's Officers which had seized upon his Chests.

The 6 th Article containing that the 11 th April, 1682, the Dutch Soldiers
came into the English Companyes Godongs, plundering and carrying away all that
they found in it, has no appearance of truth; not only because it is far from
any likelihood, That the English having carried away and laden all their Goods,
even to the smallest trifles upon their Ships to transport them to Batavia; the
day before their departure (for they departed the 12 th April, as they say
themselves) there should be any thing found in their House of the least value;
but also because, during their stay at Batavia, which was long enough, they
never made any Complaint nor ever delivered any note of what the Dutch soldiers
had robbed them of at Bantam: Wherefore we ought to conclude it is a story made
at pleasure, or that they left nothing in their House but Rags, and the Refuse
of their Household Stuff.

As to the Seventh and last Article of the said Mr. Sweeting's Deposition
speaking of the English Colors, the Subscribers to spare your Excellencies the
trouble of hearing Repetitions, will have recourse (with your permission) to
the remarks which they have made upon Mr. John Fisher's Deposition marked N. 4.

The Testimony of Mr. Wait marked N. 6. containing nothing in substance but
what has been sworn by Mr. Sweeting, does not deserve any new Observations,
excepting the Fourth Article; of which it is necessary to discover the
Malignity and the Artifice. When the English (says Mr. Wait) saw themselves
in so great a danger, especially when they knew that some of the Dutch Officers
endeavored to suborn Witnesses, (as it was related to the Agent, by those whom
they endeavored to corrupt;) and when they saw that a Dutch Lieutenant came
with Soldiers to seal up the Warehouses in their Factory, and that they did not
only take from them their Horses and Goods, but that they did also make them by
force bring and deliver out of their Ships, the Powder belonging to them, they
put on Board what they could gather up of Goods and Effects in this confusion.

First, Of what use would the Witnesses have been which the Dutch Officers
would have suborned? probably to prove that the English had assisted the young
King's Rebels: But did not the young King know it himself? And had not he been
a Spectator of it? Was it necessary to suborn Witnesses to prove a truth
manifest? And things which have been acted in the sight of all the World? But
yet those Persons themselves whom they had endeavored to corrupt, had related
it to the English Agent. This is a new method of proving that which is urged
with so much boldness. Such a one has related such a thing to such a one,
without nameing either the one or the other; by this way one may easily
dispatch an Affair without the least trouble.

That which he says afterward of the Dutch Lieutenant which sealed up the
Companyes Warehouses, is a mistake, of which it has been formerly spoken; where
we showed that James De Roy was never a Dutch Lieutenant, but that he was in
the service of the young King of Bantam in the time of the War, having some
time before fled from Batavia to Bantam to shelter himself from his Creditors.

That which he adds concerning the Horses and other Goods which were taken away
from the English, without naming the Authors of, it shows cunning, and
discovers the design of suspecting the Hollanders (under ambiguous Expressions)
for things of which they knew them not to be guilty: For the English Companies
Deputies say themselves in the Memorial which they have annexed to their
Demand, and which make one part of it, That it was Pengran Deepa Panerat, one
of the young King's Chief Ministers, who caused all the English Companies
Horses to be delivered to him, and diverse other things which he carried away
with him, as it has been observed before.

The last Affidavit marked N. 7, is that of Ambrose Moody, wherein there is
neither Rhyme nor Reason, a perfect Rhapsody of all sorts of Facts heaped one
upon another, and that which is yet more admirable, is the credulity of the
good man who makes Oath, That all and every of the Articles contained in his
Depositions are true; and who notwithstanding confesses that there are some of
them which he affirms only upon the Relations he has had from Eyewitnesses,
without making any distinction between those he says he has seen himself, and
those he believes upon the Credit of credible Persons. And although the
Subscribers might dispense themselves from making any reflection upon a
Deposition of this Nature, yet they will give themselves the trouble of running
it over, and making the Observations upon it which they think are proper.

That which he says in the beginning concerning the Dutch Soldiers which came
to the English Factory, and their taking away several things, deserves no
particular mark to be made upon it, since the same Complaints have been
answered before; to which we refer with the permission of your Excellencies,
and he being singular, and to be reproached for what he adds concerning the
Twelve Soldiers, and of what they robbed him of, one should be very ill advised
to give credit to what he swears in his own Case.

That the Hollanders kept him a Prisoner at Bantam, is very unlikely; but that
having rendered himself suspicious to the young King by his stay at the old
Sultan's Court in so nice and ticklish a conjuncture, he might be clapped up by
Authority from the young King, is not incredible.

That which he says of the Plunder which the Hollanders had in the English
Factory, is not likely, the English never having complained of it at Batavia.

What the old Sultan might say at Tartiassa (although we believe nothing of it)
and what the said Moody says of a Treaty between the Old and the Young King
(of which we never heard) does not in the least concern the Dutch Company.

That which he says of the Mastery of the Hollanders at Bantam, are made
stories; it being very remote from any likelihood of Truth, That the Hollanders
should have there made Laws and raised Taxes. But this man having no
discernment, and that besides he appears very much incensed against the
Hollanders, he was desirous to imbitter things.

That the Hollanders seized upon the Bantam Ambassadors Letters can never be
proved: But it may on the contrary be proved, that sometimes the Dutch
Companies Letters had been opened.

As to what he says of the Articles which the King of Bantam was not willing
to sign, we cannot understand what he means, since there is a Treaty between
the King of Bantam and the Government of Batavia, signed by both Parties.

That the Hollanders should have put into the King's Head the design of forcing
out of his Country all Europeans, Indians, Mahometans; (what a folly is this,
the King himself being a Mohammedan?) Gentues and Chinese, are gross Calumnies,
as it is also one, that the young King at the instigation of the Hollanders
keeps his Father in the narrowest Prison, giving him his food through an hole
which served instead of a Window; since it is evident that the Old King sees
sometimes Company, and even Strangers, and that he receives respects from them.

The Subscribers after having made their Remarks upon the Proofs of the English
Company, whereof the greatest part contain nothing of Essential, or which
deserves pausing upon, desire at present the Gentlemen of the said Company to
consider, since the Succors given to a lawful Prince oppressed by his
Subjects, was very just, and that it can never be proved that the Government of
Batavia made the Quarrel between the Father and the Son; nor persuaded the last
either directly or indirectly to drive the English out of his Country, how
unjust it is, and not becoming their Generosity to urge against the Dutch
Company either invented Stories or Trifles, which conclude nothing, and which
are not strong enough to uphold a Demand of the importance of that which the
English Company makes.

But the Subscribers having made it their business hitherto only to examine the
Nature of the Pretensions of the English Company, and to make Observations upon
all their Proofs:

There remains only to run over all the Paragraphs or Articles of the Demand,
upon which there has yet been no Reflection made; for although these Paragraphs
contain only Facts which are inserted in the Demand rather in form of a
Narrative, than with the design of making Depositions of them which they would
be obliged to prove; The Subscribers cannot however dispense themselves from
making this Remark upon them, because passing them under silence, they would
increase the impressions which the said Articles may have made upon the Minds
of your Excellencies.

The Commissioners of the English Company say in the first Paragraph of their
Demand, That the Hollanders since the Invasion of Bantam, have not only
Obstructed, but Hostilely Invaded our Trade, and shot at our Servants with
Bullets on the Coast of Malabar, to deterr and beat them off from that little
Remainder we had there of the Pepper Trade.

To which the Subscribers Answer, That the Dutch Company having taken from the
Portugals when they had War with them, the Towns and Forts which they possessed
on the Coast of Malabar, It was not unjust for the said Company to enjoy the
Advantages of their Victory, with excluding of all those who without having
shared with them in the Charges and Dangers of the War, pretend to a share in
their Conquest although they have the Trade of all the North part of Malabar
free and open, where is a great deal of Pepper, and where the Dutch Company
has very little or no Trade, and which produce much greater profit to the
English Company without being at any Charge of keeping Towns and Forts. That
the Hollanders assaulted the English fireing upon them (as it is said in this
Article:) The Subscribers protest they knew nothing of it, and that they do not
even believe any thing of it since the Letters from Batavia make no mention of
it.

The second Article speaking of the Money which the English Company had lent to
the Young King of Bantam, and with which the Fort was built, is a thing does
not in the least concern the Dutch Company, and of which they know nothing.
Besides, That when they make up their Accounts with the King of Bantam, he will
discharge himself of his Debts by a just Compensation.

The third Paragraph making mention of an Assassination (which the Dutch
Company abhors,) shows a great inclination to Suspicion and Jealousy, which
ought to be banished from the Mind, to re-establish a good Understanding between
the two Companyes.

The fourth Article is a Dilemma couched in these Terms: Because if the Old
King of Bantam had a Right to Bantam, and to the Territories thereof, they are
now His Majesty's by his Donation of them to the late King of ever blessed
Memory. If the Right thereof lies (as the Dutch say) in the Young King, He has
been so inhumane and ungrateful, and bloody an Enemy to His Majesty's Subjects
confessedly, without the least Cause or Provocation on their Parts, that we
humbly conceive His Majesty's Honor cannot be repaired without invading his
City and Country; and the rather because though he be called a King, he is in
Truth none; but a perfect Slave to the Batavians, and an Executioner of their
Will and Pleasure.

As to the first fork of this Argument, because it is evident, that the Old
King of Bantam, having resigned His Kingdom to his eldest Son, could not give
it afterward to any other; so that the inference which ought to be made from
it, is against the English Company.

As for the second part of the Dilemma, viz. If this Right belongs to the Young
King, and that it be true that he has been so inhumane, ungrateful and bloody
an Enemy to His Majesty's Subjects without the least provocation: One may
indeed infer a great deal from it, but nothing which can support the demand of
the English Company, from That of Holland: As there can be nothing inferred
from it, against the Young King of Bantam; if for good Reason (as he maintains
he has) he showed his resentment against the English. But it must be observed
here (by the by) that when they are to reproach the Young King, they say, he
has been an inhumane, ungrateful, and bloody Enemy to His Majesty's Subjects,
without the least cause or provocation. But when the Hollanders are to be
charged, and to make them pass for the Authors of the expulsion of the English
from Bantam, the language is changed, and it is said that there could not be
observed either in the Kings looks or words, the least thing which showed any
resentment against, or that he had any design of turning them out of his
Country.

The Fifth, Sixth, and Ninth Articles have been examined before.

Of the Seventh, The Gentlemen of the Dutch Company never knew nor believe any
thing.

To the Eighth it is answered, That the Young King was persuaded (as it appears
by Tack's Relation marked O. and that of Heinsius marked N.) that all those
which he had drove out of his Country had assisted his Enemies.

Thus is the Apology of the Dutch Company finished, and the English Companies
Demands destroyed.

There remains now nothing more but to relate in a word the Demands of the
Dutch Company, for the Hire of their Ships of which the Gentlemen of the
English Company at Bantam (promising to pay the Freight) made use of to
Transport their persons and Effects from thence to Batavia, and which
afterward were made use of instead of Magazines, to the great damage of the
Dutch Company who had desired them to be returned to them, to carry their own
Merchandise.

The Ships which the Gentlemen of the English Company used, are these following.

The Europe of 1200 Tuns which was at the disposal of the English from the
16th. of April, 1682. until the 13th. of August of the same year, and by
consequence four Months, each Month at 1000 l. Sterling, for four Months. -- l.
4000 New Middleburgh of 1000 Tuns was delivered to the English, the 22th. of
April 1682. and was not unladen and discharged, until the 22th. of November of
the same Year, and therefore seven Months, each Month at 900 l. Sterling --
6300 l. 10300 T. Wont, of Burden 200 Tuns, was used from the first of May,
until the first of July, being two months, each at 200 l. sterling, amounts to
for the two Months. 400 Delfshaven, Burden 900 Tons, was from the 13th. of
April, until the 13th. of August, that is to say, four Months each Month, at
800 l. sterling, amounts for the four Months to -- 3200 The whole Freight of
the Ships together amounts to -- l. 13900

And the Subscribers relying entirely upon the Justice and Right of the Dutch
Company as well in Relation to their Defense as to their Re-convention, they
hope your Excellencies will acquit them from the English Companies Demands, and
that you will condemn the English Company, to pay to the Dutch Company for the
Freights of the said Ships the said sum of 13900 l. sterling, besides Damages
and Interest.

Signed, G. Hooft Jacob Van Hoorne S. V. Bloquery. A. Paets.

Dated at Westminster 13th. October. 1685.
The Reply of the English Commissioners Instructors to the last foregoing
Paper, humbly presented to the Lords Commissioners Decisors.
To the Most Honorable the Lords Commissioners appointed by the Kings Most
Excellent Majesty, for determinig the differences between the English and Dutch
East India-Companies, according to the Treaty of 1674-75.
Right Honorable,
1. WE should admire at the Voluminousness of the Deputies for the Dutch
East-India-Companies Answer (especially considering how valuable Your Lordships
time is,) But that looking back for many years past, we find it is one of the
Old Artifices of that Company, to hide or confound the truth by a multitude of
eloquent but vain words, as Your Lordships may have observed in the Records of
all former Transactions and Complaints of the same Nature, as this is now of
Bantam; in most whereof they have been judged formerly, to pay great sums of
Money to the East-India-Company, which they did pay accordingly: But we could
never hear or read that the Dutch Company restored to the English any place of
Trade, that ever they deprived them of by fraud or violence.

2. We affirm to Your Lordships, that we never gave any Order or Liberty to Sir
John Chardin before, or at his late being in Holland, but enjoined him always
to keep strictly to the Demands of His late Majesty of glorious memory, in his
said Majesty's letter and memorial: For the proof of which assertion we here
will present Your Lordships, Copies of all our Letters and Orders to him: And
if Sir John entered upon any discourse or Articles, other then what was
contained in His Majesty's said Memorial and Letter, through the persuasion of
the Dutch Bewinthebers, or otherwise, he is now here and must make his own
justification, we being perfectly unconcerned in any thing he did contrary to
His late Majesty's, or our own instructions.

3dly. For the Negotiation that was afterward concerning this affair, with the
late Lord Ambassador Monsieur Van Citters, we refer our selves to the said
Ambassadors Long Memorial, and our Answer herewith presented Your Lordships; by
which the truth, Regularity and Justice of His Majesty's East-India-Company
will appear to Your Lordships above all contradiction.

4thly. To the Dutch Deputies question, cui bono, what profit the Dutch could
make by exciting the Young King to quarrel with his Father, and the
consequences that might happen thereupon: We say, we cannot but think it very
strange, that such experienced learned Gentlemen, should propound so slight a
question to such a wise Tribunal as Your Lordships; which the simplest Sailer
either English or Dutch, that ever was in India can resolve Extempore. Bantam
was a Port to which all European Nations Trading in India, and most of the
Natives did resort with Ships richly laden, to the number of above forty
yearly: And the Batavians by causing that poor simple man, (they yet call King)
whom they will not trust with a Knife, to expel all those Nations from his
Port, have thereby engrossed to themselves in effect the whole Trade of the
South-Seas; and had thereby fair hopes of Engrossing the whole Trade of Pepper;
as their people in India have often boasted they would: And it is most apparent
they designed it, by the hostilities they have since perpetrated against the
English and other Nations of India, upon the Coast of Mallabar; which
Engrossement if they accomplish as by like arts they have the other Spices,
Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon and Nutmegs, they might gain sufficient by that sole
Commodity, to maintain constantly a Navy in Europe strong enough to fight any
Royal Navy.

Fifthly, Their next question, How it can be imagined the Young King of Bantam
should be so simple, as to enslave himself and his posterity; We shall resolve,
when they tell us by what slights the Batavians, with pitiful inconsiderable
Forces have enslaved and held in slavery above Fifty such Kings within Eighty
years past in those Eastern parts of the World. It will be enough at present to
tell Your Lordships; The Princes and people of those parts are a naked people,
unused to Firearms, that live in the innocent primitive estate of Nature,
without understanding the guiles of the Dutch East-India-Company, until they
have built a Fort, and then the Princes themselves as well as their subjects,
must immediately become downright Slaves to the Dutch; and its too late to
repent without the hazard of being all cut off, Man, Woman and Child; which was
lately the Fate of one of the Javan Princes in the Eastern parts of that
Island, and of his people; wherein an English Fugitive Captain Cooper, was said
to be employed by them in the execution.

Sixthly, We herewith present Your Lordships the Articles, Printed at Batavia,
made at Macassar for the Exclusion of the English and other Nations, from the
Trade of that place; for which never any satisfaction was made the English
Company. Our end therein is not to make the breach wider between the two
Nations, (of which they seem groundlesly to accuse us,) but to show Your
Lordships the same Tragedy that was acted at Bantam, with little alteration,
except changing the Scene; wherein such an Ocean of humane blood was spilt, and
in such a manner (with a little fighting, and after submission) as we are not
willing to mention; and is not to be paralleled in any History we have Read; of
which there are living Witnesses that were present at the action, which we can
produce to Your Lordships, but that we are not willing to irritate or trouble
Your Lordships with what is not pertinent to the present case of Bantam: Yet
this use we must beg Your Lordships leave to make of that instance of Macassar,
that since no satisfaction has been made to the English, for that important
place; Your Lordships would be pleased to take and keep a strong hold of our
just claim to Bantam; that we may not be totally deprived of a place of rest
and security in the South-Seas, (where the Dutch have above Thirty Forts) to
the irreparable shame and reproach of our Nation.

Seventhly, The proofs we have exhibited to your Lordships are so express to
the matter of our complaint, that most of them do prove in terminis the things
complained of, and the Witnesses are not only fide digni, but Men of good
Fortunes, and approved exemplary Veracity; and we do not only believe what all
of them have sworn, and particularly Mr. Moody, but much more, (which they have
told us) concerning the many years contrivances, and horrible wicked methods
that were used by the Batavians, to create those unnatural quarrels between the
Father and the Son; which we have omitted to trouble your Lordships with,
because they could not attest them upon their own knowledge, as we have
likewise omitted (for the same reason) some Letters of the Old King of Bantam,
wherein he wrote to his late Majesty long before the surprise of Bantam, that
the Dutch were contriving to enslave him and his Country, as they had done all
his Neighbor Princes; but that he would be slave to none but to his late
Majesty of Glorious Memory.

Eighthly, What the said Dutch Deputies say in extenuation of the Hostilities
committed by their people upon the Coast of Malabarr, is so wide from any
excuse of that crime, and breach of the peace between the two Nations, that it
seems to us to be a plain confession of what they have been so often and so
justly accused of, ( viz.) that they design not only by their old arts of
setting Indian Princes at War, and making themselves partakers in the quarrel
to enslave both parties, and then compel their partners to drive the English
out of their Country: But that now having got so great a post for their purpose
as Bantam, they are become impatient of trusting to their old slow methods, and
are resolved to finish that engrossment of Pepper at once, Vi and Armis: For
one of your Lordships may remember that soon after the first News came to the
English Court of the Batavians action at Bantam, Mr. Van Damm (a ruling man in
their Committee) wrote to a Friend of his then in London, to acquaint the Lords
of His Majesty's Council, that he did for himself and all the seventeen, (which
is their whole Committee) disclaim that wicked act as (we remember) he called
it, that Spelman had done at Bantam: which now since they were so prevalent (by
promise of doing right in the fair way of a Treaty) to cause His late Majesty
to divert that Warlike Fleet that was designed for the recovery of Bantam two
years past; they have arrived at the considence not only to justify that
wicked act, but to tell your Lordships (in effect) that they have made the same
terms with the poor enslaved Creature they call the King of Bantam, as they
did make with the enslaved Macassars; and that they would make such terms
exclusive to the English, French, Danes, etc. some of your Lordships may please
to remember we told your Lordships formerly they would do; which any person,
knowing the Dutch and the affairs of India, might easily have foreseen, without
pretending to the gift of Prophecy, which they upbraid us with: And for their
justifying or defending, (as they term it) their expelling us from Bantam, we
will undertake at the hazard of our Credit with His Majesty and your Lordships,
(which is very dear to us) to prove in their own presence before your Lordships
by irrefragable Arguments, that if that defense which they have made shall be
admitted good by your Lordships, they may with ease and certainty expel us from
every Port and place in India where we have not Guns and Men enough to beat
them off. And if your Lordships, or the Deputies themselves, will nominate any
Port or places in India particularly to be discoursed before your Lordships,
(be they many or few,) we will demonstrate to your Lordships that they may
easily expel us particularly from each nominated place by the same or such like
methods as they used at Bantam, and justify their so doing by better Arguments
than they have or can urge for what they have done at Bantam: So that though
they pretend so much for Peace, if they be sincere in their pretenses, it is
such a Peace as shall leave them alone in the whole fruition of the East India
Trade; for otherwise by their own Hypothesis, (which is in substance, that they
may make any treaty with the Native Princes of India, though to the prejudice
of the Subjects of the Kings in amity with them in Europe;) the two Nations are
now and must continue in a state of War in India, though we are not in actual
Hostility; or else we and all other Europeans must quietly yield them the sole
Trade of those Eastern parts of the World; except only those few places where
we have Forts strong enough to defend our selves, against not their Forces
only, but theirs conjunctive with all Indian Nations that they have enslaved,
or can draw into their confederacy.

Ninthly, To what the said Deputies say, that some English were found among the
slain of the Old King of Bantam's party; we say, that in truth we do not know
or believe there was one man: But if there were two or three renegado English,
(servants to the Old King) it concerns not the Company, nor would be any News
especially to the Dutch Company, whose Seamen and Soldiers run away by
hundreds into the Moors, and other Natives service yearly. Their charge
likewise of the English robbing their houses at Bantam, is as ridiculous,
false, and impossible, as circumstances then stood with the English; for after
the Dutch were landed, it was immediately given out that all the English should
be Massacred that night; which our servants (remembering too well what had
formerly been done in Amboina and the Eastern Islands) were in eminent fear of
for two days and two nights together; and had enough to do to meditate and
prepare themselves for present Death, although (by what followed) they since
believe, that bloody report was given out artificially and purposely to
terrify them; that as soon as the Dutch should think fit to order their Slave
the young King to command the English to dislodge, they should do it readily,
with such a thankful Letter as Mr. Sweeting carried, or any other thanks; which
the stoutest of the English being unarmed, after such a fright, would not have
refused to subscribe.

Tenthly, If your Lordships should object, that if the Batavians can so easily
deprive us of all the remainder of our Trade in India, and that they are so
avaritious and unjust as we affirm them to be; how comes it to pass that we
have any part of the East India Trade left us? We answer, that we suppose the
reason why they deprive us not of all presently, is for fear of that word that
troubles them so much; ( viz.) if they should proceed per Saltum, it would make
a great noise in Europe, (as they say we have made about this business of
Bantam) and are the more angry at it, because they have been so fortunate in
shifting off many other aggressions which they have made upon the English
Nation: Particularly their expelling us from that important place of Macassar,
for which they never made satisfaction by any Treaty, as aforesaid. But they
must consider, (as we doubt not but your Lordships will) that they have drove
us now to the Wall, and necessity will make a Coward valiant: We must be
restored to Bantam, or for ever bid adieu to the South Sea Trade; and in a
little time more (when the noise that troubles them is over) to all the Trade
of India: The methods of their proceedings in all such encroachments upon the
English, in all times having been to make one bold step, and then spend
thirteen or fourteen years in allaying the noise of that, or paying for it not
the hundredth part of what the concernment of it is worth to this Kingdom: And
when the noise of that is well allayed or bought off in Europe, then to make a
new encroachment; so they began at Japan and Amboyna; and since that deceived
us of Pollaroon and Polloway; then of Dam and Macassar, and lastly of Bantam;
moving still from the East Westerly, to lay their Purchases together (for we
cannot call them Conquests) And without doubt when this noise is over, the next
place they will expel us from shall be Bengal and the Coast of Mallabar, (as
their own Director or Chief of Bengal has publicly declared) And then our
business in those parts of the World will be completely finished. This, my
Lords, is our Case, and must be our Fortune, if we must see our selves
destroyed, the noblest Navigation of England ruined, and consequently our King
and Country dishonored, with our hands tied behind us, so as not to be
permitted to right our selves, without being unjustly charged (as the Lion did
the Lamb in the Fable) as if we were Men affecting Wars, and promoting
Dissension between the two Nations: An imputation that we disown and abhor,
having been in all times more averse to Arms, than did consist with our
Interest and Duty, out of the too great inclination we had to Peace and
Quietness.

Eleventhly, And whereas the Gentlemen are pleased to insinuate, that though
the pretended young King of Bantam be never so mean, their Faith ought to be
kept with him as much as if he were the greatest King upon Earth; which we deny
not, but say, they had first plighted their Faith to our Deceased Sovereign of
Glorious Memory, in the last Treaty of Peace, which they have violated by those
injurious Articles they have made with the enslaved King of Bantam.

Twelfthly, If the Batavians have kept their terms with that enslaved Prince of
Bantam, (which we have reason not to believe they have) it is the first time
that ever we heard they have kept their Faith with any of those poor ignorant
Natives.

Thirteenthly, If they have made any Articles with that poor King, they were
made while he was a Prisouer within the Fort, in a most abject Thraldom to the
Dutch; in which condition the poor man would as readily set his hand to any
thing the Batavians would have him, as our servants subscribed the Letter
before mentioned. And such is certainly his condition, that the poor Creature,
if Bantam be delivered to the English, will be so far from upbraiding the
Batavians with breach of Faith for that cause, that he will look upon it as the
only good turn that ever they did him in his life, for then he may be sure of
his Liberty, and hope to be a little King upon the Hills, or in the Woods, and
at worst see his Subjects flourish under the mild Government of the English;
whereas in his present condition, with the total loss of his little Dominion,
he must live in durance, under the anxiety of seeing his Country ruinated and
depopulated.

Fourteenthly, For the justification of our Demands of Damages, or to lessen
or invalidate what is demanded of us by the Gentlemen Subscribers; we shall
trouble your Lordships with no Discourse at present, because we desire not to
enter upon that Argument till Bantam be restored to us; neither shall we
trouble your Lordships with any Paraphrase upon the Dutch Papers, offered for
Evidence upon the Netherlands East India Companies part; because few of them
are upon Oath, and none of them (as we apprehend) to any purpose.

Fifteenthly, There are some few particulars in the said Deputies answer that
we have not replied unto, being in our judgments (to use their own phrase) mere
trifles; but if your Lordships shall think any thing of moment unanswered, upon
your Lordships command we shall make a farther and particular answer thereunto.

Sixteenthly, What the Gentlemen mean by their triumphant conclusion, that they
have overthrown our pretensions, and justified that wicked act of Bantam, we
understand not, except it be a form of concluding litigious Papers in Holland.
Our Conclusion shall be no more, but to assure your Lordships that we have a
perfect confidence in your Lordships Justice, and therefore we cannot doubt but
our present Sovereigns most auspicious Reign shall be signalized, by having one
place of importance in India, that his Subjects were unjustly deprived of,
restored again to them in his time, which never was done in the time of any of
his Noble Progenitors. We are,

Dated at the East-India-House, 22th October. 1685. My Lords, Your Lordships most
Dutiful and most Obedient Servants, Joseph Ash, Governor. Josia Child,
Deputy. Jeremy Sambrook Benj. Bathurst.


The Rejoinder of the Dutch Commissioners Instructors to the foregoing Reply,
being the second Paper presented by the said Commissioners to the Lords
Commissioners Decisors, Viz.
To the Most Honorable Lords, my Lords the Commissioners appointed by the King
of Great Britain, and the Gentlemen appointed Commissioners by the Lords, the
States General of the United Provinces, for the decision of Differences arisen
between the East India Company of England, and that of the said Provinces, upon
the subject matter of Bantam.
Most Honorable Lords,
THe underwritten Deputies of the Dutch East India Company being desirous not
to engage in a fight of Calumnies, from which the Conqueror can reap nothing
but shame and confusion; instead of returning the like to the Gentlemen of the
English Company, will apply themselves solely to demonstrate in this
replication, that the Reply, far from having undermined the foundation of the
Answer, has not so much as touched it.

The English Commissioners having highly maintained in their demand, that on
the behalf of the High and Mighty Lords the States General, and of that of the
Dutch Company: It was agreed that restitution (as they call it) of Bantam
should be made into His Majesty's hands: The underwritten, before they entered
into the discussion of the principal cause, in relation of this preliminary
point ( quaestio pre judicialis) had proved two things.

I. That touching the Restitution of Bantam, there was nothing concluded nor
settled between the two Companies; and that their High and Mightinesses were far
from disposing of Towns that did not belong to them, and to which they had no
manner of Right.

II. And in the second place, That the English Company after the change which
happened at Bantam, could not take hold of the Answer returned by their High
and Mightinesses to Sir John Chardin's Memorial, no more than of the Advances
which the Dutch Company made in the Year 1683, toward the Accommodating the
Differences which the War at Bantam had been the cause of between the two
Companies.

What do the Gentlemen of the English Company reply to this? Nothing at all,
but only bring Sir John Chardin upon the Stage very improperly. The question
not being what Sir John Chardin acted at the Hague upon the matter of Bantam,
but only whether the two Companies with the consent of the States, did agree to
the Restitution of Bantam into the Hands of His Majesty; which the underwritten
have expressly denied; which was enough to prove that there was nothing
concluded between the said Companies: Wherefore it may be inferred, since the
Gentlemen of the English Company pass all this under silence, speaking there
only of Sir John Chardin, that these Gentletlemen do indirectly detract from
what they advanced in their Demand touching the Conclusion of the Restitution
of Bantam.

The English Company having had in the Capital City only a Factory and their
residence, without having made any pretense there to the least Right of
Territory; it was demanded of the English Deputies, with what appearance of
Justice the English Company could pretend to the Restitution of that which they
never possessed, unto which it had never had any real pretense founded upon the
propriety ( Dominium) which not only according to the Civil Law, but also
according to that of Nature, ought to be the Ground of a Real Action.

What do they reply to all this? Nothing at all. The underwritten after having
given (in their Answer to your Excellencies) a true Idea of the Affair of
Bantam, did afterward conjure the Gentlemen of the English Company to divest
themselves of their Prepossession, and to make serious Reflection upon the
following Considerations.

First, That the King of Bantam having resigned his Empire to his Eldest Son;
the last by this Resignation became lawful King, and was acknowledged as such
by the late King of Great Britain, of Glorious Memory, and by those of the
English Company.

Secondly, That being a lawful King, his Subjects taking Arms to Dethrone him,
were Rebels.

Thirdly, That according to the Law of Nature, and That of Nations, it is not
only lawful to assist a King oppressed by his Rebellious Subjects, but that it
also ought to be reputed an Act of Charity.

Fourthly, That it is contrary to the same Law to impute the unhappy
consequences of a lawful and just Action to the Person who was Author of the
Action, but not of the Consequences.

Fifthly, And that by consequence there was nothing more contrary to reason
than to impute, in their Reply, the Expulsion of the English out of Bantam to
the Regency of Batavia, and to their Auxiliary Arms.

What do they say to all these decisive points? Nothing at all. From which
silence, although it might be concluded, that the ground of the Answer of the
Dutch Company remaining still firmand unshaken, the pains of refuting the
English Companies Reply, (which can contain nothing Essential in it,) the
underwritten notwithstanding have thought fit to read it over from one end to
the other, and to make upon it the Remarks which are necessary.

And passing over the three first Articles of the Reply, in the first of which
they speak (although very improperly, and by way of Reproach) of Sums which the
Dutch Company paid a long time ago to the English East India Company, with the
prospect only of buying Peace: They will begin their Remarks with the
Considerations upon the Fourth Article of the Reply.

Coming to the Question of Cui Bono of the Dutch Deputies (say the English
Commissioners in the said Fourth Article) that is to say, what Advantage the
Dutch should have had in exciting the Young King of Bantam to make a Quarrel
with his Father, and what may be the Consequences of it: We answer, (add they)
that we wonder such knowing and experienced Gentlemen should make so pitiful a
Question to so wise a Tribunal, as that of your Excellencies, to which the
meanest Sailer English or Dutch which ever had been in India, could answer ex
tempore. Bantam was a Port to which all European Nations, and the greater part
of the Indian Nations traded with Ships richly laden, to the Number of more
than Forty every Year (and what follows to the end of the same Article.)

The underwritten Deputies do not doubt but that your Excellencies after so
pitiful a Rhapsody (or Gallimatias) will be pleased to allow them to complain
of the little heed which the English Deputies give to what has been said in the
Answer, and of their terming a convincing Argument ridiculous.

There is only common sense required, without being either wonderful Learned or
Experienced, to perceive that the English Deputies have not more comprehended
the Arguments drawn from the end; which every rational Man proposes to himself
in his Actions, than if it had been writ in Arabic.

The underwritten desired in their Answer (not your Excellencies, but the
Commissioners of the English Company) to explain to them cui bono, and with
what prospect those at Batavia should give themselves the trouble of making a
Quarrel between the Father and the Son, and to animate one against the other;
of what Use that would have been to them, and what Advantage they would have
drawn from it. For since the Son had ascended the Throne, and that he had
signified by his Ambassadors to the Regency of Batavia, that he was willing to
live in a good Correspondency with them, and to use them more favorably than
his Father had done during his Reign: As also indeed those at Batavia had no
reason to complain of his Behavior in relation to them; and why then should
they be willing to engage him in a War against his Father and his own Subjects,
and of seeing his Father re-ascend the Throne, or his younger Brother set up in
his stead.

What do the English Deputies reply to this? They say that Bantam was a Port to
which all the European Nations trading to the Indies, and greatest part of the
Indian Nations, traded with Ships richly laden, to the Number of above Forty
every Year; that is to say (as it ought to be Explained in the sense of these
Gentlemen) that Bantam is a Port which would fit the Hollanders very well: Oh
the fine Reply! The Question is not here, Whether the Town of Bantam be an
Advantageous Port; we agree it is; but the matter is only to know, what
Advantage 'twould be to those of Batavia, to excite and foment a War between
the Old and the Young King of Bantam? And what was the Advantage which they
could rationally hope to reap from it? The underwritten desire the English
Deputyes to tell them, what Connection there would be, in the Mind of a Rational
Man, between stirring up a War between the Old and the Young King, and the
seizing upon Bantam upon the success of this War? How those of the Regency of
Batavia? Were they Diviners and Prophets, and could they, by a Spirit of
Prophecy, penetrate into the secrets of futurity? Did they know so long before,
that the War would end to the Sons Advantage? That the English would concern
themselves in it? And that he would drive them from Bantam? Those at Batavia
had they not rather cause to fear, that the Young Prince would be overcome in
this War? And that his Father would reascend the Throne? As really we saw the
Young King within two ^ngers of his Ruin, and upon the brink of the Precipice,
writing to those of Batavia Letters filled with marks of despair. Why did those
of Batavia (if they had designed to kindle a War between the Father and the
Son) give themselves the trouble to reconcile and pacify them? Suffering all
this while the Young Prince to sigh after their Assistance? From whence we
ought conclude, whatsoever the English Gentlemen say of it, have not
comprehended the strength of this Argument, that it cannot be supposed that
those at Batavia should concern themselves with making a War between the Father
and the Son, without making things desperate, or without destroying
probabilities; which ought even to be kept in a Romance, that is to say in a
feigned story made to divert the World.

In the Fifth Article of the Reply, the English Deputies say, That the
underwritten Deputies ask them how it could be imagined that the Young King of
Bantam should be so simple as to put the Fetters on himself and his Posterity?
But it is pleasant that the English Gentlemen should represent the
underwritten as making Demands and Questions of which they have not had the
least thought. It is true, that the underwritten Demand in their Answer, what
likelihood there was that a Man of common sense should give ear to an advice so
Extravagant, and so Dangerous, as that by which they would have persuaded the
Young King of Bantam to a War against his Father, and against his own Subjects:
But they have been pleased to invent this Question, that they might answer it,
as they have done, with a Torrent of Injuries and Abuses; with which they tear
the Dutch Company in the most unjust and outraging manner.

But the underwritten having been able to foresee long since, that they would
have opportunity of exercising their Patience in rendering good for evil; they
would pray to God, that for the good of both the Companyes, he would be pleased
to incline the Gentlemen of the English Company to return into the Paths of
Moderation, and of Mildness: And as to the injuries, they would say only these
two things.

First, If the Gentlemen of the English Company ever take a fancy to write the
History of the Dutch Company in the East Indies from its beginning (to which
these Gentlemen have recourse to this time) it will be made appear, that either
this History will belie all that is said in the Reply, concerning the enslaving
of fifty Indian Kings, and of the encroachments upon the English: Or if it
confirms all that, it will be proved that it will be but a terrible Romance
grounded upon supposed facts; not to divert the World, (which is the design of
all the Authors of Romances) but to blacken the Dutch Company, and to render
them execrable to the whole Universe. But as it has pleased the English
Deputies to set the Town of Bantam in parallel with the other places of the
Usurpation, of which they complain, and to say in the Tenth Article of their
Reply in formal terms, that the Dutch had done as much to them at Bantam, as in
the other places they have usurped: It is evident that all their injurious
Complaints must vanish into smoke so soon as by the reading of the Answer, and
the proofs of the Dutch Company, it will appear that the Regency of Batavia has
done nothing at Bantam, neither toward the King nor the English Company, which
was not very just and equitable: For although since the difference between the
Companies concerning the affairs of Bantam, the English Gentlemen have been
pleased to rally (although very ungratefully) the King of Bantam, and to call
him a poor and pitiful Slave, and a Prisoner to Batavia, notwithstanding the
honor which was done to his Ambassadors here in London, in the year 1682. It Is
notwithstanding true that those of the Regency of Batavia have used this Indian
Prince in so charitable, and at the same time in so generous a manner, that
very far from having ever complained of their proceedings toward him, he has
on the contrary highly commended them.

Thus therefore there is a great deal of trouble saved to the English
Gentlemen, and to those of the Dutch, which may at present dispense themselves
from it; The first from justifying the bloody reproaches which they make
against the Dutch Company; and the others from defending themselves from them
in this replication, which would become a second Volume, if they would make it
swell with a new Apology, which is nothing of common with the affair of Bantam.

And as the English Deputies themselves (after having suffered themselves to be
carried away by the first torrent of their Passions) have upon better thoughts,
thought fit not to grieve the hearts of your Excellencies (as they speak) with
things which signify nothing to the present Case of Bantam: (although in truth
they say nothing which comes to the said point). The underwritten will keep
themselves within the bounds of the present Controversy, without going out of
it, but by an indispensable necessity.

As to the Complaints which the English Deputies have so throughout their whole
reply, in relation to the Dutch exclusive Contracts with Indian Princes; the
Dutch Company will be very well able to justify, in time and place, that which
it has always maintained, and which it does still maintain, concerning the
right of the said Contracts.

The proofs which the English Gentlemen have exposed to your Excellencies view,
as they say in the seventh Paragraph of their Reply, very far from being (as
they call them) so express upon the point of their Complaints, and that the
greatest part of them prove in terminis every one of their grievances: It is on
the contrary true, that not one of their proofs makes so much as mention of
them: The underwritten desire these Gentlemen to tell them, by which of their
Depositions they can prove, that the Regency of Batavia did ever stir up and
foment a War between the Old and the Young King of Bantam; and that the Dutch
expelled (as they call it) the English from Bantam; for as for having raised
the War, there is not one Witness so much as speaks of it, far from attesting
it. And as to their expulsion from Bantam, there is not one Witness which
swears to have seen himself, or to have heard others say, that they had seen it
with their Eyes, or that they had heard others say that they had seen it with
theirs; there being only two or three Witnesses who endeavor to ground it upon
Arguments and Conjectures, contrary to the Characters of true Witnesses, who
can depose nothing but upon the Testimony of their own Senses.

The Dutch Deputies have not extenuated the Hostilities upon the Coast of
Mallabar, for which those of Batavia were accused; but have absolutely denied
them; whatsoever the English Gentlemen may say in the eighth Paragraph of their
Reply; in which they endeavor to make an express Negative pass for a
Confession.

That which follows in the same Paragraph, concerning a Letter from Mounsieur
Van Dam, deserves a particular reflection; not only in consideration of the
matter of this Letter, but also for the person of Mounsieur Van Dam, who is a
Man thoroughly honest, prudent, and has applied himself to the affairs of the
Dutch Company, being careful and indefatigable in that labor, having served
the Company as Advocate for above thirty years, with the approbation of his
Masters, and the applause of all those who know his desert. After which the
underwritten do not at all doubt, but that your Excellencies will willingly
pardon the little Credit to what is said of Mounsieur Van Dam in the said
Reply: Not that they can believe, that the story of it could be invented by the
English Deputies, who refer themselves to the memory of one of your
Excellencies; but believe that time may have obliterated the traces of
remembrance of it; it not being at all credible, that a man so circumspect as
Monsieur Van Dam, should think fit to reprove in a Letter the behavior of
Governor Spillman, in relation to the Affairs of Bantam, without having
cleared to the bottom, the proceedings of the said Government, which is
incompatible with that which the said Monsieur Van Dam has since judged, and
still judges concerning the Affairs of Bantam; being so fully persuaded of the
right of the Dutch Companies pretensions, and the wrong of that of England in
these Affairs; that all the Letters which the underwritten have received from
them concerning the matter of Bantam during their stay in England, are marks
full of this persuasion: So that it cannot be doubted, without doing great
injustice to Monsieur Van Dam, but that the said Letter was only conditional,
that is to say, that he condemned the behavior of Spillman only in case that
the news which his friend might have sent him were true.

The English Deputies have also very well understood the sense of the
underwritten, who as they in the same Eighth Paragraph, had bestowed on them
the gift of prophecy: For it is evident, that the underwritten deducing in
their answer the Argument of Cui Bono, (as the English Deputies calls it) to
prove that it was morally impossible for those at Batavia, to make a difference
between the Old and Young King of Bantam, with the prospect of taking advantage
of the success of this War; unless that by the gift of Prophecy they could be
able to penetrate into the secrets of futurity; which is remote from the sense
which the English Deputies wrest from these words.

As the underwritten confessed frankly, that they do not very well understand
the true sense of the last words of the same paragraph, by reason of the
frequent parenthesis, are a little puzzled; they will make no answer to it: But
yet if the English Deputies do there offer to prove by irrefragable Arguments,
that the Dutch have driven the English from Bantam, the under written will be
very glad to be present at this proof; not only that they may be able to
destroy it, but also to learn by what new sort of Logic they can prove by
irrefragable arguments, Facts which are proved by no deposition of any Witness;
without which notwithstanding, Facts cannot be proved which depend on the
testimony of the senses.

The Ninth Article of the said Reply shows also, the little heed which the
English Deputies have given to the Answer of the underwritten, as to the
accusation which they talk of ( viz. the Dutch Deputies) that the English
should plunder their house at Bantam; it is equally ridiculous, false and
impossible, in the posture wherein things were then, for the English to do; for
so soon as the Dutch Landed, there was a Report spread abroad, that all the
English were to be Massacred that night; it is only to read the answer of the
underwritten to be satisfied, that it has not pleased the English Deputies to
give themselves the trouble of reading with the least application the Dutch
Companies Apology, wherein upon the matter of the plundering of the Dutch
Factory, these following words will be found; It ought not to be wondered at
that the King having re-taken the Town of Bantam from his Enemies, wherewith he
was encompassed, should cause the motions of the English to be watched, as well
as the entry and going out of the Ships, in the apprehension wherein he was,
some ill design might be carried on against his person and estate: And that in
the confusion wherein the Affairs were then, the goods of other Men were taken
away, which the Directors of the English Company themselves could no more have
prevented, than they could have hindered in the time when the Old King made
himself Master of the Town of Bantam; and that the Dutch Resident Caeff was
forced to take flight to shelter himself from the violence of the Bantamers;
some English probably without the knowledge of their Masters from plundering
the Dutch Factory. There is no cause to doubt at present that after the reading
of these words, but that the English Deputies will themselves perceive their
Error, and the little care which they have taken to understand the sense of the
underwritten; since it appears evidently in the said passage, the time is not
spoken of, in which the Dutch Landed at Bantam (as the English Deputies have
understood it) but the time when the old King made himself Master of Bantam;
and that the Dutch Resident Caess was forced to take flight. There is certainly
nothing more troublesome or tiresome than to see ones self forced to clear
passages so very evident. But as this (without doubt) ought to be attributed to
the great Affairs the English Deputies have on their hands; The underwritten
easily persuade themselves, that in this negligence there is neither design nor
mystery.

The Objections which the English Deputies make to themselves in the Tenth
paragraph of their Reply, and the Solution, which they give to it, shows that
they have difficulty enough to reconcile the encroachments of the Dutch with
the flourishing condition of the English Company.

As the underwritten Deputies confess that the credit of the Dutch Company is
engaged to His Majesty of Great Britain, (as the English Deputies say in the
Eleventh paragraph of their Reply.) The underwritten deny expressly, that That
Faith ought to be violated in acquitting themselves of that which the Dutch
Company owed to the King of Bantam, by virtue of the Leagues which they have
made with this Prince.

The Twelfth paragraph is injurious to the Dutch Company; which far from not
keeping their Faith makes a constant profession of acquitting themselves of it
every where and toward all. The underwritten, not observing any thing more in
the following Articles, which deserves any reflection; we will persist to
desire that Your Excellencies by your sentence will acquit the Dutch Company
from the demands of that of England, and that you will adjudge to the Dutch
Company what they demand in Re-convention.

Dated at Westminster, Nov. 19th 1685. Signed by G. Hooft. Jacob Van Hoorne. S.
V. Blockquery. A. Paets.


The Fourth Paper presented by the English Commissioners Instructors, to the
Lords Commissioners Decisors; being in further Answer to the Papers presented
by the Dutch Deputies; Viz.
To the Most Honorable the Lords Commissioners, appointed by the Kings Most
Excellent Majesty, for Determining the differences between the English and
Dutch East-India-Companies, according to the Treaty of 1674-75.
Right Honorable,
WE are sorry and ashamed, that we are necessitated to waste Your Lordships
time; but if the Dutch Deputies will persist injuriously to charge us with
calumniating them, because we are forced very gently and argumentatively only
to touch some of their too well known methods of managing their Affairs in
India; If likewise the said Gentlemen, after so full an answer as we gave
(though brief and pertinent) to their voluminous papers, do yet tell Your
Lordships we have said nothing to several weighty points (as they do in a late
paper presented Your Lordships) We hope we shall obtain your Lordships pardon
for this Rejoinder, which shall be as short as the nature of their paper and of
their practices in India will admit.

First, As to the Restitution of Bantam, we say, All the late King of glorious
Memory demanded, was the withdrawing of the Dutch Forces from Bantam, and
satisfaction for our damages; and we ask no more now, But that the Fort built
with the English Money may be left undemolished, that we may be able to defend
our Factors and Servants, and preserve the Trade we design there; which as the
present Affairs of Bantam are, can be no otherwise secured to us. And it is
certain that the Lords States General consented to the withdrawing their Forces
as aforesaid, by their answer to Sir John Chardins Memorial. Whether we speak
truly in this or not, we are in Your Lordships Judgment, upon view of the
authentic Copies of the said Memorial and Reply, lodged with Sir John Chardin,
and with your Lordships Secretary. And for the Gentlemen to say, the Lords
States Concessions then to Sir John Chardin, are not to be urged now, because
they have since made Articles with that poor Young King (which the Batavians
have so much abused and enslaved) and who is so ignorant and so miserable, that
he would set his Chop or Mark to a Hundred blanks if they would have him: And
we appeal not only to your Lordships Wisdom, but to all Men of common sense,
whether any thing since done with such a poor Creature, now and then in
durance, can make any new Case since the transactions at the Hague.

Secondly, The Gentlemen say, they affirmed we had only a Factory and a
Residence in the Capital City of Bantam, and can found no dominion upon that;
and that we have replied nothing thereunto; wherein (we humbly conceive) your
Lordships will find the Gentlemen under a great mistake: For though our Factory
and the Fort Built with our Money were more worth than all the rest of the
Buildings in Bantam; (which they call the Capital City) We claim no Territory
by virtue thereof; but we say the Old King of Bantam was King of Right, and his
Son only Probationary with his Fathers leave, to see how he would behave
himself, and as such a King, and the Son of a Father always Obsequious to His
late Majesty of Glorious Memory, His Ambassadors were here received with
Respect: And that the Old King his Father, (before the Articles the Dutch
Gentlemen pretend to have made with his Son,) gave that City and Territory to
His said late Majesty. And if the Dutch Deputies will yet contend, That the
Young King was King not only Probationary, but de jure; and that the Father was
subject to the Son; which was not so of Right by the Laws of that Country, nor
can ever be proved, but the contrary most certainly; if it were worth the
contesting: Then we say that Young King has violated his public Faith by his
Assassinating our Agent, and other public Persons Resident as Chiefs of the
English Nation by Commission from His late Majesty of Glorious Memory. And if
it be true, (as the Dutch Deputies themselves have constantly affirmed) That it
was not the Batavians, but that Young King of Bantam that rifled our Houses,
tore our King's Colors, drove us from our Ancient, Great, and Costly
Habitations and Trade; while at the same time his own Ambassadors were treated
here by His Majesty, and His Majesty's East India Company with the greatest
Kindness and Respect: If this be the Case, do not the Dutch Deputies themselves
in Effect confess, That that Young King deserves no longer to be corresponded
with by them: And that it is most reasonable for us that are and desire to be
their Friends, to request them to depart thence, and leave us the Fort which
our Money paid for; which is all we ask of them with respect to the pretended
Restitution of that place; and we may say, to the Restitution of the Majesty
and Honor of our English Name and Nation, which has been intolerably
affronted and abused at that place of Bantam in sight of many Eastern Nations.

3. As to that weak Question cui bono, we cannot but wonder the Gentlemen
should expose themselves again to the censure not only of your Lordships, but
of all Mankind that have the least knowledge of India: They argue thus, They
had favor at Bantam, a Factory there, their Friend King; why should they
adventure a War if compassion to their Ally had not moved them, when they could
not better their Condition? Our Answer was full to this before; but in regard
the Gentlemen will have more of it, Your Lordships we hope will pardon our
telling them, that their Factory at Bantam was used mostly for buying Rice,
Hens and Provisions; and it may be to inspect the English Proceedings; for
where the English are, Trade runs generally at so low profit, that the Dutch
care not for meddling with it in such places; But if by the Artifices they have
used, they can keep the English, French, Danes, Portugueez, Moors, Gentues,
and Mallayes, and all other Nations from bringing Callicoes to Bantam (which
Callicoes are the principal Clothing of the Javans and many Nations thereabout
to the Eastward) they may then sell one piece of Callico for the price that two
would sell for, when the Trade of Bantam was open; and buy two Baharrs of
Pepper for the price they paid for one formerly; which may alter the Dutch
Companies Affairs for the better Two, or Three Hundred Thousand Pounds per
annum; besides the much greater Advantage they would make by having the whole
Trade of Pepper in Europe, if they can keep Bantam as now it is, by any means
right or wrong. Besides the design which it is manifest they have in prospect
of obstructing all other Europeans from the China and Japan Trade, having (by
preventing all Nations from the Trade of Bantam) secured as they think the two
great Passages, viz. the Streights of Sunda, and the Streights of Malacca. If
this be not a full Answer to their cui bono, let the World judge (as we doubt
not but your Lordships will uprightly,) although the Gentlemen (with as little
reason as they did before,) should call the most clear Truth and undeniable
Arguments, by the same insignificant Term Gallimatias.

The next Question they discourse of, viz. How it can be imagined that the
Young King should be so simple etc.? We dare not say any more to it now, lest
your Lordships should apprehend it to be an abuse of your Lordships Patience,
after we have so fully and clearly answered that before.

We must own our selves obliged to the Gentlemen for the good Advice they give
us in their former Paper, to subdue our passions (which are too apt to stir in
the Minds of injured Men) and for their Prayers in this, that God would incline
us into the paths of Moderation and Mildness; and in requital thereof we shall
not only pray to God to forgive them for the Ocean of Innocent Blood they have
shed in India; but that at length they may repent and forsake those ill
Methods, by which their People at Batavia have designed to engross the whole
Trade of the East Indies; which (in truth) is much to be feared, if timely
Remedy be not applied. And as to the English Proceedings in India, though the
English Company was settled there before the Dutch, and our Trade is not yet
much inferior to theirs, bating only the Spice and Japan Trades which they
have engrossed by such ways as we have justly accused them of: We dare appeal
to the Gentlemen themselves, and to all People that know any thing of India,
whether the Dutch Company in the progress of their too well known Methods, have
not killed Thousands of Indians for one that ever dyed by the English hands,
upon any Cause or Quarrel whatsoever: From whence we may reasonably infer that
through God's Mercy we have hitherto been Men of Meekness and great (if not too
great) Moderation, considering the manifold provocations we have had.

Mr. Van Dam we have good thoughts of, and the better because he did so frankly
condemn those ill Practices of Spellman's; and we do not remember, nor believe
there was any Conditional Words expressed or employed in his Letter fore-quoted.

We observe the distinction of time which the Gentlemen now make; in which they
have been told the English Slaves robbed their Dutch House at Bantam; but we
believe not one word thereof, neither is there any probability of it.

There is nothing more that we can observe in the Gentlemen's last Paper, that
deserves the troubling of your Lordships with one Line in Answer thereunto; but
one short Paragraph which is indeed very material, and therefore we shall beg
your Lordships leave to repeat it verbatim.

The say, As to the Complaints which the English Deputies have made throughout
their whole Reply in Relation to the Dutch exclusive Contracts with Indian
Princes, the Dutch Company will be very well able to justify in time and
place, that which it has always maintained, and which it does still maintain,
concerning the Right of the said Contracts: In answer whereunto, we say,

First, This is plain dealing, throwing the Gantlet to all Nations, and amounts
to a Confession of that design they have of engrossing the whole Trade of
India, and that they will and may easily do it, is as plain, except some speedy
Course be taken to defend that Remainder of Ports and Places that are left us
in India to trade unto: For it is certainly known, that any European Nation
that is considerable in Naval Power in India, may by their Shipping take some
Advantage upon the greatest Native Prince of India; and it is as certain that
any Prince being surpised, or his Subjects Estates to a very considerable
value, will for a present Redemption of his Subjects from the Ruin of such a
surprizal, grant to the Surprizer any Conditions of Trade exclusive to any
other Nation or People residing unarmed in his Country, and by Consequence such
unarmed People expelled from the Trade of any such Native Prince his Dominions,
must remain for ever deprived thereof, or by force of Arms compel the
Restitution, which can never be without using force: For after such Contract,
they will make themselves Parties (as now they do with the Young King of
Bantam) and tell us in plain terms (as they do your Lordships) that they must
defend their Allies, and maintain their Contracts or Articles.

Secondly, We say, This Assertion makes it evident what the Design of their
Fleet now or late in the Gulf of Persia was; where if they had prospered in
their shutting up all that Great Emperors Ports, which (in probability) they
had done, if the English Ships there had not undertook the Navigation between
India and Persia; and if they had not been (as by chance they were) too many
and too strong to be obstructed by the Dutch at that time, Your Lordships may
easily conceive what Articles that Great Emperor of Persia must have entered
into to persuade the Dutch to open his Ports again.

Thirdly, Hereby your Lordships may see by what Title the Dutch hold the whole
Trade of the Spice Islands, although there be very many of them that have not
one Dutchman resident upon them: Notwithstanding which, we have forborne many
Years visiting those Islands, because we would shun all occasions that might
make any misunderstanding between the two Nations.

Fourthly, We must deny (under favor of these Gentlemen) that the Dutch have
always or at any time maintained, or could maintain, their pretended Right of
such exclusive Contracts; which will be manifest to your Lordships not only by
the last Articles of Peace and Commerce made with the Dutch, but by the large
Arguments on both sides, which remain upon Record, and were managed more
closely and to the purpose, (as to this point) than any thing we have seen from
these Gentlemen: On the part of the Dutch by Mounsieur Van Benninghen and
others, and on the part of the English by Mr. Secretary Trevor, Sir Will.
Temple, and Sir George Downing. The Result of all which long and close
Argumentation was (as your Lordships may observe it) settled in the Treaty,
That the English might trade to all places, and even to places blockard or
besieged with any Commodities except contraband Goods.

Dated in London December. 2. 1685. We are My Lords, Your Lordships most Obedient
and Humble Servants, Josia Child Deputy-Govern. Benjamin Bathurst. Jeremy
Sambrooke.


The Answer of the Dutch Commissioners Instructors to the Paper last
beforegoing, Viz.
To the Right Honorable the Lords the Commissioners appointed by the King of
Great Britain, and the Commissioners nominated by the Lords the States General
of the United Provinces, for the Decision of the differences arisen between the
East India Companies of England and of the said Provinces, about Bantam.
May it please Your Honors,
THE Deputies of the Company of Holland having read and considered the
Triplique or Third Paper of the Deputies of the English Company; They have
observed to their great Admiration, that those Gentlemen far from acknowledging
the Reproaches and Invectives which run through their whole Reply, or second
Answer, do seem to pretend, That it ought to be owned as an Obligation that the
Dutch Company which is thereby handled and rent in the most outrageous manner
in the World, is treated therein with Mildness and Moderation, and that the
said Company comes off at so easy a Rate.

The subscribed instead of rendering injury for injury, and making use of the
Law of Retaliation; do earnestly desire the English Gentlemen to consider, That
although their Company (by enjoying the protection of a Crowned Head, and of a
Monarch for whom the Dutch Company does protest they have the utmost
Veneration) be elevated above a Company who can boast of a Protection only of a
Republic; yet their said Company cannot make such ill use of their quality, as
to oppress and trample on the Company of Holland in that manner, as will be so
far from pleasing his Majesty, that it will doubtless bring upon them his Royal
Indignation.

As to the Answer of the Lords the States General, to the Memorial of Sir John
Chardin, since that instead of producing the same, it has pleased the English
Deputies to refer themselves only thereunto; The subscribed will also refer to
the same, being assured that your Honors will not find there what is alleged
by the English Deputies; but on the contrary, will see what the Subscribed have
said thereof in their Answer: So that there needs only the pains of reading of
it to, be undeceived.

As to what the Subscribed said in their Answer, That it was a very strange
thing that the English Company, who had only their Residence and Factory at
Bantam, should now pretend to the City and Fort of Bantam; The English do by
their third Paper say, That the Factory and Fort built with their Money were
worth all the rest of the Buildings on that place; As if the price and value of
their Factory, and the Money which they may have lent the King (which is not
believed no more than the value of their Factory, which was only an old
building) could give them any right of Propriety and Lordship over the City and
Fort of Bantam, which is contrary to all Laws Natural and Civil; which the
English Gentlemen being also well aware of, They add that they do not ground
their pretensions thereupon; but do say, that the Old King of Bantam was a
Lawful King, and his Son only Conditional, and at the will of his Father.

This is a new method of acting, and a strange way of proceeding, after the
Subscribed have given themselves the pains to prove in their Answer, by solemn
and authentic proofs, that the Old Sultan of Bantam did assign over his
Kingdom to his eldest Son, without reserving to himself any thing, even not so
much as Tartiassa, the place of his retreat: And that his Son having by virtue
of this Assignment, ascended the Throne, did send his Ambassadors every where;
and that he was acknowledged as a Lawful King, not only by the Deceased King of
Great Britain, of Glorious Memory, but also by those of the English Company.
Now they come and say, that the Young King was only a Conditional King, and at
the will of His Father; without refuting the proofs of the Dutch Company, and
without proving such condition and dependence as is now alleged.

The inveighing against the Young King of Bantam, is a mark of animosity; as to
which the Subscribed having already declared their sentiment in their Answer,
they will forbear to make any further mention thereof at present.

As to the question of cui bono, the Subscribed having endeavored in vain to
cause the English Deputies to apprehend the force of their Argument; They do
not see cui bono; and to what ends they should break their heads any further
about it, since it is evident by their triplique or third Paper, that they
apprehend no more of it than if the Subscribed had proposed Riddles to them.

As to what follows about the pretended Cruelties of the Hollanders, their
sanguinary humor, and of the mild temper of the English: It is a sign of
animosity and self-love, which seldom hearkens to Reason.

As to what is so much insisted on, that the Subscribed should propose as to
the exclusive Contracts, that the Dutch Company could sufficiently prove, in
time and place, what they have so often alleged, and do still allege as to
the right of the said Contracts; this is without any reason or ground; and
certainly if it were their business to prove that Right now, the Subscribed
would make it appear that there is nothing better grounded; the same being all
duly explained and limited.

The Subscribed will finish this their fourth Paper, adding only, that
Mounsieur Van Dam is in no wise satisfied with the proceedings of the English
Gentlemen, as to his particular; and that he could have wished, (as he mentions
in his last Letters) that instead of putting his name in the triplique or third
Paper, in so odious a manner, they would have produced the Letter therein
mentioned; by which it would have appeared, that all that Mr. Van Dam wrote
about the conduct of the Governor Spellman in the affairs of Bantam, was
grounded only upon a supposition of things which he had heard; and time having
discovered them to be false, it would not be at all generous to allege or
insist on such a Letter at present.

Dated at Westminster 3 December. 1685. Signed, G. Hooft Jacob Van Hoorne. S. V.
Blocquery. A. Paets.



The next day being the 4th. of December, the Lords Commissioners Decisors made
some Propositions verbally to the English Deputies to be considered of; which
Sir Josia Child, etc. desired their Lordships they might have in writing; which
was accordingly given them under Mr. Francis Gwyns hand, their Lordships
Secretary, in the following words.

December the 4th. 1685.
At the Lord Treasurers Lodgings.

Present
Lord Treasurer. Lord Privy Seal. Earl Sunderland. Earl Middleton.
It was proposed by their Lordships to Sir Josia Child and the rest of the
East India Company, to be considered of:

First, That the Dutch should withdraw their Forces from Bantam, and demolish
the Fort, and leave all things there in the same condition they were before the
War between the Father and the Son: And that it shall be Lawful for the English
to build a Fort without interruption from the Dutch.

Secondly, That there shall be an agreement, that for the future there shall be
no Treaty made with the Natives to exclude either Nation from Trading to the
places they now Trade in.

Signed, Francis Gwyn.


The said Proposals were duly considered by the Committee of the East India
Company; who made the following Answer unto them the 9th. of the said December.

To the Right Honorable the Lord High Treasure of England, Lord Privy Seal,
the Earl of Sunderland, and the Earl of Middleton, Lords Commissioners,
appointed by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, for determining the differences
between the English and Dutch East India Companies, according to the Treaty of
1674-75.
May it Please your Lordships,
THe Court of Committees for the East India Company have this day seriously
considered the two Propositions made to us by your Lordships, the fourth
instant, at my Lord Treasurers Lodgings. And as to the first, it is our humble
opinion, that the Dutch have no sincere meaning that we should live in security
at Bantam, in Neighbourly Peace and Friendship with them, unless they do
consent to deliver the Fort undemolished.

First, Because since they do agree to withdraw all their Forces from that
place, and that we shall build a Fort there without interruption from them,
etc. If they mean sincerely, it is better for them to save themselves the
trouble and charges of pulling that down; and to us the charge of building a
new one, and the rather, because we are willing to accept of the said Fort as
part of our damages.

Secondly, Since it is proposed, that they should leave all things at Bantam in
the same condition they were before the War between the Father and the Son; and
this Fort was built with our Money, and in being before the War; why should not
they leave the Fort standing, and all the Companies buildings, as well as
withdraw all their Forces from the place?

Thirdly, Because the Dutch did never comply with any agreement they made with
us; we do sincerely believe by all their carriage in this Treaty, and by the
Hostilities used on the Coast of Malabar, since the surprise of Bantam; that
they never intend we should reside at Bantam, secured by a Fortification and an
English Garrison; no more than they do intend to give us Batavia. And therefore
what ever they pretend, we conclude they will so under hand furnish our Enemy
the Young King of Bantam, with Money and black Soldiers of all Nations, that
our People at Bantam shall be murdered whilst they are at work, and never be
permitted to erect any considerable Fortification: Or else they will pretend
they have bought the Customs of the King of Bantam; and innumerable other
shifts, whereby they will disappoint the intended settlement of the English in
that place; or else they will forbid any of the Natives to work upon our
Fortifications; well knowing that the English Soldiers will not labor at such
work in those hot Countries: Or one way or other they will certainly (as they
have ever done, notwithstanding all agreements to the contrary) prevent our
settlement until our Men are dead, or disabled by the Diseases of that Country;
of which practice of theirs we have had great experience formerly.

Fourthly, Such an attempt of building a Fort failing, will not only make us
about One Hundred Thousand Pounds worse then now we are, but many brave English
Men's lives will be thrown away to no effect; Our Gracious Sovereign will be
infinitely dishonored; and the English name and Nation become a reproach, and
contemptible in the Eyes of those Eastern Nations; and the Dutch wisdom, power
and policy will be extolled to such a degree, as that an English Man will be
ashamed to show his face in those parts of the World: Whereas on the contrary,
if it be still insisted upon to have Fort delivered to us undemolished; it will
be granted or denied: If it be denied, we are in a much better condition than
ever we can be by the Proposition aforesaid; for by such denial no vast sum
of Money can be lost; no Men's lives will be cast away; no shame and reproach
can befall our Nation; and our demand will be just and good against the Dutch
hereafter: And in the mean time, we shall go on to strengthen Priaman, and as
near as we can, make it impregnable against all the power of the Dutch in
India; which is much better then to throw away charge and men's lives where we
are sure they will be lost with shame and dishonor.

Fifthly, If the Dutch should agree to deliver us the Castle undemolished, they
will perform their agreement, or they will not: If they do perform it, we will
(with Gods assistance) soon make our selves so strong as not to fear what they
can do against us: If they do not perform it, it would be a plain violation of
their Contract with His Majesty; the proof whereof will be plain and easy, and
the guilt thereof they can no way evade: But according to the proposition we
are discoursing of, they will easily contrive means totally to prevent our
settlement, and yet pretend to justify themselves, that they did what they
promised, and throw the blame upon us by a multitude of fallacies, untruths,
and false Witnesses, which they never want.

Sixthly, We humbly conceive we have clearly demonstrated to your Lordships in
our larger Papers, in Answer to the Dutch Deputies, that the Dutch Company
design nothing less than the engrossment of the whole Trade of the East Indies;
and that their ways have been always, by force or fraud, to surprise one place,
and then be quiet for ten or twelve years, till the noise of that injury is
over in Europe, and then to deprive us of some other place. So that while we
are demanding our Right at Bantam, and the noise of that injury is unallayed,
it has formerly been some kind of security against other attempts for a
season, (and may prove so at this time) although in the latter part of His late
Majesty's Reign they have been more presumptuous than they were formerly, by
forcing us from Macassar; and before they had allayed or paid for that, they
did the same thing again at Bantam, and attempted the like at Malabarr; of
which we believe our next Ships may bring us some further account.

Seventhly, Whoever concludes the Dutch will now obstinately refuse to deliver
us the Castle, must at the same time believe, they will with the same
obstinacy, and with more ease to themselves, prevent us from building one at
Bantam. And therefore we are humbly of opinion, it is much better nothing be
done at this time, than that which is propounded, which is worse than nothing;
because besides the forecited damages and disparagements that would accrue
thereby in India; Such an error in a Treaty may be of ill consequence; for that
undoubtedly the Dutch (when such a Treaty is concluded) would be as forward to
make the World sensible of their own advantage in it, as they are now to
suppress the Sight of it.

Eighthly, As to your Lordships second proposition, we humbly conceive, that as
it is worded, it would make our Condition much worse than now it is, by the
Treaty of Peace and Commerce in force between the two Nations: By the plain
words whereof (we humbly conceive) the English have a right indubitably of
Trading to every part and place in India; which we hope they shall ever have
without leave of the Dutch: And we think that matter is so well settled by the
said Treaty in force, that any thing to be added thereunto, would make our case
worse and not better, and therefore we have never complained of any defect in
the said Treaty; but of the Dutch for violating thereof at Macassar and at
Bantam, in one and the same manner whatever difference or distinction they
pretend to make in either Case.

All which we humbly submit to your Lordships.

Signed by Order of the said Court. Rob. Blackborn, Secretary.
East-India-House the 9th. of December, 1685.

After the perusal of the foregoing answer of the Court of Committees, their
Lordships were pleased to send for the Governor and the whole Committee; and
after some expostulation with them, their Lordships required them to
re-consider of their former answer; which they did very seriously; and with a
faithful regard to their bounden duty to His Majesty and the trust reposed in
them by the Adventurers, made the following address.

To the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of England, The Lord High
Treasurer of England, the Earl of Sunderland, and the Earl of Middleton, Lords
Commissioners appointed by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty for determining the
differences between the English and Dutch East-India-Companies, according to
the Treaty of 1674-75.
May it please Your Lordships,
IN Obedience to your Lordships Commands on Wednesday last, We have seriously
re-considered our last Paper presented to your Lordships; and humbly craving
your Lordships pardon for any Error or Offense in the words thereof; we think
we should fail of our Duty to His Majesty and your Lordships, if we should not
adhere to the substance of that Paper; it being our unfeigned and unanimous
opinion that it is more for the Honor and Interest of His Majesty and of His
Kingdoms in general, That the Treaty of 1674-75. should remain as it is, than
that any new agreement should be made concerning Bantam; except the Fort there
be delivered undermolished in part of the Companies great damages.

And although in our former Papers presented to your Lordships for the Dutch
Deputies view; We have given reasons to justify our demands of the Fort
undemolished, which we did not at first ask by Sir John Chardin (which reasons
we humbly conceive the Dutch East-India-Company, have not nor can sufficiently
answer:) But now, since this Paper is to be seen only by your Lordships, and
not by the Dutch Commissioners; We hope we shall clearly demonstrate to your
Lordships that what we first demanded from the Dutch by Sir John Chardin, was
(though not the same in words yet) in Reality, Effect, and Consequence as much
or more than we now demand of them: For at that time we had a strong Fleet of
Three and Twenty Ships, with Soldiers in board ready to Sail for Bantam; the
Old King of Bantam our Friend, was then at or near Bantam, in the head of a
great Army; and he had given that City and Country to His late Majesty. Under
which Circumstances at that time, if the Dutch had delivered effectual Orders
to withdraw their Forces from Bantam, we should with that Fleet and that
Alliance, have been in the possession of the Fort of Bantam immediately on our
first arrival there; and in a better posture than we can now be with the Fort
restored to us undemolished; because now the Old King is a Prisoner in the
hands of the Dutch, and his Army all overcome and dispersed.

All which is Humbly submitted to your Lordships.

Signed by Order of the Court of Committees of the East India Company. Rob.
Blackborne, Secr.
East-India-House, 2d. of Jan. 1685.

The foregoing Original papers exhibited to the Lords Commissioners Decisors,
by the Commissioners Instructors for both Companies; we think may give
sufficient satisfaction to any indifferent persons, not only of the state of
the Controversy, but a full justification of the English East-India-Companies
Right to have Bantam so restored, that they may hope to live there without
having their Throats cut, or being Stabbed, as the English Agent formerly was,
or without being obnoxious to the having all taken from them in a moment at the
pleasure of the Batavians.

Now because all Sumatra abounds with Pepper, they pretend a Right to the whole
Territory of that Island, which is computed bigger than England, full of
Inhabitants; whereon as they confess are many distinct Kingdoms, which are
governed by ancient Sovereign Hereditary Princes: And we dare presume to say,
They have not Two Hundred Dutch men upon the whole Island; and we believe not
Ten Dutch Women; having no place that we know upon that whole Island able to
resist Twenty Europeans, but Padang and Pollocinco; and their Forts upon them
are very inconsiderable; neither of them having a Garrison of above Fifty or
Sixty Europeans, and about the like number of black Fellows which are of no
value.

To Bencoolen they do not now, nor ever did pretend; but say it belongs or owes
subjection to the Young King of Bantam: Which if it be true, we have rightfully
taken possession of it, That King being our declared Enemy; but we shall say
more of that hereafter.

To Atcheen, Pryaman, Teco and Indrapoora, they did formerly pretend; and they
may (as the Reader will see hereafter) with as much reason pretend to all
India; and so (questionless) they will in a little time, if the Kings of Europe
and their respective privileged Companies will give them leave, first to take
the principal places, and then be content to accept of a little Money for them,
not the Hundredth part of the true value of them. But they must first dispatch
this business of Pepper, and make that Commodity entirely their own (as they
have all other Spices already) and then they need neither pay nor thank any
King (or their privileged Companies) of Europe for letting them take all the
rest, because the profit of that single Commodity, if it were in one hand,
would defray the charge of a power sufficient to defend all the Coasts of India
from any new-comers; and to enslave the Sea Coasts of all those great Monarchs
of the East; who though they have great Forces by Land, have no Naval power,
and very little skill in taking of Fortresses, being not accustomed to the use
of Firearms.

We know the World better, than to expect a Confession of guilt from
Statesmen; and we know how to distinguish between the Dutch Nation, and the
Dutch East-India-Company; the former may be as in-offensive and Just, as any
other Nation; but the latter (doubtless) have always been a most injurious
people; for which difference the famous John De Wit assayes to give a reason in
a certain Treatise he has set forth.

But our end being not to cavil or contend for mastery in words, much less to
promote War or dissension (with which they unjustly charge the English
East-India-Company.) We shall satisfy our selves, if we can obtain a Witness
or Justification in the hearts and minds of the good and peaceable men of both
Nations; for which purpose, if any of the States or other of the Dutch Nation
dis-interested in these debates, doubt the truth of the English Companies
Allegations, we will ask no more, but that to satisfy themselves thoroughly,
they would privately discourse some of the Dutch themselves that were at Bantam
or Batavia, Anno 1682. when Bantam was surprised, or at any time since.

Secondly, We would pray them likewise to read their own Histories, and observe
therein whether most of the wrongs complained of by the English in all ages,
were not perpetrated by the Dutch Company in time of full Peace, viz.

The falling upon the English and beating them out of the Trade of Japan: The
taking from them Lantore, Polloway, and Pollaroone, Nutmeg Islands; and
depriving them of the Trade of Banda, Seram, and others of the Banda Islands;
as also of the Trades of the Moluccas or Clove Islands; (not to revive the
History of that unparalled inhumanity at Amboyna,) and in latter times by
their depriving them of the Pepper Trades of Japarra, Andragera, Lampoon,
Pollinbam, and Jambee in the South-Seas, and Porcat upon the Coast of Mallabar;
besides those Things and Places lately complained of by His Majesty's Envoy at
the Hague. And if any English Gentleman would be further satisfied as to those
past injuries, we need only referr them to Mr. Purchas's Pilgrims, the first
part toward the latter end of that Book.

Thirdly, Ask any plain hearted Bewinthebber, or any honest Dutch Skipper that
knows India, whether the Dutch have not been contriving these Twenty years to
turn the English out of the Trade of Pepper; and whether their General Matsuker
at Batavia had not a Warrant dormant (and since him their late General Van
Goens) to enterprise that business of Bantam when ever they could effect it.

Fourthly, Ask any sober minded man, whether the encroaching, restless,
covetous, humor of the Dutch Company, has not imbroyled the two Nations in
great Wars and Bloodshed within the space of one age; and whether it be Wisdom
to try that hazardous experiment again, with such a load of guilt upon them?
Whether it were not more prudent, (since they have the noble places of Trade in
India already) to sit down quietly and let their Neighbors peaceably employ
their industry to gain a penny by their leavings?

Whether that encroaching Game be not played far enough already, and it were
not Wisdom now to set bounds to their Dominion in India? (as their wiser
Statesmen seem to have set bounds to the increase of their Territory at home)
least indignation provoke the great Kings of Europe to visit those remote
Regions with their Royal Navies at their proper charge, and thereby discover a
secret yet unobserved by the Kings of Europe, (viz.) That Sampsons strength
lies in his locks more than in his Brains, or his robust body and bones; and
that the dutch Company is no less hated in India by all Nations by reason of
their Tyranny and Oppression, than their State in Europe is loved by their best
Friends and Confederates? Whether their own people in India (which are a
mixture of all fugitive Europeans) do not think themselves under great Slavery,
by reason of their Companies severity? and whether their very countenances as
well as their discourses, do not discover their discontents as the very Clothes
(or rather want of Clothes) of their common Seamen proclaims their excessive
penury: Whereas on the contrary the Dutch Seamen in Europe, may be
distinguished from other Nations by the neatness, wholeness, cleanliness, and
sufficiency of their garments: And whether if they be pressed hard in India now
they have stretched their Arms so wide and grasp't so much, they will not be
found much weaker then they were Fifty years past when they had not half so
many Forts, and their own Servants and the Natives necks were not so gaul'd by
their Iron Yokes, which have since been straightened upon them. Verbum sapienti
sufficit!

To wave long and tedious discourses, the short case is, whether a Contract for
the sole Commerce with any Country, or a small Fort upon a Coast of a vast
Extent, or the pretense of War with any of the Native Princes, shall deprive
any Europe Nation (being in Friendship with the Dutch) from Trading to such
Country in India where such Contract has been made, or such Fort built, or
such pretense of War begun? we say, none of these can or ought to hinder a
Nation in friendship with the Dutch, from Trading with the Natives of that
Country or People, without making War in India every moment of time that any
Nation has peace with the Dutch in Europe.

Before we proceed to the argument, we own that wherever the Dutch have the
sole Occupancy, or the exercise of the sole Dominion, of any place or Country;
they may without breach of Peace prohibit any Friend-Nation from Trading to
that place; and this concession overthrowes all the arguments they draw from
the English Laws of preserving or confining the sole Trade of Barbados,
Virginia, etc. to the Kings subjects only.

To give some instances of the Case or Proposition before asserted (which will
open the Readers understanding;) We shall begin at the North of India, viz.

It is famously known that the Emperor of Persia owes the English Company a
vast sum of money for the Arrears of their half Custom of Gombroon, due to them
for the expense of their Blood and Treasure in helping the Persian to take
Ormus from the Portugueez. Now if the English should at any time think fit to
War, on this indubitably just occasion, upon the King of Persia and his
Subjects, for the Recovery of their known just Debt: suppose the Dutch should
come at the same time to Trade with their Ships, (in goods not Contraband) at
Gombroon, and the English should hinder them from Trading, or from the Natives
Lighters or Boats to Land their goods, and Ballast their Ships: Would not the
Dutch cry out loudly and justly, This is against natural Right, and a breach of
the peace? And would it be any diminution of the unjustice to say the English
would lend them Boats? Might not they reply, what is lent is not of Right, but
of Courtesy, and may be taken again when the lender pleases? Besides that it
would be a scorn and contempt put upon the Dutch Nation in sight of the
Persians, to tell them, you shall have no Boats but what we please. But this
has never been the English practice: whose it is the Reader will see hereafter
by Transcripts of the following Papers, Translated from the Latin Originals,
viz.

A Letter sent by Rehnier Casembroot (as Admiral of the Dutch Ships then in
Gombroone Road) and his Council; To Daniel Edwards Agent, and the rest of the
Council for the English Nation in Persia, dated the 2d. of May, 1685.
To Mr. Edwards Resident in the Kingdom of Persia For the Illustrious English
Company.
FOrasmuch as at this time there is such difference between us and the
Persians, that lately in an Hostile manner they prohibited us their Country;
we would not seem to be careless in that matter; but by this our very Friendly
Letter do intimate, manifest, request, and heartily advise you, That according
to the Marine Treaty between His Majesty of England, and the High and Mighty
States of the United Provinces, ye would defer for some time the un-loading the
Ship called the Bengal Merchant, lying in this Road. In so doing you will
oblige us in like manner to requite you for the future:

Your Friends ready to serve you in all Affection and Duty, R. Casembroot. W.
Lycochthon. Jacob Van Ackersdycke. Wr. V. Bullestraete.

From the Ship Blew Hulke, 12th. of May, 1685.

Daniel Edwards, etc. Their Answer to the Dutch Admirals Letter, viz.
To the Honorable Rehnier Casembroot, and the rest of the Gentlemen of his
Council.
Sirs,
YOU have been pleased to require us for some time not to unload our Ship the
Bengal Merchant, now in the Road, of the Honorable Companies goods aboard her.
Should we consent to that, How long must our Ship continue here without making
an end of her business? We have perused and looked over the Marine Treaty
between His Majesty of Great Britain and the States of Holland, and we cannot
find any Article whereon you can ground, or whereby you can justify, the
stopping or impeding the unlading the said Ship Bengal Merchant, of our said
Companies concerns. If there is any, we trust you will make it known to us; if
there is none, then we desire you to withdraw your intentions of stopping the
Boats we have employed in that Service. It is not to be supposed when any of
our Ships Arrive to any place where you shall have Wars, that our Ships must
lie still till you conclude a peace: If so, what enjoyment have we by the
Treaty? Boats are to be understood necessaries without which Ships (when they
come into Harbor) cannot do their business: Therefore we suppose not mentioned
in the Articles of Peace. It Is late of the year, and the Ship has but a small
time of stay here, having more important business in another place: Therefore
if you bear any Friendship to us (as we have no reason to question but you do)
you will rather assist than hinder us: In doing of which you will oblige us to
continue what we desire always to be,

Gombroone, the 4th. of May, 1685. Sirs, Your very affectionate Friends, Daniel
Edwards. Francis Snape.


Another Letter from the Dutch Admiral to the Agent and Council for the English
Nation in Persia, Dated the 4/14th. of May, 1685.
To the very Worthy and Prudent Mr. Daniel Edwards and Francis Snape.
Our Honored Friends,
WE Received this day your most courteous Answer to our request, by your
Interpreter David; by which we understood your demand, That we would suffer the
Persian Boats and Lighters to unload your Ship, and that according to your
sense it will by no means be convenient for us to hinder the Boats which come
from the shore to your Ship: To which we respectfully Answer, that we have no
other Thonght nor design, than to continue in all friendship with your Nation;
being ready to serve you in all things, as we do heartily wish we could do at
this juncture, without prejudice to our own honor: But seeing we are basely
and maliciously trampled upon in this place, we don't in the least doubt,
(relying on your goodness) that you will take it ill if we should hinder the
free passage of our Enemies Boats whilst we besiege this Port, as we have
determined to do: Being heartily sorry that we are forced, for the Honor of
our Nation, to this necessity; so that we cannot consent to your demands,
though in any other occasion we shall heartily demonstrate our selves to be

Your most obedient Servants, Rehnier Casembroote. William Lycochthon. Jacob
Van Ackersdyck. Wr. Van Bullesstraete.

From the Ship Blew Hulk; 14th. of May, S. N. 1685.
Daniel Edwards, etc. Their Second Letter to the Dutch Admiral, dated the 6th.
of May, 1685. with their Protest of the same Date.
To the Honorable Rehnier Casembroot, and rest of the Honored Gentlemen of
his Council.
Sirs,
YOur behavior toward us in impeding our business, has been such, that we are
forced to draw up against you in the behalf of the Right Honorable English
East-India-Company, the Protest and Declaration now sent you by our Linguist
Senior David. Your urging your aim and design to be, to continue with our
Nation in all Amity and Friendship, is very improper while you persist against
all Law and Reason to obstruct us in our Affairs. We are very sorry to be the
subject of your Scorn and Contempt, for no other reason but because you are
compelled to keep up the Honor of your own Nation against the Persians. You
have forced us to buy and make our selves Masters of Boats for our service;
which we give you to understand, that you may not plead ignorance when met
withal by you. Sure you must think us to have little regard to our own
concerns, to let things pass so. We trust there may be a means found to remedy
these irregular proceedings. We are really

Gombroone the 6th. of May, 1685. Your Affectionate Friends Daniel Edwards.
Francis Snape.


The PROTEST.
WHEREAS the Bengal Merchant, Captain John Goldsburrough Commander, in the
service of the Right Honorable English East-India-Company, and laden with
their Goods, arrived this Road the first of May, 1685. The 4th. ditto we went
according to the Course of our Duties, to unlade the Ship the Bengal Merchant
(the Marine Treaty between his most Serene Majesty of Great Britain, and the
High and Mighty Lords the States General of the United Netherlands, nothing
hindering, but altogether allowing.) In Order to which, we sent off two of the
Country Boats which we had hired and taken into our service, for the same
purpose; with Orders to go on board the said Ship, to bring on shore what of
the said Companies goods should be put on board them. In their way the first
Boat was stopped and carried away by order and appointment of Rehnier Casembroot
Commissary for affairs of the Illustrious Company of Holland (which the second
Boat perceiving returned again to the shore;) notwithstanding they had goods on
board them of the said right Honorable English East-India-Companies, ordered
and appointed to be delivered on board the said Ship the Bengal Merchant; which
they likewise carried away in the first boat, detaining some time, and
afterward returning them on shore to us. All which appears to us, to be
utterly against the sense and meaning of the first Article of the said Marine
Treaty; and therefore a manifest breach of the Peace. We therefore in the name
and behalf of the said Right Honorable English East-India-Company, do protest
and declare against the said Rehnier Casembroot Commissary for the said
Illustrious Company of Holland, for (and lay to his charge to answer at such
times and places as the same shall be demanded according to the Rules of
Justice and Equity, and in conformity to what is provided for in such cases in
the said Marine Treaty) all damages that may arise to the Right Honorable
English East-India-Company by these their Actions: and also for all other
damages that may ensue to any of the Servants of the said Company, either in
Life, Body goods or Estate. Dated in Gombroone the 6th. of May, 1685.

Signed and Delivered in the Presence of Daniel Edwards. Francis Snape. John
Gorbold, David Shaameir Armenian.


The Dutch Admiral's Counter-Protest Dated 7/17 May, 1685. Viz.
A Counter Protestation against the unjust Complaints of Daniel Edwards, and
Francis Snape, both Resident in Persia, in the Service of the Honorable
English Company.
Sirs,
WE received last Night your Protestation, by which we understand to our great
Admiration, the Complaints which you were pleased to produce for the siezing of
a certain Persian Boat rowing amongst our Ships, which you pretend to have
hired for the unlading of your Ship the Bengall Merchant; as also accusing us
for detaining the Goods for some time which were carried in her. In answer to
which ye cannot be ignorant how that this Port and Persian Bay has been blockt
up with Eight or Nine Ships for almost a whole year: And although our Agents be
attending the Persian Court, to compose those differences: Nevertheless our Men
were Hostilely driven from the Coasts, our Flagg thrown down, and that
(according to report) the Inhabitants of the City of Gombrone threatened us,
that we should be overwhelmed here in this Port with the Persian Sea Forces:
which things Nature it self teaches us to prevent. And forasmuch as it seems
good to us to destroy all the Persian Ships, yet it never came into our
thoughts you should incur any Damage by it, as you your selves very well know
it was not done in the unlading, or lading of the Ship Williamson, who came and
went, although laden with Persian Goods. But on the contrary, we offered
Yesterday to your Interpreter David (when the aforesaid Persian Boat was seized
on sailing amongst our Fleet) our Long-boats for your Service to unlade your
Ship; and for that very reason we were no hindrance at all in the least to your
Affairs: And that our Ships might be rendered secure from the imminent dangers
of our roving Enemies, who affirmed they sailed under your Name, and by your
Order. But you seem to incline rather to accuse us very unjustly, that we had
seized on your Goods being two Chests of Rose Water; rather than to accept of
our kindness in offering our Long-boats. The aforesaid Interpreter David took
along with him, those two little Chests with the same Boat which brought him
from the Shore, whilst that sloop was carried down to our Ship. And seeing the
Case is thus, you seem to darken the truth of things by patcht-up Fictions and
forged Tales. This your so ill-grounded and strange Accusations, does not at
all concern us, seeing that even from the beginning of this Expedition we have
patiently borne all those Calumnies by which we have been aspersed for some
time, by some of your Nation, amongst the Persians: And loseing Ground here in
our Affairs, especially by your promises to them, That you with Six Ships will
drive us from this Port and Castle of Kisim. Concerning the which we can
produce sufficient proofs; and withal manifest we gave you not the least Cause,
But all things were carried on with such apparent loss to our Company. And
moreover you did intend also to force us to suffer the Boats of our Enemies to
pass and repass us safely: Therefore we protest in the Name of the Dutch
East India Company, That we will be Innocent of all such Damages, Wounds,
Slaughters, Losses, and other Inconveniences which may arise from one Cause or
other.

Dated from the Ship Blew Hulke, at the Siege of the Port of the City of
Gombroon 17 th May S. N. 1685. Your Most Affectionate Friends, We the
underwritten do affirm that the foregoing Protestation was Delivered Rehnier
Casembroot. W. Lycochthon. Jacob Van Askerdyck. Wr. V. Bullestraete. Claas
Meynderw. S. Visnigh.


The Protest of Captain John Goldsborough against the Dutch Admiral, Dated June
the 1st. 1685.
WHereas there is a Treaty Marine between our Most Gracious Sovereign Lord the
Most Serene and Mighty Prince CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. and the
High and Mighty Lords the States General of the United Netherlands, to be
observed through all and every the Countries and parts of the World by Sea and
Land; concluded at London the First day of December 1674. In which Treaty there
is Liberty for the Subjects of the King of England to trade freely to any Ports
and Places in the World, without hindrance or molestation; although the said
High and Mighty Lords the States General or any of their Subjects be in actual
Hostility and War with such Ports and Places.

Now these presents show, that the Ship Bengall Merchant, John Goldsborough
Commander, in the Service of the Honorable the Governor and Company of
Merchants in London trading to the East Indies, arrived in Gombroone Road in
the Gulf of Persia, and in the Dominions of that King, the First day of May
1685, where were Six Ships belonging to the Dutch United Netherlands East India
Company, riding before the Town of Gombroone, Commanded in chief by Rehnier
Casembroot as Admiral; who pretended to be at Wars with the Persians, and
victoriously then rode in Triumph in the midst of a few Trankeys or Persian
Boats which he had seized.

On Sunday the Third of May, the said Admiral sent me word aboard our Ship
Bengall Merchant, and the same in Writing he sent ashore unto the Honorable
English East India Companyes Factors in Gombrone, That they being now at Wars
with the Persians would not suffer any of the Persian Boats to help unlade our
Ship: To which I answered, That the next Morning Boats were appointed to come
off, to begin to unlade us; and that in each of them there would be an English
Man, whereby the Admiral or his People might know that they were Boats employed
in the English Service; and I desired they would give us no hindrance or
molestation in our business.

Our Factors from the Shore sent off one to the said Admiral and his Council,
whom he found resolved to stop all Persian Boats from coming off to us.

On the Fourth of May Six Boats were provided by our Factors for the unlading
our Ship, of the Honorable English East India Companyes Goods; and in each of
the Boats an English Man: The First Boat that came off, the Dutch sent their
Boat from the Admiral's Ship, and seized and carried her aboard of the Admiral,
with one of our Men, (named Thomas Morley) in her and several Goods in her,
ordered by our Companies Factors to be put on board of our Ship. The rest of
the Six Boats seeing the First Boat taken, returned ashore, and those of them
that were not put from shore, remained there; and so we could get none off.
This Action of the Admiral and his Council, was committed by them whilst
Senior David was aboard with them (he being Linguist unto the Honorable
English East India Companies Factors in this place) and sent by them with a
Letter to inform the Admiral and his Council, That these Boats (whereof he had
taken one,) were employed in the English Service, and by the Treaty Marine
ought not to be hindered. The Goods that were Laden in the Persian Boat for our
Ship, the Dutch took out, and put into our Boat by force; she being there
waiting upon the Linguist Seniour David; who seeing the Admiral and his
Councils Resolution, told them, that we would buy Boats and make them our own:
Some of them replied, if we did they would stop them. Upon this I was forced,
with our own Boats and Men, to carry a great deal of the Companies Goods ashore
to lighten our Ship, to the great Hazard and Damage of the said Goods, and of
the Lives and Healths of our Men, in this Extreme hot Place and Season.

On the Ninth of May having somewhat lightened our Ship, we removed her in
toward the Shore, that we might in some measure, be able from her to relieve
all such Boats as came off to us, from the Insolent Violence of the said
Admiral and his Council, etc. And in striving to lay her conveniently near, for
that purpose, we grounded several Tides toward low Water, to the great hazard
of our Ship and Cargoe; being forced thereunto by the Insolence of the Admiral,
etc. to our Boats whilst our Ship lay farther off.

The Honorable English East India Companies Factors having been forced to buy
Three Boats in Gombroone, on the Twelfth and Thirteenth of May, because the
Dutch had threatened to take them away; we were forced to go ashore with our
Ships Boats, and Forty or Fifty armed Men in them, and guard these Three Boats
off to our Ship; and every time afterward, when these Boats were to come off,
we were forced to send our Boat to wait upon them, or else they would not come:
Which so sending our Boats and Men to and again, was more hindrance and loss of
time to us than if we had done the Work without them.

On the Seventeenth of May we having put out what Goods we could, until we had
ballast, for want of the Persian Boats to bring it to us, as accustomary in
this place; we were forced with our Ship and three Boats that were bought, to
sail from hence to the Island Ormuzz, and there with great trouble and
difficulty, to take in Ballast such as we could pick up. In doing which Seven
Days were spent before we could obtain this Road again, which need not to have
been if we had not been hindered or molested by the Admiral, etc. as aforesaid;
for it is evident that whilst we were putting out our Goods, we might have had
Ballast brought to us daily as we wanted it.

Now considering the great loss of time by us sustained, through the hindrance
and molestation given us by you Rehnier Casembroot Admiral, etc. Council as
aforesaid, whom I find to be men of such exact Dutch Principles that you are
bound by no League or Treaty farther than it suits with your present Interest,
particularly not by the Treaty Marine: Therefore I should think my self remiss
in Duty to my King and Country, and to all my Imployers, If I should let these
things pass in silence, without declaring against them and protesting the same.

And I do by these Presents (in the behalf of my Masters and Imployers the
Honorable the Governor and Company of Merchants in London trading to the
East Indies aforesaid, and their Successors; and in the behalf of the Owners of
our Ship the Bengall Merchant, and in the behalf of my Self, Officers and Ships
Company; and of all other Persons whatsoever that any way are or hereafter may
be concerned in this our Ship or Cargo, during her being out of England, until
her next return thither,) make this Protest against you Rehnier Casembroot
Admiral and Commander in Chief of the Dutch United Netherlands East India
Companies Fleet aforesaid, and against all your Council, and against all the
Commanders, Officers, Seamen and Soldiers, or any other Persons any ways
acting under you, and declare you all jointly and severally your Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators liable to make full satisfaction unto the
Honorable the Governor and Company of Merchants in London Trading to the
East Indies and to their Successors, and to all and every other Person that
either now is, or hereafter may be any ways concerned in this our Ship Bengall
Merchant or her Cargoe, during her being from England upon this present Voyage,
until her next return thither, and discharged from the same; for all such
Damages and Losses, causes of Sickness, Loss of Life, or Lives, or any other
Damages or Losses whatsoever, which has, may, or shall arise unto us or any
of us by this your Hindrance, Let and Molestation given to us in our Trade as
aforesaid, without any manner of Occasion or Aggravation given by me or any
under me, in any wise whatsoever; but is wholly contrary to the First Article
of the Treaty Marine before cited, and of the whole Body of the said Treaty.

And in particular, I likewise farther Protest (in the behalf of all Persons
concerned aforesaid) against you Captain of the Ship Blew Hulke, (and if I am
not misinformed named George Clareboat or some such Name) Captain under the
aforesaid Admiral, for sending Boat and Men from your Ship the Fourth day of
May, 1685 as aforesaid, and seizing the First Boat that was coming off to our
Ship (with Thomas Morley one of our Men in her) and likewise Goods in her to be
brought aboard our Ship Bengall Merchant as aforesaid, and thereby hindering
other Boats coming off to our Ship to help us unlade; and so has given us much
hindrance and molestation in our Trade, Time, and Reputation with the Natives,
contray to the said Treaty Marine, and the First and Ninth Articles of the
same, and against the whole Body of the said Treaty; you being in the said
Ninth Article particularly commanded and required to do no such thing: Nor will
your saying that you did it by Order of Rehnier Casembroot your Admiral, excuse
you from Imputation of breach of the said Ninth Article of the Treaty Marine,
nor from being accountable unto the satisfactory part thereof as far as you are
able; nor from the penal part thereof, as expressed in the said Article. In
Witness whereunto I have set my Hand and Seal aboard the Ship Bengall Merchant,
riding in Gombroone Road the First day of June, 1685.

Published and Delivered in the Presence of us John Goldsborough. Locus Sigilli
Edward Kent. Richard Cowley. Matthew Empson.


The Dutch Admirals Counter-Protest against Captain John Goldsborough Dated the
9th. June 1685. Viz.
A Counter-Protest against John Goldsborough Commander of the Ship Bengall
Merchant.
YOUR Protest was delivered to us the First day of June, according to your
Account, by those whose business it was: And after we had perused the same, we
found many things declared in it which indeed were otherwise than you took to
be, or then was correspondent to truth. Therefore we think it needless to
answer any thing more to them than what was done by our Address the Thirteenth
and Fourteenth of May, (according to our Account) to the English residing here,
Mr. Daniel Edwards and Mr. Francis Snape; (the Example or Copy of which you
have joined to this) wherein the true Constitution of the Matter is fully
contained: Therefore we refer our selves to the same. Yet we declare our selves
guiltless in as much as in your drawing near to the shore, your Ship struck
ground so often; for that is not to be imputed to us, but to your imprudence.
Moreover we never hindered or forbid the Boats to come and bring you Ballast;
therefore that is to be imputed to the Persians: And the loss of your time
(through which for that Reason you suppose your selves hindered) is not to be
ascribed to us but to them: And we declare that we are Men of no such ill
Qualifications as you are pleased to say us to be; but that the same ought
rather to be ascribed to you, as it sufficiently appears from your unjust
Protest: And therefore we do not esteem it a matter of so great moment (that if
any Dispute should arise betwixt your and our Company concerning this thing)
but that we are able (in as much as Equity and Truth is on our side) to defend
our selves. Therefore we Declare (or Protest) in the Name of the Renowned
Hollanders East India Company against you John Goldsborough Commander of the
Ship Bengall Merchant, and against all others whatsoever whom it shall concern,
that we are innocent; Nor are we obliged to render Compensation for all those
things charged against us in your so ill-grounded Protestation.

Dated in the Ship Blew Hulk at the Siege of the Port of the City Gombroon 19th
Junij S. N. 1685. And Delivered in our Presence. Rehnier Casembroot. Wr. V.
Bullestraete. Andrea Van Linden. Jacob Sluyts.


The Extract of a Letter from Captain John Goldsborough, to the Honorable
English East India Company. Dated in Gombroone the 10th. of June, 1685. (Viz.)
To the Honorable the Governor and Company of Merchants in London, Trading to
East India.
May it please your Honors,
HErewith is enclosed a Protest made by me against the Dutch Admiral Rehnier
Casembroot, etc. and a Latin Translation made of it at his request, (because he
could not understand it in English.) In the Protest you will see how they
hindered us from the help of the Persian Boats. And in regard these their
actions fell only upon me, and not before nor since; I think it my Duty to give
your Honors as brief an Account of the reason thereof as I can. It seems about
two Months before we came hither, the Persian Kawn, or Governor of these
parts, and the Dutch Admiral, had agreed that the Persians should deliver to
the Dutch the use of their Factory; and Casembroot was by the same agreement to
come and dwell in it himself: But the Dutch pretended from time to time, that
when they had made the Factory clean and fit, then the Admiral would come
ashore to it; and therefore they had the use of what was in it; and bought
Provisions freely for their Ships: But about three days before we came thither,
the Kawn seeing himself deluded by them, set a great guard about their Factory,
turned the Dutch out of it, and sent them all off the shore. Upon this the
Dutch thought themselves highly affronted; therefore they siezed all the
Persian Trankeys or Boats they could catch. And further, to show the Persians
that they could stop all Trade, and ours as well as others, they resolved to
suffer no Boats to come off to us; giving out (as I have heard say) that it was
upon Courtesy that they suffered us to Trade, and no body else; and hereby
thinking to bring the Persians sooner to their beck, and lessen us in the
esteem of these people. Whilst I was gone in our Ship to Ormuze for Ballast,
the Dutch and Persians made a new accord thus; That the Dutch should release
all the Trankeys, and then have free leave to come ashore with Boats and Men,
and buy provisions for their Ships as they did formerly; but the Factory was
still guarded, and they not suffered to go into it. And thus it now stands
between them, and is the real occasion of their hindering us as they did.

Now if ever the Dutch make a strict War with these people, your Honors may by
this little occasion, see how they will deal with your Ships, if they are
strong enough; notwithstanding the Treaty Marine; for (as I have told them in
the Protest) they keep no Leagues where they suit not with their present
interest.

Signed John Goldsborough.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the Writing this Letter, I have Received an Answer of the Protest from
the Dutch Admiral, and herewith sent you a Latin Copy thereof, and the
Translation of it into English: In which Answer he refers to what past between
your Factors here and himself; the Copies whereof Mr. Daniel Edwards assures me
he does now send you; therefore I have omitted doing it. Your Honors will be
better able to judge of the Weakness of this Answer than my self.

John Goldsborough.


This Argument That there can be no peace between the Dutch and their European
Neighbors in India, if they may obstruct their Neighbors Trade upon the
Reality or Pretense of a War with any of the Natives, (as they did at Persia)
will appear the stronger, If it be considered how easy and frequent a thing it
is with the Dutch in India, to pretend a War upon any frivolous Occasion; or to
make an Occasion of War where they want a Realone, by entering into an Alliance
with some Petty Prince on the Coast of Malabar, or the West Coast of Sumatra;
or among some of the Islands which naturally afford Spice or Pepper; and engage
that Prince to quarrel with his Neighbor Prince where the English have a
Factory, and make themselves presently Parties in the Quarrel: Thus they did
upon the Celebes between the Buggesses and Macassars; In which Quarrel joining
their small Forces to Rajah Balacca's King of the Buggesses and the King of
Buttoon's Forces, they overcame the Macassars, and then obliged them never to
suffer the English or any other Europeans to Trade more in their Countries: and
if they could do this upon so considerable a King as the King of Macassar then
was, how much more easily may they do it among those little Princes on the
Coast of Mallabar, or upon the West Coast of Sumatra, where the gift of Five or
Six Barrels of Powder, and as many Cases of Brandy, will do the Feat.

It may be said, they did but Threaten, they did not Obstruct the English Trade
at Persia: To which we answer,

First, They did really Obstruct the Ship Bengall, as before appears, to the
affronting of our King and Nation in sight of the Persians; in which they
always took a peculiar Pride in India.

Secondly, They did exceedingly hazard that Ships whole Voyage, and were the
Occasion of the Deaths of many Seamen on board that Ship, by the Excessive Toil
and Labor they injuriously forced them to in that Extreme Heat, for want of
Boats.

Thirdly, In probability, They had proceeded to further Acts of Hostility, but
that they heard of many more English Ships coming into the Gulf, upon their
necessary Occasions; which together would have made up a Force more than double
that of the Dutch Fleet in Gombroone Road.

To let the World see how little the States General would suffer their Subjects
in Europe to be treated after that manner, as the Dutch Company would treat
their Peaceable Neighbors in India; Let it be remembered, That when the
Spaniards formerly blocked up Lixboa, although the Spaniards had then a Land
Army in Portugal, yet did not the States send a Fleet thither, not only to
Force their Trade; but also to take those Spanish Men of War that attempted to
hinder it.

And when the King of Sweden lay before Dantzick with a Fleet of Men of War,
and had also at the same time Land Forces in those Parts, yet did not the
States send a Fleet from Holland, and by force open their Trade there? (as
justly they might do.)

Now we say, and we appeal to all European Nations, whether we argue rightly or
not: That what is unjust in Europe, is unjust in India and all the World over:
And on the contrary, what is just in Europe is Universally so. And that Action
of the Dutch Companies at Persia, is so much the more unjust, in regard it was
contrary not only to Natural Right, and the General Articles of Peace between
the two Nations; but expressly against that Article in the Treaty Marine of 1674
provided purposely to prevent injuries of that kind, as is well observed by
Captain Goldsborough in his Protest before mentioned.

To proceed, the English have now a War with the Great Mogull, and a superior
force of Shipping and Soldiers (by reason of that War) than the Dutch have on
that Coast in the common Course of their Trade. What then? Do the English
endeavor to hinder the Dutch Ships from Loading or Unloading in Surrat River,
or Swally Harbor, or from the use of the Natives Boats? No, all Nations know
they do not, nor ever did attempt to offer such injury to any Christian Nation
in Amity with them. But the Dutch Advocate peradventure (according to the
Liberty Men of that profession take) will say the English durst not do it,
because the Dutch were stronger than they on that Coast: which if it were true,
as it was not, would argue nothing to the prejudice of the English; because all
Christians in India will avouch, the English never offered injury in such a
case to French, Danes, or Portuguez, or other Friendly Nations, which are
confessedly weaker than the English are in India.

But that the Dutch are Universally so injurious to the English, in other
places as they were at Persia; and much more where they have the least hopes of
putting the English by the Trade of any Pepper Port, will manifestly appear by
what they did on the Coast of Malabar; For which we shall (according to our
avowed Truth, and impartial Management of this Controversy) produce true
Copies of the Original Papers, viz.

The Extract of a Letter from Callicut Dated the Fifth of May 1684, Signed by
Mr. Thomas Michell, Mr. Joan B^r^iston, and Mr. Daniel Ackworth, Agent and
Council for the Honorable English East India Companies Affairs there.
YOUR Honors of the Fourth of May by the Scipio, Arrived the Third November,
and accordingly complied with your Honors Commands, in taking the good and
wholesome Advice of Mr. Charles Zinzan; which at that juncture of time, was
very acceptable to us by reason of the great Disputes we then had with the
Dutch, about Shipping off Pepper, at Tanor, Penany, and Chittuah; the two
latter places they had for some time before blocked up with several Hoves and
other nimble Boats, which rowed to and fro, impeding the Natives (so well as
us) from Shipping off any Goods at the forementioned places; nor do believe we
had been able to have gotten the Pepper from Penany, had not the Scipio touched
there; Yet for all that the Dutch hindered us to their Powers, by underhand
dealings with the Third Rajah, etc. by Bribes; which so far prevailed, that we
could not get leave to ship off any Goods, until Mr. Thomas Mitchel went and
made our grievances known to the Samorine and Second Rajah, telling them of the
ill consequence which usually followed, if they suffered the Dutch to block up
their Ports in this Nature; and that we came only as Merchants to trade in
their Country, and not to dispossess Princes as the Dutch did; (which the King
of Cochin has woeful experience of, being no better than their Slave) With
these and many other Arguments did at last so much prevail with the Samorine,
as he gave us an Order to Ship on Board what Pepper we had in readiness; but
withal desired us, not to carry the Ship to Chittuah; for, what Goods we had
there, he would take care of; and when we were gone, would contrive means
whereby to carry it to Callicut. Upon which condition, with the advice of Mr.
Zinzan, brought the Ship to Callicut; where and at Tellichery, completed here is
and Successe's loading therewith; having taken out of the former one Chest
Treasure only, and of the latter one Chest Treasure, and Fifty Piggs of Lead,
which we advised the Honorable President, etc. Soon after this the Samorine
complied with his promise, by giving us Opportunity of bringing our Goods from
Chittuah by sending for the Dutch which lay at the Rivers Mouth to Penany,
pretending earnest business, and how desirous he was of keeping a fair
Correspondence with them. Upon which they all came ashore, thinking to have
completed their designs at once. But the Samorine soon put a Guard over them,
pretending that they might not by any means go on Board before he had spoken
with them; and so put them off for several days. In the mean time we sent our
Boats, (which lay ready for that purpose) and brought away all our Pepper and
Cassia Lignum we had ready. When the Samorine heard that we had completed our
business, he sent to the Dutch and told them, that they might now go about
their's; which they did without any audience from him. At the which the Dutch
were highly affronted, and immediately withdrew their Factory from thence; and
now give out, that they intend to declare Wars against the Samorine; who lies
ready with a considerable force to receive them, what the event of it will be,
God knows.


Extract of another Letter from Daniel Ackworth at Tellicherry. Dated the 9th.
of December, 1683.
THE Dutch being now Masters of Bantam, doubtless will be a great impediment to
the Honorable Companies investments here upon the Mallabar Coast; they not
sticking to give out, that it shall cost them a fall if they are not also
Masters of all this Coast. For, setting aside Callicut and Tanor, (two places
where the Honorable Company have Factories) all the Coast along to the
Southward of these two forementioned places, they tell us it belongs to them,
(though it be no such thing) and that for the future if we make any Contract
with the Merchants to the Southward for Pepper or Cassia Lignum; that after
such time as we have bought and paid for Ditto goods, that we shall not bring
them away. Now it is most certain they will not stick to do it, by what they
have done this year; for at a place called Chittoa which is about Twelve
Leagues to the Southward of Callicut, we had bought One hundred Tons of Pepper,
besides a considerable quantity of Cassia Lignum, on the Honorable Companies
Account: And by reason the Samorine was not willing we should carry one of our
Ships to the forementioned place to take in Ditto Goods, we sent down several
small Vessels to Chittoa, to bring the goods from thence. Now the first small
Vessel which was sent on Ditto Account, belonged to one Mr. Cracroft and my
self: Now after such time as they had Laden on board her what Pepper and Cassia
Lignum, she could conveniently carry of the Honorable Companies; after they
had weighed Anchor and were coming out of Chittoa River, there lying three
Dutch Vessels at the Rivers mouth, they haled her and asked who she belonged
to? Mr. Cracroft (one of the Honorable Companies Factors) being in the Vessel,
made answer and told them, she belonged to the English, and that she was laden
with the Honorable Companies goods: the Dutch made answer and told Mr.
Cracroft, that they had an Order from the governor of Cochin not to let any
Vessel pass that was laden with Pepper and Cassia Lignum; and if they offered
to come out of the River that they would take her. With this (the Dutch having
three Vessels to their one) they were forced to put into the River again and
unlade her; though according to the Articles of Peace, they ought not to molest
nor hinder the Honorable Company in their Trading here in India; yet for all
this (provided they can advance their own interest) they neither value the
breaking of the peace, nor what damage they do to the Honorable Company.
There was after this, another small Vessel, which was laden from the
aforementioned Port of Chittoa with Pepper and Cassia Lignum of the Honorable
Companies; and after such time as they had brought her out of the River, the
Dutch who lay with their three Vessels some small distance from the Rivers
mouth, fired near two hundred Guns and Muskets at her, it being a wonder that
they did not sink her; which if they had, would have been a considerable loss
to the Honorable Company. After this manner do the Dutch abuse and affront the
Honorable Company; which if they do not seek some remedy to prevent their base
and Traitorous designs, the Dutch will serve them such a trick as they did at
Bantam; and by degrees root them totally from that little footing they have on
this Coast; and then they have accomplished their designs. They are going to
make War with the King of this Country; for which reason (by relation) they
have sent for more men from Batavia; and all is because he suffers the English
to buy Pepper in his Country. The Dutch are also resolved, if not by fair
means, then by force to build a Factory in Chittoa: which if they effect, the
Honorable Company may in a manner bid a farewell to their Pepper and Cassia
Lignum Trade on the Mallabar Coast, it being the chief place we have to the
Southward of Callicut, to buy Pepper at; which if once lost, shall not be able
to procure any quantity of Pepper or Cassia Lignum on this Coast. The Dutch are
resolved to have a Factory here in Callicut; which if they effect, there is no
doubt but they will one way or other worm the English out hence also, there
being no trust to be put in these Mallabar Princes, unless the Honorable
Company had some kind of force in these parts, that they might stand somewhat
in awe of us as they do of the Dutch. It was our hopes that we who are the
Honorable Companies Servants on this Coast, did run the hazard of our Lives by
Sea only by running amongst these Mallabar Pirates, when we are forced to Sail
in small Vessels from place to place on our Honorable Masters business: But
now the Dutch are grown so insolent, that we are (in a manner) in as great if
not greater, danger of our lives when we meet with the Dutch at Sea, (which in
a manner are rather worse then Pirates to us, because we have peace with them)
than these Mallabar Pirates are; as plainly appears by a passage which happened
some few days past: For one of the Honorable Companies Factors was sent down
to the abovementioned place Chittoa, for to bring up the Honorable Companies
Pepper and Cassia Lignum; from whence he was bringing four small Vessels laden
with ditto goods: Now who should encounter him but one of the Dutch Vessels? He
being the first of the four which came up with him: So the Dutch seeing it was
an English man, and knowing him to be one of the Honorable Companies Servants;
yet for all this, called to him and bid him come on board; but he not giving
ear to what they said, because he had the Honorable Companies goods aboard,
and did not know but they would have stopped him, had he adhered to them;
therefore he made the best of his way. The Dutch seeing that, fired at least
Thirty Muskets at him, and had certainly killed him had he not clapped himself
down betwixt some of the Bales of Pepper, having no Arms to resist them. Thus
under the pretense of Peace not only the Companies Servants who live in these
parts, but the Honorable Company themselves are greatly abused and affronted
in being impeded by the perfidious dealings of the Dutch, contrary to the
Articles of Peace made betwixt His Majesty and them. It being specified in the
said Articles that the Honorable Company may Trade in any place whatsoever
here in the East Indies, without being molested.

Signed, Daniel Ackworth.
Dated at Tellecherry, the 9th. of December. 1683.

Note, That these Hostilities are still continued by the Dutch on the Mallabar
Coast; and all since the surprise of Bantam; and by our last Letters from India
we have advice, they are at other places upon the same Coast, in constant
pursuit of the great design of engrossing the Pepper Trade by the same means.
Of the truth whereof we could produce many more manifest Evidences, but that
they would swell this Reply unto too great a Volume.

Upon the Coast of Choromandel the English Company have a Sovereign Regency
under His Majesty, over a great City and a strong Fort and Garrison, with above
Two Hundred Guns mounted: Notwithstanding which as soon as the Dutch Company
had taken Metchlepatam (an open Town upon the same Coast;) they did
immediately, with insufferable insolence, forbid the English the Trade of that
place, on purpose to lay the English low in the Eyes of the Natives, according
to their usual Treatment. The particulars of this appears by the following
Transcripts from the Originals, Viz.

A Letter sent by the Dutch Governor and Council of Palliacatt, To the English
Governor and Council of Fort St. George, bearing Date the ^th. of August, 1686.
To the Honorable William Gyfford President, Governor of the Honorable
English East-India-Company, Residing in the Castle of St. George at Madrasse,
as also the Council.
Honorable Sir and good Friends,
IT cannot be unknown to your Honors, how our Honorable Netherlands
East-India-Company, for some years on this Coast of Choromandel, by the great
Ministers of State and other lesser Governors and Servants of the Gulcondah
Crown Bearer, as well in the Low Lands of the North from Orixa to Metchlepatam,
as also in the Lands of Carnatica, are Abused and Affronted in many unspeakable
manners, which we principally regard; the often unjust besieging the City of
Pollicatt by the Seeur Lascar Lingapah; the stopping of the Cloth Trade in
Carnatica, the shameful Robberies committed at Sadrassapatam in the said Kings
Territories, also in Pondeand and Barwa in the Dominion of Orixa; and
especially a year last past, the greatest Force on the Companies only great
Merchant Sermin Codenda committed by Pandiet Akkana, who has unjustly seized
the said Merchant and put him in prison. Whereupon our President with the
aforesaid Akkana as also the great Pandiet Madana his Brother, have used all
means even with Protest, to get the said Merchants out of their hands because
the said Merchants are indebted to the Company above One Hundred Sixty Eight
Thousand Pagodaes, which was not only insignificant, but also of so little
consideration, that the said Pandiet Akkana thereupon (in the sight of the
King) has forbidden the whole Trade of the Companies Northern Factories; with
charges to his under Governors to deprive the Honorable Companies Servants
(in all places and all Factories) of any manner of Livelihood, and that all
Weavers and other Workmen should be commanded not to deliver what they had in
their hands of our Merchants. All which proceedings with other of less import,
as the stopping the Baligatts by the lesser Governor to force the Honorable
Companies presents from them; as also their threatenings on several occasions,
which because we would not be too tedious we will pass by: All which is
unsufferable, and against the Law of Nations and the Honorable Companies dear
bought and against the Kings own Phirmaunds, by which the Honorable Company
besides the aforesaid Robberies, Force, and Affronts have suffered by the
aforesaid Merchants Chodenda who is Bankrupt, the loss of One Hundred Fifty
Nine Thousand Pagodaes, not reckoning the damage in the stopping of Trade:
whereupon the Right Honorable Governor General and the Honorable Council of
India, cannot swallow such unreasonable overgrown injuries and have been forced
to resolve the better to come by our right, in recompense of our great loss and
for the injuries and affronts done us, to take in possession (by the forces now
sent us) the City Metchlepatam; and by this means to bring the King and his
Counselors the sooner to make due satisfaction. But before this undertaking,
the High Honorable the honorable Governor General and the Honorable Council
of India have sent their chosen Governor and Honorable Commissioner Lawrence
Pitts to the King of Gulcondah, to make known in all Friendship, the Companies
just demands: who notwithstanding all Remonstrances and endeavors, could get
no satisfaction; but after the loss of much time has been forced to go away
without effecting any thing: Which resolution aforesaid of the High Honorable
to take in possession the City of Metchlapatam, is put in execution, and by
Gods blessing and the Companies Arms, so effected that we now for our Company
this 26th. of July are Masters of the aforesaid City of Metchlepatam; wherein
according to our Orders and to the maintaining our Friendships, we shall not
incommode or hinder your Honors to imbarque in your Ship from your Factory at
Metchlepatam, what goods you have ready by you as you have occasion, and to
disimbarque all your Provisions and Merchandise which are brought by your Ships
to Metchlepatam, and lay them up in your Factory; but not to carry them without
the City to dispose of them to any Merchants or Subjects of the King of
Gulcondah, so long as our Company has not satisfaction from the King, and keep
possession of the Town; which is done the sooner to bring the King to due
Compliance, as we have said more at large; and therefore it is thought
convenient by the High Honorable, the Honorable Governor General and Council
of India, that your Honors may suffer no damage by these proceedings, that
what goods you have bargained for and are yet in the Country, should be
brought to your Factory at Metchlepatam within Six or at the utmost Eight Weeks
from the time of our taking possession of the Town; In which time what your
Honors have to be brought in, it is convenient to acquaint us with, that we
may give Orders accordingly.

The Bearer hereof is the Keeper of our Chamber, from whom be pleased to
receive it, taking notice that it is for the interest of you Honorable Company
and is represented with all Friendship from them who after Friendly
Salutations, remain

Your Honors Ready Friends and Servants, John Pitts. Joannes Huysman. Rehnier
Jacobson.

Tall, ^ August, 1686.

The English Governor and Council at Fort St. George, Their answer to the
foregoing Letter.
To the Honorable Jacob Jorreson Pitts, Commissary and Governor of Palliacat,
etc. Council for the Affairs of the Right Honorable Netherlands East India
Company.
Honorable Sirs, etc.
WE have Received a large Declaration from your Honors, Dated the 3/13th. of
August, 1686. of the State and pretended grounds of the quarrel between His
Majesty the King of Gulcondah, and the Right Honorable Netherlands
East-India-Company: and you have also acquainted us, that you have taken into
your possession his Port of Metchlepatam: And because we are strangers to the
particular Causes of this War, we can say nothing to it, but must in part
believe your Honors report; yet we are not ignorant of your farther design
therein, and we wish it may not be one of your designs to overthrow our Right
Honoura-Companies Trade there, as has been practiced already too much,
particularly at Bantam, and since at Sumatra (for which you are still
accomptable:) for we have ever observed that in all your Contracts with the
Kings and Princes of these Countries (after a forced Compliance) you endeavor
to exclude us Trade in their Ports: which general design your Honors may be
well assured is now discovered and much resented in Europe; and thanks be to
God we have a King that will not put up such dishonours and injuries to our
Nation; and we must tell you, that it is too great for you to appoint us what we
have to do inreference to our Trade at Metchlepatam (though you have possession
thereof) and to restrain us therein; for we know of no obligation to observe
such directions, the house and ground of our Factory being our Right Honorable
Companies inheritance, bought with their money: As also our Concerns to a
considerable amount and therefore you had best act with discretion and justice;
for we must take notice of your proceedings in any thing to our prejudice, and
advise thereof to His Royal Majesty of Great Britain; who undoubtedly will take
due satisfaction. In the mean time we shall endeavor to follow our Trade, and
we shall not want them that are appointed to give us an account of the least
obstruction therein; which we advise you not to do, because of the ill
consequences that may be to your own interest: for we would in all things
preserve a good Friendship with you; provided it is not to the dishonor and
prejudice of our King, Country and Company.

We send these by Captain James Lesly with order to deliver it to your Honors,
desiring it may be Freindly Received, as our answer to your aforesaid
Declaration, and so we remain,

Your Honors Friends and Servants, William Gyfford. Elihu Yate, etc.

1686.

The Time they did this was while the King of Gulcondah (in whose Dominions
Metchlepatam is) was engaged in a dangerous War with the Great Mogul, and they
took that Advantage to fall out with him; and after they had got from him the
value of about Sixty Thousand Pound Sterling, with enlargement of their
Privileges at Pollicatt, they quitted the place, having no further use of it.
And indeed the English Company at the time they presented the aforesaid
Transcript, humbly acquainted His Majesty with their Opinion, that the Dutch
would not hold that place, it being not worth their Charge to defend it, having
Pollicat so near that would do their business as well. But that which the
English complain of, is the insolent injury of commanding them from their own
Possession, which they had enjoyed about Eighty Years; which is the very same
thing they did at Bantam; but intending to keep that place for ever (as they
did not Metchlepetam) they used the Name of the Young King in the former Case,
that it might look like his Act and not theirs. And whether the Dutch did well
in that, or the English had cause to complain, We would have any honest
peaceable Dutchman tell us, after we have asked them, How they would like it?
If the French now they have (as is supposed) command of the Forts at Syam,
should forbid them to Trade to the House they have built there; Or, How they
would have liked it, if our Soldiers after they had surprised the Fort at
Hughly in Bengall, should have forbid them Trading any more at their own House
in Hughly, or from bringing any Goods thither after Six or Eight Weeks, as they
did the English at Metchlepatam? The Dutch Company talk much of Natural Right
and Equity, but there is one short Rule if they would observe it, would soon
end all our differences, That is, Of doing as they would be done unto. But
that, the English Company affirm, they never did yet to them; which they may
have time to repent when they find the same measure meted to themselves.

As to the Case of Batam Capass (which is a most Egregious Case as the Reader
will observe hereafter;) The Dutch Company would extenuate the Hostilities
executed upon the English there, in so contemptuous a manner by pretending a
Title to all the Trade of the West Coast of Sumatra, by virtue of private
Contracts made with the respective Sovereign Kings or Rajahs, for all the Gold
and Pepper within their Respective Dominions: An old Claim which they long
since made as well in the time of Cromwell's Usurpation, as since His late
Majesty's Happy Restoration; but with how little Justice the Reader may partly
observe by Doctor Turner, and Sir William Thomson's Certificate, Two of the
Arbitrators that determined the Differences between the two Companies at
concluding the peace that was made between the two Nations in the aforesaid
Usurpers time; a true Copy whereof follows.

We whose Names are subscribed, being with others chosen in the Year 1654, by
the English East India Company to join with the Arbitrators chosen by the Dutch
East India Company, to end all matters in difference between the said
Companies, Do certify, That the English East India Company did Demand of the
Dutch East India Company satisfaction for a quantity of Pepper taken out of the
Ship Endymion, by the Dutch East India Company at Padognae on the West Coast of
Sumatra in the Year 1649. And that the said Arbitrators on behalf of the Dutch
Company did declare, that it was one of the clearest Demands that the English
had against the Dutch Company; And that in the Eighty Five Thousand Pound
awarded by us and the other Arbitrators, to be paid by the Dutch Company unto
the English, It was (amongst other things) for satisfaction for the Pepper
taken out of the said Ship Endymion, and for Damages sustained thereby.

And farther, That the Arbitrators on behalf of the Dutch Company did then
propose a Clause in the Draught of the award then drawn up, for excluding the
English from Trade and Commerce on the West Coast of Sumatra for the time to
come; The which was wholly rejected by the Arbitrators for the English Company,
and was thereupon left out of the said Award; for that it was insisted upon by
the Arbitrators for the English East India Company, That they were as free to
Trade with all the Governments and Natives of India, as the Dutch; all which is
very well known to the Worthy Dutch Arbitrators that are yet alive. In
Testimony whereof we have hereunto set our Hands this 26 th of March, 1670.

William Thomson. William Turner,



Subscribed in the Presence of Robert Blackborne. Notary Public.

So much for the Fact, now for the Reasons.
I. IS it not most ridiculous that the Dutch having but Two or Three
inconsiderable Forts (as is beforementioned) should pretend to the Trade of a
vast Island, upon which it may reasonably be concluded, there are about One
Hundred Sovereign Kings, one half whereof (in probability) scarce ever spoke
with any Dutchman.

II. If they have made any such Contracts, they are of no force to the English
Company, who are no Parties to the said Contracts, whatever they may be to the
Princes themselves; but by Natural Right the English Company is always at
Liberty, when ever such Contracted Princes grow weary of the Dutch by their bad
or nonperformance with them; and if the English Company do make another
Contract, and by consent of the Sovereign Prince of the place, build a Fort in
his Dominions, where the Dutch have no occupancy; and the Dutch do after that,
hire the Mallayes to murder the English, or do destroy or rob them, or destroy
their Fort themselves: We appeal to all Nations, Whether such Acts of Hostility
are not a notorious willful breach of the Peace between the two Nations, and a
pregnant Violation of Common Right? And whether this be the true State of the
Case, let the Reader judge by the following Extract of Mr. Samuel Potts his
Letter of 23 d. September 1686. from Indrapoura, and his Protest of the 31 th.
of July. But if the Dutch had no manner of Contract for the Pepper at Batam
Capasse, How vile will it appear to all men endued with the least Tincture of
Honesty?

The Extract of Mr. Potts his Letter before mentioned.
AND as for my proceeding thither, the 16 th. July departed hence with what
Soldiers and Servants I thought convenient, to carry along with me to the
Number of Forty, with whom I went down to the Qualla of Indrapoura, where I
found Orran Caq Lillam Rajah with the Mandareenes and People of Mauduta, to the
Number of about Four Hundred, who were then going to pay their Respects to the
Manumcabbo his two Sons Ampitwan Doa Sella; and so accompanied me to Batan
Capass; and having then three Sloops in the Road, did order them to meet me,
and make the best of their way thither, for betrer carrying on of our
settlement there; My self setting forward by Land toward the Emperors Sons,
who waited our coming at Pangason; and from thence we proceeded to Batan Capass
with the Princes and Mandareenes, etc. of Banda Sapeula to the Number of above
Two Thousand: And in Five Days time arrived with me at Batan Capass, and
ordered me to settle where I thought most convenient, notwithstanding the Dutch
were come to settle there, and had pitched themselves on the other side the
River three Days before upon a small Rock, and were very busy to fence
themselves against any Enemy that should oppose them. Notwithstanding the
Emperor and Mandereenes ordered them to withdraw, declaring to them that the
Country was given by them to His Majesty the King of England, for the use of
the Honorable English East India Company, and that the Dutch never had had any
such grant from the Emperor of Mamuncabbo for their Residence there. The same
day we arrived, the Dutch sent us a Protest, the Contents whereof was to advise
us to be careful of the Mallayans, and if they did cut us off, or otherwise do
us any harm, we must not impute it to them, seeing we were good Friends and at
Peace one with another; alleging also, that we did them great injustice by
settling at Bencoolen and Indrapoura, which (as they said) was formerly given
to them. In answer to which, in two days after, I returned them another
Protest, as appears by a Copy of the same Dated the 31 st. July 1686. Next
having resolved on a place which we thought most convenient and commodious, We
first brought our Guns and Ammunition on shore, and planted them round our
House, which we found ready put up in the place; and the next day the Emperor,
his two Sons, etc. Mandareens, did hoist up His Majesty's Flag with their own
Hands, and then we all fell to work for a Pallasado our selves in, which
accordingly we did finish in few days time: The Dutch in the mean time
continually using their utmost endeavors both by Night and Day, to fortify
themselves so strong as they could; to which end they brought two Sloops into
the River, just before the place where we were settled; and in the largest Sloop
the Chief of them did most commonly reside, having on Board and on shore with
him near One Hundred and Fifty Dutchmen and Mustezees, besides Mallayans and
other Nations. In this posture of Defense we both lay almost Three Weeks; All
which time neither side did molest each other: Notwithstanding all the while
the Dutch were urgent with their Mallayans to set upon us; but seeing they
would not effect their designed ends by such persuasions as they had used,
withdrew all their Mallayans and most part of their Dutchmen, about Three
Leagues distance to the Northward; intending (as the Emperor and his People
thought) to go further into the Country, and to destroy it, and the Houses
thereof, but especially the Town of Battan Capass: To prevent the same, the
Manumcabbo and his two Sons withdrew themselves and their force from me,
excepting about Sixty or Seventy Mallayans they left to keep their Works. The
next day after the Emperor and his force had withdrew themselves, (it being
Friday the 20 th August, which is constantly their Market day) several of the
Country People having brought Provisions to sell, there being a very
considerable number together Buyers and Sellers, with others fighting of Cocks,
the Dutch took that opportunity in hopes of making a great slaughter, to
terrify the people, and to discourage them from coming near us, or to bring
any Provisions for us; they fired one of the biggest Guns they had, which was
laden with a double headed shot; but missing the mark (which I suppose they
aimed at) luckily, instead of hitting the people it struck against a Tree very
near to our Palisadoes, and there broke in two, one piece whereof was kept to
show the Emperor the other for me when I returned at Night, being gone that
day to accompany the Emperor at Battan Capass, with whom (at his request) I
left two Englishmen and a Moorman with the English Colors, whom they promised
to protect, and that nothing should be wanting to them; at which the said
Englishmen were well satisfied and continued with them. The next Morning I sent
Mr. Samuel Worley Sergeant to know the Reasons why they fired over our Factory
and at our People, and withal to tell the Chief, that I should send the piece
to His Majesty the King of England, and acquaint His Majesty how they abused
His Subjects here: The Chief not being there, told his Message to an Ensign
(that was left there as Chief until the other returned) who answered as
follows, I wonder you should take so much notice of one or two Shots; (and
pointing with his Finger to a parcel that lay near him, said he) We have a
great many more of them: And accordingly to make his Words good, the same
Afternoon Saturday the 21 th. did fire two shots more in the same Nature as the
others, by which means our Mallayans were so terrified, that the greater part
of those which were left, went away from us; and they perceiving of it that few
were left with us, the same Night by Boats and Prows brought back all their
Mallayans, etc. landed them by day light the next Morning at their own
settlement, and presently afterward embarked themselves in the said Boats
with a considerable quantity of Dutchmen along with them, carrying what force
they could make, and so landed them on our side with fireing of several great
Guns from their Sloop, beside small shot, running with all the force and fury
they could, upon those few Mallayans we had left us, who were standing by Three
small Guns without our Pallasadoes, which they fired, and so run away, the
Dutch pursuing of them for a short time, then stood and drew up all their
Mallayans together, and returning came upon us, standing at the entrance of our
Pallasadoes; at which time Mr. Mackalon their Chief called from the other side
to me, saying Mr. Potts, Mr. Potts, run away run away, or else the Mallayans
will kill you, make haste, be gone: Yet notwithstanding all his words of
terror, we were not affrighted, but only desired he would give us time; at
which instant the Dutch forced their Mallayans upon us; but they not willing to
enter, the aforesaid Ensign came in the Head of them, and rushing by us brought
in all the Mallayans with above Forty Dutchmen in the Rear, forcing them along
to enter in; which accordingly they did, and the Dutchmen followed; which were
no sooner in our Pallisadoes, but said to me and all the rest of us, if we did
offer to enter in again, we must expect to be knocked on the Head. So presently
after they all fell to plundering, as well the Dutch as the Mallayans, and any
thing that appeared somewhat of worth, was by them and their Order, carried
over the Water into their own Fortification, and delivered into the possession
of their Chief; as all of us did plainly see with our own Eyes: And I am sure,
every Englishman that was there present, will swear the same. And in the time
while they were doing this, a Dutchman went and struck His Majesty of England
His Flagg; and when it was down, the Dutch with the rest of those they
commanded, did in the presence both of them and us, and all others there, tear
them in pieces; we not being able to withstand the same, by reason of the
multitude they brought along with them; who did also carry away out of our
Fortification, all things of worth and value, into their own; making havoc of
the remainder, and afterward set fire to the Houses belonging to us: And after
all these abuses had happened, the aforesaid Ensign with others, by Order of
their Chief, came and desired me to go on the other side, promising me when I
should come there, all things which could be got out of the Mallayans Hands,
should be delivered us again; which accordingly I did accept, and with their
Boat went over, where at the Water side Mr. Mackalon the Chief did receive me
and desired me to sit down while the Water served to go on Board; and in the
mean time would see to procure again from the Mallayans, so much Merchandise,
Goods, Plate, and other of our things as they could get; which they were so far
from performing what they promised, that I having but one small Leather Case
wherein I had Two or Three Suits of Clothes, with the Honorable Companies
Seal, and some of their Cash; one of my own Servants having got it clear over
the Water where the Hollanders resided; and having sat down with it a little
while, two Dutchmen came and took it from him, and carried it into their
Fortification; where after they had cut it open, and plundered what best things
were in it, they returned it to me again, with some few things not worth the
notice. After which, I asked the Chief for our Goods and Merchandise, Plate and
Money, Guns and Ammunition; This Answer Mr. Mackalon himself made me; That as
to our Goods and Merchandises, Plate and Money, or whatsoever belonging to the
Honorable East India Company or their Servants, it was fallen into the Hands
of the Mallayans, and they could not force it from them, the same being as free
prize and plunder to them; but for the Guns he would endeavor to get them
again if I would leave one of our Sloops to bring them away; which accordingly
I did, and promised as a reward Twenty Dollers for the Care and pain of those
that should bring them on Board: But after I was gone from thence, and had left
one sloop on purpose to bring them away; the Master going on shore, demanded
them of Mr. Mackalon; who told him the Mallayans would not part with them under
Five Hundred pieces of Eight. Notwithstanding the Commander of their Ship told
our Men, they were on board their Sloop which lay in the River; So our Sloop
came away without them; said Mackalon told me at Departure, that himself in
short time would be with me at Indrapoura. So having the Honorable Companies
Soldiers and Servants on board, made the best of our way for said Port, where
we Arrived the 25th. of August.

Thus far I have given you an Account of what passed in General; as to
particulars must refer you to those who have been Spectators and losers so
well as my self.

Signed, Samuel Pots.
Dated at Indrapoura, the 23 th. of September. 1686.
Mr. Potts PROTEST before Recited.
To Mr. John Mackalon, Oper Copeman, and Second Person to the Worshipful Mr.
John Cooper Commander for Affairs of the Right Honorable Dutch
East-India-Company on the West-Coast of Sumatra.
YOurs of the 29th. of June I received; wherein understand how highly you are
dissatisfied at the Residence of the English at Bencoolen, Manduta, Indrapoura,
and also at my present appearance at Battan Capass; thereby declaring to have
great injustice done you by the Right Honorable English East-India-Company my
Honorable Masters; you assuming the sole Right and Propriety of Trade, not
only of the pre-mentioned places, but also of the whole Coast of Sumatra
entirely to your selves; notwithstanding you are very sensible that Bencoolen,
Manduta, Indrapoura, Bandda Sapoula, Batan Capass, etc. Country on the said
West-Coast, are frankly and voluntarily given by the Princes and Governors of
the pre-mentioned places, to His Royal Majesty of England, for the use of the
Right Honorable Company and their Successors for ever. Also you cannot be
ignorant of the Articles of Agreement in confirmation thereof, few days since
at Planghee, being invited thither by the Emperor of Manumcabbo, and his two
Sons Ampitwan Doa Sella, etc. Princes and Governors, who unanimously by solemn
Oath and delivery of Twig and Turf, granted and confirmed said Countries to his
Royal Majesty the King of England, and the Right Honorable English
East-India-Company, so long as the Sun and Moon endures; as amply appears in
Writing under his Imperial Chop; whose authority I doubt not but will vindicate
the same; since which have given sufficient demonstration of their good
inclination and affection toward us, in accompanying me hither, where you have
been spectators of their joint accord, in hoysting His Majesty's Flag, etc. and
Congratulation therewith. Therefore until such time I am well satisfied, that
you can and do produce a better Right and Title to the pre-mentioned places on
this West-Coast for your Honorable Masters, then I can in behalf of His
Majesty of England and the Right Honorable Company, am resolved not to depart
hence; but in a legal manner shall vigorously prosecute the just Rights and
Interests of my Honorable Masters on this West-Coast of Sumatra, as time and
opportunity shall present.

I am thankful to you for your friendly caution to me, to beware of the
Mallays, by which you endeavor to acquit your selves as altogether innocent if
by Treachery any disaster or damage befall us: of which I do pre-admonish you,
not to be any ways instrumental or confederate with them in the same, having
just reason to suspect you, by your bad Neighborhood at Aja Rajee; from whence
came several Mallayes by Night; surpised our people by Night on board Sloop
William, then Riding off the Qualla at Indrapoura Road; where they most
barbarously and treacherously murdered several Englishmen and black Servants,
also carried with them very considerable quantities of the Right Honorable
Companies Bale goods, etc. Some of them afterward being taken and examined,
declared your people to be the encouragers and authors thereof; with other
actions of bad circumstance which are too notorious at present to nominate.

Therefore in the Name of his Royal Majesty of England and Right Honorable
English East-India-Company, Protest against you and your Imployers, that you
are liable to make entire satisfaction for whatever damage or damages they
have already sustained or hereafter shall accrue to them by your indirect
means. Also in His Majesty's Name require and command your speedy departure
from hence and not to violate the Articles concluded between his Serene Majesty
of Great Britain, and the United States of Holland, by obstructing and
molesting us in our lawful Trade and Commerce on this West-Coast of Sumatra, or
infringing upon the Rights of His Royal Majesty of England, and privileges of
the Right Honorable Company by any Hostility or ill usage, either to their
Servants or Confederates in what nature soever.

Signed, Samuel Potts.
Dated at Batan Capass, the 31th. July, 1686.

But the Dutch say in their Printed Treatise, they came thither three days
before us; To which we answer briefly.

First, If they did, it was purposely to hinder us; because they had Pepper
enough at their own places, and more then they know what to do with.

Secondly, If they came first, they came wrongfully, because they came with
Arms to Erect a Fortress upon the King of Englands ground.

Thirdly, If they had any pretense of Right on that side of the River they were
on, they might have stayed there peaceably, the English did not molest them,
notwithstanding they had no right to be there.

Fourthly, Its manifest they had no pretense of Right, because they did not
produce any to the Emperors two Sons while they were present upon the place.

Fifthly, If they had had the justest Title in the World, they ought not to
have used Hostility; That being a direct breach of the Treaty Marine, Anno
1674-75. by which all damages done by either Company are to be adjusted by
Commissioners in Europe.

But this going to Batan Capass of the Dutch, is but an old practice of theirs,
to hinder other Nations in Amity with them. For so, when the French Fleet
Arrived in India before the War begun, the Batavians by Consultation of the
30th. of April, 1672. Sent presently to the Island of Banca, to set up the
Dutch Flag there, hoping thereby (as they say in that Consultation) that the
French might alter their enterprise, though they had no Flag there before; and
if the Dutch had done no more at Batan Capass we should have had the less cause
to complain, except of their insatiable Avarice; but to proceed to Hostility as
they did at Batan Capass is abominable.

Now to turn the Tables, and show how directly contrary the English treated the
Dutch at Pryaman; the real truth of that case is this: The English Company
being expelled from Bantam by the Dutch practices beforementioned, thought it
their bounden duty to His Majesty, not tamely to forego all the Pepper Trade,
for fear of a little charge, as their Ancestors did the other Spice Trade after
the Dutch had forced them from Banda, Amboyna, etc. did send an Embassy to the
Queen of Atcheen to settle a Trade with her Subjects for Pepper, and built a
Fort in her Country.

But while the said Ambassadors were at Atcheen on that occasion, some of the
Orran Kays or Princes of Pryaman and Teco came thither on their own accords
unsent for, and applied themselves to the said English Ambassadors or Envoys,
and acquainted them, that their Countries (as the truth is) afforded more
Pepper than the Queen of Atcheen's; and the English should not only be
welcome to Trade with them, but to build a Fort in any part of their Country.
Upon which the English Envoys told the Oran Kays of Pryaman and Teco, That if
they would go to Fort St. George, or send thither some persons sufficiently
authorized, they might better make their Contract with the English President
and Council there, then with them, who were but Servants to the said President
and Council; and accordingly some of the said Oran Kays authorized by the rest
did go over to Fort St. George, in an equipage suitable to the occasion, with
very many attandants; and did there make an absolute Agreement, and conveyed
unto His Majesty for the use of His East-India-Company, the Sovereignty of
Pryaman, and as much of the ground thereunto adjoining, as might be contained
within the Ramble of a Shot from a piece of Ordnance. Whereupon Two or Three
Ships, and Three or Four Sloops were immediately prepared and furnished with
Soldiers; and all materials necessary for a Fortified Settlement. But a day
before the said Ships and Vessels should have sailed for Pryaman, the President
and Council at Fort St. George Received advice from the King of Bencoolen, that
he was willing and extremely desirous, the English would settle and Fortify in
His Country. Upon which after all the Orders were perfected for Pryaman, The
President and Council by Postscript ordered the Fleet and Soldiers, etc.
designed thither, to proceed first to Bencoolen, being supposed the windmost
Port, and settle that place. All this preparation wherein so many were
concerned, could not be so secretly carried, but that the Dutch had notice of
it; and thereupon sent Eight or Ten Soldiers, and Twenty or Thirty pitiful
black Fellows, to take possession of Pryaman; who built there a small Booth or
Cajan-house, landed Five or Six small Guns, and enclosed some Ground with a
slight Pallisadoe. After which one of the smaller of the Companies Ships coming
to Pryaman, upon a Presumption that the English were settled there, found those
few Dutch in the posture beforementioned. Notwithstanding with Forty or Fifty
of the English under the Command of James Jenifer second Mate and Purser of the
said Ship, marched into the said Dutch enclosure as far as their Booth, with
their Arms fixed; and could have taken possession of the said Enclosure with as
much ease as Ten Men could beat One; not only because they were much stronger,
and were within the Dutch Guns; But also because the Dutch Soldiers themselves
(such as they were being most Blacks) came to them and told them they had no
Shot in their Guns or small Arms: And that if they came to take the place,
desired them they would shoot no Bullets as they were resolved not to do
themselves, but to submit to the English. Notwithstanding which, and the
previous Right before mentioned, which the King of England has to that place;
The English (after having drank His Majesty the King of England's Health, with
the Prince of Orange's, the States General's, and the two Companies) left the
place peaceably, telling the Chief they had no Order to make War, but to leave
the Right of that place to be determined elsewhere, which ought to be by
Commissioners on both sides in Europe according to the Treaty of 1674-75.

But one Circumstance is fit to be added, viz. In treating with the Oran Kayes
aforesaid at Fort St. George, The English President asked them seriously
whether they were under any Obligation to the Dutch? Which they positively
denied, assuring the President, etc. that the Dutch had no Residence in their
Country, not so much as a Factory, House, or Lodge; as was most true at that
time: And for further certainty of their Allegiance to His Majesty said, If
there were any scattering Dutchmen in their Country they would cut their
Throats before the English came thither. But the President told them, That
would be an abominable Act in the sight of the true God whom they Worshipped
(being Mahometans;) and that the Dutch were the Companies Friends and
Christians, and therefore he would have nothing to do with them if they offered
any violence or hurt to any Dutchman that might be in their Country upon any
occasion. And this is the very Truth and the whole Case of Pryaman as the
English do a vouch upon their Faith and Allegiance to God and His Majesty, to
their Knowledge or Belief. And how contrary this is to the Dutch practice in
all times, any indifferent Reader of any Nation will easily judge.

But not to let this special Matter of Fact pass without some Testimony upon
Oath, We have added true Copies of two Affidavits relating thereunto, Viz.

James Jenifer's Affidavit made in London the 22th. October, 1686.
JAmes Jenifer Second Mate and Purser of the Syam Merchant, lately come from
the West Coast of Sumatra, makes Oath, That upon their Sailing from Fort St.
George, they went first to Pryaman, as they were ordered by the President and
Council of Fort St. George; expecting to find an English Garrison there; but on
the contrary, they met with a Dutch settlement of one Factor as Chief and about
Thirty Soldiers Whites and Blacks. That Mr. Potts landed with about Fifty Men
well Armed, of which Men (under Mr. Potts) this Deponent had the Command: That
when they came up, the Pallisado Gates were open, which they entered with their
Arms ported, (no Sentinel checking them) and that the Chief (after they were
entered within the Gate) met them, and asked whether they were Friends? which
they said they were; and the Dutch Soldiers whispered the English in the Ear,
and told them, they had no Bullets in their Muskets, and that if the Chief
contended they would shoot nothing but Powder; desiring the English to do the
same, for that they were willing to surrender. Upon which this Deponent told
Mr. Potts, if he would give leave they would take the Place presently; which
Mr. Potts denying, said he had no Order to begin a War.

This Deponent further says, that the Dutch near Indrapora hired several
Mallay Soldiers to surprise the Sloop William, and gave them for so doing ten
Dollars each Mallay; who accordingly did attempt it in the Night, and killed
two of her Men; and that they were set on by the Dutch appeared by the
Confession of one of the said Mallays who was seized upon, who confessed and
declared, that they were instigated thereunto by the Dutch, and had the Reward
aforesaid.

This Deponent further says, That upon their departure from Fort St. George,
the President and Council gave them the Proclamation for Proclaiming the
Succession of our Sovereign Lord the King's Majesty now Reigning, in the
English Factories upon the West Coast of Sumatra: That accordingly he saw His
Majesty Proclaimed at Indrapoura with great Solemnity, all the English standing
bare with their Swords drawn while the Proclamation was read; and the Emperor
or Sultan, and Seven Kings likewise with their Creses drawn, and a multitude of
the best of the Native Inhabitants in the like posture; after which many
Volleys of Shot were discharged by the English Seamen and Soldiers on Shore,
and all the Guns fired aboard the Ship Syam then in the Road.

This Deponent further says, that the Dutch had landed near Bencoolen, a
great many Soldiers (most Blacks) in the Name of the Young King of Bantam, of
Four Ships from Batavia, with Order to force the English from Bencoolen: Upon
which, several of the English being sickly, did retire from the place aboard
the Ship; but the Chief Mr. Bloom would not stir from his Charge. But the said
Black Soldiers did not come on to force the English as was expected; whether
hindered by their own Fear, or their Inclination to have the English stay there,
(which is the desire of all the Natives both Javans and Mallays) this Deponent
cannot resolve; but heard, that upon such halt of the Black Soldiers the
English returned again from their Ships; and remounted all their Guns, and
resolved upon their Defense.

And further he cannot say

Sworn the 22. October. 1686. Before Sir John Moore. Signed, James Jenifer.


Stephen Elliot's Affidavit made in London the 30th. October, 1686.
STephen Elliot Mariner, aged Twenty One Years or thereabouts, makes Oath;
That he was one of the Mariners in the Service of the East India Company in
their Sloop the William, which was lying at Anchor near Indrapora, upon the
West Coast of Sumatra. That this Deponent went on shore with the Master of the
Sloop, in the Evening about the Month of October. 1685. And that the same Night
(as this Deponent was informed by the other Mariners that belonged to the said
Sloop) there came on Board them several Prowesfull of Men armed with Clubs,
etc. Which the said Mariners perceiving immediately leapt into the Sea, and
swam on Shore (they being Lascars Natives of India) leaving on Board only Three
of their Company which were in the Cabin, viz. One Englishman named Clemuel
Ringstead, one French man named David Jennett, and one Lascar, which three Men
were immediately murdered by those that came on Board, and cut to pieces in a
most inhumane manner. Soon after, the English East India Companies Factor Mr.
Ord, who was then at Indrapoora, discovered two of the Mallayes Natives of the
Island of Sumatra who were of the number of those that assaulted the Sloop as
aforesaid, by having found some Arms on Board the Ship which belonged to them.
And Mr. Ord examining them with lighted Matches betwixt their Fingers, They
confessed that they were employed by the Chief of the Dutch Factory residing at
Padang: And that they were to receive Ten Dollars each Man for destroying the
People in that Sloop: And that there were about Fifty Men that came upon that
Design. These Mallays that so entered the Sloop, took away some of the Companies
Goods that were in the Sloop, and some quantity of Sword-Blades: But this
Deponent believes they were afraid of being surprised aboard, and therefore did
not take so many of the Goods as they might have done: And he further faith,
That it is the common Discourse of the Dutch in India, that they will for the
future have all the Pepper Trade to themselves; and therefore they do cause
these Outrages to be committed (as this Deponent verily believes) to hinder and
frighten away other Nations from adventuring to have any share in that Trade.

Sworn 30th. October. 1686. Before Sir John Moore. Signed, Stephen Elliot.


By this time the Reader will be able to judge, Whether His Majesty had not the
greatest Reason by His Envoy the Marquess of Albeville, to demand satisfaction
for all the aforesaid wrongs and abuses done to His Subjects in India; and to
insist upon the Restitution of Pryaman, and Batan Capass as well as Bantam.

And if any doubt can yet remain with any of the Honorable Lords States of the
Netherlands, of the Truth of the English East India Companies Complaints, and
of their Affirmations concerning the Dutch Practices and Designs; the English
Company desires no more Vindication in their Lordships Breasts, then such as
they may find by impartial private Conference with any honest plain hearted
Dutchman that understands India; or any indifferent Frenchman, Dane, or
Portugueez.

The Dutch Company in their Treatise Page 53. of the Amsterdam Copy, say the
Case of Bantam is now much altered, That King being become their Debtor Six
Hundred Thousand Rix Dollars; and so if they will show their own Books, It will
(we suppose) by them appear, that the King of Zeilon is in their Debt Four
times that Sum; The Queen of Atcheen Forty Thousand Pound Sterling; and many
more such Debtors Kings and Princes they have; Amboyna it self being not quite
out of their Debt in 1672. Their Custom being, when they beat any Indian King
from his own Coast, make a War upon him, or build a Fortress by his own
consent, or betray him into a War (for their own ends) to his utter ruin, To
make such King Debtor not only for all the Charges (according to a large
Estimate they accustomarily make of them) but for every Man that dies or is
killed in the Service, Whites at Thirty Pounds per Head, Blacks at Twenty
Pounds, as we have heard; but we are not so certain of the Rates, as we are of
the manner of their Accompting with such circumvented Princes.

Page 40. They say the King of Bantam wrote to the Governor of Batavia not to
consent to withdraw their Forces and forsake him, etc. which we verily believe
he did, and durst never do otherwise, since they were Masters of him; but write
or set his Hand to any thing they commanded: And so did the ruinated Kings of
Macassar write the Governor of Batavia very thankful Letters for his and
Spillman's kindness to them after many Thousand Souls that submitted, were set
upon an Island (where there was neither Meat nor Water) to starve or eat up one
another as they did. But that story is so black, that we are loath to relate it
at large, and had much rather such as desire to know the Truth would inform
themselves from Dutchmen that were present at that Action, many of whom are yet
alive.

Page 46. They say the English for many Years made it their business, to entice
away their Men in Bengall. The Truth whereof is plainly this; Commanders of
Ships, Dutch as well as English, when they want Seamen in India by reason of
Deaths or Runawayes, are always willing to fill up their Companies by
entertaining any Seamen that willingly proffer themselves to service, and when
such men are on Board Ships on either side, the deficient Commanders are
willing to hide or keep them: But we say, the Dutch East India Company is very
much more to blame for that Practice, because some of their Chiefs on shore
have avowed the doing thereof, which we do not remember that ever the English
Chiefs did, either at Fort St. George or elsewhere; although it may be true,
that the Dutch do lose more of their Seamen in that manner than the English;
for which there is a plain reason in Nature which every Body understands, viz.
Where there is the most hardship or oppression inflicted on Sailers, there will
always be the most Runawayes. We shall offer for truth of this Paragraph
Copies of Captain Bowers and his Officers, and Captain Owens Affidavit, Viz.

Captain Bowers Commander of the Persia Merchant, and his Officers Affidavit,
made in London the 20th. July 1687.
THese Deponents make Oath, That during the Persia Merchant's stay in Bengall,
the Dutch Director and others of his Council there, and also the Commanders of
Dutch Ships, made it their business by many fraudulent ways, to entice into
the Dutch Service the English Seamen belonging to the Ship Persia Merchant, and
other English Ships; particularly by sending Spies on Board the Persia
Merchant, etc. in the disguise of Runaway Dutch Sailers from the Dutch Ships;
who during their stay on Board the English Ships, were to allure the English
Sailers to run away back to the Dutch Factory with them, upon promise of two
Months pay in hand, better usage, and other specious pretenses which did
prevail to the drawing away of several of the Persia Merchants Seamen; some of
whom did receive their two Months pay in hand, according to promise: but
finding their entertainment not according to promise, run away from the Dutch,
and returned to the Persia Merchant, and came home in the Ship; but some stayed
with the Dutch, having not the opportunity of running back again.

Signed, John Bowers. Walter Goddard. John Gale. Benjamin Brangwin.

Sworn the 20th July 1687. Before Sir William Turner.

Captain Owen's Affidavit made in London the 3d. January, 1687.
NAthaniel Owen Commander of the Ship Josiah in the Employment of the
Honorable the English East India Company, makes Oath, that he arrived with
the said Ship in Hughly River in the East Indies, in April 1686. and that
during his stay there, several of the Seamen belonging to the said Ship did
desert the said Ship, and ran away to the Dutch Factory at Hughly; and were by
Order from the Dutch Commissary in Hughly, entertained and withheld from
returning to their Service aboard the said Ship, whose particular Names are,
viz. John Nicholls, Edward Robinson, Elisha Fenney, Daniel Old, Tho. Harrison,
Richard Lo, John Lydiat, Henry Johnson, besides several others; And this
Deponent further says, that he did several times endeavor to get them back,
but they had always Watches and Guards set on them in the Dutch Factory, and
aboard their Ships in the River. And this Deponent further says, That on or
about the 28 th October made his Application to Seigniour Willowbutts the
reputed Chief of the Dutch Factory next under the Here Commissary, acquainting
him that he had in Possession several of the Men belonging to the said Ship
Josia, and friendly desired him that he would Release them, that they might
return to their Duty on Board, for that the said Ship would be in Distress for
want of her Men, to perform her Voyage: To which he answered, that it was true,
there were several Men in their Factory that belonged to that Ship, and were
Entertained by them, and had Received the Holland East India Companies Pay; and
therefore he could not Release them: And this Deponent further says, That
several of their Men aforesaid did Sail out of the River of Hughly in the Dutch
Ships, and others of them remained in the Factory at the time of his coming
away, but could never get any of them out of their Service.

Signed, Nathaniel Owen.
Sworn the 3d. of January, 1687-88. before Sir John Shorter, Lord Mayor.

Page 47. The Dutch would extenuate the injuries done to the English at
Macassar, by saying, they were done before the Peace could be known in India;
(which is not improbable) but most certainly that action at Macassar was done
after the ratification of the Peace at Bredah, 1667. And if the Peace since
concluded, viz. that of 1674. should cut off the English Companies right to
demand satisfaction for the wrongs and injuries suffered there, (which is not
granted) by the burning of their Factory, carrying away their goods, and their
Servants Prisoners to Batavia (where some of them dyed through hard usage) why
should all this hinder the English East-India-Company, or any other Europeans
from Trading with such of the Sovereign Kings of Macassar as never were
subdued, or have since cast off their subjection to the Dutch; and are now (or
lately were) in open Hostility against them, as well as in the full exercise of
their own Sovereign Authority?

Secondly, If it were not evidently the Dutch Companies design to exclude all
Nations from Trade, why should they in those Articles of Macassar exclude the
Portugueez with whom they were then in Amity?

Thirdly, We verily believe, it will not be hard to prove (when this matter
falls under a serious debate.) That the Dutch Companies War against the
Macassars, was purposly made to drive the English from that place; The Dutch
Company having long endeavored to drive all other Europeans from any vicinity
to their ill got darling Spice Trade; And yet, according to our professed
sincerity, we will not deny that the Dutch Company have more to say for
themselves in this case by reason of the time it happened to be done in, than
they can pretend in any of the former Cases.

Page 48. The Dutch Company say, The English Deputies in their reply did
calumniate the Dutch Companies conduct, after so odious a manner, that the
English Commissioners (meaning the Lords Commissioners Decisors) were
constrained to abhor and manifest their discontent thereof.

To which we say, Their Lordships are able to vindicate their own honor, which
is better approved and known to the World than to be impaired by the Pen of any
Dutch Advocate. And for the East India Company, They have now exposed all their
Papers to the censure of the World; not doubting but that it will appear to all
unbiassed persons, they have said nothing but what becomes them, and is exactly
consonant to truth, and the nature of their oppressions: And if they had said
less, they had betrayed the Interest of their Sovereign, and their common
Country, as well as the trust reposed in them by the East India Adventurers.

Page 49. The Dutch demand Thirteen Thousand Nine Hundred Pounds for Freight of
the four Ships carrying the English Companies Goods from Bantam to Batavia: To
which we say,

First, If the English Companies goods were so considerable as to deserve
Thirteen Thousand Nine Hundred pounds, for carrying them from Bantam to Batavia
(about Twenty Leagues) upon Ships that must have gone thither if they had had
no such unfortunate loadings; How great must the English Companies damage be
that were at that time the injured Owners of those goods!

Secondly, We say, That the damage wrongfully done to that One injured Ship
the Bengal Merchant in the Gulf of Persia, was much more (in the judgment of
any indifferent Merchant) than all the Freight of those Four Ships could amount
unto, being bound to go from Bantam to Batavia, if they had had no such
Loadings on board them.

Page 27. Toward the end of the said Treatise they say, However this is
undeniable, That our men now lately at Bengal did the English, a signal
service; For when they were in a great extremity, and the Moors had deprived
them of all means of Livelihood; Then by our Mediation and Intercession the
business was brought to a Cessation of all Acts of Hostility for a time: So far
was it from our intent to Plot or Cause any harm to come to them; for if it had
been so, never fairer opportunity was put into the hands of any than in that
business of Bengal; wherein the English (besides the loss of Hundreds of their
Men) would have sustained irreparable damage in their Estates and Occasions.

To which we say, If we had not been long accustomed to such strange
extravagant assertions from the Dutch Company, we should be astonished that any
men in their wits should have the forehead to offer to the High and Mighty
Lords the States General and Publish to the World, such a prodigious and
palpable untruth. The true Case at Bengal being really this; The English
Company had there a very considerable Fleet, Among which Two Ships mounted with
Seventy Two Guns each, viz. The Beaufort and the Rochester, and the Nathaniel
mounted with Fifty Two Guns; besides several smaller Ships, and War-Sloops: On
board all which, and with their Soldiers on Shore at Hughly, they had near
Fifteen Hundred Fighting Men: But notwithstanding this strength, they designed
no War with the Mogulls Subjects, if they could obtain their Right by Treaty;
and His Majesty's Orders, and His East-India-Companies were expressly, that if
it must come to a War, not to begin the War at Hughly: But the Mogul's great
Governor at Decca (commonly called the Nabob) having sent down several Troops
of Horse and Foot to Hughly, (of his standing Army) and they finding their
numbers to be considerable, grew insolent, and picked a quarrel with some of the
English Soldiers in the Market place or Buzar, and wounded Two or Three of
them; whereof one afterward dyed. Upon which the English Captains and Soldiers
were so enraged, that notwithstanding the Orders aforesaid not to begin the War
at Hughley; the Companies Agent and Council found themselves under some
necessity to give their Soldiers leave to revenge their fellow Soldiers
Lives, which they did with such courage that they beat all the Nabobs Soldiers
before them like a flock of Sheep: pursued them to their Mount or Fort, where
they made no considerable resistance; took that, dismounted their Guns, etc.
And while the English soldiers were so far advanced, some of the Natives set
fire to the Cajan Houses (which will as easily burn as thatch or dry sticks)
thinking thereby (as we suppose) to obstruct the English Soldiers retreat to
their Factory, which was Fortified with some great Guns. The English killed
about an hundred in the fight and might have killed Thousands if they would;
for after the first or second assault, the Natives turned their backs and did
not so much as look behind them; and might as easily have been destroyed as
Sheep in a Penn. Besides which, in the Evening the Companies War Sloops came up
with the Tide, and fired all night upon the remainder of the Town: So that
never men could be more miserable than the unfortunate inhabitants of Hughly
then were: And all the Dutch Factors, Soldiers and Seamen, were so
inconsiderable in Hughly at that time, that they were as much at the English
Mercy (and all the Shipping they had then in the Ganges) as the Natives
themselves. In this miserable Condition Abdull Gunny the Nabob's Governor of
Hughly, and others of the best of the Natives, applied themselves to the Dutch
Chief and Council to intercede with the English Agent and Council for a
Cessation of Arms, until they could have Order from the Nabob to satisfy the
English demands: which the English Agent and Council granted at the
Intercession of the Dutch; for which they have been since blamed (as they well
deserved) by the Governor and Committees in England. And it is further to be
observed that notwithstanding the English strength at that time and place, and
the fury of the Soldiers; yet the English were so far from endeavoring to
expel the Dutch from Hughly, or to forbid them Trade after a certain limited
time (as the Dutch did the English at Metchelpatam aforesaid) that they did not
(in the height of their success) offer the least affront, or give any unkind
word to any Dutchman. And further, that God Almighty was so pleased to bless
the English endeavors to recover their just Rights; that in the conflict
aforesaid there was but one Englishman killed: and the English Agent Writes,
that of about Four Hundred English Soldiers he had ashore, he lost but Eleven
in seven months killed or by any other accident or sickness; which is an
extraordinary thing in that Country. Besides, it is observable, that the Dutch
Chief and Council, when they came to intercede for the Cessation aforesaid,
they began their discourse with telling the English Agent and Council, they
came to congratulate the great victory God had given them over their Enemies.

The Relation is so true, that we believe no honest Dutchman (then in Bengal)
will deny any part of it; and it is impossible but it should be known to the
Dutch Company in Holland before the said Treatise was Writ; since by their own
Ships the English Company Received a Letter from Abdull Gunny, the Native
Governor at Hughly, Writ in Portugueez, and (as we suppose) by advice of the
Dutch Chief and Council, because that Letter was carefully sent the English
Governor from Holland by one of the most considerable of the Dutch
Bewinthebbers (or Committee Men.) In which, Abdull Gunny Writes the English
Company here, that the Natives had suffered by fire and plunder of the English
Soldiers above Ten Millions, (we suppose he means of Rupees the lowest species
of Money there, which may amount to about One Million of pounds Sterling) and
beseeches the Company most earnestly for Gods sake, and for the sake of
Religion that they would find a way to compose those differences; which latter
expression is not the usual style of those people, and therefore we conclude,
was dictated by some European as aforesaid.

If the Truth of the aforesaid Relation needed any judicial confirmation, we
could produce Hundreds of Affidavits from honest men that were upon the place;
but that one which follows will be sufficient to convince all Gainsayers.

Thomas Ley of London Merchant, makes Oath.
THomas Ley of London Merchant late of the Council at Hughly in the Bay of
Bengal for the Honorable English East-India-Company, says and Declares as
follows; That in the year 1686. diverse Ships Arrived in the Bay of Bengal
from England; that they brought Soldiers, and Military Provisions, and withal
Instructions to the Companies Agent and Council there to make War against the
great Mogul and his subjects, in Case they could not obtain reparation and
satisfaction for the many oppressions, charges and damages, the Honorable
English Company had sustained in Bengal by the Nabob, and his under-Governours,
for diverse years past during the interloping times.

The Ships which so Arrived, were the Rochester and Beaufort of Seven Hundred
Tons each and upwards, and about Seventy Guns each, and new Ships; and the
Nathaniel of Five Hundred Tons Burden and upwards, and about Fifty Guns, the
Josia of Six Hundred Tons, and Thirty Six Guns, the new Diamond Frigate, and Ten
other Country Ships belonging to the English, besides Sloops well Manned and
of good Force, and about Six Companies of foot Soldiers.

There was at the same time, Dutch Ships and Flyboats in the River not
exceeding Ten, but they were very much inferior to the English in Burden and
Strength.

While diverse Messages passed between Decca and Hughly, upon the demands the
English Agent made for satisfaction (it being part of the Instructions that
fair means should be first used,) there fell out an Accident that unavoidably
engaged the English with the Natives; Abdul Gunny Sub-governour of Hughly,
taking advantage by the time that was spent in treating at Decca, had drawn
great numbers of Horse and Foot into and about Hughly, and began by little and
little to straighthen the English, and abridge the freedom of the Bazar or
Market; where he placed many of his new-come Soldiers; Sometime about the
28th. of October, 1686. The Officers complained to the Agent, that Abdul
Gunny's men had set on and wounded two of their English Soldiers, as they were
buying things in the Bazar, and had carried them to Prison in that condition
(where one soon died.) The Agent sent his Vackeel (a Native in the nature of an
Advocate, retained, to attend the English Affairs as often as occasion
required) to demand the prisoners; but he was denied: The Agent thereupon, on
the Twenty Eighth of October, about Nine in the Morning, did send an English
man a Factor, who could speak the Language, to know of Abdul Gunny, why he
imprisoned his Soldiers, and to demand their Liberty, and satisfaction for the
wrong done their persons. There went about Twenty English Soldiers, to prevent
affronts; but ordered to use no Force, except met with resistance. Within less
than half an hour, came an Allarm to the Factory, that the English Soldiers
had been set upon as they went along, and were engaged in fight with the Moors;
a party was sent out to assist them, and others to the relief of these; and so
it continued all day with great success to the English; for before night, the
English had cleared their way before them, where ever they went; they
dismounted their Field pieces and spiked them; had killed about sixty, and
might have easily killed many more, (as the Officers gave in their Report) had
they not been called off upon this occasion, viz. toward the Evening of that
day the fight began, came a Gentleman from the Dutch Factory of the quality of
a Second, well known to the Agent; he addressed himself in Portugueez, and the
Agent and he carried on the discourse in Portugueez, and Dutch; which this
Deponent not being acquainted with, desired the Agent to tell it him in
English, which he did to this Effect, This Gentleman (says the Agent) comes
from Dutch Commissary, to congratulate the English for the good success they
have had against their Enemies, And says that they themselves had begun, but
now the English have taken that honor out of their hands. Withal he told the
Agent, that many of the Natives (and I think the Phousdar, a great Officer in
that place) entreated the Commissary to interceed with the English Agent for
Mercy, (for that there were diverse houses then on fire) that unless the English
Soldiers were stayed, they would burn down the Town, and kill all the People:
And that the Agent would be entreated to forbear, till they (the Natives) could
write to the Nabob at Decca for Orders to satisfy the English Demands. The
Agent on this the Dutch Intercession, stayed the Soldiers from further killing
or plunder that night; though he caused two or three of the English Vessels to
ply the Town with shooting, to prevent new recruits in the night, and to awe
the place. There was great care taken by the Agent, that in this broyl the
Dutch should not suffer in their persons or affairs; but should be used with
respect; and (the Dutch desiring it) an Order was given, that no Merchant
Banyan or other Native, being in the Dutch service, should be molested; and
where their Servants (the Natives) goods were seized, upon assurance from the
Dutch, that they did belong to their service, they were presently restored. And
whereas the English kept a Guard upon the River to command it, yet all such
Boats and Vessels which did belong to the Dutch, or did wear their colors, did
freely pass without stop or interruption; though the Rowers, and such who
sailed them were Natives, and at that time Enemies to the English. And this
Deponent says, that in all that fight and conflict with the Natives, the
English lost but one man, and no more.

Thomas Ley.
Septimo die Martii, 1687. Jurat. coram me

John Shorter Major.




The Pages of the aforesaid Treatise beginning again about the middle of the
Book, (which is of two parts,) the Reader will observe, that the lower number
of Pages we are now at, are in the second part of the Amsterdam Copy. Where in
Page the 14 and 15. They say, and what concerns Bencoolen, it is true, the
English some years past, came with their Forces and possessed themselves
thereof, under pretext that the old King of Bantam had, during the Civil Wars
(in which he was taken prisoner) granted to them free Trading and Habitation at
Syllabar; but being driven out of the last place by the forces of the King that
now reigns in Bantam, they retired to Bencoolen, and built a Fortress there;
where they yet keep their abode; and from thence did transport and Wrest out of
our hands a very considerable part of Pepper. We say Wrested, Forasmuch as it
was by Contract with Bantam made over to us, whereby although they have
intruded into what belonged unto us to our great detriment, yet we will pass
that by as not being ignorant that such manner of Contracts and Obligations
made with Princes in Those Countries, where we have only Lodges or Factories do
give us no full Right actually to hinder other Nations for to buy and transport
their Commodities; but must leave it to the disposal of him that is Lord and
Master of those Countries.

This Confession comes near to the truth, but is not the whole Truth, (as has
been before and will hereafter be further demonstrated;) and yet by this
confession, they must own not only our Right at Bencoolen, but themselves in
the wrong entirely at Indrapoura, where they had neither Factory, Lodge nor
Dutchman; and where the English had settled and fortified themselves, not only
with the consent, but to the great joy, of seven Sovereign Kings. And this
confession will by consequence, convict them of doing injury, and unjustly
seating themselves at Pryaman; and more especially at Batan Capass, after those
Kings had surrendered their Country to His Majesty, and came in person to avow
their doing it to the Dutchmen themselves; and the Dutch Chief then present,
did not so much as urge for his excuse any previous Contract with those Kings,
or any defect of Title those Kings had so to Convey their Country unto His
Majesty His Heirs and Successors for the use of His Majesty's
East-India-Company, which doubtless he would have done, if he had known of any
such Right or pretenses, which have been since invented to excuse that
villainous act. Besides, supposing the pretenses to excuse that act which are
now made in the aforesaid Treatise were not inventions but realities; such real
grounds or pretenses of Contracts, can never justify the Dutch for using force
and arms against the English in a time of peace, for matters which its
confessed ought by the Treaty of 1674-75. to have been amicably determined by
Commissioners on both sides in Europe: And it is very well known to the Kings
Majesty now reigning, and all the Honorable Lords then of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, that when the English Company had been at the cost of
about One Hundred Thousand pounds, for fitting out a Fleet of three and twenty
Sail of great Ships, with about one thousand Land Soldiers, and some of the
said Fleet were departed, and others advanced on their Voyage as far as the
Downs; The Dutch Ambassadors prevailed with his late Majesty, and the Lords
then Ministers, to command the English Company to forbear recovering Bantam by
Arms, upon this very ground, That by Treaty aforesaid of 1674-75. such matters
and differences in India ought not to be determined by Arms, but by
Commissioners as aforesaid; and the distinction which the Dutch would make
between the Maliayans and their own people, in doing that mischief at Batan
Capass, every one knows is a distinction, without a difference; those
Mallayans being their hired Servants, as appears by the Protest and Affidavit
aforesaid relating to that business: For if the Dutch should be accountable
only for what they do by Native Dutchmen, there would be found very few of
them in India to be accounted with, besides Merchants, Nine Tenth parts of
their force in India, such as it is, being by Computation of Foreigners, or a
mixture of all European Nations as well as Natives, Macassars, Buggesses,
Ballees, Turnatteens, Javans, Mallayans, Madagascar Slaves, Topasses, or black
Portugueez, which will serve any Nation for Money.

Page 26. Of the latter Treatise they say, The Netherland's Company has with a
few inconsiderable Potentates or Princes made Contracts over a privative or
seclusive Traffic of some kinds of Wares which their Country did yield, but
if the English Company should maintain this to be an unlawful thing, they must
condemn their own doings, and so as it were pronounce sentence against what
themselves have done in former times, and of which many Examples may be
alleged. Now if the English Company have made such Contracts sometimes
without, and sometimes together with us when we were in a near League, Anno
1619. And some years following as may be seen and will appear in the public
Testimonies, and when the English Company had such Contracts with us together,
then according to their sentiment it was lawful and good, But now the
Netherland's Company do the same without them as having no Communion or
Fellowship with them in the least in the Indies, ought they not to call to
memory that in former times the English Merchants had the whole Traffic of the
Caviar which Rushland or Muscovy did yield, and to come yet closer to them have
they not made in the Indies and yet daily seek to make such Contracts
especially on the Coast of Malabar.

To which we answer with Truth and Impartiality:

First, That when that Treaty was concluded between the Dutch and English 1619,
in the peaceable Reign of King James the First, it was managed in England on
the Dutch's part by that Worthy Incomparable Person Hugo Grotius, and we
believe with an upright intent in him, and the High and Mighty Lords States
that employed him in that Negotiation. But how the Dutch Company immediately
upon the Conclusion of that Treaty contrary to the Lords States upright
intention turned the use of it in such a manner (as we believe the Dutch
Company would not have us remember, though it be upon Record in many Printed
Books) as to screw the English by Force and Fraud, out of all the Trade of the
Spice Islands, which is of more Value and Advantage than the whole Trade of
India besides.

2. To come nearer and close to the Question, We say, it is lawful for the
Dutch or any Nation to make such exclusive Contracts, and to secure the
performance of such Contracts by a Fort or Factory; But if any Prince or People
having made such Contracts with any Nation (suppose the Dutch) and the Dutch do
not build any Fort or Factory in such Princes Country, nor (it may be) come in
Seven Years after to buy his Commodity, or will not pay him for his Commodity
but at lower Rates, or in Truck for worse Goods, or for any other Cause grow
weary of such Contract: and the English be invited, or come thither purposely,
to bargain with him; and by his Consent, (he being Lawful Sovereign) do build a
Fort or Factory in his Country; We say in such case, if the Dutch do by Fraud
or hiring of Cutthroats (Black People) or by open Force endeavor to destroy
the English, or any other Nation so settled, such Practice is a violation of
Natural Right, Destroys the Peace established by Treaties, and is of the same
Nature as open War.

3. To make use of the Instance mentioned in the aforesaid Treatise, Page 27.
True it is the English had by Contract formerly the sole Traffic of Caviar in
Rushia by agreement with the Emperor of Vosco; but suppose (as it happened)
the Emperor grew weary of this Contract with the English, for any Cause just
or unjust, and that he had sent for the Dutch and agreed with them, for all
that Commodity for the future: We say (with submission) in this very case it
would have been notoriously unjust in the sense of all Christian Nations for
the English to have made War upon the Dutch for that sole Cause.

4. We say in Fact, That notwithstanding the lawfulness of making such
Contracts, the English did never attempt to hinder by Arms any Nation from
Trading with any Company or People whatsoever, where they had only a Factory,
how great soever that Factory were.

5. We say, the English, where they have a Fort, did never attempt to hinder
any Nation from Trading with any People out of the reach of their own Guns;
much less from Trading with any Prince upon the same Island or Continent, that
had Sovereign Power in his own Dominions, in whose Dominions they had neither
Fort nor Factory.

6. We say the English did never deny the Dutch Refreshment at any of their
Forts; but have often entertained them, when missing the Cape by bad Weather,
they came to St. Hellena in great Extremity, and were relieved in all their
wants with the same kindness as they could have been by their own Fathers or
Brothers: But the Dutch have often (though not always) denied the English
Company Refreshment even of Water, when they have been in great distress, as
particularly and lately the Ship Pryaman at Porcat when there was on Board her
many Passengers, Men, Women and Children ready to perish for want only of that
cheap but necessary Refreshment Water, as appears by Mr. Thomas Michel's and
Captain Vnkettle's Letters of 5 th. Feb. 1686-87 wherein the Expressions
against the Dutch Cruelty are so harsh, that we forbear to recite them in
terminis, but the Originals are ready to be produced.

Page 27. They take upon them to know very particularly and specially, what
Powers and Authorities His Majesty now Reigning (whom God long preserve) has
granted His present Privileged East India Company; but they betray their
Ignorance therein in giving so lame an Account of that matter; which for their
better Information, we shall assure them, there is no Power or Authority
whatsoever to the Exercise of Sovereign Power in India under His Majesty, or
otherwise, that was ever granted to the Dutch Company by their present or
former Oct-troy; but His Majesty has been graciously pleased to grant the same
Powers to His present East India Company for the good and benefit of His
Kingdoms.

His Majesty having observed by His great Experience that it is impossible for
His Subjects of the East India Company to support the English Dominion in India
against the Continual Unwarrantable Designs of the Dutch, except the English
Company be Armed and entrusted with the same Extent of Power and Authority
which the Dutch Company have, and may lawfully enjoy from and under their
Sovereigns the High and Mighty Lords, the States General.

Page 29. They bring up again that Trifle of an Argument which has been bafled
a Hundred times in former Debates; and is fit only to be urged to Women and
Children; their Words are, If then it deserve to be judged Injustice, Violence,
and Oppression in us by lawful means to seek in one and the other Country, out
or beyond Europe, to get and appropriate to our selves the Trade thereof: Then
we know not how possibly the English can be judged blameless considering what
they have done in Carolina, Virginia, New England, and elsewhere; Countries of
that vast Extent, that all which the Netherlandish Company does possess in
East India is not to be compared thereunto.

To which we Reply,

First, It Is confessed by all Nations, That all Sovereigns within their own
Dominions where they have Subjects and Exercise Sovereign Rights, may make what
Laws they please.

Secondly, It is acknowledged before in this Answer, and must be confessed by
all Nations; that whatever is just between Nations in Amity in Europe, is
equally just in both Indies, and whatever is unjust in Europe, is equally
unjust in India: But it is confessed, the King of England has a Multitude of
His Native Subjects in Carolina, Virginia, New England, Jamaica, Barbados,
Mevis, and other Islands in the West Indies; in all which His Majesty justly
exercises plenary Sovereign Power, and therefore may make what Laws he thinks
fit for the Government of those places; and so may the Dutch do likewise in
Batavia, Malacca, Cochin, and in other places; but in those, and so far only,
as they have the full Exercise of Sovereign Power, not the pretense of a Right
to the Sovereign Power, where they have neither Habitation nor Subjects; but
peradventure a piece of Paper signed by some body that calls himself an Orankay
or a Raja, a dozen or more of which may be had from abundance of those poor Men
for a small Reward, with what words the Purchaser pleases to put into those
Writings.

Thirdly, We say that by the Laws of Nations and Natural Right and consent of
Nations, no Fort upon a Pass, or upon part of an Island, where some part of the
said Island remains under the Sovereignty of the same Prince, can hinder any
Nation in Amity with the Sovereign of that part of the Island where the Fort is
built, from Trading with the People on the other part of the Island, or with
the Subjects of another Prince on the same Island: For Instance, St.
Christopher's Island in the West Indies, is possessed partly by the English, and
partly by the French; each in subjection to their Respective Sovereigns: Now we
say, while His Majesty and the French King are engaged in League of Amity, if
His Majesty pleases to admit the Dutch or any other Foreign Nation in Amity
with His Majesty, to Trade to His part of the Island of St. Christophers, the
French King cannot by Jus Gentium hinder the Dutch from Trading with his
Subjects; (and the like vice versa.) By which Rule it will evidently appear,
the English Settlements were justly made according to unexceptionable Natural
Right, and the Laws of all Nations, at Bencoolen and Indrapoura; and if the
Dutch Company do or cause to be done any hurt or damage to the English in
those places, it will be an Injurious and Hostile Action, as is likewise the
Dutch Companies hindering the English Ships from watering and refreshing at
Bantam; which they have done ever since the surprise thereof; Notwithstanding
they have ever since pretended that place is none of theirs, but belongs to the
Young King of Bantam.

Page 31. They say, They suffered us to refresh our Seamen at Batavia, and to
repair our Ships, which is very true, and the English Company will always
acknowledge their Justice in that respect; and as they never did, so they never
will fail to requite them with the same kindness where ever the English Company
have to do: But that which follows in the same Page, is as extremely unkind as
we believe it is untrue, viz. That in Case the Subjects of that State should
come to request such a thing in the Caribees, Barbados, Virginia, or Jamaica
they should not be admitted, but rather seized and confiscated.

Toward the Conclusion of their Treatise, they mention some little disorders
committed in Batavia by the Herbert's Sailers, and the Master of a free English
Ship called the Madrass at Cochin, and of Captain Andrews his searching a
Moore's Ship in that Road; of which we never heard a Word before we saw it in
print in the said Treatise; nor give any Credit to, until we hear from the said
Captain Andrews, who is a discreet sober experienced Man, and whom we have
reason to believe neither did or would do any thing but what did consist with
Justice, or his Duty to His Majesty, whose Commission he had to take all
Moore's Ships, though it seems by the Relation they give of it themselves he
was so civil at their persuasion, to leave that Ship behind him.

We have now concluded our Reply, and Animadversions upon the said Treatise;
and (we think) made it appear beyond Contradiction, that the Dutch have done
many and great Hostile Injuries to the English Company, especially since the
time that with Interloping the Rebellion of Bombay broke forth; which they
thought a proper season being expert in that kind of Wisdom of knowing the
times and seasons. But they ought to remember there is a double Account to be
given for Injuries and Oppression of the Innocent: The one to God by
Repentance, the other to Men by Restitution; without which they may (not
improbably) bring a greater Judgment upon themselves than we wish, or their
sagacity can foresee. Until they do which, and abandon those false Notions of
Right, which their unbounded Avarice has framed to themselves, and which we
have proved contrary to Natural Right, and the Laws of all Nations; They may
for ever impune Rob, Kill, and Destroy the English, notwithstanding the Peace
between the Two Nations by the Treaty in force; which we think are as equal and
just as can possibly be made or provided, if they were duly observed and obeyed
by the Dutch Company, as we affirm they have ever most exactly been by the
English Company.

SVPPLEMENT.
THough we have owned before (as we can never disown what is just in it self)
that it is lawful for any Nation in India to make Exclusive Contracts with any
Prince or People there, and to secure the performance of those Contracts by
settling Factories or Forts in such Contracting Indian Princes Dominions: Yet
so Just and Generous are the English East India Company, that they do not only
allow Refreshments of all kinds to the French, Dutch, Danes, Portugueez, and
all Nations in Amity with our Sovereign Lord the King, as well Natives as
Europeans: But also do allow them free liberty of all manner of Trade and
Commerce, and in all kind of Commodities, from and to any Port or Place in
India whatsoever, as freely as the Companies own Servants, or any English
Freeman can or may: And also to reside at Bombay or Fort St. George, and to
Rent or Purchase Houses or Lands there; and in all Respects to have the same
Liberty and Freedom for Landing or Shipping of Goods, and selling or disposing
of them to whom they please, as the English themselves have, and to be in the
like Capacity of being Aldermen or Burgesses of the Corporation at Fort St.
George and Bombay, whatever Faith or Religion they are or may be of, as the
Native English of those places are. And this we have Authority from the said
Company to publish and avow in their Names to the whole World: To the intent
that Merchants of all Nations may know with what Liberty Security and Freedom
they may resort to both or either of those places.

FINIS.

