By the Lords Justices and Council.
MAV. EVSTACE Canc. ORRERY.

WHEREAS in expectation of Conformity to the Laws of the Land, concerning
uniformity of Common Prayer and Service in the Church and the Administration of
the Sacraments, indulgence to, and forbearance of Dissenting and Nonconforming
Persons of several Persuasions has been long time used; And whereas there were
no proceedings against them for several months; and when the Judges in their
several Circuits found it fit to question those that would not make good use of
that Clemency, and yet upon new Hopes all proceedings thereupon were stopped
and suspended; and yet the event has not answered to our expectation, but
Recusants, Non-conformists, and Sectaries have grown worse by Clemency: We
therefore have thought fit to declare, That We still hoping that gentle
courses, and this further extension of His Majesty's gracious Clemency may
work upon those who were misguided, that for the time past all Offenses
committed against his Majesty's said Law of Uniformity of Common Prayer, and
Service in the Church, and the Administration of the Sacraments, shall be no
further proceeded against. Whereof all Persons concerned are to take notice.
And We do further Declare, That no Person or Persons are for the time to come
to expect the like indulgence; and that all Judges of Assize, Justices of
Peace, and all others concerned, are to see the said Law duly put in Execution.
And this Declaration we make, that none may be surprised, or pretend ignorance,
or any other excuse for their disobedience to the said Law.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin, the 30. day of April, 1662. GOD SAVE
THE KING. Ja. Dublin. Donegall. Drogheda. Conway and Kilulta. Hen. Midensis.
Jerem. Dunensis. R. Coote. Hen. Tichborne. Jo. Bysse. Paul Davys. Robert Forth.
Rob. Meredith. Arthur Hill.


DVBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer Bookseller in Castle-street, Anno Dom. 1662.


