C2 R
HONI^SOIT^QVI^MAL^Y^PENSE
DIEV^ET MON^DROIT
royal coat of arms
By the Lords Justices and Council.
MAU. EUSTACE Canc. ORRERY.

WHEREAS on the Seventh day of November last, We did set out a Proclamation
whereby We did continue the respective Collectors for the respective Counties
in the said Proclamation mentioned, in the execution of the said employment, as
Receivers of the Quit-Rents due to His Majesty, for the half year ended at
Michaelmas last, according to the Instructions formerly given by us to the late
Commissioners and Collectors, bearing date the Sixteenth day of February, 1660;
and although We then declared that We found no further use of the labor and
pains of the said Commissioners in the said service, and therefore did then
publish the same, that so they might know that We intended not to give them any
further trouble therein; yet We do still find it necessary and conducing to the
furtherance of his Majesty's Service, for the present and more speedy supply of
His Majesty's Army here, to continue Collectors for the said respective
Counties, in the execution of the said employment, as Receivers of the said
Rents for the half year ending at Easter next, which Collectors are as
follows, (viz.)

For the County of Mead, Arthur Dillon Esquire For the County of Westmeath, James
Leigh Esquire For the Queens County, John Gilbert Esquire For the Kings County, John
Wakeley Esquire For the County of Kilkenny, Joseph Wheeler Esquire For the County of
Wexford, John Tench Esquire For the County of Lowth, William Toxteeth Esquire For the
two Baronies of Rathcline and Shrewle in the county of Longford, Sir Richard
Lane Kn. and Bar. For the County of Antrim, Peter Beaghan Esquire For the County of
Down, Carrol Bolton Esquire For the county of Armagh, Francis Chambers Esquire For the
county of Monaghan, Tristram Carey Esquire For the county of Cavan, Samuel Towneley
Esquire For the county of Londonderry, Paul Brasier Esquire For the county of Tyrone,
Humfrey Evat Esquire For the county of Fermanagh, George Slack Esquire For the Province
of Munster, Roger Earl of Orrery. For the Province of Connaught and county of
Clare, Charles L. Castlecoote, For the Province of Connaught and county of
Clare, Richard Lord Coloony.
And the said Collectors are respectively to enter into Bond before any two of
His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, of the County where the persons aforesaid
are appointed Collectors respectively, with one or more good Sureties, in
double the sum designed for the Collection, to Sir James Ware Knight, his
Majesty's Auditor General, to his Majesty's use, with condition well and truly
to satisfy and pay such of the said sums as he shall receive, to his Majesty's
Uice-Treasurer and Receiver General, or his Deputy, at the Receipt of his
Majesty's Court of Exchequer, and to make a true and faithful Account of such
of the said Rents as he shall receive before such person and persons as shall
be authorized in that behalf, which Bonds the said Justices of Peace are to
return forthwith after the taking thereof to his Majesty's Auditor General; And
after the said Bonds shall be so entered into with Sureties as aforesaid and
not before; We do hereby require and authorize the Collectors aforesaid
respectively, to proceed in the Collection of the said Rents for the half year
ending at Easter next, within such County for which he has been or now is
appointed Collector as aforesaid, and to be guided therein by the Instructions
to such Collectors, dated the Sixteenth of February aforesaid; And that the
said Collectors are to appoint certain days and places of meeting in every
Barony in that County as speedily as possibly, so as the said Rents may be paid
to the said Collectors by the last day of April next, and thereof to give
public notice and forewarning throughout each Barony; And the said Collectors
are hereby required at their extreme perils to return into the Office of His
Majesty's Auditor General with all possible speed, and at the furthest by the
said last day of April next, a Duplicate under their hands and seals
respectively, of the particular Lands, Rents and persons who are to pay the
same, in such sort as was formerly prescribed to them by the former
Proclamation; And We do hereby authorize the said Collectors to defalk one
shilling in the pound, for every pound received, toward their travel and
charges, for keeping exact Accounts of their Receipts and Issues, and all other
charges incident to the said service; And We do hereby require and authorize
the said Collectors respectively, that where they find any Lands concealed,
which are liable to the said Quit-Rents, and are not as yet charged, that they
forthwith return unto his Majesty's Auditor General a particular List
containing the names of the Lands so concealed in the said County, and the
number of Acres the said Lands contein, who are the Tenants or Possessors of
the said Lands, and how long the same have been enjoyed by them, and what the
yearly values of such concealed Lands are; And We do hereby further require the
said Collectors, and every of them respectively, that where it shall appear
unto them by any Acquittance under the hand of his Majesty's Uice-Treasurer or
his Deputy, that any person chargeable with any Quit-Rent hereby designed to be
paid to the said Collectors, has paid the same for the time aforesaid, into
the Receipt of his Majesty's Exchequer here, that they do forbear the leavying
thereof; and although the same be made a part of the charge of their Accounts,
yet they shall have an Abatement of so much among the allowances and
defalkations of their Accounts, upon the perclose and determination of which
Accounts, before the Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer and his Majesty's
Auditor General, and upon payment into his Majesty's Exchequer, all such moneys
as shall be therein found due, the aforesaid Bonds into which they entered for
their due accompting, are to be delivered up unto them by his Majesty's Auditor.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin, the 27. day of February, 1661. GOD
SAVE THE KING Ja. Dublin. Kildare. W. Caulfeild. R. Coote. Santry. J. Temple.
Paul Davys. Rob. Meredith. Theo. Jones.


DUBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer Bookseller in Castle-street, Anno Dom. 1661.


