WIT IN A WILDERNESS Of Promiscuous POESY.

By the Author Tho. Jordan

Hunc novere modum nostri servare Libelli,
Parcere personis, dicere de vitiis.
LONDON Printed by R. A.

TO THE LIBERAL LOVER, CHARITABLE CHERISHER, AND PIOUS PRESERVER OF INDUSTRY,
HONESTY, CHASTE INGENUITY, SCIENCE and CIVILITY


THE much HONORED GEORGE Lord Bishop of St Ashaph WITH Due Addresses, I present
and Dedicate the dull devotion of these imperfect and unpolished POEMS.

WIT IN A WILDERNESS Of Promiscuous POESY: THE CHARACTERS OF A Complete POET.
WITH An Apology for POETRY.
HE is a man from Profanation free,
Unreverend railings, or obscoenity;
His Muse commits no treason against trust,
Does not invite to vengeance, pride or lust;
He is Truth's Favorite, and nere exalts
His Mean Degree, by guilding great men's faults;
Who sitting in his own sublimed height,
Survays, and weighs the billow-beaten fate
Of towering Statists, who do vainly raise,
Their Arms on bladders blown with vulgar praise
Popular throats, who in one hour, will cry
Both Halelujah, and Crucify:
Whose lungs (like Whirlwinds in tempestuous weathers)
Do bear down Churches, whilft they blow up Feathers.
This, and much more then this, we safely fee
Through the clear Optics of pure Pectry:
There we see one, whose head within few years
Did bear a Mytre, now wears Band o Liers:
Would it not move a Poets spleen with jest,
To see a Crosier made a Musket Rest?
Yonder Is another (by swift alteration)
Struck dumb, that was the Tongue of a wholeNation:
The Scene is changed, and He whose high command
Held up his head, must now hold up his hand;
He that in Law did hold such learned strife,
Must show by what tenure he holds his Life;
What Act so firm that strength cannot devour?
For Laws are but the Favorites of Power:
What Is he that will submit, his Sword and Tent
To the tame vigor of an Argument?
Or will resign his ravished power upon
The phlegmatic results of Pro and Can?
These are the vile vicisitudes which we
Are not obnoxious to in 'Poetry:
Such storms fly over us, when have ye known
Pernassus under Sequestration?
Or Pegasus his winged shoulders stoop
To the Conductor of a County Troop?
What Sequestrator yet could ever call
The Muses unto Hab^rdashers Hall?
Go search the books where Prize accounts are writ,
You Will searce find Item took ten tun of wit,
For what they have, so tenderly theyhandle,
It may be vented by one inch of candle:
A Poets poverty is a defense
Against the most honorable insolence:
We have no Ships at Sea, doubt no distress
Our hopes are little, and our fears are less:
Whilst the poor Merchant (robbed by Dutch or French)
Sinks in the Exchange, to rise in the Kings Bench:
Show me that Age a Poet can produce,
Who ever lost a thousand pound at Use?
Or who can say a Poet has un done
An hundred families to raise one Son?
Whilst the grave Mizer, and his powdered Sir
Study to be damned in Diameter:
Pray tell me (you that lie upon the lurch)
What brack in State, or Schism in the Church
Has Poetry begot? what Kingdom lies
Drowned in its tears for Poets villanics?
Wealth and ambition tempt not us, we pity
The careful Country, and the subtle City;
Where one man's bounds a hundred fields embrace
To pick out three yards for his burying place:
Whilst we under the shadow of one tree
Extract more absolute content then he
Finds in the firtil substance; we have more
Wealth at command, then rolls along the shore
Of golden Ganges; He is only poor
That has too much, if he do vvish for more:
And he is truly rich that in his dish,
And on his back has all that he can vvish:
Sometimes vvee'r wound^d with Loves dart, but then
Our Contemplation licks us whole again:
Content is our Elixar, what a stir
The Patient Reason-rackt Philosopher
Keeps for the Stone, attending all events
That fall from fast, and loose Experiments:
He says he will make Gold of Lead and Brass:
But (in the end) turns his own Gold to Glass:
His Furnace then as bad as hell does grow;
And he (poor man) is damned in Balneo,
Whilst he that sits upon the Muses hill,
Crovvn'd with content, turns all to what he will;
Pain into pleasure, Misery to Mirth,
By sacred skill ext^acts Heaven out of earth,
All out of nothing, and (at length) can dye
With a difiance to all Tyranny:
Like Lucan in his Bathing Tub, that stood
Speaking of verses, vvhi'lst his eyes ran blood:
Nor are they Poets that can only chyme
In numbers, and put gi^gles into Rhyme:
But he whose Catholic Conceptions can
Demonstrate to the Intellect of man
By active Metaphor and Alegory,
Remote design, Antique and modern story,
Descriptions of Battalia's, Sea Fights,
The Characters of sorrows and delights;
Annual seasons, rivers, weeping fountains,
The firtil Valleys, and the mineral Mountains:
All foreign Countries, Cities, and Kings Courts,
Their trade, war, Law, Religion, food and sports;
All contrarieties, and what does border
Upon the Banks of Beauty and disorder;
All passions and affections that do lie
Revealed, or hid in man's capacity:
Great Kings you are our Subjects, though more true
You are to us, then yours have been to you:
We can imbalm your Virtues with pure Spices,
And make a Pickle shall preserve State-vices
Five hundred years, the rage a P^^^ vents,
Can raze a thousand Marble Monuments:
The Factious people do but vainly strive
To kill that Fame which we will keep alive.
What are the deeds of the most valiant men,
If Poets do not write them over again?
'Twas not Achilles Lance, nor Hectors Shield,
But Homers Poetry that won the Field;
Caesar and Pompey, Worthies more then men,
Were made, not by their Acts, but Lucan's pen;
What are your best Orations, if they be
Not gilded by the Beams of Poetry?
It is a sweet Compendium of all Arts,
Divide the Bible in four equal parts,
And (by your disquisition) 'twill be known
(Without offense) that Poetry is one;
(Though not the first in order) the other three
Treat of Law, History, and Propheey:
Then blush for shame you that do bid defiance
To the bright Beams of so serene a Science;
For he that dares give it an ill report,
His understanding is a foot too short.
A Poem composed, and spoken by the Author to the late King at the Dedication
of Mr. Tho. Bushel's Rock at Enston in Oxon, 1638. in the porson of Caliope.
Lo I Caliope chief of the Nine
And first in order of that triple Trine;
The Muses Sisterhood; (for who is he
That knows not of our sacred Hierarchy)
Am now at length, through many a weary mile
Safely arrived upon the British Isle:
The causes of my coming, what they were
That drew me to this Western Hemisphere,
Are these, the Muses heard (for nothing's done
Which they discern not in a Vision)
Of a strange Rock discovered under ground,
That with fresh streams and wonders does abound,
Which Nature unto such perfection brought,
It looks like day from the old Chaos wrought;
And has the Pomp and pleasures of the place
That a great King and Queen have daign'd to grace,
And with their presence (far transcending ours)
Often visit those pure Wells and hallowed Bowers:
When these glad tidings from our Servant Fame
Were whispered in our ear, I strait way came
In person mounted on the fiery wings
Of our own Pegasus, to view these Springs,
To make a strict survay what waters flow,
What walks are in it, and what woods do grow;
And (as I liked them) they (on my report)
Would hither come, and hasten their resort:
But it is known Maids may long, and I would fain,
(Ere my return) first see that Sovereign,
That Royal Charlemaine whose actions are
Worthy the Muses and their Register;
Whose deeds a Pattern, and whose life a Law,
Does the whole Court to imitation draw
Of his rare virtues, (without flattery)
The height of my ambition is to be
Made happy in the object of his sight
And his dear Spouse the Consort of his light;
Kiss her fair hand, who is (as Fame does say)
More bright then is our own Urania:
But stay! what sudden luster strikes my sense
With some quick, but Seraphick influence?
Who ever asked for Phoebus in the Skies,
Or which was love amongst the Deities?
Fool that I am, it is easy to devine,
Where e're the Beams of Majesty do shine:
Then I address my self great Sir to you,
To whom these Titles and these Rites are due:
By me the Muses humbly fall before
Your sacred feet, and prostrate them adore,
^owing their ancient dwellings to forsake,
that they your Princely favors may partake:
^da, Parnassus, and the flowery Plain
Of Thessaly no longer shall detain
Their swift approach, but all the Virgin Pack
^n glory seated on the vvinged back
Of firtil Zephyrus, shall hither come,
And make these Springs their everlasting home;
Here will they sit, and Carol forth your Fame,
Your nursing Nature, and your noble Name:
Then in exalted numbers tell how great
You are, when mounted in your Mercy Seat;
And that this pregnant lsle you do inherit,
Not more by right of Blood, then right of Merit.
Could you disclaim the line of your extraction,
And (amongst millions) stand for Readiness election,
It would appear conspicuous to beholders,
That you excel in soul, as he in shoulders:
This Trinity of Crowns you wear, respect
Your will, your memory, and intellect;
(The number of perfection) for you are
The Muses Evening, and their Morning Star.
On Fickle, and his Mistress Lydia.
FIckle is vexed at heart (he says) to see
His Lydia look on him so s^urvily;
Thou art a most unconscionable man,
Would have the Wench look better then she can?
A double Acrostich and Anagram on the Noble Name of the much honored Sir Tho.
Fisher Baronet.
Though the tall Cedar, and the loyal shrub
Fall at the fury of the Zealots tub
Hopes yet are pregnant, that the good old way
In Presents merit no Anathem
Oblations of this harmless nature are
Surely no motives for another war
Much honored Sir, then grant him pardon, who
Has don, but what your favors move him t
All ^oly happiness that men have known
Ere since our Saviors Incarnation
Secure your soul and body, goods and name,
Renown your Family, and guard your Fame
May all, and more then I can say or write,
Contribute to your next New Years deligh
Sir Thomas Fisher Baronet (Anagram) Starri Beams shine forth.
HOw well your Title, and your honored Name
Comply in this apposet A^agram;
For in an Age when Learnings Laureat Head
Is with Cimerian darkness overspread,
That men can scarce discover wit or vvorth,
Most men confess your Starri Beams shine forth.
On a Love-Bag which a Gentleman found, and concealed from a Lady, when they
were playing at Questions and Commands.
I Will confess, rack me no more, 'twas I
(Not out of gain, but curiofity)
That hid your Crewil Love-hood in a place
Obscure, because it did obscure your face;
Wbo would uot (were he near) some hazard run
To take away that Cloud which hides the Sun?
Or what is he, that would not (if he might)
Withdraw that Curtain which divides the light;
This is my Fact, and had a Judge been by
He would have been guilty as well as I.
I must confess when I was held in bands.
By curious Questions, and with kind Commands;
I pleaded guiltless, though 'twas understood
I did but wear two faces in one Hood:
Yet now I hope submission and confession
Will wave my Doom, and nullify the Session;
The gentle Judge will lay aside his fury,
And fright my sense no more with a grand Jury;
For I was much afraid (e're I did part)
That I should be burned in the hand or heart,
The fear is past, and (to end controversy)
Prey let my restitution meet your mercy:
Pardon the Crime, and cease to think upon
His fact, that does return you two for one.
An Epitbalamium on the Names and Nuptials of Mr. William Drayton, and the most
devoutly vertnous Mrs. Grace Drayton.
Worth crown your Nuptials, may your Union prove
Great as the Sacred Bonds of Angels love:
Joy kindle your bright zeals, may the flame rise
Resplendent as the Phoenix Sacrifice:
Love, health, wit, wealth, with all delights that can
Advance the honor of deserving man:
Lend luster to your Loyalties, may you
Command all good your wish can prompt ye to.
If Poets may prove Prophets, I foretell
Exceeding pleasures, without parallel,
Are moving toward you; ye nere shall know
Division, nor no other Wedlock woe:
Many fair Babies may the Bride bring forth
Repleat with all things, which wise men call worth:
Dutiful, gracious, beautiful and bright,
As are the Stars in number, and in light:
Riches shall flow so fast upon your shore,
You may as well count sands, as tell your store;
And you shall see your Childrens Children prove,
That they are Offsprings of a loyal love:
You never shall know jealousy, but be
Our purest Paterns of integrity:
These things may come to pass, for we all know
Nothing's impossible to him we owe
Our Faith, and our Allegiance; but however,
Let nothing dull the edg of your endeavor,
Nor at the chances of this world be vexed,
What Is wanting here, will be supplied in the next.
Sic Vaticinatur, Your Servant, J. T.

An Encomium to the much honored Rich. Cheyny of Hackney Esquire, his bountiful
Patron, and to his incomparably virtuous Consort.
HEalth, wealth, worth, wit, with all that can be brought
In the circumference of humane thought
Exalt your soul and body; may the breath
Of Praise and Prayer guard your life and death:
Nothing appear to you, but what may be
A Badg of honor, or of amity;
What God can give, or wisest men entreat,
Fall upon you, till you are good and great:
May your dear Consort* and her issue grow
Brighter then Lillies on the Banks of Po^:
All Excellence that waits on humane breath,
From the disquiet Cradle to the death,
Remain with you two, in whose Spirits move
Concords Elixar, and the soul of Love:
May all that man can wish, or Angels do,
(In sacred consultations) fall on you:
Wit wait upon your wealth, what e're is fit
For man to ask, may you accomplish it;
May Providence defend ye from those jars
That sink great families in Civil wars:
Religion rule my Poesy, that all
Which I have said, may prove Prophetical.
These are the wishes, and the prayers of one,
Who makes your welfare his devotion.
A Poetical Parley, with a thredbare Cloak; Dedicated to his worthy friend, M.
HEN. STONESTREET.
CLoak! (If I may so call thee) though thou art
My old Acquaintance, prithee now let us part;
Tho^ were my equal friend in thirty-one,
But now thou look like a mere Hanger-on:
And ar^ so useless to me, I scarce know
Sometimes, whether I have thee on or no;
But this I needs must say, when thou go fro me,
These ten years thou have been no burden to me:
Yet that is thy Accusation, for if I
Divorce thee from me, it is for Levity;
Thou have abused my bed, that is, thou have
Not kept me warm when thou were overcast:
Transparent Garment, proof against no weather,
Men wonder by what art thou hang'st together;
Nor can the eyes of the best reason pry
unto thy new occult Geometry.
A fellow the other day but cast his Eye-on,
And swore I went mantled in Dandelion:
Another asked me, (who was somewhat bolder,)
^f I did wear a Love-bag on my shoulder;
fear a fire, as fair Maids the small pox,
And dare not look toward a Tinder-box;
Nor he that sells them up and down I know,
^f he come near it, it is but touch and go:
A red faced fellow frights me, though some fear,
That which makes his Nose red, made my Cloak bare;
They say my thick back and thin Cloak appear
Very like powdered beef and vinegar.
Another vowed (whose tongue had no restriction)
It was no garment, but the Poets fiction.
Did ever man discover such a knack,
To walk in Querpo with a Cloak on's back?
A very zealous Brother did begin
To jeer, and say, Sir! your original sin
Is not washed out, (pray do not take it ill)
I see you wear your Fathers figleaf still.
A Scholar (in an elevated thought)
Protested 'twas the web Arachne wrought,
When she contended with Minerva, but
Another Rascal had his finger cut,
And begged a piece to wrap about it; thus
You see (kind Cobweb) how they laugh at us:
Good Cambrick Lawn depart, let me not be
For ever, thus fettered in Tiffany:
Although I never yet did merit praise,
I Would rather have my shoulders crowned with Bays,
Then hung with Cypress, if this fortune be
Always dependent upon Poetry,
I would my kinder destiny would call
Me to be one oth' Clerks of Blackwel Hall;
For though their easy studies are more dull,
Yet what they want in wit, they have in wool.
Once more farewell, these are no times for thee,
Thick Cloaks are only fit for knavery:
The only Cloaks that now are most in fashion,
Are Liberty, Religion, Reformation;
All these are faced with zeal, and buttoned down
With Jewels dropped from an Imperial Crown:
He that would cloak it in the new translation,
Must have his Tailor cut it Pulpit fashion.
Do not appear within the City, there
They mind not what men are, but what men wear:
The habit speaks the man, how can thou thrive,
Where a good Cloak's a Representative?
The females will not wear thee, they put on
Such cloaks as do obscure the rising Sun.
How can thou hope for entertainment, when
Women make cloaks even of Committee men?
Farewell poor Coverwit, upon this Brier
I Will hang thee up, if any do enquire,
Where his brains were, that let his cloak there swing,
Tell them his wits are gone a wooll-gathring.
A Defense for women, in an answer to a vulgar invective.
1
SHall scurrilous pens for ever be free,
Whilst our just vengeance smothers?
The Balad of Bagnol's and yours may agree,
For I think they are svvorn brothers:
Your fragments of phantsie are cheaper then chaff,
For when in a Tavern ye svvagger and quaff,
So you may but make a fevv drunkards laugh,
You will abuse your mothers.
2
Whilst you are railing at the Sex,
Your drowsy Muse so drunk is,
That you would give all the ware in your packs,
But to know where a punk is:
You make your addresses to Cloris and Phillis,
Ye say they out-rival the Roses and Lillies,
But when they will not perform what your will is,
You grow as sick as Monkeys.
3
You are so zealous at the fport.
By turns you will watch an entry,
Some Citizens do curse ye for it,
Who in their shops stand ccntry.
Thus whilst you range in other men's Parks,
And would have the world look upon you as Sparks
You are but spruce Tailors, and Counselors Clark^
For such is our new Gentry.
4
You swagger, as if ye rise from the bed
Where Venus and great Mars lay,
Though against us your poetical head,
Did rhyme it so perversely:
Yet with a word to express you in brief,
Many there are which be Ranters in chief,
Who do wear powdered hair, though they want powdered bee^
Well boyld and stuffed with parsley.
5
You with your ranting railing words
Do seek our Sex to batter,
Although for wit each head affords
As much as makes no matter;
So patched, perfumed, and painted you be,
Ye look almost as like women as we,
The diff'r^nce is only a span above knee,
Which makes your chops to chatter.
6
Here is a toy tied to a sword,
Though much he does not trouble it:
And to vent wit in every word,
His frothy brain does bubble it,
His pitiful pate with sweet oil he annoynts,
With rainbow-like-ribbons he ties up his joints,
Whose father before did wear blew-leather points,
Brass buttons, and tawny dublet.
7
Here is another Perywig'd youth,
Whose every hair's a fetter.
And he would very fain live forsooth,
With Cribbidg, Dice, and Setter;
He pranks it, and looks like a crow in a gutter,
And though he want bread (a sad story to utter)
His hair has a breakfa^t of Gesemin butter,
A three penny chop were better.
8
I vvonder what the women find
In these vveak slashing tapers,
That they will continue to be kind,
Though so abused in papers:
Were I as your Mistresses, I would trust no man,
They merit contempt for their being so common,
That the best word they will give, is a Pox o God on'em.
I hate to see such vapers.
9
Religion they have none at all,
For they know no such thing,
But that which from full glasses fall,
Directed to their King;
In whose cause, they say, they have had many slashes,
Though povvders, perfumes, sack, music, and slashes,
Instead of mourning in sackcloth and ashes,
From their devotions spring.
10
Here is another formal Lad
Was Governor of a Town,
Who says he has lost all he had,
By being true toth' Crown:
But when he should fight he was comeing the Caster,
Which was the occasion of many a disaster,
He Will scarce love his Mistress, that nere loved his Master,
Let him vvear Svvord or Govvn.
11
I hope, though you abuse our sex,
The thriving party will
Hang large Encomiums 'bout our necks,
For it is known full well
By some, that in high places be men,
Who in the Church and State are freemen,
They were beholding at first to the zeal of the women.
A doleful tale to tell.
12
Yet never woman erred so much
In this, as did the man,
Whose vvild and frantique zeal was such,
Decide it yet none can.
The one would keep his old found diddle,
The the other was clear against surpless and fiddle,
They fell out like two fools, who should ly^ in the middle.
And so the wars began.
13
Now some repent, and some rejoyee,
And some are quite confounded,
But 'tvvixt them both, svvcet Peace's voice,
With drum and trumpets vvounded.
Against Crosses and Crossiers the people did roar,
Until they had beat down proud Babilons Whore,
But its thought they have let in ten thousand more;
'T may be they have compounded.
14
This jar did make you to engage
Almost all Christian Nations,
For then was brought upon the Stage
All sorts of sects and fashions.
Ye levied the Scotch, and the Welsh Shon a-Morgans,
And now ye dispute with the Dutch Demigorgons,
The dangerous diffrence 'twixt Bagpipes and Organs,
Did first provoke your passions.
15
Now let your thredbare Poet say,
Which of our worst offenses
Can any whit compare with they
That made these blew pretenses?
Although ye think women such dull-edged tools,
Your wit, and your reading, your travel, and schools,
Have but made ye the fitter for quarrelling fools,
Or I have lost my senses.
16
Then cease your clapper, and give over,
Let women bear the Bell,
The faults which you commit are more
Then I can write or tell.
I never did know such a surly season,
For nothing is done by Religion or Reason.
Moreover -- ds foot, I Would almost spoke treason,
I Will leave off while it is well.
A disswasion to a very virtuous Lady, who resolved to be a Nun.
REcall this Resolution, or you will prove
Sinful to God, to Nature, and to Love:
He that did form all creatures for increasing,
Made fruitful Amity the first great blessing.
Why were you made a woman? Why were we
(By different Sex) put in capacity
Of getting Children? you cross Gods decree,
You will live single, God bids multiply:
You wrong the Law of Nature, every thing
Contributes to the storehouse of the Spring:
Beasts, Fish, Foul, Grain, one ear of corn will yield
(With husbandry) enough to fill a field:
Were every thing fruitless (as you would be)
You Would eat the walls down of your Nunnery.
But your transgression unto Love is such,
As no man's pen can aggravate too much;
Were those blue veins, red lips, white hands black eyes
Made only for a vestal sacrifice?
But you reply, it is to prevent those crimes,
And hot allurements which pollute the times:
Madam, are you so weak, or sin so stout,
That nothing but stone walls can keep it out?
"Ulysses when he feared to be imbrae'd
"By Syreus, bound himself to the ship mast;
Because he found his soul so much inclined
Unto temptation, did his body bind;
And is it so with you? must you needs run
This tempting race, unless you have fetters on?
Are Maids so frail, can Virgins find no trick
For chastity, but to be buried quick?
And yet when all this straight prevention's wrought,
Not all your vvalls, nor bars, can keep out thought:
In my conceit those hearts have firmest stations,
That can be chaste in spite of all temptations:
Chaste wedlock was at first designed, that we
Might not abuse, but keep our chastity.
You may do so, and yet not live alone,
That woman's chaste enough that knovvs but one;
Stop your resolve then e're it further runs,
For virtuous wives are chaster then some Nuns.
Thrones, Annagram, Thorns.
THe late Kings sad distresses, scoffs and scorns,
Have made it manifest that thrones are thorns.
On the late K. departure, 1642.
WHen ill advice hurried the K. from hence,
Virtue was held with vicious violence.
On his conclusion.
THe ranting rout ruined the Royal head,
With a beer boul, a banquet, and a bed.
An Encomium, written in the commendation of red Noses; contrived at the
request of a friend, and dedicated to all of that Livery.
1
FArevvel pale Beauties, you that deal
In chalk and oatmeal, salt and meal,
Which your curral current hinders;
You that feed on loam and cindars,
Parched pease, and biscuit, till ye walk
Like moving figures cut in chalk;
Depart, and give my muse leave to disclose,
The ranting riches of a Rubric Nose.
2
Give ear to me you scarlet finners,
That swallow Seas in Fish-street dinners;
Who deal in gimlets, quills, and favvcets,
Hate morning ca^dles, broths, and possets,
And think there may be lesser errings,
In gammous, tongues, and pickled herrings:
You know what costly composition goes
To the well forming of a right red Nose.
3
My phantsie shall make large defense
Of the red Nose his excellence;
As Pond in's Almanacks does paint,
It is the tincture of the Saint;
The thriving color; what a loss
The Dutch have had by George his Cross;
And can he want of dignity and grace,
That wears the badg of England in his face?
4
Walk in the garden, can your nose,
Or eyes choose better then the Rose?
Look in Cabinets, can you be
Better pleased, then with a Ruby?
The flaming Topaz, blazing Stone,
The Garnet, and Vermilion?
Then he that has a right red nose on's own,
Commands the brightest Jewels of a Crown.
5
If the men of old had chose,
Not by stature, but by Nose;
Their proper Prince, it was most fit,
That the red Nose should carry it;
For then he partly might make good
His title, by the right of blood:
Yet had they voted it, I much surmize,
Their Noes had been too hard for all their I's.
6
How like a Comet does he show,
That wears the brightness on his brow?
So leaps the Sun from Thetis bed,
As he from his sublime hogshead
Of rich Canary, when he flings
His healths abroad ^o Queens and Kings:
Nay more, I Will find in a good fellows Snout,
A banquet of fish, flesh, fowl, wine, and fruit:
7
A Crab well boyld, a Salmon raw,
Prawns, Crawfish, and the Lobsters claw;
And for flesh, ^ere you may spy
The corner of a red Deer Pie,
Pe^^cks thighs, and Turkyes heads,
Cherries, Strawberries in beds,
Ripe Respas, red cheek'd Codlings, and (for wine)
Claret, Tent, Aligant, and Muscadine.
8
Then let your paler fronts give place
Unto the Royal red nosed face,
For it contains (without an oath)
Land and Trade, Meat, Drink, and Cloth,
It Is a Garden, it is a Ship,
A Treasury, a Ladies lip:
To leave particulars, and sum up all,
The red ^ose carries it in General.
A Panegirick, written at the invitation of a Gentleman, who was then going to
the Press with a book, entitled, The Praise of Podex.
INgenuous Sir prepare your petty Codex,
For I am come with paper to your Podex,
I have pervs'd your volum, and in it
I find no fragments of a costive wit;
Your Readers all are ravished, each one feels,
These liquid labors issue down the heels
Of apprehension, nay I dare be bold
To say, each line shows like a chain of gold
On Satin shoulders, bright as his (I think)
The letters of whose name do yield A STINK:
That popular Physician Doctor B.
Who proudly told me he hates Poetry;
Should I but bring him such sweet lines as these,
Would lay by Galen and Hypocrates,
To read my rhimes, whose powerful Energy
Exceeds his Salt, Sulphur and Mercury:
For he that views them w^ll, cannot forbear,
To think he has a Clister pipe in's ear:
It Is Podex that we praise, the Theme has been
Very much handled, but thus I begin;
Podex is Master of Arts, and is, I see
Of late, so versed in Lay Divinity,
That he has subtly wrought his sliding joints,
From Hooks and Eyes, to Fundamental Points:
Babilons Baggage, and the Tailors stitches,
Have sown such strife, that Podex wears the breeches*
Podex in study of the Law ascends,
And will have most of it at's fingers ends
It Is thought within this twelfmoneth, but the ills
He fears is, that the copious Chancery Bills
Will grow too small, by which he understands,
He shall not deal in-justice with both hands:
Much may be said of him, though some do vent,
Mischievous words in his disparagement:
They say he is company for Whores, and Gluttons,
And that the best on's kindred now make Battons.
I know not what they mean, I Will keep below decks,
Least I (as one of late) do lose my Podex;
It Is thought that many men have been undone,
Only by Podex and his hangers on.
Some think he is a Coward 'cause they find,
When men are fighting, he still keeps behind;
They are deceived, he best maintains the fray,
When as his face is turned another way.
Some carp at his descent, and say that he
Has his Extraction from low Pedigree;
Because in latter times he has been able,
To rise from Cobblers stall to Council table:
They envy at his Greatness, but it is well
Known to the Wise, Podex does so excel,
That give him but some Grains to mend his weight,
And he may fully fill a Chair of State.
Many men mutter many things, some say,
It is not fit that he should live a day:
This man would have him crushed, and that man crowned*
Another says Podex shall kiss the ground;
A fourth swears dam him, if he had a broad axe,
And time, and place, he would dismember Podex:
But Ladies to your feathered fingers I
Commit soft Podex for security;
You love him for the worth that is about him,
And cannot go to pluck a Rose without him:
You like him at your Boards, and in your Beds,
He bears the Keys of all your Maiden-heads.
Though you were made the Mint of Mankind, yet
It Is lovely Podex has the Stamp of it:
Then use him gently, do not overthrow him,
And, when you please, present him with this Poem.
On Filcher.
FIlcher reports that he is a Lawyer grown,
And he says true, but it is a Highway one.
On Silence.
THe liberal Lips are liable to wrong,
If you would hold your peace, pray hold your tongue.
On Chat's Wife.
CHat's Wife in speaking many tongues is known,
If he had mine, he would find enough of one.
An Apology for Danceing, Dedicate to all the active Proficients, but more
peculiarly unto Mr. R. L.
MY Muse, which fornerly was wont to prize
Ladies fair hands, white necks, red lips, black eyes;
Flies with reformed wings and (as its meet)
Lays by the head to magnify the Feet:
The subject of this half hours thought shall be
On dancing's regular Activity:
And it is fit this Quality shouid be
Exalted with the feet of Poetry:
For Scholars when their flameing souls advance
To write a Poem, all their spirits dance:
First I will tell you what the essential part
Of Danceing is, and then, Have at the Art:
It is an Act, if rightly understood,
Consisting of three parts, Time, Tune, and Mood;
Time limits, Tune does regulate, the vigor
Of Mood, does aptly form posture, and figure:
Thus are the parts distinguished, I shall next
Give you a Comment on this tempting Text
In orderly Gradations, not by leaps,
But soberly ascend to it by steps.
What can be more allicient then to see
Men move with mathematique majesty?
Whose glyding feet so press the buxom earth
As if their Motion gave the Music birth.
Where not alone the foot, but head, arm, thigh
Contribute to complete the harmony;
It is a fit of order where our eyes,
Have glimpses of the Spheres Rotundities:
It Is Music to the sight, a swift and sweet
Concord of spirits; Language of the feet,
It moves the soul with such secret devotion,
That it compels the standers by to motion:
All creatures since the world (at first did start
From Chaos) are presented by this Art:
In motion or in station, look upon,
The active glory of the rising Sun;
Where time and tune do both (at once) confine
His flameing feet along the Ecliptique line;
Exactly to a minute, some will say,
He danceth to, upon an Easter day.
The Moon does more then he, for (like our Apes,
In Antiques) she appears in several shapes;
Whilst round about her, (by divine command)
In figure all the Constellations stand:
And he that will on Plinies volum call,
Shall find much order in each Animal.
The whole Creation is a Dance, where men
Rise, walk, turn, side so to their seats again.
An Army is a Dance, where (though an Ocean,
Of mingled men) they measure all their motion;
Who (as the trumpets sound, or drums do beat)
Lead up, that is, March on, Fall back, Retreat:
But if it chance they by the Foe are foyld,
They Are all disfigured, and the dance is spoyld.
A Common-w^alth's a Dance, (mark it) Here Is one
Leads up quick time, and does as fast fall down:
This subtle fellow sides, and that is found,
(Or rather lost) to be still turning round:
But leaving these at each hand, in the middle
A man whose feet keep time to Fortune's Fiddle:
With a Coranto pace, the rest surprises,
Sets best^leg forward, makes a chase and rises:
I could enlarge upon it, but I must
In Dancing's use and the abuse be just;
In modest men, and virtuous women this
Cannot conduce to any thing amiss:
Besides, some Dances and some Dancers be
So grave, they move like a solemnity;
Rather then such as titilate the blood,
With any Appetite that is not good:
The true intent of dancing to me seems,
Only an Artful perfecting the Limbs
In gracious postures, such as Nature would,
Her self have brought to pass if that she could
This Art is necessary, if it were,
Only to make the Feet familiar
To walk the streets with hansomness, or come,
With civil motion to a strangers Room:
But (in a word) these active Recreations
Are ancient, good, and practiced by all Nations:
The abuses are, where persons void of fame
And full of lnst, use this to feed the flame:
What Is this to the Art? the Spider and the Be
Extract, by one rule of Philosophy:
And that which is an ornament in one,
May in another breed destruction:
I fear that Scripture phrase, where mischief's hid,
Has done more hurt then ever dancing did:
All things may be corrupted, meat, drink, health;
The Seat of Justice, an whole Commonwealth:
If it be so, then I may boldly say,
That Danceing is as innocent as they.
An Epitaph in an Acrostick, on the Name of his worthy Friend THOMAS MILWARD
Gent. whose face (by general conception) was very like the late King.
Though men from Law, Love, Loyalty, do fall,
Here lies a Cabinet contained them all;
One in whose unconfined soul did dwell
More worth then I can write, or thou can tell:
A man of merits, he that further dives,
Shall find he had all in superlatives.
Much of that man's dear feature he had on,
In whose late loss so many are undone;
Loyal in love he was, though strangely crossed,
With some who had just cause to prize him most;
A man more full of faith unto his friends
Remains not upon earth, without self ends:
Died, and lived well, of whom my Muse thus sing
He was a Copy of the best of Kings.
To his worthy friend Mr. THO. JORDAN.
SIR,
SInce you pleased, not only to accept, but to allow my last your commendation,
I have adventured once more to command my M^se to give you a visit, and in that
visit to present his respects to you, who is desirous of the title of your
friend (to which let experience add the epithete of faithful)

HEN. STONESTREET.

To Mr. T. J. on his Poems.
MUch like a Prisoner, that has long time lay
In darksome Cells, without a glimps of day,
Dazzled at first approach into the light,
Can scarce distinguish wher't be day or night;
So my abused Muse too long confined
To silence, by my negligence grew blind:
Her optics are so weak, she cannot discry
(Without her Spectacles) true Poetry:
Yet (thanks to great Apollo) she retains
A love of those that write Poetic strains;
She loves the name of Poet, though she be
Unskilful in the Art of Poesy:
She loves the company of those that write
Well-polisht verses, though she ^an't indite:
Such as whose wits to illustrate all their theams
Fetch Pearls from the depth of Heliconian streams:
This makes me hope they will thrive, because desire
Is the only way to gain Poetic fire;
And if by your good favor she obtain
More strength, that grace shall not be received in vain;
For she has vowed if e're such glorious rays
Inlighten her to echo forth your praise.
To the much honored HEN. STONESTREET Gent. on London Bridge.
SIR,
I received from the innocent hand of your immaculate Muse such a salute, as
would invite a late sick man to be in love with visitations; you do very aptly
say, that you bave commanded your Muse to present it, for (without flattery) I
find you have no less command of the whole Quire, then of

Sir, your servant, THO. JORDAN.

To Mr. H. S. in answer of his ingenious Poem.
NOt much unlike that Captive which we see
Fettered with favors, chained with charity:
Do I appear, your candid contribution
(Mysteriously) designs my deminution:
Your love does over-lay me, I shall die,
(If you persist) not knowing how or why:
Your Poems make me lose my apprehension,
And soar above the sense of my ascension:
But why (dear Stonestreet) do you thus confine
In your own Cabinet the noble Nine?
What have the Virgins done, that they must be
Compressed with such divine captivity?
You are more strict then Statesmen, they that sit
At Westminster will not sequester wit:
But I repent this rudeness, and think rather
You do secure them like a Foster-father:
From ignorant pretenders, or from those
That wrong the Laws of God and man in Proes:
That (nameless) number, which more evil do,
Then man can think, or hell can look into:
You have done well in it, may the Muses be
Fertile, as is your own fidelity:
Whilst I justly declare (if you go on)
That London Bridge stands over Helicon.
On a Cavalier.
A Cavalier did in an highway theft,
Lose one of's arms, but his right hand was left.
Slut (the Annagram) Lust.
SLoth needs must be a wrong to female Fame
Since Slut and Lust lodge in one Annagram:
But this you may conclude, if Sloth do hurt you
To be a busy body is a virtue.
An Aerostical Eulogy composed on the name of his much respected Coz^n M.
FRANCIS JORDAN of Ensham, in the County of Oxon.
From fair pretending in unfaithful friends,
Innocent looks that hide injurious ends;
Religious Traitors, which two faces hold,
One of Divinity, the other of Gold:
Armies of such as do with one accord
Ruin Religion, to advance Gods Word.
New Reformation, in an oath that stands
Diameter to all which God commands;
Conjealing Winters, and contagious Summers,
All such Divines as deal in Guns and Drummers,
Intemp'rate feasts, false women, and bad wine,
Neutrality in things that are divine;
Secret Consumptions, and such deeds as do
Wast wealth and wit, Good Lord deliver you.
A Comparison.
QUick-wit reports, that his wild Brother Randle
Has loved a Whore, as a Moth loves a Candle.
On Lay Elders.
ARe Elders (now) so virtuous in their ways?
They were not found so in Susanna's days.
An Elegy and Epitaph on the death of the right worshipful SIR NATH. BRENT
KNIGHT, Doctor of Law, and Judge of the Pr^rogative Court, who exchanged this
present life in the year 1653.
DRy eyes depart, all that come hither shall
Not go, but flow unto our Funeral:
This Mare mortuum admits of none
But such a Fleet, whose sails with sighs are blown.
If any Merchant has by war and weather,
Lost both his ship, and lading, bring him hither:
That Proselite which our Religion bears,
Must learn from us not to drop Beads, but tears:
We hate Disputers, they are of our Ranks,
Whose Maxims are to suffer and give thanks.
Our sorrows do not with that man accord,
Whose point of doctrine is upon his sword:
Therefore no Statesman comes, unless he con'd
Vent as much water, as he has drawn blood;
His Donatives are too severely dealt,
That wears the Key of heaven at his Belt;
And not for our Society, the loss
We have sustained, allows of no such dross:
We have interred a man, whose firtil name
Enriched his Title, and gave Spurs to Fame,
Whose noble well-weigh'd actions might impart
New rules unto the Mathematique Art.
One whose Religion never understood
How to gain heaven by the right of blood;
Who thought no man more desperate then he
That could not bless and love his enemy;
That to be courteous only to our friends,
Is but the subtle issue of self ends:
He was a man, whose wide extended store
Gave thankful invitations to the poor;
Who nere thought that man's charity profound,
That dol'd a farthing from a thousand pound;
One whose essential virtues did out-vy
A zealot in his best formality;
His meanest acts (in every man's esteem)
Did shine more bright then other men could seem:
The perfect'st Hieroglyphick of all good,
That has (of late) been mixed with flesh and blood,
More real merit in his soul did lie,
Then any Metaphor can magnify.
Good Readers let our eyes persuade your ears,
And what we want in tongues, take out in tears.
The Epitaph.
REader, can thou weep to see
The loss of Law and Piety?
Had thou rather meet thy death,
Then have learning out of breath?
Will thy eyes confess thy grief,
To view virtue, want relief?
Would thou let thy fountain run,
If thy Country were undone?
Can thy tears proclaim a tide,
To see Gospel crucified?
Will thy holy eyes wear mourning,
When thou see the Church a burning?
If thou have wep'd for any thing
Since bold Rebels killed the King
Of our Salvation, (Jesus Christ)
Weep now, or none will when thou die;
For underneath this stone there lies,
A subject for all mourning eyes.
An Epitaph on a good wife.
HEre lies a soul that loved her Savionr Christ,
Her parents, partner, paterns, Prince, and Priest.
A Similc on a fine Whore.
AN Whore is like a Squirril, that does vail,
And cover all her body with her tail.
To his faithful ingenuous friend and old acquaintance, J. T. Gent.
FRiend (in that firtil title, I dispense
To thee (at once) both love and reverence)
I do salute thee, what I now hold forth,
Is a pale prospect of thy pregnant worth,
Tricked with a pensil of less worth then will,
And drawn by one who has more love then skill:
The Sun has twenty Summers strewn the earth
With flowers, since our Acquaintance first took birth:
It was a season when our Drums and Flutes
Did give precedence to Love and Lutes:
When men by Piety were so restrained,
They durst not think a K. could be Arraigned:
Plays were in fashion too, they did not fear,
To have their plots brought to the Theater:
The big-look'd Hector-like Bravado's then
(That lived on Whores, and Country Gentlemen)
Were called the Blades, great Colonels did use
To vvear blevv Frocks, and cobble Porters shoes:
Ere Austin was put down, and Burton Sainted,
(Thanks to my destiny) we were acquainted;
Since then (I have observed) this annual Race
Has put no vvrinkles on thy soul or face:
Thy look, thy language, and thy mind are svveet
Correlatives, and in one Consort meet;
Thy active spirit, and thy form complies,
To captivate men's hearts, and womenseyes:
Thy face speaks Rhetoric, and no persvvasion
Wins credit where thy person makes invasion:
Thy Pen and Languages could not miscarry,
Were thou the greatest Princes Secretary:
Thy Poetry would make great Orpheus leese
His Lyre, and dance a part with his own trees;
That thon art valiant, he does better know,
Whom his ill destiny has made thy foe:
I should enlarge my felf in this Narration,
But that I find great volums out of fashion;
Besides, when I conceive I have sum'd all,
I may omit some main material;
Yet hovvsoe're these rugged lines are penned,
No man is more your servant, then
Your Friend, THO. JORDAN.

On a crooked Scold.
SCorta (a Queen, no Fish-wife could out-scold her,
Who wore cross natures Pack upon her shoulder)
Fell out with Clinch, and gave him vvorser words
Then Billinsgate (in Mackrell time) affords;
At which he cries (seeing it vain to prate)
Ye cursed crooked Whore, I Will kick you strait.
On Rant.
RAnt is (they say) indicted for a wit,
To which he pleads not Guilty, and is quit.
A Mock Epithalamium, composed for the Nupti^ls of an illiterate Brewer and his
Bride.
THese Nuptial flowers the fair Maids are strewing,
I am informed has been long time a brevving;
Make have to Church, good Fortune be your guide,
Till you out-gallop all that Rhyme to Ride.
The love that lurks within your amorous holes,
Is not false fire, but Gods precious coals,
Which will, if no ill in undation hinders,
Shine bright, till all the world consume in cynders;
May both your hands and hearts join all in one,
Happy conjunction, like the Bolt and Tun:
May the Bride draw your favor with more force
Of fierce affection then your Draymans horse:
(For Cupide coursers triumph on the ground,
When two well yoked Lovers are shod round)
Prove faithful to each other, let no stranger
(With fair pretense) lie at Loves rack and manger:
May the Brides bosom be the Bridegrooms charm,
Until her belly do rebound like Barm,
That when your liquid limbs together curl,
You may dissolve, and intermix like Purl;
So may the pregnant Port of pleasure prove
The firtil furnace of inflaming Love;
And you shall yearly reap the fruitful crops
Of children multiplied as thick as hops;
Which issuing from Loves bed of fragrant spice,
May well be called the grains of Paradise:
May these wars die, and they that first begot 'um,
That every tub may stand upon's own bottom:
May your trade thrive, may no Excize man thvvart
Your private guile, or set a Spoke in your Cart:
If you or she have done amiss, I pray
Let this conjunction prove a cleansing day:
For they who to a married bondage stoop,
Must be consined in the holy hoop.
May your fair bedfellow live above strife,
And overflourish the Inkeepers wife:
Although her husband can outface your Copper,
She shall both in the Church and State over top her:
Because there is (now Idols are put down)
Small distance 'twixt the Copper and the Crown.
An Epithalamium, on the noble Nuptials of Mr. WILL. CHRISTMAS Merchant, and
Mis. ELIZABETH CHRISTMAS.
STay! take my benediction e're you go,
It Is Orthodox, Poets are Prophets to:
Nor do I doubt but my Cromatick Ayrs
Have as large Pinions as the Parsons prayers:
May that felicity whose sweetness swells
In Solomon's transcendent Canticles.
Attend these Nuptials, may your union bo
The great Elixir of all sympathy:
May Doves be your Disciples, and from you
Not only learn to love, but to be true:
The active Sparrow which with amorous tread,
Makes of one Creature wife and feather bed;
Will watch your windows, and in neighboring willow^
Declare the doctrine of your panting pillows:
You shall teach all things Love, Ovid was wont
To show the Art, you know the nature on it.
But stay, methinks the Bride begins to be
Disturbed at loss of her Virginity;
She views the Bed, and Bridegroom as they were
The Scaffold, and the Executioner.
Madam depress those fears, what greater joy
Then lose a Maidenhead to win a Boy?
A pretty boy, as sweet and like the mother,
As one of her bright eyes compared with the other:
May health, wealth, wisdom, piety, and truth,
Support ye in your age, and crown your youth:
May you live free from jealousies and fears
Of foreign fury, or Domestic cares:
May the Catastrophe of both your years
Be the sad object of all good men's tears;
And may your date of death be on the stone
One thousand, seven hundred, thirty one.
A Fable.
THey say that in a neighboring Aviary
The birds fell out, the Aegle did miscarry;
That was their K. but strait the factious flock
Did choose a new, and crowned a Turkey Cock.
The Moral.
THis makes the Proverb true unto a letter,
When one is gone, there seldom comes a better.

