MONEY IS AN ASS. A Comedy, As it has been Acted with good Applause.

Written by Tho. Jordain Gent.

Licenced November the 16. 1667. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed by Peter Lillicrap, for Fra. Kirkman, and are to be sold by
most Booksellers. 1668.

The PROLOGUE
Spoken by Night. THalia Crown each Fancy, since the day
Has lost its Luster, and each glorious Ray
Of young Apollo in the bosom lies
Of beloved, Thetis, let the morn bright Eyes
That sit Incircled in your Ivory Spheres
Inspire our Souls, cheer our benighted fears
We Act in Comic strains, Heaven grant there be
No envious Fate, to make a Tragedy.
It Is new, I Am sure, nere Acted, there is none know it
We never had more Tutor, then the Poet
Since it is thus, Let us harsh censures escape
Had every Actor been some others Ape,
Seen his Part Played before him, you might say,
We had been Children, not to Act the Play;
As lively as our fautours, but (so far
Are we from such great helps, as those) we are
Direct opposers, have no setters on
But what is within us, Resolution,
Which not by you encouraged (swollen with Rage
That flies, and leaves us Statues on the Stage.
We are but Eight in Number, therefore he,
That drew this piece, being confined, not free
Could not so well declare himself as when
He shall confine, his Persons to his Pen
Accept of this, next time, we shall prepare
To feast your Senses with more curious fare.
The Actors Names.
Captain Penniless. Tho. Jordain. Mr. Featherbrain, Wall. Williams Clutch, Tho.
Loveday. Money. Tho. Lovel. Credit. Nich. Low. Callumney. Tho. Sands.
Felixina. Amb. Matchit Feminia. VVil. Cherrington.
Moneys an Ass.
Act the First,
Enter Mr, Featherbrain, Solus, Feath. All Is lost, Pox oath Dice, Fortune has
spun me a fair thread, the Devil reel it, me thinks I walk like one, that left
himself in pawn, at an Ordinary, I mean his Reputation, and now my Satin is
converted to modest stuff* my Quandam Assotiates look upon me as upon a man
scarce within ken: and I faith I having a spice, oath -- Gentleman in me, take
as little notice of them -- Oh youth what has thy prodigallity brought thee to,
the time was, I have not had so much time, as to talk to my self thus, But
Poverty, is an Excommunicate and there is no purchasing of an absolution,
without ready money -- oh, -- he is the honestest Rogue in the world, if he
were not so fugative, I had the happiness to see him the other day, he was so
busy betwixt a young Heir, and a Userer, he loves a Lotterie with his heart,
But if he but look on an Hospital the Gout takes him this is he, as I take it,
I Cannot very well Enter Money and Credit. tell, he is almost become my small
Acquaintance, and that is his Ningle Credit, goes Cheek by Choul with him -- I
would fain endeer my self Noble Mr. Money, Kind Mr. Credit,


Mo. Ningle Credit, do thou know this fellow.


Cred. Why do you injure me so, Ningle Money.


Mo. Injure thee, how.


Cred. Why in having an Ambiguous thought
I should know a man, that looks so like a --

Fea. Theif or Cutpurse, I warrant, let me help you with a term Sir -- a poor
Gentleman, and it please you


Cred. I was eene thinking upon as bad a Term.


Mo. Why he knows thee, it seems.


Cred. Say you so, let me look better upon him.


Fea. And your worship would please to remember, I have been often in Company
with you, as I remember, and the last place I see you in, was at in and in, in
Grayes Inn you slipped from me the strangest.


Cred. Upon my credit Ningle I remember him -- he told me so, for he would have
had me past my word for Twenty pounds to old Clutch the hoorder, to whose
Daughters, we are now repairing.


Mo. I do remember you Prodigal Sir.


Fea. That Is my Character indeed.


Mo. You parted Slightly from me, and for which cause you may associate your
self with Mr. Penniless, he is a most fit companion, and will not leave your
company so soon.


Fea. Thank you Sir. most kindly -- the mean time, lend me Ten pounds, this
Gentleman your Ningle, will pass his word.


Cred. No not I, I must not injure so my friend, I am many Millions in his debt
already.


Mo. Come Ningle will you walk.


Cred. Willingly.


Fea. Hark you Sir, hark you, or will you but dictate a --


Cred. Stay stay, I love to understand things as I go, what do you mean Sir to
dictate,


Fea. Why Sir. write a Letter Two or Three lines to your Mercer in my behalf,
to put my self in better habit.


Cred. Pray pardon me Sir I did think that Dictate, had no good meaning Sir.
when you can Dictate, into favor again with my friend I shall give you more
Audience -- Audience there is another word for your Dictate, and so farewell to
you Sir.


Exit Money and Credit. Fea. Mr. Money, Mr. Credit, Gentlemen a word more gone,
may the Gout take one, and the Devil crack the other, I need not Curse them, for
by their own works they are entering into a Consumption, Old Clutch the grand
Devil of Usury he has a necessary Damnation for them both (his two Daughters)
necessary evils, to train them, well in the days of old, when any fortunes
florish'd they have both looked on me, as no unworthy object, if I had and Itch
that way these two Rogues, would be my Antagonists, if my brains have not gone
more after money, and credit, I shall have that in Agitation, may do me a
pleasure in my time of need and make of these Chemists Asses.

It Is hatching be it succesful, If it prove
My loss, but gets me Wisdom, Wisdom Love,
Exit.
Scene the Second.
Enter Clutch Felixina and Feminia. Clutch. Come my Felixina, dear Feminia, fie
pine no more, husbands are now in search, but I would match you richly, richly
Girls -- and please your own minds too, Felixina I know you think worthyly of
Mr. Money.


Felix. I never saw him yet Sir:


Clutch. Right, why do I say you think but worthyly of him for when you shall
but see him (oh) joyful sight you will admire him then.


Felix. He is your object then, therefore rendering my obedience to your Age I
willingly embrace him.


Clutch. Thou would say thus I know
Thou Art my obedient Girl continue so

Felix. It Is well he spoke it for me, for I protest 'twas far from my thought,
in this case my mind tells me, 'twill have it is own dispose for all your
Avarice, your will.


Fem. You are always talking to her of Husbands, and Suitors but you forget for
me, I wis, I am as sick oath Maiden disease as my Sister, for all she is my
elder.


Clutch. And you shall both be cured if Money and Credit be prevailing
Physicians, did not I tell thee of Mr. Credit.


Fem. No, O my credit Sir.


Clutch. O thy Credit, and thy Credit shall he be I faith Calumney, within
there -- Calumney.


Calum. Did you call Sir.


Clutch. Is not this the day and hour Money and Credit were to keep their words
with me,


Calum. Yes, but I Will be hanged, and some such Rogue as your self, such a Hell
Jaw, do not swallow them before you see them.


Clutch. Say not so, good Callumney, put me in better comfort.


Callum. The Devil put you in comfort, he is like to be better rewarded, than
I, me thinks he might be more Officious, for 'twill not be long, ere he must
receive his due, when is you^ Lease out Sir.


Fem. But have not thou seen thy Golden Sweetheart, yet.


Felix. Nor ever care, unless he be of the true Coin and current mettle.


Fem. But I hope you will be a good child, and do as your Father bids you.


Felix. What need you care, you shall be married with Credit.


Fem. And you to Money, then we will call Sisters no more but Ningles, as our
Husbands do.


Clutch. Good Callumney be Officious 't shall be for thy good, I have a Trap
for Money, do thou but aid, thou shall supplant him, and marry my Eldest
Daughrer, contein thy sullen Humor tip thy tongue with words more flattering.


Callum. You Will be hanged, ere you will keep your word.


Clutch. Do think, I am a Pagan.


Callum. You are a Userer, and that is Cousen German, let the Devil be Judge --
but i will believe you, and on these conditions endeavor for you all that I can,
Aside

Heeres the Fathers Consent, if I can but obtain the squeamest Whenches -- she
looks upon me with no scornful eye; I Will put fair for it could I but rule my
tongue, there were some hope.


Enter Money and Credit, Clutch. Practice my Counsel,

See they are, Arrived kind Mr. Money let me hugg thee, let me embrace thee,
thy voice is heavenly Music, thy face bewitches thou art my dearest Idol.


Callum. Now the Devil huggs his darling.


Clutch, Next Mr. Credit, ye are a pair of Creatures the whole world adores,
and happiest am I that must enjoy ye, I am divided 'twixt ye, you inseparable
souls.


Mo. We keep our words you see.


Cred. We are not merely Promisers.


Clutch, Why look you now, you will make me angry with you do ye think I had a
thought, you were unjust no by my honesty -- these are my Daughters Gentlemen,
two bashful younglings about their years, it was my fault I faith, which since
I must confess I have amended.


Callum. I fear money will be my rival, the Rogue has a bewitching
Countenance, I wonder the wench looks with no more affectionate eye upon him,
fate has ordained her mine.


Mo. Pardon my boldness Lady, it is a fault has been by all, excused, me that
now I am to seek of Modesty, to court so fair a Mistress.


Felix. Yet you are mine, best beauty.


Callum. This Money has an excellent tongue.


Cred. By Credits self, an Oath, I dare not break, I am your infinite admirer.


Fem. Are you Cadeedlo.


Cred. I dare not take that Oath, unless I knew the meaning.


Fem. Oh me do you not know the meaning of Cadeedlo.


Cred. No i will assure you.


Fem. I Will tell you then, in that one word Cadeedlo, is concluded, all the Oaths
man can invent.


Cred. It Is a most dangerous Oath, but yet her beauty so enticeth me, that
rather then i will loose her love, i will undertake to swear it, -- Then Lady that
you may believe, I do admire you, and in that admiration, give my self your
Zealous Lover, to you I swear, Cadeedlo I admire you.


Call. Go thy ways, thou deserve her, for thou has sworn most desperately for
her.


Clutch, Take no repulse -- be not slightly denied, Music, Oh Heavenly;
shakes moneys


Call. Now the Devil whispers them in the ears,


Clutch, A handsome man's Daughter -- * mark but his sweet Language, my own Boys
both,


Mo. If you would desire an Oath, by this pure Gold --,


Clutch, Tak's Oath Daughter, tak's Oath, it is a rich protestation, not used by
every Gallant ( Calum) I have not seen so many good faces this two days.


Felix. It Is your will Sir,


Mo. Pray take it, I have an Exchequer, more, stands ready for thee, and by
that Gold, made purer by your hand I am your Honourer.


Felix. I do not question the nobleness of your love, which you term Honor,
but give me so sure the freedom of my soul to contemplate before I give you
Answer.


Mo. I did not love you, if I should not, command your time.


Felix. One day no more,


Mo. Willingly, most willingly.


Calum. But one day I must prevent you, Love and Policy be my Aid.


Cred. Will you not swear then.


Fem. To what Sir.


Cred. Why; that you admire me, as I admire you.


Fem. Indeed, I do admire you.


Cred. Indeed, Pox of indeeds, swear me Cadeedlo.


Fem. As I am virtuous I admire you.


Cred. What care I for your virtue -- what is that to Cadeedlo the Oath I swore.


Fem. Pardon me Sir --, pray hear me Sir.


Clutch, What is the difference between you.


Fem. There Is no difference Sir, we, we Sympathize infinitely,


Clutch, I am glad on it.


Cred. A word with you Sir, you know your language, better then I, pray what
does she mean by Sympathize.


Clutch, Sympathize, do you not know the meaning of Sympathize, come hither
Calumney, what is Sympathize,


Cullum. To concur I think.


Clutch, What was it Sir Sympathize, this roguish girls, troubles all our
Noddles with hard words, they did not come to her by the Fathers side, I am
sure, why Sympathize is to concur.


Cred. To concur, that's true, for indeed we did begin to snarl one at another
--. Yet there is some other meaning Ningle Money, a word with you, you are not
busy are you, what is the meaning, of concur, if you know not ask your
Mistress.


Felix. Why concur, is to Sympathize Sir.


Cred. And Sympathize, is to concur -- Sir, what is meant by Sympathize, or
concur, i will keep to my self. But your Daughter might use me more kindly.


Clutch, Feminia, where is your duty, I must entreat I must.


Fem. Sir, he would have me swear affection to him ere I have made least Trial
of Love.


Cred. No peace flattering Women, did not I swear Cadeedlo to thee.


Fem. And i will swear the like to you by and by if you will be patient.


Cred. Well, then I am content, if you do not your Father has Ears.


Fem. And you have a tongue, I make no question you will remember my Taffaty, will
you not.


Cred. When you have sworn much may be thought upon.


Clutch, Come gallants will you in, Calumney, is the meat come from the Cooks.


Calum. It Is gone for Sir,


Clutch, After dinner finish your discourse, and make an end of all, come my
dear Sons welcome. Exeunt Omnes.


Act the Second,
Scene the First.
Enter one way Featherbrain, at the other Captain Pennyless. Cap. WHat an Ass
is he that waits a hum, hum, leisure, fa la, hum, hum, hum, fa la hum, hum,
hum, hum, hum, umph, hum, hum, hum, pleasure hum, hum, happis may be robbed
Penniless Sings. of hope, and treasure, hum, inconstancy.


Fea. A third man, a third man, a third man.


Cap. What untuned tones of mandrakes, drills my ears.


Fea. I it is an untunable air, I must confess noble Captain Pennyless, as I
take it.


Cap. No you are much mistaken, your ordinary friend Pennyless the Noble, is
brought to nine pence I assure you, prethy Frank (if thy infatiable gain by
winnings have not converted thy free soul to avarice, lend thy friend Pennyless
half a piece.


Fea. Half a piece.


Cap. I, I, half a piece, no more, when fortune betters my ability I will repay
thee double.


Fea. Two Crowns.


Capt. I, I, two Crowns though they want weight Frank, it is no matter I know
thou guessest my occasion ha thou know, they will go there.


Fea. Thou would be prodigal again.


Cap. No I assure you Frank I will be very frugal go with me, and see else, i will
only bet small bets man, I have a conceit beyond thy apprehension I have been
taught it since poverty seized upon me.


Fea. Ten shillings.


Cap. Why, I, but ten shillings, it may do me ten pounds worth of good, for my
luck comes in to day, have marked it, i will warrant thee a piece, within this two
hours.

aside The Rogue's so loath to part from money.
Prethy Frank; let me entreat thee.

Fea. I have not seen half a piece, two Crowns, or ten shillings these ten days.


Cap. Pheu i will nere believe that, lend me a Crown then, or half a Crown.


Fea. Eighteen pence would not do much amiss.


Cap. Since thou art so sparing lend me that.


Fea. Faith I want sixpence on it.


Cap. Pox lend me that twelve-pence, then.


Fea. Art not thou a mad Rogue to abuse thy friend thus.


Cap. How abuse thee.


Fea. Why in offering to borrow money of me.


Cap. Say you so, is it now grown to an abuse, it has not been so Frank in my
Golden Age, I have been your Exchequer, Oh what a saving age (ere long) will be
when Prodigals, embrace frugality, farewell Offers to go away. to you Sir, thus
your abuser vanishes.


Fea. No, no, prethy do not vanish yet.

Why thou Son of incredulity, can thy Conscience beget so evil a thought, that
(if I had but half a piece) (although disposed of) I would not lend it thee.


Cap. You would not be abused so.


Fea. Oh my life, and my disguized Gentility.

Can thou imagine I would content my Corpse with this unsavory stuff, that
girds my loins,


Cap. Why art thou monyless.


Fea. As sure as thou art Captain Pennyless.


Cap. Has in, and in, confounded thee too.


Fea. I, the curse of Orphants light on it.


Cap. Forgive me I must confess I have.
Abused thee then.

Fea. And thou must make me amends, ere I part with thee, tell me has not
despair, hung plummets on thy Soul, too heavy for a hope to keep't from sinking.


Cap. I am almost discouraged.


Fea. A Captain and discouraged -- away -- do not make me out of conceit with
thee, I tell thee, I have wheels a going in this Noddle, beyond the power of
Forrune, do thou be but one of my Engines, I dare warrant thee piece upon
piece, Boy.


Cap. Oh those sweet words, piece upon piece begets more courage in me, then
Sack or Medea, -- command me I am thy instrument.


Fea. Thy very words are music to me, do thou know whose house this is.


Cap. Yes, old Clutches, a fellow for nothing so fit as to stand for a Statue,
in Mammons counting house, and appears to me like a Devil, that did weekly
counterfeit Man, merely made for deceptius visus, marry there is a pretty Virgin
in this enchanted Castle would I were her Knight.


Fea. Why who bid thee tell my tale, before me, thou more then Edipus, of wit
that can expound before the Proposition, yet since you have discharged my
Theme, let me extemporize, there are in this Castle, two Virgins who now are
solicited, by two commanding Giants, o'th time Money and Credit, so powerful
that unless we do prefer, Policy before strength of Limb, we are like to be
vanquished.


Cap. I very likely, for I am not of Ability to keep the Devil from dancing in
my pocket.


Fea. Nor I,


Cap. No we shall be wise Politians I make no question, this is not the way
(four ought I know) to get piece upon piece, yet thou tell me their
strength, I know they are able, to put an hundred of us to the sword.


Fea. Thou will with one edge, is it not Policy, first to ruminate upon the
Enemies strength, before we can make preparation, for the conspiracy which now
shall be demonstrated, look there I have completely counterfeited the hand of
Credit in a Letter, to some of his Creditors, where we shall be sure of
Clothes, rich, neat, and all things correspondent.


Cap. I do begin to relish thee now, this is next door to piece upon piece,
forward my Mercury.


Fea. Being thus habited I know where to procure some Cash.


Cap. Now it is coming.


Fea. And so well armed, we will watch the time we may approach this Castle.


Cap. But may we have admittance.


Fea. Fear it not, from rich Imbrodery, unto the plainer Satin, all may be
welcome, he does maintain his Family, with their Suitors, though his chief end,
is to match them to Money and Credit.


Cap. There is a great Operation in this Plot, and may a Jew beat me out of my
Gentility: if I do not applaud thee fort, shall we put it in practice, come, Oh
I long to exchange my habit, me thinks I walk in state again.


Fea. But you shall be true to me you Rogue, and not in the middle of a Project
leave me and return to your old confusion gaming.


Cap. If I do, may I dye Shirtless, and be buried in the highway twixt St.
Iohns-street and Islington.


Fea. I take you at your word, come go with me.


Cap. With as much Joy, as the wild beasts had when they followed the Thracian
Sings. Fiddler, what an Ass is he that waits a Woman's leisure. Exeunt.


Enter Clutch. Money and Credit. Felixina and Feminia. Clutch. Will you be gone
so soon Ladds.


Mo. Sir. our occasions are so urgent, you must excuse us.


Clutch. And whether do you wend I faith.


Cred. But to the Exchange,


Clutch. Oh you, expect good tidings Mr. Money.


Mo. A little Barbery dirt.


Clutch. Hum, Barbery dirt, I would I were up to'oth knees in it, oh how happy
are the Fishes in Pagus Chanel, when will you return again.


Mo. To morrow this time,


Clutch. A year of Torments, Daughter, come hither Daughter, thou caust prevail
with him, promise him any thing, though it be the thing (though it be) thou
understandst me, the thing ye wot on, so he will stay this night with us, I Will
have a Parson early in the morning, shall make all good.


Felix. O hell bread, Avarise, -- I will sir -- Sir a word with you.


Mo. Your pleasure Mrs.


Felix. My Father earnestly desires your stay, but trust me, whilst you are
here I can resolve on nothing, but your absence this short time will beget in
me some resolution.


Mo. I will obey you Lady.


Fem. Sir you have forced an Oath from me would make a Virgin tremble to
relate, But to you my tongue should near pronounce it.


Cred. Well we are one then and I would give you now, a nearer name then Mrs, a
name given at the first sight.


Fem. Please you sir, Call me Spouse.


Cred. It Is a most fitting term; Spouse it shall be -- and do you call me --
head.


Fem. Nothing but head Sir.


Cred. No, nothing but head, till we are married.


Fem. Then I Will exalt your name Sir.


Cred. Gramercy Spouse,


Fem. But sweet head, be not prolix in your designs, each hour will be to me a
long olympiad.


Cred. But hark you Spouse I do not love you should talk so like a Conjurer I
cannot understand your prolix nor your Olympyads.


Fem. I shall studdy more easy phrases Sir.


Cred. Prithee do, farewell sweet Spouse, come Ningle you are too tedious.


Clutch. You Will stay Sir, will you not.


Mo. Indeed I cannot.


Clutch. One hugg sweet friend. Huggs him.


Mo. Farewell Sir -- farewell Ladies'


Clutch. I Will see you out of Doors Gentlemen.


Ambo: We thank you Sir -- Exeunt


Manet the Daughters. Fem, How now Ningle is it a match is this the Ne plus
ultra, of men, when do you Commit as they say, when must the dangerous words (I
will) Be pronounced.


Felix. Do you speak to me Sister.


Fem. To you, who else, I do not use to talk to my self.


Felix. Preethy be not angry, your words carry a sense concerns me so little, I
thought you had.


Fem. Are you minded to marry, sweet Lady.


Felix. Marry, yes.


Fem. This Man.


Felix. What Man.


Fem. The Gold, and Silver man.


Felix. I know not what thou meanest.


Fem. Hey da, the wench is mad (why Mr. Money.


Felix. Oh the Trash my Father brought -- I had almost forgate him.


Fem. That Is very well I faith no sooner out of sight but out of mind, he is
much beholden to you, I care not much if I run after him and tell him so.


Felix. No prithee, my Father will be angry.


Fem. Uds me do ye cry, this is not time to jest, why weep you Sister.


Felix. Sure you deceive your self.


Fem. Most sure I do not.


Felix. It Is but a duty my Eyes ow to my Fathers name.


Fem. Ye are a dutiful Child I protest, but is there not something else, belongs
to it more then your mere duty, how long has this been a custom with ye.


Felix. Not long.


Fem. Nay prithee tell me Fe. did you not withal, think of that young
Gentleman, that brought the morgage, to my Father, whom you did praise so much,
and look upon so often, when you did wish, would you had such a Brother.


Felix. Beshrew your tongue, you will try if I can weep.


Fem. Was that the Master Vein, had you not rather have him, then Mr. Money, de
you smile I cannot blame you, come tell me, ye are grown close brested, now,
there was a time when I knew all your secrets.


Felix. That time is still Feminia, go in with me and i will reveal more, then
thou shall believe if thou have love and duty in thy Soul, thou shall be angry
with me for my news and though (heaven knows) I will speak nothing but truth,
thou will call me Forgeresse notorious Liar, think me a Bastard born, and begot
when lust and mischief were incorporate, it is a truth so strange.


Fem. It Is very strange, indeed, come i will attend you.


Exeunt. Enter Calumny. Call. Cut's throat, poison him, that will not do the
Rogue has rich Friends, I shall be sure to truss fort, and it is a question,
whether she will beg me from the Gallows, clip him, make him uncurrant that's
worse, it is petty Treason, I shall have my Limbs divided, and hung up for
Crows meat, set his house a fire and melt him in the flame that is pretty well,
but if I should be discovered danger would approach, and few will speak a good
word, for Callumny, was ever Lover so perplexed as I, there is no way left but
with toys of love to solicit the Lady, I have been held a handsome good
conditioned man, among the Jews, marry the Gentiles hate me, yet I was the
illigitimate of a Gentleman my Mother said.


Clutch. Callumny, Callumny.


Calum. Well -- now Faustus calls his Mephostophilis.

I Will think on something, if it take effect,
Let it be Quoted down, Calumnies Act.

Act the Third,
Scene First.
Enter Captain Penniless and Frank Featherbrain. Fea. THo'art the impatientest
Ass I have conversed with.


Cap. Right.


Fea. What though this project fail, are there no more shall we give up the
Cards, ere, we have played a trick.


Cap. A trick.


Fea. I tell thee I [have a brain, never barren of invention.


Cap. No, no.


Fea. Though I have mis'd the first (as wonder it is) think thou my Sconce,
quite empty of fegaries.


Cap. Fegaries.


Fea. Yes tricks, inventions, and fegaries, you Slave enough to undo a
generation of Matchevils, for all my first comes off with a hiss, thou shall
applaud me ere, I come to my Exit.


Cap. And we shall be sure of Clothes, neat, rich and all things correspondent.


Fea. Well do but follow my Counsel, i will make true my words i will warrant thee.


Cap. piece upon piece.


Fea. Why thou despairing varlet: if thou were not a Captain I would beat thee
to pin dust, thou do put me to more vexation, then my own unhappiness.


Cap. Was that Money, came Jingling by us in Cheapside.


Fea. Why who should it be else prethy.


Cap. I scarce knew him in the old stamp, I have not seen him, in Trunks a long
time -- the other was Credit, was it not,


Fea. Marry was it.


Cap. He Is changed too, he was in a Gentile habit not long since, now he is
become a Citizen again.


Fea. Why I, he was no company for you Gallants long, and when he saw his
simpleship abused, he made return unto his City friends, where I faith the
Merchant's hugg him.


Cap. Where does he keep house.


Fea. Within the compass of the City Walls, hic and ubique.


Cap. Think you, he would smell a courtier in such disguize as this.


Fea. O Pox, I he will know him by his hard words (man) he will trust no body, but
those he understands, without Security, which is more then thou understand'st I
am sure, (besides) thou have been one of his notorious abusers, and he will be
cheated in the way of Friendibility, (as your word is,) no more, but a Pox on
this increcredulous Mercer, that will trust no body, without Money or Credits
self, these are fellows, whose compositions are, a Grain of Conscience, a Dram
of Suits (and I was about to say) a Scruple of Religion, but i will leave that
out, it is an unusal Drugg, yet it may in, 'twil scarce be tasted amongst a
pound of Lies, as much of Oaths besides odd ounces of equivocating
protestations -- as I am an honest man, -- and such like -- may they live to
see their Sons made courtiers, that is enough I make no question then, but that
they will come into our order (or worse) and curse the next o'th brood, as we
do.


Cap. Yet you were confident, sure (as you said) of Clothes, rich, neat, and
all things else correspondent -- raiz'd me from a shallow desperation to lay me
deeper.


Fea. Give ear to me now Ben. (let me see) we are not in such extraordinary
rich clothes but that we may pass for Servingmen.


Cap. Had you said for Sharks, we might have both gone together.


Fea. Right, We must Shark our Melancholy Mounsiere (but as I was saying,) I
left off at Serving-men.


Cap. Yours have left off, i am sure.


Fea. As Serving-men, to Money and Credit.


Cap. I Will be hanged, if they give such bad Liveries to their Lackeys.

Thou run'st before me still, hang Liveries, hear me out, by this means we will
have access unto the Wenches, this is the house, i will knock and to them
straight, whilst the conceit is hot.


Cap. I is this your project, prethy come away, and leave your Fooling.


Fea. Stay but a minute, see me in and hang thy self.


Capt. Thank you heartily. Enter Calumney to the Captain.


Callum. How now, who is there.


Fea. Stand to your business (you Rogue) all is mard else.


Cap. Not unlikely.


Fea. Is Mr. Clutch, within I pray Sir.


Calum. Within yes, what of that.


Cap. What of that, Why we would speak with him.


Fea. Modesty good Ben. this is one of Plutres Damme's, we must through Hell to
the Heaven, we hope for.


Calum. I think you come to rob him, do you not.


Cap. What a Rogue's this, my valor does begin to rise at him do thou speak
now, I shall beat him like a Dog else.


Fea. Thou art a most valiant Rascal -- aside Sir, your name is Mr. Callumney
as I take it.


Cap. I thought so. aside


Callum. Yes Sir, my name is, Mr. Callumney.


Cap. Good Mr. Callumney, you are my near Kinsman my father was a malice, and
my mother a mischief, I am sure we give both one arms the three furious tongues
in Sables, is it not so Sir.


Callum. Yes, an envies head in the crest.


Cap. Very proper. aside


Fea. And the Motto is, avoid honesty.


Callum. Very right Sir, -- I see I am a Gentleman -- Sir i will call my master
instantly. Exit Callumney


Fea. Do sweet Cozen.


Cap. Go thy ways, thou have held a Candle before the Devil.


Fea. A ha, what think you now Ben.


Enter Clutch, and Callumney. Clutch, Speak with me, who are they.


Callum. I know not who they are Sir, there they be.


Clutch, Would you speak with me Gentlemen.


Fea. Sir, my Mr. Master Money.


Cap. And mine Sir, Mr. Credit.


Fea. Commend their loves to you.


Clutch, You are welcome, heartily Welcome.


Fea. You have two daughters Sir.


Clutch, Their wives that shall be.


Fea. True Sir, we have Letters to them from our Masters to the same purpose,
we were withal commanded to be speedy in the delivery.


Clutch, I stay you too long then, in, in Gentlemen -- Callumney Lead um in.
Exit.


Callum, Well.


Clutch, Now are the Woodcocks spring'd, -- my plots run fine Surfeit my Soul,
Money and Credits mine.


Enter Felixina and Feminia. Fem. With grief I do believe you Sister, you must
impute it to his Avarice, that sinks all goodness to oblivion.


Felix. That is the drugg, (whose philterous, effect, stronger then poppey, or
Mandragora) charms all his virtues in a lasting sleep, oh that my prayers,
could wake his deep drencht soul my words should carry a far louder sound, then
does the Midnight Bell, whose ring reports to the Inhabitants some fatal fire.


Fem. Well, but you will not have my Ningle Money.


Felix. No as I hope to embrace a noble spirit.


Fem. And your mind is fixed upon that nobler spirit, you speak of.


Felix. On him or no man, -- But you will have Credit will you not.


Fem. Oh, my head we are contracted woman.


Felix. Sure you but jest.


Fem. In earnest we have exchanged sound protestations.


Felix. Protestations, how sound I pray.


Fem. Why he swore Cadeedlo to me, and I the like to him, with many other to
the same purpose. -- (moreover) he calls me Spouse (already) and I call him
head, but the younster (Sister) the youngster.


Felix. Prethy do not talk of him, thou will put me to impatience.


Fem. Come i will plot for thee, I have a conceit in this unhappy pate of mine,
shall bring him, flying to thee, -- how now who have we here.


Enter Clutch, Calumney, Featherbrain, and Penniless. Felix. My father and some
strangers,


Clutch, How now daughters so earnest, I have good news for you, -- you Girls
worth Gold,


Felix. Or is it new coined Sir.


Clutch, Note, that she harps upon your masters name already.


Fea. She Is a wit I protest Sir.


Clutch, A notable girl, a notable girl.


Fea. Fairest my master Mr. Money commanded me.


Fem. Oh me my sister sinks. Felix. swounds.


Cap. Hey day I hope he has killed the Gentlewoman and brought me to hang for
company with him -- would I were out again,


Clutch, She swound for Joy, she swounds for Joy, how i'^^ daughter, how is it
daughter.


Fem. She comes again, Sister look up, here is Mr. Money.


Fea. Mistress, Mistress,


Felix. Oh my loved stranger.


Clutch, Feminia, come hither, come hither, what does she mean by stranger.


Fem. She calls Mr. Money, her stranger, sir. Feather. and Captain whispers.


Clutch, Does she so, does she so. He shall be more familiar with her, mine own
Girl still sure, her mother gave me leave to get this child of obedience my
self.


Fea. Quickly good Ben.


Cap. Sir, shall I speak a word with you in private.


Clutch, With me sir.


Cap. Yes, and your servant Calumney.


Clutch, with all my heart sir, Calumney attend me sirrah.


Cap. Now I have made all clear for him, if he should transgress with both the
sisters, and make the father and I his Bauds, 'twould trouble me. Exit.


Manent Felixina, Feminia, and Featherbrain. Felix. What is your errand sir.


Fea. It Is love sweet Creature.


Felix. Oh my soul, it is he -- Love sir, (what shall I do) -- I want the woman's
art, dissimulation -- whence comes your love I pray.


Fea. But from this bosom sweetest, there is a heart filled with as innocent
love, as is the Vestal Virgins to her Goddess, you wear the Cupid, beauty, thy
Ivory bow sent your white shafts of virtue to my breast,

There Is a touch. aside


Felix. And all this is, you love me, -- is it not.


Fea. And thrice so much can but confess a truth.


Felix. Pardon me Sir, I am no Infidel.


Fea. He harbors infidelity that thinks it.


Fem. This is the spark, they whisper Has been so long in the Ring of her
fancy and dazzled the eyes of her understanding (if I may credit my own
apprehension) I vow she looks upon him, as if she loved, (indeed) she is great
with Joy.


Felix. Is this your way to raise your Fortunes think you after your fluent
prodigality, (presuming on your person) to undo some weak eyed Virgin, by your
Vows and Oaths, all but to satisfy your appetite with Coin, to game or such
unthrifty Revells.


Fea. I vow she preaches -- talks -- talks hand somely what a fool was I to
come hither, I am taken with her, if I have not almost a mind to this
honorable piece (mischief) marriage, good Company forsake me, there is a new
guest come to this Inn, (called honesty, commands like a Prince, and I must
observe his laws) (the mor's my grief) I will be gone, one minute more undoes
me, all happiness dwell with you Lady.


Felix. Pray stay and hear me Sir, although from woman's fear, my words proceed,
yet (trust me) I conceit so well of you, I could nor easily be won to think
what my faint fears have uttered.


Feather. She talk's again, think's well of me her tongue a Cupid, and each
word an Arrow, she has an excellent aiming eye, a good face fine complexion,
handsome breasts, a neat middle, and i will warrant a good Foot and Leg, she
wears an hundred Cupids, -- and now they all discharged, at me together -- and
now they carry me captived to her -- and now I begin to speak, hum -- hum --

Wonder of Creatures perfectest, perfect one
Epitome of those Angellick Souls
That are the Rules of Elysium
Whose Beauty keeps the Rose buds, blown in Autum.
And the fair Lillies white as mountain snow.
Hey da see if I do not talk like one of your mad Poets already.


Fem. I do not think but the youngster has Hero and Leander, at his Fingers
ends I would I could hear a little more, O this.


Felix. Pray you do not you spend your serimonius jests upon so weak a wit, if
you must needs love tell me so -- I love the plain way best.


Fea. By thy own chaste thoughts, which were they mixed with mine, cannot be
tainted, I infinitely honor thee.


Felix. Honor, is that another term for love Sir. Kisses.


Fea. It is, and by this tempting fruit, I love and honor you.


Felix. Why do you swear so rashly indeed I will not take your oath, till you
advise your self.


Fea. Give me it again then i will think upon it. she sings.


Fem. Maids where are your hearts become look you what here is, look you what
here is -- what is there a couple of Turtles a billing, is that such a They kiss.
piece of business -- very good he has bethought himself, and now he swears again
there is two shillings in oaths already.


Felix. I can conceal no longer, love grows great, the more I labor to
deliver it -- guard me my blushes.


Fea. But cannot you affect me, my Election.


Felix. Who is that behind you sir.


Fea. A Gentlewoman, what is she more sweet Lady.


Felix. Do you observe her sir.


Fea. I do. He offers to go back.


Felix. She is one (pray fix your eyes upon her) she is one, that can tell,
that with unfeigned zeal, my soul affects you.


Fea. Indeed -- she is worth the noting -- pray Lady (then take notice, with
what integrity of pure affection I seal me hers for ever.


Fem. Withal my heart, your very nimble Gallants,


Felix. What shall we do, my Father will suspect if you stay longer.


Fea. My Friend expects me too.


Fem. Is he not your Brother Sir.


Fea. No Lady.


Fem. He is somewhat like you, and a handsome Gentleman.


Felix. I know your need, here is some Gold Sir. -- make but your habit appear
glorious, you may as freely have Admittance, as any of our Suitors.


Fea. I have hard so much, farewell my best one.


Felix. Remember Oaths. Enter Captain.


Fea. As I will do my Soul.


Cap. Oh it is well, you are coming, I had spoiled all else -- what have you,
done now.


Fea. As I could wish my Boy.


Cap. Say you so, get you gone, then i will try what I can do.


Fea. Do.


Cap. But which is your Mistress.


Fea. That Gentlewoman. Exit Featherbrain.


Cap. That Gentlewoman (good) I must then direct my Service to the other,
pretty Rogues both -- de hear Lady, are you my Frinds Mistress.


Felix. Did he tell you so Sir.


Cap. Cunning Gipsey, yes he did tell me so forfooth.


Felix, I hope you dare believe him.


Cap. Marry do I, is this your Sister fair one.


Felix. Yes Sir.


Cap. Can she love think you.


Felix. Faith Sir, she can best resolve you.


Cap. You say true, and i will to her, does she love verse or prose.


Felix. I think she is indifferently affected.


Cap. So then i will think upon something.


Fem. Ye busy Eyes, where do you carry me, why should this Stranger be your
object so, yet I Am too blame to chide you, ye behold, a man proportioned for a
Princess, how pretily this bluntness does become him, he makes this way, sure
he would speak with me.


Cap. What is your name sweet Lady.


Fem. Feminia Sir.


Cap. You are a woman.


Fem. I think so Sir.


Cap. It Is true, my little piece of modesty, you can but think so, yet by your
name you are.


Fem. And I think you are a man.


Cap. But think I am a man, do you not see a mark upon my forehead.


Fem. No truly Sir, me thinks it is a Cupid,


Cap. Cupid, oh blindness, Sit lazy Cupid upon a Soldiers Brow.


Fem. Cupid is Mars Coequal.


Cap. Then they are both there together -- I thought so, for I could love and
fight both at once, love a Mistres, and beat him, that durst abuse her and (now
I think on it) are you married.


Fem. Not yet Sir.


Cap. Then there is some hopes, but if I know how to court her I am a Jew, de ye
here Lady what said my Friend to ye, when he came in the way of Marriage.


Felix. Troth I have quite forgot Sir.


Cap. You have an excellent memory.


Fem. Why do ye Question me of marriage Sir.


Cap. The Rogue has a mind to be talked too -- pox, she might put forth her
self a little more, for my brain is out of tune I am somewhat stupid, oh Sack,
nothing like Sack it calls up a Parliament, of Rabble in the Soul of a Poet --
and too much makes em speak fustion as fast, Oh how she smirks He sings.

I would give my golden Rapier to be at her, to be at her -- I Will speak to her
least she talks me to silence, She says she is a woman, Cupid thou little Cub
of Venus assist me, can ye love Mars my fair Sithera.


Fem. Yes if he have a Cupids Soul.


Cap. Yes he has a Cupids Soul.


Fem. Where is he.


Cap. Here in this Doublet -- but hang circumstance can you vouchsafe
affection, if you can tell me, i will strive to conquer my usurping nature,
perhaps I may run mad, or so, if I do come but and see me in Bedlam, and I am
answered.


Fem. Are you so swain sir, is love so powerful in you at first sight.


Cap. What says the Poet, that most true does write
Who ever loved, that loved not at first sight.

Fem. Troth and he says true, and now I am resolved, pack hence my blushes
then, fly unto those conscious of crimes, and let them there disclose their
corrupt nature, love so pure as mine requires, not your assistance.


Cap. I forgot to kiss you, you must pardon me
I Am not versed into loves Rhetoric, more then kisses your Eyes instruct me.

Fem. The times unfit for tedious discourse, resolve your self when ere my
Sister makes your friend her Bridegroom, you shall as surely call Feminia bride.


Cap. A kiss O that, Sirrah could not thou obtain so great a blessing, from
thy Father, as four or five peieces contain, to befriend a poor Gentleman.


Enter Clutch Callumney, and Featherbrain. Fem. That would discover all -- noe
-- go but to Mr. Credit, call your self my brother, you shall be furnished with
all those necessaries, that can acouter a complete Gentleman.


Clutch. Is he so highly taken say you,


Fea. At every sigh he breathes Felixina.


Fem. He Is my Father -- isht.


Capt. Feminias name inspires his foul with raptures.


Fea. Let him but see a beauty, though as fair as Poets painted Hellen, he will
say she come but short of his Felixina.


Clutch. He dotes, he dotes, oh my most happy issue.


Cap. If I could stay, I Would reckon up a thousand of these things, but sweetest
fair, time will not now permit me.


Fem. Return my best affection*


Cap. I will.


Fea. My Master sir expects me, else I would fill up your soul with wonder.


Cap. Farewell Lady.


Fea. I Will take my leave Sir, and of you fair Lady.


Felix. Tell him your self, if he infringe his Oath I am undone farewell Sir.


Clutch, Entirely welcome Gentlemen, Callumney attend them out.


Callum. These are a couple of entire Rogues, or else I wear false spectacles.
Exeunt


Clutch, What think you of your sweet hearts now my Girls.


Fem. As of the noblest Creatures nature framed.


Felix. They are superlatively excellent.


Clutch, You are obedient Girls, but come attend me I must instruct you, in
some unknown lectures.

And wisdom to your Love -- if I obtain my Prize,
My Daughters shall be, Mammons sacrifice.

Act the Fourth,
Scene the First.
Enter Calumney, and Felixina* Felix. WEll what would you say now.


Callum. Are we free from any hearing.


Felix. We are but of each other aside
What means the fellow.

Callum. Pray let me ask a question then.


Felix. Speak, but be not tedious -- some weighty business sure.


Callum. Your answer shall be just.


Felix. Yes prethy speak without more conjuring.


Callum. Do you --


Felix. Out with it.


Callum. Do you love Mr. Money.


Felix. Yes what of that.


Callum. Faithfully.


Felix. Must I needs make my faith so familiar with your knowledge is it my
father has made you thus inquisitive.


Clutch, No (as I covet happiness) I love you, and would prevent you he is one
unfit for your deserts, my heart grieves for you.


Felix. Surely the fellows honest, prethy why.


Callum. First of all you -- are young, fair, and kind, he old gouty and
churlish, -- you virtuous, wise, and loving, he vicious damdable vicious, he
has taken in Baudy-houses night, by night -- who but money -- he makes the Old
bauds beautiful the Whores Caper naked at his appearance, marry they have
reason for it, he secures them from all troubles, he is acquainted with all the
terrible Justices about the Subburbs (and wondrous well beloved too, theyl take
his word before the bond of an Alderman, then is he very foolish, for he
prefers the cloth of Tishue, and Plush before noble Hospitality, and a hater
of all virtue.


Felix. You say I am virtuous, why does he love me then.


Callum. He does not, I know he does not.


Felix. Why does he swear he loves proves it by guests, would marry me.


Callum. He says so, i will answer, with a question, why does the Devil feed with
liquorish meats, spiritful Wine, high pride, hot lechery, and feathered ease,
those that he means to damn, he marry ye, fie, fie, he shall but like the greedy
Tree-worm, suck the sap of Reputation from you, and leave you withered.


Felix. These words carry a sense to be observed, though to me needless the
Jenius that does guard the Reputation, my chaste soul affects has preinform'd
me thus, this shows his honest though, since thou art so chary of my honor,
(and wilt I hope, persist in it, I shall invite thy Judgment to a greater
difficult, for which I will not be a light rewarder,


Callum. Here Is harmony. aside You are my Virtuous Mistress, I am your vessal,
your very eye commands me.


Felix. Go send my Sister to me.


Callum. I shall forsooth I am all aside Amorous Exit.


Felix. The very contemplation of my Love, exhilirates my heart, his name
exiles all passion, what an infusious Love -- when I was free and with
impartial eyes, vew'd every one (Eagle like) could I dare the Summer Sun now
one slight beam has dimn'd me here come my sister she is Enter Feminia
fettered (too) my helping hand was not wanting (Gramercy jealousy, for I
thinking my own choice best fearing with my eyes, she should look on him, have
taken occasion (as my surest prevention) to make her cover (by my pray appear
most worthy.


Fem. Did you send for me Sister.


Felix. Yes, Mrs. Simper I did send to you.


Fem. What would you (pray).


Felix. Talk and prattle, nothing else, what do thou think of my choice.


Fem. It Is a deserving one, is this all.


Felix. No when do thou think I shall see him again.


Fem. I cannot tell, pray heaven they both prove constant.


Felix. Is that thy meditation -- do thou fear it.


Fem. Yes, and my fears hold Angry.


Felix. That they will be false, forbid it heaven if mine be capable of Oaths I
cannot.


Fem. Nay I will hope the best, you have most cause to grieve if it prove so --
you will loose the richest prize.


Felix. Not in your eye I hope aside How rich I prethy, thine's a Jove to mine.


Fem. I am the happier Offers to go away. Juno then.


Felix. Prethy stay.


Fem. I am invited by a difficult subject requires my meditations for a while
prethy excuse me. Exit Feminia


Felix. I am invited by a difficult subject requires my meditations for a
while, prethy exuse me, this is a Riddle learn or turn Sorceress and raise up
the Ghost of Edipus to unfold it.


Exit Felixina Enter Money, Featherbrain, Credit, and Captain Pennyless. Fea. If
you derive your Pedigree from the ancient house of the Moneys, there is some
affinity between us.


Mo. I Will assure you Sir we came in with the Conqueror my mother was a Pecunia.


Fea. What kin to the Argents,


Mo. It Was my fathers name.


Cap. Well said Frank bring me into the kindred too.


Fea. My mother was an Argent, my father an Aurum.


Mo. Why then your name is Gold Sir.


Fea. Yes sir, the best of my kindred lived in Barbery.


Mo. Then by that name I must salute you never noble cousen Gold.


Fea. Sweet cousen Money, -- pray be acquainted with my Brother Jewel.


Mo. Bright Mr. Jewel. I pray salute my Ningle Credit.


Cap. Ningle Sir.


Mo. I sir, it is a familiar Term passes betwixt us.


Cap. Good Mr. Credit. I salute you.


Cred. I return your salute precious Mr. Jewel.


Cap. Indeed Sir, precious is my Christen name.


Fea. Whether go you Gent. (if without offense I may desire it.)


Mo. Ye are married Gentlemen.


Fea. Married, yes, and I believe you know our wives -- we married two Sisters,
I the Lady Portion, and my Brother, the younger Sister, beauty.


Mo. Indeed the Lady Portion is my near Kinswoman.


Cap. Yet more kindred aside


Mo. I am her fathers elder Brother. Callumney above.


Cred. Then Gentlemen we dare reveal our Voyage we are going to do, what you it
seems have done.


Fea. Marry a couple of Virgins i will lay my life.


Mo. And since happily we have met we shall desire you two, for Witnesses to
such agreements as their Fathers, and we shall conclude upon.


Fea. Then you have the Wenches consents.


Mo. Firm, firm.


Fea. And yet were distrustful, Jealous of your friends.


Mo. No not Jealous.


Enter Callumney in the Music Room. Call. Who is here my rival Money, and his
Ningle Credit, with two Caveliers -- the Old man is taking his Noons Nap, i will
wake him with this news suddenly, hoping he will run out off his wits for Joy
-- master, master awake here are both your Son's Mr. Money and Mr. Credit.


Enter Clutch above. Clutch. Where my loyal Callumney, where where --


Call. Look here Sir, look here, unless you stay them speedily two golden
unthrifts (in whose clutches they now are) will carry them from your sight for
ever.


Clutch. Forbid it Mammon, i will call to them, what if a man leaped down
Callumney -- i will leap, may a man break his neck hear think thou.


Call. His Neck scarce hurt his foot.


Clutch. Do thou leap first good Calumny, to satisfy my fear, a little lead me
the way.


Call. Alas Sir, I appear so black and horrid I shall quite scare them from you.


Clutch. Thou say true i will call, i will call, they will be gone ere I can
moderately go down stairs.


Call. Call, fie leap Sir -- it is but a squelch I have a kinsman an excellent
bone setter.


Clutch. Shall I, shall I, Callumny, I can have but a squelch thou say.


Call. No, no.


Clutch. I but twill be a Devilsh squelch -- will thou be accessory to thy good
Masters death.


Callum. You might have been down by this time.


Clutch. That I might I faith for ever rising. I might have had my last squelch
-- Vh, if I were sure my legs would come first to ground I would not care --
well I will call, Son Money, Son Credit, Gentlemen whether go you.


Mo. O Father Clutch, no further then your house.


Clutch. My faithful Sons -- that I were within an embrace, but i will come
immediately, imediately Gentlemen -- you will stay a while.


Mo. Yes we will wait you sir:


Clutch. Open the door Callumny.


Call. I cannot find the key sir.


Clutch. Not find the key, dainty fine tricks, where has your Devil-ship laid
it, break open the door, you Hell-hound.


Call. I have found it now.


Clutch. Did I call thee Hell-hound, forgive my passion gentle Callumny.


Exit Clutch and Callumny. Fea. You are well beloved here Gentlemen.


Mo. Yes faith the Old man dotes upon us.


Act Fourth Scene Third,
Cap. He may be proud of ye, ye are the best Suitors, have craced his House,
since his Daughters entered into their Teenes.


Cred. We are men (you know) the world thinks well off.


Cap. Ye are your selves, the world, in spite of the flesh and Devil.


Mo. You do ecclips us with your praise, and your affection, yields a partial
censure.


Enter Clutch and Callumny. Clutch. They are here still, Oh my right noble
Sons, Son Money let me enjoy an armful of thee -- and of thee -- trust me Son
Credit, my youngest Daughters sickness is for thee -- and Son Money did your
man tell you how my elder Daughter swounded in your absence -- I thought I
should have lost her, nothing but your name could quicken life in her.


Mo. My Man Sir.


Clutch. And my Son Credits man (too) Indeed Gentlemen I am infinitely engaged
to you, you are noble Lovers I see you do respect your Ladies.


Mo. We sent no men good Sir, bethink your self, sure he is Transported.


Clutch. True tricks of Nobility, see if they will acknowledge their good
actions aside But who are these Gentlemen, who are these I pray.


Mo. Two worthy friends of ours.


Clutch. Their names (I pray) I may salute em.


Mo. This Gentleman's name is Gold.


Clutch. Mr. Gold.


Mo. And this Mr. Jewel.


Clutch. He is in my ear already, Illustrious Mr. Jewel -- glorious Mr. Gold
-- you are both entirely welcome aside Gold and Jewel -- oh for a couple of
Daughters more, what a wealth Clutch might I be, I would Bigamy were lawful, I
must enjoy these two Gentlemen, Callumney and I will knock our Jouls together
about it Gentlemen will you draw near.


Mo. Pray lead the way Sir.


Clutch. Indeed i will follow you, nay pray Sir -- Mr. Gold, Mr. Jewel -- Exeunt*


Manet Callumney. Call. How is our house enobled -- had my Master but two
Daughters more, what marriages should we have M. Money and M* Credit ('it is
resolved) must marry the two Virgins -- say you so -- but what says Mr.
Callumny to that, by your leave, Clutch you promised him the Elder -- and Money
like a trade Rogue you will defeat him, but mark what follows (my aged
Signior) he like a more cunning Rogue, has that in practice will defeat you
both -- I am strangely lost, what should these fellows be that came with
letters -- Money and Credit said they sent none such -- I have it, I know I
have it, (without all doubt) they are servants to these fresh Mamoratto's Gold
and Jewel -- here will be some scuffling for the wenches. I may prevent you Mr.
Gold or Mr. Jewel if you solicit my Lindabradez.


Enter Clutch. Clutch. Callumny my best Callumny, why thus melancholy, Sirrah
my Daughter dotes upon thee, upon the Devil -- aside. I vow she does, I know it
-- she flouts Money beyond measure.


Call. This is the preambulation to more mischief cunning Sir, I apprehend you,
I do expect I should encourage on Gold and Jewel to your daughters -- when you
are hanged, aside you know the proverb sure Sir. my mean desert weighed with
their noble Suitors must appear most worthless.


Clutch. She thinks thee honest, them but flatterers.


Call. Well what would your Sir.


Clutch. Methinks I see thee walk in cloth of Tishue whilst I in Furs in an
imperious chair sit and prolong my hours with gazing on thee, my delightful
darling.


Call. Notable Rogue, but what is your will, declare it pray sir.


Clutch. This is day thou know, Money and Credit obleige their whole
Estates, to me on condition I give my free consent, that they may match my
Daughters, mark ye, my free consent, but if their free consents they cannot get
they are like to stand the hazard, Gold for thee my boy -- now Sirrah, oh that
I had two Daughters more.


Call. You would fetch over the new Guests Gold and Jewel,


Clutch. Thou art all apprehension, thou were composed of Craft and Subtilty.


Call. This is too hard a task, you cannot give your consent twice, Law you
know will not allow of it.


Clutch, Do thou but cheer them on, let me alone in time to work the
Catastrophe, I have a Plot, (not altogether perfected, that shall make thee
mine, never fear it, in the mean time, be thou their Genious encourage them, my
Boy, encourage them I cannot stay, I must about my profit.


Call. I apprehend the Rogue, he has given Money and Credit, his full consent,
now Sir, will he marry them to Gold and Jewel, and at the last appear as
ignorant, as they that never knew, and where is my Mistress then, kind Sir expect
(if you be wife) nothing from me may make addition to your happiness -- But who
comes here i will step behind the hangings.


Enter Featherbrain and Felixina. Felix. What plentious happiness my soul
enjoys in seeing you my wished one, nothing shall now I hope (if Hymen smile)
delay our Nuptials.


Callum. Hey day, what have we here -- sure these are Eyes, and Ears.


Fea. Sweetest it is my firm resolve, to hearts sincere, nothing so happy as
the marriage hour.


Callum. Good again.


Fea. You know my mind, lets in again your father will suspect else, I shall
declare my plots to you, at large when time shall be auspitious. Exit
Featherbrain with Felixina.


Felix. You are full of constancy.


Call. Very pretty, this is one of them (as I take it) I should encourage, she
has played my part upon her self and given him a large encouragement -- again.
Enter Captain and Feminia.


Cap. Why prerty sweet one can thy thoughts be won to think my tongue has been
the Orator of a disloyal heart.


Fem. But could you not affect my Sister dearer.


Callum. This is the second part to the same Tune what courtly Roguery may a
man descern behind Arras.


Cap. What my friends choice, unclasp an amity in whose fair Bonds, are
fettered naught but love and sweet indulgence, did not that claim a share in my
best thoughts my Amorous Soul, creating you it is object says you excel in
merit.


Fem. Think me not loveless for my easy fear.


Cap. Indeed I do not.


Fem. Be wary or all is marred.


Cap. I Will warrant ye come, let us withdraw again. Exeunt


Callum. Am I designed for a better end then hell, the Devil keeps no truer
touch with me, Love may be thus reciprocal, in as short a Season, but such aged
familiarity call's marvail in my sconce -- Oh for a Jury of Witches to find the
guilt of this business out, it is now as the Devil my aged Signior would have
it, ye shall have Gold and Jewel, to your Sons, never fear it, if I do not
cross the business, there is a business unthought off, I think of it though and
will endeavor it to my power, I Will do my good will, Mr. Clutch, ye can have but
a man's heart, here they are all, work work, my brain.


Enter Clutch, Money, Felixina, Featherbrain Credit, Feminia, and Captain
Pennyless. Clutch, Look ye Gentlemen, this is fair inconsideration of your
estates I give my full consent, that you may marry my two daughters.


Both, We acknowledge so much.


Clutch, Well said, I think you need not doubt theirs.


Mo. Theirs we are confident.


Callum. Coxcombs you are, if you knew all aside


Clutch, I know you do consider I am old. aside

Why I may dye to morrow, Not these threescore years I hope, and then you will
be blessed with all my store, these Girls must reap the fruit of all my care.


Mo. Well, their free wills we doubt not.


Cred. O you little Rogue I have thy consent, have I not Spouse.


Fem. I Cadeedlo, Head.


Cred. Cadeedlo Head, those words come so prettily from thee.


Fem. I am glad Clutch, Money, Credit Felix. and Feminia, whisper. they please
you Sir.


Enter Callumney. Call. Sir here is, Sir here is two Gentlemen, and their wives
are come to visit you, and my mistresses.


Clutch, What are they.


Callum. Mr. Silver the monyer, and his mistress.


Cap. Light heel, keep such a stamping, that we shall nere be able to endure
the house, what is the the other.


Callum. Mr. Hammer-head, the Goldsmith, Sir, he has a very handsome wife.


Fea. O then by all means let them in.


Clutch, Do, do, Callumy, their worthy friends, and necessary members in a
Common wealth, Mr. Silver, my Enter Silver and Hammer-head, and their Wives.
illustrious friend welcome, most welcome, and cousen Hammer-head, let me
embrace you.


Mo. Gentlemen pray salute your friends, Mr. Silver, you While they salute the
men Featherbrain, and Penniless salute the Women. and I are familiar friends
your hand, Ningle Credit, bid him welcome.


Fea. Fair mistress welcome and may choycest delight, ever crown your wishes.


1. Woman, The like to you.


Cap. Frank has borded one, and I like a coward stand and fear to assault the
other, but I am a Captain, and will fear no colors mrs. your welcome as I may
say.


2. Woman, I thank you Sir.


Cap. Is that your husband forfooth.


2. Woman, Yes Sir. why do ye ask.


Cap. Because I would know. aside


1. Woman, A very merry Gentleman.


Clutch, It Is as I tell you Sir, Mr. Money, and Mr. Credit, has engaged their
whole estates to me, inconsideration of my full consent, that they may marry my
daughters.


Silver. Why then we shall have weddings two or three at. --


Ham. Least, for here is my friend Mr. Silver, has stole his Mistress forth and
means to marry her presently.


Cred. Why then he is one of our rank.


Clutch, He is, but Gentlemen so many weddings toward, and nere a dance, come,
come, each take his mistress and dance, and foot it a little for the
satisfaction of these spectators.


Callum. Ha, ha, ha, -- are these your Kinsmen Gentlemen, ha, ha, ha, I am a
little absurd, ha, ha, ha, pray pardon me.


Fea. Our kinsman, yes, why do ask.


Callum. They are a couple of crafty merchants, ha, ha, ha, they may well be
confident of the consents of their mistresses.


Fea. Not unlikely, why They are your Kinsmen you say.


Cap. Yes.


Callum. Whose Credits you respect.


Fea. As our lives.


Callum. I vow ye should not know it else pray make no words on it.


Cap. Well, speak.


Call. If these two tuff blades, are of ability, they have made all sure, i will
warrant them.


Fea. Ha -- ha, sure prethy be plainer.


Cap. I do conjecture something, the Rogues breath smells worse than Garlic,
it aside ascends from the same of some unsavory secret, I fear 'twil choke us.


Callum. A trick of youth, and partly in fashion, a slight mistake, made use.
O'th Bridal night, before the wedding morning, do ye understand me now
Gentlemen -- no hurt, only.


Cap. Foah, now it is out -- the Devil choke thee for it.


Fea. How came thou to know it.


Cap. Their Baud i will lay my life. aside


Call. Very easily Sir, I was a Servant to them, and had good cash to learn
silence with many fair promises.


Cap. I, I knew't would come to it. aside


Fea. Why what a Rogue art thou to discover then.


Callum. I but I know to whom, their friends and kinsmen, all the Devils in
Hell, could not have wrinched it from me but you.


Cap. We are much engaged to you -- aside


Fea. Does not their Father know it: Captain Featherbrain whispers Clutch and
his two daughters, Callumney goes to Money and Credit.


Call. Not yet Sir.


Fea. Well let it go no further.


Call. Not for a World.


Cap. Come hither Frank.


Clutch. Felix. Feminia, let me talk with you a little.


Both. Yes Sir.


Call. Mr. Money, Mr. Credit, Gentlemen when must we have Gloves, when is the
time prefixed, I perceive you are well prepared,


Mo. To morrow, is it not to morrow Ningle.


Cred. To morrow, let me see to morrow, I to morrow a very fit day -- yes, yes,
to morrow Callumney.


Call. And are you sure you have the consent of my young Mistresses.


Cred. Sure do take us for Asses, do think we are now to make Sure, and
must be married to morrow.


Call. Come I know you are not sure, you have both most foolish lost your whole
estates.


Mo. How.


Call. Be these two yonder your Kinsman.


Cred. Yes.


Call. You are sure ont.


Mo, Yes.


Call. So sure am I, they are contracted both unto your Brides, that should be,
and (let me tell you for it is frindship bids me) the old man cares not it is (in
part) his policy.


Both. How.


Call. Nay it must out, although my Masters secret conscience will have it so,
do ye but mark his words, I give ye but my consent (says he) having reserved
to himself thus to delude you forceing his daughters privately which indeed he
need not, they are themselves too willing to give their free consents to marry
your rich Kinsmen.


Cred. And will my Spouse turn Baggage, is there no honesty in Cadeedlo.


Mo. But is this truth.


Call. Why will you here me swear.


Cred. Any thing but Cadeedlo, that hellish Oath.


Call. These eyes and ears are witnesses to their contract.


Mo. It cannot be they are married.


Call. So am I, am I not, they married -- pist -- I Will be more open to you did
not my Master tell ye, ye sent your two men to his Daughters.


Mo. I perfectly remember't we sent none.


Call. True they were servants to your kinsman, and to my knowledge brought them
letters, but as forerunners to their visits.


Mo. What will become of this is there no prevention what an unconscionable
misers this.


Call. Gentlemen, now hearken to me since I have opened the Sore I will apply a
remedy, therefore (ingeniously) observe from me, always come short of this, I
have been industrious for ye.


Cred. Honest Callumny.


Call. With resolved confidence, call them aside and in the way of frindship
make known you have enjoyed the Daughters, laughing it out (like some Familiar
action) or ye make your boast (as thus) that as aged as ye are) you can yet
overcome young Virgins, I need not teach ye to bounce I am sure, there are
twenty ways to divulge it, swear it, rather then loose your main estates.


Cred. By my Credit (an Oath I fear I shall nere swear again) it is a piece of
rare Rogurie, and I must hug thee for it.


Mo. I like it (too) weel put in practice strait.


Call. Least it be to late, they are now in consultation, be sure you bear up
stiffly, think on your Estates, go not a word more, lest we be observed.


Felix. Those Gentlemen Sir.


Clutch. Yes you know my mind, i will win your oppertunity.


Cap. Fie in a passion for her, let her pass, think your self happy that you
know it, 'twould have troubled ye more after marriage.


Fea. Well i will do something.


Clutch. Come Gentlemen will ye in, your Dinners are prepared, by this I am
sure, discourse the rest at table, 'twill make your fare digest.


Omnes. We Will wait upon you Sir. -- Exeunt.


Call. Propitious Vengeance. aid my bloody Brawls
And I will feast thy soul with Funerals.

Exit. Act the Fifth
Scene the First*
Enter Featherbrain Solus. Fea. IMpudent Slaves Joy in your sordid Acts, your
pieces of Lascivious Gravity, has Age taught you to be but wise in sin, must
you be revereced cause you are become high in Iniquity, bravely Audacious, yet
pardon my rash words, ye are to me my better Jenious, I should honor ye, call
ye the Patrons of my happiness for you have told me that, (had it been kept
till I had wedded this intemperate Woman creature) had ruined me for ever,
crewel woman, what Cupids did you see in wrinkled brows, sunk Eyes, and
whithered cheeks, should make your blood with such a flame, kindle your
appetite, hide me some happy mist, for here she comes would tempt another Adam.


Enter Felixina. Oh my heart the killing Basalisk is more courteous, his visage
does pretend no less than death, but here is a Ram shaped in Innocence.

Felix. What so private: I have strange news to tell you.


Fea. She will offend no more, has heard, I know it and will fain penitence
(death) I must ^peak to her, though I perish by it, Oh divinity, defend me from
this piece of beauteous Magic, and I will be thy Anchorite -- is your news
good Felixina.


Felix. Exceeding good to me Sir.


Fea. Goo^ come to thee, is Hell and Heaven met, or is incontinency proved no
crime aside as our wise Sophisters maintain with good my sweet.


Felix. My Father gives us free consent to marry.


Fea. Does he indeed, a piece of pleasing mischief, aside what joy have we
Felixina.


Felix. Will not you kiss me for my news now.


Fea. Joy so transported me I had forgot they kiss Oh Hespirides, thy garden
yields such fruit, that I must pluck it though the Dragon seize me -- aside her
breath excels perfumes, and on her lip lies such a pleasing warmth, might melt
the souls of devout Hermets, -- Oh you dangerous sweet one, might I be promised
to enjoy thee thus, when our two souls are doubled to the Abiss, i would pass
through this Elysium of sins and bless my Temptress.


Felix. What do you mean Sir.


Fea. Nothing, why do thou ask sweet heart.


Felix. You talk so strangely.


Fea. Indeed I do to talk of bliss in Hell.


Felix. Oh sister now I fear you.


Fea. But when must we be married fair Felixina.


Felix. Do you prefix the time Sir -- you will not want a Bride.


Fea. Thou will be she I warrant, hum what do ye blush would we were married
now, there is an amorus flame crept in my blood, makes every limb a wanton,
prithee kiss me again, -- tell me -- do not thou they kiss find a mutiny in
thy blood, relish my pulss. I am not aged but can meet thy fire with heat more
active then that flames desire.


Felix. What do you mean Sir, saying heat and fire, give your strange Dialect
some Demonstration, I apprehend you not.


Fea. Venus will be a Nun, and preach Virginity, Oh were should Devils get such
Angels shapes aside I Will tell thee then -- thy beauty and my love (too potent
Tempters) envite me to that Lilly bed thy breast, where I might banquet on thy
curious body. Lets imitate the warm embracing Turtles instruct each other how
our Parents did, when by their Amorous play we were create and propagate the
world, with love born Creatures, what do ye gaze on me -- I am turned Devil
too, Devil too, and will conspire with thee in loose embraces to beget a race
of Tempters, say do I not look like a most amorous Incubus.


Felix. You scare me with your words.


Fea. But did that bosom harbor Innocence, thou would (undaunted) hear me.


Felix. That Innocence protect me.


Fea. Nay fly me not, I am as bad as thee, I am surprised nere fear it -- Oh my
gross essence.


Felix. Sweet Sir, unfold your discontents, do you not think me chaste, pray
look on me. --


Fea. Oh no, thy eyes, will make my Judgment stagger, ye are all innocence in
show, but that frail man, that by your species, shall (like me) imagine some
inferior virtue, shall close himself within a den of thraldomes, I did believe
thee innocently good as rich in Soul, as feature, I did think each sentence
that thy tongue did utter me some,

Prophesies of happiness, but yet I find
All these but spectars, to delude the mind.

Felix. Pray Sir be more particular, does my indulgence of you tell you so, or
my bold love declare my Levity, was I too easy won, or else too free, being
won too. --


Fea. Oh, I stop there, that kindness is my torment had thou repulst me, with
a brave disdain, when for thy love I was an Orator, I had become a gross
Idolator, in paying Adoration to thy name.


Felix. Shall I not know the nature of my guilt.


Fea. Incontinency.


Felix. Incontinency -- oh she swounds


Fea. Oh me she swounds, as if within that word, lay rigorous Thunder, in me an
Earthquake is, shivering my Joints, like (too aged) building, I could out sigh
rough Eolus, what a stormy vile, lust does make in calm Lovers bosoms, how like
a Virgin in contented Urn, (that living knew not, what man called a crime) lies
this Deceptio visus, since she is false it will be piety, to raise her to
repentance, I am resolved, if I did warm this Viper in my breast, and only
have her sting for recompense, welcome my fate, she stirs, sure she will prevent
me.


Fe. Oh never wake sir, if she be false, may she thus die unpittied -- let her
not have a Grave, preserve her body and vile memory, to fright Mortality, when
Maidens plight their faith, and do enfringe let their wronged Lovers, curse my
wandering spirit, who living here, was but their base example.


Fea. Bless me good Powers, how these strange dangerous words, do operate in my
fidelity. I scarce believe her false now. aside


Felix. Sweet Gentleman (the name of Love you cancel) who has possessed your
noble spirit thus.

Faith I scarce think thou know -- his names Money.


Felix. What the Grand Devil of Rank, Callumney, would you belive him Sir.


Fea. 'Twas spoke in such a way.


Felix. If in your breast any credulity, you ever lodged to receive Virgins
Oaths, let mine a while appease you, and encourage that noble spirit, which you
bear within you, unto an Act by my invention framed shall make this Incurrer
truly confess, his words, to be gross scandal.


Fea. And vindicate thy honor with his Death,
How many Ill's proceeds from Sorded breath.

Enter Calumney Credit, and Money, Call. But did you do it bravely.


Mo. For speech, and action Rosius might have learned, had been living.


Call. And how did they take it -- ha.


Cred. Very contentedly -- they were not moved.


Mo. Made slight (as men of actions not concern them)


Call. They are subtle Rogues, and preserved, all in thought yea have prevented
them never fear it, for if they marry them, Callumney is your bondsman.


Both, Oh noble Callumney.


Call. If they should question more, be you still confident, remember your
estates, be that your Ienius, I speak from my love, I would not have such noble
Spirits ruined come lets be gone.


Mo. But I hope, they will urge no more.

You cannot tell, be you prepared for it, to seem but daunted were to open all,
and so you may become ridiculous Beggars (...) you were in state beloved of
all, all then will reckon you but (...) counterfeits.


Mo. And then we are fit for no place, but new England.


Call. Come follow me and be victorious.


Enter, Featherbrain, and Captain Pennyless. Fea. Come, I dare swear they are
chaste.


Cap. Oh I, as virtuous as waiting Gentlewomen, who will not deny the Grooms a
courtesy, to show they are free from Pride, or they which serve ancient rich
Batchellors, that in their Candles mix cantarides, to raize Rebellious Spirits,
Midwives at thirty, Widows at Nineteen, as Hellens Maid that wrote the Book,
De art Venerea.


Fea. Oh fie upon thee, thou will make them Monsters, come, come, follow my
Directions, i will warrant thee, we will prove them honest Maids, ere we have done.


Cap. Will you so, i will say you are further read in Dialectica, then a great
many of your forefathers, no, i will trouble my self no further -- e'ne those
that broke them, sodder u'm.


Fea. If thou do anger me, i will beat thee into, belief (and that is a strange
kind of Rhetoric) come they have, they have Golden Portions think of that.


Cap. If thou do lead me to damnation.


Fea, I Will be burned for thee, come follow me.


Enter Clutch, Felixina and Feminia. Clutch, But do they entertain your loves,
so willingly good Girls you have done bravely (my own flesh) let me kiss you
both i will make ye Goddesses, yea little wantons.


Felix. I Sir, but Money and Credit.


Clutch, For them let me alone, Money is an Ass, Credit his Ningle, let um pass
I have ore reached their Gravities, my subtilety shall make perdition, their
inhabitary Mansion, me thinks I hear them curse and rail on Clutch, whilst I
content me with the Foxes Proverb (better when he is cursed, a ha Mrs. Gold, and
Mrs. Jewel.


Fea. But there is a scandal laid upon our fame.


Clutch, What Is that, what scandal is it, if it hinder not our ends, no matter
Money will buy good tongues.


Fem. It hinders our hope to marriage.


Clutch, What with Gold and Jewel, declare it, ha, with Gold and Jewel, speak
it, oh my sweet hopes.


Felix. Money and Credit (joined with Callumney) Proclaim us both their Whores.


Fem. Jewel and Gold this hearing, casts us off exposing us to Contumelius
laughter.


Clutch, Oh Callumney, thou art mischievous, and have out-reacht me, this will
bring madness on me Gold and Jewel (my illustrate hopes) banished to live in
desperations desert, Mammon (thou God of our adored earth) why do thou suffer
such events to th'wart me.


Felix. Sir a devise (by me already framed, and well approved off) shall our
humors gain and we match with our liking.


Clutch, Gold and Jewel.


Both, Yes Sir.


Felix. But hear me out Sir, these as they are rich, will not be brought in the
compass of defraud, if as our Portions you will deliver up, half those estates,
Money, and Credit owned, we have wrought them to engage theirs unto you, in
witness of each other, then they are ours, if this may not be done, it is their
resolves, to leave us to the hazard of our Fortunes.


Clutch, Oh as I could wish -- i will do it, i will do it, where be they i will be engaged
immediately.


Felix. In that withdrawing Room, they wait your Answer.


Clutch, It Is well I am contented.


Exit Manet Felixina, and Feminia. Felix. So this is contrived, to purpose, is
it not, now our desires will finish (my Feminia) am I not worthy applause, be
free to me.


Fem. Thou have disposed things rarely bur (in brief) tell me were thou
persuaded I would be thy rival.


Felix. By Love I was, but prethy pardon me.


Fem. Pardon thee, yes upon condition you will return the like, I had as much of
foolish Jealousy, as love could let them claim.


Felix. I hope it will prevent that Plague, in Marriage I would not entertain
it a whole year for more then the Worlds riches.


Fem. But are not we obedient Children, to gull our Father thus.


Felix. Heaven pardon us, it is not our greatest Crime, in such a cause as this.

I hope so too, and time shall tell (sweet Madam,
Though we made shift for Husbands, yet we had um.

Exeunt. Enter Featherbrain, and Money* Fea. But do think she is with child.


Mo. I cannot tell I did my best endeavor. you may imagine how a man inspired
by such a beauty may be stir himself.


Fea. I warrant she is a Bedfellow for a Jove.


Mo. Faith I would scarce exchange her, for his Juno, why Nector is extracted
from her lips, her breath excells sweets of Arabia.

But those choice parts, which none but I could merit,
Would call up heat, in a cold coward spirit.

Fea. She has infused Poety in you.


Mo. Have not I been at her Helicon -- now I speak to purpose.


Fea. And is she pliable in her sports to you.


Mo. As is the Fish unto the Anglers bait, plays to beget desire.


Fea. Very Wanton.


Mo. As Leda, in the arms of Jupiter, I could not think my memory could --
aside Bless my tongue with so many good words to my purpose, but my estate that
does it -- Oh noble Callumney.


Enter Captain Penniless and Credit. Cap. What desperate Vow, won her, to
credit you me thinks she is nice, and very proudly coy.


Cred. To strangers she is, to me she was, but that she saw my faith in my
great Oaths.


Cap. What were they pray Sir.


Cred. Marry Sir, the greatest and surest was Cadeedlo.


Cap. Indeed then she might well believe you -- Cadeedlo quoth a --


Cred. And now we play and sport as familiarly as puppies, I call her spouse,
she calls me head --


Cap. A most firm Conjunction, her Father does not know it you say.


Cred. Not yet, and I hope you will not tell Sir.


Enter Clutch. Cap. You need not care, since his consent is given.


Cred. That Is all one (poor soul) she would blush her self to death, if she but
thought he knew it.


Cap. Why do ye expose your secrets to my bosom, I am a very blab, I shall
disclose.


Cred. Will you undo your kinsman.


Cap. Hearken to me.


Clutch. They are at it, I must make one, on both sides -- now my part comes
in, what Gentlemen retired, I am too bold to interrupt your privacies.


Fea. You are not Sir, pray stay -- are the doors to lock. aside


Clutch. They are most strangely barracaded -- aside


Crid. No stay till to morrow, then Revel at large, I would be married first.


Cap. Noe. prithee be persuaded, I would fain see how the old man would relish
his Daughters forwardness, he knows hot constitutions must be abated.


Mo. Break your discourse off, I would not have the old man guess out this
private deed, he is a piece of dangerous subtilety.


Fea. Then all is true you tell me.


Mo If you be incredulous, ask my Ningle Credit.


Fea. No, no, i will take your word, as you shall mine, you are a piece of damned
impiety, sent but to teach the world Idolatry: the Peasants wisdom, the vain
Cities Pride, the Misers luxury, the only guide to Fools and worldlings, you
were made to show Hells broadest entrance.


Cap. Think not I am a patient Auditor, I am not passive cause I dare not Act,
but keep your breath till I am charged with it, nor then prepare for storms as
violent, as the just Heavens shower upon impious Seamen after black
imprecations.


Cred. Bless me these words are worse then sympathize or concur, what do you
mean Sir.


Clutch. Now it works -- are ye at difference Gentlemen.


Fea. If ever you had fear, express it now be not so ignorant as to believe, I
will not vindicate that Ladies Honor, you by your gilded witchcraft have
deprived, tell me you Chaos of confusion, what Negromancy from Gehenna brought,
wrought this white innocence unto a deed, black, as your sorded entrails.


Clutch. Son Money, what is the matter.


Money. Alas I know not Sir (oh cursed Callumny) what is your will Sir, with me?


Capt. Thou have by Magic and Pretigious Charms Effussinated such a Noble
Creature, that all Excrutiations, Hell invents will be too sweet a Guerden for
the deed.


Cred. The wonderful words of man, if I know what he means more then I tell
would I were burned pray Sir be plainer.


Clutch, How go the Squares Son Credit, draw, draw.


Fea. Keep my swords length To the Captain, then to Feather. Sir, they are past
a Rescue, you ought to be my Agent in this Cause.


Mo. My purpose is to make amends with Marriage.


Fea. Is that my satisfaction, Know sir by oath she was contracted mine, and
had not violated that decree, but by some (Hell wrought) witchcraft, therefore
know no way but this, shall right me -- if you think brief repentance can
obtain abatements in your Torments, take your time, I will The Captains offer
to run at Credit. attend some minutes.


Cred. Oh hold, take my confession she is (for ought I know more Man then
woman, if ever I touched more then hand, or -- lip -- Cadeedlo, there is my
oath, my undoing oath, may I not thrive without honesty.


Cap. But are you serious.


Cred. Hang me if I be not.


Mo. You may believe these oaths. Enter Clutch


Fea. Know Sir, we are engaged to your daughters, and will our Contracts
Consumate with speed. But your consent is sold, to those that shall but little
by it


Enter Felixina and Feminia. Mo. Since you have of this, craft and that I see
the women are Auditors, vveel resign our intrest up, enjoy the fruit of your
ill labored brain.


Fea. Do you hear this Sir.


Clutch. But are my daughters contented.


Felix. Sir happiness, and these are so nere kin: enjoying them all happiness
is ours, and pray Sir tell me, you that durst lay claim to that Pure Maids
prize bove all earthly treasure, has my tongue, ever been so vile to vovv any
affection to you, clear me, and your self.


Mo. You might have been so wise.


Fem. And you Sir, like an Image in black Chalk what vovvs, or oaths can you
lay claim to now, more then Cadeedlo.


Cred. Oh that Cadeedlo -- that had been enough for any Christened woman to
have svvorn.


Clutch, Well since it is thus, and that you are well agreed marry my Daughters,
take my Blessings with them, be witness all.


Enter Callumney. Call. Oh cursed atonement, terror to mine eyes is all my
plotting projects come to this confusion separate your conjunctions.


Clutch, What my true Servant Calumny, give me thy hand, thou man of
discontent, what think you of my eldest daughter now sir -- you must hatch
projects then -- ha, look, look, see if Mr. Gold, and Mr. Jewel have not
prevailed, Money and Credit were but shallow Lovers, -- Sirrah -- sirrah, have I
not riches in abundance, Money and Credit, Gold and Jewel.


Call. May thy Gold, (moulten choke thee.


Cluch, Not yet Callumney, not yet, -- prethy be more charitable, thou shall
have my eldest daughter.


Fea. Spawn of iniquity, whose infectious breath carries more horror to the
bearers Ears, then does the sentence of just Radamanth, unto the black
offenders -- what is this Lady false, spit out your gall, and tell me.


Call. If she be not, she is not to old to learn, too learn, and as young stock,
as you may have a Graft, the City keeps a Nursery thank the Court Gardners.


Fea. How durst thou speak thus.


Call. Oh good Sir, Fools and Cynicks, talk by Pattent, I am a fool or you had
gone to wrack, with your fair brides (that must be) weak hearted Gentlemen
where is your estates, you were all, deluded Prisoners, you shall be till the
Devils dead, (my good old Master, and after (too) unless some Prodigal succeed
him which is the best your hopes can promise.


Clutch, Come Gentlemen mind him not, all he can do is rail, will you to
Church, these my obligatory Gentlemen, shall be the witness to your sacred
contract.


Both. We are content


Mo. I do not envy much, my cousen Gold by birth does claim presedency of me --
Let him en^oy it.


Cred. I yield so too, Jewel commands his Credit.


Fea. We thank you Gentlemen, and are engaged to your sublimed virtues. they
discover


Clutch, How now what is this.


Cap. Nothing Sir, but the Golds uncurrant.


Fea. And the Iewel's counterfeit.


Mo. Has Featherbrain.


Cred. And Pennyless.


Clutch, Daughters these are Counterfeits, shake um off, these are, nor Gold
nor Jewel -- how am I couzened.


Call. Ha, ha, ha.


Fem. As true as I live Sister, they are handsomer men now their beards are
off, by ten parts (beshrew me Sir) we will not part from them, for all this, I
love a counterfeit Jewel as well as ere a Lady in the Land.


Felix. Ye have the writings.


Fea. I, I warrant thee wench.


Clutch, Say you so too.


Felix. Yes truly Sir, I am of my Sisters mind.


Fea. The writings Sir are firm, Pray think upon the Covenants.


Cap. You shall have honest dealing of us, we will perform.


Clutch, Why these were your men.


Fea. Yes truly Gentlemen, we spoke, and pleaded for you.


Mo. They are two Prodigals, his name is Featherbrain, his Pennyless.


Clutch, Featherbrain, (passion of my heart) his name I do (almost) remember,
have not I a morgage of yours Sir.


Fea. Yes truly Father, and I hope you will return it when I have married your
Daughter.


Clutch, Hell and vexation on you.


Clutch, Oh do not curse, do not curse, we will prove true blades, nere fear it.


Call. Oh for a couple of daughters more. in his ear.


Cluch, Hell take thee for a Jewel, how am I cheated set on by spend-thrifts,
whose licentious games wast in a year, more then their Ancestors got in five
ages.


Fea. Come rail not on us, nor disturb your thoughts, what we have been we are
not, poverty the Prodigals excrutiation, has been a Caveat to admonish us, how
being blessed again (as now we are) we spend our time in such loose revellings.


Mo. I would but cannot grieve, I know it is fit,
Money like danger, ought, to be used by Wit.
And my presaging soul, tells me that he.
Will use his wealth as wise men industry.

Cred. I cannot speak in Golden Numbers, like my Ningle Money, but I mean as
well, let that pray have acceptance.


Clutch, I never had (in my life) a fit so strange as this which in my bosom
opperates me thinks that these attonements please me well, and all the world
could not persuade my mind, to better choyces, than my Daughters make, accept
them pray, with them my most of wealth.


Ambo. We thank you Sir.


Clutch, Come lets to Church, you Callumney I banish, you were my evil Jenius
prompted me to deeds most vile.

Which now I do repent, and now let us in,
And may the end crown what we now begin.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for, and Sold by Fra. Kirkman.
THe English Rogue described in the life of Meriton Latroon, a Witty
Extravagant being a complete discovery of the most eminent cheats of both
sexes. Poor Robins jest^ or the Complete Jester the first and second Part,
being a Collection of several jests not heretofore published, now newly
composed and written by Poor Robin Knight of the burned Island, and well willer
to the Mathematics. Together with the true and lively Effigies of the said
Author. The Spightful Sister, a New Comedy, written by Abraham Bailey of
Lincolns Inn Gent. Money is an Ass a Comedy, written by Tho Iordam Gent.

