A SPEECH TO THE PEOPLE

OR A brief and real discovery of the unhappy estate of these most distracted
times.

With a necessary caution to all good Subjects.

Written by T. I. Gent

A Loyal Subject to the King his Sovereign,

A Well-wisher to the Parliament his great Counsel,

And a true lover of the peace of his Country.

LONDON: Printed for H. B. 1642.

A SPEECH TO THE PEOPLE.
MIserable and most deplorable is the unhappy estate and condition of these our
present times: And as if Gods vengeance did not fall fast enough upon our heads
for our enormous crying sins, whilst the Almighty speaks peace and plenty
unto us, out of the abundance of his rich and most unparalled goodness: We
as if we had surfeted with too much plenty and happiness, while God smites us
not, go about to smite each other. What can then be expected, without heaven
avert the judgment, convert and turn our hearts unto him, but that our long
enjoyed peace should be turned into a present doubtful War, and our happy
plenty into an unhappy penury and want.

Who is so blind, as not to foresee these things at hand? And yet good God,
most of us, as if our senses were become even stupid and senseless, seek not
the right way to cause the Almighty to avert these imminent and impendent
dangers from falling on us: or I wish I might not more truly say, from
suffering our selves to fall into them: For what could the Almighty have done
more for Israel then he has done for us* Have not we for many years under
religious Princes, (the memory of all which ought ever to be pleasant unto us,
and cause us out of a just and due gratitude to be ever thankful unto God)
long and happily enjoyed both peace and plenty, flowing, I had almost said even
overflowing with the sacred Word of God, as Manna sent from above to feed our
hungry souls; flowing again I say with all rich variety of plenty and delight,
to afford happy solace and sustentation to our natural bodies.

And since our good God will not out of his unfathomed mercy take them from
us, do not we I fear (I appeal to every ones conscience) betake our selves
to such courses as will soon, yea doubtless too soon deprive us of them; for
with horror (dear Countrymen of soul I speak it, how much is the King of
Heaven and his An^^n^ed our dread Sovereign here on Earth both at one time
neglected? how much and how scornfully are sacred Functions and places
Profaned and vilified? how much in a word are the known Laws of this our
Nation most strangely, either wrested, misconstrued or impugned? But no wonder
if the Law of GOD which ought to be written in Golden Letters in the tables of
our Hearts be so much disregarded, so much disesteemed, if man's Law be no more
reputed, so much contemned. Fear God and honor the King, is the King of
Heavens counsel, and how can we imagine or rather justly assure our selves,
that we can give Caesar a due honor, when as our tongues as well as our
actions, well scanned, and with a vigilant eye being pryed into, convince us,
that we do not cordially and really fear, love, honor, and obey that great
Caesar of Caesar's.

O therefore if we would have all things to go well with us (as many fearful
curses fall on his head, who would not) let us make in the first place our
atonement and peace with God, that the God of true peace may send his peace to
reign amongst us, and this is the speediest and happiest way to avert the
Almighties Judgment from falling on us, and to cause his mercies as formerly
they have done, to flow more powerfully upon us, for mistake not dear
Countrymen, For the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, as says Kingly
Solomon; and I too much fear this fear is not as yet engrafted in our hearts,
nay rather I fear it, not at all; for did we truly fear God, we should be
afraid (and justly too) to violate his most just and sacred Law. And you know
beloved, I wish you would also practice what you know, it is his express charge
and command, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, honor to whom
honor belongs, and shall any Mandate from any inferior power, cause any of
us to violate the Mandate of heaven it self? me thinks I hear you all say,
as being of one mind with one voice, (justly indeed astonished and amazed)
God forbid. O then why contemn ye the power of your Caesar? and is not this
too frequently by too many of us daily practiced? Truly if ever there were a
Prince on earth after Gods own heart, such is our religious King CHARLES, as
unparaled for his life as he is for his virtues, and what madness then were it
for us (I say for us) because without we will consent to our own undoing,
heaven as it seems is unwilling to deprive us of these his unesteimable
blessings (I mean peace and plenty) so long, so happily continued amongst us,
as if our good King had nothing else but love and mercy lodging in his royal
heart, how has he wooed us to continue in this our peace? first then
acknowledging our own unworthiness, Let us make our peace with God, and in the
next place, not only remember, but execute Gods Command, by giving unto Caesar
the things that are Caesar's, Honor to whom honor belongs: Thus you shall
bring true honor to your selves, whilst you give a due honor to God and the
King, and become so many happy instruments, next under God, to settle a firm
and most happy peace in these his Majesty's Dominions, your native soil and
his once ( I would I could but say, and still justly say) most flourishing
Kingdom. And I beseech him who rules the heart of Kings as it best pleases
him, so to rule the hearts both of him and you all, that his holy law, may be
the holy rule by which you may al square all your actions, so shall God be
honored by you, and in a due obedience to his just and imperial commands, our
pious and most religious King CHARLES, be unanimously and cheerfully obeyed,
and if it be thy heavenly will Lord say Amen, both for thy own sake, for thy
servant our dread Sovereigns sake, for his illustrious Consort, and all their
royal offsprings sake, and lastly for all good peoples sake, who humbly and
heartily implore this great mercy from thee.

FINIS.

