A MEDICINE FOR THE TIMES. OR, AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST FACTION.

Written, By T. J.

Containing these Cures, viz. 1. How to cure a man that has a factious Spirit.
2. How to cure a woman so possessed. 3. A new and direct experiment, to know
the King's Evil. 4. How to cure one that is troubled with crosses. 5. A cure for
him that is troubled with an Ovall-pate, (in English) a Roundhead. 6. A brief
Definition of a Disease called Obstinacy. 7. A cure for his Impatience, that
is angry with me for this slender expression of my Art.


LONDON. Printed for Robert Wood. 1641.

A MEDICINE FOR THE TIMES.
1. How to cure a man that is possessed with a factious Spirit.
TAke one heartfull of Ecclesiastical obedience, as much of Regal submission
(for this being a malady of the mind, requires the Physic to be mental)
forbear the society of those infected people, that would make a breach in that
sacred Text; Fear God, Honor the King. Let not the ground of your Religion
(which is the prop of the soul) consist only in Contradiction, unless you hope
to gain Salvation, by disputing niceties. Or if you are so strangely possessed,
that you must make your lives a tedious Argument, let not your reasons be like
the women's reasons, (It is not, because it is not) there is as much difference
betwixt Religion and Faction, as is between a Temple of Saints, and a Den of
Thieves. Jf you do not love your enemies, according to divine injunction
(though that part of the Letanie be disputed) you may question your own
Salvation. If you can thus purge your self with these Receipts, you may quietly
enjoy your health, without the unnecessary charge of bleeding.

IJ. 2. How to cure a woman so possessed.
A Woman being the weaker Vessel, shall have the application of a weaker
Remedy; let her obey her husband when he has taken hi^ Cure, and not disdain
to conceive that (over his own Family) he is both a King and a Bishop, one that
is capable both of moral Government, and Divine: this observation in her, will
keep her from pulling off the sacred Chain that is about the neck of
Authority, and free her from a strange madness she has got in expounding
Scripture: and to conclude (according to her own Belief) I would not have her
sit or lie Crosse-leg'd, it is abominable, and the continuance of such crossing
may prevent the first great Blessing, Increase and multiply.

IIJ. 3. A new and direct Experiment to know the Kings Evil.
THe small Practice I have had in Physic, has instructed me that one Simple
has been mixed with many Varieties for several Diseases; such use must I make
of this one excellent drug Obedience; which being mixed with right
consideration, will so purge the brain, that the eyes of good opinion will be
open, and your discerning shall be perfect; whereas before, you looked as
people do through deceitful glasses: every white seemed a blemish, and every
such blemish a thousand; I must now prescribe a Diet: fast one month from
Faction, observe the Kings Laws, behold him in his true Prerogative; write not
about the new stamped Coin of your Conscience, Ego and Rex meus, I and my King.
Do not only ceremonially take the Oath of Supremacy, but obey it with a true
consideration, that the breach of it will shake the very frame of your
Religion; if you can sincerely obey all this, you have a sound body, and cannot
be troubled with the Kings Evil.

IV. How to cure one that is troubled with Crosses.
CArry no Coin about you; for you know that there is an Image on one side, and
a Cross on the the other: and I would have you so much the more avoid it, because
you are already prone to worship it, and some think it is the only way to make
a Papist on you: avoid that Idolatroies play of push-pin (t^ough with a sister)
let not your Children be instructed in the horn-book; because of the first
Character: forbear to walk in these forbidden paths, till their n^mes be
changed (viz.) Whitecrosse-street, Redcrosse-street, Charin-Crosse, Cow-Crosse,
Ratcliffe-Crosse, Bishopsgate-street, Ave-mari lane.

If any man's Name be Cross, let him change it, and call himself Overthwart, as
Willliam Overthwart, John Overthwart, or Martin Overthwart; unless his name be
Andrew, then you may call him Andrew Cross: J will not wish you to put away
all Cross wives, because I would not debar ye of the general society of women.

I should applaud their pulling down of Cheap Side Cross, but I fear that
there are certain men amongst them, who (under pretense of Zeal) weigh not
altogether so much the Idolatry of the form, as the ponderous substance of the
Lead: and I pray let any honest man judge, what Relation Felony has to Acts
of Piety, if it have, we must censure this to be a holy Robbery: which
according to common sense, is a strange contradiction, and cannot hold in
Religion; unless they largely stretch this Text to it: They took Heaven by
violence: which they conceive (according to litterall explanation) is with
Clubs and Haves, and short Swords, worn up to their Arm pits: Some shut up
their shops, to make the times hard, purposing to starve his Majesty's Subjects
into a zeal like theirs; (in conclusion) I would not have all Crosses, put
down; because I would have no alteration in the Regal Diadem, which has stood
many wise Ages unquestioned. I am an honest Physician (though I say it) and am
so far from being a Papist, that I dare curse the Pope; so far from being a
Seperatist I dare love the King: And that I am no Neuter, shall appear in my
willing Service (provided there be an equality in my Spirit and my Office) in
the hazard of my life for my King and Country.

5. A Cure for him that is troubled with an Ovall-pate, (in English) a
Roundhead.
NO man is demonstrated to be a Roundhead, but he that takes the name to
himself; and conceives he is so, because he is in opposition to the Cavalier:
(who may be an honest man, though he we^r skarlet and silver lace, and holds it
no sin to be in fashion.) A Roundhead is a man (though cut within a quarter of
an inch to the skull) has more hair then wit, and according to his daily
distractions, may be titled Hair-brained: And this proves him to be an
Hypocrite: for though his hair be clipped short, he loves to wear it long, and
very long; which is, from Generation to Generation. (Long may he wear it.) Has
not that man more hair then wit, whose wit is so much troubled with his hair?
(your censure Gentlemen:) For my own part, cause I would know the way to heaven
to an hairs breadth, I have left off my Periwig; and I have not had one pious
thought, for that cause, more then I had before. It is in hair, as it is in
habit; one man wonders why I wear it long, I as much wonder why he wears it
short: I love a b^oad brim'd hat, he loves a narrow one: my opinion of this
formal reformation, is but a change from one indifferent ceremony to another.
In brief, if a man be troubled with a Roundhead, let him do as if his right
hand offended him. Desperate Diseases must have desperate cures.

6. The Brief definition of a Disease called Obstinacy.
IF a man worship zealously his own opinion, contrary to divine Inspiration;
which he cannot assure himself, whilst he has one thought of Oppression;
orwants the zealous Obedience he ought to pay to Gods Lord Deputy; his own
Anointed: for in this point my opinion runs hand in hand with that Gentleman
that writ these Lines: They whom their King affront, the like would do,
To the King of Kings, could they come at him to.
I am so far from the spirit of Contradiction, that if I had a full
assurance, the alteration of my form would save me, I should willingly resign
my fashionable habit, and confine my self to the steeple crown hat, short hair,
Geneva Ruff, with all accoutrements correspondent to this posture; but indeed
I will not believe any man can add to his salvation or damnation by Form
merely: if preaching is as sacred in a stable as in a Church, why not in a
Church as well as a stable (a place fit forOxen and Asses) if ye do it in
remembrance that it was the necessitated place of our Savior, ye stand in your
own light, and confute your selves; you may with as little idolatry keep in
view the form of that whereon he died, as of that where he was born; he that
co^ceives Cheapside Cross may cause idolatry, has but a weak faith, and, for
ought I know, he doubts if it stand long, himself may be won to be a worshipper
and by this means would prevent it: For my part, if he liked as I do, which is
for the workmanship in the nice and natural postures, and as the grace of so
glorious a city, he would go home, mend shoes, and never trouble his head about
it. I plead not for it, for were it down, I would not give the poor
Contribution of a penny to have another erected, because it should not trouble
the heads of the unimploy'd people.

7. A Cure for his Impatience that is angry with me, for the expression of my
Art.
IN the first place, he has no cause to doubt my Medicines, for i will give him
no worse then i will take my self. Let him not brand me with a prejudicate
opinion, that I am a Papist; for, by yea and nay, I am none, but can with a
safe conscience, take the oath of Supremacy; I love the King, and all those
that love him, I daily pray for the prosperity of all those high designs in
Parliament; I am no Railer and Pamphletizer against Bishops; it is a charity I
hold not, to laugh at any man's fall, though my enemy and perfecutor: Nor would
I weaken so great a Synod as this present Parliament, as to conceive they know
not how to dispose of Offenders; if things may not proceed in Order, a
Commonwealth will quickly prove a heap of Ruins; and resolve, as the world
must (at the general doom) to its first Chaos. And thus being come to the
worlds end, I leave you.

FINIS.


