THE WORKS OF JOSEPHUS. With great diligence Revised and Amended, according to
the Excellent French Translation OF Monsieur ARNAVLD D'ANDILLY.

Also the Embassy of PHILO JUDAEUS, TO THE EMPEROR CAIUS CALIGULA. Never
Translated before. With the References of the SCRIPTURE, A New Map of the HOLY
LAND, And diverse Copper Plates, serving to Illustrate the HISTORY.

Francis. Patricius de Regno, Lib. II. Cap. 10. Historiarum cognitio Regibus,
Ducibus, Imperatoribus and omnibus Principibus perquam necessaria habenda est:
quam Cicero appellat Testem Temporum, Vitae Magistram, veram Memoriae and
veritatis Nunciam.

Bernardus, Epistola ad Suggerium. Tune recentia jucundius bona clarescunt, cum
fuerint malis comparata prioribus.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet Street. M.DC.LXXVI.

ADVERTISEMENTS CONCERNING THE WORKS OF Josephus.
I. Of the Jewish Antiquities.
THE Title alone of this History seems to recommend the same more than any
Preface could do; inasmuch as, professing to deduce things from the Creation of
the World, to reach as high as the Reign of Nero, and to derive the greatest
part of its Relations from the Records of the Old Testament, it implies that no
other can equal it, in Antiquity, in Continuance, and in Authority.

But that which further renders it (after the Holy Scripture) preferable to all
other Histories, is, That whereas those have no other groundwork but the
Actions of Men, this represents to us the Actions of God himself. There is seen
resplendent everywhere in it his Power, his Government, his Goodness, and his
Justice. His Power opens Seas, and divides Rivers, to give a dry passage to
whole Armies, and cause the Walls of the strongest Cities to fall down without
battery. His Government regulates all things, and gives such Laws as may be
styled the Fountain from which has been drawn whatever wisdom there is in the
World. His Goodness makes to fall from Heaven, and to issue from the bosom of
Rocks, wherewith to satisfy the Hunger, and allay the Thirst of a great People
in the driest Deserts. And all the Elements being as the Ministers of the
Decrees which his Justice pronounces, the Water destroys by a Deluge those
which it condemns, the Fire consumes them, the Air overthrows them by its
Tempests, and the Earth opens it self to devour them. His Prophets foretell
nothing, but they confirm the same by Miracles. They who command his Armies,
undertake nothing but they atchieve it. And the Leaders of his People, being
filled with his Spirit, act like Angels rather than Men.

Moses alone may be a Proof of all this. Never did so many eminent Qualities
meet together in one Person; Nor did God ever show in any Man under the Old
Law, since the Fall of the First, how high the perfection of a Creature may
rise, whom he vouchsafes to accumulate with his favors. Wherefore, since a
great part of this History may in some sort be said to be the Work of that
incomparable Lawgiver, because the same is wholly taken out of him, it ought to
be read not only with Esteem, but also with Respect; and the sequel to the end
of what is contained in the Bible deserves no less, in regard it was dictated
by the same Spirit of God which guided the Pen of Moses when he writ the five
first Books of the sacred History.

But moreover, what might not be said of those admirable Patriarchs, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob; of David that great both King and Prophet, who deserved the
unequal Elogium, of being a Man according to God's own heart; of Jonathan, that
most accomplished Prince, whose soul the Scripture says was inseparably tied to
that of that holy King; of the illustrious Maccabees, whose Piety, equal to
their Courage, effected an union of the Supreme Power attending Royalty, with
the most Sacred Functions of the High Priesthood; and lastly of Joseph, of
Joshua, of Gideon, and of diverse others, who may pass for perfect Models of
Virtue, Conduct, and Valor. If the Heroes of Pagan Antiquity never achieved
anything comparable to these Heroes of God's People, whose Actions might pass
for Fables, if it were not impiety to refuse credit to them, there is no reason
to wonder, since those Heathens had only humane Force; but the hands of those
whom God chose to fight under his Command, were armed with his invincible help:
and the example of Deborah, shows that even a Woman may become, in a moment, a
great General of an Army.

Now if the Favors wherewith God cherishes those that are his, ought to induce
Monarchs not to trust but in his assistance, the dreadful Punishments which he
executes on those that lean on their own strength, oblige them to tremble; and
the rejection of Saul, and diverse other great Princes, instructs them, by the
terrible representation of their Fall, to have recourse to God, that they may
escape the like misfortunes.

Yet not only Princes, but Princesses also may find in this Book examples both
to avoid and to imitate. Queen Jezabel is a dismal one both of impiety and
punishment. And Queen Esther is a rare one of all the perfections, and of all
the rewards which can render the virtue and felicity of a great and holy
Princess admired.

If great Personages find so great Examples here to lead them to avoid Vice,
and embrace Virtue, there is no person of any condition whatsoever but may
profit likewise by so useful a Book. It Is of general benefit for all, so proper
to imprint a respect of the Divine Majesty, by the view of so many effects of
his infinite Power, and of his adorable Providence, that his heart must be very
hard that is not affected therewith.

And how can Christians but be moved with such a holy respect, since the same
History teaches us, that those illustrious and so celebrated Conquerors, Cyrus,
Darius and Alexander, though Idolaters, could not forbear having a Veneration
for the Majesty and the Ceremonies of that Temple which was but a Figure of the
Christian Church.

But if this History be so excellent in it self, it must be confessed that no
man was so fit to write it, as he that gave it both to his own Age and to
Posterity. For who could be better informed of the Customs and Manners of the
Jews, than a Jew? Who could be better instructed of all the Ceremonies and
Observations of the Law, than a Priest? Who could better relate the Events of
so many Wars, than a great Captain? And who could better comprehend things, and
make judicious Reflections upon them, than a man of great Quality, and a great
Statesman? Now all these qualifications concenter in Josephus. He was a Jew by
birth. He was not only a Priest, but of the first of the four and twenty races
of the Priests, who held the chief rank amongst those of their Nation. He was
descended from the Asmonaean Kings. His great Exploits in War had made him
admired even by the Romans. And the several great Employments, of which he so
worthily acquitted himself, leave no room to doubt of his experience in Affairs.

Lastly, His Life written by himself, joined with his History of the Jewish
Wars, make him sufficiently known. And as for his manner of writing, I think it
needless to commend it, since this Work manifests it so excellent everywhere;
particularly in the Nineteenth Book, where he relates the Actions and Death of
the Emperor Caligula, which no Roman Author has done so accurately; I think I
may say without fear, that there is not in Tacitus any History which surpasses
that eloquent and judicious Narration. I know some will wonder, that after
having mentioned the greatest Miracles, he diminishes the belief of them, by
saying, That he leaves every man at liberty to have such opinion thereof as he
thinks fit. But in my judgment he does it only on this account, That having
composed this History chiefly for the Greeks and Romans, as it is easy to
gather, by his writing the same in Greek, and not in Hebrew, he feared their
incredulity would render it suspected to them, if he affirmed positively the
truth of things which seemed to them impossible.

But whatever Reason induced him to use that Caution, I pretend not to defend
him either in those places, or any others, where he is not conformable to the
Bible. This alone is the Divine Fountain of written Truths, which cannot be
sought elsewhere without hazard of Error; and one cannot excuse himself from
condemning whatever is found contrary thereunto. I do it with all my heart; and
there is no person but ought to do it, in order to read this excellent History
with satisfaction, and without scruple.

Neither yet do I pretend to justify this Author, in some places where he
speaks of the several sorts of Government; nor as to some other particular
sentiments, which no body is obliged to follow. Nor do I engage my self in any
matter of Criticism, the contests whereof I leave to such as are exercised in
that sort of study.

If in some places, as amongst others, in the description of the Tabernacle,
and of the Table of Shewbread, some difference be found between this
Translation and the Greek, the cause thereof is, that those passages are so
corrupted in the Greek Text, that all I could do, was to bring them into the
condition wherein they are.

II. Of the History of the Jewish War against the Romans, etc.
If the History of the Jews, advances its Author into the rank of the best
Historians, it is plain that in that of their War against the Romans, he has
surpassed himself. Several reasons have concurred to render this History a
Masterpiece; the greatness of the Subject; the sentiments excited in his
breast, by the ruin of his Country; and the share he had in the most
considerable Events of that bloody War. For what other Subjects can equal this
great Siege, which manifested to all the Earth, that one City alone would have
been the Rock of the Roman Glory, had not God, for punishment of its sins,
overthrown it by the storms of his wrath? What sentiments of Grief can be more
lively, than those of a Jew, and of a Priest, who saw subverted the Laws of his
own Nation, whereof no other was ever so jealous, and that magnificent Temple,
the object of his devotion and of his zeal, reduced to ashes? And what greater
interest can an Historian have in his Work, than to be obliged to bring into it
the principal Actions of his own Life; and to labor for his own Glory, by an
unflattering advancement of that of the Conquerors; and by acquitting himself
at the same time of what he owed to the generosity of those two excellent
Princes Vespasian and Titus, to whom the honor of having finished this great
War was due.

But for as much as there are so many remarkable Occurrences in this History, I
think to do the Readers a pleasure, in presenting them here with an Abstract
thereof, from which general Idea they may afterward proceed to the particulars
depending thereupon. It is divided into seven Books.

The first Book, and the second, to the twenty eighth Chapter, are an
abridgment of the Jewish History, from Antiochus Epiphanes King of Syria (who
spoiled the Temple, and went about to abolish Religion) to Florus, Governor of
Judea, whose avarice and cruelty were the chief occasion of that War which they
maintained against the Romans. This abridgment is so delightful, that Josephus
seems to have designed to show that he could, like excellent Painters,
represent the same objects in different manners, with so much art, that it
should be hard to know to which to give the preference. For whereas these
Histories are sometimes interrupted by the Narration of things happened at the
same time, they are here written in a continued series, and give the Readers
the pleasure to behold in one Table, what they saw before separately in
several. From the twenty eighth Chapter of the second Book to the end, Josephus
relates what passed in consequence of the troubles raised by Florus, till the
defeat of the Roman Army commanded by Cestius Gallus, Governor of Syria.

In the beginning of the third Book, Josephus shows the consternation of the
Emperor Nero upon this ill success of his Arms, which was likely to be followed
with a revolt of all the East; and how casting his eyes on all sides, he found
only Vespasian fit to bear the weight of so important a War, and accordingly
gave him the conduct thereof. He relates afterward in what manner this great
Captain, accompanied with Titus his son, entered into Galilee, whereof our
Author himself was Governor, and besieged him in Jotapat; where, after the
greatest resistance imaginable, he was taken and led Prisoner to Vespasian: and
how Titus took diverse other places, and performed actions of incredible valor.

The fourth Book brings in Vespasian conquering the rest of Galilee; the Jews
beginning to tumultuate in Jerusalem, the Factious, who took the name of
Zealots, becoming Masters of the Temple under the conduct of John of Giscala,
Ananus the High Priest stirring up the people to besiege them there; the
Idumaeans coming to their assistance, exercising horrible cruelties, and
afterward retiring; Vespasian taking sundry places in Judea, blocking up
Jerusalem, in order to besiege it; and forbearing that design, by reason of the
troubles risen in the Empire, before and after the death of the Emperors Nero,
Golba and Otho; Simon, son of Gioras, another Head of the Factious, received by
the people into Jerusalem; Vitellius, who had seized upon the Empire after
Otho's death, rendering himself odious and contemptible for his cruelty and
debauchery; the Army commanded by Vespasian, declaring him Emperor: And lastly,
Vitellius assassinated at Rome, after the defeat of his Forces, by Antonius
Primus, who had embraced Vespasian's party.

The fifth Book relates how a third Faction, of which Eleazar was Head, was
formed in Jerusalem; That afterward those three Factions were again reduced to
two, and in what manner they made War one against another. It contains also the
description of Jerusalem, of the Towers Hippicos, Phazael and Mariamne, of the
Castle Antonia, of the Temple, of the High Priest, and of sundry other
remarkable things; the Siege of that great City formed by Titus; the incredible
Works, and prodigious Exploits of Valor done on both sides; the grievous famine
wherewith the City was afflicted, and the strange Cruelties of the Factious.

The sixth Book represents the horrid miseries whereinto Jerusalem was reduced;
the continuation of the Siege with the same ardor as before; and how, after
many Fights, Titus having forced the first and second wall of the City, took
and ruined the Castle of Antonia, and assaulted the Temple which was burnt,
notwithstanding all this Prince could do to prevent it; and how at last he
became Master of all the rest.

In the seventh and last of these Books, it is showed how Titus caused Jerusalem
to be destroyed, saving only the Towers Hippicos, Phazael and Mariamne: In what
manner he commended and rewarded his Army; what Spectacles he gave to the
Nations of Syria; what horrible Persecutions were exercised upon the Jews in
several Cities; with what incredible joy the Emperor Vespasian, and Titus, who
was declared Caesar, were received into Rome; what a magnificent Triumph they
made; how the Castles of Herodion, Macheron, and Massada, the only places
remaining to the Jews in Judea, were taken; and how those that defended this
last, all killed themselves with their Wives and Children.

This (...) in general what this History of the Jewish War against the Romans
contains. And there are (...) ornaments wherewith this great person has not
enriched it. He has omitted no occasion of embellishing it, by elegant
descriptions of Provinces, Lakes, Rivers, Fountains, Mountains, several
Rarities, and Buildings, whose magnificence would seem fabulous, if what he
relates thereof could be called in doubt, when we see no person found that has
dared to contradict him, though the excellence of his History raised no small
envy against him.

It may be said with truth, that whether he speaks of the Romans Military
Discipline, or whether he represents Battles, Tempests, Shipwracks, a Famine or
a Triumph, every thing is so lively set forth, that he charms the attention of
his Readers. And I fear not to add that no other, not excepting even Tacitus
himself, has excelled more in Orations; they are so noble; strong and
persuasive always restrained within their own subject, and proportioned both
to the persons to speak, and to those that are spoken unto.

Moreover, can the judgment and faithfulness of this Historian be too much
commended, for the moderation which he uses between the praises deserved by the
Romans for finishing so great a War, and those due to the Jews for having
withstood the same, although vanquished at last, with invincible courage? so
that neither his gratitude for the obligations he had to Vespasian and Titus,
nor his love for his Country, biased him contrary to justice more on the one
side than the other.

But that which I account most estimable in him, is, that he never fails upon
any occasion to praise Virtue, to reprehend Vice, and to make excellent
reflections upon the admirable Providence of God, and upon the fear which we
ought to have of his dreadful judgments.

It may be boldly affirmed, That never was seen a greater example thereof, than
the ruin of that ungrateful Nation, of that proud City, and of that venerable
Temple; since although the Romans were Masters of the World, and that this
Siege was the work of one of the greatest Princes they glory to have had for
Emperors, the power of this victorious people, and the heroical valor of Titus,
would have in vain undertaken this design, if God had not chosen them to be the
executioners of his Justice. The blood of his Son shed, the most horrid of all
crimes, was the only true cause of the ruin of that unhappy City. The heavy
hand of God upon that wretched people, caused that how terrible soever the War
was that assaulted them without, it was yet much more dreadful within, by the
cruelty of those unnatural Jews, who more like Devils than Men, destroyed by
the Sword and the Famine, of which they were the Authors, 1100000 persons; and
reduced the remainder to that pass, that they could hope for no safety but from
their Enemies, by casting themselves into the arms of the Romans. Such
prodigious effects of vengeance for the death of a God, might pass for
incredible with those who have not the happiness to be enlightened with the
light of the Gospel, if they were not related by a Man of that very same Nation
as considerable as Josephus was, for his Birth, for his quality of Priest, and
for his Virtue. And methinks it is visible, that God minding to make use of his
testimony to authorize such important truths, preserved him by a miracle, when
after the taking of Josaphat, of forty which were retired with him into a Cave,
the lot being cast so often to know who should be slain first, he only and one
other remained alive.

This shows that this Historian is to be considered with a different respect
from all others, since whereas they relate only humane Events although
dependent on the orders of the Supreme Providence, it appears that God cast his
eye upon him to make him subservient to the greatest of his designs.

For we must not only consider the destruction of the Jews as the most dreadful
effect that ever was of Gods justice, and as the most dismal image of the
vengeance which he will exercise at the last day against the Reprobate; we must
also behold it as one of the most illustrious proofs which it has pleased him
to give Men of the Divinity of his Son; inasmuch as this prodigious Event had
been foretold by our Savior in precise and intelligible terms. He had said to
his Disciples showing them the Temple of Jerusalem, That all those goodly
buildings should be so destroyed, that there should not be left one stone upon
another, S. Matthew. 24. ver. 2. S. Mark 13. ver. 2. S. Luke 19. v. 44. And also,
That when they should see Jerusalem encompassed with Armies, they should know
that its desolation was at hand, S. Luke 21. ver. 20.

He had mentioned particularly the dreadful circumstances of this desolation.
He had said to them, Woe to those that shall be with child or give suck in
those days; for there shall be great distress in the land, and wrath upon this
people. And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away
captive into all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down by the Gentiles,
S. Luke 21. ver. 23, 24.

And lastly he had declared, that the accomplishment of these Prophesies was
ready to come to pass; That the time was drawing nigh that their house should
be left unto them desolate: and that even such as were then living should see
it, Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come upon this generation, S.
Matthew. 23. ver. 38, and 36.

All these things had been foretold by our Savior, and written by the
Evangelists before the revolt of the Jews, and at a time when there was not yet
the least appearance of so strange a Revolution.

Now inasmuch as Prophecy is the greatest of miracles, and the most powerful
way whereby God Almighty authorizes his doctrine, this Prophecy of Jesus
Christ, to which no other is comparable, may be justly accounted the chief and
most irrefragable evidence to mankind of his Divine Birth and Mission. For as
no other Prophecy was ever more clear, so neither was any more punctually
accomplished. Jerusalem was destroyed to the ground by the first Army that
besieged it; there remained not the least footstep of that proud Temple, the
wonder of the Universe, and the object of the Jews vanity; and the calamities
which ruined them, answered precisely to that dreadful Prediction of our
Savior.

But to the end so great an Event might serve as well for the instruction of
those that were to be born in afier-times, as for those that were spectators of
it, it was necessary, as I have said, that the History should be written by an
irreprochable Witness. To which purpose 'twas fit the Writer should be a Jew,
and not a Christian, lest he might be suspected to have accommodated the Events
to the Prophesies. 'Twas fit he should be a person of quality, to the end he
might be fully informed of all things. 'Twas fit he should see with his own
eyes the wonderful things which he was to relate, to the end he might be
capable of credit. And lastly 'twas fit he should be a Man, whose eloquence and
judgment might be suitable to the greatness of such a subject.

All which qualifications, so necessary to render this History complete in all
points, meet so perfectly in Josephus, that it is evident God Almighty chose him
expressly to persuade all reasonable persons of the truth of this mavelous
occurrence.

It Is certain, that having contributed in this manner to the confirmation of
the Gospel, it appears not that he made any benefit thereof for himself, or
that he had any share in the blessings so plentifully poured down in his time
upon all the earth. But if there be reason to commiserate his unhappiness in
this point, there is some also to bless the Providence of God, who has made his
blindness serve to our advantage; since the things he writes concerning his own
Nation, are, in respect of the incredulous, incomparably of more force for
confirmation of the Christian Religion, than if he had embraced Christianity:
so that we may apply to him in particular what the Apostle says of all the
Jews.

III. Josephus's Answer to Appion.
The next of the Works of Josephus, besides his Life written by himself, is an
Answer in two Books to what Appoin and some others had written against his
History of the Jews, against the Antiquity of their Race, against the Purity of
their Laws, and against the Conduct of Moses. Nothing can be more solid than
this Answer, wherein Josephus proves invincibly the Antiquity of his Nation by
the Egyptian, Chaldean, Phenician, and even by the Greek Historians themselves.
He shows that all which Appion and those other Authors have alleged to the
disadvantage of the Jews, are ridiculous Fables, as well as the plurality of
their Gods; and he excellently sets forth the greatness of the actions of
Moses, and the sanctity of the Laws which God gave the Jews by his intervention.

IV. The Martyrdom of the Maccabees.
The Martyrdom of the Maccabees follows next. It Is a piece which Erasmus, so
famous among the Learned, calls a Masterpiece of Eloquence: and I confess I
understand not why having with reason so advantageous an opinion of it, he
paraphrased it, and not translated it. Never was Copy more different from its
Original. It Is hardly any of its principal Lineaments; and, if I mistake not,
nothing can more advance the reputation of Josephus, than to see that so able a
Man intending to embellish his Work, has, on the contrary, so much diminisht
the beauty of it, and thereby showed how much Josephus is to be esteemed for
writing, not after the manner of most of the Greeks in a long-winded style, but
closely and compendiously, as affecting to say nothing but what is necessary.
And I cannot sufficiently wonder, that no person hitherto has made a
Translation of it from the Greek either into Latin or French, at least to my
knowledge. For Genebrard, instead of Translating Josephus, has only Translated
Erasmus. For my part I have faithfully adhered to the original Greek, without
following that Paraphrase of Erasmus any where, which invents names that are
neither in Josephus, nor the Bible, for the mother of the Maccabees. It should
seem Josephus did not write this famous Martyrdom authorized by the Holy
Scripture, but to prove the truth of a discourse which he makes in the
beginning, to show that Reason is the Mistress of Passions; and he attributes
to it a power over them, which there would be reason to wonder at, if it were
strange that a Jew should be ignorant that this power belongs only to the grace
of Jesus Christ. He is contented to declare that he means only a Reason
accompanied with justice and piety.

V. The Embassy of Philo to C. Caligula the Roman Emperor.
This is a brief account of all the Works of Josephus. Now because Philo,
although a Jew as well as he, writ also in Greek upon part of the same
Subjects, but handles the same rather as a Philosopher, than an Historian; and
because none amongst all his Writings is so esteemed as that of his Embassage
to the Emperor C. Caligula, of whom Josephus speaks particularly in the 10th
Chapter of the 18th Book of the Jewish Antiquities, I conceived that this Piece
having so great affinity therewith, it would not be amiss to show by a
Translation of it, the different manner of writing of these two great Persons.
That of Josephus is undoubtedly more compendious, and has nothing of the
Asiatic style; so that he expresses that in few words, which Philo does
sometimes in as many lines. The History of that Emperor may be made up from the
Writings of these two famous Authors, inasmuch as Philo relates as particularly
and eloquently the Actions of his Life, as Josephus has written nobly and
excellently the passages of his Death. Both the one and the other were so
extraordinary, that it is an advantage there remains such Images thereof to
Posterity, to animate good Princes to merit by their Virtue as great affection
for their Memory, as People have horror for those who have showed themselves
unworthy of the rank which they held in the World.

It remains only to add, That as this Volume comprehends all the ancient holy
History, so the Readers are desired to peruse it not only for Divertisement or
Curiosity, but also with an aim to profit by the useful Considerations for
which it affords so much matter. And that whereas the old Translation of Doctor
Lodge was, not undeservedly, complained of on many accounts; much pains has
been taken in this Edition to amend it, as the Reader will easily find by
comparing it with the former. If it be not so complete as could be wished, the
Reader is desired to accept heartily what has been done for his satisfaction;
and to consider, that though an old repaired Building can hardly have all the
beauty, yet it may have all the convenience of a new Fabric.

A brief Computation very useful to the understanding of the History.
FRom Adam till the Deluge, were years 1656 From the Deluge till Abraham's time
291 From Abraham till the Departure out of Egypt 500 From the Departure out of
Egypt, till the Building of the Temple by Solomon 480 From the Building of the
Temple, till the Babylonish Captivity 410 From the Return from the Captivity,
till the Maccabees time 432 From the Maccabees time, till that of Herod 134
From Herod's time, till the final and fatal destruction of Jerusalem 103
The Jews have two sorts of years; the Civil, which begins in September; and
the Sacred or Ecclesiastic, which begins in March.

They have twelve Months or Moons; and every third Year has a thirteenth Month
of 22 days; and the fourth has a thirteenth Month of 23.

Before the Captivity of Babylon, they accounted the Months successively by 1,
2, 3, etc. since their Return, they have named them rather after the manner of
the Chaldees, than the Hebrews.

The Hebrew The English The Greek Nisan. March. Andineen. Zin or Jar. April.
Veritien. Sivan. May. Distre. Tamuz. June. Xantique. Ab. July. Arthemisien.
Elul. August. Desien. Ethanin or Tisri. September. Paneme: Bull or Marksuan.
October. Loie. Casleu. November. Gorpian: Thebet. December. Hyperberete.
Sebath. January. Dien. Adar. February. Apell^^^.

This Nation in their beginning, was governed by Judges.
Moses Joshua Othoniel Adol Baruc and Debora Gedeon Abimelech Thola Jair Jeptha
Absan Elon Abdon Samson Eli Samuel.
After them they had these Kings.
Saul David Solomon Roboam Abia Asa Jehoshaphat Joram Manasses Amon Josias
Joachas Ochozias Athalia Joas Amasias Ozi^ Jonathan Achaz Ezechias Eliacim
Joachim Zedechias.
The Captivity of Babylon continued 70 years. Governors after the Captivity,
were
Zorobabel Rhesa John Ben Resa Judas Hircan^s Joseph Abner Heli Mahat Nagge
Hagaieli Naum Amos Mattathias Joseph Arses Jannes Hircanus Mattathias.
The Maccabees, who were both Princes and Priests.
Judas Jonathan Simon John Hircanus.
These following were both Kings and Princes.
Aristobulus 1. John Alexander Alexandra Aristobulus 2. Hircanus Aristob. son
of Aristob. Aristobulus 3. Hircanus.
The Race of Herod.
Antipater Herod the Great Archelaus the Great Agrippa son of Agrip.
The names of the Highpriests from the Departure out of Egypt, till the
building of the Temple by Solomon.
Aaron Eleazar Phinees Abisua Busqui Oses Heli Achitob Achimelech Abiathar
Sadoc Achimaas Azarias.
From the building of the Temple, till the Captivity of Babylon.
Joram Joses Axioram Sudeas Joathan Vrias Nerias Odeas Sellum Helcias
From the Return out of Babylon, till the Maccabees time.
Saraia Josedech Josua Joachim Eliasib Eleazar Manasses Onias 2. Simon 2. Onias
3. Joiada Jonathan Jadus Onias 1. Simon 1. Jason Onias 4. Lysimachus Alcimus.
Highpriests from the Maccabees time, till the final destruction of Jerusalem.
Simon Boethus Joseph 1. Joseph 2. Joazar Eleazar Joshua the son of Sias Joazar
Ananus Ismael Theophilus Simon Mattathias Elion Joseph 3. Ananias Ismael Joseph
Annas Eleazar Simon Joseph Caiaphas Jonathan Josuah son of Danneus Josuah son
of Gamaliel Matthias Phinees or Panaas.
Kings of Israel, otherwise called Kings of the ten Tribes, or of Samaria.
Jeroboam 1. Nadab Baasa Ela Zamri Amri Achab Joram Jehu Joachaz Joas Jeroboam
2. Zachary Manahem Pecha son of Manahe^^ Pecha son of Romelia Oseas.
Kings of Assyria and Babylon.
Phulbelocus Phulasser Salmanasser Senacherib Assaradon Berodach Benmerodach
Nabuchodonosor 1. Nabuchodonos. the great Evilmerodach Neriglossorar
Labosardach Baltasser.
Kings of Persia.
Cyrus Cambyses Smerdas Magus Darius son of Histaspis Xerxes son of Darius
Artabanus the Tyrant Artaxerxes with a long hand Xerxes Sogdianus Darius the
Bastard Artaxerxes Mnemon Artaxerxes Ochus Arsames Darius son of Arsames
Kings of Syria after the death of Alexander the Great.
Seleucus Nicanor Antiochus Soter Antiochus sirnam. god Seleucus Callinicus
Seleucus Ceraunus Antiochus the Great Seleucus Philopater Antiochus Epiphanes
Antiochus Eupator Demetrius Soter Alexander Epiphanes Demetrius Nicanor
Antiochus Sedetes Demetrius Nicanor Alexander Zebina Antiochus Gryphus
Antiochus Cyzicenus Seleucus Gryphus Antiochus Pius.
Kings of Egypt, after the death of Alexander the Great.
Ptolomey Soter Philadelphus Evergetes Philopater Epiphanes Philometor
Evergetes Phiscon Lathyrus Alexander Auletes Cleopatra.
Kings of the Tyrians.
Abibalus Hiram Belastartus Abdastartus Astartus Astarimus Phelletes Ithoballus
Badezor Merimus Pigmalion
An Explication of the Coins and Measures mentioned in this History.
SAth was a measure containing about some seven quarts English. The Epha
contained three Saths. The Core or Homer contained ten Epha's, that is to say,
thirty Saths, and was the same measure both in dry and liquid things. The Log
contained a French measure. The Hin contained twelve Logs. The Bath contained
as much as the Epha. The Cad, was a kind of Pitcher, containing such a quantity
as a young Maid might well carry. The common Sicle contained the weight of four
ounces, whether it were of gold, silver, or any other metal. The sacred or holy
Sicle weighed half an ounce of any metal whatsoever. The common Sicle of silver
was valued at about a shilling of our money. The holy Sicle of silver was
valued at about two shillings. The common Dram was the eighth part of an
ounce. The sacred Dram was the fourth part of an ounce. The Pound weighed
twelve ounces. The ordinary Talent contained fifty four pounds eight ounces and
a quarter of Troy weight in any metal: yet it was not minted money, but a mass
made up after the manner of an Ingot. The sacred Talent contained one hundred
pounds. Furthermore Note, That when Josephus mentions the Olympiads, without
any specification of the years therein contained, he ordinarily means the space
of four years complete. The Stadium, Stade or Furlong, according to the Greeks
account, (which I suppose Josephus most respected in this History) either of
600 Foot as the Olympique, that is of 120 paces; or as the Pyrrhique, which
contained 1000 Foot, that is 200 paces.
The Names of the AUTHORS alleged in this History.
A.
Acusilaus Agatharcides Alexander Andrew Apion Apollonius Molo Apollodorus
Ariphanes Aristaeus Aristotle.
B.
Berosus.
C.
Cadmus Castor Chaeremon Cherilus Clearchus Conon
D.
Demetrius Phalereus Dim.
E.
Ephorus Euhemeras. Eupolemus.
H.
Hecatusaeus Hellanicus Hermippus Hermogenes Herodotus Hesiodus Hestiaeus
Hierom of Egypt Homer Hyperocides.
I.
Isidore.
L.
Titus Livius Lysi^^achus.
M.
Manethon Menander Mnafeas Mochus.
N.
Nicholas of Damas.
P.
Pherecydes Philon Philostratus Polybius Polycrates Possidonius Pythagoras.
S.
Strabo.
T.
Thales Theodotus Theophilus Theopompus Theophrastus Thucydides Timaeus.
Z.
Zophyrion.
Imprimatur,

December. 7. 1675. Geo. Hooper Rmo. Dno. Arch. Cant. a Sacr. Domest.


Josephus Lineage.
by a long series of Ancestors, from the Sacerdotal Race, I may, with some
reason, value my self upon the Nobleness of my Birth; since, as every Nation
places the Grandeur of a Family in some certain marks of Honor that accompany
it, so amongst us it is one of the most signal to have the administration of
Holy things. But I am not only descended of the stock of the Priests; I am
also of the First of the Four and twenty Families of which it consists, and
whose Dignity is eminent above the rest. To which I may add, That, by my
Mothers side, I reckon Kings amongst my Ancestors. For the Branch of the
Asmoneans, from whom she descended, for a Simon, surnamed Psellus, the
stutterer, lived at such time as Hircanus was High Priest, the first of that
Name, and the Son of Simon the High Priest. This Simon Psellus had Nine Sons:
the one of which was Matthias, surnamed Aphlias. This Matthias took to Wife the
Daughter of the High Priest Jonathan, by whom he had one Son, who was Matthias,
surnamed Curtus, who was born in the first year of Hircanus's Priesthood.
Matthias begat Joseph in the Ninth year of Alexander's Government; and of
Joseph came Matthias in the Tenth year of the Reign of Archelaus; and Matthias
begat me in the First year of the Empire of Caius Caesar. Joseph the Son of
Matthias was born in the first year of Caius Caesar's Empire, and the 4001 year
of the world, and the 39 after Christ's birth.
I likewise have Hircanus, who was born in the Fourth; my next Justus, who was
born in the Seventh; and Agrippa my last, who was born in the Ninth year of
Vespasians Empire. This Genealogy of mine do I in this manner propose,
according as I have found it written in the Public Registers, to the end to
confound the Calumnies of my Enemies.

My Father Matthias was considerable for his Extraction, but more for his
Justice and Authority in Jerusalem, which is the Metropolis of our Country. My
bringing up, during my tender years, was with Matthias, who was my Brother by
the same Father and Mother; with whom I happily profited in all kind of
Science, having a good Memory, Joseph from his infancy very studious, and
addicted to learning.
and a quick Apprehension: so that, being yet a Child of Fourteen years of
Pharisees, which is the chiefest: The second of the Sadduces: And the third of
the Esseans. And this I did, to the end I might choose the better of the Three,
when I understood them all. For which cause, with great Austerities and
Labors, I passed through them all: and not content with this Experience, after
I had heard that a certain man called Banus lived in the Desert, clothing
himself with that which the Trees brought forth, and feeding on no other kind
of meat, but what they freely yielded,

At this time I began to engage my self in the exercise of a civil Life, Joseph
a Pharisee.
following the Sect of the Pharisees, which very nearly resembles that Sect
among the Grecians, who are called Stoics. After I was Six and twenty years
old, it was my fortune to repair to Rome upon this occasion. Whilst Foelix
governed Judea, certain Priests, my familiars, men of much honor, and more
virtue, were, upon some slight occasion, bound and sent to Rome by his
commandment, to answer to what should be objected against Caesar's presence.
Whereupon being desirous to do them service, and having special intelligence,
that the Torments wherewith they were Martyred, lessened not their Piety, but
that they lived contentedly on Figs and Nuts: for this cause I departed for
Rome, and was encountered with many great and grievous hazards by Sea. For the
Joseph's shipwreck.
wherein I sailed, was wrackt in the midst of the Adriatic Sea, and about Six
hundred of us were forced to swim all Night long, and at Daybreak, by God's
Providence, a Cyrenian ship came in sight, and both I and certain others, to
the number of Fourscore, out-swimming the rest, were taken up into it, and
saved. After I had in this sort escaped, I came to Dicaarchia, which the
Italians call at this day Puteoli, and grew acquainted with Aliturus a Jew
born, who was a Comedian, and in good reputation with Nero; by whose means
insinuating my self into the Emperess Poppea's knowledge, Joseph obtains the
Priests liberties.
I determined to beseech her to procure the liberty of those Priests with all
expedition, which she accordingly did; and being gratified likewise by her with
many great gifts, I returned into my Country. There I found the Commonwealth
The Jews seditious.
and diverse too prone and ready to Rebel, and withdraw their Allegiance from
the Romans. I enforced my self to repress the seditious, and exhorted them to
change their opinions, representing, before their eyes, the quality of those,
against whom they enterprized War, with whom they could neither compare in
experience of War, nor in good Fortune: For this cause I advised them, not to
hazard the overthrow of themselves, their Children, and their Country, by
their rashness and rage. Joseph dehorteth the Jews from sedition, is suspected
by them of treason.
To this effect I spoke to them, and instantly entreated them to desist from
their unhappy resolution, for that I foresaw that the end of this War would
prove to our utter Ruin, but I prevailed nothing with them. The fury of
desperate and dissolute men prevailed above reason: for which cause fearing
lest by Antonia was already seized upon by the seditious, I retired my self
into the Sanctuary. From whence, after Manahem, and the chiefest Revolters were
put to death, I came out again, and joined my self with the Priests, and
chiefest Pharisees; whom I found surprised with great fear, when they saw the
People in Arms, and uncertain what to do, wanting the means to pacify these
mutinies. But apparently perceiving the danger, both I and the Pharisees
feigned our selves of their mind, and counseled them to contain themselves in
peace, and let the Roman Forces depart, in hope, that Gessius would, with all
expedition, draw out great Forces, and chastise these Romans. Besides, this
ensuing occasion presented it self: The Inhabitants of the Cities that border
upon Syria, The Jews are plagued both by strangers and their own Countrymen.
laid hands on those Jews that dwelt among them, and slew them, with their
Wives and Children, without any just cause or crime committed by them. For they
had not conspired any ways, or intended to revolt from the Romans, or to use
any Hostility, or any secret Conspiracy against any of those, with whom they
were conversant. But amongst all the rest, the Citizens of Scythopolis,
exceeded all other in Damascus. But of this we have more amply spoken in those
our Books; which we have written of the Wars of the Jews: and at this present I
make mention hereof, only to signify to the Reader, The Jews constrained by
necessity to make War.
that our Nation became engaged in War with the Romans, not out of voluntary
intent and purpose, but in great part by necessity and constraint.

After that Gessius was overcome (as is before declared) the chiefest men of
Jerusalem perceiving that the Seditious were strongly armed and provided, they
began to fear lest if they should be found disarmed, they should suddenly be
overthrown by their enemies (as in effect it fell out afterward) and hearing
that all Galilee was not as yet wholly revolted from the Romans; but that a
part thereof as yet remained in peace, they sent me with two other Priests,
Joazar and Judas, who were both virtuous and honorable men, to persuade the
mutinous to lay down their Arms, and to let them know that it was more
advantageous for the Nation, that such Men as were in Authority and Reputation,
should have the keeping thereof. The resolution that was taken Romans intended
to do.

Galilee: where I found the Sephorites were ready to come to a Battle with the
Galileans, The danger of the Sephorites.
for that these latter had threatened to ravage their Country, in regard of
their league of friendship with the Romans, contracted and ratified by Senius
Gallus, Governor of Syria. But I delivered them from that fear, and appeased
the Common people, by permiting them to send at all times when they pleased,
Sedition in the City of Tiberias.
their Hostages to Gessius, who lay at Dora a City of Phoenicia. I found
likewise that the Inhabitants of Tiberias were already in Arms upon this
occasion: There were in that City three different Factions, the one of the
Nobility, whose Chief was Julius Capella, Three Factions in the City of
Tiberias.
to whom were joined Herod the Son of Miarus, Herod the Son of Gamal, and
Compsus the Son of Compsus. For Crispus the Brother of Compsus, who in times
past had been made Agrippa, surnamed the Great, was in his own possessions on
the other side of Jordan. All these, I say, were of opinion to remain under the
Romans authority, and to obey their King. But Pistus alone of the Nobility,
would no ways acaccord to this advice, by the persuasion of his Son Justus. The
second Faction was of the common sort, who concluded upon War. Justus, Son of
Pistus, who was the Ringleader of the third Faction, carried himself very
doubtfully touching the War; yet notwithstanding he secretly thirsted after
Innovation, hoping that by a change he should increase his power. The Oration
of Justus, Pistus's Son, to the multitude.
Presenting himself therefore in the midst of the multitude, he endeavored to
persuade them that their City was always one of the chief of Galilee; and that
during the days of Herod the Tetrarch, who founded the same, it was the
Sephoris should yield obedience to that of Tiberias. That they had not lost
that pre-eminence in the time of King Agrippa the Father, but had continued the
same, till Faelix obtained the Government of Judaea. But for the present since
they had been given by Nero to the younger Agrippa, they had fallen from and
lost their Superiority. For the City of Sephoris obtained the Sovereignty of
Galilee, after that she acknowledged the Roman Government, which had removed
the Treasure of the Charters and the Receipts of the Kings Money. By these
words, and others of like nature against King Agrippa, he incited the People to
Rebellion, Justus incites the people to Rebellion.
signifying to them, That an opportunity invited them to take Arms, to the end
that being associated with the Galileans, they might recover the advantages
which Sephorites, on whom they would revenge themselves with great power,
because they continued in their Allegiance, which they promised to the Romans.

By these words he won the Peoples hearts to him: for he was a Man very
eloquent, and by his subtilty and politic discourse, Justus the offspring of
War.
easily overthrew all that which his Adversaries produced against him. He was
also skilful enough in the Greek Language, to attempt the writing of the
History of those Transactions, to the end to disguise the truth thereof. But in
the process of this discourse, I will show more particularly what his ill
designs were, and how by his and his Brothers means, he wanted little of
utterly overthrowing Justus had persuaded the Citizens of Tiberias to take
Arms, and had constrained diverse Men likewise, who were of the contrary
opinion, to do the like, he issued out with them, and burnt the Villages of the
Gadarenians and Hippenians, that are situate in the Confines of Tiberias and
Scythopolis. In this estate was Tiberias: And as for Gischala, their Affairs
were brought to this pass; John the Son of Levi seeing some of the Citizens
resolved upon a Revolt from the Romans, labored to restrain them, and required
them to continue in their Allegiance: but notwithstanding all his persuasion
and diligence, he could not contain them. For the Nations round about them, as
the Gadarenians, Gabarenians and Tyrians, assembled a great Army, Gischala
burned and spoiled.
and with the same assailed Gischala, and took it by force: and after they had
consumed John being much displeased with this act, armed all those that were
with him, and set upon the abovenamed Nations; and having obtained the
Victory, he Re-edified Gischala in better sort than it was before, enclosing it
with a Wall, to the intent it might be the better fortified against future
Invasions.

But those of Gamala persevered in their faith toward the Romans, Gamala
faithful to Rome.
as I shall now declare. Philip the Son of Jacim, who governed under King
Agrippa, escaping beyond all opinion, The danger whereinto Philip, Jacim's son
was fallen.
from the Royal Palace of Jerusalem at such a time as it was befieged, fell
into another great danger, to wit, to be slain by Manahim, and those Seditious
that were with him: but certain Babylonians his Kinsmen being at that time in
Jerusalem, hindered the Philip had lay hid there for the space of four days, on
the fifth he fled away disguised in a false hair, for fear he should be
discovered. And as soon as he arrived in a Village, which was of his own
possession, situate near Gamala, he sent for certain of his Subjects to repair
unto Philip's greater good, crossed the scope of his intent, which otherwise
had been the ruin of many: for being surprised by a sudden Fever, he committed
certain Letters of his written to Agrippa and Bernice, who were yet but young,
to one of his Freed-men, commanding him to deliver them to Varus, who was put
in trust, by the King and Queen, Varus unjustly executes him that brought the
Letters.
to administer the affairs of that Kingdom, whilst they were gone to Beryth to
meet with Gessius. Varus receiving Philip's Letters, and understanding that he
was escaped, was sorry for it, because he thought the King and Queen would have
less use of him after Philip was arrived. Varus's tyranny in governing the
Country.
He therefore made the people believe that this Freed-man was a Traitor, and
brought them forged Letters, it being certain that Philip was in Jerusalem with
the Jews, Varus seeks to conceal his power and tyranny.
who were revolted against the Romans: and so he commanded him to be executed.
Philip being ignorant of the cause why his Freed-man did not return, sent
another with Letters, to the intent he might discover what was become of his
first Messenger, and for what cause he stayed so long. But Varus accusing his
second Messenger also after the same manner, commanded him to be executed, as
he had done the first. The Syrians that inhabit Caesarea, had puffed him up, by
telling him that Agrippa should be put to death by the Romans, for the
Rebellion of the Jews, and that he who was Royally descended, should possess
his Government. And indeed Varus was of the Blood Royal, deriving his Pedigree
from Sohemus King of Libanus. For these causes, he retained Philip's Letters,
hoping by these means that the King should have no knowledge thereof; and he
set watch in every passage, for fear lest any man should fly, and certify the
King of what had happened; Syrians the better content who dwelt in Caesarea, he
put diverse of those Jews that dwelt among them to death. He intended also to
undertake a War against the Jews of Bathanaea, who were called Babylonian Jews,
by confederating himself with the Trachonites of Barthanaea. For which cause,
sending for twelve of the Jews of most estimation amongst the Inhabitants of
Caesarea, he enjoined them to repair to Ecbatane, and signify to those of
their Nation there, that Varus understanding that they pretended to take Arms
against their King, and scarcely believing it, had sent them thither, to
persuade them to lay down their Arms. And that this should be a certain proof,
by which they might perfectly clear their innocence, that seventy of the
chiefest of them should be sent to him. These twelve arriving in Ecbatane, and
being entertained by those of their

As soon therefore as these, Varus kills the seventy Jews with the
Ambassadors.
with the other twelve Ambassadors, came to Caesarea, Varus having notice of
their coming* met them on the way with the Kings Forces, and slew them,
together with the aforesaid Ambassadors, and took his way toward the Jews of
Ecbatane. The Jews retire themselves into the Fortress of Gamala, and thither
resorteth Philip also.
But one of the seventy who had escaped, resorted thither with all expedition,
preventing Varus, and certified the rest what had happened. Whereupon, they
incontinently fell to Arms, and with their Wives and Children retired
themselves to the Fort of Gamala, abandoning their Villages, with all their
Goods, and great numbers of Philip had tidings hereof, he repaired also to the
Fort of Gamala. The people rejoicing at his coming, exhorted him to take the
Sovereignty, and to make War against Varus, and the Syrians of Caesarea. For
they had intelligence that the King was slain. But Philip, to moderate their
impetuosity, recounted to them what benefits the King had bestowed on them, and
of what power the Romans were, against whom it was but a folly for them to take
Arms; and in the end, he persuaded them to Peace. In the mean time, the King
understanding that Varus was determined to kill all the Jews that were in
Caesarea, Gamala still faithful to the Romans.
with their Wives and Children, all in one day, he sent Equus Modius to succeed
him, as it has been, by us, declared in another place. And Philip kept the
Fort of Gamala, and the Country thereabouts, in their fidelity and loyalty to
the Romans. Galilee, and learned all occurrences that had happened, by those who
reported the same to me, I presently signified the whole matter by Letters, to
the Council at Jerusalem, Joseph, by the commandment of the Council, remains
in Galilee.
desiring to know what their pleasure was I should do. They gave me this
answer, that I should remain where I was, and retain my Colleagues that I had
with me, if they thought good to take charge of Galilee. But they, after they
had gathered great Sums of Money for the Tenths and Tithes that were due to
them, resolved with themselves to return to their own houses. But for that I
entreated them to remain with me, till such time as we had settled affairs, they
willingly consented unto me. I therefore departed with them to the City of
Sephoris, and came into a Borough called Bethmaus, distant from Tiberias some
four Furlongs, and from thence I sent a Messenger Tiberias, desiring the
chiefest among the people, to come and speak with me: They came, accompanied
with Justus; I told them, that I was sent Ambassador Jerusalem, to persuade
them to deface that Palace that was erected by Herod the Tetrach, wherein
diverse figures of living Creatures were painted; for that our Law forbad such
things; and I exhorted them to suffer us to set about that execution as soon as
possible.

Capella, The Palace set on fire that was in Tiberias.
and those of his party, did for a long time refuse to consent thereunto: but
in the end, we pressed them so much, that they condescended. Now whilst we
debated this matter, Jesus the Son of Saphi^s (of whom we have spoken
heretofore, declaring how he was the Chief of the Faction of Sailers and poor
men) took with him certain Galileans, and set fire on the Palace, in hope to
get great Riches thereby (for that there Capella, and the chiefest Tiberians,
we retired from Bethmaus into the higher Galilee. In the mean time, Jesus's Men
slew all the Greeks that remained there, and all who before the War had been
their Enemies. Which when I was certified of, I was much displeased, and went
down to Tiberias, to secure the King's Movables, for fear they should be
carried away by the Robbers: and having recovered diverse Candlesticks of
Corinthian work, rich Tables, and no small quantity of massive Silver, I
resolved with my self to reserve it to the King's use. Joseph procures the
safety of the King's goods.
Calling therefore ten of the chiefest Senators, and Capella, Son of Antillus,
to me, I delivered the Vessels into their hands, charging them to deliver the
same to no Man

From thence, with mine Associates, I went to John at Gischala, to know what
his mind and resolution was, and I presently discovered, that he affected
Innovation and Tyranny. For he desired me to grant him liberty to Transport
Caesar's Wheat that was stored up in the Villages of higher Galilee, telling
me, that he would bestow the price of the same, in re-edifying and repairing
the Walls of his City. But I perceiving his drift, denied him that liberty. For
I thought that that Wheat would either serve the Romans, or the Province, the
care of which was committed to my hands by the City of Jerusalem. When
therefore he could get nothing at my hands, he addressed to my Companions, of
whom not foreseeing those Troubles that were likely to come, and greedy of John
used another subtlety: for he said that those Jews, who inhabited Caesarea
Philippi, being by the Command of their King, John's acts in Gischala, and his
covetousness.
restrained within their Walls, and wanting Virgin oil, desired to buy the same
of him, for fear lest contrary to their Custom, they should be compelled to use
that of the Greeks. This he said, not out of respect to Religion, or Devotion,
but for his filthy lucres sake. For knowing that among the Caesareans, two
sextaries were sold for a dram, and that at Gischala eighty sextaries were
sold for four drachms, he sent all the oil that was in that Town to them,
pretending my permission. I dared not withstand the same, lest the People
should stone me to death. By this craft, John gathered

From this place, Joseph sends back his companions to Jerusalem.
I dismissed my Companions back to Jerusalem, employing my self wholly
afterward in preparing Arms, and fortifying Cities. In the mean time, calling
the stoutest Libertines before me, and having in vain exhorted them to quit
their Arms, I persuaded the People to pay them Contribution* Joseph President
of Galilee.
which was more advantageous for them, than to suffer their Country to be
spoiled by their Excursions. And thus having taken their Oaths, I dismissed
them, on condition that they should not come into our Region, except they were
called, or wanted their due pay, nor spoil either the Lands of the Romans, or
the Inhabitants of the Country. But above all things, my care was to keep
Galilee in peace. Joseph joined seventy of the Nobility with him.
To which purpose, I got seventy pledges of their Joseph at thirty years of age
offered no Woman violence, and would not be bribed.
I was now Thirty years old; and though a man who bridles himself from unlawful
affections, can hardly escape the poisoned sting of detraction, especially if
great authority be annexed to his green years; yet none ever durst say, that I
suffered Violence to be done to any Woman, or received a Bribe from any Man;
yea, I refused those Tenths, which in right of Priesthood I might have
received. Yet after the Conquest of the Syrians, I took part of the spoil,
which, I freely confess, I sent to Jerusalem to my Kinsmen. And though at two
times I forcibly overcame Sephorites, the Tiberians four times, and the
Gadarenians once, and had brought John under my subjection, who had oftentimes
sought to entrap me; yet could I not endure to revenge my self on him, Joseph's
bounty toward his Enemies.
or any of the abovenamed People, as in the sequel

For which cause I suppose, The Galileans faith and love toward Joseph.
that God, who is the Tryer, and Searcher of all hearts, both delivered me at
this time out of the hands of mine Enemies, and afterward many times from
several dangers and misfortunes, as hereafter shall appear. But so great was
the fidelity and benevolence of the common People of Galilee toward me, John
desires that he might bathe himself in the hot bathes of Tiberias.
that their Cities being overthrown, and their Families led into Captivity,
they were less touched with their own Calamities, than concerned for my
preservation. Which when John perceived, he began to envy me. And he writ to
me, that I would give him license, for his health-sake, to bathe himself in the
hot bathes of Tiberias: I suspecting no Treason, willingly granted him that
which he demanded. Moreover, I wrote to those, Galilee, called Cana. John's
Treason.
But after that John came to Tiberias, he persuaded the Townsmen to forget
their faith and duty to me, and revolt unto him; many of them lent a willing
ear to his Entreaties, especially such as were prone to change, and desirous of
dissension, and in particular Justus, and his Father Pistus, willingly
entertained this occasion to revolt from my obedience, and to submit themselves
to John; yet was this Conspiracy of theirs prevented by my speedy access. For a
certain Messenger came to me from Silas, whom I had formerly preferred to the
Government of Tiberias, who certified me of the Silas's Letters, I Traveled
all night with Two hundred chosen Men; The people of Tiberias came out to meet
Joseph.
and sending a Messenger before me, to signify my approach to the Citizens, I
neither lost time nor way: and in the morning when I drew near the City, the
People came out to meet me, and amongst the rest, John; who, after he had
saluted me with a suspicious Countenance, fearing lest his Treason being
discovered, he should come in danger of his life, he speedily retired himself
into his Lodging. When I came to the great Piazza, and had dismissed all my
Train but one servant, Joseph's exhortations to the Tiberians.
and retained only Ten armed Soldiers with me, I began to represent to the
Tiberians, from a certain high place, from whence I might be heard, how

Scarcely had I spoken this, but one of my Friends advertised me to descend,
telling me that this was no time to reconcile the Tiberians, or to persuade
them, but rather to seek mine own security, John seeks to betray and murder
Joseph.
and how I might escape mine Enemies. That John having learned that I was
destitute of Followers, had sent a Thousand of his chosen Soldiers to kill me;
that they were at hand, and ready to commit the Murder; which they had done,
had I not speedily leapt down with the help of my servant Jacob, and Herod the
Tiberian, who carried me to the Lake; where finding a Back by Taricheas.

As soon as the Inhabitants of that City understood how persidiously and
^^^^rously the Tiberians had dealt with me, they were much displeased, and
betaking themselves to their Weapons, persuaded me to lead them forth against
them, telling me, that they would revenge the injury that was offered unto
their Governor, The Galileans require that they may invade Tiberias.
of which they sent advice through all Galilee. Hereupon, a great number of
armed Galileans came to me, and persuaded me to attaque Tiberias, and destroy
it, and f^ll the Inhabitants, with their whole Families, under the Spear. The
like did my Friends* who escaped with me out of the City, persuade me. But I,
in no sort, would admit Romans, at their coming, should (...) them in Civil
discords. By this discourse, at length, the Galileans rage was appeased.

But when John saw that he had failed of his purpose, he began to fear for
himself, John excuses himself to Joseph.
and taking with him those armed Men that he had about him, he left Tiberias,
and went to Gischala, from whence he wrote Letters to me, excusing the Fact, as
if he had been no ways guilty thereof, and desiring me not to suspect him; and
he confirmed his words with execrable Oaths, to the end to get more credit to
them. Galileans who were gathered in great multitudes from all parts of the
Region, Gischala, and all his Country. After I gave them Thanks for their love
toward me, and promised them that mine offices of love should be answerable to
their kindness. But I prayed them to restrain themselves, and to allow me to
appease this Trouble without effusion of Blood.

This Request of mine the Galileans granted: Whereupon we presently went to
Sephoris. But the Townsmen, who were resolved to continue faithful toward the
Roman people, Jesus Captain of Thieves.
fearing my approach, endeavored to divert me elsewhere. To which purpose,
sending a Messenger to Jesus the Captain of eight hundred Ptolemais, they
promised him a great Sum of Money, if with his Army of eight hundred Men, he
would make War against me. He, allured by their promises, resolved to surprise
me unawares: to which end, he desired me, by a Messenger, to grant him leave to
come and salute me: which when he had obtained, for that I was wholly ignorant
of his Treason, he took with him a Troop of his Thieves, and hasted speedily
toward me: yet failed he of his purposed Treason; for when he was not far off
from me, a certain Fugitive of his Troop discovered his intent toward me.
Which when I heard, I went out into the Marketplace, feigning that I knew
nothing of his secret Fraud, being attended with a multitude of armed
Galileans, and among them with Tiberians. Jesus seeks to betray Joseph.
I sent abroad certain parties to guard the Highways, and commanded the Keepers
of the Gates, that (...) should only suffer Jesus to enter with the foremost
of his Company, and exclude the rest: and if they attempted to break in by
force, they should beat them off. Jesus entering with a few, was required, by
me, presently to lay down his Weapons, except he desired to be slain; he,
seeing himself environed with armed Soldiers, obeyed. Whereupon, they that
followed him, Joseph politickly surprizeth Jesus.
and were excluded, perceiving that their Captain was apprehended, suddenly
betook themselves to flight; and leading Jesus apart, I told him I was not
ignorant of those Treasons which he intended against me, nor by whose
provocations he attempted the same. Yet I told him that I would pardon him, if
so Joseph's bounty toward Jesus.
and I dismissed him with his Weapons: yet threatened to punish the Sephorites,
except hereafter they desisted from their Treasons: About the same time there
came to me two Noblemen, who were Subjects to the King of Trachonites, bringing
with them both Horsemen, Armor, and Money: whom when the Jews would have
constrained to be circumcised, Joseph's care of Religion.
if so be they would remain amongst them; I would not permit them to be
troublesome to the Trachonites, alleging, that every Man ought to serve God
according to his own mind, and not by other Men's impulsion: and that it was not
to be suffered, that they, who for their security fled unto us, should repent
themselves of the trust* they put in us. And

In the mean space, Agrippa sent out his Forces under the Conduct of Equus
Modius, to take the Castle Magdola by force; which for that they durst not
assault, they beset the ways, and only troubled Gamala by placing Forces upon
the Avenues. Ebutius against Joseph.
But Ebutius Decadarcus, who had the Government of the great Plain, hearing
that I was come to a certain Village called Simonias, situate on the Confines
of Galilee, and distant from the same some sixty furlongs, took with him by
night an hundred Horse that attended him, and about two hundred Footmen, with
certain Inhabitants of the City of Gaba their Associates, whom he conducted by
Ebutius labored all he could, to toul us into the Field, for that he trusted
very much in his Horsemen: but I would not give him that advantage, considering
we were but Footmen, and resolved to fight in the place where we were, Ebutius
departs without performing any thing.
and accordingly Ebutius charged us for awhile very valiantly. At length,
perceiving that he had no use of his Horsemen in that place, he sounded a
Retreat, and departed back again with lost labor to Gaba, having only lost
three Men in the Battle. But I presently pursued him with two thousand Men: and
when I came to Besara, which is situate on the Confines of Ptolemais, some
twenty furlongs from Gaba, where Ebutius encamped at that time; I there was a
great quantity stored up in that place, Joseph transporteth Corn to Galilee.
which was gathered out of Bernice: and loading diverse Camels and Asses, which
to that end I had brought with me, I sent the same into Galilee. Joseph against
Neopolitanus.
Having finished this business, I offered Ebutius Battle: and whereas he
detracted the same, being terrified by our boldness, I took my course to
encounter with Neopolitanus, who (as it was reported) was in the Territory of
the Tiberians, and foraged there. This Neopolitanus was a Captain of Horsemen,
and had undertaken to defend Scythopolis against their Enemies. I hindered him
from doing any wrong in the Country belonging to the Tiberians, and provided
for the security of Galilee.

But John the Son of Levi, John maligneth Joseph's good success.
who (as I said) lived at Gischala, after he heard Tiberias and Sephoris, and
the Gabarenians, to revolt to him, which Cities are the chiefest in Galilee.
For he told them, that under his Conduct, they should be more happily governed.
But amongst the rest, the Sephorites gave least ear unto him, and neglecting us
both, only held for the Romans.

As for the Tiberians, they would not consent to Rebel: yet promised him some
friendship. The Gabarenians revolt upon John's persuasion.
But the Gabarenians wholly addicted themselves to John, by the means Simon, a
principal Citizen, who was John's friend. Yet did they not openly declare for
him, because they feared the Galileans, whose good will toward me they were
long time assured of, but privily they sought other means to entrap me. And
truly I fell into great danger upon this occasion. For when certain
Debarrittenians (being audacious young Men) had intelligence that Ptolomy's
Wife the Kings steward, The Debarittenians spoil Ptolomy's Wife.
was Traveling along the great Plain with a great Equipage, out of the Kings
Country into the Roman Government, they suddenly set upon her, and putting the
Woman to flight, they seized on all the Baggage which she carried with her.
Which done, they came to Taricheas, where I then was, with four Mules laden
with Apparel, and Household Stuff of diverse sorts: among which were Ptolomy, as
being a Jew (because our Law permits not to take any from those of our own
Nation, though they be our Enemies) I told those that brought the Goods, that
the same should be kept to be sold, and the price bestowed upon repairing the
Walls of Jerusalem. This motion of mine, the young men interpreted very hardly,
because they were deprived of the prey which they hoped for. For which cause,
dispersing themselves in the streets of Tiberias, they spread a rumor, that I
designed to betray the Country to the Romans, and that I only feigned that
the prey was destinated to repair the Walls of Jerusalem; but the truth was, I
kept the same, to the intent to restore it to Ptolomy. Dassian and Jannaeus the
Sons of Levi, Joseph labors to restore Ptolomy to his Goods.
true Friends to the King, and commanded them, to take the Household Stuff, and
convey it to the King, threatening them with death, if they revealed this secret
to any Man.

But when the rumor was spread through Galilee, that I would deliver the
Province into the hands of the Romans, all the People were incensed against me,
and resolved to destroy me. They of Taricheas also giving credit to the young
Men's feigned speeches, persuaded my Guard, and the rest of the Soldiers, to
take a time whilst I was asleep, and come to the Horse-race; there to consult
with others Sedition against Joseph. Jesus the Son of Saphias, conspireth
against Joseph.
and all of them determined with one consent, to treat me as a Traitor, to the
Commonwealth. But he that most of all incited them to this, was Jesus the Son
of Saphias, who at that time was a principal Judge in Tiberias, a Man given
over to all Wickedness, and born to breed Troubles and Sedition.

This Man, holding the Law of Moses in his hand, in the midst of the Assembly,
spoke thus with a loud voice: If (said he) you be touched with no care of your
selves, yet at least contemn not these Sacred Laws, which that perfidious
Joseph your Governor, has not feared to violate, and for so great a Crime
cannot be too severely

Simon, one of Joseph's guard, awaketh him.
I suspecting nothing of all this Tumult, and tired with labor, was at rest;
when suddenly Simon, one of my Guard, who at that time only remained with me,
seeing this furious Troop of people, came and awakened me; and certifying me of
the imminent peril, he counseled me rather generously to kill my self, than
shamefully die by mine Enemies hands. I recommended my self to God, and putting
on a black Garment to disguise me, and having only my Sword by my side, I went
forth, and passed through the midst of these people, and so went strait to the
Hippodrome by a by way. There falling prostrate on my face, Joseph moves the
people to compassion.
in view of all the people, I watered the earth with my tears,

Now silence being made to hear me, Joseph's oration and confession before his
adversaries.
I spoke thus: If in your opinion I deserve death, Taricheans and strangers
cried out, that I deserved thanks, and wished me to be of good courage. But the
Galileans and Tiberians continued in their animosity, so that they fell to
dissent betwixt themselves, the one threatening me with punishment; the other,
contrariwise, willing me to assure my self of security. But after I had
promised the Tiberians, and those of other Cities, that I would Joseph escapes
from danger.
where it was convenient, they credited my words, the multitude separated, and
I, beyond all expectation, having escaped so great a peril, with certain of my
Friends, and some twenty Soldiers, returned to my house.

But once again the Authors of this Sedition, Joseph in another danger.
fearing lest they should be punished for their offense, begirt my Lodging with
six hundred armed men, intending to consume it with fire. Of whose arrival, as
soon as I had intelligence, imagining with my self that it would be much
dishonor for me to fly, I resolved to use valor and courage against them: for
which cause, commanding the Gates to be shut, I required them from the top of
the house, to send in some of them to me, to receive that money, for which they
had been drawn into this mutiny: whereby they might have no further cause to be
incensed against Joseph's stratagem.
Which done, laying hold of one of the most troublesome Fellows, that with the
rest came into me, I caused him to be beaten with many grievous strokes, and
his hand to be cut off, and hung about his neck; and thus handled, we thrust
him out of doors, to return to those that had sent him. Another Sedition.
So bold an action made them wonderously afraid, and suspecting I had a great
number of armed Soldiers in my house, they suddenly all of them fled away: And
thus by my resolution and address I escaped this second danger. Yet wanted
there not some, who incited the people once more against me; saying, that the
two Lords, who fled to me for refuge, ought not to live, except they submitted
themselves to their Laws and Customs, from whom they required protection. They
likewise accused them, that they were of the Roman Faction, and prisoners; and
presently the people began Fancy, and a Chimera, and that the Romans would not
vainly nourish so many thousands of Soldiers, if they pretended to make away
their Enemies with poison. Being by these words somewhat pacified, they had
scarcely withdrawn themselves awhile, but that by certain outcasts and wicked
men, they were incited against the two Lords, so that with Weapons they went to
their Lodging, intending to murder them. Which when I heard, I was afraid,
that if this wickedness should be committed, no man hereafter would dare to
trust his life in my hand. For which cause, being assisted by diverse others, I
presently resorted Joseph privately dismisseth the Trichean^.
and shut up the Gates: and cutting a Trench betwixt it and the Lake, I called
for a Bark, and entering into the same with them, I conducted them to the
Confines of the Hippenians: and furnishing them with money to buy them Horses,
because they could not transport their own with them in their flight, I
dismissed them, desiring Romans hands, they would be safer, than if by
suffering them to remain in my Country, I should see them oppressed: I
adventured them thus. Yet were they saved, and the King pardoned them. And this
was the end of this Tumult.

But they of Tiberias wrote to the King, desiring him to send a Garrison into
their Country, The Tiberians Letters to Agrippa. Seven stadia makes almost a
German mile.
on which condition they would submit to him. As soon as I knew of it, I went
to them, and they desired me that I would build them those Walls which I had
promised them: for they had already heard that Tarichea was environed with
Walls. Whereunto Tiberias toward Tarichea, which was thirty stades distant from
thence, by chance a Troop of Roman Horsemen were discovered, not far from the
City, which the Inhabitants believed were the Kings Army: Whereupon they
presently began to utter many things in honor of the King, Sedition and
Rebellion in Tiberias.
and more in my reproach. And presently a certain friend posted to me, and told
me what their mind was, and how they intended to revolt from me. Which when I
understood, I was wonderously troubled: For I had sent back my men of War from
Tarichea to their houses, because the next day was the Sabbath: for I would by
no means, that the Citizens of Tarichea should be charged or troubled with
entertaining Soldiers. And at all times, when I remained in that City, I took
Joseph in danger for the Tiberians sake.
Being therefore at that time attended only with seven Soldiers, and a few of
my Friends, I knew not what to determine. For I thought it not fit to call back
my Forces, because the day was well nigh past; and although they should have
been with me the next morning, yet they might not have taken Arms, because our
Laws forbid the same, how great soever the occasion be that is offered. And
although I should have drawn forth the Taricheans, and the strangers that were
retired thither, and, under hope of prey, have led them forth, yet I saw that
they were too feeble to resist the enemy. On the other side, I already
perceived, that if I stayed overlong, the Army which was sent by the King,
being already entered the City, would have excluded me. I therefore determined
to Joseph saileth to Tiberias.
After which, both I and my Friends, and seven other Soldiers, betook us to a
Bark, and sailed toward Tiberias. But when the Tiberians saw that no Forces
were come from the King, and that the whole Lake was covered with Barks;
amazed, and fearing the ruin of their City, for that they supposed the ships
to be full of Soldiers, they changed their sentiments. And laying by their
Weapons, themselves with their Wives and Children came forth to meet me, and
received me with joyful acclamations, (for they though I had had no notice of
their intents) beseeching me that for the safety Tarichea. Then I demanded ten
more, and I continued to use the same artifice, till I had by little and little
got all the Senate of Tiberias, and many of the chiefest Citizens, and sent
them thither.

At length, the rest of the multitude, perceiving in how great danger they
were, they Clytus the Author of the Sedition in Tiberias.
who was called Clytus, a bold and rash young man. I was unresolved what to do,
being loath to kill one of my own Nation, and yet it was expedient to punish
him; wherefore I commanded Levias, one of my Guard, to seize on him, and cut
off his hand. Levias not daring, for that he was alone, to enter into so huge a
multitude, I, for fear lest his Cowardice should be discovered by the
Tiberians, called Clytus unto me, and said unto him:

Ungrateful and perfidious man, as thou art, since thou deservest to lose both
thy hands, I charge thee to become thine own Executioner, left through delay
thou procure thy further punishment. And whereas with many prayers he besought
me to grant him one of his hands, Clytus cuts off his own left hand.
I hardly condescended. At length, of his own accord, for fear he should lose
both, he took a Knife,

Tariche^, and the Tiberians understood what stratagem I had used with them,
they were all amazed, seeing how I had punished their ingratitude and
disobedience without any bloodshed. Afterward I sent for such of the people of
Tiberias as were in Prison, amongst whom was Justus and his father Pistus, and
invited them to sup with me: and during the repast, I told them that I was not
ignorant, that the Roman Army excelled all Men of the world in power and force:
notwithstanding, that I kept my self silent, in the respect of the Seditious
that were round about, and I counseled them that they also would do the like
in expectation of better days; and yet that in the mean time they would not
think amiss of my Government, because no other could treat them better. I
reminded Justus also, that before I came from Jerusalem, the Galileans Philip's
departure, the Gamelites, being at odds with the Babylonians, slew Cares,
Philip's own Kinsman; Joseph dismisseth the Tiberians.
whereas I had moderately punished his Brother-in-law Jesus, who had married
his Sister. After this discourse during supper time, I set Justus and his
Friends, Philip the Son of Jacim.
early in the Morning, at liberty. But before this came to pass, it happened that
Philip the Son of Jacim departed from the Fort of Gamala upon this occasion: As
soon as he understood that Varus was revolted from King Agrippa, and that
Modius Equus, who was his Friend, was sent to succeed him, he certified him of
his estate by his Letters: Agrippa's kindness and humanity toward Philip.
which when he had received, he highly rejoiced at Philip's safety, and sent
those Letters to the King and Queen, who lived at Berytus. Whereupon the King
understanding Philip, that he was the Chieftain of the Jews Army, who undertook
the War against the Romans; sent certain Horsemen to Philip to bring him to his
presence: before whom he no sooner arrived, but he embraced him very kindly,
and showed him to the Roman Captains, telling them, that that was Philip of
whom it was commonly reported, Hedio, Gadara.
that he was in Rebellion against the Romans. After which, he sent him with a
party of Horsemen, in all diligence to the Fort of Gamala; to draw his household
servants from thence, and re-establish the Babylonians in Batanaea, and travel,
to his uttermost power, that the Subjects might be continued in obedience and
peace. After Philip had received this commandment from the King, he hasted to
perform the same.

Joseph a pretended Physician or Treacle-seller, One Joseph stirred up a
sedition in Gamala.
gathering together a sort of bold young Men, and inciting the Nobility of
Gamala, persuaded the People to fall from the King, and take Arms, for recovery
of their former liberty. Having thus drawn many to his party, he fell to
killing of all those that durst contradict him. Amongst these, died Cares,
Jesus his Kinsman, and the Sister of Justus the Tiberian, as we have heretofore
declared. After this, they requested me by Letters, that I would send them aid,
and Laborers to build Walls for their Town. To both which Requests of theirs,
I easily condescended. About this time the Country of Ga^lonitis, as far as
the Borough of Solyma, rebelled against Agrippa. I also enclosed with Walls
Seleucia and Sogon, which were two strong places unaccessible, Many Jews revolt
from the Romans.
and fortified by Nature; I did the like also by Jemnia, Ameritha, and Charabe,
a Borough of higher Galilee, although they were situated among the Rocks. I
fortified in like sort Taricheas also, and Tiberias, and Sephoris, Cities of
Galilee; and the Cave of the Arbalians, Bersobe, Selamen, Jotapa, Capharath,
Comosogona, Nepapha, and the Mountain Itabyrim. In which places I stored up
great plenty of Corn, and laid up much of Armor and Munition for defense.

Meanwhile, John labors to supplant Joseph in his Government.
John the Son of Levi, increased his hatred daily more and more toward me,
being greatly grieved to see my prosperity: and whereas he was fully resolved
to rid me of my Life, after he had encompassed his Country Giscala with Walls,
he sent Simon his Brother with an hundred Soldiers to Jerusalem, to Simon the
Son of Gamaliel, desiring him to labor the matter in such sort with the City,
that my Authority might be John, by common consent, might be ordained Governor
of Galilee in my place. This Simon was born in Jerusalem, Noble in Birth, and
in Sect a Pharisee, (which Sect, of all other, is most strictly observant in
the Laws of our Country) a Man of excellent wisdom, who, by his counsel, was
able to repair the decaying Ruins of his Country, and who of long time had
made use of John's friendship, because he was at that time mine Enemy.

This Man, solicited by the intercession of his Friends, persuaded the High
Priest Ananus, and Jesus the Son of Gamala, and other of his Faction, to stop
my increasing honors, before I attained to a higher degree of power. For it
should be very advantageous for them also, if I were removed from the
Government of Galilee. Further, he told Ananus, Simon's counsel against Joseph.
that they were not to delay the matter; lest upon discovery of their counsel,
I should attack the City with an Army. Ananus the High Priest replied, That is
could not easily be done, for that diverse Priests and Governors of the People
bare witness for me, that I behaved my self honestly in that Government; and
that it was ill done to Simon heard what Ananus said, he prayed him, and the
rest, at least, to speak nothing thereof, nor to make his motion known; for he
himself would undertake the execution of it. And calling unto him the Brother
of John, he charged him to tell his Brother that the way to accomplish his
design, was to send Presents to Ananus. For (said he) they will work so much
with him, that they will make him change his opinion. In the end, Simon
obtained that which he long time sought after. For Ananus and his Adherents
being corrupted with Money, accorded to remove me from the Government of
Galilee, without the consent or allowance of any other of the Citizens. For
which cause they thought good to send certain persons Noble in Birth, and no
ways inferior to one Pharisees; the one called Jonathas, Simons second counsel
against Joseph.
the other Ananias; the third was Jozarus of the Tribe of Levi, who was also a
Pharisee, and of the race of the Priests. To these they joined Simon, who was
also descended of the High Priests, and the youngest of them all. These they
commanded to call together a Council of the Galileans, and demand of them, why
they loved me so well? If they answered that it was because I was of Jerusalem,
they should say that Jerusalem was their Country likewise. But if they said it
was because of my knowledge in the Law, they were willed to say, that they
understood the same as well as I. If they said it was in regard I was a Priest
that they loved me, Ambassadors with Soldiers sent to Joseph.
they should likewise averr, that two of them were Priests. Being thus
instructed, and receiving forty thousand silver Jonathan, they set forwards.

And for that at the very same time a certain man called Jesus, of Galilee, was
come to Jerusalem with a band of six hundred Soldiers, they sent for him, and
hired him, and gave him three Months pay, commanding him to follow Jonathan,
and his Companions, and to do as they should command them: and to these they
adjoined three hundred Citizens, whom they hired with Rewards. With this
preparation the Legates set forward, being accompanied with Simon, John's
Brother, who had one hundred Soldiers with him, with Commission from those that
sent them, that if I willingly laid down Arms, they should send me alive to
Jerusalem: and if I resisted, by their Authority, they might lawfully kill
Joseph's Father signifies all these News unto him.
They had Letters also directed to John, which incited him to make War against
me. Moreover, they charged the Sephorites, Gabarites, and Tiberians, to
maintain John against me. After I had intelligence hereof, by my Fathers
Letters, who had notice thereof by Jesus the Son of Gam^^a, one of those who
were present at the deliberation, and who entirely loved me. I was much
grieved, seeing with how much ingratitude my Countrymen requited me, and of
malice had decreed my death; and for that my Father invited me by most
affectionate Letters to draw my self homeward, telling me how much he desired
to see me, who was his Son, before he left this life. I imparted these things
to my Friends, and certified them, that within three days I would forsake their
Country, and retire my self into mine own. Joseph resolves to return home.
Whereupon they were surprised with great sadness, Galileans fearing lest I
should leave them, and by that means the Thieves should be encouraged to set
upon them, they sent Messengers through all Galilee, to signify unto them the
resolution of my departure. Whereupon diverse understanding the news, resorted
unto me from all parts, bringing with them their Wives and Children; not so
much, as I suppose, for the sorrow they conceived at my departure, as the fear
that they had for themselves. For they persuaded themselves, that if I remained
among them, there could no mischief befall them. They assembled therefore in a
great Plain, called Asochim, where I remained.

That night in my sleep I had a strange dream. Joseph's admirable dream.
For lying in my bed, and being wholly disconsolate and troubled with the News
I had received, methought a certain Man from above spoke unto me after this
manner: Comfort thy self, and fear not. For the distress in which thou art,
shall be the cause to make thee great and happy, beyond thine expectation. For
not only these things shall turn to a fortunate issue, but also many other. Be
not thou therefore dismayed, but remember the advice that I give thee to make
War against the Romans. After this dream, A number of Galileans besought Joseph
that he would not forsake them.
I awaked; and as I prepared to go down into the Plain, the people of Galilee,
with their Wives and Children, humbling themselves to the earth, and weeping,
besought me that I would not leave them for a prey to their Enemies: or abandon
their Jerusalem, that envied them the peace and happiness which they enjoyed
under my conduct.

Joseph consents to stay in Galilee.
and I resolved in my self, that in respect of so great a multitude, my life
could not be better hazarded than for their preservation. I therefore gave my
consent to remain with them, and gave order that five thousand of the best
Soldiers, with fit provisions, should attend me: as for the rest, I sent them
back to their own houses. When these five thousand presented themselves, I
joined them to the other three thousand that I had with me, and drew out with
them fourscore Horsemen, and marched on toward Chabalon, a Borough upon the
marches of Ptolemais, where I undertook to prepare them for the Battle,
Placidus against Joseph.
expecting some assault from Placidus, who was come with two Companies of
Footmen, and one of Horsemen, sent by Cestius Gallus to Galilee, and other
little. Boroughs that border on Ptolemais. And for that he was entrenched
before the City of Ptolemais, I encamped my Army likewise not far from the
Borough Chabalon, some sixty stades off: and diverse times drew I out my Forces
to bid him Battle, but there passed nothing but skirmishes. For Placidus,
perceiving my forwardness to fight, was dismayed thereat, and retired himself:
yet he departed not from Ptolemais.

About this time came Jonathan, with the other Ambassadors, who (as we have
heretofore declared) were sent by Simon, and the High Priest Ananus; they
labored to entrap me by policy, for that they durst not assail me in open
field. To which purpose they writ a Letter to me to this effect: Jonathan's
Letter to Joseph.
Jonathan and the Ambassadors with him, who Jerusalem; to Joseph, Greeting. The
chief Men of Jerusalem being informed, that John of Gischala has oftentimes
sought to betray you, we are sent to repress his malice, and to exhort him
hereafter to submit himself unto you. And being desirous to confer with you,
touching what concerns the public good, we pray you to resort to us as soon
as you can, with some few Attendants, because the Borough is not able to
entertain many. To this effect they writ to me, hoping that one of these two
things would fall out: either that coming disarmed, I should be easily
surprised by them; or else bringing with me (...) great Company, I should be
condemned for an Enemy to my Country. The Messenger that brought me this
Letter, was a valiant young Man, mounted on Horseback, and had in times past
born Arms for the King. A Horseman brought the Letters.
The time at which he came to me, was two hours within night, Galilee. After
that, one of my Household Servants had certified me, that a certain Jew on
Horseback was come to speak with me, I commanded he should be brought in; who
saluted me but coldly, and delivering me the Letter, said unto me, They that
are come from Jerusalem, send you this Letter; give them a speedy answer: For I
am commanded to make a speedy return. They that sat at the Table with me, were
amazed at the Soldiers insolence. But for my self, I willed him to sit down,
and sup with us: but he refusing the same, I opened the Letter without the
observation of any present, and having seen what it contained, I folded it up
again, and held it in my hand, in such manner as I had received it, and began
to talk with my Friends of other affairs: and not long after rising from
Supper, and dismissing the rest Joseph's policy.
Which when I understood, I answered them to this effect: Joseph's answer to
Jonathan.
Joseph to Jonathan, and those that accompany him, Health. I am very glad to
hear that you are arrived in Galilee in good health, especially because I may
now deliver into your hands the government of the affairs thereof, to the end
(according as I have long time desired) I may return into my Country. I am
willing not only to come to you at Xallon, but to any further place also,
though you should not send for me. But you will please to pardon me, though I
come not at this present: for I am now at Chabalon, to attend Placidus, who
pretends to invade Galilee. Resort you therefore unto me, after you shall
have read these my Letters. Farewell.

After I had written this answer, and delivered it to the Soldier to carry it
to them, I sent with him thirty of my most approved Friends of Galilee,
commanding them to salute the Deputies, without any further speech of any
business whatsoever. I assigned also to Jonathan's Men. They therefore set
forward on their way: and Jonathan and the other seeing their first purpose
failed them, they sent me another Letter to this effect: Jonathan's Message and
Letter to Joseph.
Jonathan and his Company to Joseph, Health. We command you that within three
days, you make your appearance before us, without any of your Soldiers, in the
Borough of Gadara, to the end we may take cognizance of the Crimes whereof you
have accused John. As soon as they had written this, and received those
Galileans whom I had sent, they went to Japha, which is the greatest Town of
Galilee, fenced with strong Walls, and peopled with many Inhabitants. The
People of that City, with their Wives and Children, The Ambassadors of
Jerusalem coldly entertained in Galilee.
came forth to meet them, exclaiming against them with loud cries, and charging
them to return back, and not to deprive them of the good Governor they had,
Jonathan and his Companions though displeased with these words, yet durst not
make any open show of their displeasure, but without returning them any answer,
they resorted to other Towns, where they met with no less peremptory
Exclamations from the Multitude, Joseph. Whereupon Jonathan with his Followers
departed without any further speech, and went to Sephoris, the greatest City of
Galilee. The Inhabitants thereof being affected to the Romans, went forth to
meet them: but they said nothing at all concerning me. Departing from Sephoris,
they went to Asochim, where the Citizens sung the same Song that the Japheans
did. Whereupon they being unable to contain their displeasure, commanded their
Soldiers to beat with their Truncheons those that exclaimed against them, and
desired me for their Governor. And when they drew near Gabara, John came out to
meet them, accompanied with 3000 Soldiers: and I having intelligence by their
Letters, that they were resolved to make War against me, departed from
Chabalon, accompanied with 3000 Soldiers; and Jotapata, because I would be
within forty stades of them, and sent them this Letter: If your will be that I
must needs come unto you, Joseph writes again to them.
there are in Galilee two hundred and four Cities and Boroughs, I will meet you
in any one of them, which you please, except Gabara and Gischala: for that the
one is the place of John 's Nativity, and the other is Confederate with him.

After Jonathan had received this answer, he replied no more, but sought means
to entrap me. The consultation of the Ambassadors against Joseph.
John was of the opinion to write to all the Cities and Boroughs of Galilee,
supposing that without question there were one or two in them that were mine
Enemies, whom they might incense against me, as against their common Enemy. He
gave order also, that this his resolution should be sent to Jerusalem, to the
end that those of the City Galileans, might in like sort confirm that their
decree by their opinion. For he said, that by this means it would come to pass,
that the Galileans, who were well affected toward me, would forsake me, for
the fear they stood in of them. This advice of John's greatly pleased them all,
and was presently brought unto me about the third hour of the Night, by one
Sacchaeas, who flying from them, came and brought me the News, and particularly
related to me their intent. For which cause, perceiving that the time required
no longer delay, I commanded Jacob, who was one of my most assured and trusty
Servants, Joseph besetteth the ways of Galilee.
to take two hundred Men with him, and to beset the ways between Gabara and
Galilee, and to send me those Passengers whom he should take, and especially
those that carried Letters. I sent Jeremy also, who was one Galilee, with six
hundred Men at Arms, to keep the passages that way toward Jerusalem, commanding
him to seize on all those that carried Letters, and to commit the Men to
Prison, and to send me their Packets.

After I had in this sort instructed those whom I sent, I commanded the
Galileans the next day following to take their Arms, Joseph with his Troops
resorteth to Gabaroth.
and to furnish themselves with Victuals for three days, and to attend me at
the Borough of Gabaroth. Those Soldiers that I had, I distributed into four
Companies, and kept those with me, in whom I reposed most confidence, for the
guard of my person: and having appointed Captains over them, and commanded them
to be careful, I charged them to suffer no unknown Soldier to enter in among
them. The next day I came to Gabaroth, at the fifth hour of the day, where I
found all the Galileans, who resorted thither to assist me, according as I had
commanded them. Thither also came a multitude of other Men from other Boroughs.
As soon as I came amongst them, and was ready to speak to them, all of them
began to cry out, calling me their Benefactor, and the Maintainer of their
Country. After I had solemnly given them thanks for this favor they showed me,
I charged them to do no wrong, nor attempt any spoil in the Country, but to
encamp amidst the fields, contenting themselves with that provision they had
brought with them, because I was desirous to extinguish these Troubles without
effusion of blood. It happened the same day, that Jonathan's Messengers and
Letters fell into their hands, who had the guard of the passages by my
appointment; and, according to my direction, the Men were put in custody, John
and the Ambassadors Forces retire to Jesus's house.
But Jonathan's Soldiers having intelligence of my coming, retired, and with
them John also, to Jesus's house, which was a great Tower, nothing different
from a Citadel, in which they lodged a good number of Soldiers, and locked up
all the other gates save one; expecting that I should come that way, to salute
them. In a word, they had commanded their Soldiers, that when I should enter,
they should suffer no Man else to enter with me, but exclude all the rest. For
they made no other account, but that by this means they might easily seize on
me. But they were deceived of their hopes: For having notice beforehand of
their intent, as soon as I came thither, I entered into a ^^dging that was right
over against theirs, and feigned that I went to take my rest. Whe^eupon
Jonathan's Soldiers supposing that I was Galileans gave a great shout,
testifying the good will they bare to me their Governor, and they blamed the
Ambassadors, that without any cause of injury, they were come to disturb the
Public peace, and required them to be gone, for that they would admit no other
Governor. When these things were signified unto me, Joseph presents himself
among his Enemies.
I made no doubt to adventure my self forth among them, to hear what these
Ambassadors had to say against me. Upon my arrival, the whole Troop shouted for
joy, and applauded me with a loud voice, giving me thanks for my just and
peaceable Government.

Jonathan and his Adherents hearing this, were afraid, lest the Galileans
should set upon them, and they should be in danger of their Lives; and so they
began to bethink themselves how they might escape. But perceiving that they
could not retire, because I required them instantly to stay, they were so
confounded, that they seemed out of their senses. I therefore commanded the
People to cease their shouting, and planted the Soldiers of greatest trust in
every passage, to prevent John from charging them unawares. After this, I
exhorted the People to betake them to their Weapons, to the end that if the
Enemy should suddenly assail them, Joseph objecteth treachery against the
Ambassadors.
they might not be put into disorder. This done, I first of all began to rip up
to Jonathan and his Followers, what Letters they had written, and how they had
certified me, that they were sent by the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, to John, and
how they had required me to come unto them. Afterward in the sequel of my
discourse, I produced their Letters in open view, to the end they might not
deny any thing, seeing themselves convicted by their own handwriting; and
spoke thus, addressing my speech to Jonathan.

If being accused by John, In the mouth of two or three witnesses consists
truth.
I should produce two or three witnesses that were men of reputation, to
testify the sincerity of my action, is it not evident that you, O Jonathan,
and you his Colleagues, could not but acknowledge mine innocence, and acquit me
of that whereof I am accused? But to the intent you may know that I have
faithfully governed the estate of Galilee, I am not contented to produce three
witnesses, but I produce all these whom you see before you. Enquire of them how
I have lived, and whether I have governed this Country in all honesty and
justice? I adjure Galilee, that you hide nothing of the truth; but that before
these men, as if they were Judges, you declare if I have done any thing that is
contrary to right.

After I had spoke after this manner, The Galileans testimony of Joseph's good
Government.
all of them, with one accord, called me their Benefactor and Defender, and
gave testimony of my forepassed Government, and exhorted me to continue the
same hereafter. And all of them affirmed by Oath, that I had carefully
prevented lest any Woman should be violated, Joseph openly reads Jonathan's
Epistles.
or any Man by my means drawn into any injury or inconvenience. This done, I
publicly read the two Letters in the presence of all the Galileans, which were
taken from Jonathan's Messengers, by those who were appointed by me to beset
the ways, and were by them sent to me; which letters

The People having heard this, The wrath and fury of the people against
Jonathan and his F^llow Ambassadors.
were displeased and animated against Jonathan and his Followers, and pressed
on to murder them; as they bad surely done, had I not pacified the displeasure
of the Galileans. As for the Ambassadors that accompanied Jonathan, I told them
all, that I pardoned whatsoever was past, provided they would change their
demeanor, and upon their return into their Country, truly report unto those
who had me to give them leave to punish with all rigor those who had committed
this Joseph pacifieth Sedition without bloodshed.
but all of them ran in crowds with great fury to the Lodging, where Jonathan
and the Ambassadors were. Whereupon seeing that it was impossible to restrain
their fury, I incontinently betook me to my Horse, and commanded the People to
follow me to Sogan a Borough of the Arabians, distant from thence some 20
stades. By this means I brought to pass, that the beginning of a Civil War
might not be imputed to me.

When I arrived at Sogan, I made a halt, and admonisht my Followers not to give
way to their froward displeasures, Joseph sends one hundred Ambassadors to
Jerusalem.
nor entertain any desire of revenge: and I commanded Jerusalem, and there
complain unto the People against those that had kindled Sedition in their
Province. And I said unto them, If the People be favorable and listen to your
discourse, you shall persuade them to write unto me, that by their authority I
remain in Galilee; and that John and his Followers depart from hence. After I
had given them this charge, and that they were furnished with all things
necessary for their journey, with all expedition on the third day I dispatched
them, and sent five hundred armed Men with them. I writ also to my Friends in
Samaria, so to provide for their passage, that they might finish their journey
in all security. For Samaria was already in subjection to the Romans; and it
behoved my Men of necessity, in order to make a short Galilee, by this means a
man may in three days arrive at Jerusalem. Furthermore, I conducted the
Ambassadors my self as far as the Frontiers of Galilee, setting Guards upon the
ways to the end that none might easily know of their departure. Which done, I
sojourned for a certain time at Japha.

But Jonathan and his Companions having failed of their purpose intended
against me, dismissed John to Gischala: as for themselves they went to
Tiberias, hoping to bring the same under their obedience; The Ambassadors hope
to get Tiberias into their hands and possession.
for that Jesus, who was President at that time, had written to them, and
promised them to persuade the People to entertain them, and to take their part
if they came: in which hope they retired thither. Sylas, who (as I declared)
was left by me as Agent in Tiberias, certified me of all this by his Letters,
advising me to return in all diligence: Jonathan and his Followers being come
to Tiberias, persuaded diverse who were mine Enemies to revolt from me; Joseph
falls in danger.
but after they were certified that I was there in person, they were afraid,
and came unto me; and saluting me, told me, that they reputed me happy, in that
I had so wisely behaved myself in Galilee: and they rejoiced also in
appearance, that I was returned with honor; telling me that they participated
in that honor as being their Fellow-Citizen. And they protested to me that the
friendship which I bore them, was more considerable to them than that of John;
and desired me to return, promising very shortly to deliver John into my hands:
and these speeches of theirs they seconded with dreadful Oaths, Jonathan and
his Confederates policy.
which made me think that I had no cause to disbelieve them. Furthermore, they
Tiberias should be drawn into trouble on that day. I who suspected nothing,
repaired to Tarichea, leaving notwithstanding certain of my Friends behind me
in Tiberias, who might curiously observe what the common talk was of me: and
all along the way betwixt Tarichea and Tiberias, I laid certain Men in wait,
who from one to another might certify me of that which was discovered by them
who remained in the City. The next day therefore they all assembled in the
Proseucha or Oratory, which was a large house, wherein they prayed, and capable
of a great Multitude. The People assemble in the Proseucha.
When Jonathan was entered into this place, he durst not openly speak to them of
a revolt, but only told them that their City had need of a better Governor. But
the President Jesus, without dissembling, spoke plainly after this manner unto
them; It were better for you (my Friends) that you were subject to four Men of
Nobility and great wisdom, than to one: and thereupon he pointed to Jonathan
and his Colleagues. Justus stood up, and praised this advice and drew some of
the people to his opinion. But the greater part assented not, and there had
presently followed a mutiny, had not the Assembly been dismissed, The Jews sixth
hour is to ui eleven or twelve a Clock at noon.
by reason it was midday, which is the ordinary hour amongst them to take
their repast. Thus did Jonathans consorts remit the determination of the matter
until the next day, retiring themselves without any good done. Which being
reported to me, I resolved with my self the next morning to repair to the City
of Tiberias: and accordingly arriving there very early I found the People
already assembled in the place of Jonathan and his Colleagues seeing me there,
contrary to their expectation, were very much troubled, and Jonathan and his
Associates subtilty.
that he had discovered certain Roman Horsemen upon the Frontiers of that
Territory, some thirty stades from the City, in a place called Homonoea.
Whereupon they cried out, that they ought not to endure their Country to be
pillaged by the Enemy in their sight. They used this Speech, supposing that
under pretext of rescuing the Country, they might send me abroad, and so
remain Masters of the City, by getting the affection of the Inhabitants to my
prejudice.

Now although I knew very well their intent, yet I gave ear to them, lest I
should bring the Tiberians into an opinion, that I was negligent and careless
of their security. I therefore rode out, and came to the place of which they
had spoken, where finding no footstep False Accusations and Epistles produced
by the Ambassadors against Joseph.
I returned speedily without delay to Tiberias. When I came there, I found the
whole Council assembled with a Multitude of People, and Jonathan making against
me a very vehement Invective, that I made no account to relieve them in their
Wars, and studied nothing but mine own pleasure. And whilst they spoke these
words, they produced four Letters, as written unto them by those who live upon
the Marches of Galilee, requiring succor of them, for that the Roman Horsemen
and Footmen would within three days forage and spoil their Country. The
Tiberians hearing these Allegations, and supposing them true, cried out,
saying, That it behoved them not in that manner to delay time, but to go and
succor their Countrymen environed with great dangers. Whereupon I answered,
That I was ready to obey them, and promised to Joseph discovers the subtilty
of the Ambassadors.
Now I knew well the pretense of Jonathan, and declared my opinion, that since
those Letters said, that the Romans gathered head in diverse places, it was
requisite to divide our Power into five Companies, appointing every one of them
a Chieftain over them, each of the Ambassadors to command one. For it is an
honor for good Men not only to give counsel, but also when need requires, to
be first in action: and it lay not in my power to lead any more than one
Company. This my advice was pleasing to all the People, who presently
constrained these Men to march out to the War: Ananias one of the Ambassadors,
a wicked man.
whereby it came to pass, that they were greatly confused to see that they
could not finish that which they had imagined, because I crossed all their
Enterprises. Hereupon, one of their Party called Ananias, a wicked and subtle
Man, counseled Jonathan writes to John to come unto him.
As soon therefore as we retired every one to our several Lodgings, Jonathan
and his Colleagues writ to John, to resort unto them early in the Morning with
his Men of War, and all the Power he could make; for that they might easily lay
hands on me, and accomplish that which they had so long time longed for. He
receiving this Letter, willingly

But Jesus, as soon as I was entered with my Friends, having the guard of the
gate, would not permit the rest of my Followers to enter with me: and as we
were ready to begin our Prayers, according to the custom of the Country, Jesus
rising up, demanded of me What was become of the Household Stuff that was taken
out of the King's Palace when it was burnt? Jesus talks with Joseph.
and where the bullion of silver was? and with whom I had left the same? all
which John's approach. I answered, That I had put the same into the hands of
Capella, and ten of the chief Nobility of Tiberias, and willed him to ask them
whether it* Joseph's debate with Jesus for twenty pieces of gold.
were true that I spoke? He did so, and they confessed that they had it. But
what (said he) is become of those twenty pieces of Gold, that you received by
the sale of a certain weight of massive silver? I answered him, That I had
delivered the same to the Ambassadors, to defray their charges in their Voyage
toward Jerusalem. Hereupon Jonathan and his Colleagues said, That I had done
amiss, in employing the Public Treasure to the use of those Ambassadors. The
People being displeased with this Malice: And when I saw that a Commotion was
likely to arise, I thought best to animate the People the more against them; I
said, That if I had done amiss in furnishing the Ambassadors out of the common
stock, they should need to take no further displeasure for that: for, said I, I
will repay those twenty pieces of Gold out of mine own Purse. Hereupon the
People were incensed the more against them, because they manifestly discovered
what hatred they wrongfully bare Jesus fearing lest some Disturbance might
arise, commanded the People to depart, The Peoples love to Joseph.
and only the Council to stay, for that it was unpossible to examine matters
discreetly, where so much trouble and turmoil was. The People cried out, That
they would not leave me alone among them. Whereupon there came one to Jesus,
who secretly informed him, that John with his armed Men was at hand. Jonathan
being unable to contain and conceal his joy, and God so providing for the
conservation of my life (since otherwise, Joseph almost suddenly surprised by
the Enemy, is delivered from peril.
John and his Followers had certainly destroyed me.) Forbear (said he) ye
Tiberians, to enquire of the twenty pieces of Gold, Joseph meriteth not
punishment for this matter; but because he affects the Tyranny, and by his
words has deceived the People of Galilee, and gotten the Sovereignty to
himself. As he spoke these words, he and those of his Faction Jonathan, and
pulled me away violently from mine Enemies. As I was getting away, I saw John
coming with his Troops; whereupon crossing down a private way that led me to
the Lake, I got into a Boat, and went by water to Tarichea, avoiding this
danger beyond all hope.

There immediately I sent for the chiefest Men of Galilee, and told them, how
contrary to all right, Joseph certifieth the Galileans how traitorously
Jonathan and the Tiberians had dealt with him.
I had almost been murdered by Jonathan and the Tiberians. The Galileans were
highly incensed against them, and conjured me, without delay, to make War
against them; John and Jonathan, with all their Followers. I restrained them
the best I could, and represented to them that it was best to expect till such
time as we knew what News our Ambassadors, that were gone to Jerusalem, would
bring. To the end to do nothing without their approbation and consent; and by
these means I persuaded them. But John seeing that at that time his design had
no success, returned back again to Gischala.

Some few days after, our Ambassadors returned from Jerusalem, and certifi'd us
that the People of Jerusalem were much displeased with Ananus the High Priest,
The hundred Amdassadors return from Jerusalem.
and Simon the Son of Gamaliel, that without their consent, they had sent
Deputies into Galilee, to Jerusalem, upon the instant Request that the People
made to them, confirmed me in the Government of Galilee, and commanded Jonathan
and his Associates to return back again with all expedition. An Assembly in
Arbela.
After I had received these Letters, I repaired to the Borough of Arbela, where
I assembled the Galileans: before whom I commanded the Ambassadors to report
how much the People of Jerusalem were displeased at those things which Jonathan
had done against me; and how they confirmed me in the Government of this
Country, The Council held against Joseph by Jonathan and his Companions.
and recalled Jonathan and his Confederates back again to Jerusalem: After
this, I sent them that Letter that was directed to them, commanding the John,
and those of the Council of Tiberias, with the Governor of Gabara, and
consulted with them what was best to do. The Tiberians opinion was, that
Jonathan and dis Colleagues should continue to take care of affairs, and not
forsake the City which had put itself into their hands, especially because I
would attack them: for that I had so threatened them, they were not ashamed to
feign and imagine. This advice not only pleased John, but he further gave this
counsel, that two of the Ambassadors should be sent from them to the People of
Jerusalem, to accuse me that I had unjustly governed Galilee; which they might
very easily persuade the People to believe, both in regard of their Authority,
as also for that the common People are by nature variable and inconstant. This
counsel John gave, was allowed by them all: and it was thought fit that
Jonathan and Ananias should in person repair to Jerusalem, and the other two
remain at Tiberias; and for their Convoy they gave them an hundred armed
Soldiers.

The Tiberians after this provided for the reparation of their Walls, gave
commandment to all the Citizens to take Arms, The Tiberians intend War against
Joseph. Jonathan with his Followers taken and kept captive.
and sent for some supplies to John, who was at Gischala, to strengthen their
Garrison, if they should any ways be assaulted by me. Jonathan traveling
onwards of his Journey, came to Dabaritta, a City situated upon the uttermost
Borders of Galilee in a great Plain: there he met about Midnight with some of
my Troops that kept the Watch, who commanded them to lay by their Arms, and
kept them Prisoners, as I had commanded them. Hereof Levi, who had the charge
of this Tiberians, by which I counseled them, to lay their Arms aside, and
dismiss every one to his own dwelling place. But they returned me an injurious
answer: for they supposed that Jonathan and his Train were already arrived in
Jerusalem. But I setting light by their Injuries, resolved to use Cunning,
rather than Force: for I thought it a dangerous matter to kindle a Civil War.
Being therefore willing to draw them out of their walls, I chose out ten
thousand of my best Soldiers, whom I distributed into three Bands, and lodged
one Company of them secretly at Dora, in ambush. I placed another thousand in a
certain Borough situate in a mountainous place, some four stades from
Tiberias; commanding them, that as soon as I gave them a watchword or sign,
they should break forth: The Tiberians scoff very bitterly against Joseph.
as for my self, I drew into the open field, and there quartered. Tiberians
saw, they made continual Excursions toward me, using many bitter and injurious
Taunts against me: and so great Folly possessed them, that they laid a Coffin
in the open Plain, and going round about the same, they scornfully seemed to
lament me, as dead, whilst in the mean time I took pleasure to laugh at their
follies.

But being desirous to surprise by some policy Simon and Joazar the two other
Colleagues, I sent to desire them that they would march forth a little without
their walls, attended by their Friends, and a Guard for their security; for
that I was minded to confer with them upon a Peace, Joseph surprised Simon by
subtilty, and leads him away prisoner.
and to share the Government with them. Simon blinded with Ambition, was so
weak as to come forth with all expedition: but Joazar suspecting some
stratagem, would not adventure without the walls. As soon as I saw Simon,
Tiberias. There was a sharp skirmish on both sides, and the Tiberians had well
nigh gotten the Victory: for my Soldiers began to fly; but perceiving how the
matter went, I animated those of my Company, and gave a valiant onset on the
Tiberians, who almost had the better, and chased them into their City, and sent
another Company by the Lake, to set fire on those Houses which they should
first light upon. Joseph surprizeth Tiberias.
Hereupon the Tiberians thinking their City was Simon to come and sup with me,
and comforted him in his misfortune, promising him to send him to Jerusalem
with all fafety, and to furnish him for his ordinary expenses with all things
necessary. The next day, with ten thousand Soldiers, I entered into Tiberias,
Joseph sends the Authors of the Sedition to Jotapata.
and having assembled the chiefest Citizens in the Hippodrome, I commanded them
to discover to me who had been the Authors of that Rebellion. They satisfied
me, and I laid hands on them, and bound them, and sent them incontinently to
Jotapata. As for Jonathan Jerusalem with Simon and Joazar, and five hundred
Soldiers for their Guard. Hereupon the Tiberians re-assembled themselves before
me, beseeching me to pardon their misdeeds, promising me to recompense by their
future fidelity their former defection: Those Goods that were taken from the
Citizens are restored.
and desiring me to restore those Goods to the Citizens, which in way of
pillage were taken from them. Whereupon I gave command, that all the prey
should be brought and laid before me: and whereas the Soldiers delayed to
perform the same, I espying one of those Soldiers that stood by me, better
apparelled than he was wont to be, asked him where he had gotten that Garment?
who confessing that he had taken it in the spoil of the City, I caused him to
be well-cudgel'd, and threatened a worse punishment to all those that

In this place I cannot forbear to reprehend Justus, A Reproof of Justus the
Historiographer, that falsely accused Joseph.
and others, for foul dealing. For having spoken of this business in their
Histories, they are not ashamed to gratify their passion and hatred by
delivering it to Posterity otherwise than indeed it was. In which they differ
nothing from Counterfeiters of Evidences, and Razers of Records, but that these
Men are more encouraged by impunity. For Justus, to the end he might seem to
employ his time well, undertaking to set down the events of this War, has
belyed me in many things, and has been no less guilty of falsities in matters
relating to his own Country. For which cause I am necessarily enforced in this
place to discover that For whosoever writes a History, though obliged to speak
the Truth; yet is not bound

Tell me therefore Justus (for thou desire to be held for the man of greatest
credit amongst all other Historians) tell me, I pray thee, in familiarity (for
I must so talk with thee as if thou were present before me) how I and the
Galileans were the Authors of that Rebellion, which thy Country began both
against the Romans, and their King. For before I was chosen Governor of Galilee
by the People of Jerusalem, both thou and all the Tiberians were not only up in
Arms, but had already made War against those of Decapolis in Syria. Thy self
had burnt their Villages, and one of thy Servants dyed in that encounter. Yet
Vespasian, how the Inhabitants of Decapolis supplicated Vespasian then in the
City of Ptolemais, that thou might be punished, as the Author of their
mischiefs: and assuredly thou had been punished by the Emperor, had not
Agrippa, who received Commission to execute thee, upon the instant request of
his Sister Bernice, spared thy life, and kept thee bound in Prison for a long
time. But the sequel of thy actions sufficiently shows what the rest of thy
life has been, and how thou did cause thy Country to rebel against the
Romans: whereof I will produce hereafter most evident Arguments, and for thy
cause will I urge somewhat against those other Tiberians, and will make it
plain to such as shall read these Histories, that thou have been no friend to
Rome, Tiberias Justus Country.
nor faithful to thy King. And I first instance in the greatest Galilee,
Sephoris and Tiberias two chief Cities of Galilee.
Sephoris and Tiberias, in which thou Justus were born. The former is situate
in the heart of Galilee, having round about it a number of Villages, and being
easily able to make a revolt at pleasure; yet notwithstanding the Citizens
thereof resolved to observe their faith to the Romans, and would not receive
me, nor take Arms for the Jews. And through the fear they had of me, the
Inhabitants surpised me by their artifices, and obliged me to encompass their
City with a wall: and that done, they willingly entertained a Garrison which was
sent them from Cestius Gallus, who was General of the Roman Legions in Syria,
and denied me entrance, because at that time he had a great power, and
terrified the Country round about. Yea, when our great City of Jerusalem was
besieged, and the Temple common to all our Nation, was in danger to fall into
the Enemies hands, the Sephorites Romans: But thy Country, Justus, being
situate upon the Lake of Genazareth distant from Hippos thirty stades, from
Gadara sixty, from Scythopolis sixscore, in a Country obedient to the King,
having not any City of the Jews round about it, might have very easily kept
their faith to the Romans, if they had pleased. For both the City and People
were furnished with Munition in all abundance. But as thou say, I was the
cause at that time. And who afterward? For thou know that before the siege
of Jerusalem, I was in the Romans hands; and that Jotapata was taken by force,
and diverse other Castles; and that a great number of Galileans had been lost in
diverse Battles. At that time should thou have delivered thy self of that
fear thou had of me, laying thine arms aside, and presenting thy self to the
Romans, if thou tookest Arms not of thine own accord, but enforced. But the
truth is, you expected Vespasian's coming, even until such time as he begirt
your City with a siege, and then laid you your Arms aside for fear of danger:
yea, even then had your City been overthrown, except the King in excuse of your
folly, had obtained your pardon at Vespasian's hands. It was not therefore my
fault, but your own, that you behaved your selves like Enemies to the Roman
Empire. Do not you remember how often I obtained the victory against you, and
how seldom you could complain of Bloodshed? But you falling at dissension one
with another, became the instruments of your own ruin; and not for the love
you bare either to the King, or the Romans, but of your own malice you slew an
hundred eighty five Citizens, at such time as I was besieged by the Romans in
Jotapata. Nay more, is it not true, Jerusalem, there were more than two
thousand Tiberians slain, or taken Prisoners? But perhaps thou will allege,
that at that time thou were no Enemy, because thou were fled to the King: but I
tell thee that thou fleddest thither for the fear thou had of me. I am a
wicked man, as thou say: but what art thou? whom King Agrippa delivered from
punishment, Justus condemned to death.
at such time as thou were condemned by Vespasian to lose thy head; whom he
made Prisoner twice, and as many times past the sentence of Banishment against,
and once commanded to be thine own Murderer, spared thy life upon the
importunate solicitation of his sister Bernice. And after so many Crimes
committed by thee, having entertained thee for his Secretary, when he found thy
corruption in that office, he banished thee from his presence.

Justus knew nothing of the Wars of the Jews.
that thou have written more exactly and perfectly of this matter, than any
man; whereas thou art utterly ignorant of those things that were done in
Galilee. For at that time thou were at Berytum with the King, and knew not
what the Romans suffered at the siege of Jotapata, seeing thou did not follow
us. Neither could thou be able to learn how I behaved my self therein, for
that there was not one of those that helped me to defend it left alive to give
thee certain intelligence. Thou will perhaps say, that thou have carefully
described that which happened during the siege of Jerusalem. And how is this
possible? For thou were neither agent nor spectator in that War; neither have
thou read the Commentaries of Vespasian. Which I clearly affirm, because thou
have written clean contrary to that which is Justus published his Book when
Titus and Vespasian were dead.
And if thou art so confident, that thy History is truer than others, why did
thou not publish it during the lives of Vespasian and Titus, who were the
Generals of that War; or during the life of King Agrippa, and his Relations who
were all of them very expert in the Greek tongue? For thou have kept it written
by thee above twenty years, and might have produced witness of thine exact
diligence before them, who were privy to all things. But now when they are
dead, and thou think that no man lives that may reprove thee, thou have
taken the boldness to publish thy Work. I have used no such policy in my Books,
but presented them to the Emperors themselves, Manifest Testimonies of the
truth of Josephus History.
who were eyewitnesses and actors thereof. For I knew in mine own soul that I
had set down all things truly: Whereupon I obtained my expected approbation.
Moreover, I communicated the same History with diverse others, whereof Agrippa,
and some of his kindred. And Titus the Emperor himself was so desirous that
posterity should learn the truth of that History out of these Books, that he
placed them in his Library, and caused them to be published, being subscribed
with his own hand. As for King Agrippa, he sent me seventy two Epistles,
testifying the truth of my Books, whereof two are subjoined, to the end that
the truth may appear thereby. King Agrippa to his dear friend Joseph, Health: I
have with great contentment read the Book, wherein thou seem in my opinion
to have handled this matter more exactly, The first Epistle.
than any other. For which cause I pray thee send me the rest. Farewell my
friend. King Agrippa to Joseph his dear friend, Health: I perceive by thy
writings that thou need no information from me, The second Epistle.
how matters passed from the beginning: yet when we I will between me and thee
tell thee certain things which thou know not. Thus was he a witness of the
truth of my History: Josephus prosecuteth his History, and leaves to debare
with Justus.
not flattering me, for it became him not; neither deriding me, for far was it
from so noble a mind to be subject to so servile a folly: but only to this
end, that the truth of my writings might be commended to the Reader by his
testimony. And thus much have I thought good to set down by way of answer to
Justus.

Now as soon as I had pacified these troubles in Tiberias, and had established
a council of such as were well affected toward me, I bethought my self of what
concerned me to do in respect of John. All they of Galilee were of the opinion,
that I should gather together all the forces of my Government and march against
John, and do justice upon John, assigning them the term of twenty days, to
determine of that which seemed best for their own security: and I threatened to
set fire on their houses, and confiscate their goods, Four thousand of John's
Followers forsake him and follow Joseph.
except they quitted their Arms. They hearing these things, were greatly
troubled, and forsook John; and after they had laid down their Arms, they came
unto me to the number of four thousand: so that only about fifteen hundred Men
remained John, either of Citizens, or strangers of Tire. When John perceived
that he was circumvented by this policy, he ever after remained quiet in his
Country in great fear.

At that time the Sephorites grew so bold, that they took Arms in confidence of
the strength of their walls, and for that they saw me distracted with other
business. They sent to Cestius Gallus Governor of Syria, praying him to repair
to them with all expedition, and take possession of their City, or send them a
Garrison at least. Gallus promised to come to them, but he set down no certain
time of his approach. Whereof when I was advertised, I took the Men of War I
had, and marched against the Sephorites, and took their City by force. The
Galileans very glad of this opportunity, and supposing the time was come
wherein they might satisfy the insatiable hatred Town, and left nothing
unspoiled; neither was there any kind of misery which they Sephoris spoiled.
Which when I saw, I was much grieved, and commanded them to give over; telling
them it was impiety in them, to show themselves so savage toward their
Countrymen. And seeing that neither by any prayer or command I could draw them
to obedience, for that their animosity was so violent, I commanded those that
were about me, and whom I most trusted, to spread a rumor that the Romans were
entering on the other side of the City with a great Army. All which I did, to
the end that by this rumor, I might restrain the fury of the Galileans, and
save the City of Sephoris. And this policy took good effect; For when they
heard this news they were afraid, and forsook their pillage, to trust to their
heels, because I who was their General did the like. For I made a show, that I
believed the rumor to be Sephoris was saved beyond all hope.

Tiberias also hardly escaped from being spoiled by the Galileans, Tiberias in
danger of ruin.
through this occasion which ensues: The chiefest of their Council writ to the
King, to desire him to come and take possession of their City. The King
promised to satisfy them very shortly, and deliver his Letters to one of his
chamber, called Crispus a Jew born, to carry the same to the Tiberians. The
Galileans took this messenger on the way, and brought him unto me: which when
the common people understood, of mere spleen they fell to Arms, and the next
day diverse of them assembled themselves from all parts, and came to the City of
Asoch where I made my abode, and made great exclamations, calling the Tiberians
traitors, and the Kings friends, and demanding of me Tiberias, and raze it to
the ground, being as much displeased against the Tiberians, as they were
against the Sephorites.

Which when I heard, I stood in great doubt how to deliver the Tiberians from
that displeasure, which the Galileans had conceived against them: for I could
not deny but that the Tiberians had written and sent for the King: for the
answer which he made them, Joseph consulteth with himself.
did evidently express the same. Having along while debated the matter with my
self, I said unto them; I know as well as you that the Tiberians have offended;
neither will I hinder you from spoiling their City, but you must proceed to the
execution thereof with some prudence. For the Tiberians alone do not betray the
public liberty, but others also, who are more accounted of in the Country of
Galilee. Stay The Galileans wrath pacified, conceived against the Tiberians.
As for the messenger that was sent by the King, I caused him to be imprisoned,
having respect to an urgent necessity of mine own, which constrained me to
depart out of the Kingdom within a little while. And calling Crispus secretly
unto me, I charged him to make the Soldier drunk, who had the charge of him, to
the end that he might in all security fly back to the King. Thus Tiberias
being ready to be destroyed the second time, by my government and providence,
avoided a great and fatal danger.

At the same time Justus, the son of Pistus, fled to the King without my
knowledge; the cause of which flight, I will orderly express. As soon as the
Romans had begun the War against the Jews, Justus desires to command Galilee.
the Tiberians concluded to obey the King, and in no sort to rebel against the
Romans. But Justus persuaded them to take Arms, thirsting after alteration, and
hoping to usurp the Government of Galilee, and of his own Country: but his
hope failed him; for the Galileans being enviously bent against the Tiberians,
for those injuries they had suffered at their hands before the War, would not
allow Justus to be their Governor. My self also, whom the People of Jerusalem
put in trust with the Government of Galilee, was oftentimes so much moved, that
I failed little of killing Justus; so intolerable was his perfidiousness. He
therefore fearing least my displeasure should shorten his days, went

The Sephorites beyond their expectation having escaped this first danger, writ
to Cestus Gallus the second time; desiring him to come to them, to the end he
might seize their City; or else send them Forces to withstand the incursions of
their enemies. And they wrought so much, that Gallus sent them a Body of
Horsemen, and after them Footmen, who came by night, and were received into
their City. But seeing that the Country round about was but in poor estate, by
reason of the Roman Horsemen, I drew my Forces together and came to Garizim,
where I encamped some twenty stades from Sephoris; and by night I approached
the same, Joseph assailed the walls of Sephoris.
and set Ladders to the wall, with which I entered a great number of my
Soldiers, and became Master of the better part of the City; from Roman Footmen
and two Horsemen, Sephorites, with the loss of one of ours. Afterward a Fight
happening between us and their Horsemen in open field, we fought for a long time
with disadvantage: For the Romans having environed me on all sides, my
Reerward, through the fear they conceived, began to retire. In this skirmish I
lost one of my Guard, called Justus, who in times past had served in the very
same place under the King. Silas Captain of the King's Guard.
After this, the King's Forces both of Horse and Foot came thither, under the
Government of Silas Captain of the Guard, who encamping some five stades off
from Julias, beset the Highways that lead toward Cana with Men of War, and the
Fort of Gamala, to hinder the Inhabitants from receiving any Commodities from
the Country of Galilee.

As soon as I received News hereof, I sent out two thousand Soldiers under the
command Jeremy, who lodging themselves within a stade of Julias, near the River
Jordan, offered nothing else but light skirmishes, until such time as I had
gathered three thousand Soldiers more, and came to them. The next day, having
planted an Ambush in a certain Trench near the enclosure of their Camp, I
touled out the King's Soldiers to skirmish, having first forewarned my Soldiers
to feign a flight, till they had drawn their Enemies as far as the Ambush;
which they cunningly executed. But Silas supposing that our Men fled for
Cowardice, set forward to follow them as fast as he could: but they that lay in
Ambush charged him on the back, Joseph puts the King's Soldiers to flight.
and discomfited his Army: and I presently turning, and making head against
them, constrained the King's Forces to trust to their heels; and I should have
got a signal Victory, had not Fortune crossed my Cepharnom. My Soldiers hearing
hereof, and fearing least some worse Misfortune had befaln me, than indeed
there had, restrained themseves from pursuing the Enemy any further. Having
therefore sent for Physicians, and caused my self to be dressed, I stayed there
for that day; and being seized with a Fever, I was carried by Night to
Tarichea, according to the advice of my Physicians.

Silas and his Soldiers having News of my accident, recovered their courages;
and understanding that we kept but slender watch in our Camp, they laid an
Ambush by Night on this side Jordan, Joseph's misfortune animateth the Enemy.
with their Horsemen; and as soon as the day appeared, he invited Tarichea to
Julias, they were afraid, and returned back.

Not long after, Vespasian arrived at Tire, accompanied with King Agrippa.
Against whom the Tyrians began to utter many reproaches, telling Vespasian,
that the King was an Enemy both to the Tyrians and the Romans; Vespasian and
Agrippa arrive at Tire.
and that Philip his General, had betrayed the King's Palace and the Roman Army
in Jerusalem, and that by the King's Commission. Which when Vespasian
understood, he reproved this impudent boldness of the Tyrians, Romans: and
advised the King to send Philip to Rome, to give account of his actions. But
notwithstanding that Philip was sent thither, yet he presented not himself
before Nero; for finding him extremely busied with Troubles and Civil Wars, he
returned to the King without doing any thing. When Vespasian was arrived at
Ptolemais, The governors of Dceapolis accuse Justus.
the Inhabitants of Decapolis accused Justus the Tiberian, for burning their
Boroughs. Vespasian therefore delivered him bound to the King, Of Vespasian's
arrival, and the siege of Jotapata, read Josephus l. 4. c. 5. of the Wars of
the Jews.
as being his Subject, that he might be punished. And the King before that
time, unwitting to Vespasian, kept him Prisoner, as it has been heretofore
declared. The Sephorites also resorted to Vespasian to salute him, and received
a Garrison from him, with their Commander Placidus, against whom I made War,
until such time as Vespasian arrived in Galilee: of which arrival I have amply
spoken in my Books of the Wars of the Jews, how he came, how he fought against
me, the first time near the City of Tarichea; how I departed from thence to
Jotapata; how I fell into the hands of the Romans; how I was afterward set at
liberty; and, in a word, all my actions and fortunes during the Wars of the
Jews, and the siege of the City of Jerusalem. But now it seems necessary that
I describe other things exploited by me during my lifetime in other places,
than in the Wars of the Jews. After the siege of Jotapata was ended, I was
Prisoner with the Romans, and kept very carefully: notwithstanding Vespasian
did me much honor. For by his commandment I married a Virgin, that was one of
those that had been taken captive in Caesarea. But she remained not long with
me: for after I was set at liberty, and Vespasian to Alexandria, she left me.
After which, I married another Wife in Alexandria, from whence I was sent to
Titus to the siege of Jerusalem, where I was oftentimes in danger of death. For
the Jews labored what they could to destroy me: and the Romans supposing that
as often as the lot of Arms was not favorable to The dangers that Joseph past
betwixt the Romans and Jews.
it was by my Treason, cried out continually to the Emperor to execute me for a
Traitor. But Titus well-experienc'd in the Chances of War, pacified the
violence which his Soldiers intended against me, by his silence. And after the
City of Jerusalem was taken, Titus often solicited me to take what I liked
among the Ruins of Jerusalem, promising to give it me. But I making small
account of any thing after the Ruin of my Country, prayed him only to give
me the liberty of some persons, and the Sacred Bible, which I received for a
great consolation in my miseries. All which he graciously granted me. Not long
after, having begged my Brother, and fifty other of my Friends, they were given
me; Joseph discharges a number of Captives.
and I was refused in nothing. Entering into the Temple by Titus's permission, I
found a great number of Prisoners shut up therein; and all those Women Cerealis
and a thousand Horse into the City of Tecoa by the Emperor Titus, to see if the
place were fit for a Camp; in returning from thence, I saw diverse Prisoners
Crucified, Joseph delivers three from the G^bbet.
amongst which, were three of my Familiars; whereat I was grieved in my Soul
and I came and signified the same to Titus with tears: who incontinently
commanded that they should be taken down, and as carefully dressed and cured as
might be: two of which dyed, notwithstanding the utmost diligence of the
Physicians, and the third survived.

After Titus had appeased the Troubles of Judea, Joseph repaireth with Titus to
Rome, and is honorably entertained by Vespasian.
conceiving with himself that the Jerusalem, would yield me but little profit,
by reason of the Roman Garrison that should be placed there, he gave me Lands a
greater distance: and intending to embark himself for Rome, he took me with him
in his own ship, and did me great honor. As soon as we came to Rome, Vespasian
had great care of me; for he lodged me in his own house, where he lived before
he was Emperor, and honored me with the title of a Citizen of Rome, and gave
me an annual Pension; and as long as he lived, continued his good affection
toward me, omitting no kind of bounty which he might use toward me. Whereupon
I was so much envied, that I came in danger thereby to lose my life. For a
certain Jew called Jonathan, having stirred up a sedition in Cyrene, Joseph
envied and slandered.
and gathered about him some two thousand Inhabitants of the Country, who
Vespasian knew his falsehood, and caused his head to be cut off. After this, my
Enemies objected diverse Crimes against me, in regard that I was in good
Reputation: but God delivered me from them all. Moreover, I received in gift
from Vespasian, an ample possession in Judaea; and about the ^^me time I
forsook my Wife, because her manners pleased me not, although she was the
Mother of my three Children, of whom two are deceased, and the third, called
Hircanus, is yet alive. After this, I married a Wife that was born in Candy,
Joseph's third Wife.
by Nation a Jew, and by Birth Noble, and one of the greatest Reputation
amongst the Inhabitants, endowed with as laudable manners, as any other Woman
Justus, who was the eldest, and Simon, who was also surnamed Agrippa. Thus far
touching my domestical affairs. To which I must add, that I have always
continued to be honored with the good will of the Emperors. For after
Vespasian's death, Titus, who succeeded him in the Empire, continued the same
favor which his Father had showed me. For although I was oftentimes accused,
yet were not my Adversaries believed. Domitian, who succeeded him, augmented my
Honors. For he punished those Jews that accused me, and gave order that the
Eunuch and slave whom I kept to teach my Son, The perpetual favor of the
Caesar's toward Joseph.
and by whom I was accused, should be punished. He granted me exemption also
from all the Tributes of Judaea, which is one of the greatest Honors that a Man
can receive. And as for Domitia the Emperor's Wife, she always continued
Epaphroditus, after I have dedicated to you the Continuation of my Antiquities,
I will forbear to say more thereof.

A MAP OF THE HOLY LAND delineated for the better understanding of the HISTORY
OF JOSEPHUS
By P. du Val the King's Geographer 1675. R* White sculp

THE HOLY LAND described according to the NEW TESTAMENT to show the places
remarkable for the residences and journeys of our SAVIOR.



map of the Holy Land A Scale of Leagues each consisting of 3000 Geometrical
Paces





THey who apply themselves to write History, have not all one and the same
intent and motive, but oftentimes very different causes of their labors. For
some are led to this study, by a desire to show their Eloquence, and to gain
Reputation: Others do it, to oblige the persons whose actions they relate; and
they strive to the uttermost to please them. Others engage upon it, because
having born a part in the Events which they describe, they are willing that the
Public should have knowledge of the same. Lastly, Romans, and a Witness of the
Actions which passed therein, and also know what were the several Events
thereof, I conceived my self obliged and, in a manner, forced to write the
History of the same, to the end to manifest the unfaithfulness of those, who
having written concerning this Subject before me, have disguised and perverted
the Truth. And on the other side, I have reason to believe that the Greeks will
be well pleased with this Work, because it will afford them an Account of the
Antiquity of our Nation, and the Form of our Commonwealth, Translated out of
Hebrew into their own Tongue. When I began the History of the Jews had their
first original; What alterations in Fortune they had fallen into; By what
Lawmaker they had been instructed in Piety, and incited to the exercise of
Virtue; What Wars they sustained through several Ages; and finally, How,
against their will, they became engaged in this last against the Romans. But
for that this Subject was too ample and copious, to be treated only in passing,
I thought fit to make a separate Work after it, and accordingly set upon this
Treatise. Afterward (as it usually happens to those that attempt matters of
great difficulty) I fell into a certain slothfulness, which made me very
backward to resolve upon the Translation of so long a History, into a Foreign
Language. Yet some there were, who inflamed with a desire of knowledge,
animated me to this action; and especially Epaphroditus, a man enamored of all
Learning, Greeks, have been curious to understand what passes amongst us. For
Ptolomy King of Egypt, the second of the Name (highly affectioned Greek Tongue.
And our High Priest Eleazar (who was not second in virtue to any other
whatsoever) thought not fit to deny this satisfaction to that Prince, as he
would without doubt have done, had it not been the Alexandria, did only
communicate that unto him which belongs to our Law. But the things that are
found written in the Sacred Books of Holy Scripture, are innumerable; being the
History of five thousand years: in which diverse extraordinary Events and
Revolutions, sundry great Wars, and many glorious Actions done by excellent
Captains are described. In sum, if any one have a desire to read this History,
he shall principally learn and observe, That all things fall out Moses our
excellent Lawgiver, how worthily he has spoken of his Divine Nature; how he
has manifested that all his Works are proportionable to his infinite
Greatness; and how his whole Narration thereof is pure and free from the vanity
of Fables, wherewith all other Histories are poisoned. For the Antiquity alone
of his History secures him from the suspicion Moses has given us thereof; it
is necessary before all other things, that I speak somewhat of himself; lest
perhaps any man should wonder, that in a History wherein it may seem that I
ought to relate nothing but Actions passed, and Precepts concerning manners,
nevertheless Moses thought it most especially necessary, for him that will
either virtuously dispose his own life, or impose Laws to other men, to begin
with the knowledge of God; and after having attentively considered all his
Works, to strive as much as in him lies, to imitate his most perfect example,
and follow him with all diligence. For it is impossible, that a Lawgiver being
void of this contemplation, should have good sense; or that his writings should
be of any moment to induce them unto virtue, who should receive those Laws,
except before all things they learn, that God who is the Father, and Lord of
all, and that sees all, gives happy life unto those that follow him; and
contrariwise invironeth them with great calamities, who forsake the way of
virtue and righteousness. Moses therefore intending to instruct his Citizens in
Moses has taught us, and I have found written in the Holy Scriptures.


The Contents of the Chapters of the First Book.
1. The Creation of the World. Adam and Eve disobey the Command of God, and are
driven 2. Cain kills his Brother Abel. God banishes him for it. His Posterity
is as wicked as himself. The Virtues of Seth the other Son of Adam. 3. Of the
Posterity of Adam till the Deluge, from which God preserved Noah and his Family
in the Ark. 4. Of the Tower of Babylon, and the change of Tongues. 5. How
Noah's Posterity dispersed themselves thorough the whole World. 6. The
Descendants of Noah down to Jacob. The several Countries which they possessed.
7. How Abraham the Author of our Nation departed from the Land of the
Chaldeans, and dwelt in the Country of the Canaanites, which is now called
Judea. Abraham pressed by Famine, departed into Egypt; where having stayed
awhile, at last he returned back again. 9. The overthrow of the Sodomites by
the Assyrians. Lot is taken Prisoner. 10. Abraham parsueth the Assyrians, and
returns victorious. 11. The destruction of Sodom. 12. Of Ishmael, Abraham's
Son; and of the Arabians Posterity. 13. Of Isaac, Abraham's Legitimate Son. 14.
The death of Sarah, Abraham's Wife, Genesis 23. per totum. 15. How the Nation of
the Troglodytes descended from Chetura the Wife of Abraham. 16. Of Abraham's
death, Genesis 25. 7, 8. Isaac's Sons, Esau and Jacob, and of their Nativity and
Education, Genesis 25. 18. How Jacob fled into Mesopotamia for fear of his
Brother, Genesis 28. 19. Isaac dies, and is buried in Hebron, Genesis 35. 29.


CHAP. I.
The Creation of the World. Adam and Eve disobey the Command of God, and are
driven out of the earthly Paradise.
IN the Beginning God created Heaven and Earth. The year of the World, 1,
before Christ's Nativity, 3963.
Now the Earth, not being subject to sight, but covered with thick darkness,
and traversed with an Air coming from Genesis 1. 1. ad fin.
and the Light Day; calling the Morning the beginning of the Day, Hedio and
Ruffi^^, cap. 1.
and the Evening the time wherein we cease from Travel; and this was the first
Day which Moses in his language called a Day, and not the first Day: whereof at
this present I could give a sufficient reason; The creation of the world.
but for that in a particular Discourse I have promised to write of all such
things; The first day.
I will refer the declaration thereof to its convenient time and place. The
^econd day.
After this, on the second Day, God created the Heaven, and placed it above all
the World, having separated it from other things; and making it firm by the
means of a Cristalline matter, he endowed it with a quality moist and The third
day.
to the end the same might render the Earth fruitful. The third Day, he firmly
established the Earth, spreading the Sea round about the same; and the same
Day, he with a word caused all Plants and Seeds to spring upon the face of the
Earth. The fourth day.
The fourth Day, he embellished the Heavens, with the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars, ordaining them their motions and courses, by which the seasons orderly
ensuing might be distinguished. In the fifth Day, The fifth day.
he made all kind of living Creatures which dwell upon the face of the Earth,
as well those that swim in the deep Waters, as those that fly in the Air;
uniting them together by couples and pairs, to the end that each, in their
kind, might increase and multiply. The sixth day.
The sixth Day, he made all Four-footed Beasts, and distinguished them into Male
and Female: and in the same Day, he formed Man. So that Moses says, That the
World, Genesis 2. 2.
and all that is therein, was made in six Days, and that on the seventh Day,
God took rest, Sabbatum,
and ceased from his labor. By reason whereof, we likewise desist from Travel
on that Day, which we call the Sabbath, which in our language signifies Rest.

After the seventh day, Moses describes more particularly the original of Man,
and the Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 1.
in these terms; God framed Man of the dust of the earth, and breathed into him
a Spirit and Soul; Genesis 2. 19.
which Man was called Adam, an Hebrew word, signifying red, Genesis 3. 20.
because he was made of earth, which was red or yellow; for the natural earth,
The first naming of all creatures.
called Virgin-earth, is of that color. Then brought God all kind of living
Creatures before Adam, showing him as well the male as the female; on whom Adam
bestowed those names, which to this present time they retain. And seeing that
Adam had no female to accompany and live with him (for as yet there was no
Woman) and for that he thought it strange that all other living Creatures had
their companions: The year of the World, 1. before Christ's Nativity, 2963.
God took one of his ribs from him at such time as he slept, and of the same he
formed a Woman; who being brought before Adam, he did acknowledge that she was
made for him. Now in Hebrew Woman is called Isha, but this was called Eva,
which is as much as to say, The Mother of all Living. He declares also, that
God planted in the East a Garden, flourishing and adorned with all sorts of
Plants, Genesis 2. 21.
amongst which was the Tree of Life, and another the Tree of Knowledge, Eve the
mother of all living creatures.
by which was known both good and evil. And after he had brought Adam and his
Wife into this Garden, he commanded them to keep and cherish the Plants. Now
this Garden was watered by a River that environed it round about, 17. Paradise.
and divided it self into four Channels or Rivers. The four floods of Paradise.
The first called Phison (which name signifies abundance or multitude) flows
by the Land of India, and enters into the great Sea, and is by the Greeks
called Ganges. 10, 11, 13, 14. The first Phison or Ganges. (...).
The second called Euphrates, and in Hebrew Phora (that is to say, dispersion
or flower.) And the third called Tigris or Diglath (which signifies strait and
swift) Gehon, which is the fourth, runs through the Country of Egypt, Head.
Seth.
and signifies as much as coming from the East: the Greeks call it Nilus.

Now God commanded Adam and his Wife to eat of the fruits of all other Plants,
2. Euphrates.
but to abstain from that of Knowledge, 3. Tigris.
telling them, 4. Gehon, Nilus.
that at what time soever they should taste of the same, Hedio and Ruffinus,
cap. 3.
they should die the death. Now at that time, all living Creatures were at
accord one with another; but the Serpent, who was very tame toward Adam and
his Wife, Genesis 3. 1.
became inflamed with envy, The subtilty of the Serpent. 3, 4, 5.
for that he saw they should be happy, if they continued in the observation of
God's Commandments: and that contrariwise, they should cast themselves headlong
into ruin and destruction, if they should disobey the same. He therefore
maliciously persuaded the Woman to taste the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge,
God himself: and by this means he caused the Woman to fall, who had no regard
of the ordinance of God. For having her self tasted of this fruit, and finding
it pleasant and delicious in taste, 6. Adam and Eves fall.
she persuaded her Husband also to taste the same: whereupon they understood
that they were naked, and sought means to cover themselves: (for this fruit had
in it self the virtue to give understanding, and to quicken the mind.) Then
covered they themselves with Fig Leaves; 7.
which they put before their Privities, esteeming themselves more happy than
they were before, in that they now knew that which before they were ignorant
of. But when God came into the Garden, Adam (who before was accustomed 8, 9.
hid himself from his presence: but God asked him for what cause he fled and
shunned him at that time, whereas before he had taken pleasure to talk
familiarly with him? Adam knowing that he had transgressed the Ordinances and
Commandments of God, answered him not a word, but God spoke unto him after this
manner: God speaks unto Adam.
I had provided for you the means whereby you might have led your life without
any evil, or sense of misery; so that all whatsoever was requisite for
necessity or pleasure, 12. Adam asks pardon.
might have happened of it self unto you, by my only providence, without any
travel or care on your parts; which if you had well used, your life would have
been very lovely and very happy: Adam's punishment.
but you have scorned this mine Ordinance* and broken my Commandments. 13. Eves
punishment.
For in that thou art silent at this time, it proceeds respect, but of evil;
of which thou find thy self culpable. Adam excuses his sin as well as he
could, 17, 18. The Seed of the Woman (that is, Christ) shall bruise the
Serpent's head.
and prayed God not to be incensed against him, laying the fault of that which
had happened, upon his Wife, alleging that he had offended, by reason he was
deceived by her: and the Woman accused the Serpent. But God for his punishment,
because he had suffered himself to be overcome by the counsel of a Woman,
declared that the earth thenceforward never more of its own accord should bring
forth fruit; but only when they tilled it with the sweat of their countenance:
Genesis 3. 14, 15.
nor should it always yield all that was expected from it. The Serpent's
punishment.
And as touching Eve, he chastised her with Childbearing, and throes in
Travel; for that being her self deceived by the Serpent, she had drawn her
Husband by the same means into extreme misery. He took also from the Serpent
his speech, and Joseph's ignorance in understanding this place of Scripture.
by reason of the malice he had conceived against Adam; and he put venom on his
tongue, declaring him an enemy both to Man and Woman; whom head of the Serpent,
as well for that all the evil which chanced unto Men, 14.
proceeded from his head; as also in that being assaulted in that part, he is
most easily put to death. The year of the World, 1. before Christ's Nativity,
3963.
Moreover, having deprived him of his feet, he condemned him to slide and trail
himself along the earth. After God had ordained them to suffer these
punishments, he drove Adam and Eve out of the Garden of delights, into nanother
place.

CHAP. II.
Cain kills his Brother Abel. God banishes him for it: His Posterity is as
wicked as himself. The virtues of Seth the other Son of Adam.
Adam and Eve had two male-children, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 2.
the first whereof was called Cain (which signifies acquisition) and the second
was called Abel (which signifies mourning) they had also three Daughters. Genesis
4. v 1, 2.
These Brothers were of very different inclinations. Of Cain and Abel Brethren.
Abel the younger honored justice, and (supposing that God was present in all
his actions) he always and wholly fixed his thoughts on virtue: and his exercise
was keeping of sheep. But Cain (being a wicked Man, 2. The year of the World,
70. before Christ's Nativity, 894.
and addicted to unsatiable desire of profit) was he that first found out the
use of the Plough. He killed his Brother for the cause which ensues, Having
concluded among themselves to sacrifice unto God, Cain offered the fruits of
his labor, and planting; Abel presented milk, and the firstlings of his fold:
which sacrifice of his, was more acceptable to God, in that it rather consisted
of things produced of themselves by the order of nature, 3. The sacrifice of
Cain and Abel.
than that which Cains covetousness from nature. Hereupon Cain (being enraged
because his Brother Abel was more honored by God than himself, slew his
Brother; and having hidden his body out of sight, 4. Weak reason in Josephus.
he thought the murder would be concealed. But God well knowing the fact,
appeared to Cain, and questioned him concerning his Brother, what was become of
him, 5, 6, 7. Cain slew his Brother Abel.
for that for some days he had not seen him; whereas before they had been
always together. Cain (being troubled, and ignorant what answer to make unto
God) said at first that he wondered what was the cause his Brother was so long
absent: 8. The talk betwixt God and Cain.
but afterward being troubled that God continued the question, and more
closely pressed him; he said he was not his Brothers keeper, nor bound to take
care of his affairs. 9. 10, 11, 12.
Then God reproved and convicted Cain of murdering his Brother, Cain offered
sacrifice, and made request unto God, that it would please him to remit
somewhat of the severity of his justice against him. Yet did God curse him, and
threaten to punish his Posterity to the seventh Generation. Cain's banishment.
Then did he drive him and his Wife out of that Country: whereat Cain being
affrighted (for fear of being encountered and devoured by some Savage Beasts)
God commanded him to suspect no dangerous event for that cause, 14.
assuring him that he might safely travel through all Regions, 15.
without being either assaulted or seized by Savage Beasts: and having set his
mark upon him, by which he Cain (accompanied with his Wife) had traveled
through diverse Regions, he made his abode at Nais, 16. Cain is not bettered by
Gods chastisements.
and in that place had several Children. But he made not use of this
chastisement for his better amendment, but rather became worse and worse; for
he abandoned himself to all sensual pleasures, making it his sport to outrage
those with whom he conversed, filling his house with riches gotten by rapine
and violence: and gathering together other wicked and debauched Men, he taught
them to commit all sorts of crimes and impieties: he destroyed that simplicity
which Men before that time had used in their mutual societies, Measures and
Waights found out by Cain.
by the inventions of Measures and Weights; the ignorance whereof was the cause
that the life of Man was estranged from deceit: but instead free and plain
sincerity, Enos the first City.
he introduced fraud and deceit. He it was that first bounded the fields, and
built the first City, and made a Wall and a rampire, enforcing his Followers to
dwell therein. This City he named Enos, by the name of Enos his first begotten
Son. Jared was the Son of Enos; of Jared issued Malaleel, whose Son was
Methusala, 1^, 18, 20.
who begot Lamech, who had 77 Children by his two Wives, Sella and Ada; amongst
whom, Jobel the Son of Ada was the first that made Tents, and took delight to
lead a pastoral life; contenting himself with the same. Jubal his Brother
invented Music, Jubal inventes of Music.
and the Psaltery, and Harp. And as touching Thobel one of his Sons, by his
other Wife Sella, he surpassed all his other Brethren in courage, and bravely
managed the affairs of War, by which means he got Riches, and Means to maintain
his 21, 22.
He it was that first invented the art of Forging, and was Father to a Daughter
named Naama. But Lamech being well instructed in divine things, and foreseeing
that he should suffer punishment for the fratricide of Cain, he told it to his
two Wives.

So it was, that during the life of Adam himself, the successors of Cain were
most Ver. 23, 24.
teaching and imitating one another wickedness, the last of them proving
always the worst; The year of the World, 70, before Christ's Nativity, 2894.
so that they were strangely inflamed to follow War and Theft: and if perhaps
some of them were more remiss than others in committing Murders, and outrages;
yet were they rapacious enough to spoil and possess the goods and heritages of
other Men. But Adam the first Man made of Earth (for the History requires that
I should return to speak of him) after the death of Abel, and the flight of
Cain, earnestly desired to have Children; Cain the Father of hypocrites and evil
Men.
and accordingly he had many, being about the age of two hundred and thirty
years: besides which, after he had lived some seven hundred more, at last he
died; amongst whose Children was Seth. Now for that it were too long to speak
of all of them, I will only touch that which concerns Seth: 25. Adams years,
930.
He being nourished and trained by his Father to the years of discretion,
studied virtue, and left his descendants Heirs and followers of his sanctity:
who being all of them well born, Genesis 4. 26.
remained in the World free from all contention, Genesis 5, 3, 4, 5,
and lived happily: Seth the Son of Adam a virtuous Man.
so that it never happened that any of them in any sort did injury to any Man. To
these we owe the science of Astronomy, and all that which concerns the Beauty
and Order of the Heavens. And to the end that their inventions might not wear
out of the memories of Men, nor perish before they were perfectly known,
(insomuch as Adam had foretold them of the general destruction of all things
after two sorts, Two Pillars raised.
the one by the force of fire, and the other by the violence and abundance of
Waters) they made two pillars; the one of Brick, and the other of Stone; and
ingraved Brick should be abolished by the overflowings and rage of Waters, that
other of Stone might remain, and declare unto Men that which was imprinted
thereon for their instructions. That of Brick was destroyed by the deluge, but
the other of Stone is to be seen in the Country of Syna even to this present
day.

CHAP. III.
Of the Posterity of Adam till the Deluge, from which God preserved Noah and
his Family in the Ark.
IN this manner Mankind lived for seven Generations, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 6.
honoring one God the Lord Genesis 5. 6.
they degenerated from the ancient institutions of their forefathers, Those
whom Josephus names in this place Angels, Moses calls the Sons of God.
neither observing humane Laws, nor continuing their accustomed service of God;
and they that before industro^^sly exiercised themselves in virtue, afterward
with twice as zealous study followed wickedness; and grew at last to that
height of impiety, that they provoked Gods heavy displeasure against them. For
the Angels of God marrying with the Daughters of Seth's descendants, Genesis 6. 2.
produced a race of insolent People, contemners of all good, by reason of the
trust they had in their Forces; Heb. 11. 7.
and for their heinous actions not unlike the Giants which the Greeks mention
in their Fables. 2. Pet. 2. 7. 11. 13.
But Noah perplexed and extremely Noah departs into another Country 13.
Then God (who loved him for his justice) became so provoked with the malice
and corruption of the rest of Mankind, that he resolved to destroy all
Creatures whatsoever in the World, and to produce another new race innocent,
and repurged from all impiety: He abridged also the time of their life, so that
they lived not any more so long as they were wont, but only attained the term
of sixscore years; and he covered the Land with Waters, by which means all of
them 14. Noah's Ark.
only Noah escaped by the means and way which God taught him: He built an Ark
of four stages; in length three hundred Cubits; in breadth fifty: and in height
thirty: into this he entered with his Mother, his Wife, and his Children, and
their Wives, 15.
having provided himself of all things requisite both for their sustenance and
use: he closed also therein all sorts of living creatures, Genesis 7. 2, 7, 8.
two and two, male and female, for the conservation of every kind, and of some
of them seven couples. The sides of this Ark were strong, Noah's genealogy.
and the cover also; so that no water could pierce the same, and whatsoever
storm might come, The deluge.
it was able to resist it. Thus was Noah (by lineal descent, the tenth from
Adam) saved with all his household; for he was the Son of Lemech, whose Father
was Methusala the Son of Enos, the Son of Jared, the Son of Malaleel, Cainan,
who was the Son of Enos who was the Son of Seth, who was the Son of Adam. This
destruction happened in the six hundredth year of Noah's age (and the second
month, The year of the World, 1656. before Christ's Nativity, 1308.
which was called Dius by the Macedonians, and by the Hebrews Marsomane) for so
have the Egyptians distinguished the year, but Moses sets down Nisan for the
first month in his Chronicles, which is Xanthicus among the Macedonians (for
that in this month he brought the Israelites out of the thraldom of the
Egyptians;) Nisan or Zanthicus is April to us.
He made this Law therefore, that all things which appertain to divine service,
should take their beginning and reckoning from this month: but in respect of
civil matters, as Fairs and Markets appointed for Traffic, he observed the
ancient order of the year, beginning in December. Moses writes that the Deluge
began the seven and twentieth day of the second month in the year two thousand
two hundred fifty and six, 11.
after the Creation of the first Man Adam (which time is carefully Genesis 5 a v
3. ad finem.
in which the birth and death of great personages of that time are most exactly
set down.) This comparison does not exactly agree with the Hebrews, and the 70
Interpretrs.
At such time then as Adam was 230 years old, his Son Seth was born unto him;
and the same Adam lived 930 years. Seth about the age of 250 years, begat Enos,
who after he had lived 905 years, left the Government of his affairs to his Son
Cainan, whom he had begotten about the 190 year of his age. After that Cainan
had lived 910 years, he had his Son Malaleel, begotten by him in the 170 year
of his age. The said Malaleel having lived 195 years died, leaving his Son
Jared: Genesis 5. 24.
who at the age of 162 years, begat Enoch, Enochs death is not written in holy
Scriptures.
who lived 962 years. After Enoch, succeeded his Son Methusala, begotten about
the age of 162 years, at such time as the said Enochs Father was yet alive: and
after that Enoch had lived 365 years, he was taken Methusala the Son of Enoch,
in the year of his age 187, had Lamech for his Son, who lived 782 years, and to
whom he left the Sovereignty, having held the same 969 years. And Lamech after
he had governed 707 years, declared his Son Noah Governor, at such time as the
said Lamech had lived 182; which Noah lived the space of 900 years.

All these years calculated into one sum, make the number of 2256; yet to
perfect this account, we ought not to seek out the decease of the Personages
(for they lived in the same time that their Children and successors did:) Genesis
7. 4.
but the only thing we are to observe, is their births. In the Geek copy, and
Moses are 40 days ^v. 17. ad 20.
Now God having given the sign, and the rain falling for the space forty days
together, the waters rose and overflowed the whole earth fourteen Cubits, (so
that there was no means of flight, or place of refuge for any.) But as soon as
the rain was ceased, The Latin Josephus, 90.
the water began to decrease by little and little for the space of one hundred
and fifty days, Genesis 8. 1.
till the 27 day of the seventh month; when Noah perceiving that the Ark was on
ground upon the top of a certain Mountain of the Country of Armenia he opened
the window, and seeing the earth a little discover it self round about he
conceived some better hope, and began to comfort himself. Some few days after,
when the water was ebbed somewhat more, Noah sends a Raven out of the Ark.
he sent out a Raven (desiring to know if the rest of the earth were delivered
from the waters, and whether without danger he might go out of the Ark. 8.
But the Raven finding the earth still covered with water, returned unto Noah:
who the seventh day after sent out a Dove to discover the state of the earth,
which returned bemired, and bearing in its mouth an Olive branch: whereby Noah
perceived that the earth was freed from the Deluge; and having still waited
seven days more, Noah forsakes the Ark, and sacrifices to God.
he set at liberty all living Creatures that were in the Ark. But as soon as
himself, his Wife, and his Family came forth, he offered sacrifice unto God,
and Feasted, and rejoiced, 16, 17.
both he and all his household. The Armenians in their language have called the
place where Noah descended, Apobaterion (which signifies a descent) and in
that place, even at this present, the Inhabitants of the Country show some
remainers of the Ark. All Historians, even the Barbarians, have made mention of
this Deluge, and of the Ark: amongst whom is Berosus the Caldean, who setting
down the occurrances Some say likewise that a certain part of this Ark is still
seen in Armenia, upon the Mountain of the Cordaeans, and that some persons have
brought from thence some of the Pitch wherewith it was Calked, which the Men of
that place are wont to use instead of a preservative against enchantment.
Hierome the Egyptian also (who has written of the Antiquities of the
Phoenicians) has made mention of this matter: Nicholas Damascen of Noah's Ark.
as also Mnaseus, with diverse others. Nicholas of Damascus likewise in his
Ninety sixth Book speaks hereof after this manner: Above the Region of the
Mineans there is a great Mountain in Armenia called Baris, in which it is
reported that diverse retired themselves for safety, during the time of the
Deluge, and there escaped: and that a certain Man born on an Ark, arrived on
the highest top of that Mountain; and that certain pieces of that bottom had
been kept there a long while. It Is probable this is the Man of whom Moses the
Law giver of the Jews makes mention. But Noah fearing lest God (having
condemned all Men to a general perdition) should every year overflow the earth
after this manner offered burnt-sacrifice unto God, beseeching him, that
hereafter he would The year of the World, 1687. before Christ's Nativity, 2307.
and that no such great calamity might arrive, by which all living Creatures
might come in danger to be utterly destroyed and exterminated; but that having
inflicted deserved punishment on the wicked, he would spare the Innocent, whom
in his mercy he had preserved from the past danger; otherwise they should be
more miserable, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 6.
than those that had been buried in the waters, if having beheld with trembling
so strange a desolation they should not be preserved from the first, but to
perish by a second. Genesis 8. 20.
He prayed therefore that he would be pleased to accept of his sacrifice, Noah
pra^eth God that he will drown the earth no more.
and in his mercy vouchsafe not to conceive hereafter a ruinous hate and
displeasure against the earth; to the end that he and his posterity might by
their labors Till it, and building them Cities might possess the same in
peace, wanting none of those commodities

Noah having in this sort finished his requests, 12. God hears Noah's Prayer.
God (who loved him for the uprightness of his heart) granted him his request,
and said he had not been the Author of their deaths who were drowned, Nota.
but that they themselves by their own wickedness had procured those
punishments due upon themselves. Hedi and Ruffinus, cap. 8. Man is the author
of his death, not God.
For had he desired that they should be extinguished, he would not have brought
them into the World. For better it is, not to grant life, than to destroy those
to whom it is given. But (said God) through their contempt of my service and
graces, Gods covenant with Noah.
they have enforced me to destroy them with the rigor of this vengeance:
hereafter I will not so severely pursue and punish their iniquities, The year
of the World, 2007, before Christ's Nativi^y, 1949.
especially for thy sake: And if hereafter at any time I shall send any
tempest, fear not (how great and hideous soever the storms be) for there shall
be no more Deluge of water upon the earth. In the mean time I command you to
keep your hands innocent from murder, and all manslaughter; and to punish
those that commit wickedness. The Rainbow the sign of atonement between God and
Noah, Genesis 9. 11, 12, 14. 15.
I leave the use of all other living Creatures to your sustenance or service;
in as much as I have made you Lords over them all, as well those that breathe
upon the face of the earth, as those that swim in the waters, and such as
inhabit and fly in the air: but you shall not eat any blood, in as much as
therein consists the soul and life of living Creatures. Hedio and Ruffinus,
cap. 8.
And I declare unto you, that I will forbear to draw the shafts of my
displeasure against Men; And I will give you the Rainbow for a sign of the
Noah's age 950. years.


Noah lived after the Deluge 350 years; and having spent all the rest of his
life in happiness* he died after he had lived in the world nine hundred and
fifty years. Neither is there cause why any Man (comparing this our present age
and the shortness thereof, with the long life of the Ancients) should think
that false which I have said: neither follows it, that because our present
life extends not to such a term and continuance of years, therefore they of
the former World attained not the age and long life which we publish of them.
For they being beloved of God, and newly created by him, using also a kind of
nutriment agreeing with their natures, and proper to prolong their lives, it is
no absurd thing to suppose that their lives were of that continuance, Why they
in tim^s past lived longer than we do.
considering that God gave them long life, to the end that they should teach
virtue, and should conveniently practice those things which they had invented,
the Sciences of Astronomy and Geometry: the demonstrations whereof they never
had attained, except they had lived at the least six hundred years. For the
great year is accomplished by that number of years: The great year.
whereof all they bear me witness, who either Greeks or Barbarians, have
written ancient Histories. For both Manethon (who has written the History of
Egypt) and Berosus, who registered the acts and affairs of the Chaldeans
(together with Mochus, Hestiaeus, Hierom of Egypt, who writ those of the
Phoenicians) and others, accord with me in that which I have said. Hesiodus
also, Hecataeus, Hellanicus, and Acusilas, Ephorus, and Nicolaus do declare,
that they of the first World lived one thousand years. Notwithstanding Genesis 9.
18* 19.
as best likes him.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Tower of Babylon, and the change of Tongues.
NOah had three Sons, The year of the World, 1790, before Christ's Nativity,
2174.
Sem, Japhet, and Cham, born one hundred years before the Deluge. Genesis 10. per
totum.
These first descended from the Mountains into the Plains, and there made their
habitation: which when other Men perceived (who for fear of the Deluge had fled
the Plains, N^ah's three Sons.
and for that cause were loath to forsake the Mountains) they gathered courage,
God commanded the posterity of Noah to inhabit the ^^^th.
and persuaded themselves to do the like: and the Plain where they dwelt was
called S^^^ar. And whereas they were commanded by God, that (by reason of the
from him, and his bounty, and presuming that their force was the only cause of
their abundance) did not obey him, Ver. 8, 9.
but rather suspected that God sought to betray them, to the end that being
thus divided, he might the more easily destroy them; Nimrod the Grandson of
Cham one of Noah's Sons, incited them in this sort to mock and contemn God. He
put them in the head that they should not believe that their prosperity
proceeded from God, but that they ought to attribute Chap. 11. 2, 3, 4.
giving them to understand, that if God should once more threaten a Deluge, he
would protect them against him, and to that end build a Tower, to whose top the
water should not reach, and also revenge the death of their Predecessors. The
stupid People gave ear to these persuasions of Nimrod, supposing it to be
pusillanimity in themselves, if they should obey God. For which cause they
began to build the Tower with their uttermost industry; neither was there any
one idle in all that work: yea, so great was the number of Laborers, that in a
little time the work was raised to a height beyond all expectation. burnt
Brick, (...)
and cimented and joined with a bituminous mortar, to the end that it might
become the stronger.

God seeing their madness, yet condemned them not to a general extermination
(by reason that they had made no profit by their example, The confusion of
Tongues.
who perished in the first Deluge) but made them mutiny the one against another
by changing of their tongue; Ver. 6, 7, 8.
so that by reason of their diversity of language, they could not understand
one another. The place where this Tower was builded, 9.
is at this present called Babylon (by reason of the confusion of tongues that
first began in that place) for Babel in Hebrew signifies confusion. Of this
Tower, and the diversity of languages, Sibylla makes mention in these words: At
such Sibyls prophecy of the Tower of Babel.
they built a most high Tower, as if they meant by the same to mount up into
Heaven; but the gods raised winds, and overthrew the Tower, and sent amongst
the Builders distinct and several languages; whence it came to pass, that the
City which was afterward built in the same place was called Babylon. But as
touching the field of Senaar where Babylon stands, Hestiaeus testifies after
this manner: It is said of those sacrificers, who escaped from this great
disorder, that they took the Sacred Relics of Jupiter the Conqueror, and came
into Senaar of Babylon.

CHAP. V.
How Noah's Posterity dispersed themselves through the whole World.
Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. ^.
so that both the Seacoasts, and the Middle-land were replenished with
Inhabitants. Some there were also, The year of the World, 1790, before Christ's
Nativity, 2174.
who passing the Sea in ships and vessels, first peopled the Islands. And there
are some Nations likewise, who at this day retain the names which in times past
were imposed on them, some others have changed them. Others are altered into
names more familiar and known to the Neighbors, deriving them from the Greeks
the Authors of such Titles. For they in latter times having grown to great name
and power, The Names of Regions and Nations.
appropriated the ancient glory to themselves, in giving names unto the Nations
which they subdued, as if they

CHAP. VI.
The Descendants of Noah down to Jacob. The several Countries which they
possessed.
NOw they, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 11.
in honor of whom the Nations receive their first names, were the children of
the sons of Noah. Genesis 10. a ver. 10. ad finem.
Japhet the son of Noah had seven children, who extended themselves in Asia,
The (...) descended from Gomar.
from the mountains of Taurus and Amanus, to the River of Tanais; and in Europe
unto Gades, occupying the Countries which they first met with, not before
inhabited, and calling their several Lands by their own name; Gomar was the
founder of the Gomarians, The Progeny of Japhet.
whom the Greeks now call Galatians: Magog dwelt amongst those, who Magogians,
Noah's first begotten Son.
and by the Greeks Scythians. Of Mad^^ (the first begotten son of Japhet)
issued the Madians, whom the Greeks name Medes; and of Javan his other son, the
Jonians, all the race of the Greeks took their original. Thobelus gave name
likewise to the Theobelians, who at this day are called Iberians* Meschus was
Meschinians, who were since named Cappadocians; for they show even at this day
a token of their ancient name, to wit, the City of Masaca, which testifies
that this Nation has been so called. There Is gave name to the Therians, who
were under his Government, and whom the Greeks called Thracians. All these
Nations took their original from the seven sons of Japhet. The Progeny of the
Sons of Gomar.
But of the three sons which Gomar had, Aschanaxes gave name to the
Aschanaxians (at this day termed Rheginians by the Greeks;) Riphates gave name
to the Riphatinians, called at this day Paphlagonians; Tygranes to the
Tygraneans, The Progeny of the Sons of Javan.
who by the Greeks are called Phrygians. Also Javan the son of Japhet, had
three sons; of whom Alisus gave name to the Alisians, who at this present day
are the Aetolians, over whom he commanded. Tharsus St. Paul 's Country, Acts 9.
Tharsus gave name to the Tharsians, which was the ancient Cilicians, as
appears by the name of their Renowned and Metropolitan City Tharsis; Chetim
obtained the Isle of Cherine, called at this day Cyprus, (whence it is that not
only all Islands, but also all places on the Seacoast are by the Hebrews
called Cethim) witness one of the Cities of Cyprus, Whence grew the change of
names.
which has had the fortune to preserve its ancient name; being called Citium,
by those that give Greek names to all things, a word not very much varying from
Cethim. These Nations were founded by the sons and young children of Japhet.
But I will first publish one thing which perhaps is unknown to the Greeks, and
then prosecute my purposed Narration which I have omitted; that is, that these
names have been changed after the manner of the Greeks, to the end their
pronuntiation might be more easy and agreeable. For we never alter the
terminations of words.

But the sons of Cham possessed Syria, and all the Region that abutteth on the
Mountains of Amanus and Libanus; Of the Sons of Cham, and their Progeny.
extending their Empire even as far as the Ocean, and giving names to the same.
Which names are partly wholly abolished, and partly so changed, that they are
very hard to be known. There are only the Aethiopians, of whom Chus, one of
Cham's four sons, was Prince, that have always preserved their name; and not
only in that very Country, but also through all Asia they are called Chuseans
to this day. The Mesreans descended from Mesre, Libya, or Africa.
have also preserved their name: for we call Egypt Mesree, and the Egyptians
Mesreans. Phut likewise established the Colonies of Libya, and called the
Inhabitants thereof according to his name, Phutians; and there is a River in
the Country of Mauritania, which has the same name, of which it is manifest
that diverse Greek Histories make mention, as also of the Country near
adjoining, which they call the Country of Phut, but it has since changed its
name by the means of one Libis one of the sons of Misraim; (why it is called
Africa, I will hereafter signify unto you.) As touching Canaan the fourth son
of Cham, The Progeny of the Chananeans.
he dwelt in the Country at this day called Judaea, and called it the Country
of Canaan, according to his own name. Chus, who was the eldest son of Cham, had
six sons; Sabas, Prince of the Sabeans; Evilas, Prince of the Evileans, The
year of the World, 1790. before Christ's Nativity, 2174.
at this day called Getulians; Sabathes, Prince of the Sabatheans, whom the
Greeks name Astabarians; Sabactes, Prince of the Sabactians; and Romus, Prince
of the Romeans; who had also two sons, of whom Juda dwelt in the Country of
the Indians, amongst those that are called Hesperians in Aethiopia, and Sabaeus
founded the Sabeans.

As for Nimrod the sixth son of Chus, Nabrodes or N^mbroth.
he settled his Colony upon the Confines of Babylon, and tyrannized there, as is
before declared.

All the eight sons of Misraim occupied all the Country from Gaza unto Egypt;
Palestine, so named of Philestine.
but only one of the eight named Philistin, has left his name to the Country
which he possessed, for the Greeks call a part thereof Palestine. As touching
the rest, Lom, Enam and Labim, Nethem, Phetrosim, Chestem, Chreesene and
Chepthom, we know neither of their actions, nor of their names, except Labim,
who planted a Colony in Lybia, and gave his name to it: For the Aethiopians
(whereof hereafter we shall make mention) overthrew their Cities.

Canaan also had eleven sons, The Children of Canaan.
amongst whom Sidonius built and named Sidon (a City in Phoenicia,) and Amathus
built Amath, which at this day the Inhabitants call Amatha, though the
Macedonians call it Epiphania (which signifies famous) from the name of one of
its Princes; Arudeus possessed the Isles of Arudus, and Ariceus built the City
of Arce, upon mount Libanus. As for the other seven, Eveus, Cheteus, Jebuseus,
Eucleus, Sineus, Samarcus and Gorgeseus; there is no memory remaining of them
in Sacred Scriptures, but only their names: For the Hebrews razed their Cities
upon the occasions which I am going to relate.

After the Deluge, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 13.
when the earth was established in its first estate, Noah gave himself to
Tillage, Genesis 9. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
and planted Vineyards; and when the Fruit thereof was ripe (and he had pressed
and made Wine thereof) he drank, and banquetted after he had done sacrifice;
being thereby made drunk, and overpressed with sleep, he lay discovered in a
most unseemly Cham his younger son beheld, he scornfully discovered it to his
Brothers; who being ashamed, covered their Father's nakedness with Noah is made
drunk, lies naked, and is scorned, and curses him that derideth him.
Which fact of his coming to the knowledge of Noah, he wished all felicity to
the two other; and as touching Cham (out of a fatherly tenderness) he cursed
him not, but only his posterity after him; who accordingly were punished for the
sin of their Forefather, as we shall show hereafter.

Sem the third son of Noah had five sons, who inhabited the Country of Asia,
beginning at Euphrates, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 14.
and extending to the Indian Ocean. For Elimis the eldest left the Elimeans or
Elamites for his Successors, whence proceeded the Persians. Assure the second
built the City of Ninive, Genesis 7. 1. and gave his Subjects the name of
Assyrians (who were rich above all the rest.) Of the Sons of Sem the third Son
of Noah, and of theirs, and Abraham's Progeny.
Arphaxad the third, named those of his command Arphaxadians, who at this day
are called Chaldeans. Aram the fourth, had the Arameans (whom the Greeks call
Syrians;) Ludis the fifth, came the Ludeans, who at this day are called
Lydians. Of those four sons which Aram had, Uses dwelt in the Region of
Trachonites, and built the City of Damascus (situate between Palestine and
that part of Syria, which is surnamed Caeler or hollow.) Otrus obtained
Armenia; Gether, Bactria. Misas was father to the Mezaneans, whose Country is
called at this day the valley of Pasin. Sale, Arphaxad's son, was Heber's
father, from whose name in times past the Hebrews were denominated: Heber begat
Jucta and Phaleg, The original of the Hebrews.
who was so called, for that he was born at such time as Lands came to be
divided: for Phaleg in Hebrew signifies Division. They that follow, were the
sons of Jucta: Elmodad, Saleph, Azermoth, Izrais, Edoram, Vzal, Dael, Ebal,
Ebemael, Sapham, Ophir, Evilas, and Jobel; who occupied some parcel of that
Region which was between Cophen a River India, and the hither Syria. Hitherto
have we spoken of the Progeny of Sem, now we come to speak of the Hebrews.
Abraham's Genealogy.
Phaleg the son of Heber begat Ragaus, by whom was begot Seruch, from whom
Nachor descended, and from Nachor Thares, who was Abraham's father, the tenth
in account from Noah, and born 292 years after the Deluge. For Thares being 70
years old, begat Abraham. Nachor at 120 years of age, begat Thares. Nachor was
born to Seruch, when he was about the years of 132 of his life, and Ragaus
begat Seruch, when he was 130 years old; and about those years Phaleg begat
Ragaus. But Heber at 34 years of age, begat Phaleg: (himself begotten by Sela,
when he was 135 years old;) which Sela was begotten by Arphaxad, when he was
135 years of age. And Arphaxad was the son of Sem, and Grandson of Noah, whom
he begat two years after the Deluge. Abraham had two Nachor and Aram; of whom
Aram left Lot for his son, and Sara and Melcha for his daughters, and
afterward dyed in the land of Canaan in a City called Vr of the Chaldees,
where his Sepulcher is to be seen even at this day. His daughters were married,
Melcha to Nachor, The year of the World, 2950. before Christ's Nativity, 2014.
and Sara to Abraham. But Thares growing weary of Chaldaea after the death of
his son Aram, he and his Family transported themselves into Charan a City of
Mesopotamia; in which place they buried Thares, when he had lived the space of
250 years. For, about this time the life of man was abridged, and grew more
short, until the time of Moses: The term of man's life about this term, 120.
when the space of man's life limited by God himself was 120 years; to which
term Moses attained. Nachor had eight children by Melcha his wife: Vx, Baux,
Manuel, Zacham, Azam, Phaleg, Jadelphus, and Bathuel, (who were the legitimate
sons of Nachor.) Tabaeus and Gadan, Thavan and Macham were begotten by him on
his Concubine Ruma. To Bathuel one of the legitimate sons of Nachor, was born a
daughter named Rebecca, and a son called Laban.

CHAP. VII.
How Abraham, Genesis 12. 1. ad. 4.
the Author of our Nation, departed from the Land of the Chaldeans, and dwelt
in the Country of the Canaanites, which is now called Judea.
ABraham having no Issue, adopted Lot the son of Aram's brother, and brother to
Sara his wife: The year of the World, 2204* before Chri(...) Nativity, 1940.
he departed out of the Country of Chaldee, when he was 75 years old, (having
had commandment from God to depart thence into Canaan) in which Country Hedio
and Ruffinus, cap. 15.
For this cause he was supposed to surpass all men in virtue, The wisdom of
Abraham.
and was he that first undertook to rectify the received erroneous opinions of
men touching the Deity. He first of all did most manifestly preach, and prove,
Abraham the first Preacher of the Word.
That there was but one God, Governor and Maker of all things; and that
otherwise if any thing conferred or furthered our Felicity, it happened unto us
not by our own workings, but by his holy Will. And this he observed and proved
by what comes to pass both in the Earth and the Sea, as also by those things
which he saw daily occur by the influences of the Sun, the Moon, and other
Stars: namely, that there is a certain thanksgiving should wholly be ascribed
to him. For which advices and counsels of his, Chaldeans and Mesopotamians
began to mutiny against him, he thought it expedient to forsake that Country,
and follow the Will and Command of God, and so went and dwelt at Canaan; where
being seated, he built an Altar, and sacrificed unto God. Berosus, Berosus.
amongst other things, makes mention of our Father Abraham, although he names
him not, when he speaks after this manner: After the Deluge, and during the
tenth Generation, there dwelt amongst the Chaldeans, a most just, excellent,
and upright man, and exercised in the knowledge of the Celestial bodies.
Hecataeus.
But Hecataeus makes not a bare mention of him; but has left a Volume which he
has written concerning him. And as touching Nicolaus Damascenus, Nicolaus
Damascenus.
hear what he says in the Fourth Book of his Histories: Abraham reigned in
Damascus (where he was a stranger) whither he arrived with his Army from a
Country situate above Babylon, called Chaldaea; and a little while after
(departing out of that Region) he went and dwelt with his People in a Country
at that time called Canaan, and at this day Judaea, and his Posterity
multiplied therein. In another Treatise I will recite that which is reported of
him: The name of Abraham even at this day, is honorable in the Country of
Damascus, Abraham's house.
and there is a Village to be seen, which bears his name, and is called
Abraham's house.

CHAP. VIII.
Abraham, pressed by Famine, departed into Egypt; where having stayed awhile,
at last he returned back again.
AFter this (when Famine had invaded the land of Canaan) Abraham had
intelligence that the Egyptians abounded in all plenty, The year of the World,
2026, before Christ's Nativity, 1938.
and decreed with himself to retire thither: purposing also to confer with
their Priests concerning their Notions of God, and either to follow their
belief, if they were better grounded in the same than himself, or to rectify
them, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 16.
if his judgment were better grounded than theirs. He led with him his wife
Sara: and understanding that the Egyptians were much addicted to women, to the
end the King might not put him to death, Genesis 12. 10.
in order to enjoy his wife Sara, Genesis 12. 13. 15.
who was very beautiful, he devised this excuse, to say, That she was his
sister; charging her, that if the matter came in question, she should not fail,
but confirm the same. But no sooner Egypt, but the like fortune encountered
them, as Abraham had before suspected: The lust of the Egyptians. 16, 17.
for the beauty of his wife was suddenly published in every place. For which
cause, Pharaoh the King of that Nation, (desirous to see that with his eyes,
which he had heard with his ears) he sought for, sent and lusted after her: but
God withstood this his unbridled lust, by afflicting the King's Subjects with a
Plague, and his State by Sedition. Whereupon taking counsel of the Priests,
what remedy might be used, and means sought to appease the Divine Majesty; 18,
19.
they answered him, That the cause of their afflictions, proceeded from his
intending violence to the stranger's wife: Whereat being much affrighted, the
King first questioneth with the woman, what she was, and who her companion
should be? and at last resolved of the truth, he excused himself to Abraham,
saying, he supposed sister, not his wife; and that his purpose was not to offer
injury, but seek alliance: and giving him a great sum of money, he gave him
leave to confer with the most excellent and learned Priests among the
Egyptians. Abraham taught the Egyptians Religion and Arts.
By this conference he grew into great estimation, in regard of his virtues:
for whereas that Nation was divided into different Sects and Opinions, and
through mutual contempt and division, were incensed one against another, he
declared, That all their different Opinions in Religion, were most vain, and
void of all truth. For these his disputations he was held in great regard among
them, and esteemed for a most wise and excellent personage; not only in well
understanding, Abraham an ^^cellent Astronomer.
but also in expressing and persuading that which he undertook to teach. He
imparted to them the Sciences of Arithmetic and Astronomy: for before Abraham
came Egypt, the Egyptians were altogether ignorant of those Sciences; but he
first brought them from Chaldaea into Egypt, and from thence are they derived
to the Greeks. As soon as he returned into Canaan, Genesis 13. 1.
he divided the Country with Lot: and for that there grew a contention betwixt
their shepherds, The division of the fields between Abraham and Lot.
(touching the bounds of the pastures where they fed their Cattle) he gave Lot
the choice and election of that Country which best pleased him, retaining unto
himself that which was left. Thus pitching his Tents toward a mountain near
the City Hebron, (which was by seven years more ancient than Tanis in Egypt) he
dwelt there. But Lot chose the Plain near the River of Jordan, not far from
Sodom; which in those days was a goodly City: but at this present, by the just
judgment of God, is utterly destroyed; so that no memory remains thereof. The
causes of


The overthrow of the Sodomites by the Assyrians. Lot is taken Prisoner.
AT this time the Assyrians were Lords over all Asia; and the estate of Sodom
flourished in all affluence, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 17.
riches, and multitude of People, and the Country was governed by five Kings;
Genesis 14.
Ballas, Bareas, Senabarus, Symoborus, and Bale^ (each particularly seized of
his Province and Kingdom.) Five Kings of Sodom.
Against these, the Assyrians encamped themselves; and having divided their
Army into four parts, (under the conduct of four Generals) they waged battle
with them; in which the Assyrians attaining the day, Sodom: who (after they had
for twelve years space performed their duty, and paid their tribute) in the
thirteenth year revolted from them. Whereupon the Assyrians levied a new Army
against them, under the conduct and command of Marphad, The year of the Wo^^d,
2031. before Ch^ists Nativity, 1933.
Arioch Chodollogomar, and Thargal, who sacked all Syria, and extinguished the
Posterity of the Giants. And drawing near to Sodom, they encamped near the
bituminous Pits (which at that time were in that valley:) and which after Sodom
was destroyed, became a Lake, which (by reason of the bituminous matter that
floateth in the same) is called Asphaltites, that is to say, bituminous. Of
this Lake hereafter we will speak somewhat. The Lake of Asphaltites.
But the Sodomites encountering with the Assyrians, there was a terrible Battle
fought, wherein many of the Sodomites perished and many Lot, who came thither
to assist them.

CHAP. X.
Abraham pursues the Assyrians, The year of the World. 2031. before Christ's
Nativity, 1934.
and returns victorious.
ABraham hearing of these things, and moved both with the taking of his Cousin
Lot, as also with the slaughter of his Friends and Neighbors, presently
prepared himself with all his Followers, Hedio and Ruf^finus, chap. 18.
to succor them: and used such diligence in pursuit of the Assyrians, that the
fifth night after he encountered them near Dan, which is one of the sources of
Jordan: Genesis 14. 14, 15, 16.
Where surprising them on the sudden, (disordered with Wine, and Soba of
Damascus; manifesting hereby, On what Victory depends.
that Victory consists not in the multitude, but rather in the courage of
those that fight; and that a few generous hearts are more worth always than a
faint-hearted multitude: for he had not with him above three hundred and
eighteen of his household Servants, and three of his Friends, to defeat this
great Army. The few Assyrians that escaped out of this slaughter by flight,
returned to their houses with ignominy.

As soon as Abraham had rescued his Nephew Lot, and those other prisoners of
Sodom which were taken by the Assyrians, v. 18, 19, 20.
he returned into his Country, and met in his way with the King of Sodom (in a
place called The Kings field) where also he was entertained Solyma* Abraham
brings back both Lot and the Sodomites that were prisoners.
called Melchisedech (which is as much as to say, The just King:) for in truth
he was no less; but was held worthy, by reason of his justice, in all men's
opinion, to sacrifice as the Priest of the most high God. Solyma in process of
time was called Jerusalem. The Kings field.
This Melchisedech friendly entertained Abraham and all his Followers, Solyma
was afterward called Jerusalem.
not suffering them to want any thing that was fit for their sustenance; he
feasted him at his own Table, highly praised him, and rendered public thanks to
the great God, for that he had vouchsafed to grant him victory. Abraham on the
other side presented him with the tenths of his spoils. Melchisedech the just
King, 20.
As for the King of Sodom he remitted all the prey that was taken, and only
required to be possessed of those Captives which were of the Country: which
condition Abraham accepted not, answering, That he Eschol; 22, 23, 24.
and the two other, Ennerus and Mambres* For this cause God praised Abraham,
saying, Thou shall not want the reward that is due unto thee for thy valiant
Acts. To which he answered, And what good shall I reap of this recompense, if I
have not an heir to possess it after my decease? Genesis 15. 1. 2, 3 4 5.
(for as yet he had no issue.) Then did God promise him a Son, God promises
Abraham a Son.
whose posterity should be so multiplied, that they might in number equal the
Stars of Heaven: which when he understood, he offered sacrifice unto God,
according to the Commandment which he had received: He took a Heifer of three
years old, a Goat of three years, and a ^am of three years, and a Turtle, and a
Pigeon; 9.
all which he divided in twain, as he was commanded, the Birds only excepted.
But before the Altar was prepared (at such time as the Fowls hovered about to
have part of the blood of those Beasts which were sacrificed) he heard a voice
from Heaven which told him, God promises Abraham a progeny, that should many
years have ill neighbors of the Egyptians.
That his progeny should suffer great oppression in Egypt for the space four
hundred years; but should at last obtain the Victory over their Enemies: and
having conquered the Canaanites, they should be Lords and Possessors of their
Countries and Cities. Abraham at that time dwelt near to the Oak that was
called Ogis, in the Country of Canaan, near to the City of Hebron. There being
much grieved that his Wife conceived not, he besought God to give him a Son.
And God not only confirmed to him his former promise of a Son, but assured him
of all the other blessings which he had promised him, Genesis 16. 1, 2, 3. Sara
brings Agar, her handmaid, to Abraham's bed.
when he commanded him to leave Mesopotamia. At that time Sara, by the
commandment of God, caused Agar one of her handmaids, who was an Egyptian born,
to accompany with her husband, to the end he might have issue by her: But Agar,
as soon as she saw that she had conceived, began to contemn Sara, aspiring to
principality, Agar contemns Sara.
For which cause, Abraham delivered her unto his Wife, to punish her: which
Agar perceiving, decreed to fly, in that she was afraid of punishment,
beseeching God to have mercy on her: and as she traveled on her way through the
Desert, the Angel of God appeared unto her, commanding her to return to her
Mistress, The year of the World, 2034. before Christ's Nativity, 1930.
and assuring her that if hereafter she were more modest she should be better
entreated; having justly fallen into those miseries, by reason she had proudly
and insolently behaved herself toward her Mistress. He added moreover, that if
she disobeyed God, and wandered any further, she should die the death: The
promise of Ishmael.
but if she returned from whence she came, she should be the Mother of a Son
who should one day be King of that Country where she then was.

To this commandment of God Agar submitted her self with all obedience, 9, 10.
and returning back again to her Mistress, she obtained pardon at her hands,
and after a while brought forth Ishmael, which is as much as to say, is Heard
by God, because God had heard the Mothers prayers. 16, 17.
Ishmael was born to Abraham when he was fourscore and six years old: but in
the fourscore and nineteenth year of his age God appeared unto him, and told
him, that he should have a Son by Sara, charging him to call him Isaac, and
giving him to understand, Isaac promised, Genesis 17. 1, 2, etc. ad finem:
that great Nations and Kings should issue from his loins, who by force of
Arms should conquer all the Country of Canaan, from Sidon even unto Egypt.
Commanding him also, that his Posterity should be circumcised in their
privities, and that this circumcision should be made the eighth day after the
birth, by reason that he Abraham's Posterity intermixed with other Nations. But
hereafter I will declare another cause of our circumcision. Abraham also asked
counsel of God touching Ishmael, whether he should live or no; and God told
him, that he should flourish many years, and that he should become a Father of
many worthy Nations. Then gave Abraham thanks unto God, and presently
circumcised himself, and his Son Ishmael, with all his Family; and Ishmael at
that time was thirteen years old, but Abraham about fourscore and nineteen
years of age.

CHAP. XI.
The destruction of Sodom.
ABout that time the inhabitants of Sodom became immeasurably proud, Genesis 18.
by reason of their affluence, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 19.
prosperity, and great riches; and committed outrages against men, and
impieties against God: The sins of the Sodomites.
in such manner as they had forgotten the benefits which they had received at
his hands, hating strangers, and giving up themselves to the Practice of
unnatural and abominable Lusts. Whereat God being displeased, decreed to punish
their intolerable Pride, to ruin their City from the foundations, and in such
sort to make desolate their Country, that from thence forward it should
neither nourish, plant, nor bring forth Fruit. Abraham entertaineth Angels.
After God had pronounced this sentence against the Sodomites, Abraham (as he
sat under the Oak at Mambres before the door of his Tent) beheld three Angels,
and supposing them to be Men and Strangers, he arose and saluted them; and
approaching near unto them, v. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5.
he desired them that they would accept of his entertainment, and lodge with
him. Whereunto when they had condescended, he commanded his Servants to bake
them bread of the finest flower; and having killed and roasted a Calf, he set
it before them (as they sat under the oak) which it seemed to him they did
eat; but they enquired of him where Sarah his Wife was? to whom he answered,
that she was within on the Tent. They told him then that they would return
again, and that they should find her a Mother. But when his Wife smiled
thereat, and said that it was impossible for her to bear Children, The year of
the World, 2084. before Christ's Nativity, 1916.
especially in that her self was at that time ninety years old, and her Husband
an hundred; they discovered themselves, Sodom. Which Abraham heard, 9, 10.
he was sorry for the Sodomites, and arising, besought God that he would not
destroy both the just and the unjust together. 12, 16.
To whom God gave this answer, that there was not one just Man among the
Sodomites; 17. ad 23.
and that if he might but find ten, The Angel promised Abraham that he shall
have a Son and foretells the destruction of Sodem.
he would spare the City from punishment. Whereupon Abraham held his peace, and
the Angels entered into Sodom: where they were no sooner arrived, but Lot
invited them to take their lodging in his house, (for he was a Man much given
to hospitality, which he had learnt from the example of Abraham.) But the
Sodomites perceiving that those young Men which were entered Lots house, were
of excellent beauty, began to offer outrage and villainy to their persons: Genesis
19. 1.
notwithstanding that Lot exhorted them to forbear, The Angels enter Lot's
house.
and not to offer villainy to his guests, but in some sort to have a respect to
his his Daughters to use at their pleasure. v. 3, 4.
But he prevailed nothing with them; whereupon God was in such wise provoked by
their iniquity that he struck them with blindness so that they could not find
the gate to enter into Lots house, 5, 6.
and condemned the Sodomites to a general perdition. 7, 8.
In order whereunto he commanded Lot to remove out of the City, verse 11.
with his Wife, The year of the World, 2948. before Christ's Nativity, 1916.
and his two Daughters who were as yet unmarried, and their betrothed Husbands;
but these last, although forewarned by him, contemned Lots advice and held him
for a dotard. Then did God shoot the arrows of his vengeance upon the City,
burning it, and all the Inhabitants therein: and desolating by the same fire
all the Countries round about; 12, 13, 14, 24.
in such sort as has already been declared by me in the History Jews. The
Sodomites are blinded.
But Lots Wife, as they retired thence, looking back toward the City, Lot and
his family are saved.
and more curiously beholding the destruction thereof, contrary to the
commandment of God, was transformed into a Pillar of Salt, which is to be seen,
even until this day. 26.
Lot himself and his Daughters fled, and dwelt in a little Country which the
fire had spared, Lot fled to Zoar*
called Zoar, (which in Hebrew signifies little:) In this place (which was
void of Men, 30 ad 35.
and scant of Victuals) Lot dwelt a long time, leading a solitary and poor
life; and his Daughters supposing that all Mankind was extingushed upon the
earth, subtly circumventing their Father, lay with him when he least
suspected it. 36, 37, 38.
By this their approachment, they bare him two Sons; the elder a Son named
Moab, (which is as much as to say, The interpretation of the names of Moab and
Ammon.
of my Father) this is he that was the Father of the Moabites, Ammon, (which
signifies the Son of my Race or kind) from whom the Ammonites descended, and
both these two Nations inhabit the Country of Coelosyria. In this sort Lot
escaped from the burning of Sodom.

As for Abraham, Hedio and Ruffinus chap. 20.
he went and dwelt in Gerar, in the Country of Palestine, leading with him his
Wife Sara in quality of his sister; Genesis 20. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
(using the same subtilty which before he had practiced for fear of the
Egyptians) for he feared Abimelech the King of that Country, Abimelech
surprised with the love of Sara.
who falling in love of Sara would have ravished her, had he not been hindered
by a most grievous sickness, which God inflicted upon him; so that being out of
all hope of recovery, at such time as he slept, there appeared unto him a
vision, which told him that he should take heed lest he offered any outrage to
the strangers Wife, Abraham thenceforward be of good cheer, promising him that
the honor of his Wife had remained inviolated. This said, he dismissed Abraham
by the counsel of his Friends; and told him, that he needed not to suspect his
Wife, by reason she had suffered no villainy: Assuring him, that God had care of
her, and that he delivered her in safety to him, (being to that end protected
by his mighty power) and in confirmation thereof he called God to record, and
the woman's conscience, vowing that he would not have taken her from him if he
had known she had been Married: moreover, he 11, 12, 13.
or if he listed to depart, he promised him Guides and all other things for
which he came into his Country. Abraham answered him, that he had in no sort
dissembled with him in calling his Wife his Sister, for that she was his
Brothers Daughter; and that he thought he could not safely travel through his
Country, except he had used this subtilty; avowing moreover, that he was sorry
to have been the cause of his sickness which had befaln him; that he heartily
wished his health, and was ready to abide with him.

Whereupon Abimelech bestowed on him both Lands and Money, and accorded to
converse with him in all uprightness, and without offer of offense, and made a
Covenant Bersabe, (that is to say, the Pit of swearing or Covenant) which name
that place retains until this day. Not long after, Abraham had a Son by Sara
his Wife, according as God had promised him, and he called his name Isaac,
(which in the Hebrew tongue signifies laughter) because Sara laughed 14, 15,
16.
having in her self no likelihood of conceiving, Bersabe the pit of swearing.
by reason she was stricken in years. For at that time she was ninety years
old, and Abraham one hundred when the child was born; and on the eighth day
after his birth he was circumcised; which custom is yet continued amongst the
Jews who circumcise on the eighth day. Genesis 21, 1, 2, 3* Isaac laughter.


CHAP. XII.
Of Ishmael, The year of the World, 2048. before Christ's Nativity, 1916.
Abraham's Son; and of the Arabians Posterity.
BUt the Arabians circumcise not till the age of thirteen years: because
Ishmael their Abraham's Son by the Concubine, was circumcised in the thirteenth
year after he was born. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 12.
Of which Ishmael it behooves to speak more exactly in this place. Sara loved
Ishmael (begotten on her Servant Agar) from the beginning, Genesis 21. 9, 10.
with no less affection than if he had been her own Son; The Jews were wont to
circumcise on the eighth day.
so that he was brought up as Abraham's heir. But after she had brought forth
Isaac, she thought it no more requisite that Ishmael should be brought up with
her Son, because he was elder, and might after his Fathers decease, become the
Master. The Arabians not before 13. years.
She incited Abraham therefore to send both him and his Mother to some other
place: but at first he gave no ear to Sara's request, thinking it more than
barbarous cruelty, Abraham banisheth Ishmael and Agar.
to drive away a tender Child and his Mother, destitute of all necessaries. At
length by the Commandment of God he listened to his Wifes counsel, and Pitcher
of Water and Bread, he commanded them to go thither, whither their necessity
should drive them. And when their Victuals failed them, and their Water was
consumed, she laid the Child, being faint and weak, under an Oak; and to the
end that in her presence he should not breathe his last, she went a little way
from him. At that time an Angel of God appeared unto her, The Angel of God
meets with Agar*
showing her a Fountain hard by that place, and charging her to look to the
careful education of her Child; because that by the conservation of Ishmael,
she was to expect great happiness. Upon these promises she took comfort, and
falling into the company of shepherds; she by their bounty was relieved in her
distress. The twelve Sons of Ishmael.


Afterward, when Ishmael had attained Man's estate, he Married a Wife of the
Nation of the Egyptians, (from whence his Mother had her original) by whom he
had twelve Sons: Genesis 25.
namely, Nahaioth, Cedar, Abdeel, Edumas, Massam, Memas, Masmes, Chodam,
Theman, Jetur, The Region of Nabathaea*
Naphes, Calmas, (all which inhabit the Lands which are between Euphrates and
the Red Sea, the name of which Country is Nabathaea.) These are they that
began and made famous the Nation of the Arabians, as well in respect of their
prowess, as of the dignity of Abraham.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Isaac, Abraham's Legitimate Son.
AS touching Isaac, Abraham loved him with an entire and Fatherly affection, as
his only begotten Son born in his old age by the goodness of God. Genesis 22. 1, 2.
The Child also addicting himself unto all virtue, The year of the World, 2074:
before Christ's Nativity, 1890.
careful to honor his Father and Mother, and studious of the service of God,
invited both his parents the rather to affect and love him. So that Abraham was
very desirous to forsake this present life, provided that he might leave behind
him all the goods which he had, unto his Son; which through the mercy of God he
happily effected. Whereupon (under trial and conformity of his faith) God
appeared unto him, and reckoned up all the benefits which he had bestowed on
him; how he had granted him victory over his enemies, and how he had established
and blessed him Isaac; 1, 2.
commanding him to conduct him to the Mountain of Morea, and there to sacrifice
him. In doing whereof, he should manifest the desire he had to serve him, (in
preferring that which was agreeable to God, before the life of his Son.)
Abraham supposing that it was no ways lawful to disobey God, but that he ought
to submit himself to his will, 3. Abraham's obedience.
(as to him by whose providence all things had their being) said nothing to his
Wife, concerning that which God had commanded him, neither how he had
determined the death of his Son; neither did he make it known to any of his
houshold-servants, lest they might have diverted him from his resolution. He
therefore took his Son Isaac, with two Servants, (loading an Ass with such
things as were requisite for sacrifice) and traveled toward the Mountain, his
Servants attending him for two days; and on the third day, as soon as he
perceived the Mountain, Son, The year of the World, 2074. before Christ's
Nativity, 1890.
he ascended up the Mountain (upon which afterward King David appointed that
the Temple should be builded.) They carried with them also the rest of those
things which were requisite for sacrifice, (save only the Beast that was to be
offered:) About this time, Isaac was five and twenty years old, and did himself
prepare the Altar, and enquired of his Father what he should offer, v. 7, 8.
considering that as yet they had no sheep for sacrifice. Isaac was 25. years
old when he should have been sacrificed.
Abraham answered him that God would furnish them, (being of power sufficient
to give Men that in abundance, whereof they have need, and to deprive them of
that they have, and whereof they held themselves possessed) if he were well
pleased with their sacrifice: Now as soon as the Altar was made ready, and the
Wood prepared and 9. Abraham's oration at such time as his Son should have been
sacrificed.
and all things in readiness) he addressed his speech unto his Son, in this
manner. My Son, I begged thee of God with very earnest Prayers; and ever since
thou were born into the world, I have intermitted no care and diligence in
thine education; neither have I thought that any thing could make me more
happy, than at departing out of this World, to see thee at man's estate, and to
leave thee the Heir and Lord of all my substance: But since it has pleased
God, that I should be thy Father, and that the same God likewise now thinks
good that I should destroy thee, generously submit, and be contented to be
sacrificed to him: For in so doing I fulfill the Commandments of God, who
requires at our hands that we do him this honor, for the favors which he
has bestowed upon us in assisting us, both in War and Peace. Since therefore
being born, thou art to die, I deem it reasonable, that in regard it seems
good unto God that thou depart out of this life, (not by sickness, nor by War,
nor by any other inconvenience, that naturally happens unto Men) but by being
offered in sacrifice to him by thine own Father, that thou render thy Soul
unto him in the midst of Prayers, and the celebration of this sacrifice, to the
end he may receive and seat thee near himself: Thou shall then be the comfort
of mine old age, (which is the cause for which I have nourished thee) if thou
procure for me assistance of God instead of that which I ought to receive from
thee. Isaac's answer*
Here Isaac with a noble heart (like the gracious Son of so godly a Father)
heard all which his Father said with great contentment, and answered, that he
would rather never have been born, then once disobey the Ordinance of God, and
of his Father; or show himself averse to submit his will to both their
pleasures, considering that if his Father only should command the same, he
should do very ill if he disobeyed him: which said, he leapt upon the Altar,
and offered himself to the slaughter. Which had surely happened at that instant,
if God had not hindered it; 10, 11.
for with a loud voice he called Abraham by his name, commanding him not to
kill his Son, and telling him that he had not given him that commandment,
because he took pleasure in humane blood, neither for that by such impiety he
would deprive him of that Son, of whom it was his pleasure to make him the
Father; but that by this act he intended to prove his affection, to see whether
being commanded such a thing, he would be obedient; and for that he had made
trial of his faith and readiness, and his disinteressed piety, he did not
repent him of that good he had done unto him; that he would never forget to
have care of him, and his race, whenever he should pray unto 12, 13.
and that when the course of his years were happily ended, he should leave a
great dominion to those of his children which should be good and virtuous. He
told him moreover, that he would multiply his race in diverse Nations, and that
he would bestow great benefits upon them, and that the memory of the chief of
his offspring should be envyed of all Men for their greatness. When God had
spoken after this manner, 16, 17.
it pleased him on the sudden (no Man knows how) to cause a Ram to appear
thereabouts for a sacrifice. God presents a Ram to Abraham to sacrifice in
stead of Isaac.
And thus (being delivered from all evils and inconveniences beyond their
expectations, after they had heard so many promises of so many blessings) they
embraced one another, and celebrated the sacrifice; which done, they returned
toward Sara in safety, and passed the remainder of their lives in happiness,
The year of the World 2087. before Christ's Nativity 1878.
God giving them his blessing in whatsoever they undertook.

CHAP. XIV.
The death of Sara, Abraham's Wife. Genesis 23. per totum.
NOt long after, Sara died; after she lived one hundred twenty and seven years;
and was Buried in Hebron; (where the Canaanites freely offered a place for
Burial;) Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 2^.
yet Abraham chose rather to buy a place to bury in, The age of Sara 127.
of one Ephrem a Citizen of Hebron, for four hundred sicles; and there the
Monuments both of himself and his posterity are built.

CHAP. XV.

AFter this Abraham married Chetura, by whom he had six Children, strong in
travel, and excellent in wisdom: namely Zembranes, Jazar, M^dar, Madian,
Lusobac, and Sus, The original of Troglodytes.
who likewise had Sons; Sus had Sabacan, and Dadanes. Of Dadanes issued
Latusimus, As^urus, Luures. The Children of Madin were Epha, Ophres, Anochus,
Ebidas, Eldas. All these Children and their successors, according to Abraham's
advice, gathered and established the Colonies which possessed the Country of
the Troglodytes, and all the Country of Arabia the Happy, whose confines
extend even unto the Red Sea. Some report that this Ophres conducted an Army
into Libya, and possessed the same; and that his successors (making their abode
in that Country) called it by the name of Africa. Libya called Africa,
Alexander Polyhistor.
Which opinion is confirmed by Alexander Polyhistor, who writes after this
manner. Cleodemus the Prophet, who is also called Malchus, and writ the History
of the Jews (after the example of Moses their Lawgiver) says, that of Chetura
there were diverse Children born unto Abraham, and he names three by their
names: to wit, Apher, and Japher, and that of Surim the Syrians took their
name: of the two others, Apher, and Japher, the City of Afra, and the Country
of Africa take their names. That they warred under the conduct of Hercules in
Libya against Antaeus; and how Hercules having taken Ophra his Daughter to his
Wife, begot of her Dedor, who was Father to Sophon, from whom those Barbarians
that are called Sophaces have taken their name.

Now Abraham thinking fit to provide a Wife for Isaac his Son, who was almost
forty years old, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 4.
sent the eldest Servant of his Family to demand in Marriage, Rebecca the
Daughter of Bathuel, who was the Son of Nachor his Brother, for Isaac, and
bound him to the performance thereof with an oath (by causing him to lay his
hand under his thigh.) Or 24. 1, 2, 3, 4.
He sent also rare presents unto them, Isaac marries Rebecca.
such as were seldom seen in those parts: The Servant The manner of swearing
among the an^ient Jews. 10.
was long upon the way, (because that in Wintertime it is troublesome to
travel through Mesopotamia, by reason of the deep bogs, and in Summer for want
of Water) besides the robberies of the Country, which Strangers and Travelers
can hardly escape, except they stand upon their Guard, and have convoy. At
length he arrived at a City called Carras; and being in the Suburbs of the
same, The year of the World, 2809. before Christ's Nativity 1875.
he beheld diverse young Maidens that went to fetch Water; at which sight he
prayed to God, that if the Marriage were pleasing in his sight, he might find
Rebecca amongst them, for whose cause Abraham had sent him thither to require
her in Marriage for his Son: and that he might know her by this sign, 12. 13,
14.
that asking all the rest for Water, they should refuse him, and she only
satisfy him. With these thoughts he approached the Well, and 15, 16, 17, 18.
which they must bear unto their houses, and not lavishly bestow on others:
whereupon one amongst them reproving the rest for that discourtesie which they
used toward the stranger; saying, that they had never been conversant amongst
Men, that refused to give him Water that requested it; she gave him Drink with
great kindness. This made him conceive a good hope of all his business yet
being further desirous to know the event of the matter, he praised the
courtesy of Rebecca, who had not refused to travel in her own person to
satisfy his necessity; asking her of what Parents she was, terming them happy
that had such a Daughter; praying God that it might please him to grant them
the good hap to Rebecca made no difficulty to tell him the names of her
Parents, 22. 23.
(the better to gratify him) neither concealed she her own, The year of the
World, 2809. before the Nativity of Christ, 1875.
but answered in this sort, I am called, said she, Rebecca, my Father was named
Bathuel, and is long since dead. Laban is my Brother, who, together with my
Mother, has care of all our Family. Which when he understood, he rejoiced at
all that had happened unto him, and was comforted with those things which he
heard, perceiving manifestly how God had prospered his journey. Whereupon
drawing out a jewel, (with certain other ornaments, Rebecca grows acquainted
with Abraham's Servant.
such as Virgins take delight to wear) he offered them unto the Maid, telling
her that he gave her these presents, in requital of the kindness

To this Rebecca answered, that he had reason to conceive a good opinion of her
Parents humanity, but yet he did in some sort prejudice, them in suspecting
their liberality, The talk which Abraham's Servant had with Rebecca.
and according to their affection. Yet first (said she) I will certify my
Brother Laban hereof, and afterward conduct you to our house: which done, she
led him into their Tent, commanding her Brother Laban's Servants to take care
of his Camels; and for himself, 30, 31, 32, 33.
he was entertained at her Brother Laban's Table.

When Supper was past, 34, 35, 37.
he spoke both to the Brother and Mother of the Virgin after this manner:
Abraham the Son of Thares is your cousin; For, (said he, addressing to the
Mother) Nachor the grandfather of your Children, was Abraham's Brother, by one
and the same Father and Mother. He now sends me unto you, desiring you to
give this Virgin for Wife to his only Son and Heir of all his substance: The
year of the World, 2124. before Christ's Nativity, 1840.
whom although he might the Maid and your house. For, at such time as I drew
near the City, and beheld many Virgins going to fetch Water, I besought God
that I might light upon this Maiden, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap 28.
and he vouchsafed me my desire: ratify therefore on your part this Marriage
favored by Gods providence; and honor Abraham in granting your consent to
this your Daughters Marriage, Genesis 24.
which I am sent to request at your hands, with most entire affection. Now
they, in that they both allowed a thing so advantageous, 58, 59, 60.
and Isaac married her, being already in possession of all his Fathers goods,
by reason that the other Sons of Abraham were already departed to establish
their Colonies in other Provinces.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Abraham's death, Genesis 24. 7, 8.
A Few days after Isaac's Marriage Abraham deceased, a Man full of virtue to
his last end, Abraham died after he had lived 175. years.
and honored by God (according to that entire love he has to virtue) Hebron
near his Wife Sara, by his Sons Isaac and Ishmael.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Isaac's Sons, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 26.
Esau and Jacob, and of their Nativity and Education, Genesis 25.
AFter the death of Abraham, Genesis 25. 21, 22, 23, 24.
Rebecca (Isaac's Wife) became big with Child, in an extraordinary manner; and
the time of her reckoning being near at hand, Isaac was sore troubled, and
sought counsel at Gods hands: who answered him, that Rebecca should bring forth
Twins, and that of those two Sons, two Nations should be verse 24, 25.
the eldest of which was very Hairy all over his body; The year of the World
2124. before Christ's Nativity 1840.
and as he came out of his Mothers Womb, his younger Brother held him by the
Heel; the Father loved the elder, who was called Esau and Seir, by reason of
his Hair, (which the Hebrews call Seir in their language) but the younger who
was called Jacob, was dearly loved by his Mother.

Now it happened that a great Famine reigned in the Land of Canaan, Isaac
resolved to retire himself to Egypt, Isaac came unto Gerar. Genesis 26. 1, 2.
by reason of the plenty of that Country, but he went and dwelt at Gerar,
according as God had commanded: In which place King Abimelech received Abraham
his Father and him.) At first therefore he showed him great signs of
Friendship, v. 6.
but afterward, the envy he had conceived, hindered him from persisting in the
same; Abimelech expels Isaac, being moved thereunto by envy.
for perceiving that God was favorable unto Isaac, and had an especial care
over him, he drove him out of his Country. He retired not far from Gerar to a
place called Pharan, that is to say, The Valley, and as he there dig'd to find
out Springs of Water, Fauces.
Abimelech's Shepherds came and set upon him, 13, 14, 15, 16.
and hindered him in such sort as he could not finish his purpose; and for that
he purposely retired from them, they supposed they had gotten the Victory.
Shortly after, when he began to dig in another place, other Shepherds of
Abimelech outraged Rooboth, which signifies large. As for the other two, he
called the first of them Escon strife: 19, 20, 21.
and the other Sienna, which signifies Hostility,

Thus increased he daily more and more both in power and riches. 26, 27, 28, 29.
But Abimelech supposing that his affluence would be many ways hurtful unto
him, and remembering that he had not faithfully entertained Friendship with him,
but in some sort given occasion of suspicion, by means of some heard measure;
fearing least hereafter the injuries fresh in memory, should more distract him
than their old and ancient plighted Friendship, Abimelech renews friendship
with Isaac. 30, 31, 32, 33.
and misdoubting his revenge, he repaired unto him, and contracted a new League
of amity with him, having with him one of his chiefest Captains, as an Arbiter
between them, by whose means he obtained whatsoever he required: so courteous
was Isaac, and so ready in memory of his Fathers old covenant to forgive new
injuries. So Abimelech Esau one of the two Sons of Isaac, having attained the
age of forty years, took two Wives, Ada the Daughtr of Edom, Esa^ his Wives 34,
35.
and Alibama the Daughter of Esebion, two Princes of the Canaanites, (and that
of his own authority, without his Fathers advice or privity, who would not have
consented, had the matter been remitted unto him, because he held it
inconvenient to mix and join him, or his, in affinity with any dwellers or
inhabitants of the Country.) This notwithstanding, he would not displease his
Son by commanding him to put away his Wives, but determined with himself to
conceal and keep the matter silent.

When Isaac was grown old and wholly deprived of his sight, Genesis 27. 3, 4, 5.
he called Esau his Son, and told him that though through his blindness he
could not see the daylight, Isaac sends Esau on Hunting.
nor The year of the World, 2186. before Christ's Nativity, 1778.
and that after his repast, he would pray to God that it would please him to be
assistant unto him all his lifetime, and be a comforter and aid unto him.
Since he could not better employ the little time that he had to live, than in
imploring the favor of God for him. 6, 7, 8, ad 30.
Hereupon Esau went a Hunting; but Rebecca in the mean time (desirous that
Isaac's Blessing should light upon her Son Jacob) contrary to her Husbands
intent and mind, Jacob by his Mothers counsel steals his Brothers Blessing.
commanded him to go and kill a Kid, and prepare a repast for his Father. Jacob
being obsequious and obedient to his Mother in all things, obeyed her command,
and as soon as the meat was ready, he wrapped his The year of the World 2186.
before Christ's Nativity, 1778.
hoping by the Hairiness thereof, to make his Father believe that he was Esau.
For being his Twin Brother, he resembled him in all things, except in this
thing only; wherefore fearing lest he should be surprised in his subtilty,
before his Father Isaac had finished his prayers, and instead of his Blessings
he might be laden with his Curses, in this dress he presented the Meat unto
his Father. But Isaac perceiving some difference in his voice, from that of his
Brother, called his Son, who stretching out his hands unto him covered with the
Kids Skins, Thou art (says he) more like unto Jacob in thy voice; but by thy
Hairiness, thou seem unto me to be Esau. Thus suspecting no deceit, and
having already eaten, he addressed himself to pray, and called upon God,
saying, O Eternal Lord, maker of all Creatures, thou have promised great Esau.
Scarce had he finished his Prayers, but Esau returned from Hunting, which
though Isaac perceived, he was no ways moved with displeasure, v. 30, ad 42.
but held himself silent. Esau besought him that he might obtain as much as he
Esau required a Blessing.
but Isaac denied him, in that he had bestowed all his Blessings upon Jacob:
for which cause Esau lamented and wept. His Father (moved by his tears)
foretold him that he should excel in Hunting, in force of Body, in Arms, and
other such exercises, whereby he should purchase immortal Glory, both to
himself and his posterity; yet notwithstanding that he should be his Brothers
Vassal. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 27.
Now for that Jacob feared lest his Brother should seek to be revenged of him
for robbing him of his Fathers Blessing, he was by his Mothers means delivered
from this danger. For she persuaded her Husband to send Jacob to take a Wife
near Allied unto her, out of Mesopotamia. Esau at that time Married another
Wife called Bassemath the Daughter of Ishmael; knowing that Isaac was not well
pleased with his former alliance with the Canaanites; v. 42. ad fine^.
for which Bassemath, whom afterward he loved more entirely than any of his
other Wives.


How Jacob fled into Mesopotamia for fear of his Brother, Genesis 28.
BUt Jacob being sent into Mesopotamia by his Mother, in order to Marry the
Daughter of Laban her Brother, Genesis 28.
(whereunto Isaac consented through the counsel of his Wife) passed through the
Country of Canaan. And for that there was a declared and open enmity betwixt
Isaac's People, and the inhabitants of Canaan, he would not take up his lodging
amongst them, but lay abroad in the fields, resting his head upon stones, which
he had heaped together in stead of a Pillow: 10, 11, ad 19.
and during the time of his rest, this vision Jacob's Ladder*
It seemed unto him that he saw a Ladder, that reached from the earth, up unto
Heaven, on the steps whereof there descended certain persons more excellent to
look on, than the ordinary part of humane kind, and on the top thereof God
manifestly appeared, and calling him by his name, spoke unto him after this
manner: Jacob, God speaks unto Jacob.
Thou art the Son of a good Father, and descended from a Grandfather renowned
and famous for his great virtue; thou must not therefore be daunted, or
dismayed by thy present travels, but rather be encouraged with the hope of a
future happiness. For by mine assistance thou shall be blessed, and endowed
with many benefits: For I am he that brought Abraham hither, from the Country
of Mesopotamia, at such time as he was driven away from thence; I have also
made thy Father happy, and 20. Jacob voweth a sacrifice unto God, and calls
the place Bethel, which is the house of God.
Let not therefore any danger dismay thee, nor travel discomfort thee: for
besides all this, whatsoever thou shall undertake, I will not cease to assist
thee in it. These things did God foretell unto Jacob, who greatly rejoicing at
that which he had seen, and that which had been declared to him, anointed the
Stones on which he had rested his head, The year of the World, 2186. before
Christ's Nativ,ty, 1778.
offering unto God the tenth of all his goods. And as for the place where the
vision appeared unto him, he called it by the name of Bethel, which in the
Hebrew tongue signifies the house of God. Continuing then his journey into
Mesopotamia, he traveled so long, till at last he arrived at Charran: and
having met in the Suburbs of the City with certain shepherds and young Men,
accompanied with young Maidens, Genesis 29. 1, 2* ad 9.
sitting near to a certain Fountain, he drew near unto them, desiring them to
give him drink; Jacob arriveth at Charran in Mesopotamia, among his Mothers
Kindred.
and falling in discourse with them, he asked them, Whether they knew one that
was called Laban, and whether he were yet alive? All of them answered, Jacob
was inquisitive after her Father: who rejoicing after the manner of young
Maidens, asked him what he was, and whence he came, and what affair had brought
him thither, wishing she had the means to supply whatsoever his necessities
required. v. 9, ad 12.
Jacob being moved, not so much by the courtesy and Kindred, as by her beauty,
Jacob's talk with Rachel. Rachels excellent Beauty.
which was very extraordinary, said unto her: If thou art the Daughter of
Laban, Abraham, Aran, and Nachor, were Thares Sons; Bathuel, thy Grand father,
was Nachors Son; Isaac, my Father, was the Son of Abraham; and Sara, the
Daughter of Aran. There is yet a nearer and dearer relation between us: for
Rebecca, my Mother, is Sister unto Laban thy Father, born of one Father and
Mother; so that we are Cousins: and therefore am I come at this present to
salute you, and renew that ancient love which our alliance requires at our
hands. But she remembering all those things which her Father was wont to report
and discourse of Rebecca, and knowing, that her Parents were desirous to hear
some news from her, wept for joy, and embracing the young Man, said unto him:
Thou bring a most desired and great pleasure to my Father and all his This
said, she brought him to Laban; where, being acknowledged by his Uncle, he both
v. 12. ad 23. Jacob 's talk with Laban.
and brought him great contentment, by his unexpected access unto them. Some
days after, Laban told him, that he took so much contentment in his presence,
The year of the World, 103. before Christ's Nativity, 1771*
that he could not express it in words; and desired him to manifest the cause
that had induced him to leave his Father and Mother in their old age, when they
had most need of him; and he promised him all assistance and favor in
whatsoever case he had to make use of him. Whereupon Jacob discoursed unto him
the whole matter; that Isaac had two Sons, Esau and himself: that his Brother
(because by his Mothers contrivance, he had defrauded him of his Fathers
Blessing) sought to kill him, as the ravisher of that principality from him
that was destinated unto him by God, and the intercepter of his Fathers other
intentions; that this, with his mothers command, Laban promising to him
whatsoever humanity he could desire, (as well in respect of their common
ancestors, as for the love he bare unto his Mother; toward whom, although she
were absent he would express his good affection, in showing himself well
affected toward him that was there present:) he told him then, that he would
give him the charge of his flock, and make him Master over all his shepherds;
and that when he thought good to return back again to his Friends, he should
depart with such rewards and honors as might well beseem a Friend so nearly
allied unto him. v. 23, ad 26. Jacob, for recom^ence, requires Rachel for his
Wife.
Which when Jacob understood, he answered, That he would willingly Labans
service, and that his devoir toward him would be a delight to himself: but
that in lieu of his labors, he required Rachel to Wife: who deserved his
esteem for her virtue, and particularly for her goodness wherewith she had
brought him thither: declaring, that the love which he bare unto her, was the
cause why he used those speeches. The year of the World 2103. before the
Nativity of Christ, 1771.
Laban (being greatly delighted and contented with this his discourse) granted
him his consent to the Marriage, telling him, that he could not have wished for
a better Son-in-Law: but with condition that he should sojourn a while with
him, for that he was no ways minded to send his Daughter among the Canaanites:
and that it repented him, that, by reason of Marriage, his Sister had been
carried into so far a Country. Jacob accepted the condition, and covenanted to
abide 22. Jacob instead of Rachel, lies with Leah*
and Jacob expected the contented possession of his love, as was promised him,
Laban prepared a nuptial feast: and when night drew on, and Jacob least
suspected, he brought his Daughter Leah less fair in face, 23.
and elder in years, and laid her in his Bed. Jacob deceived by the darkness,
and for that he had drunk liberally, lay with her: but the day after
discovering the deceit, he complained hereof to Laban, who asked him pardon,
alleging that he had not brought in Leah with intent to deceive him, 27, ad 35,
but that the custom of the Country, (which forbids to Marry the younger
before the elder) compelled him thereunto: yet that the Rachel too, on
condition to serve him yet seven years more. Herewith Jacob was pacified, and
suffered himself to be persuaded, (out of the love which he bear to Rachel;)
and when the other seven years were expired, he Married Rachel. Now these
Sisters had two Maid Servants which their Father had given them: Lea's Maid was
called Zelpha, and Rachel's, Bala; they were no Slaves, but only Subjects. Leah
lived in great grief, to see that Jacob bare greater affection to her Sister,
than to her self, bethinking her oftentimes, that if she could have Children,
she should be better esteemed and loved by her husband, for which cause she
continually besought Almighty God, that it would please him to give her issue:
whereupon it happened that God gave her a Son, and Jacobs affection was turned
toward Ruben, that is to say, the Son of Vision, because she had obtained him
through the mercy of God.

After him she bare three other Children; Simeon, (whose name signifies, that
God had heard her) Levi, The explication and names of Jacob's Sons.
(which is as much as to say the firmness of society) and last of all Juda,
(which signifies thanksgiving.) At that time Rachel fearing lest she should
lose part of her Husbands love, by reason of the fruitfulness of her Sister;
caused her Maid Bala to lie with him; Genesis 30.
by whom he had a Son called Dan, (that is to say, the judgment of God;)
Rachel brings in Jacob to Ba^a.
and after him Nepthalim, (which signifies ingenious;) by reason that she used
subtilty to requite her Sisters fruitfulness. Leah hereupon used the same
artifice, and gave her Maid Zelpha to Jacob, Leah brings in Zelpha.
of whom he begat Gad, (which signifies come by chance;) Genesis 30. 14* 15, 16.
and after him Asar, (that is to say, benificent) because that Leah was more
honored for the multitude of her Progeny.

Ruben, The year of the World, 2206. before Christ's Nativity, 1758.
the eldest of all the Sons of Lea, brought his Mother apples of Mandrake,
which when Rachel perceived, she desired her to give her part thereof, for that
she longed to taste of the same: whereunto Lea would yield no consent,
replying, That she ought to content her self in that she had the advantage in
Jacobs love. Rachel to mollify the heart of her sister told her, That she
would be content that Jacob should lie with her that night; which Jacob
accordingly did and Lea once more had children, namely Isachar, Genesis 30. 8.
(which signifies Come by hire) and Zabulon, (which imports a pledge of good
will) besides whom, 24.
she had a daughter also called Dinah. Not long after this Rachel lay with
Jacob, and brought forth a son, who was called Joseph, (which signifies an
addition.) During all this time, (which was for the space of twenty years)
Jacob Genesis 31. 1, 2, 3.
but afterward he thought good (accompanied with his Wives) to return to his
own Inheritance: Jacob with his Wives, children and flocks, flee without his
Fathers privacy.
which when his Father-in-law perceived, he would in no sort give his consent
thereunto; for which cause, he covertly determined to forsake him. To this
intent he made trial of his Wives, to see how they were affected toward his
flight; 19. Rachel bears away with her, her Fathers household gods.
who heartned him by their consents: insomuch that Rachel having stolen the
images of those gods which were honored in that Country, fled away with her
Sister, and the two Maids, and all their Children, with the rest of all their
substance. Jacob also drove away the moity of the Cattle, without the knowledge
of Laban. 23.
Rachel also bare with her the images of the gods, although she had been taught
by Jacob to contemn them, and yield them no honor: but The year of the World,
2200. before Christ's Nativity, 1758.
that if Laban pursued and overtook them, by restoring them, she might obtain
his pardon. But Laban a day after the departure of Jacob and his Wives, had
notice thereof, and being therewith much troubled, he pursued after them,
intending to assault them by force, and on the seventh day he overtook them
upon a certain hill where they sat down to take their rest, 24. Laban pursues
Jacob, but God delivers him from his purpose.
in that it was evening: but God appearing to him in a dream, commanded him to
use no violence, neither toward his Son-in-law, nor his Daughters; but rather
to listen to a peaceable accord betwixt himself and Jacob: assuring him that if
in contempt of Jacobs weakness he should lift up his arm to assail him, that he
himself would join with Jacob to protect him.

The next day, 26. Labans accusation against Jacob.
Laban having received this command from God, called Jacob unto him Jacob was
come to him, he began to accuse him; alleging, that he had received him into
his house, at such time as he came unto him being poor and naked of all means,
and had given him great abundance of Goods. I have (says he) given thee my
Daughters in marriage, hoping by that means to increase thy love toward me
more and more; but thou have had neither respect of thy Mother, neither of the
acquaintance or parentage betwixt thee and me, neither of the Wives which thou
have married, nor of thy Children, whose Grandfather I am; but have dealt with
me after an injurious and hostile manner, driving away that which appertained
unto me, seducing my Daughters to abandon him that begat them, and carrying
away my household Jacob alleged for himself, 31. Jacobs answer to Labans
objection.
that God had not only made impression in his heart, but that all men also are
possessed with the love of their Country; and that after so long space of time,
it seemed good unto him to visit his native soil. And concerning that crime
(says he) which thou objectest against me, touching the prey, if any other but
thy self be judge; thou shall be convicted to have dealt unjustly with me: for
whereas thou ought to have rewarded me, for the maintenance and increase I
have made of thy 36. Jacobs accusation against Laban.
they do not therefore only follow me, but they come after their Children.
These things alleged he for himself. Further he replied, and accused Laban,
because that being his Mothers Brother, and having given him his Daughters to
Wife, he had notwithstanding bitterly vexed him by his severe commandments to
which he had been obedient during the space of twenty years; that the toils he
had endured in order to his Marriage with Rachel had been grievous unto him;
notwithstanding that it was but a trifle in respect of that which he suffered
afterward; which had he born him an Labans subtle dealing with Jacob.
he could very well have escaped. In truth, Laban had dealt most unjustly with
Jacob. For seeing that God assisted him in all that he enterprized, Laban
promised to give him all the Cattle that were born white, and sometime that
which was brought forth black: but when that which Jacob had named and 34
Labans covenant with Jacob.
then did not Laban perform his promise unto him, but turned him over to the
next years increase, by reason he had always a respect of the greater flock,
and promised that which he hoped would not come to pass; and which if it fell
contrary, Genesis 31. v. 32. ad 34.
he was ready to infringe. And as touching the gods, he told him he might make
search for them.

This condition did Laban accept: but Rachel understanding the same, thrust the
gods into a Sack, and made them to be carried on a Camels back, and she sat
upon them, saying, that she was indisposed, by reason that at that time she had
her natural purgations. And for this cause Laban desisted from searching any
further, supposing his Daughter being so affected would not conceal or set her
self so near things that were so sacred: and Jacob, that neither of them should
call to remembrance the unkindnesses that had past betwixt them, but that he
should cherish his Daughters; all which they bound with an oath. This covenant
was made upon a certain mountain, where they reared a Pillar in the form of an
Altar: whence it came to pass that this Pillar was called Galaad, 45. 46, 47.
that is to say, the hill of witness, from whence the Country of Galaad bears
that name even until this day: and after that the alliance was made, and that
they had banqueted together, The year of the World 2206. before Christ's
Nativity, 1758.
Laban returned back again into his own Country.

But as Jacob traveled toward the Country of Canaan, he had several visions,
which presaged unto him good hope of happiness to come; and he called the place
where this thing happened, The field of God. And being desirous to know how his
Brother Esau was Genesis 22. 1, 2.
he sent messengers before him to bring him the exact truth thereof, by reason
he stood in fear lest the memory of his old discontent should be renewed: Jacob
sends messengers to his Brother Esau.
charging his messengers to signify unto Esau, that Jacob deeming it a thing
inconvenient to live with his Brother, who was displeased with him, had of his
own free will forsaken the Country, 3, 4, 5,
and that at this present he was upon his return, conceiving that length of
time might have extinguished his displeasure. He therefore led with him his
Wives and children, with all those riches which God had given him; offering
himself unto Esau, with all which he had of most esteem, by reason that he
thought it the greatest benefit that might happen to him to impart unto his
Brother a part of those commodities which he had received at Gods hands. 6, 7.
All which they signified unto Esau, who rejoiced very Jacob hearing that he
marched forward to meet him, attended by so many Men at Arms, was very much
afraid: yet fixing his confidence in God, he provided for the time, lest any
detriment should happen unto him, studying every way to defend both him, and
his, from invasion. To which end dividing his Troops, he caused some to march
before, and the rest to follow closely after: so that if any did assault the
first, they might retire themselves to the Troop that followed.

After this manner having ordered all things about him, 13.
He sent certain Servants with presents to his Brother, namely, with Beasts of
charge, and a great number of diverse kinds of four-footed Beasts, (which for
their rareness might give more content and 17, 18.
All these marched one after another, to the intent, Jacob reconcileth his
Brother with rewards.
that being beheld thus in ranks, they might seem to be a greater number than
they were: to the end, that if as yet there remained any discontent in the
heart of Esau, these presents might serve to mitigate the same. He commanded
them also that marched foremost, Jacob wrestleth with an Angel, and is called
Israel.
that they should use courteous salutation toward Esau. Having thus all the
day disposed his Troops, as soon as the night was come, he caused all his
companies to march, who passed the River of Jaboch: but Jacob, who was left
hindmost, 24.
had a vision, in which he wrestled with an Angel, and he became victor.

Now the Angel spoke unto him, exhorting him to rejoice at that which had
happened unto him, assuring him that he had not achieved an easy matter, but
that he had 28.
which was a sign of great good which would befall him, and that his posterity
should be invincible, and that no man whatsoever, should overcome him:
commanding him to call his name Israel, that is to say, according to the
Hebrews, a resister of an Angel. These things were foretold unto Jacob upon his
request; who perceiving also that he was an Angel of God, prayed him to inform
him of that which should happen unto him: which the vision did, and afterward
vanished. Jacob took great pleasure thereat, and called the place Phanuel, that
is to say, the face of God: 30.
and for that in wrestling he had hurt a part of his thigh, he afterward
abstained from eating of the same, and by reason thereof our Nation do never
eat that part.

Now when he had intelligence that his Brother approached, he commanded his
Wives to march forward severally with their Handmaids, to the end that they
might Genesis 33. 1, 2^, etc.
without intent of circumvention, Jacob saluteth his Brother Esau.
he cast himself at his feet, and Esau saluted him, and enquired of him
touching the companies of Women and Children; and after he understood all
things, he offered to lead them to his Father. 13. Jacob comes to Scenas. 17.
But Jacob excused himself, by reason of the weariness of his Cattle, and Esau
retired to Seir where he made his abode, and had imposed that name on that
Country, by reason of his thick hair. Jacob also retired himself to a place
which at this day is called the Tents; and from thence into Sichem, a City of
the Canaanites.

Now at such time as the Sichemites celebrated their Feast, The History of
Dina, Jacob's daughter.
Dina, which was Jacob's only Sichem the Son of King Emmor was so taken with
her beauty, that he defloured her: and being passionately in love, Genesis 34. 1,
2, 3, 4.
he desired his Father that he might have her to Wife: who listening thereunto,
went himself unto Jacob, praying him to give Dina his Daughter, in lawful
Marriage, to his Son Sichem. The year of the World, 2206, before Christ's
Nativity, 1758.
Jacob not daring to refuse him, by reason of his authority and quality; and on
the other side, not thinking it to be either a thing lawful, or convenient, to
match his Daughter with a stranger, desired some time for deliberation.
Hereupon the King departed, hoping that Jacob would listen to the Marriage. But
Jacob having discovered unto his Sons the ravishment of their sister, and the
request of Emmor, desired them to consider amongst themselves, what was fit to
be done in the matter: Ver. 21. 25.
whereupon some held their peace, not knowing what to say; but Simeon and Levi
(the Brothers of the same womb with their sister) complotted together this
practice: Simeon and Levi kill the Sichemites.
It was now a Festival of the Sichemites, who intended nothing but pleasure,
and banqueting; and the two Brethren taking this opportunity, by night fell
upon their first guards, and killed them as they slept; and from thence
entering into the City, they killed all the Males (and with them the King and
his Son) but to the Women they offered no violence. Genesis 35. 1, 2.
Which being executed without the knowledge of their Father, Jacob digging up
Laban's gods, goes and sacrifices at Bethel.
they brought their sister back again. Jacob was very much astonished at this
accident, so strangely executed, and was greatly displeased with his Children:
but God appeared unto him, and comforted him, and commanded him to purify his
Tents, and offer those Sacrifices which Mesopotamia, Ver. 16, 17, 18.
and the Vision appeared unto him. As he cleansed those which followed him,
Rachel dies in Childbed.
he found the gods of L^ban, which Rachel had stolen, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap.
28.
and hid in Sichem, in the earth, under an oak, without his knowledge.

Afterward departing from thence, he sacrificed in Bethel, where he had seen
the Vision, at such time as he first of all took his journey into Mesopotamia:
and as he traveled in the Land of Ephrata, Rachel died in Childbed, and was
buried there: (and she alone enjoyed not the honor of being buried in Hebron
with those of her Parentage.) After he had made great lamentation, he named the
Child which she bare at that time Benjamin, (by reason of the Pangs which
killed his Mother.) These are all the Children of Jacob, twelve Males, and one
Daughter; of whom eight were born by his lawful Wives, six of Lea, and two of
Rachel; and of their Maids, four; two, of each of them; whose names I have
heretofore mentioned. From thence went Jacob to Hebron a City of Canaan, where
his Father Isaac dwelt; but he lost him also shortly after.

CHAP. XIX.
Isaac dies, and is buried in Hebron, Genesis 35. 29.
JAcob had not the comfort to find Rebecca his Mother still living, The year of
the World, 2230, before Christ's Nativity, 1734.
and Isaac died in a little time after the arrival of his Son, and was buried
with his Wife by his Son Esau and Jacob in Hebron, among their Fathers. This
Isaac was a man beloved of God, and Abraham: and after he had passed his life
in all virtue for the space of 185 years, Isaac dies 185 years old, Genesis 35.
he died.

The Second Book of the HISTORY of the JEWS;
Written by FLAVIVS JOSEPHVS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Second Book.
1. How Esau and Jacob, Isaac's Sons, divided their habitations: and how
Idumaea fell to Esau's lot, and Canaan to Jacobs. 2. How Joseph, the youngest
of Jacob's Sons, by reason of his Dreams, which foretold his future Felicity,
incurred his Brothers envy. 3. How Joseph was sold by his Brethren into Egypt,
and grew in great authority in that 4. How Jacob, with all his Progeny, came
unto his Son. 5. Of the affliction of the Hebrews in Egypt, for the space of
400 years. 6. How under the conduct of Moses they forsook Egypt. 7. How the Red
Sea divided itself, and gave the Hebrews a passage at such time as they fled
out of Egypt.


CHAP. I.
How Esau and Jacob, Isaac's Sons, divided their inheritance: and how Idumaea
fell to Esau's lot, and Canaan to Jacobs.
AFter Isaac's death, The year of the World, 2238, before Christ's Nativity,
1734.
his two Sons divided their inheritance among themselves, and neither of them
remained in that same place which they had chosen before to make their abode:
but Esau leaving the City of Hebron to his Brother, went and dwelt in Seir, and
was Lord of the Country of Idumaea, which he named by his name (calling it
Edom) for the occasion which follows. Isaac's Sons departed their habitations.
He being very young, returned one day sore wearied with Travel, and hungry,
from Hunting: Genesis 36. 6, 7.
and finding his Brother dressing for himself a mess of Lentil-pottage, which
were very red in color, and further increased his appetite; Genesis 25. 53. 27.
36.
he desired them at his hands, that he might eat them. But he taking the
opportunity and occasion of his Brother Esau's hunger, constrained him to
forsake him Birthright, Esau, the first begotten, felleth his birthright.
and to sell him the same, on condition he Esau then pressed with Hunger,
resigned unto him his Birthright, Esau called Edom.
and confirmed it with a solemn Oath. Hereupon, his equals in age, in way of
mockery, called him Edom, by reason of his red meat; for Edom in Hebrew,
signifies red. His Country likewise was hence called Edom. Genesis 36. per tot.
Esau's Sons and Posterity.
But the Greeks, to the end they might make the name more agreeable, called it
Idumaea. He became the Father of five Children, of whom he had three by his
Wife Alibama, whose names were Jaus, Jolam and Chore: of the other two,
Aliphates was the Son of Ada: and Raguel, of Mosametha: these Children had
Esau. Aliphates had five legitimate Children, Theman, Omar, Opher, Jotham,
Cenez, (for Amelech was illegitimate, born by one of his Concubines, whose name
was Thesma.) These dwelt in the part of Idumaea, which is called Gobolitis;
Amelech, is called Amalechitis. For Idumaea being in times past a Land of great
extent, continued the name of Idumaea through the whole Country: and the
particular Provinces of the same, kept the names of those that first inhabited
them.

CHAP. II.
Joseph, the youngest of Jacob's Children, is envied by his Brothers, Genesis 37.
BUt Jacob attained to that felicity, The year of the World, 2206, before
Christ's Nativity, 1658.
that scarcely any other in all that Country was so happy; for he surpassed
all the Inhabitants of it in riches: and by reason of the virtues of his
Children, he was both envied and regarded. For, they were accomplished Genesis 37.
1, 2.
But God had such care of him, and so graciously procured and furthered his
good fortunes, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 2.
that that which seemed unto him to be grievous and contrary, he brought to a
prosperous issue for him, to the increase of his riches; and caused that both
he and his Children were the first motive to our Ancestors to forsake the Land
of Egypt, on that occasion which here ensues. Ver. 3, 4.
Jacob having begotten Joseph of Rachel, loved him entirely, both in respect of
the beauty of his body, (...).
and of the ornaments and virtues of his mind; as also his prudence, wherein he
exceeded all his other Brothers. This cordial affection of his Father, moved
envy and hatred amongst his Brothers toward him: together with the

Joseph saw in his dream, were these Being sent by his Father, in the company
of his Brothers, a v. 5. ad 9. Joseph's Dream.
to reap Corn in the time of Harvest, he saw a vision (far different from those
which commonly happen in sleep) which (as soon as he awoke) he told unto his
Brethren, to the end they might interpret it. He told them, that he thought in
his dream the night past, that his Sheaf of Corn stood upright in a place where
he had fixed it, and that theirs run toward his, to bow down and reverence the
same. Which vision of his, seemed to foretell him his ample fortune: and how he
should obtain the Lordship over all of them. But they concealed all these
things from Joseph; making show, that they could in no sort interpret the
dream: but being by themselves apart, they breathed forth contrary
imprecations, wishing that nothing of this prediction, Joseph a second and more
strange vision: The year of the World, 2206. before Christ's Nativity, 1758.
for he dreamed, that the Sun, the Moon, and eleven of the Stars descended down
to the earth, and humbled themselves before him. Which vision he revealed to
his Father in the presence of his Brethren, (without suspicion of any hatred in
them toward him) and desired him to interpret unto him the meaning thereof. v.
9. 10, 11.
Jacob greatly rejoiced at this dream, Joseph's Dream of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars.
by reason he conceived in his mind the interpretation thereof, and (in
comparing and alluding his conjectures not rashly, but with prudence) he
rejoiced at those great matters which were signified by that dream: The
interpretation of Joseph's Dream.
which foretold that his Son Joseph should be very fortunate and happy; and
that the time should come, in which his Father, Mother, and Brethren should
honor him, and do him homage. For, he compared the Moon (which ripeneth and
increases all things that grow) to his Mother; and the Sun (which gives form
and force) to his Father. And as touching his Brothers, who were eleven in
number, he compared them to the Eleven Stars, (which receive their force both
from the Sun and the Moon.) Neither did Jacob without judgment and
consideration, so interpret this vision. But Joseph's Brothers were highly
grieved at this presage, v. 11.
conceiving as enviously and hatefully thereof, as if this felicity had been
portended to a stranger and not to their Brother, with whom they might equally
partake his good fortunes, being as well Allied in felicity unto him, as in
consanguinity. Whereupon they resolved on his death and destruction: Josep^'s
Brothers complot his death.
and having complotted these counsels Sichem a fit place to graze in. v. 13, 14.
toward Sichem, (which was a part of that Country very fit to feed their
Cattle;) where they kept their flocks without giving any notice of their
departure to their Father. But he perceiving that no Man came from the herd,
that might tell him any tidings, being sorrowful and careful of his Sons, sent
Joseph to the flocks, to understand how they did, and how their affairs
prospered.

CHAP. III.
How Joseph was sold into Egypt by his Brethren, and grew in credit in that
Country: and how his Brethren at length were under his subjection.
v. 18.
they rejoiced, not as at the arrival of one of their near Friends, Joseph
comes unto his Brothers who resolve to murder him.
sent unto them by their Father, but as if their Enemy had met them, and was,
by the will of God, delivered into their hands. They therefore mutually agreed
to put him to death, and not to let slip the present opportunity. Reuben
dissuadeth his Brothers death.
But Reuben, the eldest amongst them, seeing their disposition and conspiracy
to kill him, endeavored to dissuade them; setting before their eyes, how
heinous and wicked the enterprise was, and what hatred they might incur
thereby. For (said he) if before God and before Men it be a wicked and
detestable thing, v. 21.
to lay hands on, and to murder a stranger; how much more heinous a Crime will
it be held for us, The year of the World, 2217. before Christ's Nativity, 1747.
since nothing is hidden from his providence, armed Adversary against them,
which never would forsake them. That it was an Joseph had done them no wrong,
whose tender years rather required care and compassion at their hands, than
hate and tyranny. Besides that, the cause of his slaughter would aggravate
their offense, if it should be known, that for envy of his future felicity they
should take away his life; all which good hap they likewise might participate,
by reason of consanguinity: and that it was their duty to think, that
whatsoever blessing God imparted to Joseph, was theirs, and that for that cause
they were to consider, that God would be more displeased against them, if they
should endeavor to deprive him of his life whom he had esteemed and adjudged
worthy of prosperity to Reuben alleging these and many other things,
dissuaded, and labored to divert them from shedding their Brothers blood. But
seeing that all these his motives could in no sort mollify them, and that they
hastened the rather to perpetrate the Murder; he counseled them, that at
leastwise they should allot him some milder kind of death: telling them, that
he endeavored all what in him lay, at the first to dissuade them; But since it
was thoroughly resolved among them, that he should not live; that less mischief
should follow of it, if they would be ruled by his counsel: for by that means
their will should have effect, yet a more mild and less hurtful, v. 29. Reuben
persuadeth them to cast Joseph into a Pit.
in comparison of Murder; that it were better for them to withhold their
hands, and keep them immaculate, by casting him into the next Pit, and there
leaving him in the hands of death. To this counsel, all of them agreed. So
Reuben Joseph, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 3.
and bound him with cords, and let him down easily into a Pit, which was dry:
which done, he departed, to seek out a more convenient place for pasture.

But when Reuben was gone* Juda one of Jacob's Sons (espying certain Merchants
of Arabia of the Country of the Ishmalites, v. 27.
who from the Country of Galaad carried spicery and Syrian Merchandise into
Egypt) counseled his Brothers to draw up Joseph out of the Well, Joseph* by
the counsel of Juda is sold to the Arabian Merchants.
and to sell him to those Arabians: assuring them, by that means it would come
to pass, that Joseph should die the farther off from them, amongst Strangers:
and as touching themselves, they should he exempt from that pollution. Which
counsel of his being commended by them all, 29. Reuben by night comes to the
Pit.
they drew Joseph out of the Pit, and sold him to the Arabians for the sum of
twenty pieces of Silver, at such time as he was seventeen years Reuben resolved
in himself to save Joseph without his Brothers privity; for which cause coming
by night unto the Pit, he called him with a loud voice; and seeing that he gave
him no answer, he began to conjecture with himself, that his Brethren had put
him to death; he reproved them therefore very bitterly: but after they had told
him what was become of him, he gave over his mourning. After these things were
thus passed, the Brethren consulted among themselves, in what sort they might
clear themselves from their Fathers suspicion; 31.
and concluded among themselves to tear the Coat wherewith Joseph was attired
when he came to them, and which they had taken from him when they cast him into
the Well; to the end, that having stained it in the Blood of a Goat, 32.
Joseph's Brothers persuaded his Father that he is devoured by Wild-Beasts.
they might afterward carry it to their Father, and show it him, to the end he
that Joseph was slain by wild Beasts. Which done, they came unto the old Man
(who had already heard something of Joseph's misfortunes) and told him, that
they had not seen their Brother Joseph, neither could they assure him what
mishap had befaln him: but that notwithstanding, they had found his Coat, all
bloodied and torn; which made them suspect, 34. Jacob bewaileth Joseph for dead.
that he was slain by some wild Beasts, if so be he were sent unto them,
attired in that Coat.

But Jacob (that hitherto expected more gentle tidings, supposing and hoping
that Joseph had only been captive) gave over this opinion, and took the Coat
for a most assured testimony of his Sons death; for he knew that he was
apparelled therewith, at such time as he sent him to his Brothers: for which
cause he lamented Joseph, from that Joseph was slain by Savage Beasts. He
therefore sat him down, being clothed in Sackcloth, and charged with sorrow,
27 28. Joseph is sold in Egypt to Putiphar.
and neither could his Sons by their counsels mitigate his moans, nor he
himself remit the rigor of his lamentation.

Now Joseph was sold by the Merchants, and bought by Putiphar, (an Egyptian
Lord, and steward of King Pharaohs household) who held him in high estimation,
and trained him up in all liberal Sciences, Gen 39. 7, 9, 10.
suffering him to live, not after a servile, but liberal manner, and committing
unto his charge the care of his household; all which favors he made use of. Yet
was he no ways diverted by these his privileges and promotions, from his
habitual

Genesis 39. 7, 9, 10
that his Masters Wife fell in love with him, both for his beauty, Putiphars
Wife soliciteth Joseph to lie with her.
and for his wit and diligence; and she imagined that if she opened her mind to
him, she might easily enjoy him; and that he would esteem it a part of his
felicity to be loved by his Mistress. All which she fancied, having only
regard to that servile condition wherein at that present he was, and not to his
manners, which continued always virtuous, notwithstanding any change that could
happen unto him. So she discovered to him her passion, and desired him to grant
her an amorous encounter: but he refused her demand, alleging, that it was a
most wicked requital toward his Master, if it should come to pass, that he who
had bought him, and so greatly honored him, should receive so great an injury
and outrage from him. He exhorted her therefore to conquer her appetite, Joseph
would not deny her; and her disordinate affections increasing daily she devised
and complotted a new means, in hope to bring her love to the desired issue.

Whereas therefore a solemn and public Feast was at hand, wherein (according
to custom) the Ladies were wont to adorn the solemnity by their presence;
Putiphar's Wife complotteth a second subtilty to allure Joseph.
she fained Joseph; which falling out accordingly, she began to court and
caress him with these flattering discourses, That he had done well, if (upon
her first request) he had obeyed her, without any contradiction, in respect of
her dignity who made suit to him; and her incredible passion, which had so far
commanded her, that notwithstanding she were his Mistress, she had debased her
self so much as to solicit him: that now he should behave himself more wisely
and better; if in amends of his forepassed obstinacy he at last would consent.
For if he expected this her second summons, she now made it far more
affectionate and importunate than the former, for (says she) I have fained
sickness to this end, to solicit and prefer thy company Putiphars ears than
thine. Joseph once more repulseth the assaults of her lust, ver. 11, 12.
But neither by these words, nor her Tears, the witnesses of her vows, could
Joseph be perverted; nor could flatteries allure him, nor terrors compel him to
forsake Laws, rights, and customs of Matrimony, willing her rather to respect
them, than her inordinate lust: which is speedily followed with repentance, and
a continual fear of being discovered: whereas conjugal fidelity is void of
fear, and attended by a good conscience before God and Man. Moreover, that it
was more convenient for her to govern and command him as his Lady and Mistress
than to debase her self, making him the partaker of their common sin; and far
more v. 12.
But Joseph unable to endure any longer the impudence of the Woman, Joseph
leaving his raiment behind him, fled from the Adultress.
leaving his Garment behind him, whereby she held him, fled suddenly out of the
chamber. She partly impelled by the grief of repulse, partly moved with fear,
lest her lasciviousness should be made known to her Husband, decreed first of
all falsely to accuse Joseph, and by this means to take revenge upon him;
holding it to be a craft worthy a Woman's came home, and being troubled to
behold her sadness, demanded the cause thereof. v. 14. 17,
if thou do not rigorously punish that wretched slave, The Adulteresses
accusation against Joseph.
who has attempted to violate thy Bed, forgetting both what he was when he
came into thy house, and with how great goodness thou have entertained him; and
who instead of testifying his gratitude for the same, has not forborne to offer
injury, even to thine own Wife; and which is more, on an holy day, and in thine
absence: whereby it manifestly appears, that the moderation which hitherto he
has pretended, rather proceeded of servile fear, than native modesty. And that
which has the more emboldned him, is, that (besides all hope, and beyond his
merit) thou have favored him: for seeing all thy goods committed to his trust
and dispensation, and that he was preferred before all thine ancient Servants,
he thought it lawful likewise Putiphar moved with the words and tears of a
woman, and attributing too much to his wives dissembling love, omitted the
further and faithful inquisition of the truth, and after he had praised his
Wives faith and loyalty, he cast Joseph, thus condemned of heinous wickedness,
verse. 20.
into the Prison of Malefactors, esteeming his wives chastity, and commending
it the more, Joseph is cast into Prison.
in that he was now made a witness of her approved honesty.

But Joseph committing his innocence to God, Hedio and Ruffinus chap. 4.
neither took care how to excuse himself, nor to declare how the matter had
passed: but silently suffering the necessity of his Bonds, Genesis 39. 21, 22, 23.
he comforted himself with this only hope, that God was more powerful then
Joseph's patience in Bonds.
and accordingly he soon found the effects of his providence. For the keeper of
the Prison considering both his faith and diligence in all that he employed him
in, The keeper of the Prison deals friendly with Joseph.
and the comeliness of his person, loosed him out of Bonds, and by that means
in some sort lessened his misery; giving him also an allowance more liberal
than the rest of the Prisoners had. Now, when they that were in the Prison (as
often as they had intermission from their labor) conferred together (as Men in
misery are wont to do) and questioned among themselves, of the causes of their
misfortunes; a certain Butler of the Kings (condemned by him, in displeasure,
to be cast into Irons) grew familiar with Joseph: and for that he accounted him
a prudent and provident Man, he told him his Dream, praying him, that if any
presage might be Genesis 40. 5, 9, ad 15.
Joseph bade him be of good courage, and expect, that within three days he
should be delivered from his Bonds, The Butlers Dream expounded.
admitted again to the Kings service, and The year of the World, 2238, before
Christ's Nativity, 1736.
discords dissolved, and troubles and sorrows assuaged, in stead of which,
pleasures succeed. Since, said he (as thou tellest me) the King favorably
received the Wine pressed out by thy hands, know that thou have a good Dream
offered thee, and that it signifies thy deliverance from misery within three
days, according to the number of those Clusters which thou gatheredst in thy
Dream. Remember me therefore, I pray thee, as soon as the event has approved
this my prediction to be real and true; and when thou art at liberty, forget
not us that are left here to lie in misery, for I am not here thrust into Bonds
for my wickedness, but I am punished like a Malefactor for my Joseph's so happy
interpretation (for that he likewise had seen a Vision) desired him to expound
unto him what interpretation was to be had of a Dream, which he had had the
night past, and which he related in these words. Me thought (said he) I carried
three Baskets on my head: The Bakers Dream, v. 16.
of which, two were filled with bread, and the other with flesh, and diverse
other kind of cates, such as are prepared for Kings: But the Birds of the air
hovering round about me, devoured

Joseph, after he had attentively considered the circumstances of the Dream,
told him that he would rather have informed him of more favorable success than
his Dream did portend; The exposition of the Baker's Dream.
and that he had only two days left to live, which were signified by the two
Baskets; but on the third he should be hanged and devoured by the Fowls, which
he could not drive from him. Neither did it otherwise fall out with both of
them, than Joseph had foretold: For upon the perfixed day, the King
(celebrating the feast of his Nativity) commanded that the Baker should be
hanged, Genesis 14. 1, ad 17.
and the Butler delivered from his Bonds, and restored to his former office.
But God delivered Joseph (after he had for the space of two years spent histime
in the misery of the Prison, and was in the mean space no ways assisted by the
ungrateful Butler) by preordinating this means Pharaoh the King of Egypt his
Dream.
King Pharaoh having in one and the same night seen in his sleep two Dreams,
which he conceived were of ill presage to him, though he had forgot the
explication of them which had been made to him at the same time; early in the
morning (calling before him the learned among the Egyptians) he required the
interpretation thereof. Now when he could in no sort be satisfied by them, he
became more and more troubled: which the Butler perceiving, he called to mind
Joseph, and his wisdom and prudence in these sorts of conjectures, and
repairing unto the King, told him of Joseph, and of his Vision which he had
whilst he was in Prison, together with Joseph's interpretation, and the event
thereof, and how the same day, the Master of the Bakers being condemned to the
Gallows, gave greater credit to his predictions: Putiphar, the Master of his
household, and that he was a Hebrew, as himself said, descended of good and
honorable Parents. Command him therefore (said he) to be sent for, neither
despise the Man for his present misery, for thou may manifestly understand by
him, Joseph delivered from bonds.
the signification of thy Dreams. Hereupon the King sent for him presently, and
friendly taking him by the hand, spoke to him after this manner. I understand
by the report of my Servant, that thou art prudent; and therefore desire thee
to show me the interpretation of my Dreams in such manner as thou discoveredst
his unto him, and thou shall do me an high pleasure: but beware thou neither
conceal any thing for fear, nor speak for flattery, nor feed me with falsehoods,
but tell me all things truly, although such as may breed my discontent to hear
them. Pharaoh's Dream of the seven kine.
I saw seven well fed and fat kine, which came out of the River into the
pasture: and again, me thought seven others came from the pasture to meet them,
which were very lean and ugly to behold; these lean devoured the seven others
that were fat and great, yet were never the more increased, but were all of
them miserably vexed with hunger. The year of the World, 2231, before Christ's
Nativity, 1733.
But after this vision, being awaked out of my sleep, and troubled in my mind,
what it might signify, being seized by little and little by a pleasant
slumber, I fell a sleep again; And again, I saw a vision more prodigious than
the former, and which likewise troubles and terrifies me more. For I saw seven
ears of Corn sprung out of one root, that hung down and bowed their heads,
because they were laden with grain ready to be reapt: The year of the World.
2238, before Christ's Nativity, 1726.
after which, there appeared Joseph answered: This Dream (O King) although it
has been seen in two figures, yet it imports one and the same accident,
which is to ensue. For both those seven lean Oxen and those seven dry ears of
Corn, The interpretation of Pharaoh's Dream. a v. 18. ad 36.
which you saw devour the seven fat Oxen, and seven full ears of Corn,
fore-signifie a Famine and scarcity in Egypt, for so many years as there were
Oxen and ears of Corn in good plight: so that the fertility of these good years
shall be consumed by the sterility of so many other years, according to their
number; and there shall be such scarcity of necessary provision, that it shall
be hard to prevent and supply the defect: all which is signified by those seven
lean kine which having devoured the good, could not be satisfied by the same.
All v. 47, 48, 49.
Egypt shall not feel the penury that shall follow. And when the King (admiring
Joseph's prudence and wisdom) demanded after what manner he might provide in
the time of plenty, By Joseph^s counsel the succeeding scarcity is made more
tolerable.
to prevent and redress the future sterility, he warned and counseled him,
that the Egyptians should use parsimony and that that which remained of those
years superfluity, might be reserved for future necessities. He counseled him
also to command the husbandmen to hoard up their Corn in their Barns, and only
to distribute to the People so much as was sufficient, and no more. Hereupon
the Joseph's counsel, v. 42, 43.
but also his interpretation of his Dreams) made him Lord and Commissary of all
his store; Joseph is entitled by Pharaoh to great honors.
and commanded him to provide whatsoever he thought necessary for his service
and the good of his People: assuring him that he thought no Man more proper to
execute this counsel, than himself who Egypt, he stored up all the Corn in the
Kings Granaries, and distributed to every one by measure, Hedio and Ruffinus,
chap 5.
that which they wanted for Seed-Corn, and for their nourishment, without
letting any Man understand for what cause he did it.

He was now about thirty years old, and was held in great honor by the King,
being for his extraordinary prudence, surnamed by him Psontomphanech, which in
the Egyptian language signifies, V. 50, 51, 52.
The discoverer of hidden things: he was also honored with a Wife of great
dignity. Joseph marries a Wife in Egypt, on whom he begat Manasses and Ephraim.
By the Kings order likewise he took to Wife a Virgin, Daughter to Putifar
Heliopolitan Priest, whose name was Asaneth, by whom be begat Children before
the Famine began in Egypt. The elder of which was called Manasses, which
signifies Oblivion (because attaining better fortune he grew into oblivion of
his former misery:) but the younger was called Ephraim (which signifies
Return, for that he was restored to the liberty of his ancestors.) Now when,
according to Joseph's interpretation, the seven years of plenty and affluence
were past in Egypt; the years of Famine began to infest the Land, V. 54, 55.
and for that the evil was unexpected, The Famine in Egypt.
the headlong multitude grievously pressed with hunger and misery, began to
flock about the Kings gates and Garners. Whereupon the King called for Joseph,
who presently distributing Grain to those that wanted it, became without
controversy, the Father and conserver of the commonalty. Neither Genesis 42. 1,
2, etc.
should be supplied by those that have plenty. Jacob sends his Sons into
Egypt to buy Wheat.
And because the same calamity both oppressed Canaan and other Kingdoms of the
world, Jacob also sent all his Sons into Egypt to fetch Corn; (as soon as he
understood that strangers also had liberty to traffic in that place) only
with himself he retained Benjamin, whom he begat on Rachel, and who was brother
by the whole blood to Joseph. When these ten Brethren arrived in Egypt, they
repaired to Joseph, beseeching him that they might be permitted to buy corn:
for nothing was done without his express command; it seemed an honor done to
the King, to do honor to Joseph. He taking knowledge of his Brothers, who
thought of nothing less than of him (by V. 7, etc.
and besides, none of them could imagine that he had attained to so great
dignity) determined to make trial of them, Joseph sounds this Brothers, to
the end he might understand his Fathers and Benjamins estate, V. 10.
to the end he might the better gather how they were affected. For he both
denied them his license to buy Corn, and commanded them also to be apprehended
for Spies, telling them that they were of diverse Nations, though they feigned
kindred: for how can it be (says he) that a private Man should bring up so
many worthy Sons; which felicity scarcely and very seldom is granted to Kings?
This did he, to the end he might gather some intelligence of his Father, and in
what estate he lived, Rubens answer unto Joseph both for himself and his
Brothers.
during his absence; and what was become of Benjamin his Brother: for he was
much afraid, they had offered the same hard measure to the youth Ruben the
eldest of them, began after this manner to plead their common cause. We come
not hither (said he) as Spies, but dire Famine (whose fury we seek to prevent)
has compelled us to come into this Country, hoping in your humanity; who (as
we have heard) have not only made offer of sale of Corn, and means of
sustenance to your own Citizens, but also to all strangers. That we are
Brothers, and born of the same Father, our very countenances testify, in that
they vary not very much the one from the other. Our Father is called Jacob; by
Nation, an Hebrew: who begat us, his twelve Sons, on four Women: Joseph, our
domestic fortunes began to grow to ruin. Our Father languisheth in continual
lamentations; and his Tears do no less afflict us, than in times past the
untimely death of our dearest Brother did affect us. Now are we come to buy
Corn, having left in our Fathers custody the youngest of our Brothers, called
Benjamin. That thus it is, if thou please to send any one unto our house, thou
may be assured. Thus spoke Ruben, both on his own and his Brothers behalf,
to remove Joseph's sinister opinion of them: who knowing that both his Father
and Brother were in health, V. 17.
commanded them to be shut in Prison, under pretense to call them to further
examination, Joseph commands his Brothers to Prison.
at better leisure. Some three days Joseph. But Reuben reprehended their too
late and unprofitable repentance, saying, That those afflictions which God (the
just revenger of innocence) had inflicted on his impious Brothers, v. 21.
ought Joseph's Brothers, repent them of that evil they had done unto him
After this manner spoke they one unto another, supposing that no Man was
present who understood the Hebrew Tongue: and they all lamented, being inwardly
touched with the words of Reuben; and condemned their perpetrated wickedness:
for which, at that time, they thought that God did most justly punish them.
Joseph beholding them in this perplexity, and unable to dissemble any longer
his Brotherly love, by reason the Tears already began to burst out of his
eyes, which at that time he desired to conceal, v. 24.
departed from among them.

Not long after, Joseph sends away his Brothers, and only retains Simeon.
returning again unto them, he retained Simeon with him, to be in the mean time
as a pledge, until their return; and giving them license to buy their Corn, he
commanded them to depart: giving withal a special commandment to one Jacobs
Sons returning into Canaan told their Father all that had happened unto them in
Egypt, and how they were taken for Spies, and Traitors to that Country: and
that when they protested, that they were all Brethren, and that the eleventh
was left at home with their Father, the Governor would not believe them.
Moreover, that Simeon was left pledge with the Governor, v. 36.
until Benjamin should come thither to give testimony of their truth: Jacob is
sore grieved for Simeons absence, and because Benjamin should depart from him.
whereupon they desired their Father without fear or sinister conceit, to send
their younger Brother with them. But Jacob was displeased with that which his
Sons had done; and whereas he was not a little grieved that Simeon was left
behind, he Benjamin; and neither could Reuben with his Prayers (offering his
Sons for pledges, that if any sinister fortune should fall upon Benjamin by the
way, Genesis 42. 1. ad. 10.
the Grandfather might revenge it on his Childeren) persuade Jacob to yield
consent: but they uncertain what to do, were more and more terrified, Jacobs
Sons, but in especial Juda, urge their Father to send Benjamin with them.
in that they found their Money enclosed in their Sacks of Corn. Now when Corn
began already to fail them, Jacob being compelled by force of Famine,
deliberated to send Benjamin with his other Brothers: for they dared not return
into Egypt, without him. And when necessity pressed them daily more and more,
and his Sons ceased not instantly to call upon him; yet was he still doubtful
and unresolved: till at last Juda, a Man vehement by nature, began more freely
to tell his Father that he was too Benjamin to whom nothing could happen
without the will of God, whither abroad or at home: and that without this
superfluous care of his Son Benjamin, endangered his own and all their lives,
which could not subsist but by the relief which was to be had out of Pharaohs
Country; that he ought also to have care of the life of Simeon, lest whilst
he delayed to send Benjamin on the journey, Simeon in the mean time should be
slain by the Egyptians. Moreover he exhorted him to commit the care of his Son
to God, v. 11 ad 14.
promising to bring him back again in safety, or else to die together with him:
Jacob sends his ^ons with presents into Egypt.
and proposing, that certain Fruits of Canaan, as Balm, Stacte, Terebinth, and
Honey, should be sent as Presents to Joseph, together with the double price of
their Corn. Thus shedding Tears on both sides, they depart from their Father,
Egypt, they mitigated their present grief with the hope of better fortune. No
sooner were they arrived there but they repaired unto Joseph; being sore
afraid, lest it should be laid to their charge, that by fraud and deceit they
had carried away with them the price of their former Corn: which presently,
before Joseph's steward, verse. 16.
they carefully excused, Jacobs Sons arrive in Egypt, and Simeon is set at
liberty.
saying, That they found the Money, among the Wheat at such time as they
emptied their Sacks; which now, in discharge of their truth, they had brought
back again. But he denying that he ever missed their Money, and they being
delivered from this fear, began to be more secure; so that Simeon was suddenly
Joseph was returned from the service of the King, they offer him presents: and
he enquiring of them, how their Father did? they answered, that he was in
health. Then perceiving that Benjamin was yet alive, whom he saw among them, he
asked whether that were their younger Brother? verse. 29.
he only uttered these words, Joseph unknown to his Brethren, saluteth both
them and Benjamin.
That God's providence was over all things, and departed from them, being
unwilling that any of them should see him shed Tears, which he could not any
longer contain. Inviting them afterward unto a Banquet, he commanded them to
sit down in order, according as they were wont to do when they were with their
Father; and whereas he kindly entertained all of them, he honored Benjamin
with a double share. After the Banquet, when they were all laid down to rest,
he commanded the steward to measure out the Wheat which every one should bear
away with him, and to hide the price thereof again in their Sacks: but in
Benjamins Sack, he commanded him to put his Cup which he ordinarily made use
of. This he did, Hedio and Ruffinus chap. 6.
with intent to make trial of their loves toward Benjamin; and whether Genesis
44. 2, 3,
being accused of Theft, or leave him behind as a malefactor, and return unto
their Father, Joseph tempts Benjamins Brothers, whether they would assist him.
as if the matter no ways touched them. Which being done according as he had
commanded, early in the morning all Jacobs Sons arose, and taking with them
Simeon, departed onwards of their journey; rejoicing as well at his
restitution, as Benjamins return, whom they both promised and protested to
bring back again to their Father; Joseph's brethren are staid in their journey.
when behold, suddenly a Troop of Horsemen beset them round; amongst whom, was
that Servant who had hid the Cup in the Sack. They being troubled by this
sudden incursion, and asking, why they set upon them whom they so lately had
both invited and entertained so honorably? v. 5, 12.
The Egyptians answered, and exclaimed against them, Jacobs Sons are accused of
Theft.
calling them wicked Men, who forgetting the late benefits received, Joseph's
gentleness and humanity, were so wicked, as to return him injuries for his
courtesies; threatening them that they should be punished for their Theft: and
telling them, that although for a time they had deceived the Officer of the
Table, yet could they not deceive God; and again asking them, whether they were
well in their wits, in supposing that for this offense they should not be
incontinently punished? with these, and the like speeches, the Servant insulted
over them. But they, who nothing at all suspected this subtilty, accused him
saying, That they wondered at the Man's unreasonableness, in so rashly accusing
them of Theft, who had not kept back the price of their Corn, which they found
in their Sacks, whereas none but themselves knew of that Money; so far were
they from purposely offering any wrong. Yet in that they thought the searching
Egyptians accepted; yet agreed the punishment should be inflicted only on him
who had done the injury. Afterward beginning to search, and orderly looking
into each Man's Sack, at length they came to Benjamin; not that they were
ignorant the Cup was hid in his Sack, but that they might seem to discharge
their duty more exactly. Now all the rest being secure in themselves, they were
only careful of their Brother Benjamin; and they hoped that he would not be
found guilty of falsehood: for which cause, they more freely upbraided their
persecutors; objecting unto them, how, through their importunity, they had been
hindered Benjamins Sack, they found the Cup; whereupon all the Brothers began to
mourn and lament, both bewailing their Brothers misfortune, who was presently
to suffer death for the Theft; and their own mishap, who having plighted their
faith unto their Father for Benjamins safe return, were compelled to falsify
the same through this accident. And that which further increased their grief,
was, that when as they most of all hoped to be free from dangers, they were, by
fortunes envy, thrust into so great calamity; confessing themselves to be the
authors both of their Fathers, and this their Brothers misfortune; in that they
had never ceased to importune and compel their Father (although he were
unwilling, and resisted) to send the Child with them.

Now the Horsemen having laid hands on Benjamin, led him unto Joseph, and his
Brothers followed him. ver. 12.
Joseph beholding his Brother in the others hands, and the rest bemoaning him
round about them; Benjamin is attached for Theft.
Have you, said he (O most wicked Men) either so contemned my humanity, or Gods
providence, as that you durst attempt such a heinous injury against him who
entertained you with hospitality, and dismissed you with benefits? To whom they
answered, that they were ready to suffer punishment for Benjamin, calling again
to their remembrance, Joseph's injuries, saying; that he was happy who
delivered by death from life was exempt from all calamities: and that (if he
lived) God inflicted that plague on them for his sake. They said also, that
they were the plague and great misfortune of their Father, because that to the
former sorrow which he had endured Joseph's death, they had also annexed this
new misery: neither did Reuben desist to reproach them in bitter manner with
the wickedness which they had Joseph told them that he dismissed them all
(seeing that their innocence was proved to him) and would be contented with the
Lads punishment: for (said he) neither is it reasonable that he should be
delivered for the sake of those who have not offended: nor they punished for
him that has done the Theft: He commanded them therefore to depart, and
promised them safe conduct on their way.

Whilst all of them were grievously wounded with these words (so that scarcely
one of them could speak for sorrow) Juda (who had persuaded his Father to send
Benjamin with them* A ver. 18. ad finem.
and who above the rest was a Man of confidence) purposed to expose himself to
all danger in that resolution to deliver his Brother: Judah's Oration unto
Joseph for Benjamin.
whereupon he addressed himself to Joseph, and spoke thus, My Lord (said he) we
confess that we are all Joseph's death, how grievously my Father takes the
want of his Children, I would not so earnestly entreat for his safety who is so
dear to him; or if I did, it should be only to contribute to the praise of your
clemency; The year of the World, 2237, before Christ's Nativity, 1726.
and were there not some to whom our death would bring both grief and
discontent, we were willing all of us to suffer punishment. But now whereas we
have not so much commiseration of our selves (though as yet we are but young,
and have not much tasted the pleasures of life) as of our disconsolate Parent,
who is oppressed not only with Age, but Grief, we beseech you, not for our own
sakes, but for his, to grant us life, though at this day we are under your
justice for our offense. Assuredly he is a good Man, and has omitted nothing
to render us like himself; worthy he is never to taste or be tried by any such
calamity, who now, through our absence, is discruciated Power given to save.
and in this respect become like unto him. For, since it lies in your power to
do both the one and the other, it were better you did good than evil; and
contenting your self with your power, not remember then to urge your revenge:
but only think that your power was given you to keep and preserve men; and that
the more mercy you extend toward many, the more honor you redouble on your
own head, Now it lies in your power, by forgiving our Brothers error, to give
us all life. For neither can we be safe except he be saved; neither may we
return home unto our Father, except he return; but here must we suffer
whatsoever our Brother suffers. Neither do we crave any other mercy at your
hand if we be repulsed in this, but that you will i^flic^ allege, that pardon
is usually granted to such; but here will I make an end, That whether we When
Juda had spoken thus, he humbled himself at Joseph 's feet, endeavoring, as
much as in him lay, to mollify and appease his anger: in like sort also all
the other Brothers prostrated themselves, offering themselves to die for
Benjamin.

But Joseph moved with pity, Genesis 45. 1, 2. ad 16.
and unable any longer to personate a displeased Man, sent away all those that
were present; Joseph makes himself known to his Brethren.
and being alone with them, discovered himself unto his Brothers; and in this
sort to them only he disclosed himself, and said, I cannot but commend the
piety and love which you bear unto your Brother, which I find to be greater
than I did expect, gathering my conjectures from those things which in times
past have happened unto me. For, to this end have I done all this, that I might
make trial of your brotherly affection: whereof since you have given me a
signal proof, I will not ascribe that which you have done unto me to your
natures, but rather wholly to the Will of God, who has at this present
furnished you with all things which are profitable for you, and I hope will
hereafter give you greater things by his special grace. Seeing therefore I
understand my Fathers rather desired than hoped The year of the World, 2231,
before Christ's Nativity, 1726.
you will be of good courage, and rejoice that it has pleased God to produce a
good event of an ill intent. Let not the evil sentence which in times past you
pronounced against me, any ways trouble you, since you perceive it wanted
effect: but rejoice at these Works of God, and go and tell your Father that
which you have seen, lest being consumed with immoderate care of you, I my self
be deprived of the chiefest fruit of my felicity, before he come to my
presence, and be made partaker of the same. Wherefore depart you, and bringing
with This said, Joseph embraced his Brethren: but they were wholly confounded
with tears and sorrow, and the greater was their repentance, Ver. 16.
in that they had sinned against so kind a Brother. After all this, there
followed a Banquet. The King rejoices to know that Joseph's brothers were
arrived. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 7. al. 4. v. 26, 27, 28.
And the King understanding that Joseph 's Brethren were arrived, he (as if
some good fortune had befaln him) very heartily rejoiced, and gave them
Chariots laden with Corn, and Gold, and Silver, with other Presents, to present
their Father with, who, enriched with diverse gifts, (some from their Brother to
his Father, and others to themselves, but especially to Benjamin) returned home
into their Country. Jacob understood by his Sons in what estate his Son Joseph
was, that he had not only escaped death (which he had so long time bewailed)
but also that he lived in high prosperity, Jacob rejoices to hear the
promotions and honors of Joseph.
and ministered to the King of Egypt, and had, in a manner, the whole Government
of the Kingdom in his hands: he easily believed all things that were told him,
and acknowledged the great Works of God, and his Goodness showed unto him,
although for a time it seemed to be intermitted. And a little time after, he
prepared himself to go and visit his Son Joseph.

CHAP. IV.
How Jacob with all his Family went into Egypt.
WHen Jacob arrived near the Fountain of Covenant, he offered in that place a
Sacrifice unto God; and fearing lest his Children should inhabit Egypt, by
reason of the fertility of the place, The year of the World, 2239, before
Christ's Nativity, 1725.
and that his posterity, by not returning back into the Land of Canaan, should
lose the possession of that which God had promised them; and furthermore,
doubting lest that his Journey into Egypt, being by him enterprized without
consulting the Will of God, should be prejudicial to his Children; suspecting
likewise lest he should die before he came to Joseph's presence, he was
wonderfully perplexed in mind. Whilst thus he ruminated, and cast these things
in his mind, he was surprised with a heavy sleep, during which time God
appeared unto him, and called him Jacob asking who it was that called him, God
answered, Do thou not know (O Jacob) that God, who has both protected thee,
and thy Ancestors, and succored you in all your necessities; The year of the
World, 2293. before Christ's Nativity, 1725.
who contrary to thy father's purpose, made thee lord of his family; and when
as by thy self thou did travel into Mesopotamia, did not I bring it to pass,
that being matched in wedlock very happily, thou returnedst into thy Country
back again, being blessed with many children, and stored with much riches? Was
it not I also that have kept thy family in safety, and when it seemed thou
had lost Joseph, I raised him to that high step of dignity wherein now he
lives, Genesis 46. 1, ad 5.
and made him the next in dignity to the King of Egypt? And now also I am come
unto thee, God appears to Jacob about the Fountain of Covenant.
to this end, that I may guide thee in thy journey, and that I may foretell thee
that thou shall depart this life in the arms of Joseph, and that thy posterity
shall be mighty and famous for many Ages, and shall possess that Land, the
Empire whereof I have promised them. Encouraged and made confident by this
dream, he more willingly hastened Egypt with his sons, and his family, whose
number amounted to Threescore and ten. Ver. 6, 7, ad 26.
Their names, in that they are somewhat hard, I should not mention, were it not
to satisfy some, Jacob with his Sons and Nephews depart into Egypt.
who contend that we are Egyptians, and not Mesopotamians. The sons of Jacob
therefore are twelve in number, of whom Joseph came thither long before them.
The rest are these with their sons. Reuben had four sons, Enoch, Phales,
Essalon, and Charmis. Jacob's Progeny.
Simeon had six, Jumilas, Jamin, Puthod, Jachen, Zoar, and Zaar. Levi also had
three, Gelsem, Chaath, and Marari. Juda had likewise three, Sala, Phares, and
Zara; with two sons of Phares, Esron, and Amyr. Issachar had four, Thulas,
Phrusas, Job, and Samaron. Zabulon had three, Sarad, Elon, and Janel. These
were the children which Jacob had by Leah, who also led with her Dinah her
daughter: the number of whom Rachel had two sons, of which the elder was called
Joseph, who had likewise two, Manasses, and Ephraim. Benjamin had ten,
Bolossus, Baccaris, Asabel, Gela, Naman, Ises, Aros, Nomphthis, Optatis, and
Sarod. These fourteen added to those abovenamed, make up the number of Forty
seven. And this was the legitimate issue of Jacob. But by Bala, Rachel's
handmaid, he had Dan, and Nepthalim; this latter had four sons, Elein, Gunnes,
Sares, and Hellim. Dan had only one son called Vsis. Now if these be added to
the abovenamed, they make up the number of Fifty four. But Gad and Asser were
born by Zelpha, Leah's handmaid; Gad was attended by seven sons: Zophonias,
Vgis, Sunis, Zabros, Erines, Erodes, and Ariel. Asser had one daughter, Ver. 30.
and six sons, Jacob almost deceased for joy.
whose names were Jomnes, Essus, Juba, Baris, Abars, Melmiel. These Jacob. Genesis
47. 2.
But Joseph understanding that his father was at hand (for Juda posted before
to give him notice thereof) went out to meet him, Joseph with his five Brethren.
and did so, near a Town called Heroes. Jacob was filled with such extreme and
unexpected joy, that he had almost expired; and that of Joseph was little less.
He desired his father to march onwards by easy journies, and taking with him
his five brethren, hasted unto the King, signifying unto him, that his father
with all his family were arrived. The King no sooner understood it, but he
joyfully asked Joseph in what employments he took delight: who answered him,
that his exercise was in keeping of Cattle, and that he had no other Trade.
This answer he made, to the intent they might not be divided one from another,
but that living Egyptians, if so be they should be conversant in the same
profession; Ver. 3, ad 10.
whereas this people had little experience in the keeping of Cattle. Jacob
talks with Pharaoh, and is appointed to inhabit Heliopolis.
Now when Jacob was brought into the King's presence, and had done him
reverence, and prayed God for the prosperity both of him and his Realm, Pharaoh
asked him how old he was? and he answered, that he was an hundred and thirty
years old; at which when the King admired, he added, that his Ancestors had
lived far longer. Then Pharaoh appointed him and his sons to dwell in
Heliopolis, where also the King's shepherds had their pastures. But the Famine
increased in Egypt, and the calamity was without remedy, The famine in Egypt.
by reason that Nilus did not overflow the earth after its usual manner; and on
Joseph give them Corn without ready money: Ver. 16, 17, 20.
which when they began to want, A great profit redounded to the King by this
famine.
they exchanged their Cattle and Slaves for Corn; and they that had Lands, sold
a portion thereof unto the King for their provision. And when by this means all
these possessions came into the King's hands, they went to inhabit here and
there, as they could, to the end that the King might be more assured of the
possession of their Land; the Priests only were excepted, to whom the Lands
which they had, remained entire. Finally, this necessity reduced both the minds
and bodies of the whole Nation into servitude, after such a manner, that they
esteemed no labor or means unseemly, that Joseph visiting every City of the
Kingdom, and assembling the multitude in every one of them, restored them the
possession of those Lands which they had sold to the King, The year of the
World, 2311. before Christ's Nativity, 1653.
and exhorted Joseph commanded them to pay the fifth part of their profits to
the King.
and by this means, not only Joseph's authority, but also the Peoples hearts
were not a little tied unto the King: and the inheritance of the fifth part of
the profits remained with the Kings that succeeded, and all their Posterity.

But Jacob, after he had lived 17* years in Egypt, ended his life in the arms
of his Sons, having first prayed God to give them prosperity and abundance; and
prophesied, that every one of their posterities should attain to the possession
of a part of the Land of Canaan, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 8.
as in process of time it came to pass. Besides, praising his Son Joseph, for
that forgetting Joseph's Sons, Genesis 49. 33.
Ephraim and Manasses, Jacob dyed when he was 147 years old.
into their number, at such time as they should divide the Land of Canaan, as
hereafter it shall be declared. Last of all, he prayed them to bury him in
Hebron. He lived 150 years wanting three, being second to none of his Ancestors
in piety, Genesis 50. 13.
and obtained the same blessing, Jacob is buried in Hebron.
in that he was a man adorned with equal virtues. Joseph, by the King's
permission, transported his Fathers body to Hebron, and there buried it very
magnificently. But his Brothers fearing to return with him into Egypt, in that
they suspected lest their Father being dead, he should be revenged on them, in
that they had not any Friend left alive, under whose favor they might hope for
pardon, he Joseph dies when he was 110 years old.
But he likewise dyed, when he had lived* 110 years; a man endowed with
admirable virtue, prudent in all Affairs, and moderate in his Government: by
which means it came to pass, that neither his Foreign Birth, nor his
Calamities, whereof we have spoken, did any ways hinder him, but that he was
exalted and continued in high dignity. Genesis 50. 22, ad 26.
The rest of his Brothers also, having spent their lives in happiness, dyed in
Egypt, whose bodies their Sons and Nephews transported and buried in Hebron:
Joseph's Bones translated into Canaan.
but Joseph's bones were afterward translated by the Hebrews into Canaan, at
such time as they departed out of Egypt into Canaan; for hereunto had he Egypt.

CHAP. V.
Of the affliction which the Hebrews endured in Egypt, for the space of 400
years.
THE Egyptians are a Nation addicted to pleasures and delicacy, Exodus 1.
impatient of labor, The History of the Book of Exodus.
and affecting gain: whence it came to pass, that bearing hatred to the
Hebrews, and envying their happiness, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 9.
they were very evilly disposed toward them. For seeing the Race of the
Israelites flourish and abound in Riches, which they got by their labor Exodus
1. 1, 2, etc.
they conceived an opinion that their advancement and increase, would be the
overthrow and decrease of the Egyptians; so that at length they forgot the
benefits which Joseph had done to them: The envy of the Egyptians toward the
Hebrews.
and after the Royalty was transported into another Family, they committed
diverse outrages against the Israelites, and complotted against them in what
manner they might more grievously afflict them. They enjoined them therefore to
cut Nilus into diverse Trenches, Ver. 11.
and to inviron their City with Walls, and to build Fortifications and Banks,
The Hebrews insupportable servitude.
whereby the inundations of the River might be diverted. They also employed our
Nation in building their high and vain Pyramides, compelling them to learn
diverse Arts, and to accustom themselves to endure Labor; and in such
afflictions lived the Israelites for the space of 400 years, the Egyptians
studying nothing else but to The Prophecy as touching Moses.
and our Countrymen endeavoring always to surmount all these difficulties.
Living in this estate, there grew afterward another occasion, which instigated
them the more to seek the ruin and desolation of our Nation. For one of the
Sacred Secretaries (to whose predictions those kind of People do very much
attribute) foretold the King, Ver. 16. 22.
that about that time there should be One born among the Israelites, that
should grievously afflict the estate of the Egyptians, Pharaoh commanded that
all the Male-children of the Israelites should be put to death.
and wonderously enhance the glory of the Israelites, and surpass all other in
virtue, and purchase to himself immortal glory, if so be he should attain to
man's estate. Wherewith the King being greatly terrified, published an Edict, by
the advice of this Secretary, that whatsoever Male-child should be born among
the Israelites, it should be cast into the River to be drowned: he Egyptian
Midwives diligently to observe the time when the Hebrew Women Travailed with
Child, because he trusted not to the Midwives of their own The year of the
World, 2373. before Christ's Nativity, 1591.
He Enacted also a Law with a penalty, that if any should be so bold to conceal
their Children, both they and all their Family should be put to death. Great
was their calamity, not only because they were deprived of their Children and
the Parents themselves made the Ministers to murder their own Children; but
also because they foresaw hereby, the certain and infallible extirpation of
their whole Nation, by reason that when the Children were slain, Exodus 2. 1, 2,
3.
the Parents themselves, not long after, were assured to die: thus lamented
they in themselves the extreme misfortune whereinto they were fallen. But no
man whatsoever, though he complot never so many stratagems, can resist the Will
of God. Amarames, Moses Father, prays God to be merciful to the Hebrews.
For both the Child, of whom the Sacred Secretary had fore-prophesied, was
secretly brought up undiscovered by the Kings Spies; and proved by the Amram,
an Hebrew born, and a Noble man amongst his Nation, fearing both the public
peril, lest the whole Nation should be brought to nothing by the want of issue;
and his own private misfortune, whose Wife at home was big with Child, and
ready to lie down, was troubled in his mind, and uncertain what to do. For
which cause he made his recourse unto God, beseeching him that at the length he
would have mercy on that People by whom only he had been perpetually honored;
and that it would please him to bring to an end the present affliction, which
threatened the whole Nation with utter ruin and destruction. God being moved to
mercy by his most humble Prayer, appeared to him in a Dream, and comforted him,
commanding him to be of good courage, telling him, That he had in memory the
Abraham departing alone out of Mesopotamia into Canaan, besides other
felicities, had issue by his Wife that was formerly barren, and left ample
possessions to his Successors: to Ismael, Arabia; to Chetura's Children,
Troglottite; and to Isaac, Canaan. Nor could they ever forget without impiety
and ingratitude, the attempts also which were happily achieved in War by his
assistance; that Jacobs Name is renowned amongst Foreign Nations, both in
respect of the felicity wherein he lived, and that which by hereditary Right he
left to his posterity; who taking their original from 70 Men that accompanied
their Father into Egypt, Egyptians have condemned all the Hebrews Children to
death, should be born to him: that he should not be discovered by the
constituted Spies; and having escaped beyond all expectation, should he be
brought up, and in due time deliver the Hebrews from the thraldom of the
Egyptians, and obtain an eternal memory for this his famous action, not only
amongst his own Nation, but also amongst strangers: that he should also have a
brother, that should deserve both in himself, and in his posterity, to inherit
the Priesthood for ever. Exodus 2. 1, 2, 3* ad 10.
After these things were declared in a Vision unto Amram, he awaked, and told
it to his wife Jochabel; and notwithstanding the prediction Moses birth.
their suspicion and fear the rather increased more and more: for they were not
only pensive in respect of their Child, but also by reason that the future
great good fortune that was promised them, seemed incredible. But soon after,
the woman being brought to Bed, gave credit to the Oracle, having had so easy
and gentle a Labor, that she beguiled the Overseers and Spies, in that she felt
none of those Throes which commonly afflict such as are in Labor: so that she
nourished the Infant three months secretly in her house, without being in any
sort discovered. But afterward, Amram fearing to be surprised, and doubting
lest he should incur the Kings displeasure, if the matter were discovered,
whereby both he, and the Child should be made away, and Gods promises should be
frustrate, he chose rather wholly to commit the safety of his son to Ver. 3.
Whilst in this manner it was born down by the stream, Mariam, the sister of
the young Infant, Moses cast into the flood.
by her Mothers command, went along the Bank on the other side of who for their
profit, The year of the World, 2376. before Christ's Nativity, 1588.
and particular security, seek the ruin and destruction of others

Thermuthis, Ver. 5.
the King's daughter, walking alone the River side, espied this Basket carried
away by the course of the stream, Thermuthis, Pharaohs daughter, causes Moses
to be taken out of the River.
and presently commanded certain Swimmers to fetch it to Land, and bring it
before her: who executing her Command, she opened the Basket, and beheld the
Child; who, in that he was fair and well featured, did greatly delight her.
Thus God so loved and favored Moses, that he caused him both to be nourished
and brought up by them, who, for fear lest he should be born, had decreed to
Hebrews. Thermuthis therefore commanded them to fetch her a Nurse who might
give the Child suck: who refusing the same, as all other Nurses did that were
sent for to suckle him, Mariam, as if by good fortune, and not of set purpose,
she had light into their company, began to speak thus unto Thermuthis: In vain
(said she) O Princess, do thou strive to give this Babe suck by any but an
Hebrew Nurse, for he will not accept it: for if thou call unto thee a Nurse of
the same Nation, and agreeable with his nature, doubtless he will take the
nipple. This Speech of hers being both heard, and plausibly accepted, the
Princess commanded her to bring her an Hebrew woman that gave suck; which she
diligently performing, returned, and brought her Mother with her, whom none of
the assistants knew; and who presenting her breast unto the Child, Moses,
whence he received his name.
so that upon the Princess command, the suckling of the Child was wholly
committed unto her. By reason of this accident, and for that he was cast into
the River, he was called Moses; for the Egyptians call water, Mo; and saved,
Yses: so this name, composed of these two words, was imposed on this Child; who
afterward (without exceptions) became the wisest Man among the Hebrews,
according as God had foretold: Moses, the 7th after Abraham.
He was the seventh after Abraham; for he was Amrams son, and Amram son unto
Cathis, and he to Levi, and Levi to Jacob; who was the son of Isaac, who was
the son of Abraham. He had a judgment riper than his age: for even amongst his
childish delights, he showed himself more discreet than all his equals; and
whatsoever he did, it gave testimony, that at such time as he should attain to
Man's estate, he would be Ver. 10.
only to look upon him: for the admirable beauty of this Infant, Moses the
adopted son of Thermuthis, daughter unto Pharaoh.
did ravish all those that saw him. Whence it came to pass, that Thermuthis, in
that she had no other Issue, adopted him for her Heir; and carrying him to the
King her Father, she presented him to him, saying, That she was careful of a
Successor, by reason God had not vouchsafed him to have any Issue; for (says
she) I have brought up this Infant no less excellent in wit, than divine in
beauty, having received him miraculously from the River Nilus, and I have
decreed to adopt him my Child, and to establish him as Successor to thee in thy
Kingdom. This said, she delivered the Infant into her Fathers arms: who, after
he had embraced and hugged him at his breast, (to give his daughter the more
content) he put his Diadem upon the Child's head: but Moses pulling it from his
head, after a childish manner, cast it on the ground, and spurned it with his
feet; which act of his was supposed ominous to the Realm, and dangerous for the
King. Whereupon the sacred Secretary (who had foretold, that his Nativity would
be the destruction of the Egyptians) willed them to kill the Child, crying out
with a loud voice; to the King, after this manner: O King, this Child, by whose
death God promises us security, has already confirmed the presage, insulting
over thy Kingdom, and spurning thy Diadem: Take from the Egyptians that fear
which they have conceived of him, by his death; and from the Hebrews that hope
which they build on his courage and life. Ver. 10.
But Thermuthis hastily conveyed him thence, and the King was not overforward
to lay hands on him, Moses delivered from death.
by reason that God disposed all things in this manner, in that he had a care
of Moses preservation. He was therefore very carefully brought up: and by
reason of him, the Hebrews in general were replenished with good hope; but by
the Egyptians, his education both was suspected and grudged at: yet by reason
that if the Lad should have been slain, there was not any one, either akin, or
adopted, that could pretend to the succession of the Crown of Egypt, they
abstained from his slaughter. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 10. al. 7.
Being therefore thus born, and brought up, when he increased in years, he
evidently, by his virtue, made it known unto the Egyptians, that he was
Hebrews, by this occasion which ensues. The Ethiopians, who confine upon
Egypt, having spoiled and destroyed the Country round Egyptians; who, incensed
against them for the wrongs and injuries which they had done, levied an Army,
intending to revenge them of that disgrace which their Enemies had offered
them: but in the Battle they were all put to flight, so that many of them were
slain; and the rest shamefully flying, Ver. 11.
returned with ignominy worse than death, into their own Country. The
Ethiopians proud with this good fortune, The Egyptians war against the
Ethiopians
instantly pursued them: and supposing it a cowardly part, not to take the
benefit of their present good fortune, and conceiving an assured hope of
conquering Egypt, they entered the Country, and generally wasted the same: and
having tasted of the sweetness of pillage, without any temper or moderation in
their Victory, they were encouraged to attempt greater matters. And whereas
Memphis, even to the Sea, arriving near no City that had the heart, or durst
make head against them. By which calamities, the Egyptians being much
oppressed, they send one to ask counsel of the Oracle, by what means they might
redress their miseries; and when an answer was given them, That they should
choose an Hebrew to assist them in the Wars, the King commanded his daughter to
give them Moses; who, together with the Empire, might govern the whole Army.
She taking an Oath of the King* that no injury or violence should be offered
him, delivered him into his hands; esteeming it to be a great good fortune for
Moses, that he was called to the succor of her Country: and, on the other
side, blaming the Priests, The Egyptians require Moses to be their Captain.
whom they had adjudged to be slain as their common Enemy. But Moses, exhorted
by Thermuthis, and the King, willingly took the charge upon him. Whereat the
Priests of both Nations were very joyful: for the Egyptians hoped, that when by
his virtue and valor he had overcome their Enemies, they afterward might more
easily dispatch and murder him, by some treason and sinister means; Moses
marches against the Ethiopians.
and the Hebrews conceived an hope, that they might get out of Egypt, by reason
that Moses was the General of the Army. Moses therefore making haste, before
such time as the Enemies had any notice that he was dislodged, he levied his
Army, and conducted them, not along the banks of the River, but through the
main Land; wherein he made manifest his most admirable prudence. For the
journey by Land being very Ibis, who are mortal Enemies to Serpents, and before
whom the Serpents flee; and sometimes, in flying from them like Hearts, they are
laid hold of, and swallowed by them. Otherwise these Birds are managed Greeks
do already know what kind of Bird it is.

When therefore he arrived in the Country of Serpents, The victory which Moses
and the Egyptians had against the Ethiopians.
he let fly his Ibis against the venomous Beasts, and made use of them to
encounter the other. And having marched in this sort, he surprised the
Ethiopians, before they suspected him; and suddenly charging them, he overcame
them in Battle, spoiling them of the hope they had to conquer Egypt: and
entering the Towns of Ethiopia, he razed them, and made a great slaughter of the
Inhabitants. The Egyptian Army having tasted this happy success under the
conduct of Moses, omitted not the pursuit; especially, for that they saw that
the Ethiopians were well nigh conquered, Saba their chief City besieged.
or rather wholly destroyed: and in the end having driven them Saba, the chief
City of Ethiopia, (which Cambyses called Meroe, for the love which he bore unto
his sister, who was so called) they besieged them. The City was strong, and
very hard to be assailed, by reason of the River Nilus which environs it round
about: on the other side, the Rivers of Astapus and Astaobora, flow in so
fiercely, that they could neither break the course of the water, nor wade over
the stream: for the City is built in an Island, environed with a strong wall
round about, having great Ramparts betwixt the Rivers and the walls built, to
resist the inundations of the waters: by reason whereof, that the City could be
very hardly taken, although the opposite Army had found means to pass the
water. Now, when Moses was much troubled that his Army profited nothing,
Tharbis, the King of Ethiops daughter, requires love and marriage at Moses
hands^
by reason that the Enemy durst not encounter them in open field, Tharbis, the
daughter of the King of Ethiopia, beholding Moses as he approached with his
Army near the walls of the City, and seeing how valiantly he fought, and
behaved himself, and wondering at the Exploits and Enterprises which he made,
The year of the World, 2400. before Christ's Nativity, 1564.
(which was the cause that the Egyptians, almost despairing of their
Ethiopians, (not long before esteemed the Conquerors, and happy in their
warlike exploits and fortunate executions) were in the greatest extremity of
danger, she was surprised with love of him, and for that this passion augmented
more and more in her, she sent to him seven of her most faithful household
servants, to offer him her love. Which he accepted, on condition that she
should deliver the City into his hands; promising her, by a solemn Oath, That
when he was Master thereof, he would take her to Wife, without falsifying, or
breach of his promise. The matter was no sooner motioned, but the effect
followed. Having conquered the Ethiopians, and given thanks to God for the
favors he had done him, Moses accomplished the Marriage, and sent the Egyptians
back again into their Country. Who nevertheless The Egyptians seek to betray
Moses.
and began seriously to consult and advise amongst themselves, how they might
destroy him; suspecting lest by reason of the happy success he had had, should
begin to think of making himself Master of Egypt. They accused him therefore of
Murder before the King, who already of himself had him in suspicion, as well
through the hatred he bare him for his noble carriage and courage, Exodus 2. 11.
ad 14.
whilst he was General, as also through the fear he had conceived of the
destruction of Egypt, foretold by his Priests, who incessantly incited him
against Moses: so that the King was upon the point to lay hands on him, and
murder him.

But he having intelligence of these practices, escaped, and fled secretly,
flying from Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 11. all 8.
And arriving near a City of the Madians situate upon the shore of the Red
Sea, that was named by one of Abraham, and Chetura's sons, he sat him down near
a Fountain, Moses flies to the City of Madian.
refreshing himself, and taking his ease, after his laborious journey; for it
was about Noon, and the City already appeared in his sight. In this place an
occasion befell, by which he both gave proof of his virtue, and found an
opportunity to better his estate. For whereas the Region is much troubled with
want of water, the Shepherds had a custom, to strive which of them should first
possess the Pits, for fear lest the water would be quite consumed by others,
before they and their Catttel had quenched Raguel, otherwise called Jethro, the
Priest, (whom the Inhabitants of that place held in great estimation) who had
the charge to attend their Fathers flocks; for that is the exercise wherein the
Troglodites are wont to employ their Women. These hasted to draw sufficient
water for their flocks into the troughs, A v. 16. ad 19.
expressly made to receive the water; Moses assisteth Raguels daughters against
the shepherds.
and when in the mean time the shepherds came and surprised them, and drove
away the Virgins, to the end they might be Masters of the water, Moses judging
it a shame to himself to suffer this outrage, drove away the shepherds, who
would have enjoyed that which appertained not unto them, and gave a just
assistance to the dismayed Maidens; who, as soon as they were returned into
their Fathers presence, told him the outrage Moses into his presence, to the
end he might thank him according as he deserved. As soon as he was come, Raguel
told him, That his daughters had given him to understand, how kindly he had
assisted them: and having his virtue in admiration, he said, that he had not
adventured himself, Ver. 21.
nor done kindness to those that were without sense of the courtesies that were
showed unto them, Ragnel marries his daughter to Moses, Hedio and Ruffinus,
cap. 12.
but unto those who were capable to give him thanks; yea, so ready to requite
him, that the greatness of their requital should far surpass the measure
Zephora to Wife, and made him Superintendent and Master of the flocks (in
which, in those days, the wealth and riches of most Nations consisted.) Moses
having obtained this good fortune at Jethro's hands, (for such was Raguels
surname) he abode there with him, and attended his flocks. But not long after
he led his Cattle to graze near the Mountain Sinai, which is the highest of all
those that are in that quarter, and good for pasturage, by reason of the
wholesome Herbs that grow thereabouts: which notwithstanding was not fed upon
before that time, because the shepherds durst not frequent it, in regard of an
opinion of those that dwelt in that Country, That God inhabited that Mountain.
There happened there unto him a mavelous Prodigy, ^xod. 3. 1, 2.
which was, that a flame of fire seemed God appeared to Moses in the bush.
without offending either the green Herbs, or the Flowers, or the Boughs
charged with fruit, although the flames were great and vehement. He, not a The
year of the World, 2454. before Christ's Nativity, 1510.
at last grew more and more so, when he heard a voice issuing out of the fire,
which called him by his name; charging him with boldness, in that he was not
afraid to tread upon that ground, which hitherto had been frequented by no Man;
bidding him to depart afar off from the flame, and content himself with that
vision; God convinces Moses and the Israelites by miracles, to the end they
might put trust in his promises
for although that he were a virtuous Man, yet that he ought not to be curious
to make further search into the same. The same voice also told him, That the
honor and glory which he obtained amongst Men, was by the assistance of God:
charging him to be of a good courage, and to repair into Egypt, for in that
place he should be Captain and Guide of the Hebrew Nation, and should deliver
the People which were there, from the outrage and servitude which they
suffered. For (said the voice) they shall Abraham dwelt, and they shall enjoy
all sorts of blessings, under the conduct of thee and thy prudence. Moreover,
it commanded him, That having brought the Hebrews out of Egypt, he should offer
sacrifice of Thanksgiving, at such time as he should arrive again in that
place. And such was the Oracle which he received out of the flame. Moses
altogether ravished at that which he had both heard and seen, spoke thus: O
Lord, it were madness in me, and no prudence, if I should distrust thy power,
which I reverence, and which I know has been manifested unto my Predecessors;
notwithstanding, I stand in doubt, how I, who am a Man of no eloquence, and of
less force, should persuade my Brethren, by my words, to forsake the Country
wherein they inhabit, to follow me into that Country whither I will conduct
them. And although they should be persuaded, how can I force Pharaoh to permit
them to depart from thence, by whose labors and travels the Egyptians are
daily increased in goods and riches? Whereupon God commanded him to trust in
his assistance, C. 4. v. 2, 3.
and to be of good courage, and promised that if he had need of eloquence,
Moses Rod is turned into a Serpent.
he would bestow upon him the faculty of persuasion; or if he were driven to
act any thing, that he would redouble his forces; commanding, That in
confirmation of those promises he had made him, Ver. 6.
he should let fall his staff upon the ground: Moses hand is made white.
which having done, a Dragon began to creep upon the ground, and in turning and
rolling himself, Ver. 9.
lifted up his Crest on high, making semblance, to defend himself against those
that should assail him, Moses pours water on the earth, and it turns to
blood.
and then a little while after became a staff again. Afterward he commanded
him to put his hand into his bosom, and no sooner A v. 10. ad 25.
it recovered its ordinary color. Moreover, he further willed him to draw
water out of the next Well, Moses is sent into Egypt, to deliver the Israelites.
and to pour it on the ground, and he saw it turned into a bloody color.
Amazed at these accidents, he was commanded to be of good courage, and assured
that he should have great assistance. Moreover, that he should use these signs
before all Men, to the end, (says God) that all may believe, that being sent
by me, thou do all this according to my Commandment. Furthermore, I enjoin
thee, That without any further delay, thou haste into Egypt; and that thou
travel day and night, without losing time, without delaying any more, to succor
the poor Hebrews, grievously afflicted in Egypt. Moses having no cause to
distrust that which God Egypt, he would vouchsafe to further the effect:
beseeching him further, that he would not conceal his name from him, to whom he
had participated the hearing of his voice, and the sight of his presence: that
it might please him therefore to declare unto him his name, to the end, that
when he should offer sacrifice unto him, he might call upon the same. God
declared unto him his name, which before time had been concealed amongst Men,
and of which also it is not lawful for me to speak. Moses wrought these signs
not only at that time, but also when or wheresoever he thought it requisite: by
all which he gave further credit to the fire which had appeared unto him, and
assured himself, Hedia and Ruffinus, cap. 13. all 10.
that God would be his favorable Defender, that he would deliver his Brethren,
and involve the Egyptians in great calamities. And after that he understood,
that Pharaoh King of Egypt was dead, (during whose life, he fled from thence)
he requested Raguel, to give him leave to depart into Egypt, for the profit of
those of his Nation; and taking with him Sephora, (who was Raguels daughter,
and his married wife) and Gerson and Eleazar, his children, which he had by
her, he departed into Egypt. Now this name of Gerson, in the Hebrew Tongue,
signifies Foreign: and Eleazar signifies favored by God; in memory, Cap. 4.
v. 20.
that Moses had escaped from amongst the Egyytians, by the assistance of the
God of his Fathers. Moses departs from Madian, to go into Egypt.
And as he approached near the Mountains, Aaron, his Brother, by the
commandment of God, came forth to meet him; to whom he declared all that had
Moses 2 sons, Gerson and Eleazar.
the Men of great estimation among the Hebrews (having intelligence of his
coming) came out to meet him, before whom Moses made use of the abovesaid power
of doing Miracles, The year of the World, 2454. before Christ's Nativity, 1510.
by reason he could not persuade them by words: Hebrews were ready to obey him,
and that they protested to follow him in all that he should command them, Moses
entertained by the Hebrews, shows them his miracles.
through the earnest desire they had to be at liberty; he presented himself
before the King, who had newly undertaken the Government, and showed him the
great benefits he had done unto the Egyptians, at such time as they were
despised by the Ethiopians, who had spoiled all their Country, Exodus 5. v. 1*
2.
and how he had spared no travel, but sustained all the charge of the War, as
if it had been waged for his own proper Nation. Moses persuadeth the King of
Egypt to dismiss the Israelites.
On the other side, he opened unto him the dangers which he had unjustly
suffered for his recompense. He afterward discoursed Sinai, and the talk which
God had in that place with him; Exodus 7. 9.
and the signs in particular which had been showed unto him, Moses shows
Pharaoh his miracles.
in confirmation of those things which were promised, exhorting the King not to
mistrust or resist the Will of God. The King hearing this, began to mock him:
but Moses made him see, in effect, the signs which he had showed near the
Mountain of Sinai. But the King, instead of being moved therewith, waxed angry,
and grievously reviled him; accusing him, for that in times past he fled away,
for fear to be slain in Egypt, and at this present returned thither, under a
subtle pretext, cloaking his Craft with Magic and Enchantment, the more to
afright him. And at the same instant he called into his presence the Priests of
Egypt, to let him see those signs, and to make it manifest, that the Egyptians
Moses being moved herewith, said, O King, I despise not the wisdom of the
Egyptians; but I protest, that that which I have done, does so far surpass all
their Magic and Art, as there is difference between divine and humane things.
I will therefore show you, Ver. 12.
that that which I do, is not by Enchantment, nor with a false appearance of
verity, but by the providence and power of God. Moses Rod devoureth the Rods of
the Egyptians.
This said, he cast his Rod on the ground, commanding it to change it self into
a Serpent: whereupon it obeyed, and wandering here and there, it devoured all
the Rods of the Egyptians, which seemed to be so many Serpents; Ex. 5. 5. ad 19.
Moses took his staff into his hand again, and it reassumed its pristine form;
Pharaoh enjoineth the Hebrews to more grievous tasks.
but the King being never the more astonished, (but the rather incensed at that
which was done) said, That this wisdom and subtilty of Moses, which he used in
disgrace of the Egyptians, should profit him nothing. He commanded therefore
the Overseer of the Works, who had the Government of the Hebrews, that he
should remit nothing of their labor, but that he should oppress them with more
tedious and grievous tasks than they were wont to be put unto: whereupon (where
he was wont to allow them straw, to make their Tyle with) he forbear, after
that time, to give them that allowance; and taxing them in the daytime to
follow their work, he appointed them by night to seek their straw, doubling
thereby the weight of their former labor. Notwithstanding all Moses would
neither desist from his purpose, in regard of the Kings threatening, or the
continual cry of his Countrymen, neither was in any sort dismayed thereat; but
with a confident and undaunted mind, Exodus 6. 6.
he resolutely proceeded to restore his Countrymen to their desired liberty.
Moses once more persuadeth the King to dismiss the Hebrews.
He therefore once again addressed to the King, persuading him to dismiss the
Hebrews, to the end they might repair to Mount Sinai, and sacrifice to God in
that place: For no less (says he) has he commanded, neither can any resist
his Will. That whilst God was yet favorable to him, his own interest obliged
him to grant the people the liberty which he demanded. That if he denied the
same, he could not accuse him as the cause of the Calamities which he should
draw upon himself by his disobedience, when he should see himself without
Children, the Air, Earth, and all the other Elements become Enemies to him, and
Ministers of the Divine vengeance. That nevertheless the people of the Hebrews
should (in despite of their resistance) depart out of their Country; but the
Egyptians should not escape the punishment of their hardness of heart. The King
despised these words of Moses, and would not be prevailed upon, wherefore most
grievous Plagues fell upon the Land of Egypt; all which I will particularly set
down, by reason that at that time the Egyptians suffered those things, which
never before happened to any other People; and likewise that I may manifest, that
Moses erred not in any of his Predictions: and besides, for that it is
expedient for Men to learn and do those things which are agreeable to Gods
Will, The first plague of the Egyptians, water turned into blood.
for fear lest he being provoked and incensed against them, should punish them
for their injustice. For first of all, by the commandment of God, the River
Nilus was turned into Exodus 7. 10.
but when Egyptians, but to the Hebrews it seemed good and sweet in taste,
without any ways changing the nature thereof. Hereupon the King (not knowing
what to do, and seeing this strange accident, and being afraid, in behalf of
his Subjects) permitted the Hebrews to depart. But no sooner was this Plague
ceased, but he presently changed his mind, and would not permit them liberty to
go away. For which cause, God (seeing his ingratitude, and that he would not be
warned, notwithstanding he had delivered him from the former calamity)
inflicted another Plague upon the Egyptians. Exodus 9. 6.
He sent an infinite number of Frogs among them, Another plague of Frogs.
which covered the whole Country; and the River was so stored with them, that
they that drew water to drink, found it altogether Egyptians saw themselves so
sore pressed with these evils, the King commanded Moses to depart with the
Hebrews, whither he pleased. And as soon as he had spoken this, the multitude
of Frogs vanished, and appeared no more, neither on the earth, nor in the
water, but they retained their accustomed nature. No sooner was the earth
delivered from this curse, but Pharaoh forgot the cause thereof, and retained
the Hebrews still: and (as if he desired to experiment Chap. 8. 16.
for a multitude of Lice swarmed on the bodies of the Egyptians, The third
plague, of lice.
by which the poor men were miserably devoured; neither could they exterminate
that Race either by bathings or unctions. The King troubled with this calamity,
and fearing the ruin of his People, and bethinking him of the shameful end
thereof, was constrained to permit the People to depart: but (after the Plague
was appeased) he required, that they should leave their wives and children
behind them for pledges, till their return: and by this means he provoked Gods
wrath more heavily against him, Ver. ^4.
in that he supposed to delude his providence; as if it had not been God,
Hebrews behalf) had punished them, The fourth plague, venomous beasts.
but Moses, that had plagued the Egyptians. For God filled their Country with
diverse sorts of Insects, (the like whereof, before that time, had not been seen
there) which covered the earth, that it became desolate and untilled, and many
persons died by them; and those that remained alive, they were infected with
the poison exhaling from the number of dead and sick bodies. But
notwithstanding all these, the King still continued obstinate in his
wickedness, and disobedience unto God; permitting only, that the women and men
should depart, and that their children should be left behind them; but God
desisted not to punish his wickedness by diverse most grievous Plagues, far more
tedious than the former, yea, such as were dispersed over all the People.

C. 9. 3.
and corrupted inwardly: The fifth plague, the plague.
and after this sort, the greater part of the Egyptians perished. But the King
being not melted, nor mollified by this Plague, God rained down Hail upon them,
(which never before that time was seen in Egypt; Ver. 10.
and further so great, The sixth plague, botches.
or rather greater than that which falls to the Northward, near the Pole
Artique) though it was a considerable time of Spring, and spoiled all their
fruit. Ver. 23.
After which, an Army of Grasshoppers devoured all those buds and fruits which
were unhurt by the Hail; The seventh plague, hail.
so that all the hope which the Egyptians had of their Harvest, C. 10. 14.
was utterly overthrown. These afflictions had been sufficient to persuade a
man of the meanest wit (except a Reprobate) to grow wise, The eighth plague,
grasshoppers.
and make use of that which was most profitable for him. But Pharaoh knowing
the cause of Moses, to lead away the Hebrews with their Wives; but that they
should leave their substance behind them for a prey to the Egyptians, to
recompense them for what they had lost. Moses answered, That he demanded an
unjust thing, since that hereby they would not have wherewith to offer
sacrifice to God. C. 10. v. 22.
Now while the time passed in these consultations, a most dismal darkness
overspread the land of Egypt, The ninth plague, darkness.
by reason of which, many perished after sundry manners, and others feared to
run the same fate, living in the most disconsolate condition imaginable. This
darkness being dispersed, after three days, and so many nights, Moses seeing
that Pharaoh would not repent, nor let the people of Israel depart, came unto
As long as you shall resist the Ordinance of God, (who commands you to suffer
the Hebrews to depart) there is no means, whereby you may be exempted from
these mischiefs in doing that which you do. The King, enraged at these words,
threatened him to cut off his head, The year of the World, 2454. before Christ's
Nativity, 1510.
if once more he durst appear in his presence, to motion Moses answered him,
That he would no more speak unto him touching this matter; but that shortly
both himself, and the chiefest amongst the Egyptians, would entreat him and the
Hebrews to depart; which said, he forsook his presence. Ver. 28.
But God intending to express that he meant yet once more to plague the
Egyptians, Pharaoh drives away Moses.
and to constrain them to deliver the Hebrews, commanded Moses to declare unto
the people that they should have their sacrifice in a readiness, on the
thirteenth day of the month Xanthicus, Exodus 12. 2.
to celebrate the same the fourteenth of the said month, (by the Egyptians
called Pharmuth, Zanthicus amongst the Macedons, is April, as Suidas testifies.
and by the Hebrews Nisan, and Xanthicus by the Macedonians;) and that he
should lead forth all the Hebrews, carrying with them all their Goods.
Whereupon he who had the Hebrews already in a readiness to depart, and had
distributed them The Hebrews passover signifies a passage.
they burnt the flesh that remained, as being at the point to depart. Whereupon
even at this day we retain the said custom to sacrifice in like sort, and do
call this solemnity Pascha, which is as much as to say, the passage; by reason
that on that day God leaving and overpassing the Hebrews without harm, C. 12.
29.
struck the Egyptians with sickness, for a Plague in the nightime cut off all
the first begotten in Egypt; The tenth plague, the first begotten amongst the
Egyptians both men and beasts dye.
whereupon multitudes that dwelt round about the Palace, assembled themselves
in the presence of the King, and besought him to let the Hebrews go: for which
cause Pharaoh calling Moses, Egypt would be no more afflicted with such like
Plagues. Moreover, they honored the Hebrews with Presents, partly to the end
they should depart with the more expedition, partly for the neighborhood and
acquaintance sake which they had one with another. And as they departed, the
Egyptians wept, 33. The Israelites depart out of Egypt.
and repented them of the evil usage they had showed them; but they took their
way toward Latopolis, at that time desert, and in which place afterward
Babylon was built, at such time as Cambyses destroyed Egypt. The third day they
came unto Beelzephon near the Red Sea; and for that they wanted victuals in
this Desert, they tempered their Meal with water, and kneaded it as well as
they could, and baked Cakes, with which they sustained themselves for the space
of thirty Egypt, than enough to serve them for that time; at the end of which
they were in want of food, although they had lived very sparingly, The feast of
the Azymes.
rather feeding for necessity, than eating to satiety. For which cause, in
memory of that want, The number of the children of Israel.
we celebrate a feast for the space of eight days, which we call the feast of
Azymes, that is to say, of unleavened bread. But it is not easy to number the
multitude of them that came out of Egypt, if we consider the Women and
Children; but those that were of full age, and fit to bear Arms, were in number
six hundred thousand.


The Hebrews depart out of Egypt, under the conduct of Moses.
THus the Israelites departed out of Egypt the 14 day of the month Xanthicus,
430 years after Abraham our Father came into Can^an, and in the 215 year after
Jacob went down into Egypt, Exodus 14. 1, 7, 9.
and in the eightieth year of Moses age, who had Aaron to his Brother, three
years elder than himself; The time of their departure out of Egypt.
they carried also with them the Bones of Joseph, according as he had commanded
his Sons. But the Egyptians repented that they had suffered the Hebrews to
depart: Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 14.
the King also was very much moved; supposing, that which was fallen Moses
Enchantments; and it was concluded to pursue them. They therefore armed, The
Egyptians pursue the Hebrews.
and furnished themselves with all their abiliments of War, intending to pursue
them, with intent to bring them back, if they overtook them: for they said,
that God would no more be displeased against them, for that already they had
given them leave to depart. They hoped likewise very easily to bring them under
subjection, because they were all of them disarmed, and wearied with Travel.
And having inquired which way they held, Why Moses conducted them through
Palestine.
they hasted to follow them, although they knew the Region was very hard to
Travel in; not only for those that were to march in Troop, but also for those
that were to journey one by one. Now Moses conducted them this way, to the end,
that if the Egyptians should repent of their dismission, and hasten to pursue
them, they might receive the Philistines should understand their departure, by
reason they were displeased against the Hebrews, upon an ancient grudge which
they bear them; and Palestine confines and borders upon Egypt: wherefore he led
them not by the way that directly leads thither, but he intended to bring
them into Canaan, by conducting them far about, and through many calamities; to
the end, that afterward he might lead them to Mount Sinai, there to offer
Sacrifice, The Israelites are encompassed by the Egyptian multitudes, and
depart to the red Sea.
according to Gods commandment. As soon as the Egyptians overtook the
Israelites, they prepared themselves to fight, trusting to the number which
they had: for with them, there served 600 Chariots, with 50000 Horsemen, and
200000 armed Footmen. They also stopped the passages where they thought the
Hebrews might escape, enclosing Exodus 14. 16.
by reason of the dangerousness of the way; and by this means they excluded
them from all hope of escape, or flight: for on the one side they were shut in
by the Mountain, that extended it self even to the Sea: and on the other side,
by their Camp, pitched and embattelled before their faces, to cut them off from
the Champion, if so be they intended to fly that way. Seeing therefore that
they were in no security, but were hemmed in by the straitness of the place,
and by reason of want of provision, could not endure a siege, nor yet find any
ways to fly from their Enemies; neither, although they greatly desired to
fight, had they means to defend themselves, because they were disarmed.
Finally, Ver. 11, 12.
perceiving that there was no hope of safety left them, but only by their
abject The perplexity of the Israelites, being enclosed by the Egyptians.
they began to accuse Moses; forgetting those Prodigies which God had done to
set them at liberty: and their incredulity proceeded so far, that they were
upon the point to stone Moses, and voluntarily to yield themselves subject to
their former Thraldom. For they were much moved by the Tears of their Wives and
Children, who expected nothing but death, seeing themselves begirt with Rocks,
Seas, and Soldiers, and left destitute of all hope of flight. But although the
multitude were exasperated against Moses, yet ceased he not to take care of
them, and to have recourse to God; recounting to them what he had said in times
past, touching their deliverance; and assuring them, that after so many
Miracles, God would not suffer them to be subjected or overthrown by their
Enemies. Ver. 13.
And standing up in the midst of them, he said, Moses exhorts the people to
put their trust in God.
If your affairs had hitherto been managed by Men only, it were not amiss in
you to distrust them, le^t hereafter they should not bring them to their
determined and your desired issue. But in that at this time you distrust the
Providence of God, this shows you to be without sense, or understanding;
considering it is he that has made you see all those things which he promised
you by me, concerning your deliverance, even at that time when you your selves
expected it not: you rather ought to hope, that God will help and assist you in
these difficulties, who has brought to pass, that you are now in this strait,
to the end that when he shall have delivered you from these extremities, from
which neither you your selves, nor your Enemies suppose you can escape, he may
show his power and providence in your behalf: Ver. 13.
for God is not accustomed to yield his favorable assistance, when the dangers
are only easy and supportable; When God is most ready to help us.
but in those wherein all humane hope is lost and extinct. Therefore rest your
selves, your fortunes upon such a Helper, who can make great things small, and
the strongest feeble. Fear not the force and power of the Egyptians; and though
you have the Sea and Mountains before you, which permit you not to fly from
them, despair not of your lives: for God (if he please) can turn the Mountains
into Plains, and change the Sea into dry Land.

CHAP. VII.
The Hebrews are pursued by the Egyptians, the Red Sea divides it self, and
gives passage to the Hebrews, but overwhelmeth the Egyptian Army.
THis said, he conducted the Hebrews toward the Sea, in the sight of the
Egyptians; who being very much wearied with pursuit and travel, thought best to
forbear the Combat till the next day. Exodus 14, 15.
But when Moses was arrived upon the bank of the Sea, he took his Rod, and
called upon God, and implored his aid and succor in these words: O Lord, Thou
too well know, that it is impossible for us by humane force or policy, to
escape these extremities: Moses prayer unto God.
but thou art he only that can save this company, who have forsaken Egypt,
following thy Commandment. And since of our selves we have not any hope or
means, we only recommend our selves unto thy Providence, being assured that by
that means only we can be delivered from the pursuit and fury of the
Egyptians: Send us therefore speedily thine assistance, to the end that thy
Power may be known in our weakness. Relieve, encourage, and hearten thy People,
assuring them of their safety, who through their distrust have sinned against
thee: we are environed with difficulties, which notwithstanding thou can make
easy. For the Sea is thine, and this Mountain that incloseth us; which shall
open, and the Sea divide it self, if thou command. We may likewise fly
through the Air, if it please thy Power to deliver us in that manner. Having
made his Request unto God after this manner, Ver. 21.
he struck the Red Sea with his Rod; The Red Sea divides it self.
which suddenly dividing it self at the stroke, and retyring backwards, left a
dry Hebrews to escape. Moses seeing how God had heard his Prayer, and how the
Sea had left its Channel, he first of all entered into the same, Ver. 22, 27.
and commanded the Hebrews to follow him, marching through that way which God
had by his Divine Power provided for them, The Hebrews pass through the Red Sea,
the Egyptians are drowned therein.
willing them to rejoice at the danger which attended their Enemies, and to
give God thanks for the unexpected succors he had sent them: whereupon they
were not negligent, but marched boldly forward. At first the Egyptians supposed
them mad, and that they cast themselves headlong into manifest perdition: but
when they perceived that they were entered a good way without hurt, and that
they encountered no danger or let, they dislodged, and followed them, believing
the Sea would have given them passage also; and having set their Horse in the
Vauntguard, Egyptians having spent some time in arming themselves, the Hebrews
in the mean while got to the opposite shore, without any disturbance; which
made their Enemies more bold, supposing that no evil should happen unto them.
But they knew not that God had made this path expressly for the Hebrews; but
entered the same, as if it had been a common beaten way, forgetting that it was
made to save the Hebrews from danger, and not themselves, who sought to destroy
them. But as soon as all the Egyptian Army was entered, the Sea returned to his
old course, and with winds and waves overwhelmed the Egyptians. The showers
from Heaven fell upon them, vehement Thunders ratled from the Air, intermixed
with flashings and lightnings. In brief, there was nothing that by the wrath of
God could be inflicted upon Men, which at that Hebrews could not contain
themselves, for the joy they conceived at this their unexpected deliverance,
and the total ruin of their Enemies: Exodus 15. 1.
when they saw that they who designed to make them slaves again perforce, The
Israelites with Moses sing Songs for their deliverance.
were exterminated, and that God had been so visibly assistant unto them. When
they had escaped this danger, and perceived that their Enemies were punished,
after such a manner, as the like punishment had never been heard of amongst
Men; they all of them, during the whole Night, sung Hymns and Songs of
Thanksgiving. Moses likewise composed a Song in Verse, The Sea of Pamphylia
divided it self, for Alexanders Soldiers to pass there through.
containing the Praises of God, and a Thanksgiving The wind and tide drive the
Egyptians arms into the Hebrews Camp.
or it chanced of it self; since not long time ago, God so thinking it good,
the Sea of Pamphylia divided it self, to give way to Alexander, the King of
Macedon's Soldiers, having no other passage to destroy the Empire of the
Persians. The next day the Egyptians Arms, carried by force of the stream, were
cast ashore where the Army of the Hebrews was encamped: which when Moses
perceived that it was done by the Providence of God, to the intent they might
not be disarmed, he gathered them together, and furnished Hebrews therewith;
and afterward led them to Mount Sinai, to sacrifice to God, and to give him
thanks for their deliverance, in the behalf of the People, according as he
himself had before commanded.


Written by FLAVIVS JOSEPHVS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Third Book.
1. How Moses conducted the People out of Egypt to Mount Sinai. 2. Of the
slaughter of the Amalekites, and their Confederates; and of the prey which the
Israelites attained thereby. Raguel's counsel unto his Son-in-law, Moses. 4.
Moses ascending the Mountain of Sinai, brings down the Tables of the Ten
Commandments, which he had received at God's hands, to the People. 5. Of the
Tabernacle made by Moses in the Desert, resembling a portable Temple. 6. Of the
Ark wherein Moses enclosed the Tables of the Law. 7. Of the Golden Table and
Candlestick, and of the Altars of the Tabernacle. 8. Of the Apparel both of the
High Priests and the Inferiors. 9. Of Aaron's Priesthood, and of that which was
ordained as touching the Feasts and Sacrifices. 10. The Laws of Sacrifices and
Purifications. 12. Sedition against Moses, by reason of the want of Victuals:
and the punishment of the Seditious. 13. Of the Spies, who having seen and
searched the Country of Canaan, and the returning back again to the
Israelites, amated them with fear.


CHAP. I.
How Moses conducted the People out of Egypt to Mount Sinai.
THE joy which the Israelites had to see themselves thus delivered by the The
year of the World, 2454. before Christ's Nativity, 1510.
was not a little diminisht, by the weariness and tediousness of the
difficulties which they endured in their travel toward the Mountain of Sinai:
by reason that the Country was a Desert, and uninhabitable, destitute of
Victuals and Water; and not only barren of what serves for the sustenance of
Men, but also everywhere wanting pasturage and provision for Cattle: The
Israelites in the Desare are distressed for want of water* v. 1, 2, 3*
so that they were constrained to bear with them the water which they had drawn
before they entered the Desert, according as their Captain and Conductor had
commanded them: which being spent, they dig'd Pits, out of which they drew
water with great difficulty, by reason of the hardness of the ground: and
further, the water which they found in those places was bitter, and no ways fit
to drink; Marah signifies bitternes^*
they arrived about evening in a certain place, which by reason the waters were
brackish, they called Marah, that is to say, Bitterness. There, wearied with
Travel, Exodus 15. 23.
and their Provision failing them, they began to be pinched with necessity, so
that they resolved to stay in that place; and the rather, in that they found a
certain Pit there, which although it were insufficient to satisfy so great an
Army, yet for that they found it in that Country, it yielded them no little
consolation. For they were given to understand, that if they traveled onwards,
they should find no water; and for the water of that Pit, it was so bitter and
unfit for drinking, that it neither was agreeable to the taste, nor supportable
for their very Cattle. Whereupon Moses seeing Ver. 15.
He addressed himself therefore in most humble manner to Almighty God, Moses
beseeches God to change the bitter waters into sweet.
praying that it would please him to amend the evil quality of the water, and
to make it potable. Which grace and favor he no sooner obtained, but he took a
Hebrews to understand, that God had heard their prayers, and that he had
promised to give them the water they desired, if so be they would obey him, and
with alacrity and diligence perform that which should be commanded them. And
when they were inquisitive what The year of the World, 2454. before Christ's
Nativity, 1510.
to the intent the water might be changed; he enjoined every one of them that
was of best strength and ability amongst them, to draw water; giving them to
understand, that so soon as they had drawn out great store of water from the
Pit, the rest that should remain, would be very good and convenient to be
drunk. They obeyed, and the water agitated and purified by often drawing, Exodus
16. 1.
became potable, and refreshed the weary multitude. The Israelites came to
Elim, where they began to murmur against Moses, for want of sustenance.
Hereupon dislodging from that place, they came to Helim, a Country that afar
off seemed very pleasant, by reason that it was planted with Palm Trees: but
the nearer they approached it, the more tedious they found it, (for there were
no more than Seventy Palm Trees in that place, and they not very tall, or
well-grown, by reason of the dryness and barrenness of the Soil.) They found
also twelve Springs Moses, had made them both see and partake, they conceived
indignation Exodus 16. 3.
or whether forgetting their forepassed pleasures, they would suffer themselves
to be swallowed with their present misery. Exodus 15. 1. 10* 22.
He willed them therefore to take heed, Moses exhorts the people to remember
those benefits they had received at God's hands.
lest through their impatience and ingratitude, they should be found unworthy
of God's favor, if they neglected his Will, by whose direction they were
brought out of Egypt, and threatened and hated him, who was God's Minister;
especially since hitherto they could no ways complain of him in any thing which
he had undertaken to execute by the Commandment of God. Then reckoned he up
particularly unto them, how the Egyptians were plagued and destroyed, Moses
reckons up unto the people all the benefits which God had done unto them.
whilst contrary to God's Will, they endeavored to Moses implo^eth God's help.
And for that he knew that they had some reason to be thus moved, he addressed
Moses understood, he came down to the multitude; who perceiving joy in his
countenance, by reason of those promises which he had received from God,
exchanged their dolesom lamentations into gladness. He therefore standing up in
the midst of them, told them, that he brought unto them a most speedy remedy
for their necessity. Cap. 16. 13.
And not long after, a number of Quails (which about the gulf of Arabia
multiply and increase more than any sort of Birds) flew cross the Sea; God
sends Quails into the Hebrews Army.
and being wearied in their flight, came and fell amidst the Camp of the
Hebrews; Moses once more addressed himself to call upon God, yielding him
thanks for the present and future good he had promised him. The people being
after this manner fed and refreshed, God feeds the Israelites with Manna.
were soon after supplied with a new kind of food. For as Moses stretched out
his hands, and prayed to God, a dew descended from Heaven, which thickened
betwixt his hands: and for that he supposed it to be another kind of sustenance
sent them by God, Ver. 14.
he tasted the same, and found it very pleasant. Then addressing to the people,
who knew not what it was, but thought it to be Snow which fell in that place,
according to the season of the year, he told them, that it was no ordinary dew
falling from Heaven, as they supposed, but that God had sent it them, for
Honey; in odor, Bdellium; and in form and greatness, the grain of Coriander:
Ver. 16.
whereupon, every one gathered of it. And Moses commanded that every one of
them should particularly gather every day but the measure of an Assaron, A
Commandment, how much Manna should be gathered.
which is the tenth part of an Epha; which was done, lest the weaker should
want, whilst the stronger, through avarice, gathered more than sufficed them.
And if any one, contrary to the command, gathered more than was permitted,
although he toiled and traveled more than any of them, yet was his portion no
ways increased by that means. Assaron) remained till the next morning, was of
no value, but became bitter and full of Worms. So divine and admirable was this
kind of food, and of that nature, that who so had sufficient thereof, needed no
sort of sustenance. Moreover, even in these our days, there falls in that
Country a dew like that, Manna, what it signifies.
which God, in favor of Moses, sent for the peoples sustenance. The Hebrews
call it Manna; for in our Tongue, Man is an Interrogation, signifying, What is
that? Exodus 17. 1.
Thus lived they joyfully, being sustained by this kind of meat sent them from
Heaven, The Israelites fed 40 years space on Manna.
and used the same for the space of 40 years, during the time they were in the
Desert. But afterward when they were dislodged from that place, and encamped
near to Raphidim, they were extremely troubled with thirst; The Israelites
arrive at Raphidim, and are troubled with thirst.
for upon their first arrival, they found Moses. But he withdrawing himself
apart from the fury of the people, betook himself to God in prayer, beseeching
him, that as he had given them food in their necessity, 3.
he would now also give them drink, since they were ready to perish with
thirst; and praying him to provide them drink also, otherwise their meat was
unprofitable to them. God presently granted his prayer; promising Moses, that
he would give him a Fountain, and abundance of Water, from that place from
whence he least expected it. To which end, he commanded him to strike with his
Rod the Rock which was there hand by, and promised to make the water come forth
immediately, so that the people should have sufficient without taking pains to
Moses had received, he returned to the people, who expected him, and had their
eyes fixed upon him, with great impatience as he descended from the Rock, where
he had made his prayer. No sooner was he arrived, but he told them that God
would deliver them from the necessity wherein they were, and would graciously
grant them an unexpected relief, Moses strikes the Rock with his Rod, and
there issues water.
by causing a stream suddenly to break from that Rock. But they being amazed at
that which they heard, and doubting lest tired with thirst, and spent with
journeys, they should be enforced to hew and cleave the Rock; Moses struck the
same in such sort with his Rod, that it divided asunder, and there issued out
most clear and pure water in great abundance. The people were greatly
astonished at this so strange accident, and no less rejoiced. They fell to
drink of the Water, and Moses, seeing that God had honored him in this sort;
and they acknowledged God's providence, offering Sacrifices, and humbly
thanking him for the care he had over them. The Moses, that Water should in
this sort issue from the Rock.

CHAP. II.
How the Amalekites and their Associates were overcome, and how great a Prey
the Israelites obtained thereby.
BUt when the Renown of the Hebrews was become great, and spread abroad in all
parts, it came to pass, that the Neighboring Nations were in very great fear
of them: whereupon (sending Ambassages the one unto the other) they mutually
conspired

Amongst the rest, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 2.
those of the Country of Cobol, and the City Petra, who are called Amalekites,
(a Nation very warlike, and more active than the rest) were the chief Agents in
this Expedition: Exodus 17. 8, 9.
whose Kings both encouraged one another, and stirred up the Neighbor Nations
to the Israelites destruction; The Amalekites war against the Israelites.
telling them, that a Foreign Army, flying from the thraldom of the Egyptians,
had invaded their Country, whose multitudes were not a little to be suspected;
counselling them (before they had gathered head, and recovered more means, and
a Country to dwell in, and grew more confident, by their forbearance) to
charge them first, rather than to expect their increase, and so to oppress
them; esteeming it a better point of wisdom, to repress their insolency and
forwardness Hebrews. These determinations and designs of theirs, troubled Moses
very much, for that he expected no Hostility. When therefore he perceived that
the people were affrighted and amazed, to see themselves (being wholly
unprovided) to be charged by so strong and well-furnish'd an Army, he
re-comforted them, and willed them to bethink themselves of God's promises, who
by his power had set them at liberty; Ver. 9, 10.
Wealth, Moses encourages the people to expect nothing but victory.
and Munition, and the like; yet since they had God to friend, and ready to
fight for them against their Enemy, they ought to be of good courage, as being
furnished with more than humane supplies. Alleging further, that they were not
ignorant how great an Assister God was, having had so often trial of his
goodness in their greatest dangers, as an Enemy to their enemies, and favorable
to their proceedings: which favor of his he most manifestly expressed, by his
miraculous deliverance of them from hunger and thirst; by procuring them free
escape, when they were shut in by the Sea and Mountains: And that which should
most animate them to the Fight and Victory, Moses thus having encouraged the
people by his words, called unto him the chiefest of the Tribes, and every one
of them that had the charge of them, both in private and public Assembly,
commanding the younger to obey the elder, and the elders to be obedient to
their General. Hereupon the people contemned their danger, and were desirous of
Fight, hoping that this Conflict would prove the end of their calamities. For
which cause, they earnestly desired Moses to lead them forth against the Enemy,
and not to dull the alacrity of the Soldiers by any untimely delay. Ver. 9.
Whereupon (choosing out among the whole multitude such as were most fit for
War) he appointed the son of Naveus the Ephramite, Josuah made Captain over the
Israelites.
to lead them, a man Moses his Master. He also in such sort disposed certain
Bands, that he might not be cut off from water: he left so many as might guard
the Camp and weaker company. Thus stood they all Night long in Arms, expecting
only the Signal of their General, and the Order of their Captains, to attack
their Enemies. On the other side Moses slept not, but instructed Josuah how he
should conduct the Army. And as soon as the day appeared, he encouraged Josuah
to show himself such an one in that Battle, as both the place wherewith he was
honored, and the Cause for which they fought, required; wishing him, by his
prowess and good conduct, to give life and courage to his Soldiers that
followed him. He likewise exhorted the chiefest of the Hebrews in particular,
and in

Josuah's conduct, retired upon a Mountain. Then encountered the Armies on both
sides, and every one fought most valiantly; neither wanted there encouragement
on either side. And as long as Moses lifted up his hands, the Hebrews had the
better against the Amalekites. But for that he was unable continually to
support the same, (and because he observed, that as often as he held down his
hands, so long the Enemies drove the Israelites to retreat) he willed his
brother Aaron, and Vron his sister Mary's husband, to stand on each side of
him, and sustain his hands. Which when they had performed; the Hebrews by main
force overcame the Amalekites; so that all of them had been slain, if the Chase
had continued, and had not been cut off Ver. 13.
for there was a great quantity of gold and silver taken in the Camp. Diverse
The Israelites recover a great prey in the Camp of the Amalekites.
and Tables of Brass were found therein: likewise great quantity of
Tissue-work, and excellent Furniture for War. Moreover, they had all their
Baggage, Tents, Harness, and Horses, and generally, the whole provision of an
Army became their prey. The distribution of the spoils and prey.
Thus ended this Battle. The success whereof so exalted the courage of the
Israelites, that they thought henceforward nothing would be unpossible to them.
The next day, Moses caused the Enemies that were slain, to be rifled, and the
scattered Arms of those that fled to be gathered up. He honored them also,
that had bravely demeaned themselves in the Battle, and praised the Captain
Josuah in public; whose honor was confirmed by the applause of the whole
Army. There was not one Hebrew that perished that day: though so many of the
Enemies were there put to the Sword, as their The prediction of the utter ruin
of the Amalekites.
He offered likewise a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving unto God, and erected an Altar
unto him, and dedicated it To God, the Victor. He prophesied moreover, that all
the Amalekites should be utterly extinguished, so that none of them should be
left alive, in that they had assaulted the Hebrews, and that in the Desert, and
at such time as they were in affliction. After which, he made a Feast for the
General, to testify the joy he had for his Victory. This issue had this
Battle, which was the first that they fought after their departure out of
Egypt. The Israelites come to the mountain of Sinai.
But as soon as Moses had celebrated a Feast in memory of the Victory, to the
end he might give the Hebrews some refreshment after the Battle, he caused them
to march in array; for now the Arms gotten from the Enemies, being given to
those that wanted, there were more armed Soldiers than before. Egypt, near to
the mountain of Sinai, where (as before is declared) Moses saw the Vision in
the Bush, with other Wonders.

CHAP. III.
What counsel Raguel gave to his Son-in-law, Moses.
WHen Raguel, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 3.
Moses Father-in-law, understood of this his good success; he came with great
joy to Moses, Exodus 18. 1, 2.
with purpose to salute him, his daughter Zephora, and her Raguel comes to
Moses to the Desert of Sinai.
who (greatly rejoicing at his arrival) offered a Sacrifice to God, and feasted
the People, near the Bush that could not be consumed by fire; and in the
Banquet, the People were ranked according to the order and place of every
Family. But Aaron, with Raguel, and all the multitude, sung praises to God,
ascribing to him both the means and manner of their liberty. They also spoke
much in honor of Moses, by whose virtue all things had so fortunate an issue:
Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 4.
and Raguel particularly celebrated the honor of the People, and Moses their
Governor, by whose prudence so many good and valiant men were guided. The next
day, Raguel seeing Moses oppressed with the multitude of business, (by reason
that he decided all their differences that were brought to him; as all were out
of an opinion of his ability and integrity, so that even they that were
condemned silence, (being loath to hinder them, who pretended to receive benefit
by the justice of Exodus 18. 13, 14. ad 24.
and which concerned the public estate of them all. There being diverse persons
amongst the Hebrews to be found, capable and sufficient to hear and determine
the ordinary Pleas; Raguel, otherwise called Jethro, Moses father-in-law,
counsels him to choose Judges amongst the Israelites.
but for those which regarded the general good of the People, he alone was fit
to undergo the burden of them. Knowing therefore (said he) thy virtue, and how
worthily thou have behaved thy self toward the People, being the Minister of
God, for their safety; suffer them to determine amongst themselves those
differences that arise amongst them, and reserve thy self wholly to intend the
service of God, to the end thou may more easily assist the People in their
important necessities. If therefore thou give credit to my counsel in humane
affairs, thou shall muster thy whole Army, and establish Chieftains, that shall
command over Ten thousands, and thousands, and five hundreds, and over fifties;
and shall ordain Governors over them, who dividing them by thirties, twenties,
and tens, may conduct and rule them. And let some be appointed amongst them,
who may receive Titles, according to the number and names of those they
commanded; who being approved by the whole company, to be of good fame and
upright conscience, may hear and determine all their differences. And if any
controversy shall fall out amongst any of them in authority, they shall refer
the deciding of that difficulty to thee. By this means neither shall any of the
Hebrews be defrauded of his right, and thou thy self serving God without
molestation, may render him more and more favorable unto thine Army.

This counsel of Raguel highly pleased Moses, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 5.
so that he ordered all things according to his advice; not concealing the
Author of it, nor attributing it to himself, but declaring publicly to all
men, Ver. 24.
that his Father-in-law was the Inventor thereof. Moses allows his
father-in-laws advice.
He has likewise written in his Books that Raguel was the Author of this
Government: accounting it no less honor, to attribute praise to those that
deserve it, than shame to usurp upon another man's merit; so that hereby you may
conjecture his virtue: of which, hereafter, in many places we have more to say.
Moses afterward assembling all the People, told them that he would ascend the
mountain of Sinai, to talk with God; to the end, that he might afterward
return to them, and impart to them whatsoever good things he

CHAP. IV.
Moses ascends the Mountain, Exodus 19.
and receives the Tables of the Ten Commandments from God, and gives them to
the People.
THis said, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 6.
he ascended the mountain Sinai, (which is the highest, beyond comparison,
Moses ascends the mountain of Sinai.
is not only unfrequented by men, but also cannot be beheld, without some
fear.) Besides, it being reported, that God commonly dwells on the same, it is
held sacred by the Inhabitants, Exodus 19. 2, 3, 4. 14, etc.
and dreadful and inaccessible to all that behold it. But the Hebrews,
according to the commandment of the Prophet, removing their Tents, pitched them
at the foot of the Hill, being full of hope of the favors which he had promised
them to obtain of God for them. And in the mean space, while they expected
their Guide, they kept Holy Day, and feasted, and purified themselves for the
space of three days, with all sorts of purification, and abstinence from the
company of their Wives, as Moses had commanded them. They besought God also,
that he would favorably receive Moses, and by his means bless them with the
favors of which he had given them hope. They banquetted also in great pomp,
and their Wives and Children were richly attired. Now, on the third day, before
Sunrising, a Cloud covered all the Hebrews Camp, (a thing before-time unseen
by them) and environed all the place where they had pitched their Pavilions.
And though all the rest of the Country had a clear and untroubled sky,
Horrible Lightnings about the mountain of Sinai, v. 16.
yet thereabout violent Winds were raised, which hideously roared, and a
tempestuous Rain succeeded them; and Thunderclaps dreadful to hear, and
Lightnings horrible to behold, signified that God was there present. Let those
that read this, judge thereof, as it shall please them: as for my self, it is
not any ways lawful for me to depart in any sort from that which is written in
Holy Scripture. That which the Hebrews The year of the World, 2455. before
Christ's Nativity, 1510.
the report that was published touching the mountain, That God dwelt on the
same, marvailously amazed their spirits. They therefore sad and pensive,
contained themselves within their (...) thinking that Moses was destroyed by
the wrath of God, and expecting no less misery themselves. But whilst they
were thus troubled in mind, Moses presented himself to th^^, (with a
countenance full of pleasing majesty, and looks so contented, that they
testified the inward satisfaction of his mind) whom they no sooner beheld, but
suddenly all their fear vanished, and in place thereof a hope of some great
good succeeded; and withal, the air, upon his arrival, recovered its former
clearness and serenity. Hereupon he summoned the People to a solemn and general
Assembly, to the end he might report, and they hear, what Commandments God had
given them by

Know (says he) you Hebrews, Ver. 25.
that Almighty God, as he has never despised my prayers hitherto, Moses
Oration to the Israelites.
so at this time also has he entertained me very graciously: and behold he
has vouchsafed to honor your Camp with his presence, and to prescribe to you
by me, the most happy manner of living that can be imagined. I conjure you
therefore by him, and by the many admirable works which he both done for you,
to hear with the respect you owe to him, that which he has commanded me to
tell you, without sticking at the meanness of the person whom he has employed
for this purpose. Do not consider that it is but a man that speaks to you; but
reflect rather upon the advantages which you shall receive, by observing the
Commandments which I Moses, the son of Amram and Jocabel, that is going to give
you those admirable precepts, but he it is that constrained Nilus to flow with
blood, and that through divert plagues tamed the pride of the Egyptians: it is
he that gave you passage through the midst of the Sea: it is he that furnished
you with meat prepared from Heaven, when you were in extremity: it is he that
made water spring out of the Rock, to quench your thirsts: it is he that put
Adam into possession and fruition both of the fruits of the Earth, and the
fishes of the Sea: by him, Noah escaped from the Deluge: by him, our forefather
Abraham, of a wandering Pilgrim, became an Inhabiter of the Land of Canaan: by
him, Isaac was born, at such time as his father and mother were old: Jacob
became the father of his sons so accomplished in all sorts of virtue: by him,
Joseph became Lord over all the Forces of the Egyptians: he it is that
graciously imparteth these words unto you, by me his messenger. Let therefore
these wholesome Laws of his be holy and inviolable amongst you, and more dear to
you than either your Wives and Children: for in observing the same, you shall
lead a happy Life, enjoy a fruitful Country, a calm Sea, and a numerous Issue,
and he always dreadful to your Enemies: for I have talked face to face with
God, and have heard his immortal voice; The people of Israel hear God speaking
unto them from the mountain of Sinai.
so dearly beloved are you unto him, and so careful is he of the prosperity of
your Nation. This said, he conducted the People, (both Men, Women and Children)
to the end they might hear God talk unto them, and teach them what to do, lest
the Law should have been of less regard, if it had been presented to their
understandings by a humane tongue. They all of them therefore heard his voice
descending from the Mountain, Exodus 20. 1. ad 17.
so that every one understood the precepts which Moses gave them afterward
written in the two Tables of the Law. I may not relate the very words of them,
but I will express the sense. The ten Commadments. Exodus 20. Deutr. 5.



1. That there is but one God, who is only to be worshipped. 2. That no Image
of any Creature is to be adored. 3. That no man ought to swear rashly by the
Name of God. 4. That the seventh day is not to be profaned by any work. 5.
That father and mother ought to be honored. 6. That we ought to abstain from
Murder. 7. That Adultery is not to be committed. 8. That no man ought to
steal. 9. That false Witness must not be born. 10. That no man ought to covet
any thing that belongs to his Neighbor.
When the multitude with great joy had heard God himself speak to them
(according as Moses had foretold them) he dismissed them, and each one departed
to his Tent. But some few days after they presented themselves before his
Pavilion, beseeching him to obtain of God such Laws, as might serve for
government, and regulating the Commonwealth. Moses once more ascended the
Mountain of Sinai (having premonish'd the People thereof) and ascended The year
of the World, 2454. before Christ's Nativity, 1510.
but when the time seemed tedious unto them (for he was absent from them 40
days) they were in great fear, lest some evil had happened unto him: several
spoke variously concerning it. They that loved him not, said that he was
devoured of wild Beasts. Exodus 24. 18.
Others, that he was taken up unto God: but they of the wiser sort among them,
Moses remained on the mountain 40 days, and 40 nights.
who took no pleasure to hear any of these suppositions, contained themselves,
being equally affected in respect of both the opinions: for that the one seemed
not inconsistent with humane condition, and the other had some correspondence
with the virtues of the man: so that they endured his fortune with an equal
mind, and lamented their own mishap, in that they were deprived of such a
Governor and Patron as he was, whose like they thought it impossible to find:
neither did their care suffer them to hope, Exodus 24. 28.
in that he had commanded them to expect his return. Deutr. 9. 9.
At length (when 40 days and 40 nights were past) he returned to them: Moses
fasted 40 days and nights.
having (during that time) tasted no humane sustenance: and by his arrival the
whole Host was replenished with great joy; whom he certifi'd that God's
providence was always assisting them, and that during the time of those days,
he had learned the means how they should live civilly, orderly, and blessedly,
telling them, that God commanded them to make him a Tabernacle, whereinto he
would descend as often as it pleased him, which also in their Travel they might
carry about with them: so that they should have no more need to ascend unto
Sinai, but he himself would descend into that Tabernacle to hear their prayers.
Moses two Tables.
but that they presently addressed themselves to the building thereof. This
said, he showed them the two Tables, containing the Ten Commandments written
therein, Exodus 35. 23, etc.
(in each of them five) by the hand of God. The People (rejoicing at that which
they had heard and seen) ceased not to bestir themselves to their uttermost,
for the building of the Tabernacle: so that they brought in silver, gold,
brass, and store of wood fit for building, and which would not be worm-eaten;
the hair of Goats, and the skins of Sheep; The Israelites with great joy
address themselves to the building of the Tabernacle.
the one died azure, and the other white; woolls of the same color, fine
linen, stones inchased in gold, wherewith men were accustomed to deck
themselves, with great quantity of perfumes. Such was the matter of the
Tabernacle, Exodus 36. 1, 2, 3.
and collected with so great affection, (according to each man's utmost
ability) Moses appointed Workmasters, Beseleel and Eliab are Workmasters of the
Tabernacle.
according to the Commandment of God, but such, as the like could not have been
chosen, although the matter had been committed to the Peoples suffrages; their
names are now likewise extant in the Volumnes of the Sacred Scriptures;
Beseleel of the Tribe of Juda, the son of Vron, and of Mary Moses's sister: and
Eliab the son of Isamach, The people are restrained by Edict, from bringing any
more offerings toward the building of the Tabernacle.
of the Tribe of Dan. The People showed themselves so forward for the finishing
of this work, that Moses was compelled to restrain them, causing it to be
proclaimed, That they had sufficiently contributed for the work already; for
the Workmasters certifi'd him no less. They therefore addressed themselves to
finish the Moses of the measure and greatness thereof, and how many vessels
they ought to have, according to the model which God had given Moses. Ver. 6.
The Women also strove with emulation to exceed each other in making the
Vestures of the Priests, and other things which were convenient for that work,
to the end to honor the service of God.


Of the Tabernacle made by Moses in the Desert, resembling a portable Temple.
NOw when all things were thus prepared, The year of the World, 2455, before
Christ's Nativity, 1509.
and the Vessels of Gold and Brass, the sundry Ornaments and Pontifical
Vestments finished, Moses commanded them to feast, and sacrifice, each one
according to his ability, and set forward the building of the Tabernacle. First
of all therefore he measured the outward Court, which in breadth contained
fifty, Exodus 36. a v. 8. ad finem.
and in length in hundred Cubits, in such manner as follows. He raised Hedio
and Ruffinus, cap. 7.
in the backside to every one of these Pillars, there were fastened Rings of
Silver; their Cornishes were also Silver, Moses erecteth a Tabernacle in the
Desert.
and the Bases Brass gilded, the lower parts of which resembled the point of a
Spear, the better to fix them in the earth. Through the Rings there passed
certain Cords of five Cubits length, which on the one side fastened in the
ground with brazen Nails of a Cubits length, The first Court of the Temple.
did fasten each of the Pillars, and defended the Tabernacle against the force
of winds. Then was there a Curtain of very fine Linen drawn about the same,
which hanging from the Chapters to the Bases, and enclosing all the place,
seemed to differ in nothing from a Wall. And after this manner were the three
sides of the enclosure surrounded. But the fourth side, being of fifty Cubits,
The Tabernacle.
beyond these was the secret place. The rest of the Tabernacle was for all the
Priests; and this tripartite division of the Tabernacle, resembled the nature
of the World; for the third part (which was contained within the four Pillars,
to which the Priests had no access) did, in a manner, represent Heaven, the
Seat of God: but the space of twenty Cubits (which was only permitted to the
Priest, and was unaccessible to others) resembled the Sea and Land. In the
Front where the entrance was, they placed five Pillars upon brazen Bases; after
these, the Curtains were spread about the Tabernacle, woven of Silk, and
embroidered with Purple, Sanctum Sanctorum, or Holy of Holiest; and this
Curtain or Vail was adorned with all sorts of flowers which the earth brings
forth; but there were no figures of living creatures to be found therein. The
second Vail equalled the first in greatness, workmanship, and color, and
encompassed the five pillars of the entry; which reaching from the top to the
midst of them, and fastened to each of them by a certain Ring, gave access to
the Priests that entered the same. To this was there annexed on the outside,
another Vail of like highness, and woven of Linen, drawn upon Cords from the
one side to the other, by means of certain Rings; which was sometimes spread,
and other times (especially on the Holidays) unspread, lest it should hinder
the peoples sight: on the other days (especially The Sanctuary.
which being spread, did cover the Tabernacle in the upper part, and the walls
on the sides, and behind, not extending to the earth by a foot. Moreover, there
were eleven other hangings of equal breadth, but longer; namely, every one of
them of thirty cubits, The signification of the division of the Tabernacle.
woven, with as great art, of Hairs, as the other of Wool; which covering all
the rest, and extending to the earth, resembled the form of a Bedchamber;

CHAP. VI.



AFter that the Tabernacle was after this manner built, Exodus 37. 1. ad 6.
they erected also an Ark which was dedicated to God, Hedio and Ruffinus,
cap. 8.
of a certain Wood that was naturally strong, and permanent, and that resisted
corruption, in our Native Tongue, called Heoron* It was framed after this
manner: The length thereof was five hands breadth, and the side in length there
were fastened two rings of gold, driven and riveted through the Cherubins.
having wings, according as Moses saw them near the Throne of God; for no man
before him ever had any knowledge of them. The Tables of the Law are placed in
the Ark.
In this Ark he placed the Tables, containing the Ten Commandments, in each
Table five, two and an half in one Column, and two and an half in the other;
and this Ark he placed within the Sanctuary.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Table, and Candlestick of Gold, and of the Altar of the Tabernacle.


IN the Tabernacle he placed a Table, not unlike to that at Delphos, two cubits
in length, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 9.
and one in breadth, and of the height of three hand breadths, the feet The
Table, Exodus 27. a v. 10. ad finem.
from the midst downwards, were like those feet which the Doriens set to their
Beds; but that which ascended from the other half upwards, was square. The body
of this Table was surrounded with a border, standing out four fingers: and in
every of the feet, there were rings fastened about the top of the foot, through
which were put bars of wood, gilded, and framed of most firm wood, which were
not thrust through the circle on both sides, but with a button took hold of the
upper border of the Table, and beneath rested upon another upright bar, and so
served to carry it whithersoever need required. This was wont to be placed in
the Temple toward the North-wall, not far from the Sanctuary: and on it were
placed twelve unleavened loaves, set six by six, the one over against the
other, and made of two Assars of the purest wheat, which measure Hebrews,
contained seven Cotylas of the Athenians; and above these loaves, two golden
pots filled with frankincense; but after seven days, other loaves were set in
their place on the festival day, which we call the Sabbath. The cause of which
Ceremony shall hereafter be declared. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 10.
Hard by the Table near the South-wall, was placed a Candlestick of gold (but
not massy) of an hundred pound weight, The Golden Candlestick.
(this weight the Hebrews call Cinchares, the Grecians name it a Talent in
their Tongue) and it was wrought with bowls, lillies, pomegranates, and little
cups; then arising upwards from one Base, it was divided into seven branches,
according to the number of the Sun, and the rest of the Planets; it stretched
out likewise into seven heads, having orderly correspondence the one with the
other, on which were planted seven candles, according to Candlestick being set
side-long. The Altar of Incense.
Between this and (...) (as it (...) was a little Altar erected for Incense,
made of lasting wood likewise, and covered on every side with a solid plate,
being a cubit broad from every corner, and twice as high, on which there stood
a little hearth environed with a golden crown, in which were rings with their
bars and staves, Exodus 38. 1 ad 8.
whereby it might be born by the Priests in the way. There was another Altar of
wood also before the door of the Tabernacle, covered with plates of brass, five
cubits



CHAP. VIII.
Of the Vestments of the Priest, and of the High Priest.


SUch was the Tabernacle with all that belongs thereunto. Hedio and Ruffinus,
cap. 11.
Now it remains to discourse as well of the Vestments of the ordinary
Priests, Exodus 39. 1. ad 32.
which they call Chanees, as of the Priest whom they name Sar-Hazbachim,
signifying thereby the High Priest. The Priests Vestures.
touching the ordinary Priest. When as the Sacrificer purified according to the
purification which is ordained by the Law, addresseth himself to Sacrifice: he
first of all investeth himself with Manachasses (which is as much as to say,
Manachasses.
a Truss or Restrainer, which is a kind of Drawers or Slops, covering the
privities, made of woven silk) where through he thrusts his feet, as in a pair
of upper Hose, and fastens the same about his Loins: over this he puts a Linen
Shirt or Surplice made of double Linen, (which we call Chetonem, Chetonem.
and the word signifies a Linen Garment or Surplice, for we call Linen
Cheton) this Garment is a Coat coming down to the ankles bound to the Body,
having narrow sleeves about the arms, and tied upon the breast a little beneath
the armholes, with a Girdle four fingers broad, so loosely wrought, that it
seemed like a Moses called Abaneth, Abaneth.
and we, by a word borrowed from the Babilonians, name it Emian. This Coat was
in no manner pleited, and in the neck has a broad opening, fastened about the
two shoulders with clasps, from the edge of the collar to the breast, and the
midst of the back: Massabassanes.
this called they Massabassanes. But on his Head he wears a Hat, (not made
with a high crown, Masnaemphetes.
neither* comprehending the whole Head, but somewhat Masnaemphthes; it
resembles a Crown, and is of woven Linen oftentimes doubled and sowed, which
in the upper part is covered with

The High Priest also uses the very same (omitting none of those things which
we have reckoned up) but beside the rest, he puts on a Violet colored Coat,
extending in length to his heels (we call it Methir) this he girdeth to him
with a girdle of diverse colors (not unlike the former) but that it is studded
with Gold: The High Priest's ornament Methir
the skirt of the Vest is bordered with Fringes, to which are tied certain
Pomegranates, and Golden Bells intermixed; so that between two Pomegranates,
there is placed a Bell, and between two Bells one Pomegranate. This Coat is all
of one piece without seam, open C. 39. 2.
he has a third called an Ephod (resembling the Grecian Garment called Epomis
and made after this manner.) Ephod.
It is woven of diverse colors, intermixed with Gold; in the midst of the
Breast there is a space left open (the sleeves, and all the rest are in such
sort composed, that it seems to be a Coat) in this void space there is a
piece enchased of the length of a span, v. 5.
embroydred with the same colors, Gold and Flowers, as the Ephod is. Essen se^
Logion.
This piece is called Essen, which signifies Rational (and wholly fills the
space that was left void by them that wove the Ephod.) And it is joined with
the Ephod, and Hyacinth applied to tie them together with these Buckles. And to
the end the space between the Buckles be not slack, the opening is filled with
a Hyacinthine Riband: but on either shoulder are two Sardonix Stones enchased
in Gold (instead of Buttons) to tie the Hood or Ephod; in these are engraven
the names of Jacob's Sons, in Hebrew Characters, in either Stone six: so that
the elder of them were placed on the right shoulder. Moreover twelve precious
Stones distinguish the Essen or Rational it self, of excellent greatness and
beauty, which for their inestimable price could not be bought by any private
Man. They were enchased three and three in four ranks in certain Crowns of
Gold, to the end they might not fall out: in the first order was a Sardonyx, a
Topaze, Smaragd: in the second a Carbuncle, Jaspis, and a Saphir: in the third,
a Lyncurius, an Amethist, v. 10, 11, etc.
and an Agate: in the fourth, a Chrysolite, an Onyx, and a Beril Stone. In
these were the names of Jacob's Sons engraven, whom we esteem for the first
Authors of our Tribes; every Stone being honored with a several name according
to the order of their Birth. But whereas these Rings (whereof before we have
spoken) were too weak, to sustain the weight of the precious Stones, they
fastened two greater in the top of the Rational toward the neck, being eminent
above the texture, which might receive the Golden Chains which met at the top
of the shoulders to be fastened with the little Chains, the end whereof was
crooked, and conveyed certain Pipes, put through the Rings, and were more
prominent than the brim behind the Ephod, to fasten the Rational, to the end it
should neither sway this way nor that way. To the same Rational also was there
a Girdle sewed, distinguished with the said colors and Gold; which compassing
the whole; and again knit upon the seam, was suffered to hang downwards. And as
touching the Fringes, they were fastened to hollow loops of Gold from the on end
to the other. Now his Hat was such as the other Priests used, on which there
stood another sewed thereto, and flourished with Hyacinthine: this was
environed with a Golden Crown, in which there were diverse Cups of Gold made
after such sort as may be seen in that Herb which we call Daccar, v. 30.
and the Grecian Herbalists, Henbane. And lest any Man that has not heretofore
seen the same, The High Priests triple golden crown.
should be ignorant of the nature thereof, I have thought good to set down the
description in this place. This Herb is of the Sideritis,
and pricking blades. Now it contains a certain fruit under the cover, and
the whole Cup is like to the seed of the Herb Sideritis; its flower is not much
unlike that which springs from the Poppey. This Mites covered the back part
of the head, The year of the World, 2455. before Christ's Nativity, 1509.
and the two temples; for these cups came not near the front

I cannot therefore but greatly wonder at the strange and causeless malice
which other Nations have conceived against us, as if we were injurious against
the Divine Majesty, which (they say) they so much honor. For, if a Man mark
the composition of the Tabernacle, and examine the habit of the High Priest,
and consider all the Sacred vessels which we use in celebrating the Divine
Service, he shall find, that our Lawgiver was a Man of a Divine Spirit, and
that we without any cause are injured by other Nations. For, if without
partiality a Man will duly examine it, he shall find, that all things have
been done to represent and figure the World. For the Tabernacle is of v. 51.
but the third part is sequestered, and reserved for God alone; in like sort,
The signification of the Fabric of the Tabernacle, and the Priests Ornament.
as the Heaven is unaccessible by Men. The Table on which the twelve Loaves
were placed, signifies the year divided into twelve months. The Candlestick,
made of seventy pieces, signifies the twelve Signs, through which every one of
the seven Planets pass: the seven Lamps that were therein, represent the seven
Planets. The Veyls made of four several kinds of stuff, v. 6. ad 14.
resemble the four Elements: Exodus 28. ^ v. 17, ad 21.
for the Linen seems to represent the Earth, from whence it was drawn and
derived: the Purple resemble the Sea, because the Purple color is made of the
blood of a shellfish, called Murex: the Hyacinth, signifies the Air: and the
Scarlet, denotes the Fire. The Tunicle likewise of the High Priest typifies
the Earth, for it is made of Linen. The Hyacinth which inclines to Azure,
shows the Heaven, the Pomegranats resemble the Lightning, as the Bells the
noise of the Thunder. The Surcot shows, that the whole World is composed of
four Elements, resembled by its four colors: to which Gold is annexed (as I
interpret it) for that Light is annexed to all things; Essen also is planted in
the middle thereof, in such sort, as the Earth obtains the middle place of
the World. Likewise, the Girdle wherewith he is girt, resembles the Sea, which
enfoldeth and begirteth all things. The two Sardonix Stones (set as Buttons or
Loops in the High Priests Garment) signifies the Sun and Moon. The number of
the Gems allude to Grecians call the Zodiac. The Thiara or Mitre likewise has
an allusion to Heaven, by reason of its Azure or Hyacinthine color; for
otherwise the Name of God might not be placed therein: and the Triple Crown of
Gold, by its brightness, represents his glory and Sovereign Majesty. Let this
suffice for the present; for that which we will discourse hereafter, will
furnish us with sufficient and ample matter, to show and set out the Wisdom of
our Lawgiver.

CHAP. IX.
Of Aaron's Priesthood, Exodus 28, 29.
and the Laws which appertain to the Feasts and Sacrifices.
AFter these things were thus ordered, and it remained only to consecrate the
Tabernacle, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 12.
God appeared to Moses, commanding him to establish Aaron, his Brother, Exodus
28. v. 1, 2, 3,
High Priest (who, in respect of his virtue, deserved that Title of Honor
above all the rest.) 29. 1. ad 28.
For which cause Moses (assembling the congregation) discoursed unto them his
virtues, God elected Aaron, Moses Brother, for High Priest.
and discovered his good affection, and reckoned up unto them, how many dangers
he had suffered in their behalf. Every one approved this choice, declaring the
forward zeal and love they always bare unto him. Whereupon he spoke unto them
after this manner: The work is now brought unto such an end as it has pleased
God, and has been possible for us: and for that you know we are to receive him
into Aaron worthy of this honor, and has chosen him for his High Priest, in
that he excels all other in equity and justice; commanding, that he should
be invested with the Sacred Robes, and take charge of the Altars and
Sacrifices. He shall make Prayers for you unto God, who will hear them
willingly; by reason that he has care of your Race, and will receive them,
proceeding from a person whom he himself Aaron was more capable of that honor
than any Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. But whatsoever remained of those
things which were gathered for the building of the Tabernacle, was employed to
make Veyles to cover the Tabernacle, Candelstick, Altar, and the other
Instruments, to the end, that in their travel they might not be soyled either
by rain or dust. Aarons Sons.
And having once more assembled the People together, Exodus 36. 8.
he commanded them to offer every one of them half a Sicle; (the Sicle is a
kind of Hebrew Coin, that is as much in value as four Athenian Drams)
whereunto they obeyed willingly; Sicle.
The number of them that offered, was six hundred five thousand five hundred
and fifty. And they that brought this Money, The number of the Israelites,
betwixt twenty and fifty years of age.
and betwixt the years of twenty and fifty; and that which was received, was
employed in the necessaries of the Temple. Then did he purify the Tabernacle,
and the Priests in this manner. He took the weight of five hundred Sycles of
chosen Myrrh, and the like quantity of Ireos; of Cinnamon, and of Calamus (which
is a most Odoriferous Drug) the half of the said weight; and he caused all
these to to be beaten and infused into a Hin of Oil of Olive; (this Hin is one
of our Measures, containing two Choas of Athens) all which he mixed and boiled
together, according to the Art of Perfumers, and he made thereof a most
Odoriferous Ointment; which he took, and anointed the Priest therewith, and all
that which belonged to the Tabernacle, The Holy Ointment.
to the intent to purify them: offering many and sundry sorts The Sacrifices.
they were to burn Incense, and supply the Lamps of this purified Oil; whereof,
three were to burn every day upon the sacred Candlestick, in honor of God, and
the rest were lighted in the evening. Amongst them that wrought and finished
these things, Beseleel and Eliah were the most excellent and expert workmen;
for whatsoever had been enterprized by others, v. 2.
they in their Art polished and perfected. And they found out many new things,
Beseleel,
of their own invention: yet was Beseleel judged the most excellent of the two.

All the time employed in this work, was seven months; and at that time was the
year Egypt. In the beginning of the second year, in the month which the
Macedonians call Xantichus, and the Hebrews Nisan, upon the new Moon; they
dedicated the Tabernacle, with all things belonging thereunto, Exo. 40. 1, 2, 3.
according as I have made mention. And God presently testified, that both their
Gifts and Works were acceptable in his sight; The Tabernacle was dedicated on
the first day of April, the second year after their departure out of Egypt, the
year after the Creation of the World 2455. before Christ's birth 1509.
by his presence honoring the Tabernacle after this manner: The Sky being
elsewhere clear and fair, over the Tabernacle alone there was a Cloud; not
wholly thick, like a Winter strom; nor yet so thin, that a Man could see through
the same; from whenc there descended a Dew, that gave testimony of Gods
presence unto them that had Faith. Moses having recompensed all the
Work-masters with such rewards as appertained unto them by desert, offered
sacrifice Aaron, and purified both him and his Children with Fountain water and
the precious Ointment, to the end they might be sanctified to God. And for
seven days space he consecrated both them, and their Vestments, The dedication
of the Tabernacle, and the Priests.
and the Tabernacle, with those things which appertained thereunto, with the
Oil abovementioned, with the Blood of Bulls and Rams slain every other day,
after their kind. But on the eighth day he proclaimed a Holy day and festival
to all Lev. 18. per totum.
and decreed, that every one of them should particularly sacrifice, according
to his ability; and they with emulation (striving to exceed one another) obeyed
him, Lev. 9. 24.
and offered up their Sacrifices, according as it was commanded them.

Whilst thus the Sacrifices were upon the Altar, The sacrifice is consumed of
it self.
suddenly there issued a fire from them, which kindled of it self; the flame
whereof resembled the Light or brightness of Lightning, and consumed all that
was upon the Altar. At that time, there happened an affliction to Aaron, the
greatest that could befall a Father, yet he supported it with a constant and
generous mind: for he was a Man of much constancy, and such an one as knew,
that nothing could befall him without the prescience and providence of God. Of
his four Sons, the two eldest Nadab and Abihu, bringing other sacrifices to the
Altar Moses, were burnt by the violent flame that issued from the Altar,
scorching both their Breasts and Faces, in such sort that they dyed without
possibility of being succored. Moses commanded their Father and Brothers to
take their bodies, and carry them out of the Camp and bury them decently: All
Moses forbad both the Father and his Sons to lament; to the end they might make
it appear that being honored with the dignity of Priesthood, they were more
sensible of Gods honor, than of their own misfortune. But as touching Moses,
he refused all honors which were offered him by the People, neither applied he
himself unto any other thing but to the service of God. Na^ab and Abihu Arons
Sons burned Levit. 10. 1, 2, 3. 4.
He went up to the Mountain of Sinai, and entered into the Tabernacle to take
counsel of God concerning those things, whereof he needed to be informed. He
demeaned himself like a private Man, not only in his apparel, but in all other
things, continuing a familar and modest course of life, and challenging no
privilege above any Man, Numb. 3. 3, 4.
but only in those things which pertained

He reduced into writing the Laws and ordinances touching policy, in due
performance whereof if they lived they should be both agreeable to God, and
live in union and peace amongst themselves. And all this he established,
following those directions which God instructed him in. But now will I return
and bend my style to speak of that which I omitted in the ornaments of the High
Priest; for this apparel of theirs leaves not any occasion to false Prophets,
to excecute their wicked impostures: and if there be any such, as dare
intermeddle with that which appertains to Gods Majesty* this habit makes
them know, that God never honored their sacrifices with his presence; but he
gave visible signs thereof not only to the Hebrews, A miracle of the Stones in
the High Priests vestment.
but to all those strangers, Sardonixes, whose nature is so well known to all
Men, that it were unnecessary to speak of it) that which was fastened on his
right shoulder, shined very clearly at such time as God was present at the
sacrifice, and cast its rays afar off, that it might be perceived by those
that beheld the same, contrary to its nature and custom: which truly deserves
admiration amongst all Men, except those who through contempt of Religion, do
hunt after an opinion of wisdom. But that which I will now speak of, is more to
be admired at: which is, that by the twelve Stones which the High Priest bare,
Enchased in his Rational in the midst of his Breast, God was wont to
fore-signifie victory to those that were prepared Greeks that have no aversion
for our mysteries, and are convinced by their own eyes of the truth of this
miracle, call it Logion, i. e. oracle, which we term Esse^. This Rational and
the Stone Sardonix gave over to shine two hundred years before I began to write
these Antiquities, by reason of Gods wrath which he had conceived against us
for the breach of his Laws (of which at another time I will more fitly treat,
and at this time continue and prosecute my intended discourse and purpose.)
After the Tabernacle had been thus consecrated, and that which appertained to
the Priests was set in order, the People The sacrifices and gifts of the
Princes of the Tribes.
as to him that had driven far from them all fear of evil, and from whom they
expected in time to come, far better and more prosperous things, and both in
general and in particular they offered gifts unto God according to their
tribes: and the Governors of the tribes (assembling themselves together two by
two) prepared a Chariot and a yoke of Oxen, so that there were six Chariots to
bear the Tabernacle by the way. Furthermore, every one of them offered a vial
of the weight of 70 Sicles, and a Censor containing 10 dariques, and a Coffer
or Basin, weighing 130 Sicles. The Censor was filled with odoriferous perfumes,
and the coffer and vial served to hold the Meal and Oil, which they were wont
to use at the Altar, at such time as they offered Salutarie, for every day two
Oxen and five Rams, with a Lamb and a Goat of a year old, and sacrificed them
during the term of twelve days, every one his day. But Moses ascended no more
to the Mountain of Sinai, but entered into the Tabernacle, where he was
instructed by God of that which he had to do, and what Laws he ought to make,
which are so good and laudable as they ought not to be attributed to humane
wisdom: Moses asks counsel of God in the Tabernacle.
So that our Ancestors observed them so religiously during some ages, that they
thought that neither the pleasures of Peace, nor the distresses of War could
render them excusable


The Ordinances of Sacrifices and Purifications, Levit. 1.
I will here mention only some few Laws touching Purifications and Sacrifices
(in that we have begun to speak of Sacrifices.) Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 13,
ad 12.
The sacrifices are of two sorts: some particular, Two kinds of sacrifices.
others public; and these are made after two different manners; for in the
one, all is consumed which is upon the Altar, which for that cause are called
Holocausts, Holocautoma; Lev. 1, ad, 10.
that is to say, Burned. The other are of thanksgiving, and they are made with
banquets of those that sacrifice. But first of all I will speak of the first
kind. Holocaust. They that offer sacrifices of thanksgiving, kill likewise such
sort of beasts without spot, A sacrifice of thanksgiving; Lev. 4. 5.
and more than a year old, both male and female; and after they have cut their
throats, they sprinkle the blood on the Altar; The sacrifice for sin.
The Priest besprinkleth the Altar with the blood The sacrifice of him that
has sinned wittingly.
He that has sinned voluntarily but secretly offers a Lamb, according as the
Law commands, the flesh whereof is in like sort eaten by the Priests the same
day. But if the Governors offer for their sins, Lev. 4, 9.
they sacrifice in like manner as private Men do, and ^re different from them
in that they bring a Bull, or a male-kid. The Law also ordains, that in
sacrifices both private and public, there should be fine flower brought for a
Lamb, The custom observed in sacrifices.
the measure of an Asser; for a Ram, the measure of two; for a Bull, Hin for a
Bull; for a Ram, the third part of the same measure; and for a Lamb, the fourth
part: This Hin is an Hebrew measure, which contains two Attique Choas. They
bring also the like measure of Wine as of Oil, and pour out the Wine about the
Altar. And if any one to accomplish a vow, without sacrificing offer up fine
flower, he puts the first fruits upon the Altar, that is to say, one
handful, and the rest is taken by the Priests for their maintenance, either
fried by kneading it in Oil, or making cakes thereof: but whatsoever the Priest
offers, all that must be burned. The Law likewise forbids to offer the
young of any Beast whatsoever with its Dam, Numb. 28. v. 3, 4.
The Law commands, that on the common purse there be every day killed a Lamb
of a year old, the one in the morning, the other at the shutting up of the
evening: and on the seventh day, which is called the Sabbath, that two be
offered in that manner as has been declared. And on the new Moon, besides
their daily offerings, they sacrifice two Oxen, seven yearling Lambs, and a
Wether and a Kid, for the abolition of those sins which are committed through
forgetfulness. Macedonians call Hyperberet^on) besides the abovenamed, v. 19
they sacrifice a Bull, The sacrifice of the month of October.
one Mutton, seven Lambs and a Kid for a sin offering. The tenth day of the
same month, according to the Moon, they fast till the evening; and on the same
day they sacrifice a Bull, two Muttons, seven Lambs, and a Goat, for The feast
of Tabernacles.
The fifteenth day of the said month (at such time as it draws toward
Winter) he commanded them to pitch Tents every one for his Family, Exodus 29.
against the approaching cold weather which that season is wont to bring; Lev.
23.
and that when they should enjoy their Country, Deuteronomy. 2. 31.
and enter that City which they should hold for their Metropolitan, (by reason
of the Temple which should be there builded) they should celebrate a Feast
during eight days space, in offering burnt-offering and sacrifices to God: and
that in witness of their thanksgiving, they should bear in their hands a branch
of Myrtle, and of Willow, tied together with Wool, and a bough of Palm
likewise, to which a Citron was to be fastened; and that the first day they
should sacrifice thirteen Oxen, and fourteen Lambs, and two Exo 12. v. 16.
with a Kid; and in rebating day by day the number of Oxen, Lev. 23. v 5, 6.
they come back to the seventh. The eighth day they cease from work. The Easter
was the 14. of April.
On this day (as we have said) they sacrifice a Calf, a Ram and seven Lambs,
and a Kid, for a sin-offering. These are the ceremonies of the Tabernacles
which have been always observed by those of our Nation. In the month Xantique
(which we called Nisan) which is the first month of the year, the fourteenth
day after the new Moon, the Sun being in Aries, (for at that time were we
delivered out of Egypt) he ordained, that every year we should renew the
sacrifice, which we call the Passover, and which (as I said,) was celebrated
the same time that we departed out of Egypt. Lev. 2. 14, ad finem.
and till that time untouched. And for that it is very convenient, that God
should be honored with the first fruits, from whom we receive such abundance,
The first fruits
they offer the first fruits of Barley after this manner: After they Asser of
the same upon the Altar to God; and after they have cast a handful of the same
on the Altar, they leave the rest for the Priests use: and from that time
forward it is lawful for them to reap as well in public as in private. With
these first fruits, they sacrifice to God a Lamb, for a burnt-offering. Seven
weeks after the feast of the Passover, The sacrifice of Pentecost.
that is forty nine days, on the fiftieth (which the Hebrews call Asartha:)
that is to say, fullness of favors, and the Greek Pentecoste) they offer to God
leavened bread, made of Wheat flower, of the quantity of two Assars, and
sacrifice two Lambs, which are only offered up to God, and afterward are
prepared for the Priests dinner, and it is not lawful for them to reserve any
thing What is observed in every ^east and sacrifice.
But the burnt-offerings are three Calves, two Wethers, and fourteen Lambs;
besides two Kids, for a sin-offering. There is not any feast wherein they offer
not a burnt-offering, The bread of Preposition.
and desist not from all manual labor: but in every one of these there is
ordained a certain sort of sacrifice which they ought to do: and it is first
ordered, that they rest from their labors, and after sacrifice, fall to
banquet. On the common charge they offer unleavened bread, of twenty four
Assars of flower: and those loaves they bake two by two the day before the
Sabbath; and the day of the Sabbath, in the morning they bring it, and set it
on the sacred Table, opposing six to six, the one against the other; and by
them are placed two dishes full of incense: and these things remain after this
manner till the next Sabbath, and then Lev. 8.
which are given to the Priests for their maintenance. Numb. 3.
The incense is cast into the sacred fire, in which the burnt-offerings are
consumed, Gomor of flour mingled with Oil, and a little baked by fire; and this
does he twice every day, and brings to the fire half an Assar of flour in the
morning, and the other half in the evening. But I will treat hereof more
expressly hereafter; The tribe of Levi sacred to God.
having for the present, sufficiently spoken already.

Moses separated the Tribe of Levi, and exempted them from the rest, to the end
they might be consecrated to God: Levit. 8. per totum.
and he purified them with Fountain Water, and purged them with solemn
sacrifice, and committed the Tabernacle to their charge, with all the holy
things pertaining thereunto, and all the rest which had been made for the cover
of the Tabernacle, to the end they might be ministers unto the Priests, their
superiors, who Unclean things.
from those that were to be abstained from, (of which we will speak, at such
time as occasion is offered us; and will bring proofs, and the reason which
induced him to ordain, Levit. 13. 12. 54 and 15. per totum.
that some were proper to feed upon, and for what cause he would that we should
abstain from others.) He has generally forbidden all use of blood in meats,
esteeming the blood to be the soul and spirit of Beasts, He has also generally
prohibited to eat the flesh of those Beasts that die of themselves; likewise
the caul and fat of Goats, What Men are unclean.
of Sheep and Oxen. He separated them likewise from the company and
conversation of Men, who were leprous, and such as were troubled with the flux
of their seed. Levit. 14, 1^ ad 8.
And as touching Women that have their purgations, Go^orrha^.
The like must Husbands do after they have had use of their Wives. Of Lepers.
He likewise ordered that the Leprous should be separated for ever, not
permitting them to frequent any Man's company, but esteeming them as little
differing from the dead: And if any one by his prayers made unto God was
delivered Against them that object against Moses and his Followers, that they
fled out of Egypt for Leprosy.
of which, we will speak hereafter. Whence it appears how ridiculous a fable it
is, that Moses fled out of Egypt, because he was a Leper, and that all the
Hebrews whom he conducted with him, and brought into the Land of Canaan was
troubled with that disease. For if that were true, Moses would not have made
these ordinances, to his own shame: and if any other had proposed them he would
have opposed himself against them; especially, since among diverse other Nations
there are Lepers, who are held in great honor, and who are so far from
disdainand contempt, that they have been made Generals of Armies, and elected
for Governors of Commonwealths, having liberty to enter the Temples, and to be
present at the sacrifices. Moses (if he had been infected with this malady) to
make such Laws, and ordain such Statutes among those People, who honored and
obeyed him; whereby such as were therewith infected, might be preferred? By
which it is manifest, that those things that are objected against him, are
rather of malice than probability. But Moses being clean from such sickness,
and conversing amongst his Contrymen which were untainted, made these
ordinances for them that were sick, having regard to the honor of God. But of
these things let each Man censure as best likes him.

He forbad women to enter into the Temple soon after their deliverance, Hedio
and Ruffinus, cap. 14.
or to assist at the sacrifice, until forty days were expired (if they had been
brought a-bed of a Son;) The Laws of Women that are brought a-bed.
but if it were a Daughter, he appointed that the number of the days should be
Numb. 5. v. 15. ad finem.
he brought an Assar of Barley Meal, and cast an handful thereof upon the Altar,
The Laws of adultery and jealousy.
and the rest was reserved for the maintenance of the Priests; and then the
Priest placing the Woman in the porch which is right over against the
Tabernacle, and taking the cover from her head, writes the name of God upon a
Parchment, and makes her swear that she has not violated her faith to her
Husband; and wish if she had transgressed the bounds of chastity, that her
right thigh might be put out of joint, her belly burst, and death follow
thereupon: but if her Husband had been inconsiderately drawn into that
suspicion through excess of love, then it pleased and having mingled the same,
gives it to the Woman to drink; and if she had been Moses provided for the
sacrifices and purifications; Of adultery and incest.
He furthermore made these Laws which ensue. He generally forebad Adultery,
judging it to be a great felicity, if Men demeaned themselves honestly in
Marriage: and that both in politic Estates, and private Families, Exodus 22.
it was a thing most profitable, Deuteronomy. 17.
that children should be born in Lawful Matrimony. Levit. 18. 20, 21, 29.


He condemned also as a horrid crime for a Man to have the use of his Mother or
his Fathers Wife, his Aunt, or his Sister, or his Sons Wife: and detesteth it
as a most Lev. 21. 7, 8, 9,
he permitted him not to match with a Widow, (although it were Lawful for the
other Priests) and granted him only liberty to take a Virgin to his Wife, What
Wife the High Priest might marry with.
and to keep her. The said High Priest is also forbidden to approach a dead Man

He likewise ordained that the Priest which had any bodily defect, should be
maintained by the other Priests, but in the mean time that he should not
approach the Altar, nor enter into the Temple: willing that not only they
should be pure in that which concerned the divine service, but also that they
should study and endeavor to be so in all the actions of their life, to the
end that no Man might reproach them. For which cause, when they wore the habit
of Priests, besides their general obligation to be always pure and sober, they
were forbidden to drink Wine; and they were to offer up entire Moses make in
the Desert, and caused to be observed during his life. Levit. 25. v. 2. ad 8.
Afterward he made others also, which both the People might practice in that
place; The Law of every seventh year.
and then also when they should possess the Land of Canaan. He gave rest unto
the earth every seventh year; so that it was neither tilled nor planted (in
like manner as he had commanded them to rest from their labors on the seventh
day of the week) and he ordained, that the fruits which the earth of it self
brought forth, should be common to all those that would make use thereof, as
well to those of the Country, as Strangers, without any forbidding, or
reservation. He likewise decreed that the same should be done after seven times
seven years, and that the year following which is the fiftieth year, The year
of Jubilee.
and which the Hebrews call Jubilee, i. e. Liberty, Levit. 25. a v. 8. ad 14.
and not put to death; and to those, who from the beginning had been possessors
of Lands, the same were restored in this manner following. The Jubilee being at
hand (which word signifies Liberty) both he that sold, and he that bought the
Land, met together, and cast up the account of the profits and expenses that
had been reaped and bestowed on the Land: and if it were found that the profits
exceeded the expenses, he that sold the Land repossessed it: but if the charges
exceeded the value of the profits, he paid the surplusage to the buyer, and
retained the Land to himself. And if the profits and expenses were equal, the
restitution was made to him that had the ancient inheritance. Moses received
all these Laws from God, upon the Mountain of Sinai, and he gave them in
writing to the Hebrews, that they might observe the same.

CHAP. XI.
The Laws and Customs of War. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 15. all 12.

AFter that these Laws had been after this manner provided, Numb. 1. 2, 3.
Moses addressed himself to Moses numbreth up the People.
He therefore commanded the Princes of the Tribes (the Tribe of Levi only
excepted) Levites were Sacred, and exempt* from those Functions) and the search
being made, there were found 603650 fighting Men, betwixt the years of twenty
and fifty. But in the place of Levi, he put the Tribe of Manasses the son of
Joseph, and Ephrai^ in the place of his father Joseph: according as Jacob had
entreated Joseph to give him his sons, that he might adopt them (as has been
before declared.) When they pitched the Tabernacle, it was planted in the midst
of the Camp, guarded and defended with the Tribes, which were encamped three by
three on every side. The disposition of the Army.
There were certain ways or paths likewise laid out between them, and a
Marketplace, and Shops for all sorts of Merchandise disposed by order, and
Workmen and Artizans of all Occupations, traveling in their shops;

The Priests first were placed next the Tabernacle, and after them the Levites
(for there was a view also made of them, accounting all the Males exceeding the
age of 30 days; and they were found to be 23880.) During all the time that the
Cloud before mentioned covered the Tabernacle, A cloud on the Tabernacle.
as a token of God's presence; the People remained always in the same places;
and if it departed from the same, then removed they likewise. Moses invented
also a certain kind of Trumpet made of silver, Numb. 9. 15.
after this manner. In length it was almost a Cubit, and it was like the narrow
whistle of a Fife, but a little thicker; it had but one hole at which it was to
be blown, and the end thereof was like a little Bell, Numb. 10. 2.
in form of an ordinary Trumpet. They call it in the Hebrew Tongue Asofra.
There Two trumpets made of silver.
whereof the one served to call the People to Public Assemblies; and the
other, to summon the Princes of the Tribes, when they were to consult about
Affairs of State; and if both of them were sounded, then all in general
gathered together. When the Tabernacle was removed, this manner was observed;
As soon as the first Charge was sounded, they that were encamped toward the
East, dislodged; at the second Charge, they to the Southward, disincamped; then
was the Tabernacle unpitched, and carried in the midst, six of the Tribes
marching before, and six after: the Levites were all about the Tabernacle. And
when they sounded the third time, the three Tribes toward the West removed: and
at the fourth sounding, those on the North followed them. They made use also of
all these Trumpets in the Divines Service, both on Egypt, they being in the
Desert.

CHAP. XII.
Sedition against Moses, through the scarcity of Victuals: and the punishment
of the Rebellious.
NOT long after this, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 16.
they removed their Camp from the Mountain of Sinai: and after certain
encampings (of which we will speak) they came to a place which is called
Iseremoth: Numb. 11. 1, 2.
There the People once more began to murmur, and to revive their Sedition
against Moses.
and lay the fault of their laborious Pilgrimage upon Moses; charging him, That
by his persuasion, they had left a fertile Country; and now not only were
destitute of the plenty thereof, but also in stead of hoped felicity, forced to
wander here and there in extreme misery, so that they had not so much as water
to drink; and that if Manna likewise should fail them, they must all inevitably
perish for want of sustenance. Hereunto added they diverse Contumelies, which
were every where cast upon him, though a man of so great desert and
consequence. Mean while there arose one amongst the People, who (admonishing
them of the forepass'd benefits received by the hands of Moses) counseled them
to be of good courage; assuring them, that at that time they should not be
frustrate either of that hope, or help, which they expected at God's hands. But
the Ver. 4.
How he could make provision for so many thousand men? God (says he) and I,
The Israelites obtain Quails in the Desert.
although we be evil spoken of by you, yet will we never desist to be careful
for you, and that shall you shortly perceive. Scarce had he spoken this, but
that all the Camp was filled with Quails, Psalm. 78. 24.
of which every one took as many as he would. Yet God, not long after, punished
the insolency and mutiny of the Hebrews, The graves of Concupiscence.
by the death of no small number: from Cabrothaba; that is to say, The
Sepulchers of Concupiscence.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Spies that were sent to search the Land of Canaan: and how returning to
the Israelites, they discouraged them with fear.
BUt after Moses had led them out of that place, and brought them into a
Country not so apt for habitation, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 17.
not far from the borders of the Canaanites, called Pharan; he called the
People to a Council, Number. 13. 1. ad 24.
and standing up in the midst of them, spoke after this manner:

God (says he) having decreed to grant you two great benefits, Liberty, and
the Possession Canaan; from whence both the Cities and Kings are so far from
driving us, that the whole Nation being united together, is not of power to
expel us. Let us therefore address our selves very confidently to attempt the
matter: for neither without fight, Moses sends Spies to search the Land of
Canaan.
will they resign the Title of their Country unto us; nor without great
conflicts, can we obtain the Palm of Victory. Let us therefore send out certain
Spies, to discover the Forces of the Country, and how great their power is:
but above all things, let us be at unity one with another; and let us honor
God, who assisteth us in all dangers, and fights for us.

After Moses had spoken this, the People (applauding his counsels) chose Twelve
out of the Noblest Families of the Tribes, to go and view the Country; out of
every Egypt, visited all the Country of the Canaanites, until they came to the
City of Amath, and the Mountain of Libanus. And having considered both the
Land, and the nature of the Inhabitants, they returned home again, having spent
40 days in this journey. Moreover, they brought with them such fruits as the
Country yielded; and by the beauty thereof, and by the abundance of riches,
(which they reported to be in that Country) they encouraged the hearts of the
People to fight valiantly: but on the other side, they dismayed them with the
difficulty of the Conquest, saying, that there were certain great Rivers
unpassable, both for their wideness and depth; that there were therein also
unaccessible Mountains and Cities, fortified both with Walls and Bulwarks.
Moreover, they told them, Hebron they saw a race of Giants; and that they had
seen nothing so terrible since their departure out of Egypt. Thus the fear of
these Messengers, brought the rest of the multitude into a dangerous
consternation and perplexity: C. 13. 24.
who conjecturing by their discourse, The Spies drive fear into the Israelites.
that it was impossible to conquer the Land, dissolving the Assembly, returned
each to their Houses, C. 14. 1, 2.
lamenting with their Wives and Children, saying, That God had only in words
promised many things, The murmur of the people against Moses.
but that they saw no effects of them. Moreover, they blamed Moses* and reviled
both him and his brother Aaron, the High Priest. And thus spent they all the
Night in disquiet, venting their discontents both against the one and the
other. But on the morrow they re-assembled their Council tumultuously, with
intention to stone Moses and his brother, and then return back again to Egypt,
from whence they came. But two of the discoverers (namely Josua the son of
Nave, of the Tribe of Ephraim, and Caleb, of the Tribe of Juda) seeing this
disorder, and fearing the consequences of it, Ver. 6.
they went into the midst of them, and appeased the multitude: Josua and Caleb
appease the people.
Praying them to be of good hope, and not to accuse Almighty God of
unfaithfulness, by yielding certain slight belief to some, who spreading vain
rumors of the affairs of Cannan, had terrified the credulous multitude; but
rather, follow them, who both would be the Actors and Conductors also of them
in the Conquest of the Country: and that neither the greatness of the
Mountains, nor the depth of the Rivers, could hinder them, that like valiant
men were prepared to attempt, especially God being their Guide, and ready to
fight for them in that Battle. March forward therefore, (said they) and laying
aside all fear, (and being assured of the divine succors) follow us with a bold
courage whithersoever we lead you. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 18.
With these words labored they to appease the tumultuous multitude. In the
mean while, Moses and Aaron falling prostrate on their faces, besought God, not
for their own safety, but that it would please him to restore the despairing
multitude to a better mind, who were troubled with so many present necessities,
and vain apprehensions of the future. Whereupon suddenly a Cloud appeared on
the Tabernacle, and gave testimony, that God was there present. Which when
Moses perceived, (being full of confidence) he pressed into the midst of the
multitude, and told them, That God was provoked to take punishment of the
outrage which they had committed against him; yet not so severely, us the
iniquity of their sins deserved, but in that discipline which fathers are
accustomed to use, for the amendment of their children. For at such time as he
stood before God in the Tabernacle, and besought him with tears for the safety
of the multitude, God had recounted unto him how many benefits and favors they
had received from him, and how ungrateful they showed themselves toward him:
and that at the present being transported with passion and fear, they had given
more credit to the reports of the Spies, than to his promises. Notwithstanding
all which, he would not utterly consume them all, nor exterminate their whole
Race, (whom he had honored above all the Nations of the earth) but for
punishment of their sin, Ver. 23. 33.
they should not possess the Land of Canaan, The Israelites should wander in
the Desert 40 years.
nor taste the sweetness and plenty of its fruits; but they should live in the
Desert, without House or City, for the space of forty years. Yet has he
promised (said he) to give the Country to your children, whom he will make
Lords of the Goods, and Heirs of those Possessions of which you have rendered
your selves unworthy by your murmuring and disobedience.

Moses had discoursed these things in this manner, The repentance of the people.
the People were in great sorrow and calamity, and besought Moses, that he
would appease God's wrath conceived against them, beseeching him, that
forgetting their faults that were past in the Desert, he would make good his
promises to them; Moses answered them, That God was not incensed against them
according to the manner of humane weakness, but that he had given a just
sentence against them. In this place it is not to be supposed, that Moses (who
was but a man only) did appease so many multitudes of displeased men, but that
God assisted him, Moses, a man of great authority.
and brought to pass, that the People were wrought upon by his words (having by
diverse disobediences, and by the calamities whereinto they were fallen, known,
that obedience was both good and profitable.) But what greater proof can be
desired of Hebrews, but takes himself obliged to obey the Ordinances made by
him, and regards him as present and ready to punish the Transgressors of the
same? There are besides diverse great and evident signs of the more than humane
virtue which was in him: and amongst the rest, this was not the least, That of
certain strangers that have Traveled out of the Regions beyond Euphrates, a
four months journey, to their great charges, and with no less peril, to honor
our Temple, and offer Sacrifice; yet some have not obtained license or
permission to offer, in that by our Laws it was not lawful for them to do it,
and some other, without sacrificing, (others the Sacrifice half finished, the
Moses's Law, than to satisfy their own wills; and that without the least
repining or complaint. So much did the opinion once conceived of this man
prevail, that he is esteemed more than a man, out of the consideration that he
had received Laws from God, and delivered them to men. Of late also, The great
scarcity during the Empire of Claudius.
(not long before the Wars of the Jews, during the Empire of Claudius, when
Ismael was High Priest amongst us) so great a Famine oppressed our Nation, that
an Assar of Meal was sold for four drams, and there was brought to the Feast of
Azymes the quantity of seventy Cores, (which make 30 Sicilian and 40 Athenian
Medimni, almost two Bushels of ours) none of the Priests were so bold as to eat
one grain of it, Moses, are in such force, even at this day, that they
themselves who hate us, confess, that God instituted our Government by the
means and ministry of Moses, and his virtue. But of these things, let every man
think as it pleases him.

The Fourth Book of the Antiquities of the JEWS;
Written by FLAVIVS JOSEPHVS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Fourth Book.
1. The Fight of the Hebrews with the Canaanites, and their overthrow by them,
without Moses's knowledge. 2. The Sedition raised by Chore against Moses and
his brother, for the Priesthood. 3. How the Authors of the Sedition were slain
by God's judgment, and the Priesthood confirmed Aaron, and his sons. 4. What
chanced to the Hebrews in the Desert, for the space of 38 years. 5. How Moses
overcame Sehon, and Og, Kings of the Amorites, and overthrew their Armies. 6.
Of the Prophet Balaam. 7. The Victory of the Hebrews against the Madianites:
and how the Country of the Amorites was granted by Moses to two and an half of
the Tribes. 8. Moses's Laws, and how he was taken out of the World.


CHAP. I.
The Fight of the Hebrews with the Canaanites, and their overthrow by them,
without Moses's knowledge.
WHilst thus the Hebrews passed their Lives in great penury and perplexity in
the Desert, Numb. 14. 4.
groaning under the burden of their grievous Afflictions; The Israelites,
without Gods or Moses command, devise how to assail the Enemies.
there was nothing that more distracted and distempered them than this, That
God had forbidden them to fight with the Canaanites. They would now no longer
give ear unto Moses, (who persuaded them to Peace) but growing confident in
themselves, that both without his Canaanites, presuming with themselves, that
God would succor them, not only in regard of Moses, but also for that he had a
general care of their Nation, ever since the time of their Forefathers, whom he
had always held under his protection; and by reason of whose virtues, he had
already granted them liberty. They said likewise, that if they fought
valiantly, God would give them Victory; that they were strong enough to
overcome their Enemies, though they were left to themselves; yea; though Moses
should endevor to estrange God from them. In a word, that Egypt, they ought not
to suffer Moses to Tyrannize over them, or to conform their Necks under his
yoke; in a vain belief, that God had only discovered to Moses, that which was
good for them, by reason of the affection which he bare him: As if all of them
were not derived from the loins of Abraham, and that he only were the Guide of
all, in foreknowing the things that should happen unto them, by particular
instruction from God. That prudence obliged them to condemn his pride, and fix
their trust only upon God, for conquering the Country which he had promised
them, in spite of Moses's contradiction; who for this cause hindered them,
pretending the Authority of God for it. That therefore considering their
necessity, and the Desert, which Canaanites; hoping, that God would be their
Guide; Ver. 43.
so as they needed not the assistance of their Lawgiver. The Canaanites put the
Hebrews to flight.
When this sentence was approved by a general consent, they flock out in
multitudes against their Enemies: who neither affrighted by their boldness nor
multitude, valiantly resisted them, who desperately charged them: so that (the
better part of the Hebrews being slain) they pursued the rest (enforced
shamefully to turn their backs) even unto their Camp. This overthrow (happening
besides all men's opinion) wondrously dejected the minds of the multitude, so
that they grew desperate of all future good fortune; concluding, that God had
sent and inflicted that plague upon them, because without his counsel and order
Moses saw that his Countrymen were dismayed with the overthrow which they had
received, and the Enemy grown proud with Moses retireth the people into the
Desert.
retired into the Desert with this resolution, that they would no more attempt
a Battle against the Canaanites, till they received a sign of their good
success from Heaven. But even as in a great Army it accustomably falls out
(especially in time of trouble) that the common multitude wax headstrong and
disobedient to their Governors, so did the like also happen amongst the Jews.
For whereas they were in number 600000, and even in their better Sedition
against Moses*
both amongst themselves, and against their Governor. For which cause there
arose so great a Sedition, as neither among the Greeks or Barbarians the like
was ever heard. Which things, without doubt, had overthrown them, (being
brought into so desperate an estate) had not Moses (forgetting the injury he
had received, which was no less than a purpose to stone him to death) succored
and relieved their distressed Fortunes. Neither did God utterly abandon the
care of them: but although they were contumelious against their Lawgiver, and
transgressed also against the Laws which he had delivered them by Moses, yet
delivered he them out of that danger; of which (without his special Providence)
there could be expected no Moses governed the estate when the troubles were
ended, we will now declare, having first expressed the cause thereof.

CHAP. II.
The Sedition raised by Chore against Moses and his Brother, for the Priesthood.
CHore (a Man noble by Birth, Numb. 16. 1. ad 4.
and famous for his wealth amongst the Hebrews, and endowed with a certain kind
of popular Eloquence) seeing Moses placed in the highest place of Authority,
Chore endeavors to persuade the multitude to mutiny against Moses.
was filled with jealousy and envy thereat. For although he were of the same
Tribe and Kindred, yet he thought it a great indignity to himself, to Levites,
(which were of the same Tribe with him, and his Kinsmen) telling them, That it
was not to be suffered, that Moses, under a pretext of Communication with God,
should by ambitious policy (to other men's prejudice) only study his own glory;
having of late, against all sort of reason, given the Priesthood to his Brother
Aaron, and distributed other dignities, at his own pleasure, like a King,
without the suffrage and approbation of the People. That this injury done by
him, was not to be endured, by reason that so covertly he had insinuated
himself into the Government; that before it could be observed, the People would
be brought into servitude. For he that knows himself to be worthy of a
Government, endeavors to obtain the same by the consent of the People, and not
by force and violence; but they that despair by good means to attain thereunto,
do notwithstanding abstain from force, lest they should lose the opinion of
their goodness and honesty; yet endeavor they by malicious subtilties to attain
thereunto. That it concerned the Commonweal to check the attempts of such Men,
lest of private, they at last grow public Enemies. For what reason (said he)
can Moses give, why he has bestowed the High Priesthood on Aaron and his Sons?
If God had decreed, that this honor should be bestowed on one of the Tribe of
Levi, there were more reason that I should have it, who am of the same Kindred
with Moses, and who surpass him both in riches and age. On the contrary, If
this honor appertain to the most ancient of the Tribes, that of Reuben ought
by right to enjoy it, namely, Dathan and Abiram, and Phalal, Alias Ba^^^*
who are the most ancient of that Tribe, and the most powerful in riches. These
things Chore, under color and pretense of the good of the Commonwealth, but in
effect only to raise a Tumult amongst the multitude, and intrude into the
office of the High Priest. Ver. 35.
Which discourse of his passing by little and little, from one ear to another,
Two hundred and fifty men follow Chore's Faction.
amongst the multitude, and multiplied by the envious, and such as maligned
Aaron, at last brought all the Tribes into a mutiny: so that 250 of the
chiefest Nobles grew at length to be partakers of Chore's Conspiracy; and all
of these conspired together to take away the Priesthood from Moses's Brother,
and to transfer it to him. The People likewise were in such sort incensed, They
cry out to stone Moses.
that they sought to stone Moses; and ran all of them confusedly with noise and
uproar, crying out before the Tabernacle of God, that the Tyrant was to be cut
off, and the People delivered from thraldom, who under pretext others: That if
he had decreed to bestow it on Aaron, he would have remitted the election Moses
was informed of Chore's treacherous Calumnies, and saw the People highly
incensed, yet was be nothing at all abashed thereat: but being satisfied in his
Conscience, that he had governed the estate uprightly, and well assured, that
his Brother obtained the Priesthood, not by his favor, but Gods election, he
came into the Congregation; where he uttered not one word against the People,
but addressing himself to Chore, he expostulated with him, and accused him with
great vehemence, being (besides his other qualities) by nature eloquent and fit
to speak in public Assemblies.

I think (says he) Chore, Moses's Oration to seditious Chore.
that both thou and every one of these (pointing with his finger at the 250 Men
of his faction) are worthy of honor; yea, I contemn not the rest of this
Assembly, Ver. 8, etc.
although they are not to be compared to you in Riches, and other endowments.
But neither does Aaron therefore possess the Priesthood, because he is richer
(for thou have more ample possessions than either of us) neither because he is
more noble, (for God has equally imparted the same unto us all, having given
us one and the same Grandfather) neither have I been moved thereunto by
Brotherly affection, to bestow that on him which was due unto others. For had I
considered any thing but God, and the obedience Iowe to him, I should rather
have taken this honor to my self, than have given it him; since there is no
man more near to me than my self. For what wisdom had it been in me, to expose
my self to those dangers which they incur, who commit an injustice, and suffer
another man to reap the advantage of it? But God forbid that my Conscience
should be stained with any such sin; were I guilty of this fault, God would not
leave Aaron has obtained this degree, (not by my favor, but by God's own
appointment) yet notwithstanding he refers and remitteth the matter to the
public disposition and order of you all; neither requires be any prerogative,
for that he has already exercised the charge, but esteems it to be the
greatest good fortune that may befall him, to see your Muti^ies and Seditions
cease, although with the loss of that honor which he has received from your
own election. For neither have we been guilty of desrespect toward God, in
accepting that which it pleased him to give us; nor on the contrary, could we
refuse it without impiety. But since it is a thing most reasonable, that Chore
will not be so bold as to pretend by the desire he has to this dignity, to
deprive God of the authority to dispose the same as best likes him.

Cease therefore to mutiny amongst your selves, and to be tumultuous upon this
occasion; let every one of you that desire the Priesthood, to morrow bring each
of you his Censer with perfumes, and fire from his house. And thou, O Chore, be
not ashamed to yield unto God, and to expect his judgment, without going about
to raise thy self above him: but come thou also amongst the rest of the
Competitors in this honor, to hear the decision. Neither see I cause, why
Aaron should not be there also present, to be judged with thee, in that
hitherto he has virtuously and uprightly behaved himself in the execution of
that office, and is likewise of the same Tribe and Race that thou art of. To
shall all offer Incense in the presence of the People, and let him whose
offering shall be most acceptable in God's sight, be declared and established
High Priest: so shall I be acquitted of that slander which is wrongfully urged
against me, of having (by my particular grace and favor) bestowed the office
of the Priesthood on my Brother.

After Moses had spoken in this manner, the People gave over murmuring, and the
suspicions which they had conceived against Moses; approving in themselves all
that which had been spoken, as being profitable for the Commonwealth. So the
Assembly separated.


How the Authors of the Sedition were slain by God's judgment, and the
Priesthood confirmed to Aaron and his Sons.
THe next day the People re-assembled, Ruffin. chap. 1*
to assist at the sacrifice, Numb. 16. 31, 32, 33.
and to see the controversy decided amongst the Competitors; neither was this
Assembly without Moses might be convicted of deceit. But the wiser sort,
desired to see an end of the Sedition; for they feared lest the Commonwealth
should be utterly ruined, if the Tumult should proceed any further. The
multitude likewise (being naturally desirous of novelty, and prone to speak
evil of their Magistrates) were diversely disposed upon every occurrent. Moses
sent his servants to Abiram and Dathan, to summon them to appear (according to
the accord) to attend the issue of the sacrifice. Dathan and Abiram rebellious.
But their answer was, that they would not obey him, nor any longer permit him
to assume to himself a Sovereign authority over them. Which when Moses
understood, he took diverse of the Elders of the People with him; and though he
was established by God to command over all in general, yet he disdained not to
go in person to these Revolters. Now when Dathan and those of his faction
understood that Moses with the Nobles were coming unto them, they, their Wives
and Children came out of their Tents to wait for him resolutely, having with
them also their Servants, who were armed to oppose themselves against Moses, if
so be he should offer them any violence. He no sooner drew near to them, but
lifting up his hands unto Heaven, he cried out with a loud voice in the hearing
of the whole Multitude, Moses prayer unto God.
and prayed after this manner: O God (said he) Thou Lord over all that which
either Heaven or Earth, or Sea contains; thou art a sufficient witness to me
of all mine actions, v. 15.
for that I have managed all things by thy will; and thou art he who have given
Hebrews have been my perpetual help and asistance, hear this my Prayer. For
nothing that is either done, or thought, is hidden from thee: for which cause I
hope thou will not disdain to testify and justify my truth, and manifest the
ingratitude, of these Men. Thou know Lord every thing that has passed in
the first years of my life; not for that thou have heard it, but for that thou
have seen and been present at it; Thou know also all that has happened to me
since, nor is this People ignorant thereof; But because they maliciously
interpret my management of affairs, be pleased, O my God, to give them a
testimony of my innocence. At such time as I led a peaceable life, and that by
thy help and my labor, and my Father-in-law Raguels favor, I lived quietly
and happily, I forsook the possession of my goods, and the fruition of my
peace, Sinai, and vouchsafedst both to speak unto me, and to confirm me by the
sight of miracles; who in thy Name did send me a messenger into Egypt; who
have abated the pride of the Egyptians, and have given us means to escape from
their Servitude; and have humbled Pharaohs power, when we were ignorant of our
way, by giving us a passage through the Sea, in whose bottom afterward the
Egyptians were drowned; who gave us Arms, when we were naked; thou made the
bitter water savory, and fit to be drunk of; and in our scarcity of water,
Hebrew, to favor injustice, nor suffered a poor Man, in his just cause, to
lose his right against a rich adversary. And now having administered the
Commonwealth with all sincerity, I am called in question for a crime, whereof I
am altogether guiltless, as if I had conferred thy Priesthood on my Brother for
private affection, and not by thy command: make it known that all things are
disposed by thy providence, and that nothing is brought to effect by casualty,
but by thy special ordinance: And to show that thou have care of the Hebrews*
testify Dathan and Abiram, who accuse thee to be insensible, and boast that
thou art circumvented by my subtilties. But thou shall make thy revenge most
notorious upon the unbridled detractors of thy glory, if they perish after no
common manner, but let the earth, which they unworthily tread upon, open it
self and swallow them up with all Dathan and Abiram swallowed up.
But if those crimes be truly urged which are enforced against me, then let the
curse return and light on mine head; and let those whom I have cursed, live in
safety. But Lord, after thou have inflicted punishment upon those that disturb
thy People, keep the rest of the multitude in peace, v. 31, 32, 33.
concord, and observation of thy commandments, since it is contrary to thy
justice, that the innocent multitude of the Israelites should answer their
misdeeds, and suffer their punishments. Whilst he spoke these words, and
intermixed them with tears, the earth presently trembled, and shaking, began to
be agitated (after such a manner as the waves of the Sea are by the winds in a
great Tempest.) Hereat were all the People amazed; and soon after with a
dreadful noise the earth opened, and swallowed up the seditious, with their
Families, their Tents, and all their Goods, so that nothing remained of theirs
to be seen. Whereupon in a moment the earth closed again, and the vast gaping
was shut, so that there appeared not any sign of that which had happened. Thus
perished they all, leaving behind them an example of God's power and judgments.
This accident was the more deplorable, in that their was none of their kindred
or allies that had compassion of them: so that even those that had sided with
them, praised God's Justice with joyful acclamations, esteeming them unworthy
to be bemoaned, but to be held as the plague and perverters of the People.
After that Dathan with his Family was extinguished, Moses assembled all those
that contended for the Priesthood together, committing again the election of
the Priesthood unto God, concluding that that honor should be ratified to him,
whose sacrifice was most acceptable in God's sight. For which cause the two
hundred and fifty Men assembled themselves, who were both honored for the
virtue of their Ancestors, and for their own abilities; with these also stood
Aaron and Chore, and all of them offered with their censors before the
Tabernacle, such perfumes as they brought with them; when suddenly so great a
fire shone, as the like was never seen, either breaking forth from the bowels
of the burning earth, kindled in Forests by the Sun and Winds, but such an one
as seemed to be kindled by God himself most bright and flaming: Chore with two
hundred and fifty Men is consumed with fire.
by force and power whereof those two hundred and fifty (together with Chore)
were so consumed, that there scarce appeared the least relic of their
carcasses; only Aaron remained untouched, to the end it might appear that this
fire came from Heaven. These things thus brought to pass, Moses (intending to
leave a perpetual memory to posterity of that punishment) to the end they
should not be ignorant thereof, commanded Eleazar the Son of Aaron to
consecrate their Censors, and fasten them to the Brazen Altar; that by reason
of this Monument, all Men might be terrified, who think that the Divine power
can be circumvented by humane policy.

CHAP. IV.
What things happened in thirty eight years space to the Hebrews in the Desert.
AFter that by so evident an Argument it appeared sufficiently, Numb. 17. 1, 2,
3. ad finem.
that Aaron, neither by sinister insinuations, nor by the favor of his
Brother, but only by God's election, had obtained the Priesthood; he ever
after, held it without any contradiction. Yet for all this, Another sedition
against Moses.
a new sedition brake out among the People with greater fury than at first, by
reason of the Subject which occasioned it. For though they were persuaded, that
all that had happened was brought to pass by God's order and will, yet they
imagined that God wrought these things in favor of Moses; to him therefore
imputed they all these things, as if God had not punished those Men through
indignation Moses solicitation: and they alleged, that Moses (having given
this maim unto the People, by the loss of so many Noble Men, who, as they said,
perished only for the zeal they bear to God's Service) not only had done them
open wrong; but, which was more, had assured the Priesthood to his Brother
after such a manner, that henceforward no Man durst pretend to the same, seeing
how miserably those others were punished by a violent death. Moreover, the
Kinsmen of those that were slain, solicited and stirred the People, praying
them to restrain the Pride and overgreat power of Moses, in that it lay in
their power easily to perform the same. But Moses perceiving that the People
were incensed, and fearing lest once more they should fall upon some
Innovation, whereby some Aaron brought their rods with their inscriptions; and
Aaron had written on his the name of the Tribe of Levi. Aaron's Rod fructifie^h.
These Moses laid in the Tabernacle, and the next morning brought them forth
every one, (which were easily known by the People to be the same which the
Princes of the Tribes had brought, by the marks which they had made upon them)
and they saw that all theirs remained in the same form which the day before
they retained, when Moses took them; but out of Aaron's rod there grew Branches
and Buds: and which is more to be wondered Moses and Aaron, into admiration of
the judgment which God gave in their favor; and forbear any more to repugn
against God, or to oppose themselves against Aaron's Priesthood. v. 8.
Thus three times confirmed by the approbation of God, Hedio and Ruffinus*
chap. 3, 4,
by all Men's consent he remained High Priest; and the People of the Hebrews
turmoyled with long seditions, Numb. 18.
at last by this means became settled peace in and quietness. v. 8. ad 20.
But after Moses had made the Tribe of Levi (which was dedicated to God's
service) free and exempt from warfare; Lev 14. 18, 23.
(for fear lest they should employ themselves in providing neces^aries for
their maintenance, The revenues of the Priests.
and so grow negligent in the service of God) he ordained, that Canaan should
be conquered, Forty eight of the best Cities, with their Lands within two Miles
compass, should be given to the Levites. Moreover, he commanded that the tenths
of all the yearly fruit that was gathered by the whole People should be given
to the Levites and Priests; which has been ever since inviolably observed. Now
must I declare what things are proper to the Priests. Of the forty eight Cities
which were granted to the Levites, he commanded them to give thirteen to the
Priests, and the tenth part of the Tithes. Besides, he ordained that the People
should offer to God the first fruits of whatsoever the earth yields: and that
the firstborn of four-footed Beasts allowed for sacrifice, if a male, should
de delivered to the Priests to sacrifice, to the end they might be nourished
with all their Family in Jerusalem; and that for those which the Law forbids to
eat, there should be paid by the owners, in lieu of a firstling, a Sicle and an
half; and for the firstborn of a Man, five Sicles. He allotted them likewise
the first fruits of Sheep-shearing; and those that baked Bread of new Corn were
to give them Cakes. But when they who are called Nazarites (because they let
their Hair grow and taste no Wine) have accomplished their vow, Numb. 6. 1, ad
13.
and come to present themselves in the Temple to cause their Hair to be cut, Of
the Nazarites.
the Beasts which they offer in sacrifice belong to the Priests. And as for
those that have consecrated themselves to the service of God, when they desire
to be dismissed from that ministry (whereunto by voluntary vow they bound
themselves) they must pay money to the Priests; a Woman, thirty Sicles, a Man
Moses assigned to the Priests, besides what the People offer for sins, as we
declared in the precedent Book: and whatsoever is contributed by* the People to
the order of the Priests, Numb. 20. 14, ad 21.
he commanded that both their Wives, Children and Servants should be made
partakers of the same, Moses Embassage to the Idumaans.
except those things which are offered for sins, of which only the Men which
are employed in divine service may eat, and that in the Tabernacle, and the
very same day that such sacrifices are offered. After all these constitutions
were made by Moses, and the mutiny appeased, he removed the Idumaea, where he
sent Ambassadors to the King thereof, desiring him to grant them free passage,
on condition to give him what assurance he would demand, that no violence or
injury should be offered to his Country, and that he would pay for whatsoever
victual or water either he or his Army should receive. But the King setting
light by the Embassage, denied them passage, and with a well furnished Army
marched forth against Moses to withstand him, if contrary to his will he should
attempt to pass through his Country. C. 20. v. 1,
Moses asked counsel of God, who forbad him to begin the War first, Mariam
Moses sister dies.
and commanded him to retire back again into the Desert. Numb 19. per totum.
At that time died his Sister Mary, the fortieth year after their departure out
of Egypt, The manner of Purification.
and the first Moon of the month Xantique: she was Magnificently enterred Sein.
And after the People had mourned for her thirty days, Moses purified them after
this manner: The High Priest killed near the Camp in a very clean place a young
red Heifer without blemish, (which had never yet born the yoke) and dipping his
finger in the blood thereof, he The year of the World, 2493, before Christ's
Nativity, 1473.
and then put into the fire the whole Heifer, with the Skin and Intrals,
casting in also a branch of Cedar, with a little Hyssop, and Scarlet Wool. A
man clean and chaste gathered up all the ashes, and put them in a clean place;
and all that needed to be purified, either for having touched one dead, or been
present at a Funeral, cast some of these ashes into Fountain water, wherein
they dip a Branch of Hyssop, and therewith besprinkled themselves the third,
and the seventh day; after which they passed for purified. Moses likewise
ordained, that the like ceremony should be used, when they had conquered the
Country whereof God had promised them the possession.

But after the Army (that had so long mourned for the dead Sister of the
General) Numb. 20.
he led them through the Desert, v. 23. 24.
into Arabia: and arriving in a place (which the Arabians account for their
Metropolitan City, in times past called Arce, and at this present Petra) he
spoke to Aaron to ascend up a high Mountain, which serves for bounds to the
Country; because it was the place where he was to yield up his soul to God.
Aaron went up, and in the sight of all the Army, standing on a high place, he
put off his Priestly ornaments, and gave them to his Son Eleazer, to whom by
eldership the succession appertained. And thus (in the sight of the People) he
died in the hundred twenty and third year of his age, Ruffinus, c. 4.
on the first Moon of the month of August, Hedio, c. 5.
called by the Athenians, Numb. 21.
Hecatombeon; by the Macedonians, Lous; and Sabba, by the Hebrews. Thus Moses
lost in the same year his Sister and his Brother, and all Moses removed his
Camp from thence, and pitched his Tents near unto a River called Arnon (which
springs from the Mountains of Arabia, and runs along the Desert, and then
enters into the Asphaltique Lake, separating the Region of the Moabites from
that of the Amorites.) The Country is so fertile, Moses sent Ambassadors to
Sehon, King of the Amorites.
that it suffices to maintain all the inhabitants though very numerous. To
Sehon, King of this Country, Moses sent Ambassadors, desiring passage through
his Kingdom, under such assurance as should best please him, that no wrong
should be offered, neither to his Country, nor the inhabitants thereof: and he
would pay the price of whatsoever his Soldiers took either in Victuals, or
Water. But Sehon refused him, and Arming his People, pitched his Tents on the
Banks of Arnon, Hebrews, if they presumed to pass the River.

CHAP. V.
Moses overcomes Sehon and Og, Kings of the Amorites, and distributeth their
Country by Lot, unto two Tribes and an half of the Hebrews
BUt when Moses saw the Amorites disposed to hostility, Numb. 21.
he judged that the injury and contempt was not to be endured, v. 21. ad finem
and considering the Hebrews were an untractable king of Men, The Hebrews
address themselves to ^ight against the Amorites.
and such, as idleness, and want together, might persuade to renew their former
seditions and tumults; in order to prevent all the occasion, he Amorite (as
soon as he saw them march forward, and begin the onset) forgetting his former
fierceness, was both himself terrified; v. 35.
and his Soldiers (who before the fight of their Enemies, were as cruel and
bloody as Lions) now waxed as fearful and as meek as Lambs. The Hebrews
overthrow the Amorites, and put them to flight.
So that they scarcely Hebrews perceive, that their Enemies began to fly, and
that their ranks were broken, but they more eagerly charged them, and put them
to the rout. And being extremely nimble, and lightly Armed, and besides very
expert in using the Sling, and all other weapons proper for fighting at
distance, either they overtook such as fled, or with their Slings, Darts and
Arrows, stopped the flight of those whom they could not overtake. Psalm. 135. 11.
12. 136. 17, 18, 19
So that there followed a very great slaughter, especially near the River;
because those that fled being no less molested with thirst, than with the pain
of their wounds, (in that it was Sehon King of the Amorites slain.
Their King, Sehon, also was slain in this Fight. And the Hebrews spoiled those
that were slain, and took The year of the World, 2493. before Christ's
Nativity, 1573.
They had likewise great abundance of all kinds of Fruits (in that the Harvest
was not as yet gathered.) Thus passed the Army through the whole Country,
foraging and spoiling the same without any resistance; by reason that the
Enemy, and all his Forces were defeated. This was the destruction which happened
to the Amorites, who neither used their Counsel prudently, Psalm. 135. 11, 12.
136. 17, 18, 19.
nor managed their War valiantly. But the Hebrews possessed their Country
which is enclosed between three Rivers, after the manner of an Island. For
Arnon terminates the Southern Coasts thereof, and Jobac the Northern, Sehon
King of the Amorites slain.
(which flowing into Jordan, loses its name) the Western Coasts is watered by
the River of Jordan. Amidst this prosperity of the Israelites, there arose a
new Enemy against them; The Hebrews possess the Land of the Amorites.
Og King of Galaad, and of the Country of Gaulanitis, was coming as a Sehon,
and understood the loss of the Battle; yet being very daring, The situation of
the Land of the Amorites.
he was in hope to obtain a Victory, and determined to make trial both of his
own Men's and his Enemies valor: which hope of his failed him, for he both died
in the Battle, Og King of Basan, is slain with his Army.
and his whole Army was likewise defeated. Moses no sooner passed over the
flood of Jobac, but entering Og's Kingdom, he overthrew one City after another,
and destroyed all the Inhabitants thereof, who were exceeding rich. Og was a
man of a most gigantick stature, and prodigious strength; his Bed which was of
Iron, and which was found in his chief City called Rabatha, was four Cubits in
breadth, and nine in length. This success did not only bring present advantages
to the Hebrews, but also opened them a way to greater Conquests; Ruffin. cap. 5.
for they took sixty well fortified Cities which were under Hedio, cap. 6.
Hierico.
so that there was not any of the meanest Soldiers but were greatly enriched
with pillage. After this, Moses removed his Camp toward Jordan, and pitched it
in a broad Plain near the City of Jericho (which is rich and fruitful, and
abounds with Palm Trees and Balm.) And now were the minds of the Israelites
in such sort confirmed, that they desired nothing more than War and Battle; and
Moses thinking good to make use of this their forwardness, (having sacrificed
to God in way of Thanksgiving, and feasted the People) he sent part of them
armed to destroy the Country of the Madianites, and to force the Cities of
that Region: which War had this Original.

CHAP. VI.

WHen Balac King of the Moabites (who was both an old Friend and Confederate
with the Madianites) saw the progress of the Israelites, Numb. 22, 23, 24. per
totum.
he began to suspect the security of his own fortune and estate: for he knew
not that God had inhibited the Hebrews to attempt the Conquest of any other
Country but the Land of Canaan. And therefore more rashly than prudently, he
resolved to oppose them: and for that he durst not assail them in Battle, whom
he knew elevated with the success of many Victories; yet desirous to hinder
them from proceeding any further, he sends Ambassadors to the Madianites to
consult with them what was fit to be done. C. 22. 1. ad 5*
The Madianites knowing that Euphrates there lived a famous Prophet called
Balaam (who was their especial Friend) sent some of their most honorable
Princes together with Balac's Ambassadors, Balac, King of the Moabites,
Embassage to the Madianites.
beseeching him that he would come unto them, and curse the Israelites. The
Prophet entertained the Ambassadors with great humanity, and asked counsel of
God concerning what answer he should give them: Bala^s and the Madianites
Embassage to Balaam.
God forbad him to do that which they de^ir'd. And so Balaam told them, that he
wanted not will to gratify them, but that God, to whom he owed the gift of
Prophecy, forbad him; for that Army which they desired should be cursed, was
dearly beloved of God. For which cause he gave them counsel to make peace with
the Israelites upon any conditions: which said, he dismissed the Ambassadors.
But the Madianites (being instantly requested by Balac) once more sent their
Ambassadors Balaam, who desirous to satisfy them in their demands, consulted
with God. But God (offended with him) commanded him to assent to the
Ambassadors: and he not conceiving that God spoke thus to him in his anger,
Ver. 15.
because he had not obeyed his order, departed onward with the Ambassadors. The
second Embassage to Balaam.
But as he Traveled upon the way, the Angel of God came and met him in a
narrow place, between two stone walls; which when the She-ass, whereon Balaam
was mounted, perceived, she started out of the way, and crushed her Master
against one of the walls; Ver. 21. ad 28.
and neither by the strokes which he gave her (being grieved by his bruise) nor
by any other means, The Angel resists Balaam.
could she be drawn forward. Whilst the Angel kept his station, and the
Prophet continued tormenting the Ass, God caused the Beast to speak to Balaam
with a humane and articulate voice: Ver. 28. 31.
blaming him, for that having The Ass speaks to Balaam.
he had so cruelly tormented and beaten her; and understood not that God did
prohibit him from the performance of that which he desired. The year of the
World, 2493. before Christ's Nativity, 1473.
As he stood amazed at the Prodigy, an Angel appeared to him, blaming Balaam's
astonishment, and he prepared himself to return back again: but God commanded
him to continue his intended journey, Balaam is reproved by the Angel.
charging him to say nothing but that which he should inspire to him.

After God had given him this charge, he went unto Balac, who entertained him
honorably, Ver 35, 36.
and caused him to be brought to a certain Mountain, from whence he might
behold the Hebrews Camp. Balaam comes to Balac.
Balac also himself being Royally attended, accompanied the Prophet, conducting
him unto a Mountain, which was but 60 Furlongs from their Camp. Balaam having
well considered it, desired the King to build seven Altars, on which to offer
seven Bulls, and seven Rams. All which being readily executed by the King, he
offered Israelites.

Happy People, of whom God himself vouchsafes to be the Conducter, on whom he
bestows so large blessings, C. 23. 1. ad 10.
and abundance of riches, Balaam's prophecy of the people of Israel.
and over whom his Providence incessantly watches! No other Nation shall equal
you in the love of virtue; your Successors also shall surpass you, because
amongst Men God only favors you, and takes care that no Nation under the
Sun shall either exceed or equal you in happiness. You shall likewise possess
that rich Land which he has promised you: and your posterity shall be
perpetual Lords thereof; and the glory of your name shall fill both the whole
Earth and Sea; and so shall your Nation be multiplied, that there shall Canaan
at this present will suffice you, but know that hereafter, the whole World will
not be too great for your inhabitation; so that both in the Islands, and in the
Continent, you shall live in so great number, that you shall equal the Stars of
the Firmament. And though you are like to grow so innumerable, yet
notwithstanding God will furnish you with all sort of good things in abundance,
in Peace, and in War, he will render you victorious. Wherefore we ought to wish
that our Enemies may resolve to take Arms, and to assault you, since they
cannot do it without their own total destruction. So greatly are you favored
and loved by God, who takes pleasure to abase the proud and great, and to raise
the weak and humble.

Thus spoke Balaam in his prophetical spirit, being inspired by the Spirit of
God. But Balac was much incensed against him, Ver. 11, 12.
exclaiming that he had not kept his promise; for by great Rewards he had been
by his Confederates drawn thither to curse them, Balac being displeased,
reprehendeth Balaam.
and in stead of Exercrations against them, he had given them the greatest
Benediction. The Prophet thus answered.

Think thou (said he) that it lies in our power, as often as destinies are
to be discovered, to speak or conceal what we list, Balaam's answer.
at such time as God speaks in our mouths? No, he himself causes us to utter
those words which pleases him; and he publishes those Oracles by us, which
neither we know, nor ever thought upon. I have not forgotten the Request of the
Madianites; and I came hither, to execute that which they desired at my hands;
but God Madianites, whose Prayers I ought to consider) let us erect new Altars,
and prepare other Sacrifices, and make trial if God perhaps will be moved to
grant me license to curse this People. Numb. 14. 3, 4.
Hereunto Balac gave consent; Balaam's Prophecy of things to come.
the Sacrifices were renewed: but Balaam could not obtain of God permission to
curse the Israelites. On the contrary, falling on his face, he predicted Balac
being much displeased, that the Israelites could not be cursed, sent Balaam
back again without honor: Ver. 10, 11.
who, as he came near Euphrates, desired to see the King and the Princes of the
Madianites, Balaam's counsel against the Hebrews.
to whom he spoke thus: Since it is your desire, O King, and you Princes of
Madian, that I gratify you, although it be against the Will of God, you shall
hear all that I can say to you. Hope not that any thing can extinguish the Race
of the Hebrews, either by War or Pestilence, or Famine, or any other chance;
for God has care to preserve that Nation Madianites and Moabites. Cap. 25. 1.
ad 9.
For by this means they shall incense God's wrath against themselves. Having
given The daughters of the Madianites come to the Camp of the Hebrews.
he departed. Now when the Madianites (according as they were counseled) sent
out their daughters, the younger sort of the Hebrews became entangled with
their beauty: and conversing with them, desired them not to deny them the
pleasure and enjoyment of their beauty. The young Women seeing them enamored,
made semblance of a desire to leave them, and depart. Whereupon the young Men
earnestly entreated them to tarry, and promised to marry them, swearing, that
they would not only love them as their Wives, but render them absolute
Mistresses of themselves and all their Goods. These promises they sealed with
Tears; and the Women answered after this manner: Valiant young Men, we want not
at home either riches, or the affections of our Parents and friends; neither
come we hither to you for want of these things, or to make sale of These
passionate Lovers promised to give their faith in what manner soever, and
refused no condition (by reason of their extreme love.) Well then (said the
Virgins) since you are so pleased, and that you have Customs so different from
other Nations, that you use only certain meats and drinks; it is Ver. 1, 2, 3.
if you will marry us, to adore our gods. For by no other argument can you
persuade us, The daughters of Madian allure the Israelites to Idolatry.
that your love is unfeigned, except you honor, as we do, the same gods:
neither shall you be blamed, if you honor the gods of that Country into which
you are come, considering that our gods are common unto all Nations, whereas
your God is adored by none but your selves. Choose therefore (said they) either
to conform your selves in opinion with other Men, or seek out another World
wherein you may live according to your particular ways and customs.

The Hebrews blinded with the love which they bare to the Virgins, liked well
their words, Ver. 6.
and consented to that which they said, suffering themselves to be seduced
according as they were invited; The Hebrews blinded with the love of the Women,
revolt from the Laws of their Fathers.
so that they transgressed the Ordinances of their Fathers in following strange
gods, to whom they offered Sacrifice, according to the manner of the 2.
Zambrias and Cosby.
they, together (with the rest of the multitude) were wretchedly corrupted.
Zambrias chief of the Tribe of Simeon, married Cosby the Madianite, daughter of
Zur, a Prince of the Country, and, to please her, sacrificed after the manner
of the Moses accuses the Israelites of Idolatry and Voluptuousness.
contrary to the Law of God. During this state of affairs, Moses being afraid
lest some more grievous mischief should succeed, called the People together,
and accusing no man in particular (for that he was unwilling to cast those into
desperation, who, whilst they thought their fault lay hidden, might be reduced
to a better mind) he told them, That it was a thing unworthy their virtue, and
that of their Ancestors, to prefer their pleasure before their Religion. That
it behoved them whilst they had time, to repent, and to show themselves to be
valiant men; not by contemning all holy and divine Laws, but by repressing
their disordinate Passions. That it was a strange thing, that having in the
Desert lived modestly, they should now in a plentiful Country grow so
dissolute and disordinate, as to lose that merit in affluence, which they had
acquired in necessity. By such like speeches, he endeavored Zambrias rising
up, Zambrias oration against Moses.
spoke after this manner: Moses (says he) use thou, if thou please, thine
own Laws, whereunto by long use thou have added authority, without which thou
had long ago suffered punishment for them, The year of the World, 2493.
before Christ's Nativity, 1571.
and learnt at thine own cost, that the Hebrews ought not to be deluded by
thee: For my self, thou shall never tie me to thy tyrannical decrees; for
hitherto have thou endeavored nothing else, but under pretext of Law and
Religion, to bring us into servitude and subjection, and thy self to power and
sovereignty, by forbidding us the pleasures and liberties which all men that
are born free, ought to enjoy. Was there any thing worse in our Egyptian
thraldom, than the power which thou assumest to punish every man by the Laws of
thy own making; whereas thou thy self art more worthy to be punished, in that
thou despisest those of all other Nations, and wilt have none but thine
observed, and so preferrest thy own particular judgment before that of all
other men whatsoever? But I, as touching that which I have done, in that I
suppose it to be well done, am not afraid to confess in this Assembly, that I
have taken a stranger to wife: thou hear mine actions from mine own mouth,
as from a free and resolute man; neither do I desire that they should be
hidden. It Is true also, that I sacrifice to the gods to whom thou forbiddest to
sacrifice, because I think not my self bound to submit to the tyranny, of
learning nothing that pertains to Religion but from thee alone; and I take it
as no obligation to me for any man to assume, as thou do, more authority
over me than I have my self. Whilst Zambrias spoke thus both for himself, and
others of his Faction, the People silently expected the issue of this great
quarrel, especially for that they saw their Lawgiver would not contend any
longer, lest he should make an insolent man more outrageous; and lest others,
in imitation of him, growing impudent in their speeches, should stir up Tumults
amongst the People: so the Assembly for this time was dissolved, and perhaps
the mischief had gone further, had not Zambrias been suddenly cut off in
Phinees (who as well for his own excellent qualities, as the dignity of his
Father Eleazar the High Priest, and his great Uncle Moses, was accounted the
most considerable of those of his age) was much discontented with Zambrias's
contumacy; and lest by his impunity the Law might grow into contempt, he
resolved to be revenged upon the Transgressors, well knowing how much the
example of great men prevails either way. Ver. 7, 8.
And being of no less courage than zeal, Phinees thrusts Zambrias and Chosbi
through at one time.
he repaired to Zambrias's Tent, and at one stroke slew both him and Chosbi,
his wife. By this example, many of the youth being animated by this worthy act,
to do justice on those that had committed the like offense, slew a great number
of them with the Sword, and a Pestilence, (which was sent by Gods judgment)
destroyed not only all the rest, but also Otherwise, 24000.
yet either dissembled or encouraged them in their Lust; the number of those
that perished on this manner, was 14000 men. At the same time, Ver. 9.
Moses (being incensed against the Madianites) sent out an Army to destroy that
Nation, Moses sends Forces against the Madianites.
of which Expedition we will presently discourse, after we have annexed that
which must not be omitted in this History, as tending to the praise of our
Lawgiver. Though Balaam, Ver. 16, 17.
sent for by the Madianites, to curse the Hebrews; which he could not do, being
hindered by the Providence of God, had afterward given that counsel to the
Enemy, by means whereof, within a little space, a great multitude of the
Hebrews were corrupted in their Religion; yet Moses has done him the honor to
insert his Prophecy Moses (as I began to say) sent an Army of 12000 Men against
the Madianites, choosing out of every Tribe a Thousand, and appointed Phinees
Captain over these Forces, by whose courage (as a little before I have
declared) both the Laws were vindicated, and Zambri, that brake them, punished.

CHAP. VII.
The Hebrews fight against the Madianites, and overcome them, Numb. 31.
BUt the Madianites (having intelligence that their Enemies drew near them,
Hedio, cap. 7.
and that they were not far from their borders) gathered their Forces together,
Ruffin. cap. 5.
and beset all those passages of their Country, by which they thought their
Enemy might break in, preparing themselves to repel them with force and valor.
Yet no sooner did Phinees with his Forces charge them, Cap. 3. 8. ad 18.
but upon the first encounter so great a multitude of the Madianites was slain,
Five Kings of the Madianites slain.
that the number of the Carcasses could hardly be reckoned. Neither were their
Kings saved from the Sword: these were Och, Sur, Robeas, Vbes, and Rechem,
(from whom the chiefest City of the Arabians deriveth its name, Otherwise
A^^^eme, or Arca.
and at this day retains Receme, and by the Grecians Petra.) The Hebrews
having thus put their Enemies to flight, ravaged the Region, and carried away
with them great The year of the World, 2493. before Christ's Nativity, 1471.
and killing all the Inhabitants thereof, both Men and Women, they only spared
the Virgins, according to the command Phinees had received from Moses: who
returning home with his Army in safety, brought with him a memorable and
glorious prey; of Oxen, 52067; of Asses, 60000; of gold and silver Vessels, an
incredible number, which the Madianites were wont to use for their domestic
occasions, A great prey gotten from the Madianites.
so great was their great Riches and Luxury. There were also led Captives about
30000 Virgins. But Moses (dividing the prey) gave the fiftieth part thereof to
Eleazar, and the Priests, and to the Levites another fiftieth; Number. 27. 18.
the remainder, he distributed amongst the People, who after this Battle lived
in great security, Deuteronomy. 3. 22.
having gotten Riches by their Valor, Moses appointed Joshua for his Successor.
and Peace also to enjoy the same. Now for that Moses was well stricken in
years, he appointed Joshua to Numb. 32. 1, 5, etc.
being therein instructed by his Master Moses. The Tribes of Reuben, Gad, and
the half of Manasses, require the land of the Amorites.
About that time, the two Tribes of Gad and Reuben, with the half Tribe of
Manasses (being abundantly stored with Cattle, and all other manner of Riches)
by common consent, requested Moses to give and assign to them in particular the
Country of the Amorites, which not long since they had conquered by the Sword,
for that it was full of rich Pastures. But he (suspecting that through fear,
they sought to withdraw themselves from the War with the Canaanites, under
pretext of care of their Cattle) sharply reproved them, saying, that they were
fearful; and that their desire was to possess Jordan, which God had promised
them, by overcoming those Nations which he commanded them to account for their
Enemies. These Tribes, lest he should seem to be deservedly incensed against
them, answered, that neither through fear they fled danger, neither through
sloth shunned labor, but only designed to leave their prey in commodious
places, to the end they might be more fit to follow the War: saying, that they
were ready (if so be they might receive Cities for the defense and receipt of
their Wives, Children, and Substance) to follow the rest of the Army
whithersoever they were conducted; and to adventure their lives with them,
Moses satisfied with their reason in the presence of Eleazar the High Priest,
and Joshua, with the rest of the Magistrates, granted them the Land of the
Amorites, with this condition, that (together with the rest of the People) they
should march against their common Enemies, Numb. 35. 34, etc.
till the War were accomplished according to their desire: accordingly having
received that which they demanded, they built them walled Cities, Deuteronomy. 4. 43.
and left their Children, Josh. 20. 8, 9.
Wives and Substance in the same. Moses also built ten Cities in that Region
(which are to be reckoned in the number of those 48 abovementioned) in three
whereof he appointed Sanctuaries, The Cities of refuge.
and places of refuge, which they only might take benefit of, who fled thither
for Casual Homicide; and he appointed them their term of Exile, till the time
of the death of the High Priest, under whom the Arabia, Bosora; in the Region
of Galadena, Numb. 36. 1, 2.
Arimanum: in the Country of Bazan, Gaul. Moses also ordained, that after the
Conquest of Canaan, The daughters of Salpades have their inheritance in their
fathers place.
three more Cities of the Levites should be appointed, to that end that they
might give refuge and habitation to such sort of Offenders. At that time, when
one of the Magistrates, called Salphates, of the Tribe of Manasses, was dead,
and had only left Daughters behind him, the Governors of the Tribe came unto
Moses, The history of Deuteronomy.
Whether they should inherit the Lands of their Father? Moses answered them,
Ruffin. cap. 5.
That if they married within their Tribe, they should inherit; but if they made
choice to marry themselves into another Tribe, Hedio, cap. 8.
then they should lose their Patrimony in their own: Deuteronomy. 41, etc. ad 43.
and for this cause made he this Ordinance, to the end, that every Tribe should
continually possess its proper inheritance. But whereas now there remained but
30 days only, to fulfill the number of 40 years since their departure out of
Egypt, Moses summoning an Assembly in that place near to Jordan, where now the
City of Abila is situate, environed with fields beset with Palm Trees, as soon
as he saw the People ready to hear him, spoke unto them after this manner.

CHAP. VIII.
Moses Laws, and how he was taken out of this world, from the company of Men,
Deuteronomy. 4.
MY dear friends, Moses oration unto the people before his death.
and companions, in my long Travels, with whom I have run through so many
dangers; since it is thought requisite by God, and mine age (amounting to the
number of one hundred and twenty years) requires no less, that I must depart
out of this life; and since it seems not good in Gods sight, that either I
should be agent or assistant in your affairs beyond Jordan: Deuteronomy. 4. 1, ad 43.
I have resolved to employ that little space of life which remains to me, in
order to establish your felicity according to the Grace that is given me; and
to provide that by laying open the way unto you that leads to the same, I may
oblige you to retain some affection for my memory. Give Israel, there is but
one only way whereby men attain to felicity, to wit, the favor of God, which
he only gives to those that deserve it, and withdraws from those that offend
him. Toward him if you continue dutiful (according as he requires, and in such
manner as I by his direction have instructed you) you shall never fail to
increase in virtue, and to draw all men to envy your happiness: and which is
more, Moses exhorts the people to be obedient to Gods will.
Which if you shall perform, you shall excel all other Nations in war, and be
invincible by your enemies: for by Gods assistance all things are possible.
Moreover there are great rewards (in all the course of life) proposed unto
virtue, which is also to it self a great reward: besides, by it all other
blessings are easily obtained; and if you practice it among your selves, you
shall both lead a blessed life, and obtain immortal glory, The promise of Gods
assistance.
not only amongst strangers, but also to all posterity. These things are you
to hope for, if neither you your selves violate those Laws, (which by Gods
command, and my Obedience to the Magistrates.
and the comfort to leave you in great prosperity, commending you all to the
Laws of piety and prudence, and the virtue of your Guides and Magistrates, who
hereafter are to take care of your safety and felicity. God likewise, under
whose conduct you have lived, (and to whose favor you owe whatsoever you have
received by me) will not fail to take care of you; but as long as you shall
honor both him and piety, so long shall you remain in security under his
protection: neither shall you want such men, who shall give you excellent
instructions; whose counsels if you obey, you shall be fortunate (namely
Eleazar the High Priest, and Josua, with the Senate and Magistrates of the
Tribes) toward whom Jordan, and conquered Canaan. Otherwise if made more
insolent by these blessings you fall into contumacy, and contempt of virtue,
Gods favor will never be extended toward you; and if by your sins you shall
incense him against your selves, you shall both lose the Land which you have
conquered by your courage, by being shamefully oppressed by your Enemies; and
being dispersed over the face of the whole earth, both the Land and Sea shall
be full of the marks of your servitude; which if it should come to pass, then
were it too late to repent you, that you have not observed his holy Laws.
Wherefore to avoid this danger, suffer not any one of your Enemies, after your
victory is once gotten, to live; and think it The Israelites are commanded to
kill their enemies, and destroy their idols.
But lest through ignorance of better things you become depraved, by Gods
commandment I have written you Laws, and a form of administration, both of the
Commonwealth, and your private estates; from which if you shall no ways divert,
or wander, you shall prove the most fortunate People of the earth.

When he had spoken these things, he delivered them a Book, containing in
Writing their Laws, Moses delivers the Israelites a book, wherein their Laws
and manner of life was written.
and customs of good life: which when they had received, they melted Moses to
pray for them. These thoughts produced in them a repentance of those things
which (through fury) they had committed against him in the Desert, so that all
the People (breaking out into tears) would admit no consolation. Laws made by
Moses.
But Moses comforted them, and desiring them to give over weeping, encouraged
them to observe faithfully the Laws of God: Ruffin. chap. 7.
and so for this time the assembly dissolved. The excuse of the writer of the
History, why he innovated the order of the Laws.
But before I proceed, I Moses, and see what our customs have been, even from
the first institution of our Commonwealth. For all those things are extant
which this Man wrote, so that we need not faign or affix any thing by way of
ornament: we have only changed the order; and those Laws which he scatteringly
set down according as he received them from God, we have generally digested
into their places: whereof I thought good to admonish the Reader; for fear lest
hereafter any of our Tribes coming to the view hereof, should rashly accuse me,
of not having faithfully delivered the Writings and Justitutions of Moses.
First will I reckon up those Laws particularly which appertain to the public
institution

After you have conquered the Land of Canaan, Item, the Israelites shall live
in the Land of Canaan.
and built your Cities, you shall in security reap the fruit of the Victory, if
by observation of these following Commandments, you shall render your selves
well pleasing to God. Let there be one sacred City in the region of Canaan, A
sacred City and Temple in Canaan.
situate in a commodious and fertile place, which God shall make choice of: in
the same let there be one only Temple built, and one Altar erected of rough and
unpolished stones, but chosen with such care, that when they shall Hebrew
Nation is one. Whosoever shall blaspheme God, let him be stoned to death,
hanged on a Gibbet for a day, Blasphemy against God.
and afterward ignominiously and obscurely buried. Deuteronomy. 4.


Let all the Hebrews, Levit. 16. 1, 10, 13.
from their several Provinces, assemble themselves thrice in the year in the
sacred City and Temple, Thrice in the year the Hebrews ought to meet
that they may give thanks to God for the benefits they have received, and by
their prayers implore his future assistance; and that by their conversation and
mutual entertainments, they may increase their benevolence and

Besides, let the tenth part of the fruits (besides them that are due to the
Priests and Levites) which you are accustomed to sell in your Markets (being
reduced into ready money) be spent on Sacrifices and Banquets in the sacred
City. For it is just to celebrate feasts to Gods honor, Tenths.
of the fruits of the earth, which we have received from his hands. The hire of
a Harlot.


Deuteronomy. 23. 18.
for neither does any thing delight God which is gotten by ill ways: Micha. 1.
7.
or is there greater uncleanness, than the shameful and unlawful mixture of our
bodies.

Likewise if any man take reward for covering a bitch (whether she be for the

Every seventh year, Other gods.
when the People shall be assembled together in the sacred City to sacrifice at
the feast of Tabernacles, Deuteronomy. 1.
the High Priest from a high Pulpit (from whence he may be heard by the whole
multitude) shall read the whole Law publicly: Linen and Woollen.
so that neither Women nor Children shall be kept from hearing the same, not
yet slaves and bondmen. Deuteronomy. 22. 11.
For it is good that they retain the perpetual memory thereof, always
imprinted in their minds: Deuteronomy. 11.
for so shall they sin the less, The book of the Law is to be read on the feast
of the Tabernacles.
in that they understand Deuteronomy. 11. 19.
and how he delivered us out of the bondage of Egypt. For it is a thing in
nature reasonable, Children shall learn the Law.
to give thanks to God, as well in acknowledgement of the Goods Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7,
as in expectation of his future mercies. The chief of these things also are to
be written over our doors, and worn on our arms; and those things which declare
his power and benificence, are to be born about, written on the head and arms,
The signs of the Law.
that the remembrance of Gods goodness toward his People may continually be
renewed. In every City let there be chosen seven Governors, such as are
approved in Virtue, and able for Justice. The seven Presidents.
Let each one of these Magistrates have two Ministers of the Tribe of Levi.
Honor to the Magistrate.
Let those that are appointed Judges in the Cities, be held in high reputation;
so that in their presence no man presume either to utter contumelies, or
injurious speeches; for so shall it come to pass, that men accustomed to
reverence good men, shall also exercise themselves in piety and reverence The
office of Judges.
and prefer justice before all other things; for it is contumelious to God,
Justice is Gods power.
to suppose, that he is weaker than they, for whose sake they wrest the Law,
contrary to justice, which is the power of God. He therefore that gives
judgment in favor and partiality to great men, makes them greater than God
himself. And if the Judges cannot determine of the matter in question (as it
oftentimes falls out) let them refer the cause to the Holy City, and there
shall the High Priest and the Prophet, with the assistance of the Senate,
determine that

The testimony of one witness shall not be received, Deuteronomy. 19. 16, 17, 18.
but of three, or at least of two; whose testimony shall be made good by the
examination of their behavior and life. As for women, it is not lawful for
them to bear any witness, by reason of the levity and temerity of that sex.
Neither is it lawful for a bondman to bring in testimony, by reason of his
degenerate and ignoble mind; for it is to be suspected, that either for lucre
sake, or for fear, he will depose an untrue testimony. And if any false witness
shall be convicted of perjury, The punishment of a false Witness.
let him be subject to that penalty which he should have endured that should
have been cast by his false accusation. If manslaughter be committed in any
place, and the Offender cannot be found out, and it Of Homicide committed.
that the man was slain out of malice, let there be a diligent and careful
inquisition made (with rewards proposed to the discoverer;) but if no
probabilities or conjectures can be gathered, then let the Magistrates of the
Cities adjoining to the place where the slaughter is committed, and the Elders
of the same, assemble together, and measure from the place where the dead body
lies: and let the township that is found to be nearest, and the inhabitants
thereof buy a Heifer; which they shall bring into a place unlaboured and
unplanted, where the Priests, and the Levites, having cut the nerves of the
Neck, shall wash their hands, and lay them upon the head of the said Heifer,
and protest with a loud voice, that they, and the Magistrates with them, are
not defiled with that homicide; that they did it not, nor were they present
when it

Aristocracy is without doubt a very good kind of Government because it puts
the authority into the hands of more honest and good men; take therefore heed
that you desire no other form of policy, but retain and continue the same,
having no other superiors but the Laws which God gives you; For it suffices
you that God is pleased to be your Governor.

Yet notwithstanding, Aristocracy* the best kind of Government.
if you shall chance to desire to have a King, see that ye elect one of your
own Nation, who in all things may be studious to procure justice, and all other
virtues, Deuteronomy. 17, 15.
attributing more to God and the Laws than to his own wisdom and conduct. Let
him not undertake any thing without the advice of the High Priest, and the
Elders. Of the election of a King.
Let him not have diverse Wives, neither let him delight to get great Deuteronomy. 19.
14.


It is not lawful for any man to remove the Landmarks either of his own Land,
The bounds of Lands are not to be removed.
or any other man's whatsoever; for by them is peace preserved: But they ought
to remain for ever firm and immovable, as if God himself had placed them: since
such an alteration may give occasion to great contests, and those whose avarice
cannot suffer that bounds be set to their greediness, are easily led to contemn
and violate the Laws.

If a man plant a piece of Ground, Levit. 25, 3.
and the Trees fructify before the fourth year, The plants* that are not of
four years growth are prohibited.
neither shall any man eat thereof by reason that they are abortive fruits: and
that which is contrary to nature is neither fit to be offered to God, nor
convenient for the use of man. But all that fruit that shall grow in the fourth
year (for then is the time that the Trees should bear) shall be gathered and
brought into the holy City (together with the tenth of all other fruits) and
they shall be eaten during the Feast which the owner thereof makes to his
Friends, and with Orphans and Widows; but in the fifth year it shall be lawful
for him to gather the fruit for himself.

Sow not a Field that is planted with Vines, for it suffices that it
nourishes one sort of plants: Vines to be planted.
so that it needs not to be labored and manured with the Plough. The Law of
the Plough.
but the tillage must always be performed by Beasts of the same kind.

The seeds also ought to be clean and without any mixture; Deuteronomy. 22. 10.
so that two or three sorts ought not to be sowed together; for nature allows
not a commixion of things that are different,

It is not lawful also to cover the female with the male of another kind, lest
this example should draw men to abominable mixtures, and to a contempt of that
sex which is appropriate to them; for it often falls out, that from small
beginnings, effects proceed of great and dangerous consequence. Levit. 19. 10.
For which reason nothing ought to be admitted, Deuteronomy. 24. 21, 22.
by the imitation whereof, there may chance to grow a corrupting of good Some
Gleanings are to be left for the Poor in the Field.


They that Mow and Reap Corn, ought not to gather up all the ears too exactly,
but leave some for those that are in necessity, to the end to succor them. They
likewse that plant Vines, ought to leave some clusters for the poor, and some
fruit on the Olive Trees, to the intent that they that have none of these, may
gather something for their relief: for the owners of the Field shall be so far
from suffering damage by the negligent gathering of their Corn, that on the
contrary they shall draw profit form their charity: for God will bring to pass
that their Land (who regard not their particular profit, but have care of the
nourishment of those that are in necessity) shall be far

Neither is the mouth of the Ox to be muzled, Deuteronomy. 25. 4.
at such time as he treads the Corn in the Mow: Oxen treading or grinding
For it stands not with reason, that they who have been partakers of the
labor, and have traveled for the increase of the fruits, should be restrained
from all use and benefit thereof. Deuteronomy. 23, 24.


Neither ought the Traveller in his journey be denied to gather and taste the
fruits of Autumn, Travelers are not to be driven away from ripe fruits.
but he is to be permitted to take the same freely, whether he be of the
Country, or a stranger; who shall depart joyfully, in that they have been made
partakers of such Fruit: but it is not lawful for them to carry any away with
them.

They likewise that gather Grapes, ought not to forbid any man to taste of
them,

Yea, they are to be invited, that through modesty make nice to touch the same
(if Israelites) for such are to be esteemed Friends and Masters of what we
have, The year of the World, 2493. before Christ's Nativity, 1571.
in that they are of the same race: and if Strangers, we ought to exercise
hospitality, toward them with out thinking that we lose any thing by the small
present we make them of the fruits which we have by God's bounty, Nor is it to
be supposed, ill employed, which in way of courtesy a man permits another
to take, since it is God that furnishes and gives the abundance of all
things; not to the end to enjoy the same in private, but also to bestow them
liberally. And he it is, that by this means, would declare unto other people
the good will he bears to the people of Israel, and the felicity whereof he
makes them partakers; by reason, that in that abundance which they have, his
will is, that other men should have part thereof. But Thirty nine stripes.


It shall very well become you (said Moses) since you have tasted miseries both
in Egypt and the Desert, Deuteronomy. 25. 3.
that you have compassion of those who are in like estate; and for that you are
made rich by Gods mercy and providence, The Law laid on 40. but the Jews of
superstition use but 39. as you may see.
it behooves and becomes you to impart somewhat to the indigent, who at the
present are in that condition, in which you were.

Besides the two Tenths which I commanded you yearly to pay, 2. Cor. 11. 24
(the one to the Levites, The Tenth for the poor The first fruits.
and the other for your Festivals) you shall for every year pay a third, to be

When a man has gathered his First Fruits, Deuteronomy. 26, 2, 3. etc.
he shall bring them to the Temple, and after he has given thanks unto God
(that the Land which he has given him in possession, has brought forth fruit)
and accomplished that Sacrifice, which the Law commands him to make, he shall
give the first fruits to the Priests. And after he has done all that which
concerns him to do, (as well concerning the Tenths of the Levites, as those
ordained for the Feasts,) being ready to return home, let him present himself
at the door of the Temple, and give thanks to God, That having delivered them
from the grievous servitude of Egypt, he has given them a plentiful and ample
Land to enjoy: and making protestation, that he has paid the Tenths according
to Moses Law, let him beseech God, that he will be favorable both to himself
in priva^t, and the Hebrews in public; and that he will continue those goods
unto him which hitherto he has bestowed upon him, and of his great goodness
and mercy vouchsafe to increase them.

Let those that are of full years to be married, Of Marriage
match themselves with virtuous Virgins, Lev. 21. 13, 14.
and such as are born of honest Parents. And he that will not take a Virgin to
Wife, Freemen ought not to marry Servants
let him not meddle with one that is married to another man, lest he breed
discontent and sorrow to her first husband. Let not freemen match themselves
with such as are slaves, or bondwomen, although they be thereunto moved by
love; for it is a thing praise worthy, The marriage of an Harlot.
and honorable, to surmount a man's affectionss. Let no man marry with an
harlot, The penalty of a woman married for a Virgin, and not found so, Deuteronomy..
24.
If any one that is married for a virgin, be afterward found to the contrary,
let her be brought before the Judge, and let her Husband produce all the signs
he can of his suspicion, and let the new-married Wife's cause be defended by
her Father or Brother, or by them that are next in blood; and if the Wife be
found innocent, let her return and dwell with him that has accused her, who
may not any more refuse her, except she give him great occasions, whereunto she
cannot contradict. But he that without cause, and rashly shall accuse and
slander his W^fe, shall be punished with thirty nine stripes; and in way of
amends,

If any man have two Wives, Deuteronomy. 21. 15, 16, 17.
the one of which he holds in greater honor and amity, The first begotten
should hold his right.
either for Love, or by reason of her Beauty, than the other; if the Son of her
that is more loved, demand to have the prerogative of the elder, which is a
double portion of his Fathers patrimony, (for so much import our Ordinances)
and challenge the same, by reason that his Father more dearly loves his Mother
than the other, let it not be granted him; For it is against justice, that the
eldest should be deprived

The year of the World, 2493 before Christ's Nativity, 1471.
they shall both be punished with death, for they are both equally guilty of
sin: the man, because he has persuaded the Maiden to prefer her lust before an
honest marriage; and the maid, for suffering herself to be overcome, and
abandoning her body to leudness, either for lust or lucre sake. But if meeting
her he alone, enforce her, and she have none near to succor her, let him die
alone.

He that shall deflowre the Virgin that is unmarried, The punishment of
adultery, or rather ravishing.
shall take her to Wife: but if he condescend not to the Father to take her in
wedlock, he shall pay fifty Sicles, for amends of the injury. Deuteronomy. 22. 23, 24.


If any man pretend to separate himself from his Wife for certain causes; v. 25.
such as ordinarily The deflowring of a virgin.
let him confirm it in writing, That he will never more entertain her again;
and then she may marry again unto another, and refuse the former Husband: and
if it happen that she be ill used by the second, or that, he being dead, the
first would take her again in marriage, it is not lawful for the Wife to return
to him.

Let the Brother of him that is deceased without issue, Deuteronomy. 25. 5, ad. 9.
take to Wife her whom his deceased Brother had married, The Wife of the dead
Brother married.
and let the Son born by this second wedlock bear his name, and he brought up
as the successor of his inheritance. For it is advantageous to the
commonwealth, that Families should not come to ruin, and that the goods remain
to those of the same kindred. And it will be a comfort to the Widow to be
joined

If any man take a Virgin prisoner, Marriage with a Bondwoman.
or such an one as has been already married, and be desirous to take her to
his Wife, it is not lawful for him to touch or approach her till she is shaven,
Deuteronomy. 21. 11, 12, 13.
and (having put on her mourning apparel) has bewailed her Parents, or Friends
slain in Battle: but after she has in this sort assuaged her sorrow, she may
afterward addict herself to mirth and marriage. For it is a matter both honest
and just, The lamentatation and mourning of thirty days.
that he that entertaineth her, to have issue by her, should condescend unto
her will, in all wherein he may gratify her; and that he should not only
addict himself to the pursuit of his pleasure; but when the thirty days of
mourning shall be expired, (for that time is sufficient for the Wife to bewail
her Friends) then

All those Children that shall make no reckoning of their Fathers and Mothers,
Deuteronomy. 21. 18, ad 21.
nor show them that honor which belongs to them, but contemn them, and
behave themselves insolently toward them, Disobedience* (...).
the Parents, whom Nature has made their judges, shall begin by remonstrating
to them, that they were matched together in Matrimony, not for their pleasures
sake, or that by uniting their possessions, they might become the richer, but
to the end they might beget Children, who might nourish them in their be held
happy, when they see that their Son or Daughter is, exempt from the punishment

Let the Enemy also be interred after the same manner, Enemy to be buried.
and let no dead man lie unburied, after such time as he has been judged, and
has satisfied the Laws.

It is not lawful for any Hebrew to lend upon Usury; neither money, nor meat,
or Deuteronomy. 23.
for it is an unjust thing to make profit of the misery of those of our Nation:
but it is better to succor their necessities, That which is borrowed must be
paid.
and expect Gods retribution, as a gain to them, Exodus 22. 14.
who practice such kind of benefits. But they that have borrowed either money,
or any fruit, dry or moist; when by the favor and assistance of God, they
shall reap their own harvest, and gather their fruit, let them make a willing
restitution to those that have lent them, as if they had laid them up for
themselves, to possess at such time as they had need of them. But if there be
any so shameless as they will not make satisfaction, yet let not the Creditor
enter into their house to take a Pawn, before the Judges have given order, A
pledge.
that the pledge be demanded at their door; and then the debtor without
contradiction shall bring it to him, Deuteronomy. 24. 11, 12, 13.
because it is not lawful Theft.
but he that has stolen either Gold or Silver, let him restore it twofold. If
any man kill such as break into houses to rob, Exodus: 21. 2. ad 7.
and if the Thief want means to pay this penalty, let him be their slave
against whom he has trespassed, An Hebrew slave is to be set at liberty, after
seven years.
and at whose su^e he is condemned. If any one be sold unto one of his own
Tribe, let him serve him six years; and in the seventh year, he shall depart
with liberty. But if during the time that he remains with the buyer, he beget
any Child upon a female fellow slave, and that he be willing to serve, by
reason of the good affection that he bareth unto the house; Deuteronomy. 15. 12. ad 19.
in the year of Jubilee (which happens every fiftieth year) let him be set at
liberty, Goods that are ^ound.
leading away with him his Children, and Wife, with freedom. If any man find
Money or Gold by the

Let each man direct the ignorant Traveller in his way, and set him in the
right path, if he wander, Deuteronomy. 22.
without deluding him, or hindering him in his necessity, or mis-leading him in
his journey. The Law of violence.
Let no man speak ill of him that is either absent, or deaf. If

Israelites use any mortal Poison, or Drug, that may do hurt to any man: and if
any be found with such things about him, let him dye, because it is just that
he suffer the evil which he had prepared for another. Whosoever has maimed any
man, or pulled out his eye, let him in like manner be maimed and blinded, being
deprived of the same member of his body whereof he has deprived another man;
except he that is maimed, had rather have a pecuniary amends: for the Law
remitteth it to the election of the offended, Poison.
to estimate his injury; and if he will be more severe, Exodus 21. 23.
he may. Levit. 24. 20.
If any one have an Ox that strikes with his horn, let him kill him: Talions
Law.
and if the same Ox strikes and kills any man in the Field or Mow, let him
be stoned to death, Deuteronomy. 19. 21.
and let no man eat the flesh thereof. And if it be proved, Of an Ox striking
with his horn.
let him also be put to death, as being the author of the murder committed by
the Ox. But if the said Ox kill a slave, either Male or Female, he shall be
stoned; Exodus 11. 28, 29, 32.
and the owner thereof shall pay thirty Sicles to the Master of the slave that
is slain. If one Ox be stricken by another, so as he dye thereof, let both of
them (both that which was dead, and that which struck the other to death) be
sold, and the price thereof parted equally betwixt both the owners. They that
dig a Pit or Cistern, Deuteronomy. 21, 33, 34, 35.
must be careful that they enclose and fence it with Planks or Bars, A Pit.
not to hinder any man from drawing water, but lest any man by misfortune fall
into the same. And if any man's Beast fall into the same unfenced Pit, the
owner Deuteronomy. 24.
to the end no body may fall from thence. Let him that receives any thing in
trust, keep it carefully, as a thing sacred; and let neither man nor woman
attempt to alien that which is committed to his custody, although thereby he
might gain much Gold, and although there were no man that could convince him
thereof. For since the conscience knows the same, every one ought to endeavor
to deal uprightly; and supposing himself a sufficient witness against himself,
let him do those things which are laudable in the sight of men, but especially
that which is pleasing to God, from whose sight no wrongful dealing is
concealed. If notwithstanding he to whom this trust is committed, shall chance
(without any fraud In the same place.
and there take an oath, that nothing is lost by his will, or consent, and that
he has not converted any part thereof to his own use; whereupon let him be
dismissed, without any further inquiry. But if he have made use of the least
part of that which has been committed to his charge and trust, and that he
happen to lose it, Levit. 19. 13.
he shall be condemned to restore all that was committed to his keeping. As it
has been ordained in matters of trust, Hire.
the like is decreed touching Hire due unto the Labourer: Deuteronomy. 24. 18, 19.
let each man take heed lest he defraud a Poor Man of his Hire; knowing that
God gave him his Hands instead of Lands and other possessions. Children are not
to be punished for their parents offenses.
For which cause, the payment of Hire ought not to be deferred, but satisfied
the same day; by Eunuchs.
which it never learned by examples, and for which it endures not to be
reproved. Deuteronomy. 23. 1.
Voluntary Eunuchs are to be detested, and their company to be fled, because
they have deprived themselves of the means which God has given to men, for the
increase of mankind. Such people therefore are to be driven far from us, and
esteemed wholly inexcusable, as having killed their children before they be
born.

raised amongst you, which may cause what has been well ordered and decreed
The Laws of War.
shall be obliged to undertake a War, I wish it may happen without the Confines
of your Country: but if the matter must needs be tried by the Sword, Deuteronomy. 20.
10.
you shall send certain Heralds to your declared Enemies. Heralds to be sent.
For before you enter battle, it shall be requisite first of all to parley with
them, and to declare unto them, that you have a great Army, and Horses, and
Weapons, and (besides all these) that you have Gods favor and assistance; and
you shall desire them, that you may not be enforced to War against them, nor to
make booty of their Goods, and to carry them

But when you have brought your Army into the field, Deuteronomy 20. 20.
take heed you commit no outrage: Fruitful trees are not to be cut down.
and when you shall assault any Cities, if you fortune to need Wood to make
Engines of, see you cut not down Fruit Trees, but spare them; remembering, that
they are planted for the good of men; and that if they could speak, they would
accuse you; that without cause they are ill treated, against all right; and
that if they had the power to depart from thence, they would transplant
themselves into

But when the Battle is ended, and the day is yours, kill all those Enemies
that resisted you in the Fight; Deuteronomy. 20. 15, 16; 17.
the rest reserve as your tributaries (except the people of the Land of Canaan,
The Canaanites are wholly to be extinguished.
for they, with all their Families, are to be exterminated.) Beware also (but
especially in War) that neither a Woman use a Man's apparel, nor a Man that of a
Woman's.

These are the Laws which Moses left. Deuteronomy. 30. 31, 32, 33, 34.
He gave them likewise certain Institutions, (which he had written forty years
before,) whereof we will speak in another Treatise. Some few days after (for
he assembled the people six days together) he gave them his blessing, and
pronounced his maledictions against those which should not live according Deuteronomy.
25. 19.
He committed also unto them the custody of the Tabernacle. He likewise
exhorted the people that (when by force they had conquered the promised
Country, The Amalechites to be punished.
and were planted therein) they should not forget the injury which the
Amalechites had done them, but that they should lead forth their Army against
them, and take vengeance of the wrongs they had done them, at such time, as
they were in the Desert. And Canaan, they should exterminate and extinguish all
the people.

He commanded them also to erect an Altar toward the East not far from the
City of Sichem, between the two Mountains, Garizim on the right hand, and the
other called Gebal on the left, and that distributing the people into two parts
(six Tribes in every part) they should place them on these Mountains. And he
commanded that the Levites and Priests should be with them, and that they that
were upon the Mountain of Garizim, should pray to God, to multiply his
blessings upon them that are zealous of his service, and careful of the
conservation of his Laws which had been given them by Moses. The six other also
were appointed to answer them: and when these six Moses establish, and these
the Hebrew Nation observe inviolably, even unto this day.

On the next morning he re-assembled all the people, with their Wives, and
Children; he likewise commanded, Deuteronomy. 29 1, ad 10.
the slaves should be present, binding them by an oath to maintain and keep the
Laws; Moses binds the Hebrews by an oath to keep the Law.
and that diligently tying themselves to the will of God, they

Josua likewise, during the life, and in the presence of Moses, Prophesied
whatsoever he intended to perform for the profit of the people, either abroad
in the administration of War, or at home in prescribing Laws: and preparing
them to that order of life which was newly prescribed them, he told them, that
by instructions from God he Prophesied, that if they violated their Country
Religion, they should not escape destruction; their Country should be filled
with Foreign Arms, their Cities Sacked, their Temple Burnt, and themselves sold
under the Spear; and that they should serve a Deuteronomy. 33. 23.
which would not be moved or touched with commiseration of their afflictions
and miseries; and, at length, they should too late and unprofitably repent of
their error: yet, that God, their establisher, would restore the Cities to the
ancient Citizens, and the Temple to his people: Deuteronomy. 34. 9.
And that this should come to pass, not only once, but also many times. Moses
exhorts Josua.
Then did Moses also appoint Josua to lead his Army against the Canaanites,
promising him that God would be assisting to his actions and wishing all sort
of happiness to the people.

Seeing that (says he) I go unto mine Ancestors, and God has prefixed this
day for my departure, it is very just, that living as yet, and standing in your
presence, I give him thanks for the care and providence, which he has hitherto
had of your affairs, not only in delivering Deuteronomy. 3. 13. 23.
for it is he which has given both the beginning and the accomplishment, Deuteronomy.
34. 9.
making use of me but as his Minister and Servant in all that good which has
been done to his people. For all which things I have thought requisite, in
departing from you, to bless the goodness of God, who in time to come shall
have the care and charge of you: and to acquit my self of that debt, I leave
you this in remembrance, which is, that you ought to serve and honor him, and
reverence the Ordinances which he has given you; whereby continuing his favor
toward you, he will grant you grace to preserve and keep this excellent gift.
Truly a Lawgiver that were no more than a man, would be greatly displeased
with

Whilst Moses pronounced these his last words, and foretold to the Tribes
their several destinies, Deuteronomy. 34. 8.
and wished them a thousand blessings, The Hebrews lamentation at Moses death.
the whole Multitude brake into tears; and the women beating their Breasts,
showed the sorrow they resented for his death. The Children likewise lamented,
because that in their tender years they had understood the virtue and famous
acts of Moses; and betwixt the elder and younger sort, there was as it were a
conflict who should weep most bitterly: for the one understanding of how worthy
a Governor they were deprived, lamented the time to come; and the although he
were assuredly persuaded, that a man is not to lament at the instant of his
Moses (beckning with his hand) warn them from afar off, that they should stand
still, and keep their places; and he desired them that were nearest him, by
word of mouth, not to afflict him any longer, by following him with so many
testimonies of affection. Accordingly, to obey him, they stood still, and all
together bewailed their calamity in so great and so general a loss; only the
Senators, xEleazar the High Priest, and the chief Captain Joshua accompanied
him. And when he was arrived on the Mountain called Abarim (which is very high,
and situate near Jericho, Canaan) he dismissed the Elders, and whilst with
mutual embraces he took his last leave of Eleazar and Joshua, and discoursed
with them, a Cloud suddenly environed him, and he was carried away into a
certain Valley: but the Holy Books which he left us, say that he dyed, fearing
lest for the excellency of his virtue, they might report that he was taken up
into Heaven. The whole time of his Life was 120 years, the third part whereof
wanting a month, he spent in government of this great People. Moses when he
dyed, was 120 years old. Amongst the Hebrews, Adar is the 12 month, but amongst
us it is called March.
He dyed the last month of the year, and the first day of that month which the
Macedonians call Dystros; and our Countrymen, Adar. He was, of all Men that
ever lived, the wisest; and who, in execution of his good counsels, had no man
to equal him. Moreover, in eloquence he was incomparable, and Ver. 10.
His skill in War may give him a rank amongst the greatest Captains, Moses was
a good Governor, and a great Prophet.
and no man ever had the gift of Prophecy in so high a degree: for his words
seemed so many Oracles, and that as inspired to him by God himself. The People
mourned for him 30 days: nor were they ever seized with so extreme grief, as
they were at this time, when the Prophet dyed; neither did he only leave behind
him a present desire of him, but a great estimation amongst all men, who have
ever chanced to read and examine his Writings, and by them estimated his
virtues. And these are the things which I thought good to say of the Moses.


Written by FLAVIVS JOSEPHV'S.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Fifth Book.
1. How Joshua, General of the Hebrews, having overcome and slain the
Canaanites, divided their Land amongst the Tribes by lot. 2. How after the
death of the General, the Israelites (neglecting the Ordinances of their
Forefathers) fell into extreme Calamities: and through a Civil War that was
raised Benjamin left alive. 3. How, for their impiety, the People of Israel
were delivered by God into Captivity, under the Assyrians. 4. Their Liberty by
Cenez. 5. How the People were once more overcome by the Moabites, and exempt
from servitude by Jodes, otherwise called Ehud. 6. How they were brought under
the subjection of the Canaanites, and restored to their liberty by Barac. 7.
How the Amalekites having entered the Country of the Israelites, and conquered
them, possessed and spoiled the same for the space of seven years. Gideon
delivered the People. 9. How some Successors of Gideon waged War against the
Neighbor Nations round about them. 10. Of Sams^^'s strength, and what mischiefs
he did in Palestine. 11. How the Sons of Eli the Prophet were slain in Battle
by the Palestines. 12. How Eli (hearing of the death of his Sons, and the loss
of the Ark) fell down from his Seat, and dyed.


CHAP. I.

AFter Moses was taken from amongst Men (in the manner which I have declared)
the last duties were paid to him, The year of the World, 2494. before Christ's
Nativity, 1470.
and the time of mourning was passed, Joshua commanded the People to prepare
themselves, and to march forward to Battle. He sent Spies likewise to Jericho,
who might both sound their minds, Joshua sends Spies into Jericho.
and discover their Forces. Soon after he dislodged, and encamped in the open
field, intending, with all expedition, to pass the River of Jordan, as soon as
any opportunity offered it self. Josh. 2. 1, 2, 3.
Then assembled he the Princes of the Tribes of Reuben Gad, Joshua calls to
memory, and reckons up what the Tribes of Gad, Reuben, and Manasses had
promised Moses.
and of the half Tribe of Manasses, (for to this half Tribe the Country of the
Amorites, which was the seventh part of Canaan, was given for an habitation)
and remembering them of the care which Moses had taken of them even to his
death, he exhorted them to perform with joy what they had promised him, as they
were obliged, both in acknowledgement of the affection which he had testified
to them, and for the common advantage. They showed themselves ready and willing
to perform that which he commanded them, Numb. 13.
and they furnished 50000 Men. After this, departing from the City of Abila,
The Spies survey Jericho.
he drew toward Jordan, and marched forward some 60 Furlongs. When he was
encamped, the Spies returned again, and presenting themselves unto him,
certifi'd him of the whole estate of the Canaanites. For being unknown and
unsuspected, upon the first Hebrews Camp, had surveyed the City, and taken up
their Lodging in Rahabs house, with intent to conceal themselves, till they
might get opportunity Rahab, having gotten some private intelligence of it, hid
the Spies under certain Packs of Linen, which she dried near the walls, and
told them that were sent by verse. 4, 6.
They hearing the woman speak after this manner, and imagining no subtlety or
deceit in her, Rahab hides the Spies.
returned back without searching the Hostry, and went in pursuit and search
after them every way, tracking every path, where they might be suspected to
travel toward Jordan. But having no tidings of them they desisted any further
to pursue them. No sooner was the Tumult appeased, but Rahab called forth the
Spies, and told them the dangers to which she had exposed her self for their
security (for had she been convinced to have concealed them, both she and all
her family had miserably Jericho, and kill all the inhabitants with the Sword,
(as God had told her they should) they would save the life of her and her
family as she had saved theirs.

This said, she dismissed them, to the end they might return home again. After
they had with many thanks protested, and swore to her, to acknowledge her
kindness not in words, but in deeds; and had advised her that when she should
perceive the City ready to be surprised, she should retire all her substance,
and all those that appertained unto her, into her house; and that before the
door thereof, she should hang a Red Cloth, to the intent that the General
perceiving the same, might inhibit the Soldiers from pillaging and spoiling
her house: for (said they) we will give him notice Jos. 3. 1, 2, 3.
they were let down with a rope from the wall; and when they were arrived in
safety among their Nation, Joshua passes Jordan with his Army.
they recounted unto them all that had happened since their arrival in the City.
Joshua hereupon declared unto Eleazar the High Priest and the rest of the
Elders, what oath his Spies had made to Rahab; and all of them ratified the
same. But the General was pensive and troubled, for that he knew not which way
to pass the River of Jordan, by reason that for the present it was very deep
Joshua therefore waited with his Army two days; and then he passed over the
River in this manner. The Priests marched first with the Ark; after them went
the Levites bearing the Tabernacle, and those vessels which were destinated for
Sacrifice; Jos. 4. 1, 2, 3.
then followed the whole multitude, distinguished in their Tribes, having
enclosed within their Battles the Women and Children whereby they might be the
more secure from the force of the stream. But when the Priests had entered, and
found the River passable, and the water decreased, and Josh. 4. v. 5. ad finem.
and were in security; Joshua builds an Altar on the other side of Jordan.
and when every one had gotten to the other Bank, the Priests came out,
permitting the River to flow according to its free and ordinary course: which
presently flowing, grew to that greatness and swiftness which it had at first.
Now when the Hebrews had marched fifty Furlongs, Josh. 5. 10, 11, 12.
they encamped about ten Furlongs from Jericho. But Josua built an Altar of
twelve stones (which every one of the Princes of the Tribes had gathered out of
the Channel of Jordan, The Israelites celebrate Easter, enjoy the fruits of the
earth, and cease to feed on Manna.
by his order) to the end it might be a Canaanites, (which at that time was
ripe) and carried away much other prey. In the same season likewise their
nourishment of Manna failed them, whereon they had fed for the space of forty
years. And whereas the Israelites did all these things with security, and
freely, and the Canaanites never sallied out against them, but dismayed with
fear, kept themselves up within their walls; Joshua resolved to besiege them in
their Cities: so that on the first day of the Feast, the Priests bearing the
Ark, and guarded on every side with Troops of Armed Men, Josh. 6. 3.
drew near Jericho, sounding seven Horns, thereby Joshua with his Army walks
about the City.
and they walked about the walls, being attended by the Senate, neither did
they any other thing but Blow their Joshua assembled the Army and all the
people, bringing them joyful news of the City, which that day should be taken
without labor, (the walls falling down of their own accord, and without man's
hand, and yielding them free passage and entrance into the City) and he
encouraged them to kill all those whom they met, Cap. 6. verse. 21, 22, 23.
and not to give over the slaughter of their enemies, although they were weary,
nor to be moved with compassion, Joshua commands that none but Rahab and hers
should be saved.
nor allured from the slaughter and execution by desire of prey, or to permit
the enemy, in any sort, to fly, but that they should extinguish and root out
all that had life, reserving nothing for prey or private profit. He commanded
likewise that all the gold and silver that was found should be brought into one
place, Rahab with her Kindred should be spared, by reason of the oath which the
Spies had sworn unto her. verse. 10.
This said, he advanced his Army toward the City; then did they once more walk
round about the City, The walls of Jericho fall down of themselves.
the Ark marching before them, and encouraging them to Valor by the sound of
their Cornets. And after they had environed the walls seven times, and had a
little reposed themselves, the walls fell (though the Hebrews had forced no
Engine, nor used any other violence against them.) So that they entering into
the City, slew all those that were therein, who were already discomforted by
the sudden and unexpected overthrow of their walls, verse. 24, 25.
and through their sudden fear made unapt to fight; Jericho is taken, the men
slain, and the City destroyed, and burnt.
so that they were slain in their streets, finding neither refuge nor Rahab and
hers reserved.
and with like fury they ravaged and burnt the houses of the Country; only
Rahab and her household (who kept themselves within her house) were saved by the
Spies: and being brought to Joshuah's presence, he gave her thanks, for saving
his Spies, and promised her that he would reward her courtesies; and soon after
he gave her possessions, and ever held her in great honor. All of the City
which the fire spared, the sword consumed. And Joshua pronounced Curses against
those, who should afterward endeavor to erect that which he had ruined:
namely, that he that should lay the first foundation, should be deprived of his
first begotten Son; Joshua delivered to the Priests to be laid up in the
Treasury; and after this manner was the City of Jericho destroyed. But Achar
the Son of Zebedias of the Tribe of Judah, having got the Kings Coat
embroidered with Gold, and an Ingot of Gold of two hundred Sicles in weight,
Joshua. 7. v. 1.
and thinking in him self that it were not just that the profit he had got by
the hazard of his life, Achar hides certain parts of the prey contrary to Gods
Commandment.
should be taken from him, and presented to God, who had no need thereof; he
dug a deep Pit in his Tent, and buried Gilgal, which signifies
Enfranchized, because being delivered from the affliction of Egypt, and the
penury of the Desert, they thought they had nothing more to fear. Gilgal
signifies liberty.
But some few days after the destruction of Jericho, Joshua. 7. 5.
Joshua sent out three thousand Armed men against Ain (a City situate a little
above Jericho) who encountering with the Ainites in Battle, The Israelites are
put to flight by the A^inites.
and by them put to flight, lost thirty six of their company. The news of which
disaster being brought to the Camp, the Israelites were seized with exceeding
grief, not only for the men they had lost (which were all of them valiant men,
and worthy of honor) but also by reason of the despair they conceived of their
future success. For whereas Josuah's prayer unto God.
so grievously were they afflicted with the defeat that had happened. Joshua
seeing the Army dejected after this manner, falling on his face to the earth,
addressed himself to God, Joshua. 7. 6, 7, 8, 9.
saying, We have not been induced by our own temerity to attempt the conquest
of this Land by force; but we have been hereunto encouraged by thy Servant
Moses, to whom thou have promised, by diverse signs, that thou would give us
this Country to inhabit in, and that our Army should have always the victory
in battle, and of these thy promises we have oftentimes experienced the event.
But now, beyond all expectation (having received an overthrow, and lost some of
our Soldiers) being terrified by this accident, and suspicious of thy promises
to Moses, we both abstain from War, and (after so many enterprises of War) we
cannot hope any fortunate or successful proceedings. But be thou assistant unto
us O Lord, (who art Almighty) and can by thy mercy change our present sorrow
into joy, our discouragement into confidence, and give us victory. Joshua
having made this prayer, God presently commanded him to arise, and purge the
Army of that sacrilege that had happened therein, Gods answer to Joshua's
prayer. v. 10.
and of a Theft committed by one of the multitude, who was so hardy as to
violate and conceal those things which were consecrated to him, assuring him,
that that was the cause of the present calamity: but as soon as he had searched
out, and punished the sacrilege, the Israelites should become fortunate, and
obtain the victory. This Oracle Joshua declared to the people, and calling for
the High Priest and the Magistrates, he cast lots upon the Tribes; and when the
lot had fallen on the Tribe of Juda, it was again cast by Families; and when
again the Sacrilege was found to be committed Zacharias Family, they cast the
same once more man by man, and it fell upon Achar: Achar found out by lot and
punished. v. 16, 17, 18.
who unable to hide what was discovered by God himself, confessed the fact, and
brought forth those things which he had concealed: whereupon being presently
put to death, he was by night buried after an ignominious manner, according as
he deserved. But Joshua having purified the people, led them forth against Ain,
and laying Ambuscado by night above the City, early in the morning he drew the
Enemy out to fight, who boldly broke forth (being encouraged by their former
victory;) but Joshua making a show of Retreat, drew them farther off from their
City, imagining that the Israelites fled, and that they should gain a second
victory over them. But when Joshua suddenly made a stand, and charged them, and
gave a signal unto those that lay Ainan sacked and burnt. v. 24, 25.
In this manner was the City taken, and all that were therein slain, Joshua on
the other side pressed those in such manner, with whom he maintained skirmish,
that they turned their backs, and fled toward the City, as if it had been in
the same state as they left it: but when they perceived that it was taken, and
saw both it, their Wives and Children consumed with fire, they scattered
themselves about the fields, Joshua. 8. 1, 2.
not being able to rally, by reason of their disorder. By this overthrow of the
Ainites, The prey distributed amongst the people.
there were a great number of Women, and Children, and Bondslaves taken
Captive, and store of all sorts of movables. The Hebrews also became Lords
Joshua upon his return to Gilgal distributed amongst the Soldiers. But the
Gibeonites (who dwelt not far from Jerusalem) understanding what had happened to
them of Jericho and the Ainites, and fearing lest the like misfortune might
fall upon themselves, thought it to no purpose to endeavor to move him by their
prayers, because they knew that he warred with a resolution, utterly to root
out and extinguish the Nation of the Canaanites from off the earth. Joshua. 9.
3.
They therefore persuaded the Cepherites and Cathierimites their neighbors to
join with them, in order to contract an alliance with the Hebrews, as the only
means to secure themselves from the danger which threatened them. Which counsel
of theirs being accepted, they sent Ambassadors to Joshua, The Gibeonites send
Ambassadors to Joshua.
to treat a peace betwixt them and the Israelites; and knowing that it would be
very dangerous for them, if they should say that they were Canaanites; and that
on the contrary they should avoid the danger, if they protested that they had
no community or alliance with them, but dwelt far from them; they told Joshua,
that (being incited by his fame) they had undertaken a long journey, the truth
whereof he might conjecture by their habits; which upon their setting forth
were new, but by their long journey were quite worn, to which purpose they had
put on old garments, to the end to color their subtle insinuation.) Standing
up therefore in the midst of the multitude (attired after this manner) they
told them that they were sent by the Gibeonites, verse. 6.
and The Gibeonites oration to the Hebrews.
For knowing well that the Country of Canaan was given unto them by the favor
of God, to the end they should be masters and possessors thereof, they were
much rejoiced thereat, verse. 15.
and desired to be received as their confederates. By these words, and the
oldness of their garments, Joshua makes a covenant with the Gibeontes.
and the pretense of their long journey, they persuaded the Hebrews to enter
and accord an amity with them. And the High Priest Eleazar with the Council of
the Elders swear unto them, that they should be reputed for Friends and Allies,
and that no hostile action should be enterprized against them; the people
likewise approved the alliance. After this, Joshua encamping with his Army upon
their confines, and understanding that the Gibeonites dwelt not far from
Jerusalem, and that Canaanites, he sent for the principal among them, and
upbraided them with their deceit: whereunto they answered, that they had no
Eleazar the High Priest, and the Council of the Elders; and it was resolved not
to infringe the Oath made to them, but that they should be obliged to serve for
the public works; Whereupon they were adjudged to attend on these services:
and by this means delivered they themselves from their imminent peril. But the
King of Jerusalem was much incensed against the Gibeonites, v. 21, 23.
for that they had revolted and submitted to Joshua; The Gibeonites are
appointed to public ministeries.
and he assembled together the Kings of his neighbor Nations, to make War
against them. The Gibeonites perceiving the danger they were in, and how the
Enemy prepared to assault them, and to that end had pitched their Tents near a
certain Fountain not far from the City, they desired Joshua to assist and Josh.
10. v. 1.
For their affairs were in that state that they expected death from the hands
of their Friends: The King of Jerusalem moves War against the Gibeonites.
and contrariwise hoped for help from those Hebrews, with whom they had
contracted amity, notwithstanding that they arrived in that Country to destroy
the whole Nation of the Canaanites. Joshua therefore (hasting onward with his
whole Army to give them assistance, and marching both day and night) early in
the morning charged the Enemy (at such time as he intended his assault) and
having put them to flight, verse. 9, 10 11,
he pursued them by a steep tract, Joshua drives them of Jerusalem to flight.
which place is called Bethora, where he saw manifestly that God fought for him
by the Thunder, Lightning and Hail that fell, at that time, far bigger than was
accustomed. The day also (the like whereof was never heard before) was
lengthned, verse. 1. 3.
lest by the speedy approach of the night the Enemy The Sun stood still.
and Joshua took all those five Kings in a certain Cave near Makkedah, where
they were hidden, and condemned them all to death. And that this day was longer
than ordinary, Five Kings slain.
it is registered in the sacred Volumes, which are reserved in the Temple. After
this wonderful success, Joshua led his Army to the Mountains of Canaan, Joshua
11, and. 12. per totum.
where having made a great slaughter of Men, and taken rich booty, he brought
back his Army to Gilgal. Now when the renown of the Hebrews valiant acts, and
their giving no quarter to any one person of their Enemies, was bruited abroad
amongst the neighbor Nations, they were possessed with great fear: so that the
Kings of the Canaanites, Joshua 11. 1. ad 5.
that bordered upon Libanus, and they also of the Plain of Canaan, The Kings of
the Canaanites move War against the Hebrews.
joined themselves Confederates with the Philistines, and all of them encamped
Berotha, (a City of the higher Galilee, not far from Cedes, which is also
situate in the Land of Canaan.) The whole Army consisted of three hundred
thousand Footmen, ten thousand Horsemen, The huge Army of the Canaanites.
and twenty thousand Chariots. This great multitude of the Enemy astonished
Joshua, and the Israelites, so that they conceived little hope of obtaining the
Victory: but God reproached and upbraided them for their timidity, and for that
they suspected themselves to be unsecure under his protection; he promised them
likewise, that he would overcome their Enemies, and make their Horse
unprofitable, and consume their Chariots by fire. Joshua emboldened by these
promises from God, marched out against his Enemies, and came upon them the
fifth day. The encounter was strong, and the slaughter so great, that they who
heard the same, would scarcely believe it. Many Joshua also commanded that
their Horses should be slain: v. 7. ad finem.
and he burnt their Chariots, and Victoriously marched through the whole
Country; All the Kings of the Canaanites slain.
so that no man durst come out, or make head against him. He besieged likewise
their strong places, and killed all those that fell into his hands. Now when
the fifth year was ended, Joshua spoyleth the whole Land of Canaan.
and none of the Canaanites were left alive, (except such as were fled into
their Cities and Fortresses) Joshua once more retired his Camp toward the
Mountains, and placed the sacred Tabernacles in the City of Siloe, which seemed
to be a very convenient place, by reason of the beauty of the same; where the
Ark might remain, till such time as their affairs permitted them to build a
Temple. From thence he departed Sichem; and there built an Altar, according as
Moses had formerly commanded; and having divided his Army, he planted half of
them on the Mountain of Garizim, and the other half on the Mountain of Gebal
(on which also he built an Altar) with the Levites and the Priests; and after
they had sacrificed and pronounced the curses formerly mentioned, and engraven
them on the Altar, they returned to Siloe. Now, inasmuch as Joshua was well
stricken in years, and very well perceived, that the Cities of the Canaanites
were hardly to be assaulted, both in respect of the places wherein they were
situate, and of the munitions wherewith (besides other advantages of nature)
their Walls were strengthened and fortified (for the Canaanites having
intelligence of the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt, and how Siloe;
where he represented to them the happy success which (till that time God had
favored them with, The year of the World, 2499. before Christ's Nativity, 1465.
because they had observed his Laws. That the 31 Kings which had v. 23.
he thought good that the Tribes which had been drawn from out the Country
beyond Jordan, Joshua divides his Army into parts.
to be Associates in this common cause of Conquest, and by reason of affinity,
had made themselves companions in their perils, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap 3.
Joshua 13. a v. 1. ad 12.
should be sent back into their own Country, with thanks. And that some of
each Tribe of approved uprightness and loyalty should be chosen, who surveying
the Country might faithfully give a report of the extent thereof. Joshua
commands the dividing of the Country, and counsels that the two Tribes
and an half should be dismissed.
This sentence was approved by the whole multitude, and thereupon diverse men
Canaan is such, that though there are great Plains very fertile, yet the Land
being compared with other places of the same Country, cannot be esteemed
excellent, compared with the other Countries of Jericho, and the Land about
Jerusalem, it may seem to be nothing worth: although generally the whole
Country be small, and for the great part mountainous, yet in respect of the
abundance, Joshua sends certain men to measure and divide the Land.
and beauty of the fruits thereof, it is second to no other whatsoever. For
this cause he thought good that the portions should rather be estimated
according to their value, than their measure; by reason that oftentimes one
Plow-land was worth one thousand other. Those which were sent were ten in
number, who (having Joshua 13 19.
and surveyed the same) returned again, Joshua divides the Region of Canaan to
the nine Tribes, and the half Tribe of Manasses.
at the end of six months, to Siloe, where the Ark was kept.

Then Joshua, (taking unto him Eleazar, with the Elders, and Princes of the
Tribes) divided the Region amongst nine Tribes; and the half of the Tribe of
Manasses, proportionably to the greatness of each Tribe, and when the lot was
cast, there fell to the Tribe of Judah all the higher Judaea; Joshua, 14, 15.
19. per totum
which extends it self in length to Jerusalem, and in breadth to the lake of
Sodom; to which likewise were annexed the Cities of Ascalon and Gaza. The Tribe
of Simeon (which was the second) obtained a part of Idumaea, confining upon
Egypt and Arabia. The Benjamites had that Country which extends from Jordan
to the Sea in length, and in breadth from Jerusalem to Bethel: this portion
Jericho and Jerusalem. The tribe of Ephraim was allotted its portion in length,
from Jordan to Gadara; and in breadth from Bethel to the great Plain. The half
Tribe of Manasses had the Territory from Jordan to the City of Dora in length,
and in breadth to the City of Bethsan (which is at this day called
Scythopolis.) After them, Issachar had that which lies between mount Carmel,
and the River of Jordan, in length, and the Mountain Itobir, for the bounds of
its breadth. The Tribe of Zabulon was allowed that Country, which stretches
out as far as Genazereth, and abutteth on mount Carmel, and the Sea. The
Country which is betwixt Carmel and Sidon, was adjudged to the Asserites, in
which portion was comprised the City of Arce, which is also called Actipus.
Nephthalites possessed that quarter that stretches out from the East to the
City of Damascus, and the lower Galilee, as far as the Mountain of Libanus, and
the head of Jordan, that issues from the same, on that side which confines on
the City Arce Northwards. To them of Dan were assigned the Valleys extending
Westward, and terminated by the Cities of Azoth and Doris, Supra lib 4. chap. 7.
containing all the Country of Jamnia and Gitta, from Abaron, even unto that
Mountain where begins the portion of Juda. After this manner did Joshua
divide the Country of six Nations (bearing the name of Canaan) and gave it in
possession to nine Tribes and an half. Numb. 32. 8, 9
For Ammorhaea (so called from of the Sons of Canaan) had been already taken by
Moses, Joshua 13. 24, 29.
and assigned by him to two Tribes and an half, as I have already declared. But
all the Sidon of the Aruceans, Amatheans and Aritheans were not comprised in
this division. But Joshua finding himself burdened with years, and unfit to
execute his enterprises in his own person; Joshua severally commands every
Tribe to root out the race of the Canaanites.
and observing that the Governors of the people to whom he gave employments,
acted negligently; he exhorted every Tribe in particular, to bestir themselves
couragously in the extent of the Territory allotted to them, for exterminating
the remainder of the Canaanites; as Moses had before told them, that their
safety, and the maintenance of the Laws and Religion consisted in that one
point, which he had likewise learned by his own experience. The Cities of
refuge.
Further, that they should deliver unto the Levites thirty eight Cities,
because they had already ten in their possession, within the Land of Amorrhaea:
Numb. 35. 6, 11, 14.
three of which were ordained for Cities of refuge to those that Deuteronomy, 19 2.
(for he advised them, with all consideration and care to omit, nothing of that
which Moses had commanded them,) Joshua 20. per totum.
of the Tribe of Juda, Hebron; of that of Ephraim, Sichem; and of Nephthali,
Cades* which is in higher Galilee. Moreover, he distributed unto them the
surplusage of the prey, which was very great: so that not only in public, but
in private, they got no small quantity of sustenance; for there was so much
Gold, and Raiment, and Household Stuff, and so great store of Cattle and Horses,
that the Commonwealth and all particular persons were enriched with it. The
distribution of the prey.
After which he assembled the whole Army, and to those that were planted on the
other side of Jordan, (who had born Arms with the rest, and were in number no
less than 50000) he spoke after this manner. Joshua 22. 22. ad 6.


Since God (the Father and Master of our Nation) has given this Country into
our possession, Joshua's oration to those that dwelt on the other side of
Jordan, and had served with the rest.
and has promised to continue and conserve the same so for ever; and since
likewise you have willingly and forwardly assisted us in all our necessities
and dangers, (according to Gods command and direction) it is requisite at this
present (since there remains not any further matter wherein we have need to
employ you) that we dismiss you home, to enjoy some quiet, not doubting, that
if hereafter we shall have need of you, you will, with no less willingness, be
as industrious to do us kindness. We therefore yield you hearty thanks, for
that you have vouchsafed to be companions in our perils: and we desire, that
you will continue your mutual affection, remembering us as your friends, and how
you have gotten your possessions by our help, as we (by Gods favor and your
assistance) have attained to this our present felicity. Neither have you
adventured, without some reward of your travels; for in this your warfare you
are enriched, Moses command, before he departed out of this life, and have
spared no endeavor, whereby you might tie our affections to you. We therefore
dismiss you to your own possessions, in fullness of contentment; praying you to
remember these things, and never to put any bounds to the inviolable amity
which is between us; and let not the River Jordan, which is betwixt you and us,
hinder you from considering us as Hebrews. For all of us (both those that dwell
on this side, and on the other side of Jordan) are the posterity of Abraham;
and one and the same God gave life both to your and our progenitors; whose Laws
and Religion (instituted by Moses) are diligently to be observed:

After he had spoke to them after this manner, he embraced in particular, the
chief of these Tribes, who returned, and their whole people with them. This
done, he stayed in that place; Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 4.
but the rest of the people accompianed them onward with tears, and they
separated the one from the other, Joshua 22. 10, 11, 12.
with great grief. But after the Tribe of Reuben and of Gad, and the rest of
the Manassites, had passed over Jordan, they built an Altar upon the Bank of
the River, The Israelites after they had past over Jordan, builded an Altar on
the Bank thereof.
that might serve for a memorial to posterity, of the alliance which they had
with those that dwelt on the other side of Jordan. When the tidings v. 13, 14,
15.
But Joshua and the High Priest Eleazar, The Embassage of the ten Tribes to the
rest of the Israelites.
with the rest of the Elders, Phinees, the Son of Eleazar, and ten other of the
noblest among the Hebrews, as Ambassadors to them, to know what the intent and
reason was, why they had built that Altar on the bank of Jordan.

Now when these Ambassadors had past the River, v 6.
and were come amongst them, they summoned an Assembly, Phinees Oration to the
Rubenites,
and Phinees standing up in the midst of them, spoke after this manner:

(says he) to be punished only with words: yet notwithstanding, we have not
upon the instant taken Arms to assault you in Battle, nor had regard to the
heinousness of your Crime, to the intent to punish you; but we are sent to you
as Ambassadors (in consideration of our alliance) and for that (as we suppose)
you may be Canaanites. But if you repent Canaanites, we will treat you after
the same manner as we have treated them. For do not suppose, that because you
have past the River, you are exempt from God's power; because God is in all
places, and it is impossible for you to avoid either his power, or his
vengeance. If the Province which you possess is an impediment to your
salvation, it were better for you to make a new division of Lands, and leave
this Region, how plentiful soever. It behooveth you therefore to renounce your
Error, as we conjure you to do, by that love which you

After Phinees had finished this his Oration, the chief of the Assembly
answered him in this manner:

We never thought of altering the Union which joins us so near together, Ver.
21.
or of innovating any thing in that Religion of our Fathers; The Reubenites
answer.
we will always persevere therein: we know that there is one God, the common
Father of all the Hebrews, and none but the Brazen Altar which is Abraham's
Posterity can be guilty, without deserving to lose his life.

As soon as Phinees had heard these things, and praised their constancy, he
returned to Joshua, Joshua dwelt in Sichem.
and gave him account of his Embassy in presence of the People: who rejoicing
Josh. 23. per totum.
or Bloodshed, offered to God Sacrifices of Thanksgiving; and presently
dissolved the Assembly, each man returning to his own home: Joshuah's
Exhortation at his death, to the Magistrates and Elders amongst the Hebrews.
but Joshua chose his habitation in Sichem.

After twenty years, Joshua being extremely old, called to him the most
honorable of every City, and the Elders and Magistrates, and as many of the
People as might commodiously be present, and spoke unto them. First, he called
unto their remembrance the many benefits which God had bestowed upon them; by
means whereof, from a poor and afflicted condition, they had attained great
riches and glory. Then he exhorted them to observe his Commandments most
Religiously, to the end God might continue his merciful hand over them; since
they knew that his favor could be kept to them Josh. 24. 39.
he desired them to accept well of that his good admonition, and to be
perpetually mindful of the same. Joshuah's death.
As he ended these words, he gave up the Ghost, and dyed in the 110 year of his
age, whereof he spent 40, as Minister under Moses, their chief Magistrate; and
after his death, governed the Commonwealth 25 years. A Man of incomparable
prudence and eloquence, wise and diligent in matters of Government, and equally
capable of the most important affairs of Peace and War; in a word, the most
excellent Captain Governor of his time. Ver. 33.
He was buried in a City called Thamna, belonging to the Tribe of Ephraim.
Eleazar's death.
About the same time likewise dyed Eleazar the High Phinees's Son) his
Sepulcher is seen at this day in the City Gabatha. After their deaths, Phinees
being demanded by the People what God's The year of the World, 2525. before
Christ's Nativity, 1439.
and to whose charge the Wars against the Canaanites should be committed,
answered them, that God commanded to give the Government to the Tribe of Judah,
which choosing that of Simeon for their Associates, undertook the War, with
this condition, that when they had utterly rooted out the remnant of the
Canaanites out of their own Tribe, Judge. 1.
they should likewise employ themselves to extinguish all the Relics of that
Race amongst the other Tribes.

CHAP. II.
How the Israelites, after the death of their Emperor, forgetting the Religion
of their Forefathers, fell into extreme Calamities: and how through a Civil War
raised amongst
BUt the Canaanites (whose estate at that time was very potent) expected them
with a great Host about the City of Bezec, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 5. al. 2.
having their Army conducted by the King of that place, Judge. 1. 1, 2, ad 5.
called Adoni-Bezec, which name signifies, Lord of the Bezecenities: (for
Adoni in the Hebrew Tongue, is Lord) and these Men promised themselves the
Victory, by reason that Joshua was deceased. Ten thousand Canaanites slain, and
Adoni-Bezec taken, ver. 6, 7.
Against these, the two Tribes of Judah and Sim^on fought very valiantly, and
slaying 10000 of them in the pursuit, they took Adoni-Bezec Captive, who having
his hands and feet cut off, acknowledged the divine justice: for he confessed
that he had used 72 Kings before times after the same manner. In this condition
Jerusalem, where departing out of this life, they buried him. Then they
overrun the Country, sacking and taking the Cities; and after they had diverse
of them in their possession, they besieged Jerusalem, and entering the lower
City, they put all the Inhabitants to the Sword. But the higher Town was very
hard to be assaulted (by reason of the Fortresses, and strength of the Walls,
and the naturally strong situation of the place) which was the cause that they
raised their Camp to go and besiege Hebron, which they took, and slew all that
were therein. Amongst whom there were some of the Race of the Giants, whose
stature was so prodigious, their aspect so terrible, and their voice so
dreadful, that it can scarce be believed; their Bones are still to be seen at
this day. This City being very considerable, was given to the Levites, with
2000 Caleb, according as Moses had commanded, he having been one of those Spies
which Moses sent to view the Land of Canaan. Jethro's posterity, who was the
Father of Moses, possessed of Lands.
They gave lands and possessions likewise to the posterity of Jethro the
Madianite (who was Father-in-law to Moses) for that they had forsaken their own
Territories, and joined themselves to the Israelites, and been with them in the
Desert. The Tribes of Judah and Simeon took those Cities of the mountainous
Country of Canaan, and also those that were in the Plain near the Seacoast,
namely, Ascalon and Azoth. But they could not take Gaza and Accaron; for those
Cities being in the Plain, and defended with a great number of Chariots,
repelled those that assaulted the same to their disadvantage. So these two
Tribes having had good success in Wars, retired

As for the Benjamites, Ver. 16.
to whom Jerusalem appertained, The Israelites overcame not the Canaanites at
one time.
they received the Inhabitants thereof as their Tributaries; so that all being
in peace, and the one ceasing from slaughter, and the other assured from
danger, they employed themselves in manuring the Country. The rest of the
Tribes did the like, conforming themselves according to the example of the
Benjamites, Av. 22. ad 26.
and contenting themselves to receive their Tributes, they suffered the
Canaanites to live in peace. The Ephraimites recover Bethel by a stratagem.
The Tribe of Ephraim having long besieged the City of Bethel, could not see
such an end of their design, as the length of time, and the Travels they had
taken in the Siege required: and although they were very much toyled and
wearied with the same, yet they continued the Siege. At last one of the
Inhabitants, Israelites ceased to make War, and employed themselves in Tillage
of their Lands, and husbanding their Fruits: and being grown rich, they
followed the delights and pleasures of the World in such sort as they became
dissolute, and had no regard either of their ancient Discipline, or the Laws of
their Forefathers. Whereupon God was highly incensed against them, Hedio and
Ruffinus, cap. 6. ^l. 3.
and he gave them to understand, that contrary to his Command, they had spared
the Canaanites; and that those Canaanites, in Judge. 2. 1, ad 11.
should exercise great Cruelties against them. And although they were
astonished at what was declared to them, The Israelites omit War
yet they would not resolve to renew the War, both for that they had received
many Tributes from the Canaanites, and because (being effeminated with
delights) they were unwilling to endure labor. The year of the World, 2426.
before Christ's Nativity, 1438.
At this time the Government Judge. 19. per totum.
The occasion of which ensues.

A certain Levite of the common sort, that dwelt in the Dominion of the
Ephraimites, took a Wife that was born in the City of Bethlehem, The History of
the Levites Wife.
which pertains to the Tribe of Judah, whom (by reason of her incomparable
beauty) he most entirely loved; but was much grieved, that he found not her
affection answerable to his: At last, his reproaches of unkindness became so
tedious to the Woman, that (tired with disquiet) she forsook her Husband, and
went and dwelt with her Father. The Husband grieved hereat, Thirty Stadia are
four Italian Miles.
and had consumed the better part of the day in entertainment.) They had a
Servant which followed them, and an Ass likewise, on which the Woman was
mounted. Now when they had traveled 30 Furlongs, and drew near the City of
Jerusalem, Two Italian Miles and an half.
their servant counseled them to take up their lodging in some place, lest by
their late Travel they might fall into some disaster, and the rather, because
they were not far from the Enemies Country; and that the present time was
such, as gave Canaanites) but his intent was to pass farther, and Travel yet 20
Furlongs more, to take up his lodging in one of his own Cities. This resolution
being taken, they came to Giba, a City of the Tribe of Benjamin, when it was
late: and finding no man in the Marketplace that would lodge them, at length a
certain old man, returning out of the Country to his house, (who was by birth
an Ephraimite, and dwelt in that City) meeting him, asked him what he was? and
why he made it so late before he took up his lodging? he answered, That he was
a Levite, and that he brought his Wife with him from her Parents, and was
returning to his house, A ver. 22. ad 26.
which was amongst the Tribe of Ephraim. The old man having regard to The
horrible wickedness of the Gibeonites.
(by reason that he was of the same Tribe) lodged him in his own house. But
certain young men of the City, who had seen the Woman in the Marketplace, and
were taken with her beauty, understanding that she was gone to the old man's
house, who, by reason of his weakness and age, was not able to defend her, went
and knocked at his door. The old man desired them to depart; and not to offer
him such a displeasure. But they importuned him to deliver them his Guest;
which done, they promised him in no sort to cause his further molestation. But
though the old man alleged that she was his Kinswoman, and that her Husband
was a Levite; and that they should commit an heinous offense, in sinning, for
the sake of their corrupt pleasure, against the Laws: yet had they no regard of
equity, but mocked him, and menaced to murder him, because he hindered Ver. 29.
He laid the dead body upon his Ass, The Levite divides the body of his Wife
into 12 parts, and sent them to the twelve Tribes, Judge. 20.
and carried it to his house; where he no sooner arrived, but he divided the
same into 12 pieces, which he sent to the 12 Tribes of Israel; commanding them
that bare the same, to tell every Tribe, who were the Authors of his Wifes
death, and what Villainy they had practiced against her. The Tribes were enraged
at what they saw and heard, (having never heard of any the like adventure) and
incensed with extreme, yet just, fury, they assembled Siloe before the Ark,
where they resolved suddenly to take Arms, and to attack Giba. But the Elders
represented to them, that they ought not after that manner The year of the
World* 2526. before Christ's Nativity, 1438.
before they had more particularly examined the crime whereof they were
accused; since the Law permits not any War (no not against strangers) before
an Enter-parley and Embassage, to demand satisfaction. That accordingly it was
just to send certain messengers to the Gibeonites, to demand at their hands the
Authors of that villainy, C. 20. 1. ad 25.
to the end, that when they were delivered, The Israelites send ambassadors to
the Gibeonites to require those at their hands that had committed the rape.
they might take satisfaction by their punishment: but if they should not
regard that which was demanded, then it was lawful for them to assail them with
open War. Hereupon they sent certain Ambassadors to the Gibeonites, to complain
of those youngmen that in perpetrating this indignity against the woman had
violated the Law of God, and to demand that they might suffer condign
punishment by death for the same. Gibeonites would not yield up the young men,
esteeming it an indignity for them for fear of War to be obedient to other men's
commandments, They deny to yield them up: hereupon the Israelites make an oath
never to match their Daughters with any one of the Tribe of Benjamin, and they
levied and lead out against them an Army of four hundred thousand men.
for they thought themselves no ways inferior unto others in feats of War,
both in respect of number and courage. The rest of the Tribe also made great
pr^^aration, being all resolved, mutually to defend themselves against
whosoever should assail them. When the Gibeonites answer was brought to the
Israelites, they swear an oath among themselves, not to give their daughters in
marriage to any Benjamite, and to make War against them more bloody than that
which their predecessors had made against the Canaanites. They speedily
therefore levied and led into the field an army of 400000. men against them.
The Benjamites Army consisted of 25600. armed men; 500. of which were expert in
shooting, Giba, wherein the Benjamites put the Isralites to flight, who were
slain to the number of 22000. and more had been slaughtred that day, had not
the night suddenly overtaken them, and ended the fight. v. 25.
The Benjamites joyfully returned to their Cities and the Isralites were
discomfited by their defeat. Twenty two thousand Israelites slain in battle.
The next day they once more renewed the battle, and the Benjamites had the
upper hand once again: so that the Israelites lost eighteen thousand men more,
and thereupon forsook their camp through fear, and retired to Bethel, which was
not far off. Eighteen thousand Israelites more slain.
The day after they fasted, and besought God (by the mediation of Phinees the
High Priest) that it would please him to appease his wrath against them, and
that contenting himself with the two overthrows which he had sent them, he
would now v. 29, ad 36.
All which God promised them by the prophecy of Phinees. The Israelites place
one half of their battle in ambush, and as if they ^^ght with disadvantage,
they retired by little and little.
Whereupon they divided their Army into two parts, and laid the one in ambush
near the City. In the mean time (whilst the other half that made head against
the Benjamites, retired themselves, to the intent their Enemies should assault
them) the Benjamites suddenly issued, and set upon them that orderly retired,
and the more they retired (on purpose to draw them the further from the Town)
the more eagerly the Enemy insisted: so that all those who through age and
weakness were left in the City, sallied out to be companions and sharers in the
future prey. But when they were drawn far enough from the City, the Hebrews
stayed, made head, and fought against them. Then gave they a sign to those that
were Benjamites themselves so surprised, knew not what to do, but retiring into
certain Barricadoes, defended themselves with Arrows; but all of them were
slain except six hundred: who making head, and closely filletted and
embattelled together, thrust themselves desperately into the midst of their
Enemies, and by this means escaped to the neighboring mountains, where they
encamped. All the rest to the number of 25. thousand, or thereabouts were
slain. And the Israelites burned Giba utterly, and slew both the women and
children. They excercised no less severity on the other Cities of Benjamin (so
much were they transported with fury.) v. 35.
And for that Jabes (a City of Gilead) would not join with them in Battle
against the Benjamites, Five and twenty thousand Benjamites slain, and only six
hundred escape alive.
they sent twelve thousand chosen men out of their ^^^panies to destroy the
same, who slew all those that bear Arms, with their Wives and Children, except
four hundred Virgins. So much rage and fury had they conceived upon the
accident that chanced to this woman, against the Benjamites for provoking them
unto Arms: which fury being somewhat appeased, Jabes and other Cities of the
Benjamites burned.
they were touched with compassion seeing themselves deprived of one Tribe:
wherefore though they thought they had justly punished them for having offended
against the Laws of God; yet they appointed a fast and sent to recall those six
hundred that were fled, Judge. 21.
and that held a certain Rock in the Desert which is called Rhos. These
messengers represented to them the concern that the other Tribes had for their
misfortune; a v. 41. ad finem.
but since there was no remedy, The Israelites revoke the six hundred that were
fled.
they ought to bear it with patience Benjamites acknowledging their justice,
and that they were condemned by the just judgment of God, returned into the
possessions of their Tribe. And the Israelites Jabes: and for the rest (which
were 200) they deliberated with themselves how they might provide them of
Wives, to the intent they might have issue. And whereas in the beginning of the
War it was decreed by an oath, that none of them should match his Daughter with
any of the Tribe of Benjamin; Judge. 21, 22, ad 25.
there were some that thought good that the oath might be dispensed withal, by
reason it was made in wrath, and with precipitation; alleging further, that it
would not be displeasing to God, The Israelites gave the Benjamites the 400
Virgins of Jabes in marriage.
if they might save a Tribe which was in danger to be utterly extinct: That
Perjury is a great sin, not when enforced by necessity, but when practiced with
an intent to do evil. But when the Elders declared that they abhorred the
mention of Perjury, there rose up a certain Man amongst them, that said he knew
a way Benjamites might have Wives. When and how an Oath ought to be kept.
And being commanded by the Senate to declare the same, We have a custom thrice
every year (said he) to assemble and keep a Feast at Siloe, and for Companions
we have both our Wives and Daughters: as many of these as they can (...), let
the Benjamites lay hold of, without reproof, (neither being inhibited nor
encouraged by us) and if their Fathers shall be displeased therewith, and shall
require revenge, we will say that they are in the fault who have negligently
kept their Daughters, and that we ought not too much to whet our wrath against
the Benjamites, for that we had too much already used the same toward them.
Ver. 20. ad fin.
This advice was approved by all, and it was decreed, The Benjamites are
permitted to ravish them Wives.
That it was lawful for the Benjamites to seize, and violently take to
themselves Wives amongst them. Now when the Feast was at hand, the 200
Benjamites (of Benjamin (which was well nigh utterly exterminated) was
preserved, by the wisdom of the Israelites: and it flourished and increased in
a little time, as well in number of men, as in all other things.

The like accident happened to the Tribe of Dan, Hedio and Ruffin. cap. 7. al. 4.
which fell into the like mischief, for this

The Israelites about this time having forgotten the exercise of Arms, Judge.
18. 2, etc.
and being only occupied in Tilling their Land: The Tribe of Dan oppressed by
the Canaanites.
the Canaanites (in contempt of them) raised Forces, not for that they were
afraid for their own Estates, but to the intent that defeating the Hebrews with
some memorable overthrow, they might more securely inhabit their Cities for the
future. They brought into the Field a great number of Footmen, and Chariots,
and they drew Aschalon and Acharon (two Cities within the lot of Judah) into
their Confederacy, and diverse other Cities of the Champion Country: so that
the Tribe of Dan was driven into the Mountains, having no place in the Champion
where they might peaceably inhabit; and (for that they were neither able to
recover their Lands from Libranus, and lower than the sources of Jordan,
bordering upon the great Plain of the City of Sidon. In which place (having
observed that the Land was good and fertile in all sorts of fruits) they made
their report to their People, who Traveling thither with their Army, built a
City in that place called Dan (by the name of the son of Jacob so called, and
of their own Tribe.) Many adversities befell the Israelites from that time
forwards, They of Dan seek out a place to inhabit.
both by reason they were unexercised in Travel, and for that they contemned
Piety. For having once forsaken the Canaanites.

The year of the World, 2586. before Christ's Nativity, 1438.

How the people of Israel, by reason of their wickedness, were by God delivered
to the servitude of the Assyrians
FOr this cause the wrath of God was kindled against them, Judge. 31. 2, 3, 4.
in such sort that he abandoned them, and through their luxury they soon lost
the felicity which they had gotten by infinite pains. The Israelites oppressed
by Schisart.
For Schisart King of the Assyrians levied and an Army against them, killed a
great number of their men in fight, and either by force, or composition, took
diverse of their Cities and brought them under his subjection. Many also
willingly submitted

CHAP. IV.
Their liberty restored by Cenez.
A Certain man of the Tribe of Juda called Cenez, a man of understanding and
courage, was advertised by a voice from Heaven, Ibidem c. 3. v. 9, 10, 11.
that he should not permit the Israelites to be reduced into so extreme
necessity, without taking care for them, but adventure himself to set them at
liberty. Cenizus, or as the holo Scripture speaks, his Son Athaniel rigned
eight years.
Upon which calling to him some few whom he knew Assyrian Garrison which
Schisart had placed over them. This first success, caused the number of his
followers to increase a little more and more, so that in a little time they
seemed sufficient to equal the enemy in open field: whereupon encountering him
in one battle, they overcame him and recovered their liberty; and the rest of
the scattered and confused Army retired toward Euphrates. After Cenez had by
this action given proof of his valor, he received the government at the
peoples hands; and exercised the office of Judge forty years, and died.

CHAP. V.

AFter his death (the government being void) the affairs of the Israelites
began again to fall to ruin, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 8.
and the rather, for that they neither yielded due honor to God, Judge. 3. 12*
ad 15.
or obedience to the Laws: whence it came to pass, that Eglon King of the
Moabites (seeing the disorder of their policy) made war against them, Eglon
King of the Moabites conquereth the Israelites.
and defeated them many times. And for that he was a Prince of greater
puissance than any of his Predecessors, he weakened their Forces, so that he
constrained them to pay tribute

This man removing his Court to Jericho, and proud of his Victories, omitted no
Jodes the Son of Gera of the Tribe of Benjamin (a young man, endowed with
Valor of mind and strength of body to attempt any worthy action) dwelt at
Jericho. Jodes or Ehud insinuated himself into Eglons familiarity.
This man insinuated himself into Eglons familiarity; and by presents courted
him in such sort, that he was well beloved and esteemed amongst all the
Courtiers, and had frequent access to the Palace. It chanced one day that
bearing certain Presents unto the King (attended by two of his Household
servants) he secretly hid a Dagger under his clothes, v. 10.
at such time as he entered in to the King. Now it was Summer and Midday
likewise; and the watch was Eglon (who at that time refreshed himself in a
certain Summer Chamber) began to discourse with him. Now they were both alone
(by reason that the King resolving to talk familiarly with Jodes, had sent away
his Guard) but Jodes fearing, lest he might miss his blow as the King sat upon
the Throne, desired him to rise, telling him that he had a Dream to relate to
him by the commandment of God. Whereat he rejoicing, arose from his seat; and
Jodes stabbed him to the heart: and leaving the Poynard sticking in the wound,
locked the door after him, and escaped; For the Guard supposing the King laid
down to rest, let him pass. But Jodes giving private notice hereof to the
Israelites, offered Eglon were wholly ignorant of what had happened, but about
Evening (fearing lest some mishap had befaln him) they entered into The year of
the World, 2641. before Christ's Nativity, 1350.
and found him dead; whereat they were greatly astonished, so that they knew
not what course to take; so that before they had assembled their Forces
together, the Israelites came upon* them, and killed some; the rest, being Ten
thousand in number, Ver. 29, 30.
fled, in hope to recover their Country of Moab: but the Israelites (having
before waylaid and fortified the passages of Jordan) pursued and slew them:
The Moabites put, to flight, and slain by the Israelites.
so that many of them perished in the River, and not one escaped their hands.
By this means the Israelites were delivered from the servitude of the Moabites,
and Jodes was advanced to the Government of the People. After he had lived
Fourscore years, he dyed. A Man (besides the action now mentioned) worthy of
praise for many other things. After him, Sanagar the Son of Anath was elected
Governor, and in the first year of his

CHAP. VI.
How the Israelites were brought under the subjection of the Canaanites, and
delivered from Servitude by Barac.
BUT the Israelites (in no sort reclaimed or bettered by their forepass'd
Calamities) fell again into their former impiety and disobedience; Hedio and
Ruffinus, cap. 9.
and before they had sufficiently shaken off the servitude of the Moabites,
Judge. 4. 1, 2, 3.
were subjected to Jabin King of the Canaanites. Jabin King of the Canaanites,
subdueth the Israelites.
This Man kept his imperial residence at Asar (a City situate on the Lake
Sachonites) and had in his Pay Thirty thousand Foot, and Ten thousand Horse:
and besides these, he had Three thousand warlike Chariots. This great Army was
commanded by Sisara, Ver. 2.
(an eminent Man amongst the Kings Favorites) who encountering with the
Israelites, Sisares, or Sisara, the Captain of the Host.
brought their affairs into so desperate an estate, that they willingly for
their own security accepted servitude, and paid Tribute, whereunto they were
forced, almost for the space of Twenty years, not daring to lift up their heads
(all which fell upon them by the Will of God, to punish the too great contumacy
and ingratitude of that Nation.) At the end of which time, repenting
themselves, and acknowledging that the cause of their Calamities, Ver. 4, 5.
(proceeded from the contempt of Gods Laws) they repaired Debora, the
Prophetess.
called Debora, (which name in the Hebrew Tongue signifies a Be) beseeching
her, that by her prayers she would endeavor to move God to mercy, and not
suffer them so to be oppressed by the Canaanites. God (being inclined by her
prayers) granted them help, Ver. 6.
and appointed Barac to be their Governor (a Man of the Tribe of Nepthali,
Barac appointed Emperor against the Enemy.
whose name signifies Lightning.) Debora sending for Barac, commanded him to
choose out Ten thousand Men, and lead them forth against the Enemy; saying,
that their number were sufficient, since God had promised him the Victory. But
Barac denying to undertake the Government, except she also would join in the
administration of it with him; she moved with anger, replied, Art thou not
ashamed to surrender the dignity which God has given thee, to a Woman? Well, I
will not refuse it. Whereupon Ver. 8, 9.
they pitched their Tents near the Mountain of Thebor. Sisara at that time
(according as the King had commanded him) presently marched out to meet them,
and encamped not far from them. But Barac, and the rest of the Israelites,
(being terrified with the multitude of the Enemies) was encouraged by Debora,
Ver. 14.
who commanded them that very day to undertake the Battle; Debora and Barac
charge the Enemy.
assuring them, that the Victory should be theirs, and that God would assist
them. Whereupon they charged the Enemy, and there suddenly fell a storm of
Rain, mixed with Hail, which the wind drove against the faces of the
Canaanites, and took away their sight, rendering those that carried Darts, and
served with the Sling, unprofitable in the service; likewise those that were
heavily armed, having their hands benumbed with cold, could not wield their
Swords. Israelites, not only gave them less offense, but made them also more
courageous (as being a manifest sign of Gods favor and presence.) Whereupon
disaraying and breaking through their Enemies Battle, they made a great
slaughter of them; Ver. 15.
so that part of them fell by the weapons of the Israelites, the rest were
overrun by their own Horsemen and Chariots. Sisara slain, with his Host.
Sisara seeing his Soldiers turn their backs, leaped from his Chariot, and fled
away, till at last he arrived at the Tent of a woman of Cenetis, called Jael,
whom he desired to conceal and hide him. She admitted him; and when he desired
drink, she gave him sour milk; which when he had largely drunk, Ver. 21.
he fell asleep. The Woman seeing him in this condition, took a Mallet, Jael
kills Sisara with an iron Nail.
and drove an Iron Nail through his temples, and fastened him to the pavement;
soon Baracs Soldiers came to her, she showed them his dead body. Thus a Woman,
according as Debora had foretold, was the Author of this Victory. But Barac
Asor, Barac governs the Israelites 40 years.
defeated and slew Jabin, who came out against him with an Army, razed his City
to the ground; governed the Israelites for the space of Forty years.

CHAP. VII.
How the Amalekites overcoming the Israelites, destroyed their Country for the
space of seven years.
Barac and Debora, The year of the World, 2654. before Christ's Nativity, 1310.
which happened almost about the same time, the Midianites, accompanied with the
Amalekites and Arabians, armed themselves against the Israelites; and
encountering them in open field, overcame them in a great Battle, and
(destroying their Fruits and Harvest) carried away great Booty. They continued
these their incursions for the space of seven years, and compelled the
Israelites to forsake the Champain, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 10.
and fly to the Mountains: where digging themselves Caves and Houses under the
earth, Judge. 6. 1, 2, 3.
they kept secretly hidden all which they had reserved, from the fury of the
Enemy. The Midianites, confederate with the Amalekites, overcome the Israelites
in a great Battle.
For the Midianites having taken their Harvest in the Summer time, permitted
them to Till their Lands in the Winter, to the intent they might gather the
fruits of their labor afterward. Thus lived they in perpetual famine and
want: neither was there any other hope or succor left them, but only by
prayers and supplications

CHAP. VIII.
How Gideon delivered the Israelites:
ABout that time as Gideon (the Son of Joas, God commands Gideon to deliver
the Israelites from the Midianites.
one of the chiefest of the Tribe of Manasses) was grinding some sheafs of
Corn, which he had secretly conveyed into his Press, for he durst not do it
openly, for fear of the Enemy. An Angel appeared to him in the form of a young
man, and told him, That he was happy, and beloved of God. Judge. 6. 11, 12, 13.
answered Gideon, when I am forced to use a Press instead of a Grange. The
Angel exhorted him to be of good courage, and to endeavor to recover his
Countries liberty. Gideon answered, That it was impossible, by reason that the
Tribe whereof he was descended, had very few Men in it; and that he was too
young and incapable of affairs of that consequence. God will supply all these
defects, said the Angel, and under thy conduct will give the Israelites
victory. These things Gideon communicated to certain young men, Judge. 7. 2, 3,
4.
who willingly believing the Oracle, answered, That for the present they had
Ten thousand Soldiers in readiness, God commands Gideon to choose a few men.
to attempt any thing for their liberty. But God appeared to Gideon in a dream,
and told him, That Men being so vain, that they are willing to owe nothing but
to themselves, and attribute their Victories to their own strength, instead of
attributing them to his assistance; The Victory is to be attributed to God.
he would make them know, that 'twas to him alone that they were indebted for
them. To which end he commanded him, That about the mid-time of the day, at
such time as the heat was most vehement, he should conduct his Army to the
River, and there diligently observe those that bowed themselves to drink, which
he might esteem for Men of Valor; but all those that drank hastily, and with
noise, should be marked as Men timorous, and afraid of the Enemy. Gideon did as
God commanded: and there were found but Three hundred Men that lifted water to
their mouths with their hands, without fear and trouble. God commanded him to
assail the Enemy with those Three hundred, promising to give him the Victory.
At this time were they encamped upon the Bank of Jordan, ready to pass the Ford
the next Morning. But Gideon Midianites, to see what passed there. He obeyed;
and for his better assurance, took with him one of his servants. Now as he drew
nigh a certain Tent, Ver. 13, 14.
he perceived, that they that were within the same, were awake, and heard one
of them with a loud voice tell his Companion the dream which that Night he had
had, Gideon repaireth to the Enemies tents, and by them is confirmed by a dream.
which was thus: He thought he saw a Barley Cake (which looked as if not worth
the taking up) it rolled through all the Camp, and first overthrew the Kings
Tent, and afterward the Tents of all his Soldiers. This dream (answered his
Companion) signified the loss of our whole Army. The reason is, that of all
sorts of Corn, Barley is Asia, there are not at this day any People more
contemned than the Israelites; and in this respect, they resemble Barley. Now
you know that they have gathered Troops, and formed some design under the
conduct of Gideon. And whereas this Cake turned to overthrow our Tents, I fear
lest it Gideon. Gideon (having overheard this Discourse) conceived good hope,
and presently commanded his Followers to arm themselves, after he had told to
them the Dream of their Enemy. Whereupon they speedily prepared themselves at
his Command, being encouraged by so happy a presage to attempt any thing. Ver
16 17 22.
About the latter Watch of the Night, Gideon led forth his Army, and divided it
into three Bands, Gideon with 300 attempteth the fight.
and in every Band he put an Hundred Men: all of these bare in their hands
empty Pots, in which were hidden burning Torches, in such sort, that the Enemy
could not discover them, when they sallied out. Moreover, they bare Rams Horns
in their right hands, which they used in stead of Trumpets. The Enemies Camp
took up much ground, by reason they had a great number of Camels; and though
distributed

The Hebrews having had instructions from their Captain what to do, at such
time as they approached near their Enemies, and the sign of the Battle being
given, they sounded their Horns, and broke their Pots, and with their flaming
Lights, fell into the Enemies Camp, crying, Victory, Victory, by the assistance
of God, and the strength of Gideon. Trouble and Fear surprised the sleeping
Enemy, for this action was in the Nightime, and God disposed all things to
this issue, that few of them fell by the Hebrews Sword, but they themselves
slew one another in great numbers (by reason that they were different in
language.) For confusedly encountering one another, they Massacred all they met,
supposing them Enemies. When the Rumor of this Slaughter, and Gideon's Victory,
came Israelites, Ver. 22.
they armed themselves, and pursued and overtook the Enemy, The Madianites and
their Confederates kill one another.
(being entangled in certain places, unpassable, through many Brooks) so that
being environed on every side, most of them were put to the Sword; amongst
which, were two Kings, Oreb and Zeb. Two other Kings, Zebe and Hezerbun
escaped, with their Soldiers, Ver. 25.
to the number of Eighteen thousand, and encamped not far from the Israelites:
The Israelites pursue their Enemies, and kill Oreb and Zeb
but Gideon was no ways astonished hereat, but charging them valiantly with his
whole Army, he defeated all the Troops, and took the Kings captive. There dyed
in the two Battles of the Madianites, and Arabians their Allies, almost
Sixscore thousand. Judge. 2. 7.
The Hebrews also took an inestimable prey of Gold, Silver, Apparel, Camels,
and Horses. Gideon takes Zeb and Ezarbon.
But Gideon returning to Ephraim, put to death the two Kings of the Madianites
Ephraim being displeased with his happy execution, Ver. 10.
resolved to make War against him; accusing him, that he had not made them
privy to his design against the Enemy. 120000 Madianites, with their
Confederates, slain.
But Gideon being a prudent Man, and endowed with all kind of virtue, gave them
this modest answer, That he had not proceeded by his own direction, but by the
command of God: notwithstanding, that the Victory was no less theirs, than his,
or those of his Followers, that achieved the Enterprise. With these his words
appeasing their wrath, he did no less service to the Hebrews by his prudence,
The year of the World, 2292. before Christ's Nativity, 1270.
than by his valor; delivering them from a Civil War, whereinto they had
fallen, if his discretion had not prevented it. This Tribe was punished for
this outrage offered to so noble a Personage, as we will declare hereafter in
due place. Gideon desiring to Israelites for the space of Forty years, doing
justice to every one that desired it at his hands, Ver. 22. 32.
with so great integrity, ability and wisdom, that the People never failed to
confirm the judgments which he pronounced, Gideon reigned 40 years.
because none could be more equitable. He Ephraim.

CHAP. IX.
How some of Gideons Successors made War with the Nations round about them.
GIdeon had seventy lawful Sons begotten on diverse Wives, Hedio and Ruffinus,
chap. 1.
and one Bastard by his Concubine Druma, called Abimelech: who, after the
decease of his Father, retired to Shechem, Judge. 9. v. 1. ad 5.
where his Mother was born. There (assisted with money, by his Mothers kindred,
Abimelech kills 69 of his Brethren.
and backed by men resolute, and fit for all bad actions) he returned to his
fathers house, where he slew all his brethren (except Jotham, who by good hap
saved himself by flight.) When he had once usurped the Government, he ruled all
things according a v. 8. ad 25.
and neglected the Ordinances and prescripts of Law, hating all those that in
any sort were maintainers of equity. Jotham, by an allusion, upbraideth the
Shechemites of their ingratitude toward Gideon.
One day whilst there was a solemn feast held at Shechem, (whereunto the whole
people were usually wont to resort) Jotham his Brother (who as we said, saved
himself by flight) getting up the Mountain of Garizim, which over-hangeth the
City of Shechem, with a loud voice (that might easily be overheard by the
people) and in a general silence of the whole multitude, desired them to hear
him a few words; and he told them, that in times past the Trees were accustomed
articulately to speak after the manner of men; The counsel of the Trees, in
choice of a King.
and that (in a certain assembly, wherein they were to consult of their
government) they desired the Fig Tree to accept the sovereignty over them;
which when it refused and pleaded in its own behalf, that it If you unfainedly
desire me for your King, repose your selves under my shadow; but if it be only
in mockery, and to deceive me, there shall a fire issue from me, and consume
you. These things (said Jotham) I report to you, not to move you to laughter,
but for that, you (having received many benefits at the hands of Gideon) suffer
Abimelech, who in spirit differs nothing from fire, to usurp the Government,
after the slaughter of my brethren. When he had spoken after this manner, he
departed, and for three years lived hid amongst Abimelech. After some time the
Shechemites (being moved with compassion and just revenge, v. 23, etc.
of the murder committed upon the Sons of Gideon) drove Abimelech out of their
City, The Shechemites banish Abimelech.
and the whole Tribe. Whereupon he resolved to do some mischief both to the
City and the Citizens. And though their Vintage was at hand, yet they durst not
go forth to gather the fruit, for fear of him. It happened at that time a certain
great man called Gaal, arrived their with a Troop of Soldiers, and his kindred:
The Shechemites desired him to grant them a Guard, whilst they gathered their
Harvest; which request of theirs being granted by Gaal, they issued out with
their Forces and securely brought in their fruits: and feasting one with
another in companies, they were so bold as to scoff at Abimelech, and the chief
of his v. 34.
by Ambuscado, diverse of Abimelechs people, and slew them. But Zebul one of the
Shechemites, Abimelechs, practice against the Shechemites.
and Abimelechs Host, signified unto him by a messenger, how Gaal incited the
people against him; and he counseled him to lie in wait for him, near about
the City, promising to bring Gaal thither, and so he might easily revenge
himself of the injury which his enemy had offered him* and reconcile himself to
the people again. When Abimelech had chosen a place sit to lie (...) ambush,
and Gaal with Zebul, carelessly walked in the suburbs, Gaal suddenly espying
certain Armed men coming toward him, cried out to Zebul, That he had
discovered the (...); Zebul replied, that it was nothing but the shadow of
Rocks. But Gaal drawing nearer them, and seeing apparently who they were,
answered Zebul, That they were no shadows but ambushes of (...). Zebul replied,
Do thou not object cowardice to Abimelech? Why therefore (...) thou not thy
great valor, in fighting with him Gaal confusedly amazed, bore the first
charge of the Soldiers of Abimelech: in which conflict, some of his Followers
were slain, and he himself fled into the City, giving example to the rest to
follow him. v. 39, 40, 41.
Hereupon Zebul labored, that Gaal might be expelled out of the City; Gaal put
to flight by Abimelech, is banished out of Shechem.
accusing him of cowardice in his encounter with the Soldiers of Abimelech.
Now, when Abimelech had afterward gotten certain intelligence, that the
Shechemites would go out again to gather their Vintage, he laid an ambush near
to the City. And no sooner were they come forth, but a third part of his Troops
surprised the Gates, to cut off their return; v. 45.
the rest ran after those that were scattered here and Shechem taken and
sacked, and razed to the ground.
and the City was ruined to the very foundations, and they sowed Salt upon the
ruins thereof. But they that escaped through the Country, and had avoided the
danger, assembled to fortify themselves upon a strong Rock, The year of the
World, 2493. before Christ's Nativity, 1470.
whereon they encamped. But as soon as Abimelech had notice of v. 46. 47, 48,
49.
and in an instant it flamed, and burnt vehemently; so that none of them were
saved, but all perished, with their Wives and Children, to the number of
fifteen hundred men, The Shechemites flying, are burned upon a Rock.
besides many of the weaker sort. This calamity happened to the Shechemites, who
were worthy of compassion if they had not deserved this punishment for their
ingratitude toward so upright a Judge, and so gracious a Benefactor. Abimelech
cooled the courage of the Israelites, by this treatment of the Shechemites, and
gave sufficient testimony that he aspired higher, and would never terminate
Thebans and their City, which he took: in the Town there was a great Tower,
whither all the people had retired themselves, and as he prepared to besiege
the same, and approached near the Gates, Abimelech takes Tebez.
a certain woman cast a piece of a Millstone at him, which hit him on the head,
and made him fall to the ground. Abimelech feeling that he was wounded to
death, v. 52, 53, 54, 55,
commanded his Armor-bearer to dispatch him, that it might not be reported that
he died by the hand of a woman. A woman wounds Abimelech, and his Squire
kills him.
The man did as he was commanded, and so Abimelech suffered the punishment of
the cruelty he had committed against his Brethren, and the tyranny executed
upon the Shechemites; according as Jotham had foretold. As soon as Abimelech
was slain, all the Army dispersed, and returned to their Hedio and Ruffinus,
chap. 12. al. 19.
and Jair the Galeadite, of the Tribe of Manasses, took upon him the
Government. Amongst other felicities of this man, these were of greatest note,
that he was rich, Judge. 10.
and had thirty Valiant Sons, all prudent men, and of chief rank in the Country
of Galaad. After he had governed the people twenty years, he died when he was
very old, and was honorably intombed in Chamon a City of Galaad. From this
time forward the policy and estate of the Hebrews grew more and more
disordered, and the Laws began to be neglected: Thola reigned 23. years.
Whence it came to pass, that the Ammonites and Philistines destroyed all their
Country with a great Army, and made themselves masters of the Land on this
side Jordan; After him Jair 22. years.
and so much were they heartned, that they pressed further, to possess the
other side of the River, Judge. 102, 34.
and conquer the same. Whereupon the Hebrews being brought to Ammonites led
their Army into Galaad, they of the Country arose to meet and fight with them;
being destitute of a Governor to conduct them. Now their was a certain man
called Jeptha, of great estimation, as well for the virtue of his ancestors, as
his own valor; for he had a considerable body of men in his own service. To
him they sent a messenger, desiring him to assist them; v. 5* 6, 7, 8.
and promising him, The Israelites oppressed by the Ammonites and Philistine^
that he should continue in the Government during the term of his life. But he
was nothing moved with this request, but reproachfully Galaad, receiving all
^^ose into wages which came unto him, of what place soever. But after they had
presthdhm, and sworn to him, he joined his Troops with them, and became their
General: and speedily providing whatsoever was necessary, he encamped near
Maspha, and sent Ambassadors to the Ammonites, accusing them for invading a
Country that belonged not to them. They on the contrary blamed the Israelites,
for that they coming out of Egypt had usurpt that Country from his Ancestors,
who were lawful Lords of Judge. 11, v. 5, 6, 9* 10, 11.
Jeptha answered, that they had no reason to accuse their Ancestors in respect
of Amorrhaea: Jeptha is created the Judge of Israel.
but rather they were beholden to them, for that they had permitted them to
enjoy the Country of Ammon; it being in Moses power to have conquered the
same. In a word, they were resolved not to forsake the Country which God had
given them, and they had held in their possession for the space of three
hundred years; and would defend against them by dint of Sword. With these words
dismissed he the Ambassadors of the Ammonites. Then Jeptha prayed to God that
it would please him to grant him victory: and he made a vow that if he returned
to his house in safety, he would Sacrifice the first living creature that he
should meet with at his return. v. 30, ad 40.
After this, encountering the Enemy, Jeptha makes a vow.
he defeated and pursued him, killing those that fled continually till he came
Minnith. Then entering the Country of the Ammonites, he destroyed diverse
Cities, and carried away a great booty, and so delivered his Nation from the
The year of the World, 2624. before Christ's Nativity, 1270.
But as he returned homeward, he fell into such an inconvenience, as was no
ways answerable to his noble actions. For the first person he met as he
returned home, was his only Daughter (a Virgin of eighteen years) who came out
to meet him: Whereupon melting into tears, he began to check her, He overcomes
the Ammonites.
for that so hastily she had come forth to meet him, by reason he had vowed the
first thing he met with to God. But this accident was no ways displeasing to
the Virgin; who with a wounderful constancy answered her Father, that a death
which had for its cause the victory of her Father, and the liberty of her
Country, could not but be very acceptable to her: and that the only favor she
desired of him, was, that he would please to grant her two months, C. 11. v. 39*
before she were sacrificed, to the end she might Jeptha Sacrifices his
Daughter.
with her companions: and that after that term, her father might acquit himself
of the vow which he had made. Jeptha granted her the time she had limited:
which being expired, C. 12. 1, 2. etc.
he sacrificed his Daughter for a burnt-offering. Which oblation of his, The
Ephraimites are incensed against Jeptha.
was neither conformable to the Law, nor desired by God. But he was resolved to
accomplish his vow, without considering what judgment men might make of it.

The Tribe of Ephraim hearing of his victories, Judge. 12
declared War against him, by reason he had not communicated to them his
enterprise against the Ammonites, that he might have the prey, and the honor
of the enterprise to himself. He answered, that being of his kindred, they
could not be ignorant, that both he and his were assailed by War; v. 6.
that if they restrained not themselves, he would (by the assistance of God) be
revenged on them. Almost forty thousand of the Ephraimites slain.
But these words of his were both neglected and despised, so that he was forced
to Arm himself against them, and with an Host of men sent from Galaad, v. 7.
he made a great slaughter, partly in pursuing those that fled, partly also in
preventing their passage who fled to Jordan: Jeptha dies.
the number of the slain, amounted to about forty thousand. Ibzan was for seven
years space the Judge in Israel.
After Jeptha had governed six years, he deceased, and was buried Sebei, in the
place where he was born, and the Country of Galaad. After his death Ibzan took
upon him the Government. He was of the Tribe of Juda, of the City of Bethleem,
v. 11.
and had sixty Children; Elon reigned ten years.
thirty males and thirty females, which he left all alive and married: he died
when he was very old, without performing any thing worthy of memory, during the
space of his seven years Government: he was buried in his own Country. In like
manner Elon a Zabulonite his successor did nothing memorable and during the
term of ten years wherein he governed. Abdon the Son of Elon, and (of the Tribe
of Ephraim of the City of Pharathon) was declared Sovereign Judge after Elon,
and is renowned only for his felicity in his Children; the state of the
Israelites being in peace, v. 13*
so that he exploited nothing worthy glory: he had forty Sons, who Abdo^ Judge.
and rode accompanied with these seventy, who were all of them expert
Horsemen. He left them all alive, and died when he was very old, and was
magnificently buried in Pharathon.

CHAP. X.
Of Samsons valor, and how many mischiefs he did to the Philistines.
AFter his death, Judge. 13. 1.
the Philistines prevailed over the Israelites, and exacted tribute from them
for the space of forty years. The Israelites are overcome by the Philistines.
From which misery they were delivered Manoah an excellent man, and chief of
the Tribe of Dan, without exception, had a Wife most famous for her beauty, and
excelling all others of that time; yet had he no Children by her, Hedio and
Ruffin^^, chap. 13. al. 10.
whereat he was very much grieved, and made his continual prayers unto God (and
especially when they were retired to a Country house which they had near the
City) that it would please him to give him a lawful heir. v. 3, 4, 5.
He loved his Wife very passionately, The Angel foretells Samsons birth.
and not without some jealousy: on a day as the woman was there by her self,
an Angel of God appeared to her in form of a young man of incomparable beauty
and shape; and told her that he came from God, to inform her that she should be
the mother of a child, perfectly beautiful; and whose strength should be so
extraordinary, that as soon as he was entered into the vigor of youth he
should Philistines; but God forbad her to cut his Hair, and commanded likewise
that he should taste no other drink but water; and after he had said thus, he
departed. As soon as her Husband returned home again, she told him all that the
Angel had said unto her, The year of the World, 2783. before Christ's Nativity,
1181.
and so extolled the beauty and good grace of the young messenger, who appeared
v. 9. ad 13.
which when she had obtained, The Angel appears once more unto Manoah.
she went and fetched Manoah, who notwithstanding was not delivered from his
suspicion; but desired him to relate to him all that he had signified to his
Wife. The Angel answered, that it sufficed that she knew it: whereupon he asked
him what he was, to the end that when his Son should be born, he might give him
presents, and thanks. The Angel answered, that he had no need thereof, by
reason that he had not brought the good news of the birth of his Manoah
entreated him to stay and receive some token of kindness; but he would not
consent. Finally, being instantly pressed to abide and receive some gift;
Manoah killed a Kid, and commanded his Wife to roast it. And when all things
were in readiness, the Angel commanded them to lay the Bread and Flesh upon a
Rock without dishes: which being done, he touched the Flesh with a wand which
he had in his hand, and suddenly a flaming fire consumed both the Bread, and
Flesh; and the Angel was seen to ascend up into Heaven in the Smoke as it were
in a Chariot. Manoah was in great fear lest some inconvenience should happen
unto him, because they had seen God: but his Wife comforted him, assuring that
God had appeared to them for their good. Shortly after she became big with
child, and observed v. 24.
and when the Infant was born, Samsons birth.
she called his name Samson (which is as much as to say, strong) who soon grew
to be of excellent beauty both of mind and body, wearing his Hair unshorn, and
using sobriety in his diet, whereby he gave some signs of what had been
foretold concerning him.

It happened on a day that there was a solemnity celebrated in Thamna, a City of
the Philistines, whither Samson resorted with his Father and Mother; and being
surprised with love of one of the Damsels of that place, he desired his Father
and Mother that this maid might be given him in marriage: which they refused,
alleging that she was not of the same Lineage, Judge. 14. 5, 6.
and that God would provide him a match to the good and profit of his Nation:
Samson teareth a Lion in pieces with his hands.
but in the end he prevailed so much, that he espoused the Maiden. Samson
marries one of the Daughters of the Philistines.
and he took three hony-combs which he carried with other presents to his
intended Wife. After this, lie invited the Thamnites to the celebration of his
marriage, who (for that they feared his strength) under color of doing him
honor, chose out thirty strong and valiant young men, v. 1, 2, 3.
to be seemingly his companions, but in effect his Guardians; to the end he
might not attempt any commotion, in the midst of the festivity. Samson said v.
12, 13, 14.
and other vestments. They being very desirous both to be reputed wise, Samson
propounds a riddle to the Thamnites.
and to gain the reward proposed, pressed him to propound his question: which
he did in these terms; He that devoureth all, has been himself the food of
others; and how terrible soever he was, this food has been no less sweet and
agreeable. They employed three days to find out the sense thereof, but they
could not: and therefore they desired Samson's Spouse to get the secret from
her Husband, and disclose the same to them; which if she refused, they
threatened to burn her to death. Samson at the first (notwithstanding her
flatteries and solicitations) denied to tell it her: at last she urged him so
instantly, and shed so many tears (telling him that if he v. 18.
and (not distrusting either fraud or guile) he related the whole story to her,
Samsons Wife discovers the riddle to the Thamnites.
and she afterward reported the same to those that had employed her in the
discovery. When the seventh day was come* and the question was to be decided,
the young men assembled themselves together about Sunset; and said, There is
nothing more terrible than a Lion, nor any thing more pleasant to taste, than
honey: v. 19, 20.
Whereunto Samson replied, Samson kills certain Ascalonites, and his Wife
marries with another.
you should add that there is not any thing more dangerous than a woman; for
she it is that has betrayed me, and reported my words to you. Notwithstanding
all this, he delivered that which he had promised them, out of the booty,
Ascalonites, whom he encountered upon the way. But he would not pardon his Wife;
and the woman (seeing her self despised) married The year of the World, 2791,
before Christ's Nativity, 1173.
who had, in his behalf first solicited the marriage. Samson (being more
incensed by this injury) resolved to revenge himself both on her and the whole
Nation: For which cause in the Summer time (when the Corn was ready to be
reapt) he took three hundred Foxes, to whose tayls having fastened flaming
Torches, he drove them into the Philistines fields of Corn; Judge. 15. 4, 5, etc.
consuming by this means all their hope of Harvest The Philistines
understanding that Samson had done this, and conceiving the reason that induced
him to it, Samson burned the Philistines fruit.
sent a party of Soldiers to Thamna, and burnt this woman alive with all her
kindred, as the cause of the loss that had happened to them. After Samson had
slain diverse Philistines in the Country, he went and dwelt at Etam (which is a
strong Rock in the Tribe of Juda.) For which cause the Philistines assailed
that Tribe, who Samson, and especially since they paid them tribute. The
Philistines replied, that unless they would be maintainers of his act of
unjustice, they must deliver Samson unto them. They (desirous that the
Philistines* might have no cause of quarrel against them) came to the Rock to
the number of 3000 men, and there blamed Samson for those actions which he had
done against the Philistines, because they were a people that might endamage
the whole Nation of the Hebrews: concluding that they came to take, and deliver
him into the Philistines hands, and praying him to submit himself voluntarily
to that their resolution. Samson made them swear that they would do him no
other injury, but deliver him only to their enemies; which done, he descended
C. 15. 11. 12, 13.
surrendering himself to the hands of those of Juda, who bound him with two
cords, and led him away to deliver him to the Philistines. Now being arrived in
a certain place, Samson is delivered to the Philistines.
which at this present is called the Jaw (by reason of what happened there at
that time) and approaching near the Philistines Camp; which shouted for joy
that they had faithfully executed that which they desired of them: Samson brake
his bonds, and catching up the jaw of an Ass which he found at his feet, and
falling upon the Philistines, v. 14, 15.
he slew and beat down to the number of almost two thousand, and put all the
rest to flight. Samson with the jaw bone of an Ass kills a thousand men.
This extroardinary and unparalleld exploit so puffed up Samsons heart, that he
forgot to attribute it to the assistance of God, but ascribed the same to his
own strength. But it was not long before he was punished for his ingratitude:
For being seized v. 18.
nor deliver him to his Enemies, Samson by his prayers causes a Fountain to
break out of a Rock.
though he had deserved it, but assist him in the present danger. God heard his
prayers, and caused a pleasent Fountain to spring from the foot of a Rock: for
which cause Samson called the place Maxilla or Jaw, which name continues even
unto this day. After this battle, Samson set light by the Philistines, and went
to Gaza* where he sojourned in an Inn. The Governors of the City understanding
his arrival, set men to keep the Gates, to the end he might not depart without
their knowledge. But Samson not ignorant of what they intended against him;
arose about midnight and took up the C. 16. 3.
with the hinges and locks, and all the furniture of the same; and laying them
on his shoulders, Samson bears away the gates of Gaza.
carried them to the Mountain above Hebron. Not long after, he transgressed the
Laws of his Fathers, and corrupted his ways and manner of living, conforming
himself to the fashions of the Gentiles, which was the source and cause of all
his ruin. For he was taken with the love of a Philistine Cortisan called
Dalila. As soon as the Governors of the Philistines knew it, they by promises
wrought so with her, that they persuaded her to get out of him wherein his
force consisted, and what the cause was that he could not be conquered by his
Enemies. Dalila to accomplish their desire, made use of fasting and flattery,
praising his great actions, and thence taking occasion to ask him whence his so
prodigious strength proceeded. But Samson well judging on what design she asked
him this question answered her: that if he were tied with seven Vine-branches
young and pliant, C. 15 ^ v. 6, ad 16.
he should become the weakest of all men. She believed him, and having given
notice thereof to the Governors of the Philistines, Dalila the strumpet
sounds Samson, to find out wherein his strength consisted, and is deluded.
who sent to her house certain Soldiers, these, when he was drunk and asleep,
bound him as strongly as they could; Dalila suddenly waking him, told him that
certain Soldiers were at hand to take him: but Samson brake the bonds of
Vine-branches, and prepared himself to resist the assaults of those that lay in
wait for him. The woman frustrate of her hope, not long after took an
opportunity, to complain of him, that distrusting her love and constancy, he
had concealed that from her which she most desired to know, as if she were
unable to conceal that which might any ways concern the Samson told her, that
if he were tied with seven cords, he should lose all his strength. Which when
Samson told her, that if she pleeted his hair with a fillet, he should be
weakened: and having experimented that also, she found that it was false.
Finally, she pressed and conjured him in such earnestness, v. 16, 17, 18.
that being no longer able to avoid the ill that attended him, at last he
condescended to gratify her, Samson discovers to Dalila wherein his strength
consisted: his eyes are pulled out, and he is led away prisoner.
and said to her after this manner: It has pleased God to have care over me,
and as I was by his special providence brought into the World, so by his
command I nourish this hair, for God has forbiden me to cut the same; and my
force shall endure as long as these locks shall endure and grow. Which when she
understood, she shaved off his hair whilst he slept, and betrayed him to his
Enemies, whose forces at that time he was too feeble to resist; and they
plucked out his eyes, and led Philistines celebrated a public feast (wherein
the Princes and Peers banquetted and entertained one another in a spacious
place, the cover whereof was upheld by two pillars; and Samson was sent for,
and brought to the feast, to the end they might mock him in the midst of their
mirth; his hair was then grown again; a v. 25. ad finem.
and this generous spirit taking it more grievously than all other evils which
he endured, Samson with three thousand Philistines is slain.
to be treated with such indignity, and not to be able to revenge himself on
those that thus injuriously used him; feigned himself very weak, and desired
the Boy that led him, to let him approach and lean upon the said Pillars. As
soon therefore as he got hold on them, Samson ruled 20 years.
he shook them in such sort, that they were over-turned, and the house fell
upon those that were therein, who all perished to he number of three thousand
Samson, who finished his days in this sort, after he had commanded over Israel
for the space of twenty years. He was a man of great virtue, strength and
magnanimity: even to his latter hour, was fatal to the Philistines. And whereas
he was allured and besotted by a woman, it is an effect of the infirmity of
humane nature, which is prone to such faults: in all other things, we cannot
too much admire his virtue. His Kindred took his body and buried it in Sarasa
his Country, in the Sepulcher of his Ancestors.

CHAP. XI.
How the sons of Eli the High Priest were slain in battle by the Philistines.
AFter the decease of Samson, Ruth 1. v. 1, ad 6.
Eli the High Priest took upon him the Government of the Israelites. Hedio and
Ruffinus, Chap. 14.
During his time there was a great Famine; and Elimelech unable to endure the
misery thereof, came from Bethlehem a City of the Tribe of Juda, to inhabit in
the Country of Moab, A famine in the days of Eli.
bringing with him Naomi his Wife, and Chilon and Maalon his Sons, whom he had
by her. Now when his affairs had fallen out with as fortunate success as could
be desired, he married his Sons to certain Daughters of the Moabites, Chilon to
Orpha, and Maalon to Ruth. After ten years, Elimelech and his Sons died. By
which affliction Naomi being cast into great sorrow, and destitute of their
company, whose dear familiarity she had preferred before the love of her
Country: changed C. v. 7, ad 14
lose the certain pleasure and peaceable fruition of their Country. These her
persuasions took effect with Orpha: but Ruth (resolved in no sort to forsake
her,) attended on her Mother-in-law as future companion of whatsoever fortune
v. 15, ad 19.
Now when both of them arrived in Bethlehem, Namo^, after the decease of her
Husband and Sons, departs with Ruth into her own Country.
(where, as we shall see afterward) Boos Abimelechs Kinsman entertained them
in his house: the Citizens called her by the name of Naomi, but she said, that
they should rather call her Mara* (for Naomi in the Hebrew tongue signifies
felicities, and Mara bitterness.) When it was Harvest time, Ruth by the
permission of her Mother, went out into the fields to glean Corn for their
sustenance: Ruth goes into Bethlehem.
and it fortuned that she met in the field with Boos, who came thither likewise
not long after; and who beholding her, inquired of the chief Reaper touching
this young woman. Ruth 2. v. 1, ad. 8.
He, having a little before understood her condition, (...) friend to Naomi and
Ruth.
declared it to his Master Boos, commending her for the good affection which
she bare her mother-in-law, and for the memory she had of her deceased Son,
whom Ruth had married; wished her all good fortune: and not suffering her to
glean, he permitted her to reap and to gather all that which she might;
commanded the Master-reaper The year of the World, 2811. before Christ's
Nativity, 1153.
and that when the reapers took their refection, they should give her both meat
and drink. What Corn Ruth gathered she reserved for her Mother-in-law, and came
home at night and brought her the sheaves. In like manner Naomi reserved a
portion of certain victuals for her, which in way of kindness her neighbors
had sent her. At her return, Ruth reported to her all the words that Boos had
said unto her: and Naomi gave her to understand that Boos was her kinsman, and
so good a man that it might be hoped he would take some care of her. So Ruth
went again with Boos handmaids to gather her gleanings; and certain days after
(about the time that they threshed Barley) Boos came to his Farm, Ruth 3. v. 14
and slept on the floor: which when Naomi understood, she thought it Ruth by
her mother-in-laws perswasino lies at Boos Feet.
Ruth (that made a conscience to contradict her mother-in-law in whatsoever she
commanded her) went very gently and lay at his feet; and upon her first arrival
Boos perceived nothing (because he was fast a sleep:) but when he awaked about
midnight, and felt some body lying at his feet, he demanded who it was:
whereupon she told him her name; requesting him as her master, that he would
permit her to repose in that place for that time. He enquired no further, but
let her sleep; but early in the morning, before the Servants began their work,
he commanded her to arise, and to take as much Barley with her as she could
bear, to the end she might return to her mother-in-law, before that any man
perceived that she had slept Ruth 4. v. 1^ ad 7.
if he says that he likes thee, thou must then necessarily submit unto him:
but if he refuse thee, I will take thee for my Wife according as the Law
obliges me. Now when she had reported these news unto her mother-in-law, she
took courage and conceived hope that Boos would not abandon them. Boos came to
the City about noon, and called a Council of the Elders, and sent for Ruth and
his kinsman, to whom he spoke thus: Do thou not possess the heretage of
Abimelech? Yes, answered he, I am seized thereof by the right of proximity,
according to Boos replied, Thou must not (says he) only observe the Laws in
part; but thou must precisely execute them all. Behold here a young woman,
Abimelech's Widow, whom it behooves thee to marry according to the Law, Boos
exhorts his kinsman to marry Ruth.
if thou will inherit possessions. But the man surrendered to Boos, not only the
possessions, but also the woman; by reason that Boos was allied also to those
that were dead, and especially for that the said kinsman had already both Wife
and Children* Boos therefore (having first taken the Magistrates to witness)
called for the woman, and willed her to draw near her kinsman, and to unloose
his shoe, and strike him on the face (according as the Law had ordained;) which
done, Boos espoused Ruth, by whom (about a year after) he had a Son, which
Naomi brought up; and called his name Obed, in hope he would assist in her old
age: Obed in the Hebrew tongue signifies assistance.) v. 13.
Obed begat Jesse, Boos begets Obed David's grand father upon Ruth.
and Jesse begat David, who was King, and who left the Realm to his successors
for one and twenty Generations. I was obliged to relate these things touching
Ruth, because I would declare how God, by his Soveragin power, 1 Samuel 2. 12. ad
17.
raises whom he pleases from obscurity, to the highest dignity, as he did
David, whose original I have showed you.

The affairs of the Hebrews were at this time in very poor estate, Ophni and
Phinees the wicked Sons of Eli the High Priest.
and they entered into a new War against the Philistines upon this occasion: The
High Priest Eli had two Sons Ophni and Phinees. They, against all right and law
(offering outrages to men, and committing impieties against God) suffered no
sin to escape them: Hedio and Ruffinus. chap. 1^. all 12.
for they were not contented to receive what belonged to them, but they took
what did not. And as women Eli, and the Prophet Samuel (who then was very
young) what vengeance should fall upon Eli's Children, he mourned over them, as
if they had been already dead. But I will first speak something concerning this
Prophet Samuel, and afterward of the Children of Eli, and what calamity fell
upon all the Hebrew Nation. Elcana was a Levite of mean condition, living in
Ramath, a part of Ephraim: 1 Samuel 1. v. 10* 12, 13.
he had married two Wives, the one called Anna, the other Phenenna: by Phenenna
he had children; Anna. the Wife of Elcana requires a Son at Gods hand.
yet he loved Anna very entirely, although she was barren. Elcana with his
Wives were at Silo, where the Tabernacle of God was (as we have before
declared) to the intent to offer Sacrifice in that place: during the festival
he distributed the portion of his meat to his Wives and Children: Anna
(beholding the Children of his other Wife sitting near their Mother) began to
weep and The year of the World, 2818. before Christ's Nativity, 1468.
because she was without issue, and could not be eased with all consolation
which her Husband gave her. She went into the Tabernacle to beseech God that it
would please him to make her a Mother; and made a vow that if he gave her a
Son, he should be dedicated to the service of God. And for that* she employed
much time in making her prayers, the High Priest Eli, who sat before the
Tabernacle, commanded her to depart from thence, supposing that she had drunk
too much Wine: but after she told him that she drank nothing but Water, and
that (being oppressed with grief) she was come to the Tabernacle, to beseech
God that it would please him to grant her Children; he exhorted her to be of
good courage, and assured her that God had heard her prayers: whereupon she
returned to her Husband full of good hope, and v. 20. ad finem.
They returned to their own house, she began to be big with child, Hannah bare
Samuel to Elkanah her Husband.
and at last she brought forth a Son, whom she called Samuel (that is to say,
requested of God.) Afterward they returned to offer Sacrifice, and give thanks
to God for the birth of the child, which God had given them, and to bring their
tenths. Hannah, remembering the vow she had made, delivered the child into the
hands of Eli, and consecrated him to God to be his Prophsie. For which cause
they suffered his Hair to grow, and he drank nothing but Water, and he was
brought up in the Temple. Elkanah had by Hannah other Sons also and three
Daughters. 1 Samuel 3. v. 3. ad 10.
As soon as Samuel had attained to the age of twelve years, he began to
prophecy. For on a certain night whilst he slept, God called him by his name:
and he supposing that it was the High Priest that Eli told him, that he had not
called him. The same thing was done three times: and then Eli, easily judging
what it was; said to him, Samuel, I neither called thee now, nor before, but it
is God that calls thee, answer him therefore, and say, Here I am, ready to
obey. He heard the voice of God once more; and he answered, behold me O Lord,
what would thou have me to do? I am ready to obey. Then God answered, saying:
Go and tell the Israelites that so great a calamity shall fall upon them that
no tongue can express it. The Sons of Eli shall die in one day, and the Priest
hood shall be removed from his Family to that of Eleazar: For, Eli has loved
his Children more than my service, and has drawn my curse upon them.

Samuel fearing to overwhelm the old man with sorrow, C. v. 11. ad 21.
would not disclose God foresheweth Samuel of the death of Eli and his Sons.
but Eli constrained him to tell it, and it made him the more assured of the
imiminent death of his Sons. And because all the things which Samuel prophesied
came to pass, his reputation increased daily more and more.

At that time the Philistines (leading out their Army against the Israelites)
encamped near the City of Amphec, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 16.
and for that the Hebrews were negligent to oppose them, 1. Sam. 4. v. 1. (...)
4.
they advanced further into the Country. So at length in a fight with their
Enemies, the Philistines got the upper hand and slew 4000 Hebrews, The
Philistines kill four-thousand of the Israelites.
and pursued those that fled even to their own Tents. The fear of the Hebrews
after this overthrow was so great, that they sent to the Council of the Elders
and the High Priest, praying them to bring the Ark of God with them; to the end
that having it present with them, they might give C. 4. v. 4.
was greater than the Ark, which deserved not to be reverenced but for him. The
Hebrews bring the Ark into the battle.
The Ark was brought, and the Sons of Eli attended it, whom their Father
expressly commanded, that if it fell out that the Ark was taken, they should
never more come into his presence. Now Phinces executed the office of the High
Priest by the permission of his Father, by reason he was very aged.

The Hebrews upon the arrival of the Ark conceived great hope that they should
have the upper hand of their Enemies. v. 5. ad 11.
The Philistines likewise were dismayed, fearing the presence of the same: v.
11. 12. etc.
but the event was not answerable to the one or to the others expectation.
Ophni and Phinees with thirty thousand are slain, and the Ark is surprised by
the Enemy.
For when they joined battle, the victory which the Hebrews hoped Philistines;
and the loss which the Philistines feared, fell upon the Hebrews, who at last
perceived that they had reposed their confidence on the Arc in vain. For as
soon as their Enemies gave them the first charge, they turned their backs, and
lost about thirty thousand men, amongst whom were the two Sons of the High
Priest; and the Ark was taken and carried away by the Enemy.

The year of the World, 2871. before Christ's Nativity, 1093.

Eli understanding the loss of his Sons, fell from his Seat, and dyed.
AS soon as the news of this overthrow was brought to Silo, 1 Samuel 4. 13, ad 18.
and it was certainly known that the Ark was taken, Eli understands of the
loss of his sons, and the surprizal of the Ark.
(for a young Benjamite, who had escaped out of the Battle, came to bring
tidings thereof) all the City was filled with sorrow: and Eli the High Priest
(who sat in one of the gates on a high Throne) understanding the lamentation,
and judging that some disaster had befallen his People, sent to seek out this
young Ver. 18.
(and those adversities which are foreseen, do less afflict us when they
happen:) But when he knew that the Ark was taken, Eli hearing of the loss of
the Ark, dyed.
and in the Enemies hands, a Calamity so beyond his expectation, in such sort
augmented his grief, that he suffered himself to fall from his Throne upon the
ground, where he dyed: he lived 98 years in all, and spent 40 of them in the
Government of the People.

The same day dyed the Wife of Phinees the Son of Eli, soon after she
understood the misfortune of her Husband: Ver. 19, 20, 21.
for she was with Child when the message of his death was brought to her,
Phinees wi^e bare Ichabod, and dyed.
and she was delivered of a Son in the seventh month, which lived and Ichabod,
(which signifies ignominy) by reason of the Infamy received at that time by
the Army.

Eli was the first that governed among the Successors of Ithamar, one of the
Sons of Aaron: The genealogy and progeny of Eli the High Priest.
for before that time the house of Eleazar was possessed of the Priesthood,
(the Son receiving it from his Father) Eleazar left it to Phinees; after him,
Abiezer his Son enjoyed the place, and left it to his Son Boci, whose Son
called Ozes received it; after whom Eli (of whom we speak at this present) took
the same, whose Posterity retained that dignity till the time of the Reign of
Solomon, when the Posterity of Eleazar were restored to it.

The Sixth Book of the Antiquities of the JEWS; The year of the World, 2850.
before Christ's Nativity, 1114.

Written by FLAVIVS JOSEPHVS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Sixth Book.
1. How the Philistines, compelled by Pestilence and Famine, sent the Ark of
God back again unto the Hebrews. 2. The Victory of the Hebrews under the
Conduct of Samuel. 3. How Samuel, when his strength failed him through age,
committed the administration of 4. How the People being offended with the
manners of Samuels Sons, required a King that might rule over them. 5. Saul by
Gods Commandment anointed King. 6. Saul's Victory against the Ammonites. 7. The
Philistines assailing the Hebrews, are over come by them in Battle. 8. The
Victory of Saul against the Amalekites. 9. Samuel translateth the Royal Dignity
unto David. 10. The Expedition of the Philistines against the Hebrews. 11.
David's single Fight with Goliath, and the slaughter of the Philistines that
followed. 12. Saul admiring David's fortitude, gives him his Daughter in
marriage. 13. How the King sought David's death. 14. How David oftentimes hardly
escaped the Kings malice; yet having him twice in his power, he would not hurt
him. 15. The Hebrews are overcome in a great Battle by the Philistines, wherein
Saul the King, and his Sons fighting valiantly, are slain.


CHAP. I.
How the Philistines, compelled by Pestilence and Famine, sent back the Ark of
the
AFter the Philistines had got the Victory over the Hebrews, 1 Samuel 5. 1, ad 6.
and taken the sacred Ark, Hedio and Ruffi^us, cap. 1.
(as we have before declared) they brought it, with their other spoils, to the
City of Azot, and placed it in manner of a Trophee in the Temple of Dagon their
Idol. The sacred Ark is carried into the Temple of Dagon.
But the next day after, when early in the Morning they entered into the Temple
to adore their god, they found him fallen from that Base or Pillar that
sustained him, and lying along the ground, his face upward, They of Azot are
horribly plagued for taking away the Ark.
before the Ark; whereat being much moved, they took him up, and fastened him
in his former place: and when they came often thither, and always found him
prostrate, Mice devour the fruit of the Country of Azot.
At length, a grievous Plague not only ranged in the City of Azot, but also
seized on all the Inhabitants of the Country. For the People being suddenly
taken with the Flux, dyed in great Torment, and some of them vomited up their
Bowels being corrupted and corroded with the disease. Besides this, the whole
Land swarmed with Mice, which destroying all things, neither spared the Corn,
nor any other Fruit. The Azotians being afflicted with these Calamities, and
unable longer to endure the same, understood that the Ark was the cause
thereof, and that neither the Victory, or the taking of the same, had any ways
procured their advantage. They therefore sent to the Ascalonites, desiring them
to receive the Ark into their City; who willingly condescending Azotians had
suffered. For together with the Ark the calamities also were transported; for
which cause it was likewise sent from this place to another, where it remained
but a little while; for the Inhabitants of the place being afflicted with the
same Maladies which the other endured, sent it to the Neighbor Cities: and
after this sort the Ark was conveyed to five Cities of the Philistines,
(exacting as it were, by those Plagues, a Tribute of every one in punishment of
the Sacrilege which they committed, by retaining a thing consecrated to God.
At last, wearied with so many evils, and made examples unto others not to
entertain the Ark, which so grievously recompensed those that received the
same, 1 Samuel 5. 2, a^ finem.
they conceived there was no other way left, Geth, Accaron, Ascalon, Gaza, and
Azot* were assembled, they consulted Consultation about the Ark.
denying that those evils were to be imputed to the Captivity of the Ark,
(whose power, if it were so great as they imagined, or if God had any care of
the same, he would never have permitted it to have fallen into the hands of Men
of a contrary Religion) and persuading them to bear these Misfortunes with an
equrl mind; and to account all these Calamities as effects of Nature, which at
certain periods of times is wont to produce in Men's Bodies, in the Earth, and
in Plants, and in other things Hebrews, and traveled toward their Country,
then they should assure themselves that the Ark was the cause of their evils;
The conclusion of the counsel as touching the sacred Ark.
but if they drew another way, let them (said they) be driven back again, being
most assured, that the Ark has no such virtue in it. This counsel was approved
by every one of the Assembly, and presently executed: having prepared all
things, they brought the Chariot into a high way that looked three ways, and
leaving it there, returned back again.

CHAP. II.

NOW when the Kine took the way which led to the Israelites, 1 Samuel 6. 12, ad
18.
and Traveled therein no otherwise than if some Men had led them, the
Governors of the Philistines followed them, The sacred Ark comes to Bethsama.
desirous to understand whither they went, and in what place they would rest.
There is a Borough in the Tribe of Juda called Bethsama, toward which they
drew: And although they had a very fair Plain before them, yet would they not
Travel any further, The gratulation of the Bethsamites upon the arrival of the
Ark.
but rested the Chariot in that place. The Inhabitants came to the spectacle,
and greatly rejoiced thereat: for although it was Summertime, (wherein every
one was busied in gathering the fruits of the field) yet when they perceived
the Ark, Philistines saw, they returned back into their own Country to carry
the News. But Gods indignation and displeasure was kindled against the
Bethsamites: Ver. 16.
so that 70 of them were slain, because they had dared to touch the Ark,
Ruffinus writes, that God struck 70 of the greatest, and 50000 of the common
sort, as it is, 1 Samuel 6. 21.
and with profane hands (not being Priests) attempted to sustain it. The
Inhabitants lamented their loss, and mourned, for that their Countrymen were
extinguished by no common death, but by a punishment and plague sent Hebrews,
to let them understand that they had recovered the Ark out of the hands of the
Philistines. Whereupon order was given to place the same in Cariathiarim, The
Ark is transferred into Cariathiarim.
a City bordering upon the Bethsamites. In that place there dwelt a Man of the
Race of the Levites, called Aminadab, (who had the honor and reputation of a
good Man) to his House the Ark was sent, as to a place agreeable to God,
because there dwelt in the same a Man of so much virtue. Hedio and Ruffinus,
cap. 2.
His Sons had the charge of the Ark, and continued in that service for the
space of 20 years, The punishment of the Israelites.
during which time it remained in Cariathiarim, after it had remained only four
months with the Philistines. Whilst the Ark was in the City of Cariathiarim,
the Israelites lived very Religiously, and offered to God Prayers and
Sacrifices, showing great devotion and forwardness in his service. 1 Samuel 7. 3,
ad 6.
The Prophet Samuel perceiving this their good demeanor, and supposing it a fit
occasion to exhort them to liberty, and the benefits which attend the same; The
year of the World, 2851. before Christ's Nativity, 1113.
he accommodated his Speech to their Sentiments, and spoke to them Ye men of
Israel, since at this present the Philistines cease not to molest you, and God
begins to show himself merciful and favorable to you: it behooves you, not
only to be touched with a desire of recovering your liberty, but also to
endeavor to recover the same in effect. Hedio and Ruffin. cap. 2.
Beware therefore, lest through the corruption of your own manners, you make
your selves unworthy thereof; and let each one of you endeavor to follow
justice, and expelling all sin out of your minds, The punishment of the
Israelites, 1 Samuel 7. 3, ad 6.
convert your selves in all purity to God, and persevere constantly in his
service. For in doing these things, you shall shortly obtain all felicity, and
especially a new liberty, and an assured victory against your Enemies; which
neither by valor, or by the strength of your bodies, or by the multitude of
your Armies, Samuels oration to the people*
you were able to obtain: for God has not proposed Rewards for these things,
but for virtue and justice; and (trust me) he will not deceive your
expectation, Samuels exhortation to the people as touching their repentance.
nor fail in the execution of his promises. When he had spoken after this
manner, all the People testified their consent, by acclamations, showing the
pleasure they conceived by this discourse, and promising to do that which
should be well-pleasing to God. Whereupon Samuel assembled them the second time
in the City of Maspha (which word signifies conspicuous) there they erected an
Altar, and sacrificed unto God; and after they had fasted for a days space,
they made public Prayers to God. The Philistines being advertised of this
Assembly, came suddenly with a great Army, and many Forces, intending to
surprise the Hebrews, who neither expected nor were prepared for them. This
sudden approach of theirs much dismayed the Hebrews: so that running to Samuel,
they told him that their hearts failed them through fear, The prayers,
supplications and fasts of the Israelites in Maspha.
and their minds were troubled Philistines are encamped near us, v. 8. 9,
and ready to surprise us, naked and disarmed: we have no other hope therefore
of security, What things in warfare are to be opposed against the-Enemy.
but what proceeds from thee, and unless God, moved by thy prayers, give us
means to escape their hands. Samuel, in way of answer, wished them to be of
good cheer, assuring them, that God would give them some testimony of his
assistance: whereupon sacrificing a sucking Lamb in the name of the People, he
prayed God that it would please him to stretch forth his right hand for them in
the Battle against the Philistines, Samuel comforted the people, v. 10.
and that he would not permit them to fall this second v. 11, 12, etc.
being well-pleased with their offering, and promising them victory. Samuels
sacrifice and prayer.
Before the Sacrifice was wholly consumed with the flame, and the Ceremonies
performed, the Enemies ranged their Battles in the Israelites sight, supposing
the day already theirs, The sacrifice devoured by celestial flame a token of
Gods assistance.
in that they had surprised the Jews unprepared for fight (as being assembled
in that place to no such end.) But the matter fell out contrary to what they
expected; and had they been foretold the same, they would have scarcely
believed it. For first by an effect of Gods Omnipotence, the Earth trembled
under their feet, so that they could scarce stand, v. 10*
and some were suddenly swallowed up by the Earthquake, A horrible earthquake
among the Enemies.
and a great Thunder was accompanied with such scorching Lightnings, that their
eyes being Samuels victory over the Enemy.
and so were constrained to repose all their hope and confidence in flight. But
Samuel seeing them thus dismayed, suddenly set upon them, and killing many of
them, ceased not to pursue the rest as far as a place called Corre, where he
erected a stone for a Trophee, or mark both of his own Victory, and the Enemies
flight, and called the same the strong Rock, to testify that the People had
received from God all the strength which they had used in this famous Battle.
The Philistines, after they had received this overthrow, sallied not out any
more against the Israelites; but remembering their fear, and the strange
accidents that befell them, they remained in peace, offering no further
invasion: for the confidence which the Philistines had before that time
conceived against the Hebrews, was Hebrews ever after this Victory. Samuel
continued the War against them, v. 14.
and slew a great number of them, and for ever abased their pride, taking from
them that Country which formerly by Conquest they had cut off from the
inheritance of the Jews; Samuel recovereth those Lands which the Israelites had
lost.
which Country extends from the Frontier of Geth, to the City of Accaron:
and the rest of the Canaanites at that time had peace with the Israelites.

The year of the World, 2871. before Christ's Nativity, 1093.

Samuel unable, by reason of his old age, any longer to Govern the State,
commits it to the administration of his Sons.
NOw when the Prophet Samuel had reduced the people to a good form of
Government, Samuel prescribes laws, and disposes the judgment seat in several
Cities.
he assigned them a City whither they might appeal, and decide those
differences that fell out amongst them: and he traveled twice every year from
City to City, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 3.
to administer justice unto them, and continued this policy for a long time.
But when he found himself overburdened with years, and unapt to execute his
ordinary 1 Samuel 8. 1, 2.
surrendered the Government and Superintendency of the people to his Sons, the
elder of whom was called Joel, Samuel commits the Government and care of the
commonwealth to his two Sons.
and the younger Abiha; and he commanded that one of them should make his seat
of justice in Bethel, and the other reside at Bersheba, dividing the people,
and attributing each part to its particular Judge. Now it became manifest, by
experience, that Children are not always like their Fathers; but sometimes of
evil Parents there are good Children bred; Joel and Abia.
as contrariwise at this time, of a good Father there were evil Sons. For
forsaking the instructions of their Father, they followed a quite contrary
course, and perverted justice with corruptions and rewards and surfeited in
delights and pleasures; in contempt of the will of God, and the instructions of
their Father, who had no greater care, than that they should acquit themselves
well of

CHAP. IV.
How the people, being displeased with the manners and government of the Sons
of Samuel, demanded a King.
WHen therefore the people saw, v. 4, 5, 6.
that the Sons of the Prophet committed so many outrages against their Laws,
The Israelites report unto Samuel the le^wd behavior of his Sons, and beseech
him to nominate a King that may reign over them.
and Policy, they were greatly displeased, and had recourse to their Father who
dwelt in the City of Kamatha; where relating to him the misdemeanors of his
Sons, they desired him that seeing his age rendered him unfit Philistines for
their many injuries. This demanded of the people, sensibly afflicted Samuels
mind: for he extremely loved justice, and liked not Kingly government, being of
opinion that Aristocracy was the happiest of all governments. Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 1.
This matter so troubled him that, v. 6.
by reason of his care, he could neither eat nor sleep; but all night long he
tossed and tumbled in his bed, Samuel is discomforted through the peoples
demand.
through the great agitation of his mind. Whilst this his indisposition
continued, God appeared to him, and comforted him, bidding him not to be
grieved at what the people had required: that this injury, not only concerned
him, but God himself whom they disclaimed for their King and Governor. That
this was not v. 7, 8.
that they had inclined to it from the day that they departed out of Egypt;
Samuel ^ comforted by God.
But ere it be long (said he) they shall repent themselves, but too late, when
the evil is past remedy; and they shall condemn themselves for their
ingratitude toward me, their God, and toward thee their Prophet. I will
therefore that thou choose them a King, him that I shall nominate to thee, after
thou have advertised them what evils they shall endure by their having a King,
and what inconveniences follow the change which so vehemently and unhappily
they pursue. The next day Samuel assembled the people about break of day, and
promised them that he would establish them a King. God commands Samuel to
create a King.
But says he, before I effect that which you request, I must declare to you
what condition you shall live in, under subjection to royalty; and v. 10* ad 18.
by those Kings that shall Govern you. Samuel expresses unto the Israelites
those inconveniences they should suffer under a King.
Know therefore first of all, that your Kings will take your Children from you,
and make some of them Coachmen, and others Horsemen and Archers of their Guard,
others their Posts and Tribunes and Centurions; some likewise their Handicrafts
men, and Armorers, and Chariot-makers, and Smiths, and Forgers of Weapons, and
Husbandmen of his fields, and Ploughers and diggers of his Vineyards: neither
is there any thing which they shall not be compelled to do after the manner of
bondslaves, that are bought with money. They shall take your Daughters also,
and make them their Perfumers, Cooks and Bakers; and they shall employ them in
all servile offices, wherein bond-maids are employed, either by fear or
punishment. They shall take from you your substance, and give it to their
Eunuchs and other Servants. They shall take your flocks, and distribute them
amongst their Domestics: In a word, you and all yours shall be subject not
only to one King, but also to his Servants. When you endure these things, then
shall you call to remembrance what I have foretold you, and with repentance
beseech God, The year of the World, 2880. before Christ's Nativity, 1804.
that he will have mercy on you, and give you speedy deliverance from the
servitude of your Kings: but he will not respect your prayers, but neglecting
them, will suffer you to bear the penalty of your imprudence and ingratitude.
Although these future inconveniences were foretold them, yet did the people
neglect them: and not suffering the perverse opinion they had conceived in
their minds, to be altered or diverted, they insisted with all obstinacy, v. 19.
and without care of future mischiefs, that they might have a King created over
them, The people obstinately persevereth in craving a King.
because (as they said) it was necessary to have a King that might manage War
for them, to revenge them on their Enemies, and repress their Forces; and that
there was nothing more reasonable, than that they should be governed in the
same sort as their Neighbors were. Samuel finding his persuasions could
prevail nothing at all with them, and that they could not be diverted from
their resolution. He spoke thus: Go your ways for this time every one of you to
your houses, and I will cause you to be assembled in a short time, when God
shall have informed me what King he will give you.

CHAP. V.
Saul, by the command of God, is declared King.
THere was a man of the Tribe of Benjamin, 1. Sam. 9. v. 1. ad 3.
of Noble Birth, and commendable manners, called Cis, who had a young Son named
Saul, who was tall of stature, and had so much spirit and courage that he might
well pass for an extroardinary man. This Cis having fair Asses, wherein for
their handsomness he took more pleasure than Saul having traveled in quest of
them through all his Fathers Tribe, journeyed through the rest of the Tribes,
without any tidings of them: for which cause he determined to return home
again; for fear lest his Father should conceive some care and grief for him in
his absence. v. 3.
As he arrived near the City of Ramath, the Servant that followed him, Saul
seeks the Asses that were lost.
told him, that there dwelt a Prophet in that place, who always foretold the
truth, and he counseled him to address to him, with assurance, that by him he
should understand what was become of his Asses. Saul answered, that he had no
money left to recompense the Prophet, having consumed all they brought forth
with them in their v. 6* ad 10.
of whom Saul demanded where the Prophet dwelt? they told him, Saul asks
where the Prophet dwells.
and advised him to make haste before he was set down to supper, for at that
time he entertained diverse persons at his house. Samuel had invited this
company, by reason that all the day long he had instantly besought God, to
declare to him, who it was that should be established King: and God had given
him to understand, that the next day, and at the same hour, v. 15, 16, 17.
he would send a young man to him of the Tribe of Benjamin, who was the person
he had chosen. God certifieth Samuel whom he should create King.
Thus Samuel sat in the upper part of his house, Saul. At that very instant
God signified to Samuel, that it was he whom he had elected Prince and
Governor over the people.

Saul addressing himself to Samuel, desired him to show him the Prophets
lodging, being he was a stranger, v. 18, 19.
and knew it not. Samuel told him, that he himself was the man, and invited him
to the banquet; Saul comes unto Samuel* Samuel certifieth Saul how he shall
enjoy the Kingdom.
assuring him that not only his Asses (in search of which he had traveled so
long) were safe, but that he should reign, and abound with all sort of goods.
Saul answered: My Lord I am too mean to hope or expect so much; and my Tribe is
the least of all the Tribes: and you mock me, in speaking such things as
surpass my condition. v. 23, 24.
The Prophet took him by the hand, and brought Samuel conducteth Saul unto the
banquet.
and placed him above all those that were invited, who were to the number of
seventy, and he placed his Servant next him. Samuel commanded that a royal
portion should be set before Saul; and when the hour of bedtime came, all the
rest arose and departed to their houses, but Saul and his Servant lodged that
night with the Prophet: and as soon as it was day, Samuel awaked Saul, and
leading him out of Town, commanded him to send his Servant before, and to
remain himself with him behind, because he had certain things to impart to him
in private. Hereupon Saul sent away his Servant, and Samuel taking a Cruse of
Oil, powered the same upon the young man's head, and embracing him, said, God
establishes thee King over his people, 1 Samuel 10. 1
to avenge them of the Philistines. Thou shall have this sign Samuel (...).
when thou art departed from hence, thou shall overtake three men in the way
traveling to Bethel, to adore and sacrifice to God: the first of Rachel, where
thou shall meet a Messenger, that shall certify thee that the Asses are found.
From thence coming unto Gabatha, thou shall find the Prophets assembled in
their Congregation, v. 2. ad 1.
and being filled with the Spirit of God, thou shall prophecy amongst them: so
that whosoever shall behold thee, Samuel, in way of confirmation tells Saul
what shall befortune him in his journey.
shall say with admiration: Whence comes it to pass that the Son of Cis has
attained so good fortune? and when thou have had these signs, thou can no
longer doubt that God is with thee: go and salute thy Father, and thy kinsmen,
and then come back to me at Galgal to the end we may offer sacrifices of Samuel
having in this manner spoken to Saul, gave him license to depart: and all these
things happened to Saul, according as the Prophet Samuel had foretold him. When
Saul arrived at the house of his Father, Abner, who was his Uncle, and whom he
loved above all the rest of his Friends, questioned with him about his voyage,
and those things that had happened to him: and Saul hid nothing from him, but
particularly informed him of all that happened to him, during his abode with the
Prophet Samuel, and how he had told him of the recovery of his Asses: but
touching the Royalty, and those things that concerned the same, he said
nothing, fearing that either it would not be believed, Saul concealed his Royal
dignity.
or else it would draw envy upon him. For although he were both his friend and
cousin; yet he thought it more secure and convenient to The inconstancy of man's
love.
considering the infirmity of man's nature, and that few men are constant in
friendship, and capable of beholding without envy, the prosperity of others,
even their near relations and friends, though they know that the same befalls
them by the particular favor of God. Samuels oration to the people as
concerning Saul.


After this, Samuel assembled the people in the City of Maspha, where he spoke
to them in this manner: Behold what God has commanded me to tell you in his
name. When you groaned under the yoke of the Egyptians, I freed you from
servitude, and delivered you from the tyranny of the Neighboring Kings who
conquered you so often; Now in acknowledgment of so many benefits, you will
have me no longer for your King; and as if you were ignorant, that the greatest
good that can happen to men, is to be governed by him that is the sovereign
good; You abandon your God to set a man upon the throne; who, according to his
pleasure and the unbridled bent of his passion, will use you like beasts, and
will usurp upon your goods, without forbearing any thing whatsoever. For how
can men have as great love for men, as I, whose handy work they are.
Notwithstanding since you have thus determined, and fear not to commit so great
an outrage against God, rank your selves in order according to your Tribes and
Families, and cast your lots. To this the people condescended, and the lot fell
on the Tribe of Benjamin; v. 19.
being cast the second time, it fell on the Family of Metri; Lots cast through
every Tribe and Family.
and afterward being cast upon the men of that family, it fell upon Saul, who
was the Son of Cis. The young man, who before knew what would happen, had stepped
aside, to the end that it might not seem that he was ambitious of his dignity.
The Saul not only was void of vain appearance (although he were to be King and
Lord of so many worthy people) but which is more, v. 21.
he stole away from the presence of those men over whom he was to command,
Saul's modesty and temperance in undertaking the Government.
and obliged them to seek after him, and labor to find him out. Whilst
therefore they carefully sought and knew not what was become of Saul, the
Prophet prayed God that he would show them where he was, and bring him into
their presence: which having obtained, he sent out certain messengers to
conduct him thither, v. 22.
and as soon as he came amongst them, Saul hides himself from the presence of
the people.
Samuel placed him in the midst of the people. Now he was taller than any of
the company by the shoulders, v. 23.
God has given you this man to be your King, behold how he surpasses you all,
and shows himself worthy to be your Prince. Saul of a high stature.
But as soon as the people had cried, God save the King; v. 24.
the Prophet, who had reduced into writing all those mischiefs that should
befall them, Saul saluted by the people for their King.
read the same to them in the hearing of the King, and put the book into the
Tabernacle of God, for a perpetual testimony to posterity of those things which
in future ages should succeed, v. 26, 27.
according as he had prophesied: which done, Samuel dismissed the people, and
returned to the City of Ramath, Diverse attend on Saul, othersome contemn him.
which was his Country. But Saul departing to Gabatha, diverse worthy men gave
their attendance on him, and paid him the honor that appertained to a King.
But diverse seditious and loose companions, who set him at naught, Hedio and
Ruffinus chap. 5.
and those things which he did, neither brought they any presents unto Saul, 1 Samuel 11. ^, ad 4.
nor seemed either in affection, or in word, to respect their King. A month
after this installment, there fell a War betwixt him and Nahas King of the
Ammonites, which brought him great reputation. This Nahas had offered diverse
outrages to those Jews that dwell on the other side of Jordan. For he had
passed the River with a great Army levied against them; and had taken diverse of
their Cities. And to the intent they might not revolt to deliver themselves
from his subjection, he used this subtilty and prevention. To all that
surrendered themselves to his mercy, or that were taken Captives in the wars, he
plucked, out their right eyes; and this he did, to the end that when they would
defend themselves, they might have their left eyes covered with their Bucklers,
and by that means unable to use their Armor. Saul's War against the Ammonites.
The King of the Ammonites having after this manner dealt with those on the
other side of Jordan, he led his Army against the Galaadites, and encamped near
their chief City called Jabehs, 1 Samuel 11. 3, 4, 5, 6.
to which he sent Heralds to summon the inhabitants to surrender on these
conditions: either to suffer their right eyes Nahas King of the Ammonites
offers unjust conditions of peace to the Galaadites.
or hazard both their Fortunes and lives together. The Galaadites, terrified
with this dreadful election, knew not what to resolve upon, but asked truce for
seven days, to the end that sending their messengers to those of their Nation,
they might crave their aid, which if they could obtain, they would War;
otherwise they promised to submit themselves unto the enemy, on what conditions
were best pleasing unto him. The Ambassadors of the Galaadites to the
Israelites.
Nahas made no difficulty to grant them what they demanded so much he contemned
the Israelites: and he permitted them likewise to crave assistance at all their
hands, who were their associates. Whereupon they presently sent messengers
Israelites of all that Nahas had done unto them, and the extremity whereunto
they were reduced. The Israelites understanding in what estate they of Jabesh
were, greatly lamented their condition; but their fear suffered them to assist
their friends in no other manner than by commiseration. Yet as soon as their
messengers arrived in the City where Saul was, and that they had recounted to
him the dangers wherewith the Jabesites were oppressed; the people were also
moved with unprofitable compassion. But Saul at his returning from the field
into the City, perceiving the inhabitants drowned in tears, and enquiring for
what cause they were so dejected, he no sooner understood it, but he was
stirred up by the Spirit of God, and sent the Ambassadors back again to those
that sent them, promising that within three v. 7, 8, 9.
and that he would have the upper hand of the enemy before Sunrise, Saul
promises assistance to the Jabesites.
to the end that the rising Sun might behold them victorious, and delivered
from all fear. In the mean time he commanded some of them to stay with him, to
the intent they might guide him in the way.

CHAP. VI.
The Combat and Victory of Saul over the Ammonites.
SAul desirous, Saul's serious exhortations and command for War.
by the fear of punishment, to incite the people to take arms immediately, and
make War upon the Ammonites, cut the hams of his own oxen, and threatened
Jordan, to follow the King and the Prophet Samuel, whither they would conduct
them.

The fear of this penalty published among the Tribes, made them gather to a
body about the same time, so that all the parties of the people were mustred in
the City of Bala. In this survey, besides those of the Tribe of Juda, were
numbered seven hundred thousand men, and of the Tribe of Juda in particular, 1 Samuel 11* v. 11, 12.
there were seventy thousand. Saul having passed Jordan, and marched all night,
came before Sunrise to the place where he intended to conduct them, Ten
Sh^oeni or Cables length of Nilus so called by the cords that draw the Ships by
Nilus* make 37 Italian miles.
and dividing his Army into three parts, he attaqued the enemy on every side,
who suspected no such encounter: and fighting valiantly against them, he Nahas
King of the Ammonites. This victory made Saul's name famous amongst the Hebrews,
so that he was wonderfully praised and honored for his valor: and if before
any contemned him, now they changed their opinions, and honored him, and
accounted him the worthiest of them all. For he was not satisfied to redeem and
deliver those of Jabe^s, Saul kills the Ammonite, and Naahs their King.
but he entered the Country of the Ammonites also, and ravaged the same with
his Army; and after he had obtained a great booty, both he and his Army
Victoriously returned to their dwelling places. The people highly pleased with
this noble action achieved by Saul, Saul made his name famous amongst the
Hebrews.
rejoiced that they had demanded a King, and exclaimed against those that said
it would be discommodious and unprofitable for the Commonwealth, saying, where
are now these murmurers? let them be put Saul is praised by the people.
with other such like words, that a people besotted with good success, is wont
to speak against them that oppose the same. Saul commended the affection of The
year of the World, 2810. before Christ's Nativity, 1084.
but swore that none should be put to death that day, because it would not seem
agreeable, that the victory given them by God* should be sullied with the blood
of their Brethren; but rather that it was more proper the time should be spent
in feasting and jolity. After this Samuel told them, that they ought to confirm
the Kingdom of Saul by a second Election, Saul's lenity against his adversaries.
and to that end, they assembled together in the City of Galgal, according as
he commanded them: and there, in the sight of all the people, Samuel anointed
Saul the second time with the consecrated Oil, v. 12, 13.
and proclaimed him King. Thus was the Aristocracy and Government of the better
sort amongst the Hebrews, v. 14, 15.
turned into a Monarchy. For under Moses and his successor Joshua, Saul once
more anointed King by Samuel.
who was General of the Army, the form of the Commonwealths was Aristocratical.
After their death, for the space of eighteen The distinct Governments of the
Hebrews.
the people was without Government. The Commonwealth not long after resumed
its first form of Government; and the supreme authority was given to him that
was esteemed the most valiant in War, and the most upright in doing Justice.
During which time such Magistrates were called Judges.

After this the Prophet Samuel assembled the people, and spoke to them after
this manner: 1 Samuel 12. 3, 4.
I conjure you by that great God that sent those two admirable Brothers Moses
and Aaron to deliver our forefathers from the Egyptians, Samuels justification
of himself in the presence the people.
and their tyranny, that without any consideration either of fear or favor, or
of any other passion, you truly testify whether I have committed any injustice
either for interest, avarice, or affection. Declare it, If I have taken away
any man's Calf, or sheep, ar any other thing whatsoever, but that which I might
lawfully take for All of them cried out with one voice that no such fault had
been committed by him, but that he had Governed their Nation in Holiness and
Justice. After the people had thus publicky testified in behalf of Samuel; he
said unto them: Since you have freely protested, that you have no cause of
wrong to charge against me, v. 7. ad 16.
hear I pray you, wherewith I can justly accuse you: Samuel expostulateth with
the people, and objecteth their sins, and ingratitude.
You have griveously offended against the Majesty of God, in that you have
required a King at his hands: you should have rather remembered, that your old
Father Jacob accompanied only with his 70 Sons came into Egypt, constrained
thereunto by famine, and Egyptians kept in captivity, doing them extreme
outrages. And when your fathers called upon God, he wonderfully delivered them
from the distresses wherein they were, without giving them any King, but
sending them two Brothers, Moses and Aaron; who brought and conducted them into
this Country which you possess at this present. And although you participated
these benefits from the hands of God, yet you forget his religion, and
neglected piety. This notwithstanding, at such time as you have been conquered
by your enemies, he has set you free; assisting you, first of all, with the
overthrow of the Assyrians and their forces; then giving you victory over the
Ammonites, and Moabites; and finally over the Philistines. Now these great
exploits were performed by you, not under the conduct of a King, but by the
direction of Jephta Gedeon. What folly therefore has bewitched you to fly
from God, and to seek to live under the subjection of a King? But I have named
such an one unto you, Whom God has chosen to be your Governor.
Notwithstanding, to the intent that I may give you a manifest testimony, that
Gods wrath is provoked against you, because you have desired a King; I will
desire of God, that he will make you see in this place, and in the heart of
Summer such a storm, that there is not any one of you, that has ever seen the
like. Scarce had he spoken the words, but suddenly there appeared great
Lightning, Thunder and Hail, in confirmation of what the Prophet had said: v.
16, 17, 18.
so that amazed and confounded with fear, A huge tempest falls, upon Samuels
prayer.
all of them confessed that they had offended, and desired the Prophet, that
with a good and fatherly affection, he would beseech God to appease his wrath
toward them, and forgive them this offense which they had committed through
ignorance, as he had pardoned their other negligences, whereby they had
transgressed his holy will. All which Samuel promised them do to, and be sought
God that it would please him to pardon them the error which they had committed
in this matter, and to be appeased by his prayers. After this he exhorted them
to live uprightly, and to keep in continual remembrance what evils had happened
unto them, v. 20. ad finem.
for that they had forsaken the way of virtue; and what wonders God had done,
An exhortation to the consideration of Gods assistance and benefits bestowed on
the Israelites*
and what Laws he had given by Moses, all which they ought to meditate on, if
they desired to be in safety, and live happily with their King. But if they
failed herein, he foretold them, that both themselves and their Kings should be
grievously punished. Samuel having prophesied these things to the Hebrews,
dismissed them to their own dwellings, after he had confirmed the Kingdom to
Saul the second time.

CHAP. VII. The year of the World, 2880. before Christ's Nativity, 1084.

The Philistines, assailing the Hebrews, are overcome in Battle.
BUT when the King had Mustered his Men, 1 Samuel 13. 1, ad 4.
and chosen out 3000 of the best Soldiers, he appointed 2000 of them for the
guard of his Person, and with them went and dwelt at Bethel. Hedio and
Ruffinus, cap. 6.
The rest he gave in chrge to his Son Jonathan, and sent them to Gaba, Saul
elected 2000 for his own guard and 1000 for Jonathans.
to attend and guard him there; who, followed by them, valiantly overcame a
Garrison of the Philistines near to Gebal. For the Philistines of Gaba having
gotten a Victory over them, had taken their Arms from them, and seized and
fortified both with Men and Munition the strongest Cities of their Country;
prohibiting them to bear Arms, and Saul overcomes the Philistines.
by reason of which Inhibition, if their Husbandmen had at anytime need of any
Iron work, as of Plough-shares, Mattocks, or any such other Instrument fit for
manuring or tillage of their Lands, they were enforced to seek it, and get it
forged amongst the Philistines.

Now when the Philistines understood that their Garrison was defeated, Ver. 5.
they were extremely moved, The Philistines prepare to invade the Israelites.
and conceiving that the injury and outrage was not to be suffered, they armed
themselves against the Jews, and marched out embattelled with 300000 Footmen,
30000 Chariots, and 6000 Horse, encamping with their whole Host near the City
of Machmas. Which when Saul the King of the Hebrews understood, he marched
toward the City of Gilgal: and as he Traveled through the Country, he animated
and encouraged Philistines; whose Forces he so little feared, that he mocked
thereat, saying, That they deserved not to be feared for their multitudes, nor
any danger which might accrue by an Encounter with them. But when Saul's
Soldiers were certified of the true number of their Enemies, Ver. 6, 7, 8.
they were dismayed, The Israelites dismayed at the report of the Army of the
Philistines.
so that some of them hid themselves in Dens and places under the earth, others
fled on the other side of Jordan, into the Country of the Gadites and
Reubenites. But Saul sent for the Prophet, to consult with him about the War;
who gave him answer, that he should attend in the same place where he was, and
prepare Beasts for Sacrifice, because that within seven days he would come to
him, and sacrifice on the seventh day: Ver. 9, 10.
which done, he might encounter the Enemy. According to this direction of the
Saul sacrifices contrary to God and the Prophets direction.
yet observed not entirely all that Samuel had enjoined him. For when he
perceived that he was somewhat slack in coming, and that his Soldiers left him,
he took the Beasts that were prepared for the Sacrifice, and offered a
Burnt-offering: but afterward understanding that Samuel was arrived, he went
out to meet him, and do him honor. Samuel accuses Saul.
Samuel told him that he had done amiss, by reason that neglecting that which
was commanded him, Ver. 11, 12.
he had presumed before his arrival, to offer the Sacrifices which were to be
made to God for the People. Saul excused himself, alleging, That he had stayed
during the term of 7 days which were appointed him: but that necessity, and the
departure of his Soldiers, upon intelligence that the enemies Army had left
Machmas, and was coming to Gilgal, had induced him to offer Sacrifice. Samuel
replied, saying, Thou Hedio and Ruffinus.
and Saul with 600 Soldiers (only accompanied with his Son Jonathan) came to
the City of Gabeon. The greater part of these Men were disarmed, by reason that
the Country was destitute of Iron, and Workmen expert in forging Armor: for
the Philistines permitted them not to have any, Gilgal.
as we have declared a little before. Ver. 22, 23.
The Philistines dividing their Army into three Battles, invaded the Country
of the Hebrews so many ways, The Philistines spoil the Country of the Hebrews.
destroying and ravaging all things in the sight of King Saul, and his Son,
Achias the High Priest, sat down upon a Hillock, 1 Samuel 14. 1, ad 4.
and seeing the Country spoiled round about them, they were much dismayed. But
Saul's Son proposed to his Armor-bearer, to enter secretly into the Enemies
Camp, Jonathan with his Harness-bearer, do privily enter the Enemies Camps.
and raise an Uproar and Alarm in the same; who willingly promising and
offering him his service to adventure with him in all occasions and places,
with the hazard of his life: they both of them descended from the Mountain, and
marched directly toward the Enemies Camp, who had pitched their Tents on a
high pointed Rock, which extended it self in length with three angles, and was
each way begirt with a Bank, as it were a Wall and Fortification against the
incursion of their Enemies. For Jonathan encouraged his Companion, to assail
the Enemy after this manner. If (says he) they epsy us, and will us to
ascend, let us take this Summons of theirs for an assured token that our design
shall succeed: but if they hold their peace, and call us not, let us return
back again.

As they approached the Enemies Host, about break of day, the Philistines said
one to another, Ver. 11, 12.
the Hebrews creep out of their Caves and Dens; then cried they out to Jonathan
and his Armor-bearer, saying, Come hither, come hither to us, to receive the
punishment of your audacious enterprise. Jonathan heard these words with joy,
as a certain presage that God favored his enterprise, and parted with his
Armor-bearer from the place where they were first discovered; answering them
that he would shortly visit them. So withdrawing Ver. 12, 13, 14, 15.
and overcoming the difficulty of the place with great labor, at last they came
where the Enemy was, Jonathan slays a certain number in the enemies camp, the
rest invade one another, and are put to flight.
whom they found asleep, and assailing them, slew 20 of them, and filled the
whole Army with terror and amazement: so that casting away their Weapons, they
fled with all speed: and some being ignorant which were their Friends or Foes,
invaded one another as Enemies. For imagining with themselves, that only two
Hebrews durst never enter their Camp, they conceived there was Treachery among
themselves, and so fell to slaughter one another: so that some of them were
slain, others fled to escape the Sword, and fell headlong down the Rocks. But
when the Kings Spies told him what confusion and disorder was happened in the
Camp of the Philistines, Saul demanded whether any of his Company were absent?
and hearing that his Son and his Armor-bearer were missing, he desired the High
Priest to attire himself with the Ephod, that so he might learn of God what was
to happen. He did so, and assured him that he should obtain the Victory over
his Enemies. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 7.
Whereupon Saul sallied out, and assaulted the Philistines, Ver. 20, ad 26.
whilst they were thus confused and disordered, and fighting one against
another. Saul hearing that there was a tumult in the Philistines camp, fallieth
out upon them.
To him there flocked in great multitudes, such as before were fled into dens,
and places under ground, as soon as they heard that the Victory inclined on
Saul's side: so that gathering together to the number of 10000 Hebrews, he
pursued his scattered Enemies through all the Country. But afterward, a great
inconvenience happened unto Saul, proceeding from the joy he had conceived by
this Victory, (for commonly Philistines, he published an Imprecation or Curse,
against any one whomsoever, that intermitting the pursuit, should take
sustenance before Night, purposing to continue the same till dark Night. Ver.
27, ad 30.
This Execration thus published by Saul, it chanced that his Son, who had not
heard of it, Saul's Edict unwittingly broken by Jonathan.
nor the general allowance of the same by the People, entering into a certain
Grove belonging to the Tribe of Ephraim, wherein were many swarms of Bees, by
chance light upon a Honeycomb, and pressing the Honey, did eat the same.
Afterward having intelligence that his Father had under a grievous penalty of
Execration, forbidden Philistines, about Evening they began to ransack and
spoil the Camp of the Philistines, and they carried away great spoils, and a
number of Cattle, part of which were slain and eaten with the blood, Ver. 32.
contrary to the Law. Which when the Scribes had signified to the King, The
Hebrews feed on bloody flesh.
how, the People had offended against God, by slaughtering the Beasts, and
eating the flesh of them, before it was either washed or purified from the
blood; Saul commanded that a great stone should be rolled into the midst of the
Camp, and that the People Saul erected an Altar in that place, on which he
offered a Burnt-sacrifice to God. This was the first Altar that he erected. But
Saul being desirous incontinently to assail the Enemies Camp, and sack all that
was therein before day, whilst his Men of War diligently followed him, and
showed great forwardness in the execution of his command; the King asked
counsel of the High Priest Achilob, Ver. 37, 38.
whether God would give him the victory, and permit those that should enter the
Enemies Camp, to return from thence Conquerors. The High Priest told him, that
God returned him no answer: which when he understood, Ver. 41, 42.
It is not without some great cause, said he, that God is thus silent, who
heretofore was wont to give a (...) answer what we ought to do: Saul tries by
lot, who has displeased God.
but there must needs be some hidden sin amongst us, that giving offense to
him, causes him to be silent. But I swear by the same God, that although mine
own son Jonathan should have committed that sin, I will to appease God, with no
less severity punish him, than any the least stranger that is neither by
alliance nor affinity tied unto me. Now when the People cried out, and
encouraged him to the performance of what he had spoken, he presently assembled
them in one place, and standing with his Son apart, began by casting lots to
find out him that was faulty. When the lot fell upon Jonathan, Ver. 44.
he asked him what Crime he had committed? Jonathan answered, I know no other
thing, Saul intends to kill his own son, being prepared and resolute to dye.
but that yesterday, being in pursuit of the Enemy, and ignorant of thine
Edict, I tasted of an Honeycomb; whereupon Saul swore that he would put him to
death, rather than violate his Oath, the observation of which he preferred
before his own blood, and all the sentiments of nature. He nothing astonished
at his present danger, with a generous and dreadless mind, presented himself
with this Reply: O Father, (said he) I entreat no favor at thy hands: for I
willingly submit to that death, which may discharge thee of thy vow, Ver. 45,
46.
the more contentedly, because I have seen so famous a victory: for I shall dye
contented, The Israelites rescue Jonathan from his displeased Father.
to see the insolence of the Philistines overmastered by the power of the
Hebrews. This valor and courage of the young man, moved the whole multitude to
remorse and commiseration; so that they all swore that they would not suffer
Jonathan, who was the Author of so famous a victory, to be put to death: so
they rescued the young man out of the hands of his displeased Father, and
prayed to God to pardon him the fault which he had committed. Saul, after he
had slain about 6000 of his Enemies, returned with victory to his own house,
Oba or Soba.
and Reigned afterward very happily, and overcame the Ammonites, Philistines,
Moabites, Idumeans, Amalekites, and King Zoba. He had three sons, Jonathan,
Joshua, and Melchi, and two Daughters, Merob and Michol. The Abner the son of
his Uncle called Near; for Near and Cis Saul's Father, were Brothers, and Sons
of Abiel. He was very strong both in Horse and Chariots; and against whatsoever
Enemy he marched forth, he always returned with victory: Ver. 47.
so that he reduced the affairs of the Hebrews to a happy state, and so much
increased their power, Saul always Conqueror.
that they were feared by all those Nations that neighboured upon them. But the
chiefest of the youth, that excelled either in strength or beauty, he chose to
be of his Guard.

CHAP. VIII.
Saul's victory over the Amalekites.
BUT Samuel coming to Saul, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 8.
told him that he was sent to him by God, to admonish him how he had chosen him
above the rest, and preferred him to the Kingdom: and for that cause that it
behooved him to be obedient unto him in all things, 1 Samuel 15. ^, ^, 3.
because as he Ruled the People, so God Rules both Kings, Kingdoms, and all
things. Thus therefore (said he) does God command thee. Since the Amalekites
offered many injuries unto the Hebrews in the Desert, whilst in their
departure out of Egypt, they Traveled into that Region which they now inhabit;
Samuel by Gods commandment, addresseth Saul to make War upon the Amalekites.
justice requires that they be punished for that inhumanity. Wherefore I give
thee order to declare War against them, and after Moses commanded, root out the
name of the Amalekites from off the earth. All these things did Saul promise to
perform, and conceiving that obedience consisted in the speedy execution of
that which was enjoined him, he presently assembled all his Forces together,
and mustering his Soldiers at Gilgal, he found about 40000, Ver. 4.
besides the Tribe of Juda, which of it self afforded 30000 Men: with these did
Saul enter the Country of the Amalekites, Saul mustering his people, finds
in the Tribe of Juda only 30000 men.
and laid diverse Ambushes near Amalekites, and besieged and took some of them
by Engines, others by Mines and Countermures raised on the outside, Ver. 5, 6.
others by famine, and want of water, and diverse other ways. Saul razeth the
Cities of the Amalekites.
And in those Cities which he overcame, he neither spared Women nor Children,
not supposing their slaughter to be cruel, or inhumane: both for that they were
his Enemies, and for that he did nothing but according to Gods commandment,
toward whom disobedience would be a Crime. He took (...) Prisoner also, who
was Amalekites, whose beauty and personage seemed unto him so goodly, that he
thought him worthy to be kept alive, and so being led rather by his own
inclination, The year of the World, 2883, before Christ's Nativity. 1081.
he used such clemency as was not lawful for him at that time: For God so hated
the Amalekites, that he would not have their Infants spared, though they ought
in natural compassion to have been more pitied than the rest. But Saul kept
alive the King of his Enemies, and the Author of all the Hebrews evils,
regarding more his beauty, than Gods commandment. This sin of his the People
presently imitated: for they spared Horses, Ver. 7 8.
and other kind of Cattle, and made prey of them, notwithstanding God had
charged them to reserve nothing. Saul takes Agag the King of the Amalekites
prisoner, and keeps him alive contrary to Gods Commandment.
They carried away with them all other Movables and Riches, and only consumed
those things which were of smallest value, by fire. This victory had Saul over
those People that dwell betwixt Polusium, (a City on the borders of Egypt) and
the Red Sea. But he meddled not with the Sichemites, which Midian, whom, before
the Battle, he commanded to retire themselves, lest they should partake the
Calamities of the Amalekites: for being they were allied to them by Raguel,
Moses Father-in-law, the Hebrews had care of their safety. Saul having obtained
this victory, Ver. 9.
and rejoicing at his good success, returned home, as full of content, The
People, contrary to that which God had ordained, drive away the horse and
cattle of the Amalekites.
as if he had pretermitted nothing of that which God had commanded him by the
Prophet Samuel, before his War with the Amalekites; but had precisely observed
all that was enjoined him. But God was greatly displeased, both that the King
of the Amalekites was preserved, and that the People had made prey of their
Cattle: for both these actions of theirs were expressly against Gods command.
For it was not to be tolerated, even by a mortal King, that they should neglect
and contemn his Laws and Samuel, that he repented that he had made Saul their
King, considering that he infringed his Commandments, and governed himself
according to his own will. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 9.
When Samuel heard these words, he was much troubled, and prayed to God all
Night, that he would appease his wrath and displeasure conceived against Saul:
Ver. 10. ad 24.
but notwithstanding all the importunities and prayers which the Prophet made
for him, God displeased with Saul's disobedience, Samuel striveth to reconcile
Saul unto God.
God would in no sort be reconciled, because he judged it not just, that the
sins which were committed by Saul, should be remitted by Samuels intercession.
For sin never more augmenteth, than when such as are offended, are too remiss
in their punishments: for whilst they would be reputed both for good and
merciful, they themselves Too much indulgence and lenity confirms the wicked
in their ungodliness.
Samuel repaired to Saul, who at that time remained in Gilgal. As soon as the
King saw him, he run unto him, and embraced him, saying, I give God thanks for
the victory; and all those things which he commanded me, I have performed. But
Samuel answered, How comes it then to pass, that I hear this bleeting of
Sheep, and bellowing of Beasts throughout the Army? Saul replied, That the
People had reserved that Cattle for Sacrifice; but all the Nation of the
Amalekites was exterminated, as God had commanded, and none remaining but only
the King, whom he would cause to be presented before him, to the end they might
consult together what should be done with him. Ver. 17, etc.
Hereunto the Prophet answered, That God took no pleasure in Sacrifices, Samuel
chideth Saul.
but in those men that are good and just, and such (said he) are they, that
obey his Will and Commandment; since no action may be reputed good, but in
respect of the reference it has to Gods Will: for God refuses not him that
sacrifices not, but him that disobeyeth him. Ver. 22.
For he accepts not those Sacrifices that are offered to him, by those that
submit not themselves unto him, The contempt of God, wherein it consists.
and offer not unto him the true and acceptable offerings; yea, though they
present diverse and many great Sacrifices, and bring him jewels of gold and
silver; but he rejects such things, and respects them not as pledges of
piety but effects of hypocrisy: But he takes pleasure in those only that
observe that which he has commanded, A pleasing and acceptable sacrifice unto
God.
and had rather dye, than infringe the same, not seeking that Sacrifices should
be offered unto him; but if they be offered, although of small and no value,
yet are they more acceptable unto him in poverty and obedience, Ver. 23.
than all those which the richest hand, or strongest fortune can afford. Know
thou therefore, Samuel tells Saul of Gods displeasure, and the loss of his
kingdom.
(said he) that thou have incurred Gods displeasure, in that thou have
contemned and neglected his Commandments: for how can thou think that he will
regard those Sacrifices with a gracious eye, which he himself has adjudged to
utter perdition and ruin? Is it possible for thee to think that there is no
difference between destroying and sacrificing? Be assured therefore of the loss
of thy kingdom and power, Ver. 24.
which has in such sort transported thee, that thou have contemned God, Saul
confesses his sin, and craveth pardon: which notwithstanding is denied him.
who bestowed the same upon thee. Saul confessed that he had sinned, and done
amiss, in that he had not obeyed the words of the Prophet; yet alleged, That
he was compelled to do the same, in that he durst not restrain the Soldier, who
was set upon the prey: but (said he) be favorable, and merciful unto me, for
hereafter I will take heed, lest I fall into the like sin* and he entreated him
that he would stay with him a little, and offer a Peace Offering in his behalf.
But the Prophet knowing that God would be moved by no Sacrifice, would not be
persuaded by him.

CHAP. IX.
Samuel proclaims David King.
BUT Saul, Ver. 27, 28.
willing to retain Samuel, took hold of his Garment; and for that the Prophet
hastily withdrew himself, Saul striving to stay Samuel, renteth his garment.
he tore away a part thereof: whereupon the Prophet told him, That in like
manner his Kingdom should be rent from him, and another who was more honest and
upright, should take possession thereof: for God is not like men, he is
unchangeable in his determinations. Saul answered, That he had grievously
sinned; but being it was impossible for him to recall that which was past, he
desired him that at least he Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 10.
which Samuel condescended to, and went with him to adore God. After this, Agag
the King of the Amalekites was brought before Samuel, Ver. 32.
who heard him lament, The King of the Amalekites is slain by Samuels command.
and complain that death was very bitter; to which he answered in this manner,
As thou have caused diverse Mothers amongst the Hebrews, to weep and lament the
loss of their Children; so shall thy death cause thy Mother to weep and lament:
which said, he presently commanded that he should be put to death in Gilgal, 1 Samuel 16. 1; etc.
and returned back again to the City of Ramath. But the King perceiving into
how many mischiefs he had fallen by his offenses committed against God, God
sends Samuel to Bethlehem to anoint David King.
departed to his chief City called Gaba, (which name signifies a Hillock) and
from that day forwards, he never more saw the Prophet Samuel, who was heartily
sorry for his Bethlehem, to the house of Jesse the Son of Obed, and there
anoint that of his Sons for King, whom he should show him: and when the Prophet
said that he was afraid, lest Saul getting notice thereof, should seek to slay
him, God commanded him to fear nothing: whereupon being encouraged in his
attempt, he came to the forenamed Town, where he was saluted with great
concourse of People, who enquired of him, to what intent he came thither? and
he answered them, that he came to offer Sacrifice to God. Now when the
Oblations were performed, he invited Jesse and his Sons to banquet with him;
and beholding the eldest of them to be a goodly and well proportioned Man, he
conjectured by his stature and comeliness, that it was Ver. 7, 8, ad 11.
whom he thought so worthy of the Kingdom: God respects not the beauties of
the body, but the perfections of the mind.
it was answered him, That God judges not in such manner as men do. For thou
(said he) beholding the beauty of the young man, supposest him worthy of the
Kingdom: but I dispose not of a Crown by the beauties of the Body, but by the
virtues of the Soul; and him I consider that is perfectly furnished herewith,
and has his mind beautified with piety, justice, obedienee and fortitude. Upon
these words, Samuel desired Jesse to bring all hss other Sons into his
presence, and he presented to him five others, the eldest being called Eliab,
Jesses sons being goodly in personage, were not to be preferred to the
sovereignty.
the second Aminadab, the third Sala, the fourth Nathaneel, the fifth Rael, the
sixth Asam. Now when the Prophet beheld these no less beautiful Men than the
eldest, he Samuel enquired of Jesse, whether he had any other Sons besides
them? who told him, that he had one called David, who had the care and custody
of his Flocks. The Prophet desired him to send for him, saying, that it was
reasonable he should have a part as well as his Brothers in the Feast. Now when
David was come, Samuel seeing him fair of complexion, quick-ey'd, and of a
martial aspect, This is he (said he softly to his Father) who is elected by God
to be our King. Ver. 12, 13.
This said, he sat down at the Table, Samuel anointeth David King.
and made the young man sit next him, and above Jesse his Father, and his other
Brethren. Afterward taking the Cruet of oil in the presence of David, he
anointed him, and told him in his ear, That God had chosen him to be King, and
exhorted Ver. 14, 15, ad 20.
his Kingdom should be of long continuance, his family and stock famous and
renowned, and that he should overcome the Philistines, and conquer those
Nations against whom he should fight, Gods Spirit forsaking Saul descends on
David, who begins to prophecy.
and obtain glorious Renown in his lifetime, and leave an immortal Memory
behind him. Samuel having made this Exhortation, departed; and the Spirit of
God abandoned Saul, and entered into David, so that he began to prophecy:
whereas on the other side, Saul was tormented with strange passions of the evil
spirit, whereby he fell into strange suffocations, so that his Physicians could
not find any remedy for him, but gave counsel that search should be made for a
Man expert in singing and playing on the Harp, to the end that when the evil
spirit should assault Bethlehem a son of Jesse, a young man of excellent
feature; and besides his other good qualities, very cunning both in Song, and
playing on the Harp: and also dextrous enough, fit to serve in War. He
therefore sent Messengers to Jesse, to take David from the Fold, and send him
to him, because that having heard report of his beauty and valor, he was
desirous to see him. Ver. 21.
This command of his Jesse obeyed, and sent his son with Presents to Saul the
King, Saul makes David one of his Pensioners or Guard.
who greatly rejoiced upon his arrival, and made him his Pensioner, and favored
him in all things. For he was delighted by him, and David was his only
Physician against the vexation of evil spirits, when they seized him: for by
singing Psalms to his Harp, he restored the King to his right mind. So the King
requested Jesse that he Jesse condescended.

CHAP. X.
A second Expedition of the Philistines against the Hebrews.
NOt long after, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 11.
the Philistines gathered together great companies of men of War, with which
they assailed the Israelites, 1 Samuel 1^. ^ etc.
and encamped between Succoth and Azeca. Saul on the other side led forth his
Army against them, Another expedition of the Philistines against the Hebrews.
and encamping upon a certain Mountain, Philistines to dislodge from their
first Camp, and entrench themselves upon another Mountain right over against
that where he had pitched his Tents. The Camps being thus separated the one
from the other, there was a Valley between both the Armies: Ver. 4. ad 15.
into this there descended a certain Giant called Goliath, Goliath a Man of
prodigious stature amongst the Philistines.
who was of Gath, of huge stature, being four Cubits and a span in height,
having his Limbs covered with huge and mighty Armor; for his Cuirass which he
bare on his back, weighed five thousand Sicles; his Helmet and Pouldrons were
of Brass, made fit to cover his massy Members; the Spear which he bare in his
hand, Goliath challenges a single Combat at the Hebrews hands.
was no light Lance, but he bare it on his shoulder, and the Head thereof
weighed six hundred Sicles. This Giant, followed by a great Troop, presented
himself in this Equipage in the Valley that separated the two Armies, Saul and
the Hebrews in these terms, Hebrews, what need you hazard the doubtful fortune
of a Battle? Single me (...) an Adversary, and let us determine by our two
fates, on whose side the victory and conquest shall fall; which soever of us
shall be overcome, let his Party be obliged to receive Law from that of the
Victor. For it is better that a single person, than the whole Army be exposed
to danger. When he had spoken thus, he returned back to his own Camp. The next
day he came forth again, and used the same words; and thus for forty days he
ceased not to defy the Hebrews in such words: so that both Saul and all his
Army were displeased, and kept themselves always ready and ranged in Battle,
Ver. 25.
yet came not to blows. David was not then in the Camp, Saul sends David back
again to his Father.
because Saul had sent him back again to Jesse his Father, (contenting David
discoursed with his Brothers touching those things which his Father had
committed to his charge, Goliath came after his usual manner, but more insolent
than ever, and reproacht the Israelites, Ver. 26.
that none amongst them had the courage no fight with him. David was herewith
so greatly moved, David desires to fight with Goliath.
that turning himself to his Brothers, he told them that he was ready to fight
hand to hand against that Enemy. But Eliah the elder Brother reproved him for
so speaking, telling him that he was more hardy than became his age, and David
out of respect to his Brother, departed from thence, and meeting with certain
Soldiers, said unto them, That he feared not to encounter that proud
Challenger: which they presently signified unto Saul, who incontinently sent to
seek him out. When he came into his presence, Saul asked him, Whether he had
spoken after that manner? David answered, That he had, and that he feared not
that Philistine, though he appeared so terrible; and that if the King would
permit him, he would abate the pride of this Giant: and how terrible and fierce
soever he appeared, he would subdue him, and turn his terror to contempt; and
so much the more should the glory of his Army be enhaunced, that so great and
expert a Man at Arms, should be subdued by a young unexperienced Soldier. Saul
admired That he was too feeble to encounter a Man so expert in fea^^ of Arms.
David answered, That which I promise you (my Sovereign) is upon the assurance
that I have in God, which heretofore I have proved, by the succor which I have
received at his hands. For whilst I fed my Fathers Flocks, I rescued a Lamb
that was ravished out of my Fold, out of a Lions jaws; and catching the wild
Beast by the tail, that with open mouth assaulted and sought to devour me, I
beat him to the ground, and slew him. With no less success I slew a Bear that
set upon my Flock; and I do not believe that this Philistine is more terrible
than Lions or Bears. But that which gives me most assurance, is, that I cannot
but think that his slanderous railings both against God, Ver. 34, 35, 36.
and Men, David redeemed a Lamb from the jaws of a Lion, and slew him.
cannot longer escape the Divine arm of Justice which he so wickedly provokes.
And for these Reasons, I dare assure my self that he will assist me, to tame
his pride, and to overcome him.

So much prevailed this extraordinary hardiness of the young Man, that the King
imploring David killed a Bear.
furnished him with his own Armor, a Sword and a Helmet, Ver. 38, 39, 40.
and sent him forth to the Combat. But David feeling the weight of his Armor,
David laying aside those Arms wherewith he was furnished, to fight with
Goliath, marches forward with his sling against the Enemy.
and finding himself rather laden, than advantaged by it, said to the King,
These Arms, Sir, are proper for your Majesty, who are able to make so good use
of them, but not for me; wherefore I beseech you to leave me at liberty, to
fight as I please. Saul granted his desire; and he putting off his Armor, took
a staff in his hand, and five stones, which he gathered on the bank of the
Torrent, and put into his Scrip, his sling he bore in his right hand: and being
thus armed, he marched forward to encounter his Enemy. When the Barbarian saw
him thus furnished, he so much contemned him, that in way of scorn, he asked
him, Ver. 41, ad 47.
Whether he thought him a Dog, that he thus came forth to fight with him only
with stones? David drawing near his Enemy, is contemned.
Nay (said David) I esteem thee worser than a Dog. These words so incensed
Goliath, that he swore by his God, That he would tear his Carcass in a thousand
pieces, and give them to the Beasts of the Field, David's talk with Goliath
before the Combat.
and the Birds of the Air. But David answered, Thou come against me with thy
Sword, thy Javelin, and Cuiress; but I march out against thee, trusting in the
power of God, who will destroy thee by my hand, and with thee thy whole Army;
for this day will I take thy head from thy shoulders, and cast the rest of thy
body to the Dogs, whom, by thy rage, thou resemblest; and all Men shall know
that God protects the Hebrews, that his Providence conducts them, that his help
renders them invincible, and that no strength nor arms can keep them from
perishing, whom he abandons. The weight of the Philistines arms hindered him
from marching readily: so that he walked step by step toward David, contemning
him, and trusting to kill him easily, both for that he was disarmed,

CHAP. XI.
The single Combat betwixt David and Goliath, and the slaughter of the
Philistines that followed it.
DAvid advanced boldly against Goliath, being assisted in an invisible manner
by God; and drawing one of the stones out of his Scrip, Ver. 49, 50, 51.
and fitting it to his Sling, David's victory against Goliath.
he threw it against Goliath, which gave him such a stroke on the Forehead,
that it pierced him to the very Brain, The Philistines fly, and are
discomfited.
so that he fell down suddenly dead; and David running upon Philistines: for
seeing the most esteemed Warrior amongst them overthrown and slain, they began
to fear the issue of their Battle, and resolved to fly; which they did in
great disorder and confusion, hoping by that means to deliver themselves out of
danger. Ver. 52, 53.
But Saul, and the whole Army of the Hebrews, pursued them, with great shouts
and cries; 30000 of the Philistines slain.
and in the pursuit, made a great slaughter of them, and drove them to the
borders of Gath, and even to the gates of Ascalon. In this Battle, there dyed
on the Philistines side, above Thirty thousand, and the hurt and wounded were
Saul returning back to the Camp, pillaged and burnt their Tents; but David bore
Goliaths head to his Pavilion, 1 Samuel 18. 6, ad 9.
and hung his Sword in the Tabernacle, and consecrated the same to God. But
Saul afterward conceived a secret hatred against David, upon this occasion:
Saul privily hates David.
As he returned triumphant like a Conqueror with his Army, the Women and
Maidens singing and dancing to their Cymbals and Tymbrels, in way of honor,
Saul from one of his chief Nobles, makes David a tribune, to the end that
being often drawn out by the enemy* he might be slain.
came out to meet him: the Women sung, that Saul had slain thousands of the
Philistines; and the Virgins answered, that David had slain Ten thousands:
which when Saul understood, and saw that barely thousands were ascribed to him,
and Ten thousands to David, he thought that after so glorious Acclamations,
there wanted nothing to David, but the name of King. For which cause he began
to fear and suspect him: and by David's honor; to the intent that being often
engaged in encounters with the Enemy he might perish by some disaster or
other. But David, having in all places the assistance of Almighty God, returned
always with good success: so that his extraordinary Valor acquired him an
universal esteem, and Michol, Saul's Daughter, that was about that time
marriageable, Ver. 17, ad 26.
began to be enamored with him, that she could not hide her passion even from
the King her Father. Saul's daughter in love with David.
Saul, instead of being displeased, rejoiced at it, hoping by that means the
sooner to entrap David. He gave ear thereto with some show of allowance, Saul
subtly objecteth David to slaughter, under a colorable condition of
slaughtering the Philistines
and told them who spoke of it to him, that he would willingly give him his
Daughter to Wife; for he reasoned thus with himself: I will propose that I will
give him my Philistines heads; and I am certain that being valiant and generous
as he is, he will with joy accept this condition, because the more dangerous it
is, the more glory it will acquire to him; and so exposing himself to all
manner of dangers, he will be slain by the hands of the Philistines; Ver. 27,
etc.
and that intention which I have conceived against him, shall succeed according
to mine own hearts desire: Saul, under covenant of 60^ Philistines heads,
promises David his daughter.
for I shall be delivered of him, in sending him out of the world, not by my
means, but by other men's hands. Having taken this resolution, he charged his
Courtiers to sound David's sentiments, and how he stood affected to the
marriage: and they told him, That the King bare him great kindness, and so
rejoiced that the People admired him, that he would give him in marriage the
Princess his Daughter. David Think you it a small matter to be Son-in-law to
the King? for my self, I esteem otherwise, considering mine own base condition,
who have neither reputation, nor any honorable quality. When Saul's servants
had reported to him what answer David made them, Tell him (said he) that I
value not Goods or Presents, (for that were to expose my Daughter to sale, and
not to match her with an Husband.) I seek a Son-in-law that has Valor, and
that is adorned with all Virtue, such as is manifest and apparent in thee: and
my desire is, that for the dowry of my Daughter, thou give me neither gold nor
silver, nor any other wealth out of thy Fathers house; but that thou make War
upon the Philistines, and six hundred of their heads, shall be the most
acceptable dower thou can present me with. My Daughter also desires, above
all the dowers, to be married to a Man that is so ennobled and famous for the
overthrow of the Enemies of her Father and her Country.

When these words were reported to David, he was very joyful, thinking that
Saul acted sincerely concerning this alliance: and without delay, or taking
counsel or deliberation, whether the thing were easy or impossible for him to
execute, he incontinently departed with his company to find out the Enemy, and
execute the condition upon which the marriage was promised him; God assisted
David in this occasion, as in all others. And after he had slain a great number
of them, and cut off six hundred of their Heads, he returned, and presented
them to the King; and in consideration thereof, desired the performance of his
promise.

CHAP. XII.
Saul admiring David's fortitude, gives him his Daughter to Wife.
BUT Saul, 1 Samuel 18. 27, etc.
that could not fly from his promise, (because it would be a great dishonor
to him to fail of his word, and to have promised his Daughter under color,
Saul marries Michol to David.
either to murder him, or to put him upon the execution of things that were
impossible) delivered his Daughter Michol unto him. Nevertheless he changed not
his purpose. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 12.
For perceiving that David was gracious in Gods sight, and in good reputation
among the People, Saul resolves to kill David.
he was afraid of him: and being unable to conceal his fear of being David;
Jonathan loves David, and shows him his fathers determination, and
counsels him to have care of his safety, and stand on his guard.
giving Commission to his Son Jonathan, and diverse other of his Servants, to
execute the same. But Jonathan amazed to see this change in his Father, who, in
stead of the good liking he had of David in times past, sought to injure him*
not in any slight sort, but by taking away his life: and on the other side,
being singularly affected toward him, and respecting his virtue, he
communicated the secret intention of his Father to him, counselling him to have
a care of himself, and to fly the next morning; in the mean while he would go
and salute his Father, and as soon as occasion presented it self, he would
confer with him, to know the cause of his displeasure against him, to the
intent he might pacify the same; conceiving it a matter unreasonable, that he
should be (said he) what my Fathers resolution is. David gave credit to his
wholesome counsel, and retired from the presence of the King.

CHAP. XIII.
How the King practiced to murder David.
THE next morning Jonathan came to Saul, and finding him well disposed, began
to speak to him to this effect, ^ Sam. 19. 3, ad 6.
concerning David: Of what fault, (O Father) either great or small, Jonathan
reckons up unto his father the good deserts of David, praying him to pacify
his displeasure conceived against him.
have you found David guilty, that you have commanded him to be put to death? A
Man that has done you such signal service; that has revenged you upon the
Philistines, abated their Pride, and advanced the Honor of the People of the
Hebrews, and has delivered them from that disgrace and contempt under which
they have layen for the space of Forty years, being the only person that dared
to oppose himself against the proud defiances of that Giant, whom he so
gloriously overcame; and who since that time has brought as many of the
Philistines heads as were demanded of him, in recompense whereof he has taken
my sister to Wife. Be pleased to consider that his death would be a great grief
to us, not only upon account Ver. 7.
and the revenging you of your Enemies. For it is a thing unworthy either your
Majesty, Jonathan certifieth David how he has pacified his father.
or the name of a Man, to forget good deserts. With these words was Saul
pacified, so that he swore to his Son he would do no hurt to David: for his
just persuasions and arguments were stronger, than the choler and fear of the
King. Jonathan sent to seek out David, and told him these good tidings from his
Father, and brought him to him; and David continued to serve him as formerly.


How hardly David escaped the ambushes that were often laid for him by the
King; yet having him twice at advantage and in his power, would not murder him
ABout the same time, v. 8, 9.
the Philistines again led forth their Army against the Hebrews, David has a
great victory against the Philistines.
and Saul sent David against them accompanied with his forces; who encountering
them, slew a great number of them, and returned to the King with a great
Victory. But Saul entertained him not, as he hoped, and as the happy exploit
achieved by him merited; but he envied his good actions and honorable
deserts, as if David's happy Saul's disadvantage and prejudice. But when the evil
spirit returned to vex him, he lodged him in his own chamber, and having at
that time a javelin in his hand, he commanded him to play on his Harp, and to
Sing Hymns. Now whilst David obeyed his command Saul stretching out his arm,
v. 9, 10.
threw his Dart at him: but David foreseeing it, Saul darteth his javelin at
David.
avoided the stroke, and fled to his own house, where he stayed all the rest of
the day. When night was come, the King sent certain of his Servants to watch
his house lest he should escape, to the end that the next day, being brought
forth to judgment, he might be condemned and put to death. But Michol, David's
Wife, and Saul's Daughter, having intelligence of her Fathers intention, went to
her Husband, told him in how great peril he was, being desirous to save his
life, with the hazard of her Beware (said she) lest the Sun at his rising find
thee in this place; for if it do, I shall never more see thee. Fly therefore
whilst night offers thee opportunity, which I pray to God to lengthen for
thy sake: for be assured, that if thou be surprised in this place, my Father
will make thee die a miserable death. This said, she let him down by a window,
and so saved him; and soon after, she prepared his bed as if he lay sick
therein, and under the covering she laid the Liver of a new slaughtred Kid; and
when her Father sent the next morning to apprehend David, she answered that he
had been sick all the night long: v. 14.
and opening the Curtains, Michol persuadeth the Kings Servants that David is
sick.
she gave them to understand that David was laid therein, the Coverlet being
moved by the Liver which was hot and yet stirred, made them believe that the
Liver that lay there was David, who panted and breathed very Saul, he commanded
that he should be brought to him in that estate wherein he was, because he
resolved to put him to death. But when Saul's messengers returned thither, and
opened the bed, they perceived Michols subtilty, v. 17.
and went and certified the King thereof: who reproved her very sharply, for
that she had saved his Enemy, Michol excuses her self for delivering David.
and deceived her Father. But she excused her self with words full of good
appearance, saying that David had threatened to kill her; and through fear of
death, she was induced to save him. For which cause she ought to be pardoned,
since by constraint, and not ofset purpose, she had furthered his escape. For
(said she) I think that you seek not so greedily after the death of your Enemy,
as to prefer the same before the safety and security of your Daughter. v. 18.
Upon these reasons Saul pardoned his Daughter.

David delivered from this peril, David expresses to Samuel how the King was
affected toward him.
went to the Prophet Samuel at Ramath, and told him what ambushes the King had
laid for him, and how hardly he had escaped death by the stroke of his javelin;
whereas in all things that concerned Saul, he had always showed himself
obedient: having served him advantageously in war upon his Enemies, and by Gods
assistance been fortunate in all things; which was the cause that Saul was so
displeased with him. The Prophet informed of Saul's injustice, departed from
Ramath, and led David to a certain place called Galbaath, where he remained
with him. But as soon as Saul was informed that David was retired, v. 19, 20,
21.
and accompanied with the Prophet, he sent out certain Soldiers to lay hands on
him, Saul sent armed Soldiers to apprehend David, who began to prophecy, and
he himself likewise coming thither prophesies.
and bring him to him. They reparing to Samuel, and finding the congregation of
the Prophets were seized with the Saul understood, he sent out others, with the
like order, and they had the l^ke ecstasy. For which cause he sent out others
and seeing the third company prophecy likewise, he was in the end so enraged,
that he went thither in his own person. And when he drew near the place, Samuel
before he saw him, made him prophecy also; so that he was transported out of
himself, and having dispoiled himself of his raiment, 1 Samuel 20. v. 1. ad 4.
he remained naked all day and night in the presence of Samuel and David. David
departed from thence, and went to Jonathan, to whom he complained of those
ambushes which his Father had laid to entrap him, David complains unto
Jonathan of his Fathers injuries.
telling him, that notwithstanding he had never committed any fault against his
Father, he earnestly pursued him to put him to death. Jonathan persuaded him
not to suspect these things rashly, nor to be overcredulous Jonathan excuses
his Father.
For if he had, he would have told him, being never wont to act any thing
without his counsel. But David swear unto him that it was so, and conjured him
not to doubt of it, but rather to consider how Jonathan, persuaded by David's
reasons, asked him what he desired at his hands, or wherein he might show him
friendship? v. 5. ad 11.
David said unto him I know that thou will further me, in what thou may,
David desired Jonathan to sound his Father how he was affected toward him.
and refuse me in nothing. Now to morrow is the first day of the month, in
which I was accustomed to dine at the Kings Table; if thou think good, I
will depart out of the City into the field where I will lie hid. And if he ask
for me, thou shall say, I am gone into the Country of Bethlehem, where my
Tribe solemnizeth a feast; and thou shall certify him also that thou have
given me leave. And if he Jonathans heart, that he promised him to accomplish
his request and certify him if he any ways could perceive that his Father was
ill affected toward him; and to the intent he might the better be believed, v.
16, 17, 8, 19.
and there swear to him that he would not omit any thing that might tend to his
preservation. For (said he) that God that sees and governs all things in
this universe, Jonathan confirms his friendship toward David, with an oath.
and who, before I speak knows my mind; he, I say, shall bear witness of that
accord which shall be between thee and me, that I will not cease to sound my
Father, till I know his intention concerning thee; and as soon as I understand
the same, I will not conceal it from thee, but give thee notice thereof, be it
good or evil. The same God knows how incessantly I beseech him to be
assistant to thee, as also he is at this present: and that he never abandon
thee, but make thee Lord over thine Enemies, yea, though it were my Father, or
my self. Only remember me in this point, that after my death (If I chance to
die before thee) v. 20. ad 24.
After he had sworn this oath, Jonathan gives David certain signs whereby he
should know whether his Father were displeased with him.
he dismissed David; willing him to conceal himself in a certain place of the
Plain, where people ordinarily exercised themselves: For that as soon as he
understood his Fathers mind, he would return thither with his Page; and if
(says he) having shot three shafts at the mark, I command my Page to fetch
them back again to me, know that thou art to expect no evil from my Father: but
if I do not, think thou that my Father is incensed and ill affected toward
thee; yet howsoever it be, I will do my best, that nothing shall befall thee
otherwise than we expect and wish. Be thou therefore mindful of these things
when thou shall obtain thy happy days, and be favorable to my children. David
being confirmed Jonathans promises, retired to the appointed place. The next day
after, which was the solemnity of the New Mood after the King had purified
himself according to the custom, he sat down to take his repast: and as his
Son Jonathan was set on his right side, and Abner the General of his Army on
the left, Saul perceived David's place void, and spoke not a word, supposing
that he was absent from that company, by reason he was not purified since he
had the company of his Wife: v. 25. ad 30.
but seeing that on the second day of the New Mood he was absent likewise, Saul
questioneth about David's absence.
he asked his Son Jonathan, why David was not present at the feast those two
days? He answered him, that he was gone into his country, Jonathan by his
answer, essayeth to know his Fathers mind.
(according as it had been concluded between them) where his own tribe
celebrated a feast, and that he had given him leave to assist at the same.
Further (said he) he invited Jonathan knew the displeasure his Father had
conceived against David, v. 30.
and perceived most apparently how heinously he was affected: Saul discovers
his heinous hate against David.
for Saul could not conceal his choler, but began to rail upon his Son, calling
him Rebel and Enemy, and companion and confederate with David; and telling him,
that he showed reverence neither to him, nor to his Mother, since he was so
minded: and that he could not believe, v. 28, 29.
that as long as David lived, their Royal estate could be safe: he commanded
him therefore to bring him before him, Jonathan excusing David to his Father,
is almost slain with a javelin by him.
to the end that he might do justice upon him. Jonathan replied, What evil has
David committed, for which he should be punished? Hereupon Saul not only
expressed his choler in words and reproaches, Jonathan clearly discovered the
^^^red of Saul David, and how ardently he sought his ruin, since his
friendship to him had like to to have cost him his own life. Then did Jonathan
withdraw himself from the banquet without eating, seeing with how little profit
he had pleaded: and seeing that David was adjudged to die, he passed all the
night without sleep; and about daybreak he departed out of the City, to the
appointed field, making show that he walked out to take his exercise; v. 33, 34.
but indeed it was to discover to his friend the intent which his Father had,
Jonathan flies from the banquet.
according as it was covenanted between them. After Jonathan had done that
which he promised, and sent back his Page into the City, he came to David, both
to see and speak with him in private. v. 35, 36.
David, as soon as he saw him, cast himself at his feet, Jonathan and David
meet in the field.
calling him the preserver of his life. But Jonathan lifted him up from the
earth, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 13.
lamented their misfortune with tears, and this their separation, which was no
less grievous unto them, v. 41, 42, 43.
than death it self. Finally, since there was no remedy, exhorting one another
to have in perpetual remembrance their faith and friendship, they departed the
one from the other. C. 21. v. 1, 2* ad 6.


David flying from the persecution of Saul, David comes to Naban or Nob, to
Abimelech the High Priest.
retired to the City of Nob, to Abimelech the Priest: who wondered to see him
come alone to him, without either friend or Servant, and desired to know the
cause why he thus wandered without any attendance. David told him, that the King
had sent him about some secret order, which might not be communicated to him,
although he were desirous to know it: and as touching my Servants, v. 7, 8, 9,
10.
that he would give him such things as were necessary for his journey; and some
Arms, David receiving Goliaths sword, flies to Geth, to Achis King of the
Philistines.
either Sword or Javelin. Now in this place was present one of Saul's Servants,
called Doeg, a Syrian by Nation, and the Master of the Kings Mules. The Priest
answered him, that he had no Arms by him, except Goliaths Sword which he
himself had hanged in the Tabernacle, and dedicated to God at such time as he
slew the Philistine. David having gotten it, fled out of the Country of the
Hebrews, and went to Gath, a Country of the Philistines, where Achis was King.
There being known by the Kings Servants, he was discovered to be that David, v.
11, 12, 13.
that had slain so many thousand Philistines. David counterfeits madness, to
escape the fury of Achis.
David fearing to be put to death by him, and to fall into the same danger
which he had escaped Saul, counterfeited himself mad, so that he let the
spittle issue out of his mouth; and he counterfeited in all things so
cunningly, that he made the King of Gath believe that he was frantic. 1. Sam.
22. v. 1, 2.
Whereupon the King was angry with his Servants, that they had brought him a
madman, and commanded them forthwith, to drive him out of his country. Having
in this sort escaped out of the Country of Gath, he went to the Tribe of Juda,
where hiding himself in the Cave of Adullam, he sent to his Brothers to let
them understand that he was there. They came to him with all their relations,
and diverse others, that either were in need, or stood in fear of Saul, resorted
unto him, offering to perform whatsoever he should command them; they amounted
in all to the number of four hundred. David therefore being thus assured, by
the succors v. 3, 4.
dislodged from thence, and went to the King of the Moabites, David repairing
to the Moabites, commits his Father and Mother to his protection.
beseeching him, that he, and those that accompanied him, might remain in that
Country, till such time as he understood what would be the issue of his
affairs. The King vouchsafed him this favor, and treated them very well all
the time they were in his Country. David went not out of it till he received
instructions from the Prophet Samuel to abandon the Desert, and return to the
Tribe of Juda; which he obeyed, and coming to the City of Saron, David comes
to Saron, Saul fears David.
made his abode there. But when Saul understood that David had been seen with a
number of men, he fell into an extraordinary fear and trouble of mind; for
knowing both the conduct and courage of the man, he thought that he would
attempt no action that was not great, and such as might endanger his Kingdom.
Gaba (where he kept his Royal Court, and which stands upon a little Hill called
Arvon) and accompanied with his Guards, v. 7, 8.
and the Officers of his house, he spoke to them from his throne, Saul's oration
to his Captains, friends and estates against David.
after this manner; I cannot believe that you have forgotten the benefits
wherewith I have enriched you, and the honors to which I have advanced you:
But I would know of you, whether you hope or expect greater from the Son of
Jesse? for I am not ignorant of the affection which you bear him, and that my
own Son has inspired the same into you. I know that Jonathan and he are united
without my consent in a very strict alliance; that they have confirmed the same
by oath, and that Jonathan assists David against me with all his power. Yet are
none of you concerned at these things; but in great quiet you expect what will
be the event of them.

Doeg the Syrian, Master of the Kings Mules, rose up and said, That he had seen
David in the City of Nob, whither he went to the High Priest Abimelech, to ask
counsel of him touching his affairs; and that he had received from him such
things as were needful to his journey, Goliaths Sword; and how he was safely
conducted toward the place whither he pretended to go. Hereupon Saul sent for
the High Priest and all his kindred, and spoke thus unto them, What wrong or
displeasure have I done thee, that thou have entertained the Son of Jesse, v. 9.
and given him Victuals and Arms; to him, I say that seeks but the means to
possess himself of my Kingdom? Doeg tells Saul how he saw David in Nob with
Abimelech.
what answer have thou made him touching those demands he propounded to thee,
concerning his future fortunes? can thou be ignorant that he fled from me,
and what hatred he bears against both me and my family? The High Priest denied
none of these things, but freely confessed that he had delivered him such
things as were reported, v. 10, 11, 12, 13.
but not with an intent to gratify David, but the King: for I entertained him
(said he) not as your Enemy, Saul reproves Abimelech for furnishing David with
Victuals and Arms.
but as your faithful Servant, and one of the principal Officers of your Army;
and which is more, as your Son-in-law. For who would have thought, that one
dignified with so much honor by you, should be your Enemy? nay rather, who
would not esteem him for your favorite and nearest friend? And whereas he
asked counsel of me touching Gods will, v. 14.
this is not the first time I have answered him, but I have formerly done it
often. Abimelechs Apology to Saul's accusation of Treason.
And when he said he was sent by you about some speedy and secret business, if
I should have refused him those supplies which he required at my hands, I might
have been judged to have done an injury to your Majesty. Wherefore you ought
not to think evil of me; or that if David at this time has some ill design
against you, v. 15, 16, 17.
that by reason of the courtesy I have showed him, The unjust slaughter of
Abimelech, with his whole Family.
I either favor him or maintain him to your prejudice. Notwithstanding all
these just allegations, Saul could not be induced to believe him: but imagined
that it Abimelech speak in this manner, so that he commanded certain armed men
that were about him, to put both him and all his family to the sword. But when
they excused themselves because it was no less than Sacrilege to violate, by
violent death, Nob the City of the Priests is burnt, and all the inhabitants
slain.
such persons as were consecrated unto God: Saul commanded Doeg the Syrian to
commit the slaughter, who accordingly, with certain other sacrilegious and
impious men, murdered Abimelech and all his Race, who were in number three
hundred thirty and five. Sup. li. 5. ca. 11.
He further sent to Nob the City of the Priests, and put all of them to the
sword, sparing neither woman nor child, and consumed the whole City with fire;
only one Son of Abimelech escaped, 1 King. 2. and 3.
who was called Abiathar. All which came to pass, according as God had foretold
to the High Priest Eli, that, by reason of the transgression

This cruel and detestable act perpetrated by King Saul (in shedding the blood
of all the Sacerdotal Race, v. 18, 19.
without either compassion of Infants, or reverence of old age, A manifest
exemplification of that proverb, Honors change manners.
and his destroying of that City, which God had chosen to be the residence of
the Priests and Prophets) manifestly shows how far the pravity of the mind of
man may proceed. For so long as men are low, and limited by a private estate,
because they neither dare nor can give scope to their wicked inclinations, they
seem good and just, and make show of great love of justice, and of a sense of
pity, Note diligently.
and are persuaded that God is present in all our actions, and discerns all
our cogitations. But no sooner do they attain to Power and Empire, but they lay
aside their former fair semblances; they take upon them as it were a new part,
and another personage, becoming A manifest example whereof appears, in Saul the
Son of Cis: who after the Government of the Nobility and that of the Judges,
having been established the first King of the Hebrews, slew three hundred
Priests and Prophets, only for that he suspected Abimelech; and after he had
slain them, destroyed their City with fire; v. 20. 21.
and as much as in him lay deprived the High Temple of God, of Priests,
Abiathar escaping from Saul's hands, tells David of the slaughter of Abimelech
his Father and of the Priests.
sacred Ministers; and after so hideous a slaughter, neither spared their
Country nor any of their offspring. But Abiathar, Abimelechs Son, who only
escaped of all his family, flying to David, declared to him both the overthrow
of his family, and the death of his Father. David answered him, that he
expected no less than that which happened at such time as he espied Doeg there,
who, as his mind gave him, would not fail to calumniate Abimelech to Saul: yet
he was extremely sorrowful for the misfortune that happened

David understanding that the Philistines made an inroad into the Country of
Ceila, and wasted the same, he determined to assault them, if after the Prophet
had asked counsel of God, he should be by the Oracle animated to it: which
accordingly falling out, he sallied out, accompained by his friends, and set
upon the Philistines, and made a great slaughter of them, and recovered a very
rich prey, and gave safeguard to the Ceilans, till they had safely gathered in
and housed all their Corn and fruit. The rumor of this his exploit was
presently brought to Saul: for this great action was not shut up within the
limits of the place where it was performed, David defends Cilla against the
incursions of the Philistines.
but the renown thereof was dispersed every where, and both the Action and the
Author thereof were highly commended. Saul was very joyful to hear that David
was in Ceila, 1 Samuel 23. 1, 2, 3, ad 7.
Gates, and Bars; whereupon he suddenly gave commandment to his Soldiers to
march against Ceila, v. 7, 8.
and besiege the same, and not to raise the Siege till David were either taken
or slain. Saul seeks to besiege David in Cilla.


But David having intelligence hereof, and advertised by God, that if he stayed
among the Ceilans, v. 9. 10, 11, 12.
they would deliver him into the hands of Saul, took with him his four hundred
men, David admonished by God flies from his danger.
and withdrew himself from the City into the Desert, and encamped on a hill
called Engaddi. Whereof the King being advertized, forbore to send out an Army
against him. From thence David departed into the territories of Ziph, where
Jonathan, v. 13, 14.
Saul's Son, David came with his Army to Caena or Ziphia, where Jonathan comes
unto him, comfort him, and renews his covenant.
met him, and after embraces, exhorted him to be of good courage Hebrews
subject to him; but that such things were not wont to happen, till after
suffering great Travels: and after they had once more renewed the oath of
mutual Amity and Faith between them, for all the time of their lives, calling
God to witness with imprecations against him, that should fail therein;
Jonathan left David somewhat eased in heart, and disburthened of his fear; and
returned to his own home. But the Ziphians to gratify Saul told him, v. 19.
that David was amongst them, and promised to deliver him prisoner into his
hands, The Ziphians certify Saul of David's abode in their Country.
if so be he would come out against him: for if he would seize all the
straights of the Country, it should be impossible for him to fly into David,
and to break over the Forest, promising them that shortly he would follow after
them. Thus did the Governors and Princes of the Ziphians offer themselves to
the King to search out and apprehend him, expressing their affection therein,
not only in outward show, but also with their whole power, laboring what they
might, that surprising him, they might deliver him into the Kings hands. But
their unjust desire had as unfortunate success; (wicked people as they were)
who being to incur no peril by concealing him from pursuit, promised to betray
him into the Kings hands, through adulation and avarice, v. 26.
a man that was both vertous, and wrongfully persecuted David hearing of the
Kings coming, flies to save himself.
For David being informed of their malice, and of the Kings approach, quitted
those narrow straights wherein he then encamped and escaped to a certain Rock
s^ituate in the Desert of Simon. Saul continued to pursue him; and knowing by
the way that he had overcome the straights, he came to the other side of the
Rock, where David had surely been taken, had not the King been revoked by
tidings, which assured him that the Philistines had forcibly entered and spoiled
his Kingdom. v. 27, 28.
For he thought it more conveninet to revenge himself on those his public and
open Enemies, Saul pursues David, and having circumvented him, had taken him,
had not he received news that revoked him.
and to give succor to his Country and people, being ready to be spoiled and
wasted; than out of desire to lay hands on a private Enemy, to betray both his
Country and Subjects to their Swords: and thus was David saved beyond all
expectation, and Engaddi. But after Saul had repelled the Philistines, certain
news was brought him that David was in the straights of Engaddi: whereupon,
presently taking with him three thousand of the choicest men in all his Army,
he led them speedily to the forenamed place and being not far from thence, he
perceived near the high way a deep and large Cave, where David with his four
hundred men were hid, and he descended alone into the Cave to disburthen the
necessities of nature. This was presently discovered by one of David's
followers, who told him, that God had presented him a fit opportunity to
revenge him on his Enemy, 1 Samuel 24, 5.
and counseled him to cut off Saul's head, David cut off the lap of Saul's
Garment.
and to discharge himself thereby of further trouble. But David arising and
finding him out, only cut off the lap of the vesture wherewith Saul was
attired, and presently that it were a wicked deed in him to kill his Lord, whom
God by Election had raised to the estate of Majesty and Empire. For (said he)
although he be unjust toward me, yet ought I not to be injurious toward him
who is my Lord.

But when Saul was gone out of the Cave, David followed him, and cried with a
loud Saul to give him audience. Saul turning back to him, David cast himself
prostrate at his feet according to the custom, and spoke after this manner;
How unworthy is it for thee, O King, that opening thy ears to scandalous
backbiters, and giving trust and credit to vain and loose men, thou suspectest
thy most faithful friends, whom thou rather ought to judge by their sincere
and upright actions? for words may be either false or true, but the mind can be
descovered by no more apparent arguments than by men's actions: as at this
present thou may judge, David upbraideth Saul for his subtilities to seek
his death who was innocent.
whether thou have raishly believed them, that make me guilty before thy
Majesty, of that crime that was never yet so much as in my thought, and who
have so much exasperated thee against me, that day and night thou think on
nothing more than my destruction? See thou not now how vain thy opinion is,
whereby they persuade thee, that I am an Enemy of thy house, and earnestly
desirous of thy death? Or with what eyes think thou does God behold thy
cruelty, who seek the death of him, who having an opportunity offered him to
be revenged on thee, spares thy life; whose life were it in thy hands, were
assuredly lost? For as easily might I have cut off thy head as this lap of thy
garment (and therewithal, in confirmation of his words, he showed it him) yet
did I forbear this just revenge. But God shall bear witness hereof, and shall
condemn him of us two that shall be found the most culpable. Saul amazed to see
how strangely his life had been preserved, and to consider the virtue and
generosity of David, v. 10, ad 17.
began to weep, and David wept also: but Saul said that he had greater cause to
lament than he. Saul acknowledged his malice, and David's innocence, and
requesteth him that when he has obtained the Kingdom, he would be favorable
to his Family.
For, said he, by thy means have I received many benefits, and thou at my hands
have been repayed with infinite Hebrews attends thee. Assure thou me
therefore by an oath, that thou will not exterminate my Race, or remember those
injuries that I have done unto thee, but that sparing my posterity, thou will
keep them under thy protection. David swear to him according as he had
required, and suffered him to return into his Realm, and both he and his
companies retired themselves to the straights of Maspha. About the same time
died Samuel the Prophet, a man who for his merit was in great estimation
amongst the Hebrews; Samuels death and burial.
the testimony of 1 Samuel 25. 1.
with great pomp: and when they had performed his rites, they buried him in
Ramath his Country, and lamented his death many days, not only as a common
loss, but as if each one of them had in particular been allied to him. For he
was a man naturally framed to all justice and Goodness, and for these his
virtues most acceptable to God. He governed the people after the death of Eli
the High Priest, first in his own person, Nabals flocks saved by David v. 6.
for the space of twelve years, and afterward during the Reign of Saul
eighteen years. But in those places where David at that time remained, there
was a certain Ziphian in a Town called Emma, a man very rich, and owner of much
cattle. named Nabal, for he had a Troop of three thousand Sheep, and a Herd of
a thousand David forbid his people to meddle with any of his goods for any
necessity, or pretext whatsoever, because that to violate and take another man's
goods, was a wicked thing, and contrary to Gods commandment. He instructed them
in this sort, imagining with himself, that he gratified a good man, and such an
one as deserved to be in like sort favored: but Nabal was a rude and churlish
person and very mischievous; yet had he a Wife that was good, wise and fair. v.
7. ad 12.


To this Nabal did David send ten of his Servants about the time of his
Sheep-shearing, David's Embassage to Nabal to require relief; and his curr^^^
answer.
both to salute him, and to wish him all sort of prosperity for many years, and
also to desire him, that he would impart to him something for the sustenance of
his company, since his Shepherds could inform him, that having long remained in
the desert, they had David, he should bestow it on a mindful and thankful
personage. Thus spoke the Messengers to Nabal: but he answered them very
discourteously, and rudely, demanding of them what that David was? and being
informed that he was the Son of Jesse: what (said he) a fugitive, who hids
himself, for fear of falling into his Masters hands, is become audacious and
imperious? v. 13, ad 17.


David, David ^allieth out against Nabal with 400 Armed men.
was grievously displeased at these words, and commanded four hundred of his
men to take their Weapons and follow him, and two hundred to keep the Baggage
(for at that time he had six hundred) and in this equipage he marched forward
against Nabal, swearing that, that very night he would utterly exterminate and
root out all his Race, and destroy his riches. Neither was he only displeased
that Nabal was ungrateful The year of the World, 1889. before Christ's
Nativity, 1075.
without respect of that humanity which they had showed toward him and his:
but also, that without any cause of injury offered, he had injured and outraged
him in words.

In the mean while, certain Shepherds that tended Nabal 's Cattle, told their
Mistress, that David having sent to her Husband to desire some small courtesy,
had not only obtained nothing, but also received insupportable injuries,
whereas till that day, he had suffered his flocks to be untouched: telling her,
that that insolency of their Lord, might breed them all much mischief. A ver.
18, ad 25.
Which when Abigail heard, (for so was the Woman called) she loaded diverse
Asses with all sorts of Presents, Abigail, Nabals Wife, appeaseth David with
Presents.
(without giving any notice to her Husband, who was so drunk, that he was
insensible) and went toward David; who, as he descended the straights of the
Mountain, marching toward Nabal, accompanied with 400 Men, met her. As soon as
Abigail perceived him, she leaped from her Horse, and falling on her face,
prostrated herself before him, beseeching him to pass by Nabals words, Ver. 35.
knowing that Nabals nature was answerable to his name; for in the Hebrew
tongue, Nabal signifies a Fool.
Nabal signifies Folly: she excused her self likewise, saying, That she saw
none of them that were sent to her Husband. For which cause, (said she) I
beseech thee to pardon us, and to consider what cause thou have to give God
thanks, that by my means he has hindered thee from polluting thy hands in
innocent blood: for if thou remain pure and innocent from bloodshed, thou will
engage him to punish thy enemies, and to bring upon their heads that
destruction which was ready to fall upon that of Nabal. I confess that thy
anger against him is accepting her Presents, gave her an answer after this
manner. Woman, said he, God of his goodness has this day brought thee hither,
otherwise thou had not lived, or seen the next morning. For I have sworn,
that this night I would overthrow thy house, and leave none alive of that
ungrateful Man's family, who has so contumeliously abused both me and mine: but
now God has put thee in mind wisely to prevent and pacify my wrath.

As for Nabal, Ver. 36, 37, 38.
although at this present he be exempted by thy means from punishment, yet
shall he not escape, David's Prophecy of Nabal.
but he shall perish some other way. This said, he dismissed Abigail: who Ver.
38, 39.
Which when David understood, he said that he was deservedly punished by God,
Nabal conceives so much sorrow and fear for his immodesty against David, that
he dies Apoplectic^^.
because his own wickedness was the cause of his punishment, giving thanks unto
God, that he had not dipped his hands in blood: and by this example he learnt,
that no wicked Man can escape Gods judgment; and that humane affairs depend not
on Chance, as if neglected by God, but that the good are rewarded, and the
wicked punished, according to their wickedness. He afterward sent Messengers
to Nabals Wife, and caused her to come unto him, to the intent he might An
example of Gods Providence, that no sin can escape unpunished.
She answered the Messengers, That she thought herself unworthy to lie at his
feet; notwithstanding, she repaired to him with a good equipage, and was
married to David, having obtained that degree of honor by her modesty and
beauty. Now David had a Wife before named Ahinoam, V. 39. ad finem.
whom he had married out of the City of Abesar.

As touching Michol the Daughter of Saul, David marries Abigail, Nabals wife.
and other-whiles his Wife, Saul gave her to Wife at Lissa, to the Son of
Phalti of the City of Gethla. After this, certain Ziphians coming to Saul, Saul
marries his daughter Michol to another husband.
told him, that David was returned again into their Country, and that if it
pleased him to assist them, they might easily apprehend him. Whereupon Saul
took the Field with 3000 Men, and being surprised by Night, he encamped in a
certain place called Siceleg. 1 Samuel 26. v. 1, ad 9.


David was certified that Saul was come forth against him, The Ziphians once
more labor to betray David in their Country.
he sent out certain Spies, to whom he gave charge to bring him intelligence
into what place at that time Saul was retired, who ascertained him that he was
at Siceleg; he watched all that Night, without the knowledge of any of his
Followers, and went into Saul's Camp, attended only by Abisai his sister,
Servia's Son, and Abimelech the Hittite. V. 7, 8, ad 13.


Now whilst Saul was asleep, David once more attended by two, entering into
Saul's Camp, stole away his Dart and his Pitcher of water.
and his General Abner with all his Soldiers, David entered into the Kings Camp:
and although he knew the Kings Pavilion, by his Javelin that stood at the door
thereof, yet slew he him not; neither permitted he Abisai, who was very forward
to execute the slaughter. But this he said, that although the King were wicked,
yet since he was appointed by God himself, he could not attempt any thing his
life; The year of the World, 2891. before Christ's Nativity, 1073.
he bare away with him his Javelin, and the Pitcher of water that stood by Saul
whilst he slept, without the knowledge of any of the Camp: so much were they
devoured and overwhelmed with sleep. He therefore departed thence in all
assurance, having executed all that which either the time or his courage would
permit him to do. But after he had passed the River, and had attained the top
of a Mountain, from whence he might be easily heard, he cried out to Saul's
Soldiers, and their General Abner so loud, that he awaked them from their
sleep; and calling unto Abner, as well as the common sort of Soldiers, Ver. 14,
ad 18.
the General asked, Who it was that called him? to whom David answered, David
upbraideth Abner King Saul's General, for suffering his Kings Javelin and
Pitcher of water to be taken from him.
It is I, the Son of Jesse your Fugitive: but, said he, How comes it to pass,
that thou who art so great, and in chiefest authority about the King, have so
small respect and guard of his person? Thy sleep is more pleasant unto thee,
than to watch for his conservation. Assuredly this act of thine deserves a
capital punishment, because thou neither have discovered me, nor any others
before we entered the Camp, or approached the King. Behold here the Kings
Javelin, and his Pitcher of water, by which you may perceive in what great
danger he has been, even in the midst of you, without any notice or discovery
of yours.

Saul perceiving that it was David's voice, A ver. 21, ad finem.
and seeing that through the negligence of his Guards, Saul praises David, and
wills him to be of good courage, and exhorts him to return to his own house.
it had been easy for him to have slain him, which (after so many
provocations) would not have seemed strange to any man, he acknowledged himself
indebted to him for his life, exhorting him to be assured, and without
suspecting any evil, to return home unto his house, because he was persuaded,
that he loved not himself so much, as he was beloved by David; notwithstanding
that he had pursued him, and for a long time David willed him to send some one
of his Servants to bring back his Javelin and Pitcher of water: protesting that
God should be Judge of both their natures, manners, and actions, who knew that
that day also he had spared his Enemy, whom if he had thought good, he might
have destroyed.

David having thus the second time spared Readiness life, 1 Samuel 27. 1.
and not willing to continue any longer in a Country, David declares his
innocence to Saul.
where he might be in danger of falling at length into the hands of his
Enemies, he thought good to retire into the Country of the Philistines, and
sojourn there. Saul desisteth to persecute David.
So that accompanied with 600 Men which he had with him, he went to Achis Gath,
one of their five Cities; who received him kindly, and gave him a place to
dwell in: Ver. 8, ad fin.
so that he abode in Gath, having with him his two Wives, Atchimaas and
Abigail. David with six hundred men, and his two wives, went into Palestine to
Achis King of Gitia.
Which when Saul understood, he troubled him no more, because he had twice been
in danger of his life, whilst he pursued him. David held it not convenient to
remain in the City of Gath, and therefore requested the King of the
Philistines, that he would assign him some part of his Country, where he might
make his habitation, because he feared to be chargeable to him, if he remained
in the City. Achis assigned to him a Village called Siceleg, David requires a
certain place at the Kings hands to make his habitation in.
which David, after he obtained the Kingdom, loved so well, that he purchased
the perpetual inheritance of it, after he came to the Crown. But hereof will we
speak in another place. The time that David lived amongst the Philistines,
Siceleg, were four months and twenty days; during which time, The King gives
him Siceleg.
by several excursions against the bordering Sarrites and Amalekites, he
spoiled their Country, and returned back again with a great booty of Oxen and
Camels: yet brought he thence no Bondmen, David spoiled the Sarrites and
Amalekites, and gives part of the prey to the King, persuading him, that he
took it from the Jews that inhabited the South Plain.
lest Achis by their means should thereby have intelligence into what Country
he had made his inroad. He sent likewise a part of the prey unto the King, and
when he demanded from whom he had taken it? he answered, That he had taken it
from the Jews that dwelt Southward and in the Plain: so that Achis conceived an
opinion, that since David warred against his own Nation all the time of his
abode with him, he would be a faithful Servant to him. About the same time, the
Philistines having determined to lead forth their Army against the Israelites,
sent to their Allies, requiring Rendezvous at Renga, to the intent that being
there assembled, they might dislodge and assail the Israelites. Amongst the
other their Auxiliary Companies, Achis had requested David to assist him with
his 600 Soldiers: which he promised readily, telling him, That the time was now
come wherein he might requite his kindness, and the hospitality he had shown
him. Achis promised him, that after the Victory, when all things should have
succeeded according as he desired, he would prefer David to be Captain of his
Guard; thinking by the promise of this honor and trust, he might augment
David's forwardness and affection toward him.

The year of the World, 2809. before Christ's Nativity, 1074.

The Philistines renew their War against the Hebrews, and obtain the Victory;
Saul with his Sons, are slain in the Battle.
SAul having advice, 1 Samuel 28. 3, 7, 8, 9.
that the Philistines were advanced as far as Sunam, drew out his Forces, Saul
banisheth all diviners and enchanters out of his Kingdom.
and encamped over against them; but when he perceived their Army to be much
more numerous than his, his heart failed him, and desiring the Prophets to
enquire of God, what should be the event of this War? and receiving no answer,
his fear was Ver. 6.
and in this perplexity he resolved to have recourse to Magic; but having
lately banished the Inchanters, Saul hearing the Philistines make head against
him, asked counsel of God.
Magicians, and such as pretended to tell Fortunes, it could hardly be expected
that one of them should be found: but yet he commanded that they should enquire
for one of those that could raise the spirits of the dead, and by their
information learn what should come to pass hereafter. And being advertised that
there was such an one at Endor, without the knowledge of his Army, laying aside
his Royal Habits, and attended only by two of his most faithful servants, he
repaired to Endor to this Woman, requiring her to divine and raise up the
spirit of him whom he should name. Saul repaireth to Endor, to ask counsel of a
Sorceress.
The Woman denied, and said, That she ought not to offend against the Kings
Edict, who had driven out of his Realm all such sort of Soothsayers, telling
him, that he did not well, Ver. 8, 9.
who having received no wrong at her hands, should endeavor to lay a snare to
bring her into a Crime which might cost her her life. But Saul swore unto her,
That no man should know thereof, and that he would not discover her divination
to others: and that she should incur no danger thereby.

After that by his Oaths and Protestations he had persuaded her, Saul
commands the Witch to raise Samuels ghost, v. 10, 11.
that she should have no cause to fear, he commanded her to raise the spirit of
Samuel. She not knowing what Samuel was, called him, and he suddenly appeared.
But when she perceived somewhat divine, or more than ordinary, in his
countenance, she was troubled; and turning to the King, she asked him, If he
were Saul? for Samuel had certified her no less. Saul confessed For what cause
she seemed to be so much troubled? She answered, That she saw a Man ascend,
that resembled God. Saul commanded her to declare unto him his shape, habit,
and age: she told him, That he was a reverend old Man, attired in the vestment
of an High Priest. By these marks Saul knew that it was Samuel: whereupon,
prostrating himself on the earth, he adored him. The spirit of Samuel asked
him, For what cause he had troubled him? To whom he complained, That he was
enforced thereunto by necessity: Ver. 15.
for that a mighty Host of his Enemies were at hand, Saul complains of his
miseries to Samuel, and asks his advice.
and that he was forsaken by God, having from him no answer, either by
Prophecy or Dream: wherefore, said he, I apply my self unto thee, who have
always expressed great kindness toward me. But Samuel foreseeing that the
Kings end drew nigh, answered him, It was in vain for thee to enquire
concerning those things that shall happen, since thou know that thou art
forsaken of God. Know therefore, A ver. 16, ad 20.
said he, that David shall possess the Kingdom, and that it is he that shall
establish the State by Arms: Samuels ghost certifieth Saul of the event of his
battle against the Philistines.
but thou shall lose both thy Kingdom and thy life, because thou have disobeyed
God in thy War against the Amalekites, and have not observed his Commandments,
according as I foretold thee when I was alive. Know therefore that thy People
and Host shall be discomfited by the Enemy, and that both thou and thy sons
shall be to morrow slain in the Battle, and be with me. Ver. 20, 21.
When Saul understood these things, he became speechless, through sorrow, Saul
through sudden sorrow fell in a swoon.
and fell down on the ground, either because his strength failed him through
sudden grief, or for want of food; because he had eaten nothing that night, nor
the day before.

Ver. 22, etc.
hardly recovering himself out of his Swoon, the Woman importuned him to
receive some sustenance, The Enchantress entreats him to refresh himself, and
take some re^ection.
telling him, that she desired no other reward for the hazard which she had run
of forfeiting her life, before she knew that he was the King himself, by whose
Commands those Divinations had been lately prohibited: wherefore she prayed him
that he would sit down at the Table, and refresh himself, that he might be the
more able to return unto his Army. An example of courtesy and liberality in
the Enchantress.
And although he refused to eat, because he had no appetite, and was utterly
desperate; yet she so effectually importuned him, that at length she persuaded
him to receive some little nourishment. And whereas she had but one Calf, (for
she was but a poor Woman, and had no other riches) yet spared she not to kill
it, and dress it for Saul and his Retinue. After which, Saul returned to his
Camp. Saul; yet without remembering that it was he by whom her Art had been
condemned, The year of the World, 2890. before Christ's Nativity, 1074.
she entertained him Saul should shortly lose his life) nor according to the
ordinary course of men, that naturally honor those that have bestowed some
dignity upon them, and become serviceable to those from whom they expect to
receive some profit hereafter. She therefore ought to be imitated, and in her
appears an excellent example of bounty, approving that there is nothing more
worthy of praise, than to relieve those that are in necessity, without
expecting any recompense; 1 Samuel 31. 3* 4.
which we may see in this History of Saul. For, although he knew that which
should befall him, Josephus praises Saul for a worthy and valiant King, in
that foreknowing his danger and death, he exposed himself to assured peril.
and that his death was at hand, (according as it had been foretold him) yet
resolved he not to avoid the same; neither so loved he his life, that for the
conservation thereof, he would deliver up his People into the hands of their
Enemies, Saul, may deservedly be called just, praiseworthy, courageous, hardy,
and contemners of all dangers.

This is the praise of Saul, who is an example to all that desire to eternize
their memory, that should upon the like opportunity propose the same resolution
to themselves: but especially to Kings, who, by reason of the excellency of
their Function, ought not only to forbear to be evil, but also strive to be
eminently virtuous. I could say more of Saul's Valor, but lest I should seem too
affectionate, I will return to our former purpose.

After that the Philistines were thus encamped, 1 Samuel 28. 1, ad 5.
and had numbered their Forces according to their Nations, Kingdoms, and
Governors, King Achis came at last with his company, whom David followed, 1 Samuel 29. 3, ad finem.
accompanied with 600 Soldiers: whom when the Chieftains of the Philistines
beheld, Achis leads out David with him against the Hebrews, and is reproved
by the Chieftains of the Philistines for so doing.
they asked the King, Whence those Hebrews came, and what their Leaders name
was? Who answered, That it was David, who fled from Saul his Master, and how he
had entertained him again; how David, in recompense of the kindness he had
received, and to avenge himself on Saul, was ready to fight for them against
him. But the Chieftains blamed him, because he had chosen an Enemy for his
Associate, advising him to dismiss him, lest he should (as he might find
occasion) turn his Arms against them, because (said they) he has now a fit
opportunity to reconcile himself to his Master. They therefore advised him to
send David back with his 600 Soldiers unto the place which he had given to
inhabit, because it was the same David of whom the Damsels made Songs, singing
in praise of him, that he had slain many thousand Philistines. When the King of
Geth understood these things, he approved their counsel: for which cause,
calling David unto him, he said unto him, The knowledge which I have had of
your Valor and Fidelity, Ver. 10. 11.
has made me desirous to employ you in this War; but our Captains will not
allow of it: Achis dismisseth David.
wherefore retire thy self to the place which I have given thee, without
conceiving any evil suspicion of me. There shall thou be in Garrison, to prevent
the Enemy from foraging our Country: and in so doing, thou shall partly assist
me in the War. Hereupon, David departed Siceleg, according as the King had
commanded him.

David was in the Camp, and attended on the Philistines War, The year of the
World, 2809. before christ's Na^ivity, 1074.
the Amalekites made an Incursion, and took Siceleg by force, and burnt the
City: and after they had gathered a great booty both in that place, and in
other villages of the Philistines Country, they retired back again. Now when
David arrived at Siceleg, and found it wholly spoiled, and seeing likewise that
his two Wives, and the Wives of his Companions were Prisoners, Ver. 1. 2, ad 6.
together with their Children; he presently rent his Garments, The Amalekites
in David's absence, spoil and burn Siceleg, and ^ carry away the prey.
and and abandoned himself to grief: beside this, his Companions were so much
enraged with the Captivity of their Wives and Children, that they were ready to
stone him to death; accusing him, that he was the cause of all which had
happened. But when his grief was abated, and he returned to himself, he lifted up
his heart unto God, and Abiathar to put on the Ephod, and ask counsel of God;
and that done, Ver. 7, 8, 9.
to declare unto him how he might overtake the Amalekites, if he should pursue
them; David takes counsel of God, whether he will assist him to recover his
Wives and Goods out of the hands of the Amalekites.
and whether he should recover his Wives and Children that they had led away,
and revenge himself of his Enemies. As soon as the High Priest had certified
him that he might pursue them, he sallied out with 600 Soldiers, and pursued
the Enemy: and drawing near unto the River, he found a certain stragler, an
Egyptian by Nation, very faint and feeble, through want and famine, having for
three days space wandered in the Desert without any sustenance; whom, after he
had refreshed with meat and drink, he asked, to whom he belonged, and what he
was? The Egyptian told him his Country, and how he had been left in that place
by his Master, because that through his weakness it was Ver. 11, ad 19.
not only other quarters of Judea, but Siceleg also. David guided by an
Egyptian slave, overtaketh the Amalekites.
David taking this Man for his Guide, overtook them, finding some of them lying
on the ground, others banqueting and debauching, and almost senseless by
overmuch drink: wherefore being not in a condition to defend themselves, he
fell upon them, and slew so great a number, that scarce 400 Men escaped; for
the slaughter continued from Noon until the Evening: David assaileth the
Amalekites, makes a great slaughter of them, and recovereth the whole prey.
So recovered he all that which the Enemy had ransackt, and released both his
own Wives, and those of his Companions. Whereupon they returned to the place
where they had left the other 200, which could not follow them, because they
were appointed to guard the Baggage: To these, the 400 would not grant a part
(as they said) followed the Enemy with them, but showed themselves slack in the
pursuit; alleging, that they ought to content themselves with the recovery of
their Wives. But David thought the sentence pronounced against them to be
unjust* Ver. 20, ad 25.
for since they had defeated their Enemies, all of them deserved to partake of
profit, David compromitteth the debate betwixt those that pursued the chase,
and those that kept the Baggage touching the pillage.
which ought equally to be divided, both amongst those that fought, and amongst
those that stayed behind to guard the Baggage. And from that day forward, this
Law has been firmly observed amongst them, that they that guard the Baggage
should have an equal part of the prey with those that go out to Battle. But
when David was returned to Siceleg, he sent unto his Friends of the Tribe of
Juda, apart of the spoil. In this manner was Siceleg sacked and burned, and
thus were the Amalekites discomfited. Philistines fought a bloody Battle with
Saul, wherein they got the Victory, and slew a great number of their Enemies.
Saul, King of Israel, with his Sons, fought valiantly, and seeing that there
was no hopes of conquering, they endeavored to die as honorably as they
could. 1 Samuel 31. 1, 2, 3.
For since the Philistines bent all their Forces against them, they could not
make good their Retreat, Saul and his sons seeing their Army overcome by the
Philistines, are desperately dismayed and slain.
so that, encompassed by them, they died in the midst of them, and yet before
their death, slew a great number of their Enemies. There were there present
Saul's three sons, Jonathan, Aminadab, and Melchi: who being defeated, the
Hebrew Army turned their backs: so that being closely pursued by the Enemy,
there was a great slaughter made: Saul, with those about him, retreated in good
order. And although the Philistines drew out against him a multitude of Archers
that shot many 1 Samuel 31. 4, etc.
before he should be taken alive by his Enemies: which he refused, not daring
to lay hands upon his Master. Saul striveth to kill himself, and being unable,
uses the assistance of a young Amalekite.
Whereupon Saul drew his own Sword, and setting it to his Breast, cast himself
thereon; but unable to force it home enough, he looked back, and saw a young
man behind him, whom he asked, What he was? and hearing that he was an
Amalekite, he requested him, That he would kill him, that he might not fall
alive into the hands of his Enemies: which he did; and having taken from him
the Gold which he had about his arms, and the Royal Crown, he fled. The Esquire
seeing Saul Gilboa. When they that inhabited the Valley on the other side of
Jordan, and in the Plain, had intelligence that Saul and his sons were dead,
and with them a great number of their Nation was slain, The year of the World,
2891* before Christ's Nativity, 1073.
they abandoned their Cities, Philistines finding these Cities destitute of
Inhabitants, seized on them. The next day whilst the Philistines spoiled the
dead, they found the bodies of Saul and his sons, which they spoiled and
beheaded, sending their Heads round about the Country, ^a Ver. 7, ad 10.
to make it known that their Enemies were defeated. They offered up their Arms
also in the Temple of Astaroth, and their Bodies they hung on the Walls of the
City of Bethsan, The Hebrews that inhabit the Valley beyond Jordan, leaving
their towns, fly to defenced cities.
at this day called Scythopolis. When they of Jabes, a City of Galaad,
understood how the Philistines had cut off the Heads of Saul and his sons, they
were enraged, and thought it became them not to be unconcerned: whereupon the
most valiant amongst them, went out and marched all night, till they came to
Bethsan, and approaching near the Walls, they took down the Bodies of Saul and
his sons, Ver. 9.
and carried them unto Jabes, without any opposition of the Enemy. These men of
Jabes lamented over the dead Bodies, The Philistines hung up the bodies of Saul
and his Sons.
and buried them in the best part of their Country, called Arar. Thus they
mourned, both Men, Women, and Children, beating their Breasts, and lamenting
for the King and his sons, and tasting neither meat nor drink, Ver. 11, 12, 13.
This was the end of Saul, according as Samuel had foretold him, because he
disobeyed God in his War against the Amalekites, The Citizens of Jabes rescue
the bodies of Saul and his sons, and both bury and lament them.
and because he had slain Abimelech, and all the Sacerdotal Race, and destroyed
the City of the Priests. He Reigned, during the life of Samuel, the space of 18
years, and 22 years after his death.


Written by FLAVIVS JOSEPHVS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Seventh Book.
1. David is created King of one Tribe in Hebron: over the rest, Readiness Son
obtains the Sovereignty. 2. Ishboseth is slain by the treachery of his
Servants, and the whole Kingdom comes unto David. 3. David having surprised
the City and Citadel of Jerusalem, drives the Canaanites from thence, and
causes the Jews to inhabit it. 4. David assailed by the Philistines, obtains
a famous victory against them near unto Jerusalem. 5. David overcomes the
neighboring Nations, and imposes tribute on them. 6. They of Damascus are
overcome by David. 7. David overcomes the Mesopotamians. 8. How through the
intestine Wars of his family, David was driven out of his Kingdom by his Son.
Absolon marching out with his Army against his Father, is overthrown. 10. The
happy estate of David restored again unto his Kingdom. 11. David, in his
lifetime, anointeth his Son Solomon King. 12. The death of David, and what he
left his Son toward the building of the Temple.


CHAP. I.
David is created King of one Tribe in Hebron: over the rest, Readiness Son
obtains the Sovereignty.
David returned Conqueror to Siceleg, after he had subdued the Amalekites. But
about three days after his return, he that slew Saul, and had escaped from the
Battle, having his garment rent, and ashes upon his head, came and cast himself
prostrate before David: and being asked from whence he came? he answered, from
the Battle of the Israelites; and certified David of the unhappy event: 2 Samuel
1. v. 1, ad 12.
telling him, that many thousands of the Hebrews were slain, and that Saul
himself and his Sons were fallen in the conflict. He likewise related, how he
himself retreated amongst the Hebrews, An Amalechite certifieth David of Saul's
death, and in testimony thereof presents his bracelets and Crown.
when the King fled: confessing that he had slain him, that he might not fall
alive into the hands of his enemy: For (said he) Saul David perceiving no cause
whereby he should doubt of his death, whereof he had most evident and
infallible testimonies, rent his garments, v. 12*
and spent the day in weeping and lamenting with his companions: but he was the
more grieved for the loss of his dear friend Jonathan, David lamenteth Saul and
Jonathans death.
whom he acknowledged to be the preserver of his life: And so affectionate
showed he himself toward Saul, that although he had oftentimes been in danger
to have been slain by him, yet was he much troubled at his death; v. 13, 14, 15.
and not only so, David commands the Amal^chite to be slain that killed Saul*
but he likewise put to death him that slew him; telling him, that he himself
had accused himself for slaying the King, and shown himself Amalekite. He
composed likewise Lamentations and Epitaphs in the praise of Saul and Jonathan,
which are yet extant. After that he had thus honored the King, and performed
his Lamentations and Obsequies, he asked counsel of God by the Prophet: 2 S^m.
2. 1, ad 7.
What City of the Tribe of Juda he would give him to inhabit in? David by Gods
commandment comes and dwells in Hebron, and is declared King of the Tribe of
Juda.
who answered him, That he would give him Hebron. For which cause he forsook
Siceleg, and came and dwelt in Hebron, and brought thither his Wives and his
Army. All the people of the Tribe resorted thither unto him, and proclaimed him
King: where understanding how the Jabesins had buried Saul and his Sons, he
sent Ambassadors unto them, both to praise and approve their actions, assuring
them, that he allowed their act, and would recompense that kindness which they
had showed to the dead: giving them likewise David praises the Jebafines for
burying Saul and his Sons.
that the Tribe of Juda had chosen him for their King. But Abner the Son of
Ner, General of Saul's Army, a man of great courage, and a noble disposition,
understanding that Saul and Jonathan, and his two other Brothers were dead,
came into the Camp, The year of the World, 2891. before Christ's Nativity, 1873.
and bringing with him the only Son of Saul that was left, whose name was
Isboseth, he passed to the other side of Jordan and proclaimed him King. He
appointed likewise for his Royal seat and place of residence, a certain
Country called in Hebrew Machare, that is to say, the Camp. From thence he
went with a select band of soldiers, with a resolution to encounter those of
the Tribe of Juda, because they had chosen David for their Kings. Against him
marched out Joab the Son of Suri and of Sarvia, David's Sister, General of his
Army, to encounter him, accompanied with his Brothers Abisai and Azael, v. 8,
ad 12.
and all David's soldiers: and arriving near a Fountain in Gabaa he drew up his
Army in that place. Abner the Son of Ner crowned Jeshboseth Saul's Son.
Abner proposing that before they joined Battle they should try some of the
soldiers of each party, it was agreed between them, that twelve of either side
should be chosen out to decide the quarrel; Abner leads out his Army against
the Tribe of Juda.
These men marched out into a v. 13.
upon the place Hereupon the Armies met, and after a cruel Battle, Abner with
his followers were discomfited: Joab with all David's Army issues out to meet
him.
and flyng in great haste were pursued by Joab, who encouraged his soldiers to
follow them close without suffering any of them to escape. But amongst the
rest, Joabs Brothers were hot upon the Chase, and the youngest of them called
Azael, v. 15.
gave special testimony of his forwardness, for he ran not only more swift than
other men, Twelve soldiers fight, and kill one another, and Abners side are
overthrown.
but outstripped horses also in their race. Whilst thus he pursued Abner with
great vehemence, without turning either to the one side or the other; Abner
seeing himself closely pressed after, advised him to forbear his pursuit, and
promised him a complete v. 17, ad 23.
and thereby render his brother Joab implacable. Azael, Joabs Brother pursues
Abner.
But Azal not regarding him, Abner struck him through with a Javelin so that he
presently died. But they that pursued Abner, likewise arriving in the place
where Azaels body lay dead, Abner in his flight kills Azael.
stood round about him, and forbear to pursue the Enemy any further. But Joab
and his Brother Abisai passing by and conceiving a more mortal hatred against
Abner, v. 25, ad 30.
because he had slain their Brother, Joab and Abisai pursued (...) Sunset*
they pursued him til Sunset unto a place called Amon that is the aqueduct.
There mounting upon a hillock, he saw Abner with the Tribe of Benjamin flying
from him; who began to cry out to him that men of the same Tribe ought not to
be so incensed the one against the other: v ^0. ad finem.
that their Brother Azael was in Joab sounding a Retreat, restrains his
Soldiers.
because that although he had exhorted him to cease from pursuing him, yet
could he not persuade him, and that therefore he had slain him. Joab
considering these his sayings, How many on each side died in the Battle.
he commanded the Trumpet to sound a Retreat, and forbear to pursue them any
more, and encamped for that night in the same place: during which time, Abner
traveled without ceasing, 2 Samuel 3. 1, 2.
and having past over Jordan, returned to his camp to Isboseth Saul's Son. The
beginning of civil war amongst the Hebrews.
The next day Joab surveyed the dead, and caused them to be buried. Those that
were found dead on Abners side, were about three hundred and sixty men; and on
David's nineteen, besides Azael, whose body Joab and Abisai took with them, and
carried it to Bethlehem, a v. 2. ad 5.
and after they had interred it in the Tomb of their Ancestors, David had six
Sons born in Hebron.
they repaired to Hebron unto David. From that time forward there arose a civil
War amongst the Hebrews, David's followers had always the upper-hand, and never
adventured the hazard of the field without some gaining advantage; a v. 6. ad
11.
whereas the Son of Saul and his partakers were daily weakened. Abner bridled
and governed the multitude, so that a long time they were subject to Ishboseth.
David at that time had six Sons and as many Wives; the eldest of them was
called Ammon, the Son of Achimaas; the second was Daniel, the Son of Abigal;
the third was called Absolon, the Son of Maacha, the daughter of Tolmar King of
Gessure; the fourth was Adonias, the Son of his Wife called Aggite; a v. 12, ad
17.
the fifth was Sphacia the Son of Abithal; the sixth Jethraam the Son of Egla.
Abner sends Ambassadors to David in Hebron, to make a covenant with him.
But after this civil War was begun, and that the Kings on both sides had
oftentimes encountered and fought together; Abner the General of the Army of
King Saul's Son, a prudent man, and one that was beloved by the people,
endeavored all Isboseth, and in effect they all submitted unto him for a
certain time: David requires his Wife Michol at Abners hands.
but when it afterward fell out that Abner was charged to have kept company
with Rispa, Saul's Concubine, the Daughter of Sibath, and that Isboseth reproved
him for it, he was much incensed, as thinking himself very ill rewarded for his
services; whereupon he threatened to establish the Kingdom of David, and to make
Isboseth know, that it was neither his own valor nor conduct that made him
Sovereign over the Tribes on that side Jordan, but that his fidelity and
experience was the cause thereof. Whereupon he sent unto Hebron to David,
requiring him, by an oath, to accept of him as his confederate and friend,
promising him to persuade the people to forsake Saul's Son, and to proclaim him
King of the whole Country. David Michol David's wife whom he had purchased Saul
with the heads of 600 Philistines which Michol, The year of the World, 2891.
before Christ's Nativity, 1073.
Abner had taken from Phalti, who had since that time espoused her: whereunto
Ishboseth also consented, to whom David had written. Abner therefore assembled
all the Elders and Governors of the people, and told them, that at such time as
heretofore they were ready to forsake Ishboseth, and to submit themselves to
David, he dissuaded them from that intent; David requires his Wife Michol at
Abners hands.
but that he was now willing to comply with them, because he was assured that
God had chosen David (by the mouth of Samuel the Prophet) to be King over all
Israel; and had foretold that he should subdue the Philistines, and bring them
under his subjection. Which when the Elders and Governors understood, Abner
consulteth with the Elders and Governors of the Army to revolt to David.
they all of them agreed to submit themselves to David. Abner seeing them thus
resolved, did afterward assemble all the Tribe Benjamin (out of which the
Archers of Ishboseths guard were chosen) and told them the like, and perceiving
that they complied with him and submitted themselves unto his pleasure, he
gathered about twenty of his familiar friends, and came to David to receive him
in his own person, a v. 20. ad 23.
in confirmation of what David had promised. David received and entertained him
very kindly, The Elders Captain pursuaded by Abner follow David.
and magnificently feasted him for many days; after which, Abner desired him
that he might return, and bring the people with him, to the end that in their
presence and sight, he might deliver him up the government. When David had
dissmissed Abner, The Benjamites accord with Abner, he resorteth to David, and
certifieth him thereof.
some little time after his departure, Joad the General of David's Army came to
Hebron, and knowing that Abner had been with David, and was lately departed
from him, and considering the merit of Abner whom he knew to be a great David,
he began to fear some dieminution of his own greatness, and that the Army was
not like to continue under his command, Abner being kindly entertained by
David, is friendly dismissed.
whereupon he endeavored to persuade David to give no credit to the promises
of Abner; since he was very well assured, that he had no other design than to
settle the Crown upon Ishboseth, that this whole treaty was nothing else but a
mere trick to cheat him of his Kingdom; and that Abner was returned with a
great deal of joy, because his designs were like to succeed so well. But
perceiving that these his subtilties took little effect with David, v. 24, etc.
he attempted a more perilous exploit than the former. For resolving with
himself to kill Abner, he sent out certain men after him, whom he appointed,
that as soon as they should overtake him, they should desire him in David's v.
26.
because he had forgot to speak to him about some affairs of great importance.

When Abner heard the words of these messengers (whoover took him in a place
called Besira, v. 27.
some twenty Furlongs off of Hebron) he struck out of the way without
suspecting any treachery; and Joab going before him, embraced him with great
kindness, and like an affectionate friend, and singling him from his other
company, and making as if he would inform him of certain secrets, and having
drawn him into a by-way beside the wall, accompanied only with his Brother
Abisai, he drew his sword, and thrust it into his short ribs; of which wound
Abner died, surprised by the Treason of Joab, who colored that act of his,
with the revenge and death of his Brother Azael, whom Abner Hebron; but in
truth it was but the suspicion of his greatness and honor, fearing lest he
should be deprived of his place, Men inclined to ambition and avarice; dare all
things.
and Abner obtain the next degree of honor unto David. Hereby may a man
perceive how many and how mighty things men attempt and hazard for their
avarice and ambition sake, and to the end they may not be inferior unto any
others. For when they desire to attain riches and honors, they atchieve it by
ten thousand mischiefs; and at such time as they fear to be dispossessed, they
strive to continue their estates by means more pernicious, because they think
it to be the less sin; and that the unhappiness is less, rather not to have
obtained to any greatness and power, than after the possession thereof, to fall
from it. Thence it comes, that all of them intend and practice David having
notice of the murder of Abner, conceived a great grief in his heart, and
called all his friends to witness, lifting up his hands unto God, and
protesting that he was no partaker of the murder, and that Abner had been
slain without his knowledge. He likewise uttered most grievous curses against
the murderer, v. 31.
his house and accomplices, praying that they might be overtaken by that
vengeance which uses to pursue the murderer: David with the whole people
bewail Abner, and honor his funeral.
for he greatly suspected lest he should be thought to be a party in that which
had happened unto Abner, contrary to his Faith, and promise, which he had past
unto him. Moreover, he commanded that all the people should weep and lament for
him, and that his Funerals should be honored according Israelites followed,
beating on their Breasts, and shedding tears, The year of the World, 2899.
before Christ's Nativity, 1065.
and testifying the love which they bare unto him during his life, and their
sorrow for Hebron with great Magnificence, and Epitaphs composed in his praise
by David himself, who setting himself on the Tomb first of all lamented, and
gave others an example to follow him. And so much was he troubled at the death
of Abner, that he forbore all kind of meat until the Sunset, notwithstanding
the instances of his friends, who urged him to take meat: which act of his
purchased him much love amongst the people. v 33, ad 35.
For they that loved Abner, were very glad to be witnesses of that honor which
he did him at his death, David s^lveth his honor, and avoideth the suspicion
of Abners death.
and that faith which he maintained in honoring him, as if he had been his
Kinsman or friend, and not embasing him with a vile and contemptible Tomb, as
if he had been his Enemy. And in general, all of them were so much possessed
David, that they believed he would have the like kindness for them, as they saw
him express for deceased Abner. And by this means David happily maintained his
credit, and increased the peoples good opinion of him, escaping thereby the
suspicion that he might in some sort have been accessory to his death. He
protested also unto the people, that he conceived no small grief at the loss of
so good a man, declaring that it was a great prejudice to the State to be
deprived of him, maintained their peace by his good advice, and ratified the
same by his executions and Warlike valor: But God (said he) who has care of
all things, shall not suffer him to die unrevenged: And he it is that shall
bear me witness, that it lies not in my power to punish Joab and Abisai, who
have greater credit in the Army than Abner.

CHAP. II.
Ishboseth is slain through the Treason of his followers: the whole Kingdom
devolveth unto David.
WHen Ishboseth Saul's Son, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 2.
had notice of Abners death, he was much troubled, not only that he was
deprived of his near kinsman, but also of so great a personage as had settled
the Crown on his head. 2 Samuel 4. 1, ad 6.
Neither did he himself long time remain alive Jeremon, Banaoth and Than, he
was Traitorously slain. These two being Benjamites, and of the chiefest
Nobility amongst them contrived to make away Ishboseth, and thereby obtain a
great reward from David; supposing that such an act would merit the chiefest
place and dignity in the Army. For which cause, finding Ishboseth alone in his
house about midday, laid on his bed and asleep, and unattended by any of his
Guard, and perceiving likewise that the Porter was asleep: they entered into the
lodging where Ishboseth was asleep, and slew him: and having cut off his head,
they traveled all the night and day as if they fled from those whom they had
offended, and sought for rescue. And when they came to Hebron, they presented
David with Ishboseths head, v. 6. ad 12.
offering themselves to do him service, letting him know, that they Ishboseths
head is brought to David.
and made away his adversary. But David allowed not their act, but thus
received them; O cursed men, (on whom I intend presently to execute justice)
have you not heard how I punished him that murdered Saul, David sharp
invective against the murderers of Ishboseth, and their punishment.
and brought his Royal Crown unto me? Yea, although he slew him at his own
request, and to the intent the enemy should not surprise him alive? Did ye
think that I was changed, and that I am not the same that I was, but that I
take delight to be partaker with you in your wickedness, or that I will
countenance it, as if these acts of yours (who are murderers of your Master)
were to be commended? Ungrateful Villains, have you no remorse for having
murdered, on his Couch, a Prince that never did an injury to any, and had
showed so much kindness unto you? but I will certainly punish you with the loss
of your lives, because ye have thought that Ishboseths death would work my
content: for you could not in any thing dishonor me more, than by conceiving
such an opinion of me. Which said, he adjudged them to die by the most cruel
torments that might be imagined: and with a great deal of solemnity, he caused
Ishboseths head to be interred in Abners Tomb.

These murderers being thus put to death, the chief of the people repaired to
David unto Hebron (both they that commanded over thousands, 2 Samuel 5. 1, 2, 3,
etc.
and such also as were governors) and submitted themselves unto him, The Nobles
of the Hebrews repair to David to Hebron, and declare him King.
they recounted the good offices they had done him, both during Saul's
lifetime, as also the honor which they had always shown him, since the first
time that he was a Commander in that Army, especially that he had been chosen
by God through the mediation of the Prophet Samuel, to be their King, and
Hebrews, to defend the same, and discomfit the Philistines. David accepted
their rea-readiness

Of the Tribe of Juda, there came together about six thousand and eight hundred
men of War, David entertained the Nobles kindly.
bearing for their Arms a Buckler, and a Javelin; who before that time had
followed Saul's Sons, and were not of those that had adhered unto David. Of the
Tribe of Simeon, The Armed Soldiers that came to David.
seven thousand, and one hundred, or somewhat more. Of that of Levi 4700, whose
Captain was Jodam, with whom was Sadoc the High Priest, accompanied with twenty
and two of the same lineage. Of the Tribe of Benjamin four thousand men of War;
for this Tribe were as yet of that opinion, that some of the Heirs Saul should
reign. Of that of Ephraim 20800 strong and valiant men. Of that of Manasses,
eight thousand. Of that of Issachar two hundred, who were skilful in
divination, and 20000 men of War. Of that of Zabulon 20000 chosen fighting men:
for only this entire Tribe was wholly at David's command, who were armed in like
manner as they of Gad were. Of the Tribe of Nepthaly there were a thousand
Captains, famous for their valor, and armed with shield and Javelin, attended
by an infinite number of their Tribe. Of the Tribe of Dan there were 27000
chosen men. Of that of Aser 40000. Of the two Tribes on the other side of
Jordan, and of the half Tribe of Manasses, sixscore thousand armed men, with
Buckler, Javelin, Helmet and Sword: The rest of the other Tribes also wore
Swords. All this multitude was assembled together in Hebron David, with great
provision of victuals and wine, sufficient to sustain them all, who all of them
with one consent, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 3.
appointed David to be their King. Now when the people had mustered and feasted
for three days space in Hebron, David dislodged from thence with his whole
Host, and repaired to Jerusalem. But the Jebusites, who at that time inhabited
the City, and were of the Race of the Canaanites, shutting up their Gates
against his coming, v. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
and placing on their walls as many as were blind and lame, The Siege of
Jerusalem undertaken by David.
or maimed in any other sort, in contempt of him, scoffingly jested and said,
That these were sufficient to keep out the Enemy: so much trusted they to their
fortifications. Wherewith David being incensed, David surpriseth the lower Town.
he prepared to besiege Jerusalem with all the vigor imaginable, that he might
by making himself Master of that place strike a terror into all the rest that
should David geteth the upper Town.
He took the lower Town; and because the higher Town as yet held out, the King
resolved to encourage his men of War to show themselves valiant, The valor of
David's Soldiers, and in espeacil of Joab.
promising them honors and rewards and, that he would make him General over
all the people, that should first of all Scale the Wall. Whilst they thus put
themselves forward to mount without refusing any danger (through the desire
they had to obtain the Government that was promised) Joab the Son of Servia,
was the forwardest; and having got upon the Wall, called from thence to the
King to acquit himself of his promise.

CHAP. III.

AFter therefore he had cast out the Jebusites from the higher City, David
expels the Jebusites out of the Town and City of Jerusalem.
and repaired Jerusalem, he called it the City of David, and resided there all
his Reign: so that the whole time that he ruled in Hebron, over the Tribe of
Juda, was seven years, and six months. But after he had taken Jerusalem for his
Royal City, his fortunes daily more and more increased, The league of
friendship between Hiram and David.
because God was with him. Hiram also King of Tire, sent unto him, and made a
league with him: he presented him likewise with Presents of Cedar, and the
Workmen and Masons, to build him a Royal house in Jerusalem. Now when How
Jerusalem was called Solyma, and what mention Homer made thereof.
the gave the government thereof to Joab. This King was the first that drove
the Jebusites out of Jerusalem, and called the same by his name. For, from the
time of Abraham our forefather, it was called Solyma: neither want there some
that infer, that Homer under that name intends Jerusalem. For, in the Hebrew
tongue Solyma is as much as to say, The years since Joshuas conquest to this
time 515. Orphant a Jebusite, friend to David.
Security. All the time since the war made by Joshuah against the Canaanites,
and since the division of the Country (during all which time, the Israelites
could not drive the Canaanites out of Jerusalem) until David took the same by
force, were five hundred and fifteen years. But I must not forget one Orphan, a
rich man amongst the Jebusites, who because he was well affected toward the
Hebrews, was not put to death Jerusalem: 2 Kings 24.
but was much honored by the King. David espoused other Wives besides those
which he had; David's Sons born in Jerusalem.
and took many Concubines: by them he had eleven Sons, whose names are these
which follow, Amnael, Seba, Nathan, Soloman, Jaber, Eliel, Phalna, Ennapha,
Jenaah, Eliphal: and a Daughter called Thamar. Nine of these were Thamar was
Absalons Sister by the same Father and Mother.

CHAP. IV.
David assailed by the Philistines, obtains a great victory aaginst them near
Jerusalem.
NOw when the Philistines knew that the Hebrews had created David King, they
led forth their Army against him toward Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 5. 18. ad finem.
where, encamping themselves in Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 4.
But the King of the Hebrews, who was wont to do nothing inconsiderately,
commanded the High Priest to ask counsel of God what success the War should
have; who after he had informed him that God favored their designs, he
presently drew out his Army against the Enemy: and giving the battle, he
suddenly assailed the Enemies, The Philistines moving War against David, are
partly slain or put to flight.
slaying many of them, he put the rest to flight. But let no man suspect, that
the Army of the Philistines was either small in number, or weak in courage,
which at that time assailed the Hebrews, because they were easily overcome,
without their performing any memorable action. For all Syria, Phenicia, (and
the other Warlike Nations beyond them) were confederates with them, The
Philistines invaded the Hebrews with a mighty army gathered out of sundry
nations.
in this War: which was the cause, that notwithstanding they were so many times
overcome, and lost many thousands of men, that they desisted Hebrews with
greater force: having been defeated in the battle beforementioned, yet they
reinforced their Army, and encamped in the same place. Whereupon David again
required of God what the issue of this battle should be; and the High Priest
told him, that he should encamp in the Forest called Tears, because it was not
far off from the Enemies Camp, and that he should not depart from thence,
neither make any attempt upon them, before the trees should shake without any
agitation of the wind. Whereupon, as soon as the trees shook, and the time
which God had appointed was come; without any delay he marched out with an
assurance of returning victorious. For the squadrons of the Enemy were
disordered, The Philistines flight.
and incontinently betook themselves Gerar (which is a frontire-town of their
Country) their Camp was plundered, and in it were found great riches; and
amongst other things, their gods, which broken to pieces by the Israelites.

The battle being ended, it seemed good unto David (by the counsel of the
Elders and Colonels over thousands) that all the flower of their youth should
be assembled from all the parts of the Country, 2 Samuel 6. 1, ad 5.
every one according to his Tribe. David's commands as touching the
transportation of the Ark.
And that the Priests and Levites should rapair to Cariathiarim, and bring from
the Ark of God and convey it to Jerusalem; to the end that when it should be
there, the service of God might for the future be celebrated in that place, and
other sacrifices and honors, agreeable to the divine Majesty be performed.
Which if Saul had religiously observed, Aminidabs house, they laid it upon a
new Wain drawn by Oxen, and committed the conduct of it to their Brethren and
their Children.

The King marched foremost, and after him all his people, praising God, and
singing Psalms and Hymns to the sound of the Trumpets and Cymbals, v. 6, 7, 8,
9.
and several sorts of Instruments: Oza stretching out his hand to stay the Ark,
is suddenly stricken dead.
and in this manner conducted they the Ark into Jerusalem. But when they were
come to the threshing floor of Childon, Oza died, through the wrath of God: for
the Oxen stumbling that drew the Chariot, and the Ark tottering, he stretched
out his hand to hold it up; but being no Priest, God struck him dead because he
presumed to touch Oza, and the place where he died is called to this day, v.
10, 11.
Oza's Striking. David, fearing lest if he should carry the Ark with him into
the City, David places the ark in Obed-Edoms house, who prospers
there-through in all felicity.
the like misfortune might attend him that had befallen Oza, (who died, because
he only stretched out his hand) he carried it not with him into the City, but
commanded that it should be left in the possession of one called Obed, by
descent a Levite, a good and virtuous man: where it remained for three months
space; during which time, his house was blessed with all worldly happiness. The
King being informed of the success of Obed, v. 12.
(who of a poor man, was suddenly become very rich, so that all men had their
eyes upon him, The Ark transported into David's house and, placed in a
Tabernacle.
and some envied him) he assured himself that no inconvenience would befall
him; if he should take the Ark to Jerusalem. It was carried Michol, David's
Saul's Daughter, The year of the World, 2900, before Christ's Nativity, 1004.
seeing him, mocked at him. The Ark then being thus carried, was placed in a
Tabernacle erected by David, who offered sacrifices of all sorts, in such
abundance that he feasted all the people, both men women, and children,
distributing unto every one a Cake, and a portion of the sacrifice: and after
he had thus feasted the people, David is mocked by his Wife Michol.
he dismissed them, and retired unto his own house. But Michol his Wife, the
Daughter of King Saul, drawing near unto him upon his return, besought God for
him, v. 13, 14, 15, 16.
that it might please him in all other things she might express unto her
husband all that which became her entire and unequaled love toward him: but in
this she blamed him because that being so great and mighty a King he had
dishhonoured himself in dancing, and had thereby discovered that which became
him not, doing all this in company David answered, that he was not ashamed of
performing a thing so acceptable unto God as that was, who prefered him before
her Father, and placed him above all others, assuring her that he should
oftentimes behave himself after that manner. This Michol had no children by
David, but being married again to another (to whom her Father had betrothed her
after he took her from David) she bear five Sons of whom we will speak
hereafter. 2 Samuel 7. 1, 2, 3,
The King perceiving how by Gods assistance his affairs prospered daily more
and more, David decreeeth to build a Temple unto God.
thought that he could not without offense dwell in an house of Cedar, and
suffer the Ark to remain in a Tabernacle: wherefore he designed to build a
Temple unto God, according as Moses had foretold, and to this intent consulted
with the Prophet Nathan, who willed him to perform all that which he was minded
to Nathan, commanding him to tell David, v. 5. ad 17.
that he accepted his will, and commended his resolutions yet notwithstanding
he permitted him not to proceed because he had embrewed his hands in the blood
of many of his Enemies. God certifieth David by Nathan, that Solomon should
build the Temple.
But after his decease (which shall happen after he has lived a long and
prosperous life) his Son Solomon (to whom he shall leave the Kingdom after his
death) shall cause a Temple to be built, promising him to assist the said
Solomon (even as the Father does his Son) and that he would continue the
Kingdom in his Heirs: v* 18 ad finem.
And that if they shall happen at any time to offend him, David gives God
thanks for the blessings which were promised him by Nathan.
he will only punish them with sickness and famine. David hearing this was very
joyful, because

CHAP. V.
David overcoming the neighboring Nations, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 5.
imposes tributes on them.
David Warreth against the Philistines, and takes a great part of the
inheritance from them.
David made War upon the Philistines, partly, that he might avoid the suspicion
of sloth and idleness; and partly, that having (according as God had foretold)
discomfited his Enemies, he might leave a peaceable Kingdom to his posterity
after him. He therefore assembled his Army, commanding them to be in a
readiness to march, and departing out of Jerusalem, he made an inroade into the
Country of the Philistines; 2 Samuel 8. v. 1, 2.
whom he overcame in battle, A great slaughter of the Moabites.
and took a great part of the Country from them, by means whereof he enlarged
the frontiers of the Hebrews. He made war also against the Moabites: whose Army
being divided into two parts, was by him defeated and overthrown, 3, 4.
and many prisoners taken, David overcomes the King of Sophona.
and tributes were imposed on them. Afterward he led out his Army against
Adarezer Son of Ara, King of Sophona: and Euphrates, he slew about two thousand
foot and five thousand Horse: he took also almost a thousand Chariots? the
greater part whereof was wholly consumed, and one hundred of them only reserved
to his own use.

CHAP. VI, 2 Samuel 8. v* 6, 7, 8.

They of Damascus are overcome by David. Adad King of Damasco and Syria, is
overcome by David in battle.

A Dad King of Damascus and of Syria, understanding that David had made War on
Adarezar (who was his feiend and confedarate) raised great forces to assist
him. Nicholaus the Historiographer makes mention of King Adads War with David.
But entering the field, and encountering with David near unto the River
Euphrates, Nicholas the Historiographer makes mention in the fourth Book of his
History, in these words: A long time after the most puissant Prince of this
Country called Adad governed in Damascus, The year of the World, 2904. before
Christ's Nativity, 1061.
and over the rest of (except Phoenicia) who making War against David King of
Judea, and having oftentimes fought with him; in his last encounter (wherein he
was overcome near the River Euphrates) he signalized himself by such actions as
were worthy of a great Captain and a great King. Of another King of Syria that
spoiled Samaria.
Moreover he speaks of his Heirs that reighned successively after him. That
he being deceased, his Sons reigned for ten generations after him, each of them
receiving from their father, the same name and the same Kingdom, after the
manner of the Ptolomies of Egypt. 2 Samuel 8. 1, ad 4.
The third of these being more mighty than the rest, and desirous to revenge
himself of the injuries, which were offered unto his grandfather, led forth his
Army against the Jews, David imposes tribute on the Syrians whom he subdued.
and destroyed the Country called at this day Samaria. Wherein he varied not
from the truth: for he of whom he speakth, is that Adad, that made War Samaria,
during the Reign of Achab King of Israel, of whom we will speak hereafter. But
when David had led forth his Army against Damascus, Jerusalem spoiled by Syssac
King of Egypt.
and against the rest of the Country of Syria, he reduced them all under his
obedience placing garrisons in their Country and imposing tribute upon them.
He dedicated also to God in the City of Jerusalem, the Golden quivers and Arms
of Adads guard: which afterward Syssac King of Egypt took when he vauquished
Roboham his Nephew, and carried away great riches out of the temple of
Jerusalem, as it shall be declared hereafter, when we come to treat of that
matter. This King of the Hebrews being inspired by God (who made him prosperous
in all his wars) encamped before the chiefest cities of Adrezar, that is to
say, Betha and Mazcon, which he besieged, took, and spoiled: where there was
found great store of Gold 3 King. 14.
which was more precious then Gold, whereof Solomon made that great vessel
called the Sea, The prey that was made in the War.
and other fair lavers, as such time as he adorned and furnished the Temple of
God. When Thoy King of Amoth understood all which had happened to Adarezer, 2 Samuel
8, 6. etc.
and how his power and forces were destroyed, he grew afraid of his own estate,
The King of the Amathens requires a League at David's hands.
and resolved to enter into a league and confederacy with David, before he
should come out against him: and to that intent he sent his Son Adoram unto
him, to congratulate his success against Adarezer his Enemy, and to contract an
amity with him. He sent him presents also, namely vessels of antique work of
Gold, of Silver, and of Brass: whereupon David made a league with him, and
received the presents that were sent unto him; and afterward honorably
dismissed his Son, both for the one David compels the Idumeans to pay
tribute by the Pole.
but having also sent Abisai Joabs Brother the Lieutenant of his Army against
the Idumeans, he likewise granted him victory: for Abisai slew in the battle
about eighteen thousand of them, and filled all Idumea with garrisons imposing
a tribute throughout the Country by the Pole. The distribution of Offices*
This King loved justice of his own nature and the judgment which he gave was
always most equitable, He had for his Lieutenant General of his Armies Joab, 2
King. 9.
and appointed Josaphat the Son of Achilles chief over the Registers, After
Abiather, he established Sadock of the house of Phinees for Sisa was his
Secretary, Banaia the Son of Ioiada was Captain over his guard, and all the
Elders were ordinarily about him to guard and attend him. He remembering himself
also of the covenants and oaths that past 'twixt him and Jonathan the Son of
Saul, and of their amity and affection (for amongst his other excellent
qualities he was always most eminent for his gratitude.) He caused inquiry to
be made, if any one of the house and family of Jonathan were left alive, to the
intent he might return the friendship he had received from Jonathan. Whereupon
a certain man named Ziba, was brought unto him (who was enfranchised by Saul)
that might inform him what one of his Race was alive: C. 9. v. 1, etc.
who asked him if he knew any Jonathans Sons then living, David makes an
enquiry if any of Jonathans kindred were left alive.
to whom he might make some return of the kindness which he had formerly
received from their Father. Who answered him, that he had one Son remaining,
whose name was Mephibosheth, who was lame of his legs for when the news came
that both his Father and Grandfather were slain his Nurse hastily snatching up
the child let him fall from her shoulders, and so hurt him. When he heard where
he was brought up, he sent unto the City of Labath to Machir, with whom
Mephibosheth, was kept, v. 7, 8.
and commanded him to be brought unto him. Now when he came to David's presence,
David gives Mephibosheth his father Jo^athans house and Saul's inheritance.
he cast himself on his face before him; but the King exhorted him to be of
good courage, and to hope hereafter for better fortune, and gave him his
Fathers house with all the possessions, that were purchased by Saul his
grandfather, appointing him to eat with him daily at his own table. The young
man did him reverence, thanking him David called for Siba, and told him how he
had given Mephibosheth his Fathers house and all Saul's purchases, commanding
The year of the World, 2910* before Christ's Nativity, 1014.
and to have a care of all things, and to return the revenue to Jerusalem,
because Mephibosheth was every day to sit at his table, charging both him and
his fifteen Sons, and twenty Servants, to do him service. After the King had
thus disposed of him, Siba did him reverence; and after he had promised to
perform whatsoever he had given him in charge, v. 9. 10, 11.
he departed, and Jonathans Son remained in Jerusalem, David commits the
disposing of Mephibosheths Lands to Siba, and commands him to make the return
of his revenues in Jerusalem.
where he lived at the Kings table, and was entertained and tended as carefully
as if he had been his own Son: he had a Son also called Mica. These were the
honors that those children which survived after Jonathan and Saul's death,
received at David's hands. About the same day died Nahas King of the Ammonites,
who during his lifetime was David's friend, and his Son succeeded him in his
Kingdom, to whom David sent Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 6.
But the Governors of the Ammonites entertained this Embassage very
contumeliously, and not according as David had intended it, and murmured
against their King, telling him that they were but spies sent by David to
inquire into their forces, 2 Samuel 10. v. 1, 2, 3, 4.
and discover the strength of their Country, David sends Ambassadors to
comfort the Son of the King of the Ammonites, who are b^sely abused.
under a pretext of kindness; advising him to stand upon his guard, and not to
give ear to his protestation, lest being deceived, he should fall into some
remediless inconveniency.

Nahas King of the Ammonites, supposing that his Governors spoke nothing but
truth, unworthily affronted the Ambassadors that were sent unto him: for
causing the half of v. 5. 6.
Which when David saw, he was much displeased, and protested that he would not
suffer that injury so easily to be digested, David is sore displeased with the
injury offered to his Ambassadors, intending revenge.
but that he would make War on the Ammonites, and revenge those indignities
that were offered to his Ambassadors. The Friends and Governors of Nahas
considering how they had violated and broken the Peace, and how for that
occasion they deserved to be punished; prepared for that War, and sent a
thousand talents to Syrus, King of Mesopotamia, desiring him that he would be
their confederate in that War, The Ammonites hire their confederates, and
prepare for the War against David.
and receive their pay: they requested the like of Subas: these Kings had 20000
footmen in pay. They hired also with their money the King of the Country called
Michas, and the fourth called Istob, which two brought

CHAP. VII.
How David overcame the Mesopotamians.
BUt David being nothing discouraged, v. 7, 8.
either with the confederacy, or force of the Ammonites; David sends out Joab
with the choicest flower of his Army against the Ammonites.
but trusting in God, since he was satisfied that his cause was just, persisted
to the revenge of those outrages which he had received from them. Having
therefore mustered under Joab the flower of his whole Army, he commanded him to
depart and make War upon them: who came and encamped himself before their chief
City Aramath; which when the Enemies perceived, they came forth and ranged
themselves in battle, not in one body, but two several parties. For their
confederates and allies were encamped apart in the Plain, and the Ammonites
stood in battle-array near unto their City gate, to make head against the
Hebrews. Joab perceiving this, took this course, Joab and Abisaies Armies,
that he might meet them without any disadvantage: for he chose out the ablest
and stoutest of his men to serve under him against Syrus, v. 9, 10, 11.
and the other Kings confederate with him, and gave the rest to his brother
Abisai; commanding him to oppose himself against the Ammonites whilst he
charged the rest; and appointing him, that if he perceived that the Syrians
were stronger than he, and did put him to the worst, that he should come to
succor him; promising to do the like, if he perceived him to be oppressed
Ammonites, When therefore he had exhorted his Brother to behave himself
valiantly, he sent him before to charge the Ammonites; and he on the other side
assailed the Syrians, who valiantly resisted him for a little space; but Joab
having slain many of them, constrained them at length to turn their backs.
Which when the Ammonites perceived (who were afraid of Abisai and his people)
retreated likewise, v. 12, 13* 14.
and following the example of their allies, Joabs victory.
they took their flight into the City. By which means, Joab having defeated his
Enemies, returned in triumph and with victory unto the King to Jerusalem.

Yet were not the Ammonites wholly weakened by this loss: for although they had
by experience a certain knowledge that the Hebrews were stronger than
themselves, yet would Chalama King of the Syrians on the other side of
Euphrates, whose confederacy they attained by bribes and huge sums of money.
This King had one called Sobac for his Lieutenant General, and under him
fourscore thousand foot, The year of the Wo^ld, 2910. before Christ's Nativity,
1540.
and ten thousand horse. David understanding that the Ammonit^s drew Sobac
also, Chalamas Lieutenant, so that he died of his wounds. Hereupon the
Mesopotamians yielded themselves unto David, 15, 16, 17* 18, 19.
and gave him many great and magnificent Presents. He therefore, by reason of
the Winter, The Syrians with the Ammonites assembled themselves against David.
retired to Jerusalem, but at the Spring he sent out his Lieutenant Ioab once
more to make War upon the Ammonites: who overrunning their Country, utterly
spoiled it, and shut them up in Aramath their principal City, which he besieged
and took. About this time it so fell out, that David (notwithstanding he were a
just man, and one that feared God, The Mesopotamians submit themselves to David.
and an exact observer of all the Laws and ordinances of his forefathers)
Bethsabe) bathing her self. Aramath besieged.
His passion became forthwith so impetuous, that he could not resist it;
whereupon he sent for her, and kept her with him till she conceived. She
desired him to bethink himself of some means whereby her shame might be
concealed, Hedro and Ruffinus, chap. 7.
and her life (which was in hazard, 2 Samuel 11. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
by the Law, for her Adultery) might be preserved. Who thereupon sent for Vrias
(Bethsabes Husband, and one of Joabs Captains, who at that time was at the
siege of Aramath) and enquired of him upon his arrival touching the state of
the siege, David's adultery.
and of the Army: who answering him that all things were fallen out according
to his wish; v* 5.
David took a part of his own supper and gave it him, Bethsabe certifieth the
King that she is with child.
willing him Vrias slept among his fellow soldiers near unto the person of the
King. Which when David understood, he asked him wherefore he repaired not to
his own house, v. 6, 7, 8.
according to the custom of Husbands that had been long absent: David sends
for Urias, and wills him to repair home unto his Wife; which he does not.
and why he visited not his Wife from whom he had been so long parted? Vrias
replied, That it became him not either to repose or take pleasure with his
Wife, whilst his companions and General lay upon the ground in the Enemies
Country. Which said, David commanded him to sojourn there all the day long, to
the end that on the next morrow, he might send him back again to Joab. That
night the King invited him to supper, v. 14, 15, 16, 17.
and although he were made drunk through the abundance of Wine he received,
David writes unto Joab to punish Urias.
which the King had purposely caused to be given him, Joab, Joab sets Urias
in a dangerous place to encounter with the Enemy.
commanding him to punish Vrias because he had offended him: enjoining him to
place him in the greatest danger, and in face of the Enemy, to the intent, that
he might be abandoned and left alone, whilst they that fought next unto him,
retired when they saw him charged. When he had thus written and sealed up the
Letter with his own seal, he delivered it to Vrias to carry to Joab: who
receiving the same, and conceiving the Kings pleasure, placed Vrias in that
quarter where he knew the Enemies would fight most desperately; appointing him
some of his best Soldiers to second him: he assured him, that if he could make
any breach in the wall he would come up to him with all his power, that he
might through that place force

Vrias (who was a good Soldier, Urias is set with some associates to attempt
the siege: the Ammonites sallying out, his company forsake him.
and a man of much honor and reputation among those of his Tribe, and refused
no danger) valiantly accepted the charge: But Joab privately appointed those
that were ranked next him, that when they should see the Enemy sally out with
the greatest fury, they should abandon Vrias. When therefore the Hebrews drew
naer unto the City, the Ammonites, fearing lest the Enemy should speedily Scale
and enter the City on that side where Vrias was placed, they chose out a
squadron of the most resolute men amongst them, v. 18, 19, 20.
and setting open their gates they furiously assaulted their Enemies. Urias
with some others is slain and the King is certified thereof*
They that were near Vrias seeing them draw near, retired back again according
as Joab had beforehand commanded them: but Vrias being ashamed Joab sent
messengers unto the King, to let him know, that not enduring the delay of the
siege, but attempting to carry the Town by Storm, he was compelled to return
back into his Camp, with the loss of some of his men; but he commanded the
messengers, that if they perceived the King to be displeased with the news,
they should let him know that Vrias was dead also.

The King hearing this seemed displeased, saying, that it was a fault in him
that he had so nerly approached the wall, v. 20, 21.
alleging that he might have done far better, to have taken the town by Mine,
David is displeased with the news of his overthrow.
or by battering it with his Engines; in the case of Abimelech instancing
Gideons son, who intending to surprise by force a tower that was within the
City of Tebez, was stricken with a stone that was cast at him by a woman:
whereof he died. In remembrance The year of the World, 2910* before Christ's
Nativity, 1054.
they ought to have been more wary, and not to have approached the Wall of the
Enemy so nearly. For it is the part of a Soldier to retain in his memory both
fatal and fortunate successes, to the end that when he shall be in the like
danger he may follow the one, and fly the other. Whilst he thus rebuked them,
the messenger certified him of Vrias death, which did somewhat appease him. v.
25.
So that he commanded them to tell Joab, that it was but an humane accident,
David is appeased, hearing of Urias death.
and that such was the nature of War, that sometime the one had the better and
sometime the other: To conclude, that he should provide for the siege, and take
care lest hereafter they should receive any further loss; counselling him by
Trenches and Engines to ruinate the wall, and commanding that all those that
were in the Town, should be put to the Sword. The messenger thus dismissed,
reported all these Joab, v. 26, 27.
according to the kings commandment. But Vrias Wife having notice of the death
of her Husband, David marries Bethsabe, who bears him a Son.
wept and mourned for him diverse days: and when her mourning for the dead was
ended, the King espoused her, and she bare him a man-child: Yet God beheld not
this Marriage with a favorable eye, but was wroth with David, and appearing to
the Prophet Nathan in a dream, he commanded him to reprove David. Now Nathan,
who was a wise and experienced man, knew well that when Kings are displeased,
they suffer themselves rather to be guided by passion, than by reason:
wherefore he thought fit to conceal the threatenings of God for that time; 2 Samuel 12 v, 1, 2, ad 6.
and to begin his discourse with something that should be less harsh to the
King; wherefore he addressed himself after this manner. Two men (said he) dwelt
in the same City: the one of them was rich, having much great and small
cattle; the other was poor, and had but one only sheep, v. 7* ad 13.
which he fed and loved like his children. It happened that this rich man had a
stranger came to his house, Nathan prophesies of David's punishment, and
sharply rebukes him: he is condemned by his own mouth, and repents himself.
for whose entertainment he would not suffer any one of his own Beasts to be
slain, but sent a messenger, who took away, by force, the poor man's sheep, and
caused it to be dressed, to entertain his guest. This report of Nathans much
displeased the King, inso much that he swore unto him, that he that had
committed such an act, was a wicked man, and that he should restore him
fourfold, and that afterward he should be put to death. Whereunto Nathan
replied, saying, That it was he that deserved this punishment, who had given
sentence against himself; in that he had presumed to commit so grievous a sin.
Moreover, he certified him of Gods displeasure, who, notwithstanding he had
made him King over all the Hebrews, and Lord over all the Nations round about,
which were many and great; and had protected him from the hands of Saul, and
had given him Wives, whom he had espoused lawfully, was so dishonored by him,
that he had taken another man's Wife, and caused her Husband to be slain. For
which sins, he pronounced that he should be punished by God, and his Wives
should be violated by one of his own Sons, who should likewise lay a snare for
him so that he should suffer an open shame for the sin he had committed in
secret. Moreover, (said he) the son which thou shall have by her, shall shortly
die.

After the had King received this message, v. 13. 14.
he was troubled, David confesses his sin, and obtains pardon at Gods hands.
and wept, confessing that he had done wickedly: for before this time he had
always feared God, and had never in his life offended him, but in the case of
Vria: whereupon after his submission, God was v. 15, 16, 17, 18.
and that he would be no more displeased with him, if he repented him of the
sin he had committed. David fasteth seven days, lamenting, and mourning for
his Son.
After Nathan had declared these things unto David he departed unto his own
house. But God, according to the word of the Prophet, inflicted a grievous
sickness on the infant that was born by Bethsabe: for which cause the King was
troubled, and for seven days space would eat no meat, although he was earnestly
pressed thereunto by his Servants. He put on likewise a mourning habit, and
clothed himself with Sackcloth, beseeching God that it would please him to
grant him the child's life. But when the infant was deceased about the seventh
day of his sickness, v. 20, 21.
his servants durst not let him know it, supposing that if it should come unto
his ear, David being certified that the child was dead, arises, and washing,
takes sustenance.
he would the more obstinately abstain from eating, v. 21, 22.
and changed his raiment, and presented himself before the Tabernacle of God,
David yields a reason why during the child's life he fasted, and why being
dead he took refection.
and commanded that they should bring him meat that he might eat. Whereat his
friends and Servants wondered, and besought him that they might know the cause,
he answered, while the child was alive, and I had hope of his recovery, I
omited no means whereby I might move God to mercy; but now after he is dead, it
were in vain for me to spend my self with unnecessary grief. Which when they
heard they v. 24.
After this Bethsabe his Wife brought him a second Son, who was called Solomon.
Solomon was born by Bethsabe*
Mean while Joab closely besieged the Ammonites, and cut off their water and
supplies of Provision; so that they were nigh famished for want of Victuals:
The year of the World, 2816. before Christ's Nativity, 1040.
for they had only one little spring, so that they feared lest it would be
suddenly

The King, Joab by letters solliciteth the King, to come to the surprisal of
Rabatha.
understanding what Joab had written, commended his affection and fidelity, and
taking with him all the forces which he had, he came to the taking in of
Rabatha, which being carried by force, and the plunder given to his Soldiers,
he reserved for himself the Crown of the King of the Ammonites, weighing a
talent of Gold, in the midst whereof was enchased a Sardonyx of great value, v.
27. ad finem*
which David wore upon his head. He found likewise in that City diverse spoils
of great price: David surprising Rabatha by force, gives it for a prey to his
Soldiers.
but the inhabitants he put to the Sword, and did the like in all the Cities of
the Ammonites which he took by force. But after Jerusalem, a great misfortune
befell his family, upon this occasion. He had a Daughter which was a Virgin,
fair and beautiful, and surpassed all other women in perfections, Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 8.
whose name was Thamar, born of the same Mother with Absolon. Of her, Amnon the
eldest Son of David became enamoured: and because he could not enjoy her at his
pleasure, 2 S^^. 13. 1. ad 19.
he grew so melancholy, that his body dried up, and his color changed through
grief. A certain cousin and friend of his called Jonathan, perceiving his
passion, and observing every day how Amnons beauty and strength decayed, came
unto him, and asked him the cause thereof, alleging that that indisposition of
his seemed to proceed from some amorous affection. Jonathan counseled Amnon
how he might enjoy his love.
Which when Amnon confessed, and how he was in love with his Sister by the
Fathers side, Jonathan suggested to him the Amnons ears, who presently
counterfeited a sickness; and laid him down on his Bed (as Jonathan had advised
him) and when David came to visit him, he desired him to send his Sister unto
him. When she came, he prayed her, that with her own hands, she would make some
Cakes for him, because they would the more content him if they were of her own
making: wherefore she in her Brothers presence tempered the flower, and made
certain Cakes, and fried them in the Pan, and presented them unto him: but he
tasted them not, but commanded all his Servants to retire out of his lodging,
because v. 13.
As soon as this commandment of his was performed, Amnon persuadeth his Sister
to submit to his lust.
he prayed his sister to bring the Meat into his inner Chamber: He followed
her, and discovering his passion began to offer violence. But the Virgin crying
out, endeavored what she could, to dissuade him from an action so sinful, and
dishonorable to their family; Amnon notwithstanding his Sisters resist
Violateth her.
or if he had not the power to resist the same, she advised him to require her
at his Fathers hands, and not to take her honor from her by force. But he
enraged with love, neglected all these sayings, and violated her,
notwithstanding all her resistance. And as soon as he he had satisfied his
lustful desire, he hated her and commanded her to arise and depart. She
answered, that this second outrage was more heinous than the former; for that
having violated her, he would not suffer her to remain Absalom met her and
enquiring what evil had befaln her, she reported all the injury which her
Brother Amnon had don her: whereupon he exhorted her to pacify her self, and
to suffer moderately whatsoever had befallen her; v. 20, 21.
and not to suppose herself to be dishonored by any act of her Brother.
Absalom comforetth his Sister Thama.
Whereupon she was somewhat pacified and remained a long Absalom unmarried.

David having intelligence of that which had happened, was displeased,
notwithstanding he loved Amnon very entirely, Ver. 24. ad 29.
(because he was his eldest son) and would not disquiet him: Absalom invited
his father and brethren to his sheep-shearing, and commands his servants to
kill Amnon, being overcharged with wine and sleep.
but Absalom hated him extremely, expecting some fit opportunity, wherein he
might revenge himself on the Ravisher. Now when two years were expired since
his sister was defloured, it chanced that Absalom intending a sheep-shearing in
Belsephon, a City of the Tribe of Ephraim, invited his Father and Brethren to
come to his Entertainment. But when the King refused to go, lest he might be
chargeable unto him, Absalom pressed and persuaded him to send his brothers
thither; which he granted. Hereupon Absalon commanded his servants that when
they should see Amnon charged with wine and sleep,

The year of the World, 2912. before Christ's Nativity, 1052.

How through the Domestic discord of his Family, David was banished by his Son
out of his Kingdom.
AFter that Absalom's servants had thus executed his Commandment, Ver. 30, 31.
a trouble and fear seized all the rest of his Brethren, David is certified
that all his sons are slain by Absalom.
insomuch as they suspected their own persons: wherefore mounting themselves on
Horseback, they posted all in haste toward their Father. But a Messenger who
arrived before them, reported unto David, that Absalom had slain all his sons.
Who, surprised with the dreadful apprehension of so heinous a crime, Ver. 32,
33.
But Jonathan, Jonathan comfort David, contradicting his fear in respect of
all his sons, and only upon just ^urmise suspecting Amnons death.
the son of Sama his Brother, exhorted him to moderate his passion, telling
him, That he could not be persuaded that the rest of his children were slain,
in that he could conceive no probable cause of conjecture. But as touching
Amnon, there needed no question, for that it was very like that Absalom (by
reason of the injury which was offered unto his sister Thamar) would hazard
himself to kill him. Mean while a great trampling of Horses, and a confused
Troop of Men break off their discourse. These were the David's sons resort unto
their father.
whom a little before he supposed to be lost, returned in safety, they gave
themselves over to tears and lamentations; the Brothers bewailed the loss of
their Brother, Ver. 34.
and the King his murdered Son. But Absalom fled into Gessur (unto his
Grandfather on the Mothers side, Absalom flies to his grandfather.
and Lord of that place) and sojourned with him three whole years: at the end
whereof, David determined to send for his Son Absalom, 2 Samuel 24. 1, ad 25.
not to punish him, but receive him into favor, (for the indignation he had
conceived against him, was at that time abated:) Joab also furthered this his
resolution by all means possible: Absalom, by the subtilty of a woman, and the
setting on of Joab, is revoked from banishment unto Jerusalem.
For he caused a certain old Woman, attired in mourning David, who said unto
him, That betwixt her two Sons that lived in the Country, there happened such a
difference, that falling to handy-strokes* they were so enraged one against the
other, that not enduring to be parted, the one of them so wounded the other,
that he died; and because her Relations were incensed against the Murderer,
and sought without mercy, to deprive him of life, she humbly besought the King
that he would give her her Sons life, and not deprive her of that only comfort
of her old age; which he should bring to pass, if so be he prohibited those
that would kill her son, from executing their intents: for except it were for
fear of him, they would by no means be withdrawn from their fatal and bloody
resolution. Now when the King had granted her Request, the Woman proceeded, I
most humbly thank your Majesty, (said she) who have had compassion of mine age,
and do so providently take care that I be not deprived of my Son; but that I
may be the better assured of thy sincerity, I beseech thee (O King) first of
all pacify thy displeasure conceived against thy Son, and be no more incensed
against him: For how can I persuade my self that you will grant me this favor,
if you your self continue your displeasure conceived, upon the like occasion,
against your Son? For it is contrary to the Rules of Wisdom, to add to the
irreparable loss of one Son, the voluntary deprivation of another. Upon these
words, the King began to suspect that Joab had suborned this Woman; and
understanding no less by the old Woman's report, he sent for Joab, and told him,
That he granted him that which he desired, commanding him to send for Absalom,
assuring him that his displeasure was pacified, and choler assuaged. Joab cast
himself down prostrate before the King, and returning him Thanks, he went unto
Gessur, and brought Absalom from thence with him to Jerusalem. The King
understanding that his Son was come, Ver. 24.
sent out a Messenger to meet him, commanding that as yet he should not presume
to come into his presence, Absalom revoked by his father, is commanded for a
time to fly his presence.
because he was not disposed to see him so suddenly. Whereupon he forbore to
show himself unto him, and went and dwelt amongst his own Friends, and Household
Servants: Neither was his beauty any way decreased by the sorrow he had
conceived, or for that his entertainment was far different from the quality of
a Princes Son; but he rather exceeded, and grew more famous thereby: so that
for beauty, and comeliness of person, he excelled all others; his Hair was so
thick, that it could scarcely be polled in eight days, and weighed 200 shekels,
which amount to five pound. He lived two years in Jerusalem, and was the Father
of Ver. 27, 28.
and one Daughter, which Roboam the Son of Solomon afterward took to Wife,
Absaloms children born in Jerusalem.
of whom he begat a Son called Abia. In process of time, he sent Messengers
unto Joab, to desire him that he would pacify his Father, and prevail with him
to admit him to his presence, The year of the World, 2816. before Christ's
Nativity, 1040.
that he might see him, and submit himself unto him. But receiving Joab, he
sent his servants, and commanded them to burn Joabs Cornfieldsd that joined
unto his: who hearing what had happened unto him, he came unto Absalom, accusing
him, and asking him, For what cause he had done him this injury? To whom
Absalom answered, I have (said he) invented this stratagem, to make thee come
unto me, seeing thou took'st no notice of the Address which I made, V. 30, 31,
32, 33.
to desire thee to reconcile my Father unto me. And now, I beseech thee, that
thou will move my Father in my behalf; otherwise, I shall think my return more
grievous than my banishment has been, Joab urged by the burning of his houses,
reconcileth Absa^om to his father.
if my Father shall yet continue his displeasure. Joab was persuaded through
the compassion he conceived of the necessity wherein he saw him, and went and
solicited the King, with whom he so effectually debated, Absalom, that
altering his disposition, he graciously sent and called for him. As soon as he
came unto his presence, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 9.
Absalom cast himself prostrate on the ground, asking pardon for his offenses:
but David raised and lifted him up, and promised that from thenceforth he would
no more upbraid him with those misdeeds. After these things had thus fallen
out, Absalom within a little space, provided a great number of Horses and
Chariots, 2 Samuel 15. 1, ad 6.
and entertained fifty Men for his Guard, and every day early in the Morning
presented himself before the Kings Palace, Absalom subtly affects his
fathers Kingdom.
and talked with those that resorted thither about the trial of their
differences: and whereas some of them lost their cause, he talked with them
according as he found them affected, alleging, That his Father had no good
Counselors, and that perhaps he himself had in some things judged amiss: and
by these means endeavored he to get the good will of all men, telling them,
That if he had the like authority, he would make them know by proof what his
equity was. Having by these plausible persuasions drawn the hearts of the
common People unto him, he was persuaded they would serve him in whatsoever he
intended.

Four years after his reconciliation, he came to his Father David, desiring
that he might go to Hebron, and sacrifice unto God, according as he had vowed
at such time as he fled from his presence. Which request when David had granted
him, he went thither, being attended with a great concourse of People, Ver. 10,
ad 14.
(by reason he had appointed diverse to meet him in that place, Absalom
proclaimed King.
amongst whom was Achitophel the Gelonite, one of David's Counselors, and 200
others of Jerusalem, who altogether ignorant of his design, assembled
themselves in that place to be assistant to his Sacrifice:) by all whom he was
declared King, David's ears, and he was assured how his Son had behaved himself;
he was much troubled for his impiety and arrogance: that he should so soon
forget the pardon, which he had obtained for his enormous Crimes; and, contrary
to all Law, plunge himself, and hazard his Reputation in more grievous
offenses, to pervert the state of the Kingdom which God had established, to
deprive his own Father of his Crown and Dignity; wherefore he resolved to fly
to the other side of Jordan, Ver. 14.
carrying with him his most trusty Friends, to whom he represented the
unbridled fury of Son, David departed out of Jerusalem.
remitting all things unto God, who judges all things; and leaving the
Government of his Royal House to the management Ver. 24. ad 30.
he departed from Jerusalem. David flying, prohibiteth the High Priests to
follow him, to the intent to give him intelligence of that which did pass.
He was accompanied with a great number of People, besides those 600 Soldiers,
who had followed him in his Banishment during Saul's lifetime. And although the
High Priests, Abiathar and Sadoc, with all the Levites, had resolved to depart
with him, yet persuaded he them to abide with the Ark, assuring them, that God
would deliver them, although the Ark should continue in its place. He commanded
Abiathar likewise to send him private intelligence of each occurrent that
should happen, reserving with him for most intimate and trusty Counselors,
Achimaas the son of Sadoc, and Jonathan the son of Abiathar.

But Ethei the Gittite, by no persuasions of the King, could be induced to
stay, but contrary to his Command, Ethei departed with David.
followed him, whereby he more manifestly expressed his affection toward him.
Ver. 31.
But as he went on his bare Feet up the Mountain of Olivet, and all they
Achitophel revolteth from David, and follows Absalom, whose counsels David
striveth by prayer to make frustrate.
(intermixing their travel with bitter tears) a certain Messenger came and
certified him, that Achitophhel was with Absalom. Which report aggravated and
increased his grief: so that he besought God, that it might please him to
alienate the affection of Absalom from Achitophel, that he might not give heed
unto any of his counsels, because Achitophel was a Man of a ripe judgment, and
ready execution in all that concerned him. As soon as he came unto the top of
the Mountain, he beheld the City: and, as if he had utterly been banished from
his Kingdom, he began, with abundance of tears, Ver. 32, etc.
to call upon God. Chusai is persuaded to submit to Absalom, and to cross
Achitophels counsels.
There met he with Chusai, his sincere and unfeigned Friend, whom, when he
beheld with his Garments rent, with ashes on his Head, and lamenting the
unhappy change which he beheld, David comforted him, and exhorted him Absalom,
under color that he had forsaken his part, where diligently prying into his
secrets, he might oppose himself Achitophels counsels, The year of the World,
2920. before Christ's Nativity, 1044.
because he could not do him so considerable service in attending on him, as he
might in staying with Absalon: Chusai being after this manner persuaded by
David, returned back to Jerusalem, where presently after he met with Absalon;
who repaired thither. In the mean time David marching onward a little further,
chanced to meet with Siba, Mephibosheths Servant, and Purveyor of all those
Goods which David had given him, 2 Samuel 16. 1, ad 5.
(for he was Jonathans Son, who was the Son of Saul.) This Man drove before him
two Asses laden with Victuals, which he presented to David and his company,
Siba accusing his master wrongfully, is made owner of his riches.
to refresh themselves; and being demanded, Where he had left Mephibosheth? In
Jerusalem (said he) where he expects to be chosen King, through the occasion
of those troubles that have happened, and in memory of the benefits that diverse
men had received at Saul's hands. David displeased with this false report, gave
Siba all those riches which he had conferred upon Mephibosheth in times past,
judging him more worthy of the same than Mephibosheth. Wherewith Siba was very
well contented.

When David drew near unto a place which is called Bachor, Ver. 5, ad 9.
a Kinsman of Saul's, Simei's reviling of David.
called Simei, the Son of Gera, came out against him, and cast stones at him,
and reviled him; and the more David's friends environed and defended him, the
more obstinately persevered he in his reproofs and scandalous railings: calling
him Murderer, and Captain of the wicked, charging him like an execrable Man,
to get him out of the Kingdom; giving God thanks for that he had deprived him
of his Kingdom, by the means of his own son, as a punishment for those Crimes
which he had committed against his own Master. David's followers to displeasure,
so that all of them were ready to revenge them on Simei; and amongst the rest,
Abisai would have slain him: Ver. 9, ad 15.
but David would not permit him, but commanded him to forbear: For fear, (said
he) least to our present miseries we annex a further and new occasion. David
forbids to kill Simei.
Forasmuch as concerns my self, I set light by this mad Dog, and refer the
matter to God, who has permitted him to be thus desperately bent against us.
Neither is it to be wondered at, that I suffer my self to be thus abused by him,
since mine own son is so wicked, that he dares openly declare himself my mortal
enemy; but God, through his goodness, will at length look upon us with an eye
of mercy, and his justice will certainly confound all those that have conspired
to my ruin. He therefore walked onward on his way, not caring what Simei said,
who ran on the other side David was arrived on the bank of Jordan, he mustered
and refreshed his Army, who were wearied with their march: mean while Absalon
entering Jerusalem with Achitophel his Counselor, Ver. 16, 17, 18.
was saluted and applauded by the concourse of the people; Chusai, under a
color offers his service to Absalon.
and amongst the rest, David's friend came unto him, who prostrated himself
before Absalons feet, wishing him a long and happy Reign. Absalon asked, how it
came to pass, that he who was reputed to be one of David's most intimate
friends, and esteemed always to be most loyal and faithful unto him, should at
that time (when occasion served to express his loyalty) abandon him, and submit
himself to his enemy? To whom Chusai answered readily, That it became him to
follow God, and the good will of the people.

(said he, my Sovereign) that both these are on your side, it concerns me to
follow you, because you have received the Kingdom from God: If therefore you
shall think fit to account me amongst your friends, I will approve unto you my
loyalty and affection in like manner, as to your knowledge I have done unto
your father, who ought not to be displeased at that which has happened, since
the Kingdom is not removed into another house, but remains in his own family,
because he who was his son received the same. By these words he reconciled
himself to Absalom, Ver. 20, 21, 22.
and removed all suspicion. Hereupon Achitophel was sent for to consult about
their affairs in hand: Achitophel persuadeth Absalon to lie with his fathers
concubines.
who advised him to abuse all his fathers Concubines, and make them his own.
For, (said he) from that time forward, the people will believe that you and he
will never he reconciled; and will be more ready to bear Arms, and oppose your
father (said he) they have unwillingly professed themselves to be his Enemies,
suspecting least a peace should be concluded betwixt the father and the son.
Absalom giving heed to this advice, caused a Tent or Royal Pavilion to be
pitched in the sight of all the people whereinto he entered, and enjoyed his
fathers Concubines, And thus was accomplished what was foretold by Nathan the
Prophet.

CHAP. IX.
Absalon's War against his Father: 2 Samuel 17. 1. ad 14.
his death, and the discomfiture of his Army.
Absalon had done that which Achitophel had advised him, Achitophels counsel
persuading Absalon to pursue David.
he requested him once more to counsel him concerning that War which he had
undertaken against his Father: Chusai's opposition.
who required 10000 chosen Men, by whose assistance he promised to kill David,
and to bring all that were with him under his subjection: assuring him, that
Absalon's Kingdom would be then established, The year of the World, 2816 before
Christ's Nativity, 1040.
when David's head was cut off from his shoulders. This counsel pleased Absalon,
whereupon he sent for Chusai, who was the chiefest amongst David's friends, (for
so David himself had termed him) to whom he discovered the advice which
Achitophel had given him, and required him to give his opinion what he thought
thereof: who knowing very well, that if Achitophels counsel were followed,
David would be in danger to be surprised and slain, enforced all his arguments
and counsels to the contrary. For, (said he) Sir, you are sufficiently informed
both what your Fathers valor is, and their virtue that accompany him; who has
fought many Battles, and has returned victorious over all his enemies. It is
not to be doubted but that he is at this present encamped in the field. For he
is well exercised in leading Armies, to prevent any stratagems, Achitophel has
given you. Therefore in my opinion (without following the advice of Achitophel)
your Majesty ought to gather together all your Forces, and to take the command
of them your self, without committing them to the conduct of any other, and by
this means you may assuredly expect to have an easy victory over him, if you
assail him in the open field, because he is accompanied with a very few men,
and your self are attended by many thousands, who Ver. 14.
And if so be your father shut himself up in any City, Chusai's counsel
accepted: Achitophels rejected.
we may easily take the same by Mines and Engines. This advice of his seemed to
be better than that of Achitophels, so that Absalon accepted it. For it was God
that put this into his heart, to neglect Achitophels, and respect Chusai 's
counsel.

Now when Chusai had thus prevailed, he presently went to the High Priests
Sadoc and Abiathar, acquainting them with Achitophels designs, and how he had
contradicted him; finally, how his opinion had taken place, giving them in
charge to send private intelligence unto David thereof, and to inform him of
his sons resolution; wishing him with all speed to pass over the River of
Jordan, lest Absalon, being informed of his abode

The High Priests beforehand, Ver. 15, 16.
had provided that their sons should lie hid without the City, Sadoc and
Abiathars sons sent unto David.
on purpose, that they might be sent unto David, to inform him how affairs
went. They therefore sent a trusty servant unto their sons, who brought them
news of Absalons intentions, with express commandment to inform the King
thereof with all speed, who presently, upon this intelligence, like good and
faithful ministers, posted away, to report their fathers message unto the King.

But scarcely had they traveled two furlongs, Ver. 17, 18, ad 22.
when certain Horsemen discovered them, Absalon, who presently sent out Scouts
to apprehend them: The High Priests sons being pursued, are hidden by a Woman
in a Pit.
which when the children of the High Priest perceived, they forsook the
Highway, and retired into a certain Village near unto Jerusalem, which is
called Bocchura, where they besought a certain Woman to hide them, and shut
them in some place of security, who let them down into a Well, and covered the
mouth thereof with bundles of Wool. She being demanded by those that pursued
them, Whether she saw them? denied the same, saying, That as soon as she had
given them drink, they departed from her presently, assuring them, that if they
presently pursued them, they might easily apprehend them: But after they had a
long time followed, Ver. 22.
and could not find them, David informed of Absalons deliberation, passes
himself and his whole Army over Jordan by night.
they returned from whence they came. The Woman perceiving that they were
departed, and that there was no cause of fear, lest the young men should be
surprised, she drew them out of the Pit, and David, and declared unto him
Absalons designs. Hereupon David passed the River Jordan with all his men, and
although it were night, he was not discouraged by the darkness.

But Achitophel seeing that his counsel was rejected, Ver. 23.
took his Horse, and went unto his Country of Gelmone: Achitophel perceiving
his counsel was despised, hung himself.
there calling together his household servants, he related unto them what advice
he had given Absalon; which since he had not accepted, he told them that they
should shortly find that he was a lost man, and that David would be victorious,
and return into his Kingdom. It is better therefore, said he, for me, as it
becomes a valiant man, to depart out of this life, than to submit my self to
David's punishment, for having joined my self unto Absalon, and giving him
counsel. This said, he went into the most private David having past Jordan,
came The year of the World, 2940. before Christ's Nativity, 7300.
the best fortified in that Country: there was he kindly entertained by all
the Noblemen of that Country, partly moved thereunto by the man's present
necessity; partly through the reverence of his former felicity. The chief of
these were Berzillai the Galaadite, and Siphar the Governor of the Province of
the Ammonites, Ver. 24. ad fin:
and Machir the chief of the Country of Galaad, who supplied David and his
Army with whatsoever they wanted: David c^meth to Mahanaim, where he is royally
entertained by the Peers.
so that they lacked neither beds, nor bread, nor flesh, but were plentifully
stored with all things. They that were sick and wearied also, wanted nothing
that either might serve for their repose or refection. In this state remained
he. But Absalon assembled a great multitude of people to make War upon his
father, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 10.
and after he had passed Jordan, he pitched his Tents near unto his fathers,
within Galaad, and made Amasa General of his Army, opposing him against Joab
his cousin: Ver. 24.
for Amasa was the son of Jothar and Abigal, the sister of Sarvia, the mother
of Joab, Absalon passes over Jordan.
both of them sisters unto David. When David had mustered and numbered his
Forces, and found that he had 40000 fighting men, it was thought sit to put it
forthwith to a battle, and not to expect till Absalon should attack him.

He therefore appointed Colonels over thousands, and divided them into three
squadrons; 2 Samuel 18. 1, 2.
the one of which he gave to Joab, the second to Abisai his brother, and the
third to Ethei his familiar friend (who was of the City of Geth.) The division
of David's Army.
In this battle his friends would not permit him to be present, Ver. 3.
(and that upon good consideration) for they said, That if they should be
defeated in his company, David's friends dissuade his presence in the battle.
they should utterly lose all hope: but if one squadron should be overcome, the
rest might have recourse unto him, who might unite and reinforce; the rather,
for that the enemies would always think it likely, that he had some other
recruits with him. This counsel pleased him, for which cause he remained within
the City. But at such time as he sent out his friends unto the battle, he
besought them (that in remembrance of all the benefits and favors he had
bestowed on them) they would both show themselves courageous in the fight, Ver.
4, 5.
and that having obtained the victory, David commands them to spare his son.
they would spare his son, for fear least his death should increase and
redouble his discontents. Thus praying God to give them victory, he dismissed
them to the battle, But when Joab had placed his Army right over against the
enemy, and had extended them on the Plain, having a Wood upon their backs;
Absalon also drew out his Army against him; so that Ver. 6, 7.
they performed many notable actions on both parts: the one hazarding
themselves in all dangers, The battle betwixt Joab and Absalon.
and employing all their affections, to the intent that David might recover his
Kingdom: the others neither refusing to do or endure any thing, so that Absalon
might not be deprived, or exposed to his fathers punishment and displeasure for
his insolent attempt. Besides that, they held it an indignity for them, that
being so great in number as they were, they should be overcome by such a
handful of people as followed Joab: thinking it an utter disgrace unto them,
that being so many thousands of them in Arms, they should be discomfited by
David's followers.

But Joab and his men being more skilful and trained in feats of Arms than the
rest, Ver. 8, 9.
discomfited and brake Absolons Army: The flight and overthrow of Absalons Army.
so that they fled through Woods, and into strong David's Soldiers pursuing
after them, took some, and slew others; so that both in flight and fight, a
great number of them were put to the Sword: for there fell that day about 20000
Men. But all David's Troops freshly set upon Absalon, who was easily known by
his beauty and stature: he fearing to be surprised by his enemies, mounted upon
a swift Mule, and fled in great haste. But by the swift motion of his body, his
locks being scattered abroad, his bush of Hair was entangled in a thick and
branchy Tree, where he hung after a strange manner, and his Mule ran onward
with great swiftness, as if she had as yet born her master on her back: but he
hanging by the Hair amidst the branches, suddenly fell into his enemies hands.
This when a certain Soldier perceived, he brought news thereof unto Joab, who
promised him to give him 50 sicles, if he would kill him.

David had requested them to spare him. Hereupon Joab commanded him to show him
the place where he had seen Absalon hang: who had no sooner discovered him, but
thrusting a Javelin to his heart, he slew him. A ver. 9, ad 15.
That done, Joabs Esquires surrounded the Tree, took him down, Joab kills
Absalon.
and cast him into a deep Pit, they overwhelmed him with stones: so that in
appearance it seemed to be a Tomb or Monument. After this, when Joab had
sounded a retreat, he withdrew his Soldiers from pursuit, as thinking it
unnatural for one Countryman to imbrue his hands in the blood of another.
Absalon had erected in the Royal Valley, Ver. 17, 18.
two furlongs distant from Jerusalem, a Marble Pillar, with an Inscription upon
it, to Absalons marble pillar.
his memory might be preserved by that Monument which he had erected. Now he
had 3 sons, and a daughter called Thamar, who was married to Roboam, David's
Nephew, and had by him a son called Abia, who succeeded his father in the
Kingdom; of whom we shall speak more at large.

CHAP. X.
The happy state of David being restored unto his Kingdom. The year of the
World, 2920. before Christ's Nativity, 1044.

AFter that Absalon was slain, Ver. 21, ad 32.
all the people returned privately to their own houses: but Achimaas, Chusai
sent to certify David of the victory.
the son of the High Priest Sadoc, drew near unto Joab, requiring his leave to
repair unto David, and to certify him of the victory, and how by Gods help and
providence he had vanquished his enemies. This did the General deny him,
telling him, That it was not convenient that he, who heretofore was wont to
bring joyful news, should now certify the King of his sons death. He therefore
commanded him to stay, and calling Chusai to his presence, he gave him
commission to certify the King of that Achimaas requested him the second time
that he would suffer him to go, promising him that he would make no mention but
of the victory; and that as touching Absalons death, he would not utter any
thing: whereupon he dismissed him also, who choosing the shorter way,
outstripped Chusai. Now as David sat in the gate of the City, (expecting some
messenger that might certify him of the success of the battle) one of the
Sentinels perceiving Achimaas, that came running hastily, and not being able to
distinguish who it was, told David that he saw a messenger coming toward him:
who answered, that it was some one that brought joyful news. Anon after, he
told him that a certain other messenger followed: to whom David answered
likewise, that it was one that brought glad tidings. And when the Watchman
perceived that it was Achimaas, Sadoc the High Priests son, and that he was
near at hand, he ran first of all and certified David; Ver. 33.
who was very glad thereof, saying, That he brought some good and desirable
news touching the event of the battle: David hearing of Absalons death by
Chusai, grievously bewaileth him.
and no sooner had the King spoken the word, but Achimaas entered, and fell down
upon his face before David, to whom he reported that his Army had the victory.
Being afterward demanded what was become of Absalon? He answered, That he
incontinently departed from the Camp, as soon as the enemies were put to
flight, but that a great number of Soldiers pursued Absalon: and further then
that he knew nothing, because by Joabs commandment he was speedily sent away to
bring tidings of the victory. When Chusai was come, and had humbled himself
before the King, and had declared unto him the success of the battle, the
question Absalon did? whereunto he answered: The like fortune happen to all
thine enemies (O King) as has happened to Absalon. These words quite
extinguished the delight and joy that David conceived in the victory, and the
excess thereof much troubled his servants; for the King ascending into the
highest part of the City, bewailed his son, beating his breast, tearing his
hair, and afflicting himself after such a sort as cannot be expressed, and
crying out in a mournful manner: My son, (said he) would God, my son, that I
were dead with thee. For although of his own nature he was of a tender
disposition, yet loved he Absalon above all the rest of his children.

When the Army and Joab were informed that David lamented his son in his sort,
2 Samuel 19. 1, 2, 3, 4.
they had this respect unto him, Joab and his army enter the city in mournful
manner.
that they would not enter the City after a triumphant and victorious manner:
but they entered hanging down their heads, and weeping all of them most
tenderly, as if they had returned from some defeat. But when the King, having
his head covered, persevered to bewail his son, Joab entered in unto him, and
said, O King, you consider not that in this behavior of yours, you dishonor
your self: for it is to be thought that you hate those that love you, and
expose themselves to all perils for your sake; yea, that you hate your self and
your own succession: and that contrariwise, you love your most mortal enemies
most entirely, since you bewail them, when they are justly deprived of their
lives. For if Absalom had had the victory, and had possessed the Kingdom, there
had not any one of us been left alive that love you, but had all suffered
death; nay, and in the first rank, your self and your own children: neither
would they, being our enemies, have lamented, but laughed at our deaths; Ver.
5, ad 8.
they would punish them likewise, David is taxed for lamenting his son, and
upon Joabs persuasion presents himself unto the people.
who should have any compassion of our miseries: yet are you not ashamed to
lament after this manner, for a man that hated you, who, although he received
his life from you, yet he showed not that honor and respect which he was
obliged to express toward a father. Desist therefore from thy unjust
lamentation, and offer thy self in presence to thy well-deserving Soldiers, and
give them thanks, that by their valor have obtained this victory: otherwise if
thou continue as thou have begun, this day will I translate the Kingdom from
thee, and give thee a more just occasion to lament than hitherto thou have had.
By these words Joab allayed the Kings Lamentations, and drew him to the care of
his Commonweal; for clothing himself in a Royal habit, whereby he might appear
the more glorious unto his Soldiers, he sat in the gate: so that all the
people hearing thereof, flocked

Absalons Army, returning home unto their houses, sent messengers to every
Village, to remind them how many benefits they had received at David's hands,
and how after many and grievous Wars, he had brought them to a secure liberty,
and how unjustly they had revolted from him, and translated the Kingdom unto
another. For which cause it behooved them, since he was dead whom they had
chosen, Ver. 9.
to make their submission unto David, that he might be reconciled to them, The
kingdom of Israel is once more offered unto David.
and receive the people into his favor, and that according as heretofore, so
now also, he would vouchsafe them his pardon and protection. David being
informed of these things, by express Letters, commanded Sadoc and Abiathar the
chief Priests, that they should certify the Princes of the Tribe of Juda, that
it would be David to the Kingdom before them, especially since he was of their
Tribe. In like manner he commanded them to speak with Amasa the General, Ver.
13, 14.
and expostulate with him, why he who was his Nephew by the sisters side, David
not only gives Amasa his pardon, but makes him General also of the whole Army.
did not persuade the Army to recommend the Kingdom to his hands: willing them
to assure him, that he was not only to hope for pardon for that which was past,
but also for the government of the whole Army, according as Absalon had granted
it unto him. Hereupon the High Priest not only conferred with the Princes, but
also informed Amasa what the King had promised in his behalf, whereby they drew
him to their party. Ver. 15.
And first of all, The Tribe of Juda comes as far as Jordan to meet with
David, and make a Bridge over the flood.
those of his own Tribe recalled David into his Kingdom; the rest of the
Israelites by their example, and Amasa's authority, did the Jerusalem. But the
Tribe of Juda signalized themselves above the rest, by going out as far as the
bank of Jordan to meet him: with these came Simei the son of Gera, with a
thousand men, which he had brought with him of the Tribe of Benjamin; Siba
likewise Saul's freeman came thither with his 15 sons, and 20 servants, who made
a bridge over Jordan, that the King might the more easily pass over with his
Army. As soon as he came unto Jordan, he was saluted by the Tribe of Juda:
Simei is pardoned.
and Simei marched forward on the bridge, and prostrating himself at the Kings
feet, Ver. 22, 23.
asked pardon for his offenses, and besought him to be reconciled: and that in
recovering his authority, he would not make him the first example of his
justice, but that he should remember this also, that he had repented of his
error, Abisai, Joabs brother, spoke after this manner: Why should he not dye
that has thus villanously reproached the King, whom God has established? But
David turned back unto him, and said, Ye sons of Servia, will you never cease
to promote new troubles, and to add new divisions to your former commotions?
Know ye not that this is the first day of my Reign? For which cause I swear an
oath that I will pardon all them that have committed any crime against me, and
that no one man shall depart from me without my pardon. For which cause be of
good cheer Simei, and fear thou not that I will seek thy blood. Whereupon he
cast himself down before the King, and afterward marched on his way. After
this, Mephibosheth, Saul's Grandchild, came out to meet him, clothed in mean
apparel, having David fled and forsook the City, he had been so afflicted, that
he neither had trimmed his Hair, nor changed or cleansed his garment, supposing
this calamity to touch him as nearly as it did the King: A v. 24, ad 33.
and he was the rather grieved, that Siba his steward, had unjustly detracted
from him, Mophibosheth purges himself of Siba's slanders.
and accused him to the King. After he had prostrated himself, and adored the
King, David asked him, For what cause he forsook him in his troubles, and
offered not himself to accompany him in his flight? Who answered, That it was
the wickedness of Siba, who was the cause thereof: for he, said he, being
commanded to prepare my necessaries for that journey, neglected the execution
thereof, contemning both me and it, as if I had been some abject slave:
otherwise, had I had the use of my feet, and the means to have waited on thee
in thy journey, I had never endured to have forsaken thee. Neither was he
contented to hinder me from performing my duty, and to give your Majesty a
testimony of my affection and loyalty, but furthermore, he has maliciously
incensed your Majesty against me: yet know I well, that your wisdom will not
give credit to his detractions, both for that you are just, as also for that
GOD and Truth, which you only aspire to, are only beloved by you. For,
whereas during my Grandfathers days, you were always conversant amongst the
greatest dangers, and persecuted by him; and whereas all our posterity by that
means deserved to be utterly extinguished, yet have you used moderation and
meekness in forgetting those indignities, when it was in your power to revenge
them. And notwithstanding all these things, you have entertained me like your
Friend, feasted me at your Table, and dignified me with no less Honors, than
if I had been one of your nearest Kinsmen. When David heard these things, he
thought neither good to punish Mephibosheth not to examine whether Siba had
wrongfully accused him; but after he had certified him, that he had given Siba
all his Goods, yet did he pardon him, and promise him the restitution of half
his possessions. Whereunto Mephibosheth Let Siba possess the whole, it only
suffices me, that I see your Majesty restored again to your Kingdom. After
this, David invited Berzillai the Galaadite (a virtuous man, and of great
authority, and by whose bounty, during the time of his War, he was assisted,
David pardons Mephibosheth, and restores him to the half of his possessions.
and who had attended him as far as Jordan) to accompany him unto Jerusalem,
promising him to make no less account of him than of his Father, and assuring
him that he would allow him all things that were suitable to his age and
quality. But he being desirous to live in private, besought his Majesty to
dismiss him from the Court, because (as he said) his age was so great as it
made him unfit for pleasures, v. 31, ad 37.
considering that he had attained to the age of fourscore years: Ber^illai
excuses himself, and will not resort to Jerusalem.
alleging, that it beter became him to think of David to favor him so much,
as that he might govern himself according to his own desire, because that by
reason of his age he neither knew how to savor meat nor drink; besides, for
that his hearing was lost, so that he could not distinguish or discern the
sound of instruments, wherein they who converse in Kings Courts do most usually
take such delight.

To this David replied, since (said he) thou do so earnestly request me to
give thee leave to depart from me, I dismiss thee: but leave thou thy Son
Achimaas with me, that I may express that kindness unto him which thou have
deserved. Hereupon Berzillai left his Son with him, and taking leave of the
King (with prayer that God would grant him the fullness of his desires) he
returned to his own house. v. 41, 42, 43.
But David went unto Gilgal The Tribe of Judas accusation, and excuse, for that
without the knowledge of the other Tribes they had gone out to meet the King.
and the whole Tribe of Juda.) Thither resorted then unto him the chief
governors of that country, attended by a great multitude of people,
complaining unto the Tribe of Juda, for that unwitting to the rest they had
resorted to him, when as by a mutual consent they should all of them have met
him together. But the Princes of the Tribe of Juda requested them in no sort to
misinterpret their prevention of them. For that by reason of their alliance,
and being of the same Tribe with the King, they were obliged to show him a more
particular respect, neither for that diligence of theirs received they any
reward, 2 Samuel 20. 1, ad 8.
whereby they that came after should think themselves prejudiced. Siba a
seditious person incenseth the people to rebel against the King.
This answer of theirs the Princes of the Tribes took not in good part, but
spoke thus unto their brethren: We wonder (said they) that you only challenge
the King to be your kinsman, as if he were not to be accounted an Ally unto us
all, whom God has equally placed to be Governor over us all; when as
therefore the whole people consists of eleven parts, you only are but one;
besides, we are your elders: so that you have not dealt uprightly, David's
concubines, whom Absalon had deflowred are sequestered from ^im.
in that you have secretly sought out the King, without giving us notice of
your design. Whilst the Governors after this manner debated the matter, a
certain wicked seditious person called Siba, the Son of Bochri, of the Tribe of
Benjamin, standing up in the midst of the people, began to cry out with a loud
voice, and exclaim after this manner: We have no part with David, nor
inheritance with the Son of Jess^e* This said, he sounded a Trumpet, and
proclaimed War against the King, so that all men followed him, and forsook
David. Only the tribe of Juda remained with Jerusalem: upon his first coming
thither he removed his Concubines (which his Son Absalon had known) out of his
Palace, and never after that time had any company with them. After this he
declared Amasa General of the Army, and placed him in the same degree which
Joab had, near unto the Person of the King; commanding him that he should
assemble what forces he could out of the Tribe of Juda; and that within three
days he should return unto him, to the end that having delivered him both the
Army and the place of General, he might send him to make War upon the Son of
Bochri. Joab by reason of Amasa's delay is sent out against Siba by David.
After that Amasa was departed, and had employed his time in gathering up his
Army; the King seeing that he failed to return upon the third day, told Joab
that it was dangerous to permit Siba to gather a greater head by Absalon had
done. For which cause (said he) stay thou not, but take unto thee those forces
which thou have in readiness, and my six hundred men, with thy brother Abisai;
and pursue thou the Enemy, and in what place soever thou meetest him, by all
means endeavor to give him the Battle. Haste therefore, and overtake him, lest
he seize some of our strongest Cities, and thereby create us a greater trouble.

Joab with all expedition obeyed his commandment, and took with him the six
hundred, with his Brother Abisai, and commanded all the forces that were in
Jerusalem to follow after him, and marched in good order after Siba. When he
came unto Gabaon (a Village about forty furlongs distant from Jerusalem) Amasa
met him, with great forces. Joab having his Sword girt by his ^ide, v. 9, 10.
whilst Amasa came onward to salute him, he on purpose Joab kills Amasa.
and taking it up from the ground with one hand, he drew near unto Amasa, under
pretense to salute him, and taking him by the beard, he David had equalled him
in honor with him; for which very cause heretofore he had slain Abner.
Notwithstanding that act of his seemed in some sort more excusable, by reason
of the wrong which he had pretended to be done unto his Brother Azael, v. 9, 10.
yet was not this a sufficient color to excuse the murder of Amasa. Joab
kills Amasa.
When this was done, he pursued Siba, and left a certain man to wait upon the
body of Amasa* who had commandment given him to proclaim, with a loud voice,
Joab, and his Brother Abisai; whilst his body lay thus in the way, and all the
multitude (as it is usual in such like accidents) flocked round about it, he
that had charge of the body took it up, and bare it into a certain place out of
the way, and covered it with a Garment: which done, all the people followed
Joab.

Now whilst he pursued Siba through all the Region of the Israelites, he told
him that he had retired himself into a certain strong City called Abelmacha;
where he no sooner arrived, but that he begirt the City, and entrenched it
round about, commanding his Soldiers to undermine and overthrow the walls: for
he was much incensed because they had shut the gates against him. Joab
besieges and shuts up Siba within Abelmachaea.
But a certain prudent woman, seeing her country in extreme Joab; who coming
forth unto her, she spoke after this manner, God has ordained Kings and
Generals of Armies, to the end they might destroy the Enemies of the Hebrews,
and plant amongst them an universal and perpetual peace; v. 16. ad 22.
but you enforce your selves to destroy one of the chief Cities of Israel, A
woman rebukes Joab for seeking the subversion of the City, which he rather
ought to protect.
that has in no sort offended you. Joab declared, that far from any such
design, he wished them all happiness and prosperity, and said, that for his own
part it was not his meaning that any one of the City should die, neither his
pretense to raze and deface so famous a City; his intent only was that if Siba
the Son of Bochri and the Kings adversary were delivered into his hands, to do
justice on him, he would raise the siege, and cause his Army to retire from
thence. When the woman heard what Joab had said, Joabs conditions of peace
proposed to the besieged.
she prayed him to stay a little while, promising him Wretched men that you
are, The punishment of Siba.
will you miserably suffer your Wives and Children to be slain for a wicked
man's cause, and a stranger whom ye know not? will you admit him in the place of
David your King, from whose hands you have received so many benefits? v. 23. ad
finem
think you that one only City can resist so vast an Army? Officers distributed
by David*
After this manner persuaded she them to cut off Sibas head, and to cast it
into Joabs camp: which done, Joab commanded the retreat to be sounded, and
raised the siege; and returning back unto Jerusalem, was once more declared
General of all the people. The King also appointed Benaja Captain of his
Guards, and of six hundred Soldiers. Adoram was made Treasurer to gather in the
Tributes; Sabath and Achilaus had Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 2.
Susa was made Secretary; Sadoc and Abiathar were made the Highpriests. 2 Samuel
21. 1. 2.
After this, it happened that the Country was afflicted with a famine: For which
cause David besought God that he would have compassion on his people, A famine
infl^cted on the Israelites for breach of oath.
and that it might please him to manifest not only the cause, but also the
remedy of the malady. The Prophets answered him, that God would be revenged of
the wrong done to the Gibeonites whom King Saul had deceived and traitorously
slain, without respect of the oath, which the Governor Josuah and the Elders
made unto them. If therefore he would suffer the Gibeonites to revenge the
death of their slaughtered friends according to their desire, God had promised
to be appeased, and to deliver the people from their imminent and present
evils. As soon as he understood by the Prophets what God required, he sent
Gibeonites, and asked them what it was which they required? who wished him to
deliver into their hands seven of Saul's Sons to take their revenge on them:
whereupon the King made search after them, only sparing and protecting
Mephiboseth the Son of Jonathan. v. 7, 9.
When the Gibeonites had laid hold of these seven, Seven men of Saul's kindred
delivered to the Gabeonites to be puni^hed.
they executed them according to their pleasures: and thereupon God
incontinently sent down Rain, and disposed the earth to bear fruit; allaying
the drought, so that the Land of the Hebrews recovered again its former
fruitfulness. Not long after, the King made War upon the Philistines, and
vanquished them in a great Battle; but it so fell out, that the King hotly
pursuing the chase, was left alone, and discovered in his weariness by one of
the Enemies called A^mon, v. 16. 17.
the Son of Araph of the race of the Giants, David in hazard of (...) life is
delivered by Abisai.
who beside his Sword had a Javelin, David very violently, with an intent to
kill the King of his enemies, by reason that he saw him spent with travel. But
about the same instant, Abisai, Joabs Brother, arrived in the place, The year
of the World, 2924, before Christ's Nativity, 1400.
who stepped between them, ane preserved the King, and slew his David persuaded
to abstain from War.
by reason of his forwardness, and by that means should deprive the people of a
most excellent Prince whose wise conduct was the chief security of their
happiness. The King having intelligence that the Philistines were assembled in
the City of Gazara, sent out an Army against them, in which the Hittite, Sobach
one of David's chief Captains behaved himself very valiantly, v. 18, 19, 20.
and got great reputation: for he slew diverse of them that vaunted themselves
to be of the Race of the Giants, David's valiant Captains Sabath.
and that were very proud and puffed up with presumption of their valor, and
was the chief author of that victory Hebrews obtained.

After this last defeat, the Philistines once more hazarded their fortunes,
against whom when David sent out an Army, Nephan his kinsman showed himself
very valiant. For fighting hand to hand against him that was accounted the most
valiant Champion amongst all the Philistines, he slew him, and put the rest to
flight, very many of them dying in the Battle. in process of time they
re-incamped near unto a City not far from the Frontiers of the Country of the
Hebrews: Nephanus.
In this Army their was a man six Cubits high, who had on either foot six toes,
and on either hand six fingers. Against whom Jonathan the Son of Sama (one of
those that were sent by David in this Army) fought hand to hand, Jonathan.
and slew him: so that approving himself to be the means of that victory,
Philistine boasted likewise that he was descended of the Race of the Giants.
After this Battle, they warred no more on the Israelites. Hereupon David,
delivered from War and danger, and ever after enjoying a perfect peace,
composed Odes and Hymns in praise of God, in diverse kinds of verse: 2 Samuel 72.
per totum,
for some were Trimeters, other were Pentameters. He made Instruments also,
David a Poet.
and taught the Levites to praise God upon them, on the Sabbath days and other
Feasts. David's instruments of Music.
The form of these Instruments was after this manner. The Vaial was Composed of
ten strings, and played upon with a bow. The Nable contains twelve sounds of
cords and is stricken with the fingers. The Cymbals were large and made of
Brass, 2 Samuel 23. 8, 9.
of which it suffices, in this sort, to make some mention, lest the nature of
those David's thirty eight champions.
Now all those that were about the King were valiant men; but amongst all the
rest, there were eight most notable and heroic men. The noble actions of five
of which I will declare, which will give some specimen of that extraordinary
and heroic courage by which they were able to conquer whole Nations. The first
of them was Issem the Son of Achem, who having thrust himself into the midst of
his disordered Enemies, Issem.
never gave over fighting till he had slain nine hundred of them. Eleazar.
After him was Eleazar the Son of Dodeias, who had accompained the King in
Sarphat: He, in a certain Battle (wherein through the multitude of the Enemies,
the Israelites were affrighted and put to flight) kept his place, and faced the
Enemy, and rushing in among them, made a great slaughter of them, so that
through the Israelites seeing the Philistines put to flight, by him, came down
and ran upon them, and obtained a great victory over them. For Eleazar
slaughtered those that fled, and the rest of the Army followed and spoiled
those that were slain. The third was the Son of Ilus called Sebas, who fighting
against the Philistines, in a place called the Jaw, (and seeing the Hebrews to
be afraid of their power, and almost out of heart) resisted them alone, as if
he had been an Army, and slew some of them, and pursued and put the rest to
flight, in that they were unable to sustain his force and violence. These three
performed, with their own hands, these great atchievments. About that time that
the King lived in Jerusalem, the Army of the Philistines came out to make War
upon him; David (as we have declared heretofore) was gone up into the higher
City to ask counsel, of God, what the event of that War should be; and the
Enemies being encamped in that Valley (that extends it self as far as
Bethleem, a City some twenty Furlongs distant from Jerusalem,) David said to
his companions: There is very good water in the place where I was borne, Sebas.
and especially that which is in the pit, v. 13 ad 16.
which is near unto the gate; if any one will bring me of that water to drink I
shall esteem it more than if he gave me gaeat riches. Three Champions pass
through the Enemies camp, and drew water in Bethleem, and brought it unto David.
These three men hearing these words, instantly ran out, and past through the
Enemies Camp, and went to Bethleem; where having drawn water, they returned
back unto the King, forcing their way through the midst of their Enemies,
declaring that the Philistines being afraid of their hardiness, and great
courage, kept themselves that it was bought After these three followed Abisai
Joabs Brother, who slew six hundred of the Enemy in one day. The fifth was
Banaia of the race of the Levites, who being defied by certain Brothers, famous
amongst the Moabites for their valor, overcame them. Abisai.
Moreover a certain Egyptian of a wonderful stature, having defied him
(notwithstanding the said Banaia was naked and the other Armed) yet charged he
him, Banaja.
and took away his Javelin and slew him. To these foresaid acts of his, a man
may annex this as the most valiant, or very nearly equalling the rest. For it
came to pass, v. 18.
that after a certain Snow, a Lion fell into a pit (whose mouth was so narrow,
Banaia slew an Egyptian with his own spear.
especially since it was at the same time covered with Snow) where being
enclosed, and seeing no means to escape, he roared out: which when Banaia who
passed that way heard, he followed the voice, and drew near unto the place; and
afterward went down into the pit, where with a staff he bare in his hand, he
fought with, overcame and slew the Lion. The thirty three other were of like
valor and courage. v. 24.
But King David being desirous to know how many thousand men he could number
amongst the people, Banaia slew a Lion.
and forgetting the commandment ordained by Moses (who had given order that if
the people should be numbered, Hedio and Rufnus, cap. 13.
there should be paid unto God for every head half a sicle) he commanded Joab
to go and number all the people: 2 Samuel 24. 1, ad 10.
and although Joab represented it unto him as a David sends Joab to muster
the people.
yet could he not persuade him, but that he enjoined him with all expedition,
to set forward on his way, and muster the people of the Hebrews.

Hereupon Joab took with him the principals of the Tribes and the Scribes, and
went about the Country of the Hebrews, to know how many there were; and at the
end of nine months and twenty days, v. 9, 10.
he returned to Jerusalem to the King, and presented him with the list of the
people, The sum of the Israelites that were numbered.
the Tribe of Benjamin only excepted (for he neither numbered that Tribe, nor
the Tribe of Levi.) The King when it was now too late, perceiving that he had
displeased God, was very sorrowful and pensive. The number of the other
Israelites was of 900 thousand men, able to bear Arms, and to follow the War,
besides that the only Tribe of Juda contained 400 thousand men. When the David
how God was displeased with him, he began to pray and beseech him, that it
might please him to appease his wrath, and to pardon his offense. Hereupon God
sent the Prophet Gad unto him, who brought him the choice of three things,
willing him to make choice which of the three he would endure: either that
Famine for seven years space should reign in his Countries; or that War for
three months space should afflict the same, wherein he should always have the
worst; or that the Plague and pestilence should rage for three days amongst the
Hebrews. Being thus troubled by reason of his difficult choice, v. 12, 13, 14.
amongst these imminent miseries; and the Prophet urging him to return a short
answer, David having election of three sorts of punishments, chose the Plague.
whereby God might be satisfied: the King bethinking him that if he should ask
Famine, he should rather seem to respect his own That it was better to fall
into the hands of God, then into the hands of his Enemies. When the Prophet had
received this answer from him, he reported it unto God; who sent a Plague and
mortality amongst the Hebrews, which afflicted them so variously, so that it
was very heard to discern the malady; which being but one v. 15, 16.
yet notwithstanding it discovered it self by great variety of symptoms. For
one of them died after another, A hug^^ slaughter of those that died of the
pestilence that was inflicted by God.
and the sickness seizing them unawares, brought a sudden dissolution of the
spirits, and swouning upon them; so that some of them gave up the ghost with
grievous torments, and strange dolors. Others were presently parched up through
the burning agonies they endured, and (irrecoverable by any counsel or remedy)
departed in the midst of their tortures. Others died strangled, having their
eyes suddenly darkened and blinded. Others giving order for the burial of their
household Servants, died before they were thoroughly interred; and from the
daybreak (at which time the pestilent mortality began to rage) until dinner
time, v. 17.
there died seventy thousand persons. David prayed for the innocent people.
And now had the Angel of God stretched out his hand over Jerusalem, Whilst
thus he prayed, The year of the World, 2930. before Christ's Nativity, 1034.
lifting up his eyes, he beheld the Angel of God hovering Jerusalem, with his
naked Sword: whereupon he besought God and said, That it was he that was the
shepherd, who had deserved to be punished, and not his flock, who ought to be
spared, in that they had not any ways offended, praying him to satisfy his
displeasure upon him and his posterity, and to spare the people.

Hereupon God giving ear unto his prayer, ceased the Plague, and sent the
Prophet Gad unto him, commanding him that he should presently repair to the
threshing-floor of Oronna the Jebusite, v. 18.
and there build an Altar, A comandment to build an Altar.
on which he should offer sacrifice unto God. Which when David understood, he
neglected not this command, but went presently to the appointed place. When
Oronna (as he was threshing his Corn) saw the King accompanied by his Sons
coming toward him, v. 20, 21.
he ran out to meet him, Oronna the Jebusite.
and Jebusite, and one of the greatest friends that David had (by means whereof
he plundered him not at such time as the fortress of the Jebusites was taken,
supra, l. 7. c. 2. called Orphona.
as we have heretofore declared.) Oronna asked him for what cause his Lord came
thus unto him, v. 22, 23.
who was his Servant? David answered, that it was to purchase his
threshing-floor, Oronna gives David his floor.
to the intent that he might build an Altar in that place, and offer sacrifice
unto God. Oronna replied, that both his Floor, his Ploughs, and Oxen were the
Kings to offer up for a burnt-sacrifice, The sum that was paid for the
threshing floor.
beseeching God that he would graciously accept that offering. To this the King
answered, that he commended his liberality and beneficence, and that he
accepted the offer he had made him, yet that it was his pleasure that he should
receive the price of the same, The place of the Altar that was built.
because he ought not to offer sacrifice unto God upon other men's charges. To
this Oronna answered, that his Majesty might do as best pleased him. Genesis 22.
Hereupon he bought the foresaid Floor of him for fifty sicles. Then erected he
an Altar in this place, supra. l. 1. c. 13.
and offered sacrifice thereon, as well burnt-offerings as peace offerings: and
by this means the Divine Majesty was appeased, and ever after showed himself
favorable. (Now this place was the very same, whereto Abraham in times past
had brought his Son Isaac to offer up for a burnt-sacrifice unto God; and as he
was about to sacrifice him, a Wether upon the instant presented it self unto
the Altar, which Abraham offered up in stead of his Son, as we have heretofore
related) David seeing that God had heard his prayer, and favorably accepted
his sacrifice, decreed that in that place the general Altar of the people
should stand, and that on Jerusalem, and it was found that there were one
hundred and fourscore thousand men: of which number he appointed eighty
thousand to intend the hewing of stones; Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 14.
and ordered that the rest of the common people should bear Stones unto them:
and he appointed three thousand and five hundred, The workmen allo^ted for the
building of the Temple.
who should govern them, and have the overseeing of the works. He gathered also
a great quantity of Iron and Brass, to work upon, with store of huge
Cedar-trees, which they of Tire and Sidon sent him, whom he had put in trust to
furnish him therewith; 1 Chronicles. 22.
telling his friends that he made that preparation at that time, to the intent
that when his Son should govern after him, a 1 ad 5. and v. 14.
he might have materials in a readiness for the building of the Temple: David
gathers great store of Iron, Brass and Wood.
and to the intent that he being as yet young and unexperimented, should not be
troubled with the gathering thereof, but having all things in a readiness might
finish the building of the Temple.

CHAP. XI.
DAVID during his life time, surrendereth the Kingdom to SOLOMON.
THEN calling unto him his Son Solomon, he charged him that after his decease,
and his own instalment in the kingdom, v. 5, 6.
he should build a Temple unto God: telling him that though he had both a will
and intent to perform the same; The building of Solomon's Temple is commanded.
yet that he was not permitted by God, because he had been a man of blood, and
brought up in War. Adding further, that it was fore-prophesied unto him, that
the finishing of that Edifice was by Gods appointment reserved to his younger
Son that should be called Solomon, whom God should not less tender and care
for, than the Father does his Son: and how the whole Land of the Hebrews should
be made happy under this Prince; and among other benefits, that they should
have peace (which is an especial blessing) and not only be freed from foreign
Wars, v. 7, ad finem.
but also from civil dissentions. For which cause (said he) since by God thou
were appointed King before thou wast born* David counseleth Solomon to honor
God.
take care to make Moses, and not permitting others to transgress a v. 1 ad 5.
thou shall hereby perform that which is most agreeable in the sight of God,
The treasure that was gathered toward the building of the Temple.
and he shall be thy sovereign and safe conductor. He exhorted also the
Governors of the people to set to their helping hand, and yield their
assistance to his Son in finishing this Work* The Assistants that Solomon had
in building the Temple.
and flourishing estate (such blessings as God bestows upon those that study
after piety and justice.) Moreover he charged him to place the Ark within the
Temple at such time as it should be finished, with all other sacred utensils,
for the reception whereof the Temple should long since have been builded, The
comandment as touching the Ark, and laying up all other sacred utensils within
the Temple.
had not their forefathers neglected Gods command, who had enjoined them, that
at such time as they should possess their Enemies Land, they should build him a
Temple. These were David's exhortations, not only unto his Son, but also to the
other Princes.

Now when David was very old, so that by reason of his years his body was cold
and benumbed, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap 15.
that notwithstanding the many coverings and clothes they laid upon him, 1
King. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4.
because by this means she might warm his chill limbs, and comfort his decaying
heat. David grows old and numb.
Whereupon after search made, they found out a Damsel called Abisag, which
surpassed all other in beauty, Abisag wa^meth him.
who slept with him and warmed him: for by reason of his age, he was unable to
have the use of a woman. But of this Virgin hereafter we shall make
furthermention.

The fourth Son of David was a goodly tall young man, v. 5.
called Adonias, the Son of Aegistha, Adonias affects the Kingdom.
who (resembling Absalon in complexion and ambition) designed to make himself
King: and amongst his ordinary discourses which he used to his friends, he said
that the succession to the Crown belonged of right unto him. To this intent he
Joab the General, and the High priest Abiathar, were engaged on his side, and
stood firm to his interest; but they that opposed him, were the High Priest
Sadoc, and the Prophet Nathan, and Benaia the Captain of the Guard, with Simei,
David's friend; besides all other the Valiant men at Arms. Whereas therefore
Adonias made a banquet without the City, and in the Suburbs near unto the
Fountain of the Park-Royal, he invited all his Brethren unto the same, except
Solomon; and took with him Joab and Abiathar, v. 11, ad 29.
with the Governors of the Tribe of Juda: but as touching Sadoc, Bethsaba by
Nathans persuasion certifieth David of Adonias usurpation.
the Prophet Nathan, Benaia, and the rest of the contrary party, he called them
not Nathan tell to Bethsabe, Solomon's mother, certifying her that Adonias was
made King, without the knowledge of David, advising her both to have care of
her own security, and the state and Majesty of her Son (who by reason of
Adonias usurpation was like to be supplanted) wishing her in person to certify
the King thereof: and further promising, that while she debated these things
with the King, he would come in the mean while and confirm that which he had
said. Bethsabe being thus persuaded by Nathan, came unto the King, and humbling
herself before him (and afterward desiring leave to speak unto him) she
informed him of all those things that had happened, according as she had been
advised by the Prophet: particularly giving him an account of the banquet which
Adonias had made, and what guests he had Abiathar and Joab, with the rest of
his Sons, except Solomon and his particular friends) urging this furthermore,
that the people expected who it should be whom David would nominate to succeed
him: for which cause she earnestly besought David that he would provide, that
he who should succeed him in the Government, should neither seek her blood, nor
the death of her Son Solomon. Whilst Bethsabe discoursed after this manner,
the King had notice that Nathan attended to speak with him. Whereupon, David
commanded that he should be called in, and as soon as he was entered, he asked
the King if that day he had appointed Adonias to govern and succeed in the
kingdom after him? for that (said he) he has made a sumptuous feast, whereunto
he has invited all thy Sons, but Solomon, thither also has he called Joab;
where after the great cheer and banqueting, they have proclaimed and cried,
Long live the King Adonias; Furthermore. (said he) he has neither invited me,
nor the High Priest Sadoc, nor the Captain of the Guard Banaia^ It therefore
behooveth thee to let us know, if this be done by thy approbation and allowance.

As soon as Nathan had made an end of his speech, The year of the World, 2931.
before Christ's Nativity, 1033.
David commanded that Bethsabe should Bethsabe re-entred the chamber, David said
unto her, I swear unto thee by the great God, that thy Son Solomon shall reign
after me, according as before this time I have already sworn unto thee, and he
it is that shall sit upon my throne, yea even this present day. v. 30.
Upon these words Bethsabe humbled herself, and besought God to grant the King
long life. The kingdom is confirmed to Solomon by an oa^h.
Whereupon he called for Sadoc, the high Priest, and Banaia the Captain of the
Guard, and appointed them to take the Prophet Nathan with them, and all the men
at Arms that attended him in Court; charging them to mount his Son Solomon upon
his Royal Mule, upon which only the King was wont to ride, and to conduct him
out of the City, near unto the Fountain of Gehon: in which place (after they
had Solomon King; commanding the High Priest Sadoc, and the Prophet Nathan to
see his will performed: charging those that followed him throw the City, with
sound of Trumpet, and a loud voice, to cry out, that Solomon was seted for ever
in his fathers throne, to the intent that all the people might understand that
by his Fathers consent he was declared King. And calling Solomon unto him, v.
33, ad 40.
he gave him instructions by which he might, with justice and integrity, govern
the Tribe of Juda and the rest of the Israelites. Solomon is anointed King and
placed in his Fathers Throne.
After this, Banaia besought God that it would please him to be favorable unto
Solomon; and with all expedition Solomon was mounted upon the Kings Mule, and
conducted out of the City near unto the fountain; where (after he had been
anointed with oil) they brought him back again into Adonias and they that
banqueted with him, hearing the noise, were all of them troubled and Joab in
particular, said that those tunes and trumpettings did no ways please him.

Whilst thus they sat at the banquet, v. 40, 41, ad 50.
and every man through pensiveness forbore to eat (being distracted through
variety of thoughts) Jonathan the Son of Abiathar came hastily in amongst them.
Adonias, for ^ea of the Kings displeasure, flies from his banquet, and takes
hold of the horns of the Altar.
This young man did Adonias most willingly behold, and Solomon, or had been
decreed by David. Whereupon Adonias, and all his guests forsook the banquet,
and suddenly fled every man unto his own house. But Adonias fearing the Kings
displeasure (by reason of his ambition and arrogance) ran unto the Altar, and
laying hold of it after the manner of a suppliant, hung thereon, according as
he in reason had cause to do.

Now when these tidings were brought unto Solomon, and what he had done, and
how he required that Solomon would assure him, that he would never more call to
memory that which had happened, but pardon his offense: Solomon answered him
graciously and moderately, and pardoned that fault; notwithstanding with this
caution, that if hereafter Adonias himself, who should be the author of his
mischief: with this answer he sent some to deliver him from the Altar.

When as therefore he came into Solomon's presence, and had saluted him, he was
commanded to repair home unto his house, without fearing any mischief that
might befall him: yet by the way was he admonished to behave himself uprightly
for the time to come, if he respected his credit or profit.

But David willing that his Son should be accepted for their known and anointed
King amongst the people, 1 Chro. 23. 3^4.
assembled the Governors in Jerusalem, David numbreth the Levites and
distributeth their offices.
with the Priests and Levites; and first of all taking the number of them, he
found thirty three thousand men that were above thirty three years old; 23000
of which, he appointed to take charge of building of the Temple, six thousand
to be Judges and Scribes, with the like number of Musicians to play upon
instruments, who were furnished therewith by David (as we have heretofore
declared) and distributed by him according to their families. So that
separating the Priests from the rest of their Tribe, 1 Chronicles. 23. 6, ad 24.
he found four and twenty families of them; The division of the Priests into
24. kindreds.
sixteen of the house of Eleazar, and eight of the house of Ithamar, giving
order that one only family should officiate for the space of eight days. And
thus were all the families distributed by lot in the presence of David, of the
High Priests Sadoc and Abiathar, 2 Chronicles. 24. 5, 27.
and of all the Governors. The first family that went up to the Temple was
enrolled first, He divided the Levits into 24. parts.
the second next, and so successively the rest, to the number of 24, (and this
order remains even unto this day.) He made also 24 divisions of the Tribe of
Levi, (who ascended according as they were chosen by lo^ in the same manner as
the Priests, Moses posterity; for the appointed them to be keepers of Gods
treasury, and of those presents which the Kings should offer. He appointed
also, that all (as well Levites as Priests) should serve God day and night,
according as they were commanded by Moses. That done, he distributed his whole
Army into twelve companies, v. 13, 14.
with their Governors, Centurions, and other field Officers: Moses posterity
appointed to keep the divine treasure.
every squadron contained four and twenty thousand men, whom he appointed to
guard and attend King Solomon, for the space of thirty days (continuing from
the first to the last, with their Captains over Thousands, and Centurions.) He
likewise established those men in Office and Authority over every squadron, 1 Chronicles. 26. 1, ad 12.
whom he knew to be most resolute and courageous. The A^my divided into 1^.
parts.
He appointed also Surveyors, who should have the charge of the treasure, of
the buroughs and fields, and of the Cattle (whose names in mine opinion it
were unnecessary to declare.) 1 Paral. 27.
After that every one of these things were in this manner disposed, David
assembling the governors of the Tribes, commends his son Solomon to them.
he summoned all the civil Magistrates of the Hebrews (and in general all
those that had any commission over the affairs or demains of the Kings) to a
general assembly, and placing himself on a high Throne, he spoke after this
manner: My brethren and countrymen, I am desirous that you should know, that
having determined with my self to build a Temple unto God, I have made
provision of a great quantity of Gold and Silver, 1 Chronicles. 28. ad finem.
the sum whereof amounts to an hundred thousand talents: but God, by the
Prophet Nathan, has forbidden me to build the same, by reason of your Wars,
and because my hands have been stained with the slaughter of the Enemies, which
I have conquered Jacob, Juda, by the general consent of them all, obtained the
principality; and that I amongst my six brethren have been preferred and placed
by God in the Kingdom, and notwithstanding no one of them supposes himself to
be injured: so do I also request that Solomon having obtained the Empire, my
other sons, should neither in respect of him nor amongst themselves nourish any
unnatural hatreds and seditious, but knowing that he is chosen by God, they may
willingly submit themselves to his dominion. For whereas if God shall think
meet you ought patiently to submit your selves to the yoke of a foreign Prince,
how much greater reason have Solomon) may be durable. Which without doubt will
so fall out, and all things shall happily succeed, if thou my Son be a
maintainer of piety and justice, and the ancient Laws and ordinances of thy
progenitors: otherwise, if these be neglected, there is no other thing to be
expected, a v. 11, ad 1^.
but misery and destruction. After he had finished these sayings, David gives
his son the model of the Temple.
he gave his Son the model of the building of the Temple, with all the
foundations both of the houses and chambers, together with the number, height
and breadth of the same. He also limited the weight of those vessels that were
to be fashioned either of Gold or of Silver, Levi to assist him, both because
his years were not yet come to maturity, as also because by Gods divine
providence he was elected King, and appointed to build the Temple, assuring
them that the building would be very easy, and no ways laborious; considering
that he had prepared a great number of talents of Gold, and far more of Silver,
and Wood, besides a great multitude of Carpenters, and hewers of Sone, a great
quantity likewise of Emeraulds, and other sort of precious Stones. Lastly, he
told them, that now also for the present he would bestow on them, to that use,
other three thousand talents of pure Gold, 1 Chronicles. 29. 5, ad 9.
out of his own treasury to adorn the holy place, and the chariot of God, and
the Cherubins, that should stand upon the Ark, and cover it with their wings.

The Princes of the people gave a huge sum of Gold, Silver, Brass, and
precious Stone toward the building of the Temple.
Priests and Levits who showed a greater readiness, and voluntarily proffered
to contribute toward the carrying on of this holy work five thousand talents
of Gold, and ten thousand stateres, of Silver an hundred thousand, and of Iron
many thousand talents; and if any one of them had a precious Stone, he brought
it and delivered it into the Treasurers custody, who was called Jalus, being
one of Moses posterity. This thing pleased all the people, and David (seeing
the affection and readiness of the Governors and Priests, and in general of
all the rest) began to bless God with a loud voice, calling him the Creator and
Father of this whole World, the fashioner both of divine and humane things, and
the President and Governor of the Hebrews whose Kingdom he had committed
Solomon with all Princly virtues. He commanded the people likewise to sing
praises unto God; which they performed, and prostrated themselves upon the
earth, and afterward gave thanks David for all those benefits they had
received, during the time of his Government. The next day as a sacrifice to God
they offered up a thousand Calves, a thousand Rams, and a thousand Lambs, for a
burnt-offering: and for peace offerings they slew many thousand other Beasts. 1
Paral. 29.
The King celebrated a feast all that day with the whole people, and Solomon
was anointed with Oil the second time, The sacrifices and festival solemnized
upon Solomon's Coronation.
and proclaimed King. Sadoc also was established High Priest of all the people,
and Solomon was conducted into the Kings house, and placed in his Fathers
Throne, and from that day forward they obeyed him.

CHAP. XII.
The last instructions of David to Solomon: his death, and the magnificence of
his funeral.
NOT long after this, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 16.
David failing through age, and knowing that he should depart out of this
world, he called for Solomon his Son, and spoke unto him after this manner; 1
King. 2. 1. ad 4.
My Son, I must now depart and sleep with my Fathers, and enter the common way
which both they that now live, David's last counsel to Solomon.
and those which come after shall tract; from whence we shall not return, nor
behold and revisit those things that are done in this life. For which cause,
whilst I yet live and draw onward to my death, I earnestly exhort thee (as
heretofore I have counseled thee) that thou behave thy self justly toward thy
Subjects, and piously toward God, that has honored thee with this kingdom;
charging thee to keep his precepts and laws, which he has given us by Moses,
and to take heed, lest either surprised by flattery, or misled by favor, or
seduced by covetousness, or any other sinister affection, thou be drawn to
neglect Hebrews. Remember likewise the iniquity of Joab, who, through
emulation, v. 5.
slew two good and just Generals, Abner the Son of Ner, and Amasa the Son of
Jethram; David wills Solomon to punish Joab.
punish him as thou think meet, for hitherto he has escaped punishment,
because he was stronger and more powerful than my self. I commend also unto
thee the Sons of Berzillai the Galaadite, v. 7.
whom for my sake advance to honor, and dignity: Nor would I have thee esteem
the kindness which thou shall show them to be any courtesy, David commends
Berzellai's Sons to Solomon.
but only a recompense and Simei the Son of Gera, of the Tribe of Benjamin, v.
8.
who during the time of my flight, How Simei should be punished.
and at such time as I retired my self into my Camp, injured and reviled me,
and afterward came out to me near unto Jordan, and took assurance of me, that
for that time I should not punish him: I leave him to you to be punished
according as you shall find an opportunity.

After he had thus exhorted his Son, and had communicated with him all his
affairs, both touching his friends, v. 10, 11.
and those whom he thought worthy of punishment, he gave up the ghost (after he
had lived seventy years, The years of the age and Reign, together with the
virtues of David.
and Reigned in Hebron a City of Juda for the space of seven years and an half,
and thirty three in Jerusalem over the whole Nation.) Vria's Wife. He left as
much or rather more riches behind him, than any other King of the Hebrews, or
other Nations had Solomon buried him most Royally in Jerusalem, with all those
ceremonies which were accustomed in Royal obsequies, and amongst other things,
he buried a great quantity of riches with him; the incredible estimate whereof
may be conjectured by that which follows. The sumptuous Sepulcher of David.
For one thousand three hundred years after, the High Priest Hircanus being
besieged by Antiochus surnamed the Religious (who was Demetrius's Son) and
willing to gratify him with some sum of money (to the intent he might raise
the siege, Hircanus ^aketh a huge sum of money out of David's Tomb.
and remove his Army) and unable to levy money by any other means, he opened
the Sepulcher of David, from whence he took three thousand talents, which he
delivered to Antiochus, and by this means delivered the City from the siege (as
we have declared in another place.) Herod spoileth David's Sepulcher.
And again a long time after, this Herod also opened it, and took from


Written by FLAVIVS JOSEPHVS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Eighth Book.
1. How Solomon obtaining the Kingdom, expelled his enemies. 2. Of the riches,
prudence and wisdom of Solomon; and how first of all he builded the Temple in
Jerusalem. Solomon being dead, the people revolted from Rehoboam his son, and
made Jeroboam King of the ten Tribes. 4. How Susac King of Egypt sacking
Jerusalem, carried away the riches of that City into Egypt. 5. The War of
Jeroboam against Abias, Rehobohams son, and the slaughter of his Army; and how
Basanes extirpated Jeroboams posterity, and possessed the Kingdom. 6. The
Invasion of the Ethiopians under Asa, and the overthrow of their Army. 7. The
Race of Basanes being rooted out, Zamri ruled in Israel with his son Ahab. 8.
Adad King of Damascus and Syria, is twice overthrown by Ahab. 9. Of Jehoshaphat
King of Jerusalem. Ahab being provoked to War by the Syrians, is overcome and
slain in battle.


CHAP. I.
How Solomon obtaining the Kingdom, expelled his enemies.
WE have declared in the former Book what David was, how great his virtue has
been, 1 Kings 2.
what profits and benefits those of his Nation received by him, Solomon King of
Israel after David's death.
what Wars he undertook, what Victories he obtained, and how happily at last
(through extremity of age) he departed Solomon his son (being at that time very
young) had obtained the Kingdom, and was placed in his fathers Throne
(according as David had determined, and the divine power had decreed) the whole
people (according to the common course in the election of new Princes) with
many acclamations wished him a long and prosperous Reign. But Adonias, who
during his fathers lifetime, thought to possess and seize himself of the Royal
estate, came unto the Kings mother, and with all humility and reverence saluted
her. To whom Bethsabe said, That if there were any thing wherein she might
serve him, he should let her know it, and that she would willingly apply her
self unto it. Whereupon he began to say, That it was a thing very well known,
that the Kingdom appertained unto him, both in regard of his age, as also in
respect of the favor and good liking of the people: Ver. 17, ad 24.
but since that it had been transferred unto Solomon, her son, Adonias
requires Abisag to wife.
by the Will of God, he was content therewith, and would be his servant, being
very glad of the fortunate success of his Affairs. He therefore besought her,
that she would solicit Solomon in his behalf, and persuade him to give him
Abisag to Wife, ^ho had slept with David, for that he had not any carnal
company with her by reason of his age, and that as yet she was fully possessed
of her virginity.

Bethsabe promised him to further his suit to the uttermost of her power, and
willingly to employ herself toward the accomplishment of the Marriage, since
she knew the King was willing to gratify her in whatsoever she should desire,
as also for that she would instantly entreat him: so that he departed from her
with assured hope of good success in Bethsabe presently addressed herself to
the King, intending to certify him both what Adonias had requested, and what
she had granted. When Solomon heard that his Mother came to visit him, he went
out to meet her, and embraced her, and afterward conducting her into his
Presence Chamber, he sat him down, and commanded his servants to place a seat
on his right hand, for his Mother; who being seated by him, spoke unto him
after this manner: My son, vouchsafe me one favor that I shall request at thy
hands, and send me not hence discontented, and dissatisfied, through thy
refusal. Solomon answered her, That she should command him, by reason that duty
tied him to the satisfaction and favor of his Mothers suits; reproving her for
that insinuation she had used, by reason that thereby she evidently expressed
that she was not Abisag for Wife to Adonias his Brother. The King displeased at
this her suit, dismissed his Mother, alleging that Adonias had ill designs,
and that he wondered that in requiring Abisag to Wife, he had not requested
Solomon Adonias was elder than he, and had more mighty friends than he had;
namely, the General Joab, and the High Priest Abiathar. For which cause he
forthwith sent Benaia, Captain of his Guard, to kill Adonias his Brother. Ver.
25.
Then calling unto him the High Priest Abiathar, The pains (said he) that thou
have endured by accompanying my father David, Adonias is slain.
and attending and bearing the Ark with him, make thee escape from death; yet
notwithstanding, for that thou have been assistant to Adonias, Ver. 26. 27.
and followed his faction, Abiathar i^ dispossessed of the Priesthood.
I banish thee from my presence, charging thee not to see my face any more, but
to retire thy self to thine own house, and there to live in thy Country, until
thou have ended thy days: since you have made your self unworthy of that
charge wherewith you are entrusted. For this cause was the House of Ithamar
deprived of the Priestly Eli, one of the Ancestors of Abiathar) and translated
to the Race of Phinees, and established in Sadoc. Those of the Race of Phinees,
who led a private life all that time that the Priesthood remained in the family
of Ithamar (whereof Eli was the first) were these: Ver. 35.
Boccias, the son of Joseph; Joathan, the son of Boccias; The genealogy of the
High Priest Sadoc.
Mareoth, the son of Joatham; Aropha, the son of Maraeoth; Achitob, the son of
Aropha; Sadoc, the son of Achitob, who was the first High Priest under King
David.

Joab having heard of the death of Adonias, was very much surprised; for he
loved him more than King Solomon: and by reason of that friendship which he
bare unto him, he, upon good grounds, apprehended his own danger, and in this
respect he fled unto the Joabs resolution was made known unto the King, he sent
Benaia unto him, with Commission to bring him from the Altar, and to conduct
him to the Judgment Seat, that he might in that place justify his actions: but
Joab said, That he would never abandon the Temple, but that he had rather dye
in that place than in another. When Benaia had certified the King of this his
answer, he commanded him to cut off his Head in the same place, as he required,
and that in that sort he should be punished, by reason of the two murders
which he had cursedly committed upon the persons of Abner and Amasa: commanding
that his body should be buried in the same place, to the end that his sins
should never depart from his Race, Ver. ^8, ad 33.
and that both David and Solomon might be held guiltless Joab. Joab is slain.
This command of his Benaia executed, Benaia is substituted in his place.
and was afterward made General of the Men of War. Moreover, the King
established Sadoc solely in the place of Abiathar whom he had deposed. He
commanded Simei also to build him an House in Jerusalem, to keep himself
therein, without passing the brook of Cedron: for if he should break that
commandment, the penalty which he should incur, should be no less than death;
and to the more serious performance of this his injuction, he tied him by a
solemn oath. Simei thanked Solomon for the charge he had imposed on him, and
swore that he would fulfill the same: so that forsaking his own Country, he
came and dwelt in Jerusalem, where after he had sojourned for the space of
three years, it happened that he had news that two of his slaves had fled, and
Gath: Ver. 35.
whereupon he went to find them out* and no sooner returned he back again with
them, Sadoc obtains Abiathars place in the Priesthood.
but that the King had intelligence that he had neglected his commandment; and
which is more, that he had broken that oath which he made unto God: Simei's
punishment and death.
which incensed him very much. Wherefore calling unto him, he spoke after this
manner: Have thou not sworn (said he) that thou will not go out of this City to
another? Ver. 38. ad fin.
And do thou think it a small matter, to add Perjury to that other vilany
which thou have been guilty of in so scandalously reproaching my father of
blessed memory, when the rebellion of Absalom compelled him to forsake the
capital City of his Realm? Prepare thy self therefore to suffer the punishment
which thou deservest, which shall be such as shall suffice to convince the
World, that though the punishments of the wicked are oftentimes late, yet they
are abundantly recompensed by their sureness and severity. Whereupon Benaia
slew Simei, according as he was commanded. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 2.
From that day forward, Solomon had his Royal estate secured; and after that
his enemies had received condign punishment, he took to wife the daughter of
Pharaoh King of Egypt, 1 Kings 3. 1, ad 4.
and afterward builded the walls of Jerusalem, far larger and stronger than
they were before: Solomon marries the King of Egypts daughter, and
establishes the kingdom.
and all the rest of his life, he governed his Commonweal in peace; so that his
youthful years hindered him not from the observation of justice, and the
maintenance of laws, neither excluded the remembrance of that which his father
had charged him at the hour of his death: but behaving himself in all things
exactly, he executed the affairs of his kingdom with that circumspection, that
such as excelled him in years, could not surpass him.


Of the wisdom, prudence and riches of Solomon, and how first of all he builded
the Temple in Jerusalem.
AS soon as he came to Hebron, he determined to pay his vows unto God, on that
brazen Altar which was erected by Moses, Ver. 5, ad 8.
and sacrificed thereon in burnt-offerings a thousand head of Cattle; God
appears to Solomon by night in a dream, and wills him to ask that which
most of all he desired.
which honorable devotion of his was most acceptable unto God. For the very
same night he had appeared unto him in a dream, and commanded him to ask
whatsoever blessing he thought fit, as a recompense of this his piety. But
Solomon required a most excellent thing, which God does liberally bestow, and
Men very Ver. 9, ad 15.
But give me (said he) O Lord, Solomon requires wisdom at Gods hands, who with
it gives him riches and honors also.
a ripe judgment, and a good understanding, to the intent that by these means I
may administer justice to this people with truth and equity. With this demand
of his, God was well pleased, and promised him to give him all other things
whereof he had made no mention, namely, riches and glory; and above all these,
such an understanding and wisdom, as no King or private Man has had before
him. Moreover, that he would continue the Kingdom in his family for many ages,
if he continued in the ways of justice, and obeyed God in all things, and
walked in his fathers ways, and imitated his virtues.

Solomon had received these blessings from God, and was made happy by these
promises, he forsook his bed, and worshipping God, returned unto Jerusalem,
where he offered great Sacrifices before the Tabernacle, and magnificently
feasted all those of his Household. About the same time a very difficult case
was brought him to decide, the resolution whereof was very hard to be
discovered. And I have thought it necessary to declare the occasions whereon at
that present the debate was grounded, to the end that the Readers may
understand the difficulty of the thing in question, and that if they happen at
any time to be concerned in such affairs, they might by his example learn to
discover the truth. Two Women of loose life and conversation came unto him, one
of the which (who seemed to have suffered the injury) began after this manner:

Two women accuse one another, for exchange of their children.
O King, (said she) and this Woman, dwell together in one Chamber; but so it
fortuned, that both of us on one day, and at the same hour, bare each of us a
son: some three days after we were delivered, this Woman lying by her Infant,
had in sleep overlaid it, and stifled it, and has taken my Child from between
my knees, and laid it by her, and put the dead Child, whilst I slept, A v. 16,
ad fin.
into my bosom. Now on the morrow, when I thought to give mine Infant suck, I
found not mine own, but perceived that her Child lay dead by me: for I knew it,
because I had exactly marked it. This my Child I have demanded at her hands;
and because I could not recover it, I have made my Address unto your Majesty:
for in that we were alone, and she is obstinate, and fears not to be
convicted by any, she persisteth in her denial of the same.

After the King had heard her request, he enquired of the other if she had any
thing Ver. 24, 25.
as well the living as the dead; and calling one of his Guard unto him, Solomon
commands both the children to be divided into two parts.
he commanded him with his naked Sword, to cut both the Children into two
parts, to the intent that both of them might take the half of the living, and
the other half of the dead Child. This sentence of his at first seemed so
ridiculous, that it was exploded by all that stood by. In the mean time the
true Mother began to cry out, and desire that Ver. 27.
and of the other, Solomon, by the speech and gesture of the women, discovers
the true mother.
which was the true Parent, adjudged the Infant unto her that opposed his
death, (for that in equity she was the true Mother) and condemned the
wickedness of the other, who had murdered her own Child, and labored as much
as in her lay, to procure the death of her companions innocent Infant. All the
people took this judgment for an assured proof and sign of the Kings prudence
and wisdom, and from that time forwards, they respected and honored him, as
Vri governed the Country of Ephraim, wherein was comprised the rule of
Bethlehem; Aminadab commanded over the quarter of Dura, and the Seacoast, and
had espoused the daughter of Solom^n. The great Plain was subjected Benaia the
son of Achila, who governed likewise all the Country that extended toward
Jordan. Gaber commanded the Galaadites and Gaulonites, as far as the Mountain
Libanus, and had under him sixty great Cities and Forts. Achinadab governed all
Galilee as far as Sadon, Solomon's governors and captains.
and had espoused also one of Solomon's daughters called Basima: Banacat
presided over the Ma^^time Country near to the City of Arce: Saphat commanded
the Mountains Itabyr and Carmel, 1 Reg. 4. 1, ad 21.
and the Land of Galilee as far as Jordan: Sonbeia governed the whole Land of
the Benjamites: Tabar had all the government on the other side of Jordan, and
was elected Governor-general over them all. Thus about this time did the
Hebrews wonderfully increase in riches, and particularly the Tribe of Juda, by
reason that the people addicted themselves wholly to the tilling and manuring
of their The happy peace of the Israelites in Solomon's time.
For they were assured of their peace, and not distracted by any warlike
tumults, and besides that fruitfully enjoying a most desired liberty, they
especially intended this thing only, to increase their private estates. The
King also had other Governors who ruled the Syrians, and commanded other
strange Nations, which are extended from Euphrates as far as Egypt, who
gathered the Tribute of those Nations for the King. These Barbarians every day
furnished the King for his own Table, Ver. 23.
and the maintenance of his Household, Solomon's daily expenses.
with thirty measures of fine flour, and sixty of the courser: ten fat Oxen,
and twenty grass Beeves, with an hundred fat Lambs. All which things, besides
Venison and Buffalles taken in chase, Birds and Fish were furnished daily by
the Barbarians to serve the Kings Household. Ver. 26.
He had likewise a great number of Chariots, so that he had forty Solomon's
chariot, and horsemen.
and besides these, he had twelve thousand Horsemen, half whereof kept always
about the King in Jerusalem, the rest were billetted in diverse Villages
belonging to the King, Solomon's prudence and wisdom.
and remained there. And they that had the charge to furnish the Kings
expenses, provided likewise necessary provender for the Horses, conveying it to
what place soever the King took his progress. But so great was the wisdom and
prudence which God had bestowed upon Solomon, that he surpassed all his
Progenitors, and the Egyptians likewise, who are esteemed the wisest of all
Men, were far behind him. Solomon's method in conjuration, whereby he cast out
devils.
For he excelled all those that in that time were in the greatest account
amongst the Hebrews, whose names I will not omit; these were Ethan, Eman,
Cha^^, and Dodan, all four the sons of Machol. He composed also 5000 Books of
Odes and Songs, The Author in this place abuses the gifts of God bestowed on
Sol^mon, in extending them to those Arts which are forbidden by the express
word of God.
and discoursed of them all, and had knowledge of their several and secret
properties. He obtained also the knowledge of the Art of Magic, for the profit
and health of Men, and the exorcising and casting out of Devils; for he devised
certain incantations, whereby the diseased are cured, and left the method of
conjuration in writing, whereby the Devils are enchanted and expelled; so that
never more they dare return: And this kind of healing to this day, is very
usual amongst those of our Nation. For I saw a certain private man amongst the
Hebrews, by Eleazar, in the presence of Vespasian, his Sons, Tribunes, and
other Soldiers, that cured diverse that were possessed. And the manner of his
Cure was this: He applied to the Nose of the Demoniack a Ring, A Jew casts
out Devils.
under the Seal whereof was a root of those things that Solomon had declared,
which drew the Devil out of the Nostrils of the Sick, as soon as he smelled the
root: and as soon as the Man was fallen, he adjured him never more to return,
intermixing some mention of Solomon, and rehearsing those Incantations that
were invented by him.

After this, the said Eleazar being desirous to show unto them that were
present, the efficacy of his Art, he set a Pot or Pitcher of water not far from
the place where the possessed stood, and commanded the Devil, at such time as
he forsook the Man, to overturn Solomon was. For which cause I thought good in
this place to make mention thereof, that the worthy endowments of this King
might be known unto all Men; and how beloved of God he was, 1 Kings 5. 1, ad 12.
and how surpassing in all kinds of virtue. When Hiram King of Tire understood
that Solomon succeeded his father in the Kingdom, he was glad thereof, Hiram's
Ambassadors to Solomon.
(for he was David's friend) for which cause he sent Messengers unto him to
salute him, and to congratulate his succession to the Crown; by whom Solomon
returned an answer in these terms:

Solomon to Hiram the King: Know thou that my father having a great desire to
build a Libanus, Ver. 6.
to hew down trees in that place: for the Sidonians are more skilful in hewing
and preparing timber, Solomon requires Carpenters and workmen from Hiram.
than our people are, and I will pay the Workmen according to your direction.
When Hiram had read this Letter, he was very glad to peruse the Contents of the
same, and wrote back again unto him to this effect:

The King Hiram unto King Solomon: Thou have cause to thank God, that he had
delivered thy fathers Kingdom (who was a wise and virtuous Prince) into thy
hands. For which cause, Ver. 7. ad 10.
I will send it thee by Sea by my servants, Hiram promises Solomon wood, and
instead thereof requires corn
whom I will command, (and furnish with convenient vessels of burden) to the
end they may deliver the same, in what place of thy Kingdom it shall best
please thee, that afterward thy Subjects may transport them to Jerusalem. And
I desire that by way of exchange, you would furnish us with Corn, whereof we
stand in need, because we inhabit an Island.

The Copies are yet at this day kept, not only by those of our Nation, but also
by the Tyrians: so that if any man desire exactly to know what they be, let him
search the public Records of the Tyrians, and he shall find in them matters
agreeing to that we have The truth of Josephus History.
but contrariwise, if I cannot approve the truth by sufficient testimonies, I
desire not to be allowed. As soon as Solomon had received these Letters from
the King of the Tyrians, he praised his facility and benevolence, and presently
sent him that which he demanded: Ver. 11.
every year therefore he sent him two thousand measures of Wheat, The King
sends Hiram a great quantity of wheat, oil, and wine.
and two thousand Baths of Oil, and two thousand Baths of Wine (each Hiram and
Solomon increased more and more, so that both of them protested that it should
continue for ever. The King ordered that thirty thousand Workmen should be
provided, whom he gave in charge to work continually, alotting to each man his
part. He ordained that ten thousand of them should cut wood in Libanus for the
space of one Month; Ver. 14.
and that then they should rest two Months, The order of the Carpenters in
Libanus.
returning every man unto his own dwelling place, until such time as the twenty
thousand had in their turn accomplished the task in the time that was prefixed
unto them, and then the first ten thousand renewed their work, and followed the
same in the fourth month. Adoram was constituted Superintendent over them.
Besides these, there were Seventy thousand Men appointed Ver. 15. ad fin.
who were strangers in that Country, according to the commandment of David.
The order of the Masons, and other workmen.
There were fourscore thousand Hewers of stone, over which were 3200
Commissaries; these had the King commanded to cut the greatest stones, to make
the foundation of the Temple: which after they had hewed and prepared in the
Mountain, he commanded should be drawn and brought into the City, which was
observed not only by his Countrymen, bu^ by those Workmen also that were sent
him by Hiram.

Solomon began this Building in the fourth year of his Reign, Hedio and
Ruffinus, cap. 9.
in the second Month, which the Macedonians call Artemisium, 1 Kings 6. 1, etc.
and the Hebrews Jar, (which is the Month of April) Five hundred ninety and two
years after the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt, One thousand and
twenty years since the arrival of Abraham in Mesopotamia; One thousand four
hundred and forty years after the Deluge: And since Adam the first Man until
Solomon (who builded the Temple) all the years that are passed, When the
building of the Temple began.
have been Three thousand one hundred and two. But the beginning of the
building of the Temple happened in the eleventh year of the Reign of Hiram, The
depth of the foundations of the Temple.
who governed in Tire: and since the first time that Tire began to be
inhabited, until the said building of the Temple, there passed Two hundred and
forty years. The King therefore laid the foundation of the Temple, Ver. 2.
and made a deep Trench, and fortified it with most strong stones, which might
be able to resist all the injuries of time. These stones were closely joined
the one unto the other, that by the strength of the foundation, they might make
the base and ground The year of the World, 2933. before Christ's Nativity, 1033.
height, greatness, magnificence and ornament. The walls were made of white
stone, Ver. 2, 3, 4, 5.
and the length as much, The height, length and breadth of the Temple.
and the breadth twenty. Over that was another edifice, having the like
dimensions, so that the whole height of the Temple was sixscore cubits, and the
entry thereof was Eastward. The porch thereof had twenty cubits in length, The
porch before the Temple.
(which was the breadth of the Temple) and in breadth ten cubits: and the
height thereof was sixscore cubits. About the Temple was built thirty Cells,
which environed the same on the outside, The Cells which were built in the
circuit of the Temple.
and served to sustain all the Edifice; for that they were of that number, and
they passed out of the one into the other. The entries were made after the same
manner, from whence a man might easily pass from the one to the other. Every
one of these Cells had 25 Cubits in breadth, and as many in length, and 20 in
height: and above them there were others built: and others likewise above these
Ver. 22, etc.
were the stronger. To these beams was fastened wainscot of the same stuff, The
beams and w^lls beautified with gold.
which was curiously polished, carved and gilded. The walls on the inside were
covered with Cedar plants, intermixed with gold: so that all the Temple shined,
and the burnisht gold dazzled their eyes that entered into it. All the whole
building of the Temple was most artificially made of stones most exactly
carved, and most closely and cunningly joined together: so that they that The
year of the World, 2933* before Christ's Nativity, 1031.
and rather growing in that place of it self, than garnished by the hands of
cunning workmen. Touching the ascent into the highest part of the Temple, the
King so contrived it, that in the thickness of the wall he included a pair of
winding stairs to that purpose. This part had not a great gate toward the East
as the lower had, but in the sides there were little doors made: Winding stairs.
All the whole Temple both within and without was covered with Cedar-planks
fastened together with strong chains to strengthen the same. The Temple within
was divided into two parts, the one whereof contained the Sanctum sanctorum,
The Temple divided into two parts
of twenty Cubits, (which was unaccessible) the rest of the space of forty
Cubits was consecrated to the use of the Priests. And in the midst of the wall
made he two gates of Cedar, enriched with store of Gold, and diverse curious
carved v. 22 ad 24.
Purple, and Scarlet intermingled with pure white and delicate Linen. He placed
also upon the Holy of Holies (which was twenty Cubits broad, Two Cherubins.
and as many long) two Cherubins of massy Gold, each one five Cubits high, and
each of them had two wings that were spread five Cubits broad, by which means
they were not far distant the one from the other, but that the one of their
wings touched the Southern wall of the sacred place, The pavement, gates, and
all other things in the Temple beautified with Gold.
and the other the Northern wall: the other wings that touched one another
served for a cover for the Ark, which was placed between them both. But what
the figure of the Cherubins was it is impossible to express: he made the
pavement of the Temple also, of plates of beaten Gold. To the gate of the
Temple he also fastened convenient Solomon sends to Hiram for Uram a cunning
workman.
But the gate of the Porch had no such ornament. After this Solomon sent unto
Hiram King of Tire, for one who was a cunning workman, called Vram, the Son of
a woman of the line of Nephtali, and of Vrias the Israelite; this man had great
knowledge in all kind of works, but his especial excellency was in working
gold, Silver and Brass, who made all that which covered the temple according as
the King commanded. He made two pillars of brass, four fingers thick and
eighteen Cubits high, and twelve in the circumference; on the chapters of each
of them, he placed Corniches in the form of Lillies, of five Cubits in height,
2 Chronicles. 4. 2.
the one on the right hand called Jachin, A vessel called the brazen Sea.
the other on the left called Boz. He founded also the Brazen Sea, made after
the manner of a Hemesphere, and this vessel was called the Sea by reason of the
hugeness thereof. For it was a laver that by measured line was ten Cubits
broad, the thickness of a hands breadth, the midst thereof was sustained with a
pillar ten times twisted, whose bigness was a cubit. This laver was sustained
by 12 heifers, which by three and three were placed directly opposite against
the quarters of the four winds: and the hindermost part of these Heifers were
set somewhat stooping, 1 King. 7* 27.
to the end that this Ten brazen bases of the laver.
This Sea contained two thousand Baths, which is a measure made use of for
liquids. He made also ten brazen bases four square, for the lavers, each one in
length five cubits, in breadth four, in height three; thus were the parts of
this work severally fashioned. There were four little pillars square and
erected at every corner one, in which the sides of the Bases were adjoined, and
divided into three sorts, according to the place distinguished between the
joints; with Images, here a Lion, there a Bull, and in another place an Eagle.
The pillars likewise were adorned with the same ingraving: and all this whole
work hung upon four wheels, which were made of cast work, which had certain
naves or spoaks a cubit and a half in the Diameter: and it was a wonderful
thing to see the v. 37, 38.
that they that beheld them, Ten round lavers.
would have supposed them rather to be natural creatures, than otherwise: and
betwixt them also there were certain Palm Trees figured: Such was the
composition of the ten lavers. Moreover, he made ten other Brazen lavers after
the manner of a round Cockleshell, each of which contained forty Choes: for
they were in height four cubits, and from brim to brim, there were likewise
four cubits: Meconoth, five of which stood on the left side of the Temple, that
extended Northward, the other five on the right hand toward the South. Here
likewise placed he the Sea full of water, to the intent that the Priests
entering into the Temple, might wa^ their hands and feet before they went up
unto the Altar. The year of the World, 2933* before Christ'^ Nativity, 1031.
The other lavers served to wash the inwards and feet of those Beasts The use
of the Sea, and the other ten lavers.
and amongst these, one great one of Gold (on which the Sacred Bread was laid)
the rest not far inferior, yet made after diverse manners, held Ewers and
Platters of Gold, The Altar and vessels appertaining to the same.
to the number of twenty thousand, and of Silver forty thousand. He made
likewise ten thousand Candlesticks (according as Moses had commanded) whereof
one he dedicated to the Temple, that according to the law it might give light
there in the The Table of sacred bread.
hard by the Candlesticks, which were placed toward the South. The Altar of
Gold was placed betwixt them both. All which things were enclosed in that part
of the Temple that contained forty cubits, The Candlestick.
before the Tapestry of the Holy of Holies, where the Ark was to be placed. The
King also caused fourscore thousand Pots, The^ ups and vials.
and an hundred thousand Ewers of Gold, and twice as many of Silver, to be
made, and fourscore thousand plates of Gold, and twice so many of Silver, to
offer the kneaded flower in them upon the Altar; The bowls, the censers.
and threescore thousand Cups of Gold, and twice so many of Silver, to lay the
flower mingled with Oil thereon; and two thousand measures of Gold, and twenty
thousand of Silver, resembling a Hin or an Epha of Moses. Twenty thousand
Censers also of Gold, wherein the perfume was burnt, to hallow the Temple;
Priests garments.
with their surcots, heads, and pectorals, notwithstanding there was but one
Crown, wherein Moses had written the Name of God, which had continued even
until this day. He made also ten thousand Stoles for the Priests of fine
linen, with scarlet girdles for every one of them; two hundred thousand
trumpets according to the ordinance of Moses, Instruments of Music.
and forty thousand instruments of Music, to record and praise God with (as
the Psaltery and Harp of a mixed matter the fifth part Gold, and the fourth part
Silver.) All which Solomon most magnificently prepared for the service of God,
sparing no cost, but employing himself to the utmost Gison, to exclude the
profane multitude, and admit none but the Priests only. The ^^^closure before
the Temple.
Without this wall there stood a Temple apiece with great and broad Isles,
which opened with very great gates; every one according to the quarter of the
wind; The Fane.
and the doors thereof were covered with Gold. Into this place all the people
that were purified might enter, and they likewise that kept the ordinances of
Moses. The huge trenches, wherein the foundation of the Temple was laid, filled.
It can scarcely be believed, how admirable that exterior Temple was: for he
filled huge trenches, which by reason of their unmeasurable depth, could not be
looked down into without vehement apprehension of fear, (for they were four
hundred Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 4.
and the Gates were of Massive Silver.

After that King Solomon had in seven years finished these so fair and
magnificent buildings, 1 Reg. 8. 5.
and all the other necessaries which he had bestowed upon the Temple, and
declared thereby his great riches, and showed his power, that that which at the
first sight might require a man's whole life to finish, Solomon's Temple was
consecrated in the month of October.
he accomplished in few years: He wrote unto the Governors and Elders of the
Hebrews, commanding them to assemble all the Jerusalem to behold the Temple,
and to bring in the Ark of God: and although this assembly was publicly
proclaimed, yet scarcely did the people make their appearance in Jerusalem
before the seventh month which we call Th^ri, v. 1, ad 4.
and the Macedonians Hyperberete. The Ark is carried into the Temple.
About this time fell the feast of Tabernacles, which the Hebrews, most
religiously observe and honor with great festivals. They therefore took the
Ark and the Tabernacle that Moses had made, with all those necessaries which
appertained to the Divine service, and bare them into the Temple. The King and
all the people, with the Levites marched before, having their cattle ready to
sacrifice, and filling the way with offerings, and the blood of diverse
slaughtered beasts, burning an infinite quantity of perfumes, wherewith the air
was filld round about, the scent whereof dispersed The year of the World, 2941.
before Christ's Nativity, 1023.
But when it was to be carried into the Holy of Holies, the rest of the
multitude departed, and the Priest only placed it under the two Cherubins, who
embraced it with their wings, as if it had been covered with a pavilion or some
canopy: for they had been fashioned after that manner by the workmen. The Ark
contained naught else but the two tables of Stone, v. 4.
in which were kept in writing the Ten commandments pronounced by God on mount
Sinai. The Priests place the Ark of God in the Sanctuary, and in it the Tables
of Stone, wherein the ten commandments were written.
For as touching the Candlestick, and the Table and Altar of Gold, he placed
them in the Temple before the most Holy of Holies, in places correspondent to
those where they stood, when they were in the Tabernacle. Then offered they the
ordinary sacrifices, and placed the brazen Altar before The Candlestick, Table,
and Altar of Gold.
suddenly there fell amidst the sanctuary a thick Cloud, not pitchy, nor such
as resembles winter Clouds laden with rain; but diffused and tenuous, which
darkened the sight of the Priests so that they saw not one another. The Brazen
Altar.
But thereby every man's mind was easily induced, A cloud in the Tabernacle.
to believe, and his opinion confirmed, that God was descended into the Temple
which was dedicated to his Name, to testify how acceptable it was to his
divine Majesty: v. 22, a^ 54.
In effect all men had no other opinion: But King Solomon arising from his
throne whereon he was seated, Solomon's prayer unto God.
addressed his prayers unto God, in such words O Lord (said he) thou have an
eternal house, God immeasurable.
neither are we ignorant that thou have framed this whole mass of the Universe
for thy self, The causes why the Temple was builded.
which consists of heaven, earth, air and seas: which thou altogether
fillest, yet art thou not contained by them. But therefore have we adorned and
erected this Temple to thy Name, to the end that we might offer up our prayers
in the same, and send them up to heaven (as a sweet sacrifice) to obtain thy
favor, God is true in his promises.
assuring our selves that thou art here present also, and wilt never be absent
from this place. For whereas thou see all things, hear all things, yet
forsakest thou not us at all, neither do thou abandon the place where thou
do inhabit: but rather thou art always near unto all men, but in especial
present with those that both do humbly desire to approach unto thee day and
night. These words spak he, looking upwards toward God, and afterward
addressing himself unto the people, he spoke unto them touching his power and
providence, how he had foretold his father David of all that which should
happen: the greater part whereof was already accomplished, and the rest was
shortly to succeed. Furthermore, he declared how God himself had given him his
name before he was born, and that it was known how he should be called: and how
at such time as he should be King after the decease of his Father, he should
build him a Temple; which things they saw brought to pass according as they
were foretold; for which they ought to give God thanks, and not to lose any
hope of any of those things that had been promised them for their future
happiness, v 55, 56, etc.
having sufficient encouragement to believe by the accomplishment of those
things which were already come to pass.

When the King had spoken after this manner unto the people, Solomon^ prayer
wherein he thanks God for his benefits, and beseeches his future protection.
he turned again, and beheld the Temple, and lifting up his hands toward the
people, he began thus: It is impossible (said he) for men to return thanks unto
God according to the greatness of those benefits which they have received, for
he is by his infinite greatness placed so far above us that our oblations are
altogether unprofitable unto him. But (O Lord) it behooves us, that since of
thy grace thou have made us more excellent than other living creatures, we
should bless and give thanks unto thy Majesty, and in especial it concerns us
to honor thee for the benefits thou have bestowed on our Family, and all the
Hebrew Nation. But by what other means can we appease thee when thou art
displeased, than by that voice which we draw from the air, and which returns
into the air again? I ought therefore first of all to give thee thanks in
respect of my Father, whom from a low degree thou, have raised to the highest
honor: next that thou David, establish the Crown on my head, and continue it I
beseech thee, to my successors, for many generations. Solomon humbly
beseeches God, that he will protect this Temple as his own house.
Bestow thou this benefit upon us, and bequeath unto all mine, that virtue
wherein thou take delight. Moreover I beseech thee that a portion of thy
Spirit may come and dwell in the Temple, to the intent that we may understand
that thou dwell upon earth; for not only this Temple, but the whole Heavens
are too little for thy habitation. I beseech thee therefore that it may please
thee to take care of it as thine own, to the end it may never be destroyed by
the Enemy, but that thou may always secure it, as thine own peculiar
inheritance. as being present in this place and have compassion on them, and
deliver them from their adversities.

Neither do I only entreat thee for the Hebrews when they shall have offended
thee: but if it happen that if any stranger of what Country soever he be,
shall from hence implore thine assistance, hear thou him, I pray thee, and
grant his request: For by this means all men shall know, v. 4^.
that it is thy will that thy house should be built in this place, and that we
are not so inhumane as to envy this happiness unto others, He prays tha^
(...) may be heard also in this place.
but that we have desired that thy help and the communication of thy blessings
should be bestowed, not only on those of our Nation, but also on all the World.
This said, he cast himself on his face, and continued in prayer a long time,
and afterward rising again, he offered sacrifices upon the Altar; and having
filled the Temple with offerings, he knew most evidently that God did
graciously accept of his oblations; 2 Chronicles. 7, 1.
for a fire passing through the air, A fire from heaven consumes Solomon's
(...).
and lighting upon the Altar in the sight of all men, consumed and devoured the
sacrifice. When this vision had happened, the people manifestly conjectured that
Gods abode should be in that Temple, and with great joy humbled themselves on
their faces, and lay prostrate on the pavement. But the King began to praise
God, and incited the people to do the like, considering they had already
received the testimonies of his mercy, exhorting them to pray that he would be
always merciful unto them, and that he would keep them for ever in cleanness
and incorrupt minds, and that they might justly and religiously lead their
lives in observing those commandments which he had given them by Moses. Solomon
exhorts the people to praise God, and to give him thanks, and to pray unto
him.
For in so doing, the people of the Hebrews should prosper and grow more happy,
than all the Nations of the World. Moreover he exhorted them to keep in their
remembrance those means, by which the benefits they possessed had been gotten;
assuring them that by the same 1 King. 8. 62, 63.
When the King had spoken after this manner unto the people, he dismissed the
assembly (having first of all accomplished the sacrifices both for himself and
the people, Solomon's sacrifices in the dedication of the Temple.
by offering up twelve thousand Oxen, and sixscore thousand sheep.) For then
first of all was the Temple embrewed with the blood of the slaughtered
sacrifices, and all the Hebrews with their Wives and Children were entertained
therein. The feast of Tabernacles.
The King also feasting with the whole people, celebrated the solemnity of the
Tabernacles for the space of fourteen days in great pomp and magnificence. v.
66.
And when all things were performed, and nothing was deficient that concerned
the service of God, The King dismisseth the people.
every one (dismissed by the King) departed to his own dewlling place, 1 King.
9. 1, 2.
giving him hearty thanks for the care he had taken of them, and for the works
he had done for them; God appears again to Solomon, and promises him all
blessings, if he (...) not from his fathers precepts. 1* 6* 7* 8* 9.
praying God that it might please him to grant their King a long life. And thus
they returned home with joy, praising and singing hymns unto God, so that they
arrived at their own habitations without being sensible of the toil of their
journey.

After they had conducted the Ark into the Temple, and beheld the greatness and
beauty of the same, and had celebrated most excellent sacrifices, and made
great solemnities they returned every one unto his City. But a vision that
night appeared unto the King during his sleep, A g^^^vous (...) the Israelites,
if they fall from the way of righteousness.
which gave him assurance that God had heard his prayer, and that he would
guard his Temple, and dwell in the same for ever (if his posterity and all the
Juda for ever; provided that they kept his statutes and observed his laws: but
if he forgot the Lord and followed strange gods, he would pluck him up by the
roots, without leaving any remainder to Reign after him; neither should the
people of Israel remain unpunished, but should be exterminate by infinite Wars
and adversities, and be cast out of the Country which he had given unto their
ancestors, and become banished men, and runnagates in a foreign Land. And
concerning the Temple which is built at this present, I will (said he) deliver
it to the Enemies to ransack and burn it, and the Hebrews are thus hated by
God, who beforetime have been so advanced by him in riches and honors: and they
shall be informed by those that survive, that those calamities are brought upon
them by their sins; and the transgressions which they have committed against
the ordinances of their forefathers. These things that were declared unto him
in a dream, 1 King* 7. 1.
are registered in the sacred Letters.

Seven years after the Temple had been thus built (as it has been heretofore
declared) he began the building of his Palace, Hedio and Ruff^^us, cap. 5.
which he scarcely finished in thirteen years Solomon's (...) finished (...)
thirteen years.
for he was not so intent and earnest in building thereof, as he was in the
structure of the Temple. For although the temple was very great, and of
incredible and mavelous magnificence, yet so it is that God (for whom it was
made) assisting the workmen, it was Hebrew King required. But it will not be
amiss if I declare all the order and disposition of the same House, that by the
description thereof, the Reader may be informed of its capaciousness. It was a
great and goodly Fabric, sustained by diverse Pillars, prepared to receive and
contain much People at the time of their assemblies, wherein they treated of
affairs, Ver. 8.
and held pleas. It was an hundred cubits in length, and in breadth The Hall.
and in height thirty, supported by sixteen square pillars covered with
Corinthian work, The Tribunal.
with stairs and carved gates, which contributed no less to its beauty, than
its security.

In the midst of this space, and hard by the Temple, there was another Pavilion
thirty cubits square, Ver. 8.
sustained with strong pillars, within which there was another magnificent
Tribunal, The Queens house, and other Palaces of pleasure.
on which the King sat to give judgment, unto which there was adjoined another
Palace prepared for the Queen. All the Chambers, as well those that were
ordinarily in use, Ver. 9. etc.
as those for recreation, after he had retired himself from public affairs,
were adorned with planks of carved Cedar, The ornaments of Solomon's Palace.
and were built partly of stone ten cubits square, partly of curious marble,
and very rarely and cunningly wrought by the most Chambers of pleasure, with
household stuff of gold.
And that which made it more beautiful, were three panes of Tapistry, and the
fourth admirable for the artificial engravings: for the Workmen had made
therein Trees and Plants of diverse sorts, shadowed with their branches and
leafs, hanging in such sort, that to behold them, a Man would have thought that
they shook, the workmanship was so exquisite and curious that covered the
stone. The rest, as far as the roof, was enchased, and flourished with diverse
Antiques and Pictures. Furthermore, he built other places of pleasure, with
very long porches to beautify the Palace; amongst which, there was one most
magnificent to make Banquets and Feasts in, which was throughout adorned with
gold: 1 Kings 10.
and all the necessaries for entertainment were of gold. It would be difficult
to give an exact account of the variety, the capaciousness Solomon's Throne made
of Ivory.
of Cedar, of Gold, and of Silver: the floors and walls were figured with
diversity of flowers, and of precious stones, inchased in gold, after the
manner of the Temple of God, 3 Reg. 5.
which shined with such like ornaments. There was likewise erected a very large
Throne, made in form of a Tribunal, with six steps of pure Ivory: on each side
of which there stood two Lions, and the like number were placed above. About
the place where the King sat, there were several Arms stretched out, which
seemed to

Solomon built all this that has been spoken of, in the space of twenty years,
being furnished by Hiram, King of the Tyrians, for these his buildings, with
great sums of gold, and far greater of silver, besides a quantity of Cedar and
Pine-trees. Solomon also remunerated him, and gave him great Presents, and sent
him every year abundance of Corn, Wine and Oil, (as we have heretofore
declared) whereof he stood in great need, by reason that his Country was an
Island. And besides that, he gave him twenty Cities in Galilee, Ver. 11, 12.
not far distant from Tire. Hiram having visited them, and not well-pleased
with them, Solomon's gratuity to Hiram for the benefits he received.
sent unto Solomon to certify him thereof, that he had no use for his Cities:
and Chabel, which is as much as to say, in the Phoenician tongue, unpleasant.
Hiram likewise sent unto Solomon certain mysteries, 1 Kings 9.
and difficult questions, requiring him to explicate them, and solve those
doubts and difficulties that occurred in his demands. 1 Kings 5.
Solomon being a Man of ripe judgment and understanding, explained them all
with a great deal of perspicuity. Solomon interprets certain hidden questions
sent unto him by Hiram* Menander the Historiographer, makes mention of Hiram
and Solomon.
Of these two Kings, Menander (who Translated the Antiquities of the Tyrians
out of the Phoenician Tongue into Greek) makes mention, after this manner:
After the decease of Abibale, Hiram his son succeeded him in the Kingdom, who
lived Fifty and three years, and reigned Thirty and four. He annexed the Field,
which is called the great Field, unto the Island, and consecrated a golden
pillar in Jupiters temple. He also caused a great quantity of wood to be hewed
down in the mountain Libanus, to make covers and roofs for Temples. For having
pulled down some ancient Temples, he builded that of Hercules, and that of
Astarte, and made his first building of Hercules in the month of Peritien,
(which is February) and made War against the Eyceens, who refused to pay their
tributes: and after he had brought them under his subjection, he returned to
his own Palace. In his time lived a young man called Abdemon, who always
resolved those questions which Solomon King of Jerusalem proposed.

Dion also makes mention of him in these terms: After the decease of Abibale,
his son Hiram reigned: he it was that fortified the quarter of the City to the
Eastward, and enlarged the same, Dion makes mention of Hiram.
and joined the Temple of Olympian Jupiter to the City, which before that time
was in another place, and filled all the place between them with earth, and
adorned it with pendants of gold; and afterward going up to Libanus, he hewed
down timber to build Temples withal. He said also, that Solomon reigning at
that time in Jerusalem, sent unto Hiram certain subtle questions, demanding
the exposition thereof under this condition, that if he explained them not,
Dion of Solomon.
by way of penalty he should pay a great Sum of money; and afterward that a
certain Tyrian called Abdemon, expounded that which had been proposed, and in
lieu thereof proposed certain others, which Solomon could not expound, and for
that occasion he paid a great Sum of money unto Hiram. This is that which Dion
writes.

The King seeing that the City of Jerusalem wanted both Bulwarks and Towers to
secure the same, Solomon repaireth the walls of Jerusalem, and erecteth towers.
and that the strength of it was no way answerable to the dignity thereof, he
repaired the walls, and erected great Towers on the same. Moreover, he built
certain Cities, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 6.
which deserve to be commemorated amongst the most Renowned, namely, Ascor and
Magedon, and the City of Gaza in the Country of the Philistines: against which
Pharaoh King of Egypt led out his Army, Solomon builds certain Cities, Azor,
Mage^on, Gaga, Betachor, Baleth.
and took it by force; and after he had put all the Inhabitants thereof to the
Sword, he destroyed the same, and he gave it in Solomon. For which cause the
King fortified it; seeing it to be already sufficiently fenced by nature, and
that it stood very commodiously for the War, and to hinder the incursions of
the enemy. Not far from thence, he fortified two other Cities, whereof one was
called Betachor, and the other Baleth. Besides these, he built others, which
were Cities of recreation and pleasure, by reason of the good temperature of
the Air, and the pleasantness of the fruits, and in especially the sweet Rivers
wherewith they were watered. Afterward entering into the Desert that is above
Syria, and conquering the same, he built another great City two days journey
distant from the higher Syria, a days journey from Euphrates, and six from the
great Babylon. The cause why this City was inhabited far from peopled quarters
of Syria, was, Thadamor, or Palmira.
He therefore built this City, and begirt it with strong walls, and called it
Thadamor, (which is the name which the Syrians term it by, even at this day,
and amongst the Greeks it is called Palmyra.) And these were Solomon's works in
that time. But since diverse are inquisitive to know the reason why the Kings of
Egypt that have been since Mineus the founder of Memphis, Why the Egyptian
Kings were called Pharaohs.
(who reigned diverse years before our great Ancestor Abraham) till Solomon's
time, for the space of more than Thirteen hundred years, have been called
Pharaohs, deriving that name from one that reigned in the midtime between both:
I have thought fit to give some account of it. The name of Pharaoh amongst the
Egyptians, signifies as much as King. But I suppose Authority. (For the Kings
of Alexandria having been heretofore called by other names, The Egyptian Kings
called Pharaohs.
at such time as they take upon them the Kingdom, they are called Ptolomies, by
the name of their first King.) The Roman Emperors likewise, notwithstanding
they have other names at the time of their birth, Ptolomei.
yet are they called Caesar's; Caesar's.
because the sovereignty and honor whereunto they are raised, Herodotus
writes not the names of the Egyptian Kings.
imposes that title on them: and the name that was given them by their
Fathers, is no more retained. For this cause it is, that although Herodotus of
Halicarnasseus, says, that since Mineus the Founder of Memphis, there have
been Three hundred and thirty Kings of Egypt; yet declares he Nicaule Queen of
Egypt and Ethiope, comes to Solomon.
because they were called Pharaohs. For when after these a Woman had obtained
the Kingdom, he called her by her own proper name, Nicaule: whence it
appears, that the men who have been Kings, were usually called by this name,
and that it had not been communicated unto this Woman: for which cause it was
necessary to declare her own first name. For mine own part, I have found in the
Books of our Nation, that since Pharaoh, who was Father-in-law to Solomon, none
of the Kings of Egypt have been called by that name: and that some little while
after, the forementioned Woman came unto Solomon, who reigned in Egypt and
Ethiopia: of whom we shall speak hereafter. But at this present I have made
mention of it, that it might appear that our Records, and the Chronicles of the
Egyptians, agree in many things.

But King Solomon conquered the Canaanites, (which till that time were not
under his subjection) and those that inhabited the mountain Libanus, as far as
the City of Amath, The year of the World, 2953. before Christ's Nativity, 1011.
and chose out from amongst them every year such, as he might employ in servile
works, and domestic affairs, and tillage of the land. For no Hebrew was a
slave: neither was it convenient, that since God had subjected diverse Nations
under them, (whom they might make slaves of) that they should tie those of
their own Nation to that bondage, 1 Kings 9. 16. ad 21.
who were all of them employed in Arms, and rather took delight to ride in
Chariots, and on Horses, than to submit to any mean or servile employment.
Solomon compels the remainer of the Canaanites to pay Tribute.
Over the Canaanites (whom he employed in his service) he appointed Five
hundred and fifty Commissaries, who had their charge and authority from the
King, and imposed on them those works wherein they were employed. He built a
Navy also in the Gulf of Egypt, The thraldom of the Canaanites.
in a certain place of the Red Sea called Asiongaber, which is named Berenice,
not far from the City of Elana (which Country in times past appertained to the
Jews.) 1 Kings 9. 16, ad 21.
And toward the building of his Navy, he obtained of Hiram, King of Tire, a
very considerable assistance: for he sent him Models of Ships, and Men that
were skilful in Navigation, whom he appointed to sail with his Factors to the
Country at that time called Ophir, and at this present the Land of Gold, in
the Country of India, to bring Gold from thence: who returned back again unto
the King, after they had gathered about Four hundred Talents.

About this time the Queen of Egypt and Ethiopia, (a Woman adorned with wisdom,
and admirable in all other things) having heard of the renowned virtue and
prudence of Solomon, 1 Kings 10. 1, ad 18.
desired to see with her own eyes whether those things which were reported The
Queen of Egypt and Ethiope resorteth to Solomon*
nor was she deterred either by the length or difficulty of the journey from
undertaking it, that she might thereby receive that satisfaction which she had
promised her self. She therefore came unto Jerusalem with great pomp, glory,
and riches; for she brought with her several Camels laden with gold, odors, and
precious stones of great value. After that the King had graciously entertained
her, and honored her in all things, he easily apprehended those doubts which
she proposed, and gave her a more speedy solution of the same, than might be
expected: so that she was ravished with the incredible wisdom of Solomon, Ver.
6, 7.
knowing by the effect, that it exceeded the report which she had heard of him.
The Queen of Ethiope wondreth at Solomon's wisdom.
But in special she wondered at his Palace, considering the greatness and beauty
thereof; and, above all, at the rich furniture and curious architecture the
Forest of Libanus: but the magnificence of his ordinary Table, and the
furniture and service of the same, made her astonished. The attire of his
servants likewise, and the goodly order which they observed in their service.
Moreover, the Sacrifices that were every day offered up unto God, and the care
and diligence of the Priests in discharging their offices, pleased her more
than all the rest, when she observed them daily: and being not able to contain
her self, she expressed how wonderfully she was affected; and her admiration
still increasing, she could not but express it to the King, after this manner:

We may very well doubt of things extraordinary, V. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
when we have no opportunity of being acquainted The Queen of Ethiopia praises
Solomon's wisdom.
But the fame of your riches, both those which you have in your self, (I mean
your wisdom and prudence) as those also which your Kingdom has brought you, is
neither false nor feigned; but yet I must confess, that the happiness which I
have seen, is much more excellent than that which was represented to me: for
report depends only on hearsay, neither gives it so certain a notice of
things as the sight discovers, when one is near unto the same. For mine own
part, I gave no credit to what I heard, but I have seen far more than I could
expect, and repute the people of the Hebrews to be most happy; and your
servants and friends most blessed, who are continual witnesses and hearers of
your wisdom. And each one of you ought to give God thanks, that he has so much
loved this Region, and the Inhabitants thereof, that he has established you in
the Royal Seat. I shall relate also, how she expressed her affection she bare
unto the King, Ver. 10* 11, 12.
by diverse Presents which she offered unto him. For she gave him twenty talents
of gold, The Queen gives Solomon many sumptuous Presents.
and an innumerable quantity of sweet odors and precious stones. It is said
likewise, that we have that Plant that distilleth balm, and which our Country
brings forth at this day, by the gift of this Princess. Solomon for his part
requited her bountiful Presents with the like, Ver. 13.
which she made choice of according to her own liking, Solomon remunerateth the
Queens bounty.
for there was nothing which she could require, which he granted not unto her:
showing himself most ready to give her satisfaction with a liberal and royal
heart. When the Queen of Egypt and Ethiopia had received these favors at the
Kings hands (according as it has been spoken) and he likewise had
magnificently requited her, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 7.
she returned back again into her own Country. Ver. 14. ad (...).


The precious timber that was brought to Solomon.
from the Country called the Region of Gold, a quantity of precious stones,
and of Pine-trees. This Wood was employed to make supporters in the Temple, and
in the Kings house, and to make Instruments of Music likewise, as Harps and
Cymbals, on which the Levites might praise Solomon, that which was given him at
that time, was most excellent in greatness and beauty. But let no man think,
that the Pine-wood (which we speak of) had any resemblance with that which we
call by that name at this day, or which the Merchants, to delude their Chapmen,
sell for the same. For they are like unto fig trees, but that they are more
white and clearer: which I thought good to take notice of in this place, lest
any Man should be deceived through ignorance, in not discerning the one from
the other, because the affairs of Solomon have drawn us to make mention of this
matter. The weight of gold which this Navy brought unto the King, was Six
hundred sixty and six Talents: besides that which the Merchants Arabia had sent
unto him by way of Present. This gold caused he to be molten down, and made
thereof Two hundred Targets, each one weighing Six hundred shekels; and Three
hundred Bucklers, each one of them weighing Three hundred mines of gold, and
placed and hung them in the Hall, called the Forest of Libanus. He caused also
diverse vessels of gold and precious stones to be made for the use of his Table,
all curiously wrought; the rest of his necessaries also were of gold: for
nothing was either bought or sold for silver. For the King had many ships upon
the Sea of Tharsis, which upon his command carried diverse merchandise into
remote Countries, by vent whereof they brought him home much gold and silver,
and much Ivory and Ethiopian Moors and Apes; and this Navigation in sailing to
and fro, was finished in three years. The renown and fame also of Solomon's
virtues Solomon's ships spent 3 years in their journey.
They therefore sent him vessels of gold and of silver, scarlet Robes, and all
sorts of aromatique Drugs, Horses and Chariots, Many Kings Present Solomon with
sundry Presents.
Mules and Sumpter-Horses, wherein (as it was reported unto them) the King took
pleasure, by reason of their strength and beauty: so that to the number of
Horses and Chariots which he had before, there were annexed Four hundred more,
which had been sent him as Presents, The horses and other gifts presented to
Solomon.
For before that, he had a Thousand Chariots, and Twenty thousand goodly
Horses, excellent for shape and swiftness: so that the like were not to be
found, that were comparable to them for beauty and pace. And that which gave

There was a certain place called Ittan, Ittan.
some eight Leagues distant from Jerusalem, delightful and enriched with
gardens and pleasant fountains of water, whither he usually retired himself for
his pleasure. He forgot not likewise to make Causeys, but caused Jerusalem, The
ways about Jerusalem paved with flint.
(where he made his abode) to be paved with black stone, to make them more
accessible for those that traveled to and fro, and to show his magnificence
and riches. He then divided his Chariots, and placed them in such sort, that in
every City there was a certain number, The Cities of Chariots.
and some few he kept about himself, and those Cities he called the Cities of
Chariots: Ver. 27, 28.
he stored Jerusalem also with abundance of silver, The abundance of silver in
Solomon's time.
so that it was as plentiful as stones; and with Cedar-wood (whereof before
that time there was no quantity) he stored the Country, that it was as
plentiful to be had as wild Fig Trees. He commanded the Merchants of Egypt
also, to buy him certain Chariots drawn by two Horses, 29. Egyptian horses.
for the price of Six hundred drachms of silver, which he sent unto the Kings
of Syria, and to those on the other side of Euphrates.

Now although he were the most magnificent and entirely beloved of God,
surpassing Hebrews; yet continued he not in this state until the end. For,
forsaking the observation of the ordinances of his Fathers, his latter years
were not correspondent to his former: for he grew altogether dissolute, and
immoderately given over to Women; and was not content only with those of his
own Country, 1 Kings 11. 1* ad 13.
but took also strange Women for his Wives, as Sidonians, Tyrians, Ammonites,
and Idumaeans, whereby he transgressed the laws of marriage instituted by
Moses, Solomon marrying strange Women, is seduced by them.
who inhibited to marry with those of foreign Nations. Afterward he began to
honor their gods also, that he might the more affectionately express the love
which he bare unto them: which thing the Lawmaker foreseeing, he had forbidden
the Israelites to marry with those that were not of their own Nation, for fear
lest The year of the World, 3964. before Christ's Nativity, 1000.
But Solomon transported with these brutish pleasures, made no account of
these things, but took him wives of the daughters of Princes and Nobles, to the
number of 700, and 300 Concubines, besides the daughter of Pharaoh King of
Egypt; by which means he was excessively overcome by them, insomuch as he
followed their examples, and was forced to give a testimony of the good will
and extreme affection that he bare them, in ordering his life according to the
fashion of their Countries. As therefore he increased in years, and his
judgment grew weak, he was in such sort misled, that he could not retain in
memory the customs of his Country, but more and more neglected the God of his
father, and promoted the worship of those gods which were introduced by his
wives. Before all this, he chanced to ^in, and transgress against the
observation of V* 14, etc. 23.
whence it came to pass, that by neglecting to follow his steps
(notwithstanding that God had exhorted him thereunto* The punishment inflicted
on Solomon, for honoring strange gods.
by appearing unto him at two several times) he dyed most ignominiously. There
came therefore unto him a Prophet sent from God, telling him, That his sins
were manifest, and notorious in Gods sight, threatening him that ere long he
should repent the wickedness he had committed. Yet notwithstanding, the Realm
should not be taken from him during his life, because God had promised David
that he should be his successor; but after his decease, he would chastise his
son, for the iniquity of the father: not so as all the people should revolt,
but that he would give ten Tribes unto his servant, and leave two unto the
Grandchild of David, because he had loved God, and by reason of the City of
Jerusalem, where it pleased him to make his habitation.

When Solomon heard these things, he was sore troubled, because all his
felicity began to decline. Nor was it long after this denunciation of the
Prophet, but that there rose up an enemy against him, Ver. 14, ad 22.
who was called Ader, by Nation an Idumaean, and of the Princely stock, Ader,
enemy to Solomon.
who, upon this occasion, grounded his rebellion and insurrection. For at such
time as Joab, Ader fled into Egypt.
General of David's Army, had conquered Idumaea, and in the space of six months
defeated all the youth, and those that were capable to bear Arms, he fled unto
Pharaoh King of Egypt, Ader beseeches Pharaoh to dismiss him, that he might
return into his Count^^y.
who entertained him very courteously, and gave him an house and lands for his
maintenance, and loved him dearly when he came to man's estate; so that he
married him to Taphines his wives sister, on whom he begat a Son, who was
brought up with the Kings children: who having intelligence in Egypt of David
and Joabs death, addressed himself unto Pharaoh, and besought him to give him
leave to repair into his own Country.

The King asked him what he wanted, or what the cause was that moved him to be
so forward to forsake him? Notwithstanding therefore that he importuned and
requested him diverse times, yet prevailed he not with him. But when Solomon's
fortunes began to decline, Ader returns into Idumaea, and from thence
departs into Syria.
(by reason of his iniquities abovementioned, and the wrath of God provoked
Ader, by Gods permission, came into Idumaea, after he had obtained leave of
Pharaoh to depart. But being unable to move the people to revolt from Solomon,
by reason of the strong Garrisons he held; Raas and Ader enemies to Solomon.
and knowing, that without hazard of his own person, he could move no
alterations or innovation in that place, he departed from thence, and went into
Syria: where confederating himself with a certain man called Raas (who was fled
from his Master Adarezer, King of Sophone, and lived like an Outlaw in that
Region) he contracted friendship with him, and a great sort of Outlaws and
Thieves that were his followers, and went into Syria, and seizing on that
Country, proclaimed himself King thereof. From whence, making excursions into
the lands of the Israelites, he spoiled and pillaged the same, during Solomon's
lifetime. Thus were Hebrews enforced to sustain those Outrages at Aders hands.

Moreover, a certain Man called Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, by Nation a Jew,
rebelled against Solomon, Ver. 26, ad 35.
and raised his hopes above his estate, persuaded thereunto by a Prophecy that
concerned him, Jeroboam rebelleth against Solomon.
and incited him unto the action. For being left very young by his Father, and
carefully instructed by his Mother, as soon as Solomon perceived him to be of a
noble and courageous spirit, he made him Commissary over the building of the
Walls, at such time as he immured and fortified Jerusalem. In this office he
behaved himself so well, Ver. 30.
that the King thought very well thereof, and by way of recompense, made him
General over the Tribe of Joseph. Ach^as the Prophet foretells that he should
be King over the ten Tribes.
Toward which, whilst he traveled from Jerusalem, a certain Prophet met him
upon the way, (who was of the City of Sil^, called Achias) who approaching near
unto him, and saluting him, drew him out of the way into a place, where none
but themselves were present, and there renting the garment which he wore upon
his back in twelve pieces, he commanded Jeroboam to take ten, telling him, That
God had so decreed, The year of the World, 2971. before Christ's Nativity, 993.
and how he would rent the Government from Solomon, and reserve only one Tribe
unto his son, with that other which was annexed unto it, by reason of the
promise made to David; and to thee (said he) he gives the other ten, because
Solomon has offended God, and addicted himself to the love of strange Women,
and the service of foreign gods.

Now since thou know the cause wherefore God has alienated the Kingdom from
Solomon, be thou just, and observe the Laws; for if thou behavest thy self in
such sort as thou know David did, a great reward of thy piety, and
recompense of thy observance attends thee, so that thou shall become as
mighty as David has been before thee. Jeroboam confirmed in great hopes by
these words of the Prophet, being by nature haughty, in years young, and
besides that, Ver. 40.
desirous of authority, Jeroboam flies into Egypt and remains there until
Solomon's death.
he took no rest; but being possessed of the place of Achias, he presently
began to persuade the people to revolt from Solomon, and to choose him for
their King. Solomon hearing news of this his design, sought means to lay hands
on him, and to put him to death: but Jeroboam preventing him, fled unto Susac
King of Egypt, with whom he remained until the death of Solomon. And thus for
that time escaped he punishment: and thus was he reserved to the fortune of a
Kingdom.

CHAP. III.
After the death of Solomon, the people revolt from Rehoboam his Son, and
proclaim Jeroboam King of the Ten Tribes.
BUT when Solomon was very old, The death of Solomon.
he dyed, after he had Reigned fourscore years, and lived ninety four, and was
buried in Jerusalem; of all Kings the most happy, rich* and prudent, Hedio and
Ruffinus, cap. 8. al. 4.
(except that sin whereunto he was drawn by Women in his old age) of whom, and
those calamities that presently after befell the Hebrews, we have sufficiently
spoken. 1 Reg. 12. 1, ad 11.
After the death of Solomon, as soon as his son Rehoboam (whom he begat upon an
Ammonitish woman, called Noma) succeeded him in the Kingdom, the Governors of
the people sent certain messengers into Egypt, to recall Jeroboam: who arriving
in the City of Sichem, Rehoboam came thither also, resolving in that Assembly
of the Israelites, to take the Kingdom upon himself by the peoples consent. The
people require Rehoboam to mitigate their burden.
To him therefore the Princes Jeroboam, beseeching him, That he would remit
somewhat of their servitude, and show himself more merciful than his father had
been: for that under his government they had been sorely oppressed, assuring
him that by that means his Kingdom should be the more secured, if so be he had
rather be beloved, than feared. He three days after promised them to return an
answer to their demands, and by that means drew them into suspicion, that upon
the motion he misliked of the offers they had proposed: for they thought it
became his years to be affable, and ready to deserve well; yet remained there
some hope in them, Ver. 6, 7, 8.
that they had not presently suffered a repulse. Mean while, he calling about
him his fathers friends, The wholesome advice of the Elders.
consulted what answer he should give the people: they that wished his welfare,
and knew the nature of the people very well, persuaded Ver. 8, ad 11.
entertain themselves amongst them. But Rehoboam rejected this counsel of
theirs (which was both good and profitable in all occasions, Rehoboam rejects
the advice of the Elders, and follows the counsel of the younger.
but especially upon the first entrance into a Kingdom) and that not without
Gods providence, since contrary to all reason he neglected the right course,
and followed the perverse: so that calling unto him certain young men of his
own humor and disposition, he told them what the Elders had counseled him, and
willed them to discover their opinion in that matter: That his little finger
was more great than the loins of his father; and that if they had experimented
and endured grievances under him, that he would be far more rigorous; and that
if his father had chastised them with the stroke of the Rod that they should
expect to be punished by him with a severer chastisement. The King delighted
herewith, supposed the answer to be agreeable to the dignity of his Empire.
When therefore the people were assembled on the third day to hear his
resolution, and all of them were in suspense, expecting and desirous to hear
him speak, from whom they hoped naught else but sweetness: Rehoboam contemning
the counsel of his friends, proposed unto himself that of the young Men. All
which Achias had prophesied might be fulfilled.

David's alliance, neither with his succession, Ver. 18, etc.
telling him, that they would only leave the Temple his father had built, unto
his charge, and threatening him to abandon him. The Israelites moved with their
repulse, revolt from Re^oboam.
Furthermore, they were so heinously incensed, (that Rehoboam having sent unto
them Adoram, the Superintendent of the Tribes, to pacify their wrath, and to
persuade them to pardon his youth, if he had spoken any thing lightly, and
unrespectively unto them) they could not endure to hear him speak, but slew and
well-nigh overwhelmed him with stones. Which when Rehoboam Jerusalem, where the
Tribe of Juda, and that of Benjamin (by their common suffrages) made him King.
Ver. 21, 22.
But as touching the rest of the people, Rehoboam intending to make War on
those Tribes that revolted, is inhibited.
from that day forward they revolted from the Successors of David, and
proclaimed Jeroboam King of their estates. Rehoboam the son of Solomon being
sore displeased herewith, assembled the two Tribes, with an intent to muster
One hundred and fourscore thousand chosen Men, to make War on Jeroboam and his
people, and to enforce them by War to acknowledge him for their Sovereign. But
God restrained him by the means of a Prophet, who forbade him to make That it
became not those of the same Nation, to contend one against another: and the
rather, for that this their revolt had happened by the Will of God, by which
means and persuasion he dismissed his Army. But first of all I will rehearse
that which Jeroboam King of Israel did, and afterward declare the acts of
Rehoboam King of the two Tribes, and thus shall the course of the History
continue in order.

After that Jeroboam had settled his Court in the City of Sichem, The Court and
Palace of Jeroboam.
he made his ordinary abode in that place, except that sometimes he sojourned
in the City of Phanuel. Not long after this, the feast of Tabernacles being at
hand, Jeroboam (supposing that if he permitted the people to go up and worship
God in Jerusalem, and solemnize the feast in that place, they might either
repent themselves of the revolt, or that by the magnificence of Ver. 26, 27, 28.
they might be persuaded to forsake him, Why Jeroboams Calves were made.
and submit themselves to their first King, and by that means he might be drawn
into danger of his life) to prevent the danger of such a mischief, took this
course: He caused two golden Calves to be cast, and built two several Temples,
the one in Bethel, and the other in Dan, (which is situate near to the source
of little Jordan) in which he placed these Calves; and afterward assembling
the ten Tribes that were under his subjection, he spoke unto them in manner
following:

My Friends and Countrymen, I know that you are not ignorant how God is in all
places, and that there cannot be any place wherein he assisteth not, nor time
wherein he hears and beholds Jerusalem, which is a City at enmity with us,
neither that you make so long a journey to perform your devotion: Jeroboam
persuadeth the people to Idolatry.
for it was a man that built that Temple, even as I have consecrated two golden
Calves, the one in Bethel, and the other in Dan, to the end that every one of
you that inhabit near unto those Cities, may go thither and worship God.
Neither shall you want Priests and Levites: for I will elect some such among
you, to the intent that you may have no more need of the Tribe of Levi, or the
Sons of Aaron. Whosoever therefore amongst you would be a Priest, let him offer
Calves and Muttons unto God, after the same manner that Aaron did when he was
first appointed to be a Priest.

By such like Speeches seduced he the people, and caused them to fall from
their Forefathers Hebrews: by which means being overcome in War, The neglect of
Gods service, is the cause of all evil.
they fell into captivity, and were made subject to strangers, (whereof we will
treat further hereafter.) Now when the feast of Tabernacles (which happened in
the seventh month) was at hand, he himself intended to celebrate in Bethel
after the same manner, as the two other Tribes had feasted in Jerusalem, and
erected an Altar before the Calf, and was himself the High Priest, ascending up
to the Altar, being assisted by the Priest.

Now at such time as he was about to sacrifice, and to offer up burnt-offerings
in the sight of the people, there came a Prophet and stood by him, called
Jadon, (sent from Jerusalem by the commandment of God) who standing up in the
midst of the people, and in the hearing of the King, turned himself toward the
Altar, and spoke after this manner: Thou Altar, thou Altar, thus says the
Lord, there shall a man rise of the Tribe of David, called Josias, he shall
kill upon thee the false Prophets of his time, and shall burn the bones of the
deceivers and seducers upon thee: And to the intent that each man may believe
that this Prophecy is true, it shall be confirmed by a Prodigy. This Altar
shall suddenly break, and the fat of the Sacrifices that are laid thereon,
shall be poured on the ground. Jeroboam displeased with these words of the
Prophet, 1 Reg. 13. 1, 2, 3.
stretched out his hand, commanding them to lay hold on him. But the hand that
he stretched out, became instantly withered, so that he could no more draw it
back again to himself, The Prophecy against the Altar in Bethel.
but held it hanging down, astonished and mortified. On the other side the
Altar cleft in twain, and all that was thereon fell down (according as the
Prophet had foretold.) The Prophecy is confirmed by a miracle.
The King perceiving that the man had a true and divine spirit of Prophecy,
besought him to pray unto God, that his hand Ver. 4.
and he prayed, and his hand was restored; Jeroboams withered ^and restored.
wherewith Jeroboam being well-pleased, invited the Prophet to dine with him.
But Jadon answered him, and said, That he neither might enter into his house,
nor taste any bread or water within the City, because God had prohibited him:
furthermore he told him, That it was not lawful for him to return the same way
that he came. But the King admiring at the continency of the man, Hedio and
Ruffinus, cap. 9.
began the more seriously to suspect his estate, and (conjecturing by those
things which he had both seen and heard) he divined the assured disaster of his
estate and fortunes. There dwelt in that City a certain false Prophet, whom
Jeroboam held in great honor, (in that he soothed him up in whatsoever was
best pleasing to his ears.) This man lay at that time sick upon his Bed, being
feeble through age; and when he was informed by his son that there was a
Prophet come from Jerusalem, and what wonders he had wrought, and how Jeroboam
by his prayers recovered again his withered hand; he fearing lest the King
should make more account of this stranger, than of himself, commanded his sons
presently to saddle his Ass, and to have him in a readiness against his
departure. Which when they had performed, he mounted thereon, and went after
the Prophet, whom he overtook, where he rested himself under a thick shadowy
Oak; and upon the first encounter, saluted him, and afterward expostulated,
why he had not visited him, Ver. 7, ad 10.
neither accepted of that hospitality which he willingly would have afforded
him. The Prophet is brought back, by the subtilty and f^^ud of the false
Prophet.
Jadon answered him. That God had forbidden him, and charged him not to taste
any kind of sustenance in any man's house that dwelt within the City. Truly,
said the other, with me thou might eat, for I also am a Prophet, and honor
the same God that thou do: and now also come I unto thee by his commandment,
to conduct thee back again unto my house, and to entertain thee with a friendly
dinner. These words of the false Prophet made Jadon credulous, so that he
turned back again with him. But as they sat at their Banquet, and were making
merry together, God appeared unto Jadon, and said unto him, That since he had
broken his commandment, he should suffer punishment for the same; and withal
expressed unto him the manner, which was, That in his return homewards, he
should be torn in pieces by a Lion; Ver. 19, ad 23.
and that he should not be buried in the monument of his fathers. This thing
happened in my opinion by the Will of God, The disobedience of the Prophet; his
punishment and burial.
to the intent that Jeroboam should not respect Jadons words, who had been
found a liar. As therefore Jadon returned back to Jerusalem, a Lion met him on
the way, and tore him in pieces from his Ass, Jadons Prophecy is detracted to
Jeroboam by the false Prophet.
and his Tomb might be honored. When therefore he had interred the Prophet,
and given his son these things in charge (being other Jeroboam, and said unto
him: Why art thou troubled at the words of this mad man? The King told him all
that which had happened about the Altar, and his hand, and assured him, that he
accounted him a true and divine Prophet, and one sent by God. But the false
Prophet began most maliciously to weaken his belief, and disguise the truth of
that which happened by his persuasive words. For he told him that what had happened
to his hand, was only occasioned through weariness, and the pains he had taken
in bearing the Sacrifices; and after that he had a little rested, that it came
into his own natural state again: and that the Altar being newly built, and
diverse great Sacrifices laid thereupon, it cleft in twain, and fell down
through the weight of what was laid on it. Consequently he declared unto him
the death of him that had foretold these signs that were to come, and how he
had been slain by a Lion: for which cause he persuaded him to think that he in
no sort was a Prophet, nor had the spirit of Prophecy.

Jeroboam.

Touching Rehoboam, Solomon's son, (who was King of the two Tribes, as we have
before declared) he built these great and strong Cities, Hedio and Ruffinus.
cap. 10.
Bethleem, Itama, Thecos, Bethsor, Socoth, Rehoboams defenced Cities.
Odolam, Epan, Maresa, Zipha, Adorai^, Lachis, Saraim, Elon, and Hebron, within
the Confines of Juda. He built also other great Cities in the Country of the
Benjamites, 2 Chronicles. 11. 5.
and placed Garrisons and Governors in every one of them, and great store of
Corn, Wine and Oil: and generally in every City he made a great storehouse
with all sorts of provision, 2 Chro. 11. 13.
and victuals, The godly Israelites return to Rehoboam.
with a great number of targets and lances. To him the Priests and Levites
joined themselves, who were dispersed through Israel, who came and dwelt in
Jerusalem. For they could not endure to be obliged to adore those Calves that
Jeroboam had erected; Ver. 18, 19* 20.
and during the term of three years, Rehoboams Wi^es and Children:
they increased the Kingdom of Rehoboam: who being married to one of his own
Line, had three children, and was afterward married also to Maacha the
daughter of Thamar daughter to Absalon, who was of his Parentage likewise, of
whom he begat his son called Abiah. He had also diverse other children by other
women; but above all the rest, he loved Maacha Abiah the son of Maacha, and
committed all his Treasures and strong Forts unto his hands. But Men most
usually are corrupted by the flatteries of fortune, as appears by this King.
For Rehoboam seeing his Kingdom thus increased, bent himself to all unjust and
impious actions, and contemned the service of God: the people also conformed
themselves to his impieties. For the life of the subject is oftentimes
perverted, by reason of the corrupt and dissolute life of their Princes; and
those that are inferiors, beholding the riot of their superiors, will easily be
withdrawn from all modesty, and follow those vices they profess, as if they had
been their professed Regis ad exemplum tot^^ componitur orbis.
for should they do the contrary, they would seem to mislike the actions of
their Princes: And thus it happened under the Government of Rehoboam, where the
Subjects addicted themselves to all manner of impiety: for they would not make
profession of honesty, for fear of offending their Prince, in appearing to be
more virtuous than he.

CHAP. IV.
Susac King of Egypt, after the spoil of Jerusalem, carries away the riches of
that City into Egypt.
Susac King of Egypt to take vengeance for that wickedness, 1 Chronicles. 12. ^.
which was committed against his Majesty by Rehoboam, Alias cap. 5.
(whose actions Herodotus wrongfully ascribes to Sesostris.) Susac invadeth
Judea with great Forces.
For this Susac in the fifth year of Rehoboam's Reign, assembled a huge Army of
many thousands, and brought them out against Rehoboam: wherein it is reported,
that he had twelve hundred Chariots, threescore thousand horsemen, and four
hundred thousand foo^men. The greater part of these were Lybians and
Ethiopians: breaking therefore into the Hebrews Country with this power,
without stroke, he seized the strongest places of the Kingdom of Rehoboam, Ver.
2. ad 8.
and fortified them, and at last came and encamped before Jerusalem. Jerusalem
besieged.
But Rehoboam and his Associates, seeing themselves begirt on every side by
Susac's Army, S^m^^^s the Prophet reprehendeth the Jews of their impiety.
Sam^^^s comfort the people.
at last had recourse unto prayer: yet could Samoeas threatened and told him,
That God would abandon both him and his, in like manner as they had forsaken
him and his service. Which when they heard, they suddenly lost their courage,
and seeing no means to escape, they all of them began to confess, that God had
justly forsaken them, because they had offended against him, and perverted all
his Laws. But God seeing them thus disposed, and making confession of their
sins, said unto the Prophet, That he would not utterly destroy them: yet
notwithstanding that he would deliver them into the hands of the Egyptians, to
the end that they might learn whether it were more difficult to serve God, or
men. When therefore King Susac had without bloodshed or resistance taken the
City, Ver. 9, 10 etc.
and was received into the same by Rehoboam, Jerusalem and the Temple are
spoiled.
he kept not those Covenants that were made betwixt Targets and Bucklers of
gold, which were made by King Solomon: neither left he behind The year of the
World, 2975. before Christ's Nativity, 989.
which was offered by David, and received by him of the King of Sophena: which
done, he retired back again unto his own Country. Of this expedition,
Herodotus of Halicarnassus makes mention, (who differs only in the name of
the King) and says that he assailed diverse Nations, and subdued Palestina and
Syria, and took many men prisoners without any resistance; What Herodotus wrote
of this expedition
whereby it is manifest that he means no less, than that our Nation has been
overcome by the Egyptians. For he says, that in their gates, who yielded
themselves up unto him without making opposition, as an eternal Reproach of
their Cowardice and Luxury, he erected Pillars which were figured with the
secret parts of a woman. For King Rehoboam was the only Prince that ever
yielded up the City without opposition. It is said that the Ethiopians have
learnt of the Egyptians the use of circumcision of the Prepuce. For the
Phoenicians and Syrians that are in Palestine, confess that they have learnt it
of the Egyptians. But it is very manifest, that no other are circumcised in
Palestina or Syria, but our selves. But let each one speak of these things,
according as he pleases.

After the Retreat of Susac, Ver. 9, 10.
King Rehoboam made shields and bucklers of brass, Reho^oam for the golden
shields and bucklers, makes new of brass.
instead of those of gold, and gave the like number unto his guard: and instead
of living in a brave Army, in a Royal and Princely state, he reigned after a
servile manner, being all his lifetime an enemy to Jeroboam. He dyed after he
had lived fifty seven years, whereof he Reigned seventeen. Ver. 13, 14.
He was a haughty and undiscreet man, and lost his estate, because he would not
give credit to his Fathers friends. Re^oboam dies, and Abias reigns after
him.
He was buried in Jerusalem in the Sepulcher Abias succeeded him in the
Kingdom, at such time as Jeroboam had already Reigned eighteen years over the
Ten Tribes.

After having related the end of Rehoboam, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 11.
we must give an account likewise of that of Jeroboam. 1 Reg. 14. 2, ad 18.
He observing no mean or end of his impiety, employed himself continually in
making of Altars and high places, and presumed to ordain Priests of the meanest
of the people. Jeroboams impiety.
But God withheld not long to heap the punishment of those his impieties,
Jeroboams son falls sick, his mother is sent to Achias the Prophet.
on the head of him, and of all his posterity. Whereas therefore his son Obimes
was sick, about that time, he commanded his Wife to lay aside her Royal
garment, and to apparel her self like a common Woman, and afterward to go to
Achias the Prophet, assuring her that he was admirable for his knowledge in
foretelling things to come, and had Silo where Achias dwelt; and as she was
upon entering his house, (notwithstanding he had lost his sight through age) God
appeared unto him, and told him that Jeroboams Wife came unto him, and all that
he should answer to her demands. At such time therefore as she entered into his
house, after the guise of a common and strange Woman, Achias cried with a loud
voice;

Enter, thou Wife of Jeroboam, wherefore hidest thou thy self? Thou can not
hide thy self from God, who had certified me of thy coming, and has informed
me what answer I shall give Ver. 10, etc.
He therefore said unto her, The punishment of Jeroboam, and the misery of the
people foreprophesied.
that she should return unto her husband, and certify him of Gods answer to
this effect: Of little and nothing that thou were, I have made thee great; and
having dismembered the Kingdom from David's posterity, I have given it unto thee:
But thou have forgotten me; and having forsaken my service, have molten down
new gods, whom thou honor: wherefore will I exterminate thee, and abolish
all thy posterity, and cast them off for a prey unto the Dogs, and the Fowls of
the Air. For I will constitute a King over my people, that shall leave no one
of Jeroboams Race alive. The people also shall have part of this punishment,
and shall be deprived of this their fruitful Country, and be scattered amongst
the Regions on the other side of Euphrates, because they have followed the
impieties of their King, and adoring those gods that were forged by him, have
omitted to offer sacrifice unto me. And Jeroboam.

When Achias had finished his Prophecy, the Woman started back, sore troubled
and dismayed, Ver. 17.
through the danger of her son, and went lamenting onward on her way, to find
out the King, not considering that the more haste she made, the more she
hastened the death of her son, who was not to expire till she arrived, and
(according to the prediction of the Prophet) she was not to expect to see him
any more alive. When as therefore she was arrived, she found her son dead, as
the Prophet had foretold her, and recited Jeroboam.

The year of the World, 2988, before Christ's Nativity, 976.

Jeroboams Expedition against the son of Rehoboam, the overthrow of his Army,
Basanes rooteth out the whole posterity of Jeroboam, and makes himself King.
BUT Jeroboam nothing moved therewith, Alias chap. 6.
levied a great Army, with an intent to make War against Abias, The expedition
of Jeroboam against Abias King of Juda.
the son of Rehoboam, who had obtained his Fathers Kingdom over the two Tribes.
For he despised him, because he was young. Notwithstanding the young King, who
was no whit dismayed, (although he was informed of Jeroboams coming) with
greater wisdom than was common to his years, Ver. 1. ad 9.
and beyond all expectation of his forward Adversary, Abias levied an Army
against Jeroboam.
levied an Army out of the two Tribes, with which he encountered Jeroboam at the
Mountain of Samaria; where incamping his Host near unto him, he provided all
things in a readiness that were requisite for the Battle, and had with him four
hundred thousand fighting Men, 2 Chronicles. 13. 1, ad 4.
but Jeroboam had twice as many. Now when the Armies were ranged, and expected
orders to charge, Abias stood up in a certain high place from whence he might
be seen and heard, and making a sign with his hand, he required that Jeroboam
and the people would first of all hear him peaceably; which granted, Ver. 5, ad
12.
and each one attending in silence, he brake out into these words: There is
none of you but knows, Abias oration to the Hebrews, wherein he upbraideth
them of their superstition, and fors^^ing of their Religion.
that God has promised the Kingdom to David, and his posterity for ever; I
therefore greatly admire how you have revolted from my Father, to submit your
selves to Jeroboam Jeroboam usurpeth unjustly even at this day, and which, as I
suppose, he shall not enjoy long. For God shall certainly punish him for those
Crimes which he has committed, and which he continues daily to commit, and to
the imitation of which he endeavoreth to seduce you that follow him. You have
received no injury at my Fathers hands; but by reason that he was misled by the
sinister counsels of certain wicked persons, and spoke unto you certain words
which seemed harsh in your ears, you have forsaken him in your displeasure:
but, in effect, you have separated your selves from God and his Commandments.
Truly you should have pardoned a young man untrained and untaught in Oratory,
not only for the rude words which he used, but although his youth and Solomon,
ought to have prevailed with you, to pass by the defects of his son my father.
But you have had no regard of all this, neither then nor at this present, but
led forth a great Army against us. But whereupon ground you the hope of your
victory? Is it on your Calves of gold? Is it on your Altars on the mountains,
which are witnesses of your impiety and irreligion? Is it your great number
that surpasses ours by far, that makes you confident? Truly, the force of
many thousands is of no value, where the Army fights in an unjust quarrel.
For in justice only and piety toward God, consists the most assured hope of
obtaining victory over a man's enemies; which must needs be on our side, who
observe at all times the ordinances of our

Thus spoke Abias to the people. But whilst he yet continued his discourse,
Jeroboam sent certain of his Soldiers by by-ways to enclose Abias within two
straits, Ver. 13.
before his followers could discover them. Now when Abias was thus enclosed in
the midst of his enemies, his Army began to be discomforted, and to lose their
courage: but he encouraged them, and exhorted them to put their trust in God,
who could not be enclosed by Jeroboams Soldiers, that they fled, and those on
Abias side obtained the victory. Never was there War recorded by the Historians
either amongst the Greeks or Barbarians, that was pursued with so great a
slaughter as the Army of Jeroboam: whereby it appeared, that this wonderful and
admirable victory came from God. For they discomfited five hundred thousand of
their enemies, and took their most defenced places by force, and spoiled them.
Bethel and Ithan also, with their lands and signiories belonging unto them: so
that as long as Abias lived, The death of Abias.
Jeroboam was never after able to raise any power since the loss he received.
Abias Jerusalem, 1 Reg. 15. 9.
in the Sepulcher of his Ancestors, leaving twenty two sons, and sixteen
daughters behind him, Asa King of Juda.
all which he begat on sixteen Women. His son Asa succeeded him in the Kingdom,
The year of the World, 2991. before Christ's Nativity, 973.
whose Mother was called Maacha: under his Government the Country Israel
enjoyed a firm peace for the space of ten years. This is that which we have
observed of Abias, son of Rehoboam, the son of Solomon: Jeroboam the King of
the ten Tribes dyed likewise, after he had reigned twenty two years, and Nadab
his son succeeded him, at such time as Asa had already reigned two years. The
son of Jeroboam governed two years, resembling his father in impiety and
wickedness. During these two years, he made War against Gaban, a City of the
Philistines, and encamped thereabout to surprise it by force: Hedio and
Ruffinus, cap. 12. a^. 8.
but being betrayed by the treachery of a certain friend of his called Baasa,
the son of Machil, he dyed. This Baasa taking possession of the Kingdom,
exterminated all the posterity of Jeroboam: Asa's piety.
and it came to pass, that they of Jeroboams Race that dyed in the City, 1
Kings 15. 9, ad 24.
were torn in pieces, and devoured by Dogs; and they that 2 Chronicles. 14. 1, ad
finem.
were made a prey unto Birds, according as God had foretold by his Prophet. By
this means the house of Jeroboam suffered a deserved punishment for their
impiety and wickedness.

CHAP. VI.
The Ethiopians besiege Jerusalem during the Reign of Asa, and are repulsed.
BUT Asa King of Jerusalem, was a man of an upright and honest life, and one
that feared God; neither proposed he to himself any other rule of his Actions,
than the Divine Law. He corrected whatsoever was vicious and irregular in his
Kingdom, purging Juda, armed with Bucklers and Javelins, and two hundred and
fifty thousand of the Tribe of Benjamin, bearing Bucklers and Bows. After he
had reigned ten years, Zaraeus King of Ethiopia came out against him, with a
great Army of nine hundred thousand footmen, and one hundred thousand horsemen,
with three hundred chariots, and destroyed all the Land as far as Maresa, a
City of Juda: in which place Asa met him, and set his Army in array against him,
The Ethiopians war against Asa.
in the valley of Saphath, not far from the City. Where seeing the great number
of the Ethiopians, he besought God that he would give him the victory over his
enemies: because he had not come forth against so formidable a power, but in
confidence of his assistance, who had the power to make a few men superior unto
many, and the feeble to overcome the mighty.

Whilst Asa prayed thus unto God, 2 Chronicles. 14* 9, ad 14.
a certain sign of victory was given him; so being confirmed in that God had
given him a token that he would assist him, he assailed his enemies, and slew a
great number of the Ethiopians: as for the rest that were put to flight, he
pursued them as far as the Country of Gerar; and after they had conquered
their Enemies, they sacked the City of Gerar, and brought from thence a great
mass of gold, and much spoil, with Camels, Dromedaries, and Herds of diverse
kinds of Cattle.

When Asa had obtained at Gods hands such a victory, Asa's victory.
and so great riches, he returned back again to Jerusalem: Ver. 12.
and when he drew near unto the City, the Prophet Azarias came out to meet
them, who stayed him, and spoke after this manner: That since they had obtained
from God so notable a victory, they ought to behave themselves like virtuous
men, and The exhortation of Azarias the Prophet.
conforming themselves unto his will in all things; assuring them that if they
persisted in the same, God would give them victory over their enemies, and all
the happiness of this life: but if they forsook the service of God, they should
fall into so great extremity, that neither true Prophet or Priest should be
found amongst them, 2 Chronicles. 15.
that should instruct them in righteousness; ver. 3, 4.
that their Cities should be overthrown, and their Nation should be scattered
over the face of the whole earth, that they should live like Wanderers and
Vagabonds. In the mean while therefore, while they had time, he counseled them
to live uprightly, wishing them that they would not deprive themselves of that
favor which God bare unto them. When the King and all the people heard these
words, they were very joyful, and every one was careful to serve God. The King
also sent out certain Deputies over the Country, who were commanded see the
laws duly executed. In this state were the affairs of Asa King of the two
Tribes.

Now will I return to Basa King of Israel, Religion rene^ed in Israel.
who (having slain Nadab the son of Jeroboam) usurped the Kingdom. He made his
abode in the City of Thersa, and reigned four and twenty years, showing himself
more wicked, than either Jeroboam or his son had been. He miserably oppressed
his Subjects, and by his blasphemies dishonored the Name of God, Basa's
impiety.
who sent the Prophet Gimon unto him, 1 Reg. 1^. 1, ad 5.
to foretell him, that his whole race should perish, and that his house should
be persecuted with as many miseries as himself had inflicted on Jeroboams
posterity: because that having received the government from God he showed
himself ungrateful unto him for his goodness, A Prophecy against Basa.
and governed his The year of the World, 3006. before Christ's Nativity, 9^8.
to the dissolute course that Jeroboam used, and had given himself over to
follow the same vices, he might deservedly expect to suffer the same
punishment. Although Baasa heard all those evils (that should shortly fall on
him and his posterity; by reason of his wickedness) yet he redeemed not the
time, nor endeavored to obtain pardon of God, by repenting himself of his
sins: but he continued still to engage himself further than before in all sorts
of wickedness, and became worse and worse, to the utter ruin and confusion
both of him and his household. In the end he assembled an Army, 1 Kings 15. 17,
21.
and assailed Ramoth once more, (...) was a great City, some four Leagues
distant from Jerusalem; Baasa surprised Ramath. and fortified it*
which he took, placed a Garrison therein, and fortified it, with a resolution,
from thence to make his inroads into Asa's Kingdom. But Asa fearing the
invasion Ramath, did grievously pillage the adjacent Countries, sent
Ambassadors to the King of Damascus with gold and silver, to induce him to
become an Associate in the War, and to renew that amity between them, Asa
inciteth those of D^mascu^ to invade Baasa;
which was begun betwixt their Fathers. The King graciously received those
treasures that were sent him, and made a league with him, and brake the truce
which he had made with Baasa: so that he sent the Governors of his Dominions
against those Cities that were under Baasa's subjection, with a commandment
that they should destr^y them.

Of these they burnt some, and ransackt others, amongst which were Gelam, Dan,
and Abelma. Which when the King of Israel understood, he gave over the
fortifying of Ramath, Alias, chap. 9.
But Asa in the mean while built two strong Towns, The death of Baasa.
Gabath and Maspha, of the materials which Baasa had prepared to build withal.
Baasa afterward (prevented by death) had no more opportunity to make War
against Asa. He was buried in the City of Arsane, and his son Ela succeeded him
in his Kingdom: who, after he had reigned two years, was traitorously slain by
Zamri, a Captain of half his Horsemen. For whilst Ela banquetted with Osa, who
was the steward of his house, Zamri wrought so effectually, that he persuaded
some of his horsemen to assault Ela, who at that time was alone, and destitute
of his Guards, because all his Soldiers were at the siege of Gabathan, a City
of the Philistines.


Baasa's Offspring being extinct, Zamri reigned in Israel; and after him Amri,
and his son Achab.
AFter that Ela was slain, Baasa's stock destroyed.
Zamri took the kingdom upon him, and wholly rooted out Baasa's posterity
(according as the Prophet Gimon had foretold.) For after the same manner was
his Family utterly overthrown for their impiety, Ver. 11, 1^*
as Jeroboams progeny was extinguished for their iniquity (as we have before
declared.) For the Army which besieged Gabathan, hearing news of the Kings
death, and that Zamri had murdered him, Amri General of the Army, and anointed
him for their King: who raising the siege before Gabathan, came before the
Royal City of Thersa, which he besieged, Diverse factions of the people.
and took by force. Zamri seeing the City destitute of defense, had retired
himself into the most secret place of the Palace; where setting it on fire, he
burnt both himself and it, Ver. 16.
after he had reigned seven days. Suddenly after this, the Israelites fell at
variance amongst themselves, Amri King of Israel.
because some of (...) thought to prefer Thaman to the kingdom, and others were
wholly addicted to Amri* but they of Amri's side had the better: and being of
the better sort, slew Thaman, and made Amri Sovereign over the people. The
thirteenth year of Asa, Amri began his Reign, and was King for twelve years
space; six years governed he in Thersa, and six in Mareon, (which the Greeks
Samaria) himself imposed this name of Samaria, from the name of him whom he
purchased the Mountain, on which he built this City. He differed in nothing
from the other Kings his predecessors, but in that he was worser than any of
them; for there was nothing which he left unattempted, Ver. 28.
that by daily impieties he might alienate the people from God. Amri dies* and
Achab h^^ son succeeded him.
For which cause God being displeased, exterminated him and his posterity from
the face of the Earth. This Amri dyed in Samaria, and Achab his Son was his
Successor.

Hereby a Man may easily perceive, what care the Divine Majesty has of humane
affairs, and how he loves the virtuous, and utterly rooteth out the vicious.
For the Kings of Israel, through their impiety, in a short and successive
course, the one after the other, Asa (King of Jerusalem, and the two Tribes)
living happily in the favor of God, for his piety and justice, attained to a
reverend and old age: and after he had reigned one and forty years, he dyed a
good death: The year of the World, 3028. before Christ's Nativity, 936.
and after his death, Jehoshaphat his son (whom he begat on his wife Abida)
succeeded David, according as it shall be declared hereafter. But Achab, King
of Israel, made his abode in Samaria, and governed the Kingdom for the space of
22 years, without any alteration of those ordinances which his progenitors,
Kings of Israel, had established; alias, chap. 10.
but that he exceeded them daily in wickedness. For he imitated all their
impieties, Asa dies, J^hoshaphat succeeds him.
(but especially the Apostasy of Jeroboam) for he adored those Calves that
were erected by him; and besides that, (...) far worse impieties than the
former. 2 Chronicles. 17, 1, 2.
He took to wife Jezabel the daughter of I^^obal King of the Tyrians and
Sidonians, of whom he learnt to adore the gods of her Nation: for she was a
busy and audacious woman, ^ Kings 16. 30, 31.
and so insolent, that she feared not to build a Temple in honor of Bell, the
god Tyrians, and to plant a Grove furnished with all kind of Trees, and to
ordain Priests and false Prophets also, in honor of that god. The King also
took delight to have these Men oftentimes about him, exceeding all other Kings
before him in madness and malice. Jezabel.
To him came a certain Prophet named Elias, 1 Reg. 17. 1, ad 4.
sent by Almighty God, that was born in Thesbon in Galaad, telling him that he
fore-prophesied, That neither dew nor rain should fall on the Earth a long
time, The dearth of victuals prophesied to the Israelites.
until that himself, who was prepared to depart from him, should appear again
unto him: and binding the same with an oath, (for the better confirmation
thereof) he retired himself to the Southward, where he lived by a certain
River, from whence he fetched his drink: for his meat was daily brought him by
Ravens.

Now when the River, through want of rain, was grown dry, God commanded him to
repair unto Sareptha, (a City not far from Sidon and Tire, and situate in the
midst between them both) where he should find a Widow-woman, who would furnish
him with food. Ver. 4, 5.
As soon therefore as he drew near unto the gate, Crows feed Elias.
he saw a woman that lived by her labor, gathering of sticks, and God gave him
to understand that it was she to whom he was sent. Ver. 9, ad 16.
Whereupon he came unto her and saluted her, praying her that she would bring
him some water to cool his thrist; The widow of Sareptha entertaing Elias,
neither flower nor oil fail.
and as she was ready to depart, he called her back again, and willed her to
bring him some bread also. Whereupon she swear unto him, that she had nothing
in her house but an handful of flower, and a little oil, and that she was come
forth togather sticks, to the end she might bake the same, and make bread Go,
said the Prophet, and be of good courage, and conceive better hopes; and when
thou have prepared meat for me, bring it: for I tell thee, that thy flower
shall not fail nor thy pot of oil be empty until God send rain upon the earth.
When the Prophet had spoken thus, she approached unto him, and performed that
which he commanded, and she herself had sufficient to feed upon, and she gave
the rest unto her son, and to the Prophet: so that they wanted nothing, so long
as the drought continued.

Menander makes mention of this great drought, in the acts of Ithobal King of
the Tyrians, Menander of the famine during the time of Elias.
speaking after this manner: In this time there was a season without rain, from
the October, until October in the next year after; whereupon the Prince caused
prayers and supplications to be made, which were followed with great store of
Thunder. He built the City of Botris in Phoenicia, and Auzate in Lybia.
Doubtless he expressed hereby the drought that happened in Achab's time: for
about that time, Ithobal reigned over the Tyrians, as Menander ^^stifieth in
his History. The woman (of whom we have spoken heretofore, that entertained the
Prophet) seeing her son fallen sick, and lying senseless, as if he had been
already dead, or yielding up the ghost, wept, and brake out into so great a
passion, that she forbore not to say, that the cause of her misfortune was, in
that the Prophet was come into her house, and had discovered her sins; and that
he had been the cause, that God for her punishment, had taken away her only
son. But he

Now when she had brought him, he took the child, and carried him into his
lodging, and laid him on his bed, 1 Kings 17. 17. ad finem.
and cried unto God, saying, That since the loss of her only son seemed to be
but an unequal recompense unto her that had so charitably received him, he
therefore besought him, Elias restores the widows son to life.
that he would command the soul to return into the body, and restore life unto
the Infant. Whereupon, God having compassion on the mother, and being willing
to gratify the Prophet, and to the intent that no man might suppose that he
came unto her to prejudice her, he restored the child to life, beyond all
expectation. For which, the mother gave thanks unto the Prophet, saying, That
by this means, she was thor^wly persuaded, that God had spoken unto him. Not
long after, he sought out Achab, according as God had commanded him, to let him
know that he should have rain. At that time the famine The year of the World,
3040. before Christ's Nativity, 924.
and there was great want of necessary victuals; so that Men did not only faint
for want of bread, but the Earth also for want of rain, could not bring forth
that which was requisite for the sustenance of horses and other cattle. The
King therefore calling Obadiah unto him, (who was the Master of his Herds) he
commanded him that he should each way seek out for fountains and brooks,
willing him, 1 Kings 18. 1, 2.
that if he found out any grass, he should mow the same, and give it to his
cattle for their sustenance. Elias is sent by God to prophecy rain to Achab.
And whereas by his command the Prophet Elias was sought in diverse places, and
could not be found, he appointed Obadiah also to follow him. So taking both of
them several ways, the King followed one, and the Master of the cattle another.
Achab seeks for Elias.


This Obadiah was a godly and virtuous Man, Obadiah concealeth and sustaineth
an 100 Prophets.
who, when the Prophets were put to death, hid one hundred of them in Caves,
and sustained them with bread and water After this Man departed from the King,
Elias met him, and he asked Elias what he was? which when he had told him, he
humbled himself on his face before him. Elias commanded him to go to the King,
and to let him know, that he was nigh at hand. Obadiah asked him, Wherein he
had offended him, that he should desire to put him upon an action that might
occasion the loss of his life? For there was not any straight, whither he sent
not some of his men to find out Elias, with charge, that if they found him,
they should put him to death. Now it may be (said he) that whilst I repair
unto the King, the Spirit of God shall carry thee away; the King not finding
thee here, and frustrate of his desire, will revenge himself on me. Jezabel,
and taken care to preserve in Caves, until this day. Notwithstanding all these
words, Elias commanded him to go unto the King, and to cast off all fear,
swearing unto him by an oath, how that that day he would make himself known
unto Achab.

When Obadiah had told the King that Elias was at hand, Ver. 17.
Achab went out to meet him, and being full of indignation, Achab accuses
Elias of impiety.
said unto him, Is it thou that heapest so much mischief on the Hebrews heads?
Art thou the man that art the cause of this sterility? To whom Elias replied,
That it was he and his race that were the occasions of these mischiefs, because
they had brought strange gods into their Country, whom they adored; and had
forsaken the true God, Carmel, and bring with him his Wife and her Prophets,
whose number he reckoned up: the Prophets likewise of the woods, who were in
number four hundred. When therefore all of them, Ver. 21.
being summoned by the King, were gathered together in that place, Elias stood
up in the midst of them, Elias reproves the superstition of the people.
and said, How long will ye continue in this uncertainty, whom ye ought to
follow? For if you think that the Hebrews God is the true and only God, why
follow you him not, and why keep you not his Commandments? But if you think
that the honor belongs not to him, but to foreign gods, follow them. When
Elias perceived that the people replied nothing hereunto, he proceeded: For an
undeniable proof whereby ye may be satisfied which is the most powerful, either
that God which I worship, or those false ones which

This proposal of his was generally approved. Whereupon, Elias commanded the
false Prophets first of all to choose an Ox, and to kill it, and afterward to
call upon their gods; and when it manifestly appeared, that their prayer was of
no force, Elias began ^o mock them, saying, Why call you not out upon your gods
with a loud voice? for it may be they are on some voyage, or else happily they
sleep. Whilst thus they had invocated from Elias that was to make his
sacrifice, Ver. 34, ad 38.
commanded the false Prophets to stand aside, Elias doctrine and office
confirmed by miracle.
and the people to draw near unto him, and observe, for fear lest secretly he
should convey fire under the wood. When the people approached he took twelve
stones, according to the number of the twelve Tribes of Israel, and made an
Altar, and dug a deep trench round about it; and afterward heaping wood
upon the Altar, and laying his sacrifice thereon, he commanded them to fill
four tuns with fountain water, and to pour it upon the Altar, that the trench
might receive and drink up the water. Ver. 38.
Which done, he began to pray, and call upon God, beseeching him, that it might
please him to manifest his power unto his people, Fire from heaven devoure^ the
sacrifice.
who had so long run astray: no sooner Israelites beheld, they fell down on
their faces upon the earth, adoring one only God: confessing him to be the
most mighty and only true God, and that all other were Elias. He willed the
King also to depart, and take his refection, and to take care for nothing,
because he should very shortly see that God would send him rai^; and thus
d^parted Achab from him. Ver. 40.
But Elias went up to the top of Mount Carmel, and sat him down on the ground,
B^^^s Priests s^^in.
leaning his head upon his knees: whilst he thus sat, he commanded his
servant to get up upon a certain Rock, Ver. 43. ad (...).
and to look toward the Sea, and to tell him if he saw any clouds arise in any
part (for till that time the Air had been always clear) His servant having
often gone up to the top of the Rock, Elias foreprophesieth rain.
and told that he saw nothing, at length going up the seventh time, in
descending, he brought him this news, that he saw Elias understood this, he
sent unto Achab, wishing him to retire himself within the City before the rain
fell; who had no sooner recovered the City of Jezrael, but that the Air was
presently covered with thick clouds, and a vehement wind intermixed with rain,
fell upon the earth, 1 Reg. 19. 1, ad 4.
and the Prophet seized by the Spirit of God, ran with the Kings chariot as far
as Jezrael a City of Asser. Elias flies from Jezabel.
When Jezebel Achab's Wife, had notice what miracles Elias had performed, and
how he had slain her Prophets, she was displeased, and sent messengers unto
him, threatening him in like sort to revenge herself on him, as he had slain her
Prophets. Which Elias fearing, fled into the City of Bersabe, which is upon the
borders of the Tribe of Juda, Gods care for his servant^.
bounding upon Idumaea: in which place he left his servant* and retired Sinai,
Ver. 5, 6.
he went unto (where it is said that Moses received the Law from God) where
finding out an hollow Cave, God speaks to Elias in the desert.
he entered into it, and remained therein. And being demanded by a certain voice
which spoke unto him, he knew not from whence, Wherefore he remained in that
place, and forsook the City? He answered, Because he had slain the Prophets of
the false gods, and because he had persuaded the people that there was but one
only God, who ought to be honored by all men; and that for this cause he was
sought for by the King^ wife, that he might be put to death. The voice replied
again, and commanded him to show

Hereupon as soon as it was day, he forsook the Cave, and perceived the earth
to tremble under his feet: Ver. 16.
and after all things were appeased, the voice which proceeded he knew not from
whence, Jehu King of Israel.
willed him, That he should in no ways be discomforted with that which he saw:
for that no one of his enemies should have power to hurt him, charging him to
return unto his house, to the intent to proclaim Jehu the son of Nimsi King of
the people, and Azael of Damascus King of the Syrians, Ver. 19.
assuring him that in his place, Elizeus calling*
Elizeus of the City of Abela should be Prophet; and that the wicked people
should be destroyed, the one by Azael, and the other by Jehu. When Elias heard
these things, he returned into the Country of the Hebrews, and met Elizeus the
son of Saphat at the Cart, and with him diverse others, driving before them
twelve couple of Oxen: he came near him, and cast upon him his garment, and he
instantly began thereupon to prophetize, so that forsaking his Oxen, he
followed Elias. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 14. ad 11.
Yet required he, that before his departure, he might take leave of his
Parents; which when he had performed, he committed them unto God, and followed
Elias, 1 Kings 21. 1, ad 16.
attending on him, during all his life, like his disciple and servant. This
issue had the affairs of this so excellent a Prophet. The story of Naboth, who
was stoned to death, for denying Ach^b his Vineyard.
But a certain Citizen, called Naboth, of the City of Azar, had a Vineyard near
unto the lands of Achab, who required him to sell him the same, at what price
he thought convenient, to the intent he might annex it to his own lands, and
make them one possession; wishing him, that if he would not sell it him Naboth
answered him, That he would not do it, but that he intended to gather the fruit
of his own land himself, which he had received as an inheritance from his
father. The King no less troubled with the repulse, than if he had lost his own
inheritance, would neither wash, nor receive any sustenance. Whereupon Jezabel
his wife, inquired after the cause of his discontent, and how it came to pass,
that he neither washed, nor eat: he told her of Naboths rude behavior, and how
having offered all just and reasonable composition, he could not obtain what he
requested. Hereupon Jezabel willed him to be of good cheer, advised him to
continue his ordinary entertainment, because she herself would take upon her to
revenge him on Naboth. Whereupon she presently sent Letters in Achabs name to
the Governors Naboth should have a seat prepared for Naboth (accused by false
witness for scandalizing God and the King) was stoned by the people, and put to
death. When Jezabel had tidings hereof, she repaired to the Kings presence, and
told him, That he should enjoy Naboths Vineyard, and disburse nothing for it.

But God displeased with this her wickedness, Ver. 17, ad 26.
sent the Prophet Elias purposely to meet with Achab in Naboths ground, Elias
prophesies what revenge God will take of Achab and Jezabel.
and to tell him, That he unjustly possessed the lawful inheritance of another,
whom he had put to death. As soon as the King perceived that he came That in
the same place where Naboths Carcass was consumed by Dogs, that both his and
his Queens blood should be shed, and that all his Race should be destroyed; for
that they durst commit such an impiety, and so wickedly murder (against all
Law) so good and innocent a man. These words made so great an impression upon
Achab, that he repented him of the offense he had committed: Ver. 27, 28.
so that apparelling himself in sackcloth, and walking barefoot, Achab's
repentance.
he tasted not any meat, but confessed his sins, with hopes to appease Gods
wrath. Whereupon God certified him by the Prophet, That during his lifetime,
the punishment of his Race should be deferred, because he had repented him of
his misdeeds: but that the threats and menaces should take effect in his sons
time.

CHAP. VIII.
Adad King of Damascus and Syria, fights two several Battles with Achab, and
is overthrown by him.
Whilst Achabs affairs were after this manner disposed, 1 Kings 20. 1, ad
(...).
the son of Adad (that reigned over the Syrians, Adab's War against Achab.
and those of Damascus) assembled the Forces of his whole Country, and
associated with him two and thirty other Kings, with whom he came and made War
against Achab. Who being far inferior to him in power, came not into the
Samaria, (which was begirt with a very strong wall, and very hard to be taken.)
For which cause the Syrian (taking his Army with him) came to Samaria, and
encamping before it, The Syrian^*
intended to batter the City. But first of all he sent a Herald to Achab,
Embassage to Achab.
to require him to give audience to his Ambassadors which he would send unto
him, by whom he should be certified what his resolution was. As soon as the
King of Israel had granted them free access, the Ambassadors came, and
(according to the Kings directions) required that Achabs goods, his children
and wife should be at Adads command: which if he would yield to, and suffer him
to take so many as he pleased, he would raise the siege, and batter the City no
more. Achab gave the Ambassadors order Syria, that both himself, and all
whatsoever was his, was at his command. Upon which answer, the King sent a
second message unto Achab, enjoining him the next day to admit such of his
servants as he should send unto him, to search his Royal Palace, and the houses
of his friends and kinsmen, and take from thence that which they liked best.

Achab amazed at this second Embassage of the King of Syria, assembled his
People, and let them know, that he was ready to deliver up into the Enemies
hands his wives and children, for their safety and repose, and to abandon all
that likewise which was in his possession; (for the Syrian had demanded no less
at his hands in his first Embassage:) But that now he required that his
Servants might be admitted to ransack all their houses, Syrian was sensible
that Achabs tenderness for his Subjects security, had prevailed so far with
him, as to grant him whatsoever belonged peculiarly to himself, he sought
nevertheless an occasion of a breach, by demanding liberty to seize upon their
Proprieties; notwithstanding that he would do whatsoever they should think good
of. To this the People answered, That they could not endure that any of his
demands should be listened unto, or respected; but that the King should prepare
for War. Whereupon he called for the Ambassadors, and dismissed them with this
answer, Ver. 10, 11.
That they should report unto their Master, that Achab agreed unto those things
which were required, His answer to the L^gat^s.
(because he desired the happiness of his Subjects:) but touching his second
demand, that he would no ways condescend thereunto: and thus sent he them
away. When Adad heard this answer, he was moved, and sent unto Achab the third
time, threatening him, That his Soldiers should make a bulwark higher than the
walls (he so much trusted in) yea, The year of the World, 340. before Christ's
Nativity, 924.
though only each of them should bring but an handful of earth with them;
(which boast he used to terrify him, and to express thereby how great a
multitude of Men he had to oppose against him.) But Achab answered, That he
ought not to glory in his Army, but in those actions that should determine the
War. When the Ambassadors were returned back, they found the King at Dinner
with two and thirty Kings his Allies, to whom they made report of Achabs
answer. Hereupon Adad gave commandment to begirt the City with Palisadoes, Ver.
12.
and to raise bulwarks of earth, Adads confidence in his Soldiers.
and to streighten the siege. Whilst these things were in hand, Achab was
grievously troubled, and all the People with him: but at length he grew
confident, and cast off all his fear, through the arrival of a certain Prophet,
who said unto him, That God promised to deliver all those thousands of Soldiers
and his Enemies, which he beheld, into his hands. The same Prophet By whose
means this victory might be gained? He said, That it should be by the Sons of
the Governors, whom the King himself should lead forth. Achab therefore calling
unto him the Governors Sons, found that their number amounted to 232; and
having notice that the Syrians intended naught else but pleasure and
banqueting, V. 13, 14, etc.
he opened the City-gates, The Israelites God promises victory against the
Syrians.
and sent these young Men out against them. Now when the Sentinels of the
adverse part had discovered them, they certified Adad thereof, who sent out
certain Soldiers against them, commanding them, That if they were come out in
warlike sort to bid the Battle, they should bring them unto him fast bound; and
if they came in peace, they should do the like. Now Achab had within the City
ranged another Army, and kept them in a readiness. When therefore the young men
had charged the Syrian guard, and slain Achab spying his present victory and
advantage, caused his whole Army to sally forth; who giving an unexpected
charge upon the enemies, Ver. 20, 21*
discomfited the Syrians, (who little expected such a stratagem from the
Hebrews) and assailed them disarmed and drunken: Achab's victory against the
Syrians.
so that they left both armor and weapons behind them, and fled from their
Camp; and their King likewise was so hotly pursued, that he scarcely had
opportunity to save himself by the swiftness of his Horse. Achab made a long
chase in following the Syrians, and slaughtering them that fled; he spoiled
their Camp likewise, and carried thence great riches, and an huge quantity of
gold and silver. He took Adabs Chariots and Horses also, and with them returned
back into the City.

But whereas by the advice of the said Prophet, he was persuaded to prepare and
keep an Army in readiness against the next year, (for that the Syrians were
resolved to assault him again) the King omitted no preparation that concerned
the War. For Adad (being escaped from the fight with those few Forces that
remained after the battle) consulted with his friends, how he might war against
the Israelites. Who advised him from thenceforth, never more to fight with them
in mountainous places, for that their God was powerful upon the Mountains, and
for that cause they had been overcome by them: but if he fought with them in
the Plain, both he and his should be assured to have the upper hand. Moreover
they counseled him, that he should dismiss those Kings that he had
confederated with him, to the end that each of them might return into his own
Country, and that Adab supposing that they had discreetly counseled him in
this matter, ordered his Army according as they had advised. And as soon as the
Spring was come, Ver. 23, ad 27.
he assembled his Army, Adad's second expedition against the Israelities.
and led them forth against the Israelites; and coming near unto the City of
Aphec, he encamped in a plain field. But Achab with his Forces marching out to
meet him, pitched his Tents near unto him, although he were far inferior both
in force and number. To him the Prophet appeared again, telling him, That God
would once more give him the victory, to make it known, that his power was not
only in the Mountains (as the Syrians persuaded themselves) but in the Plains
also. Thus continued Achab drew out his Army, and faced them and presently
charged them: where after a long and dangerous fight between them, the Enemies
were put to flight, and many of them slain in the chase. For some of them were
entangled with their own Chariots, others slew those of their own party, and
some few of them found the means to fly unto their City of Aphec, who perished
likewise to the number of Seven and twenty thousand (being slain by the walls
that fell upon them) besides One hundred thousand men that perished in the
fight. But Adad, attended by some of his principal Officers, went and hid
himself in a Cave under the ground; and they representing Israel were merciful,
and that there was hope of pardon to be had (if after the manner of Suppliants
they sent unto him) Adad permitted them. Whereupon they incontinently presented
themselves to Achab clothed in The year of the World, 3040. before Christ's
Nativity, 923.
with Ropes about their Necks, (according to the manner of Supplicants amongst
the Syrians) telling him, That Adad besought his Majesty to grant him his life;
promising on his behalf, that from thenceforth he would always continue his
servant, and acknowledge his favor. Achab answered them, That he was very glad
that their King was as yet alive, and had escaped from the fury of the fight,
offering him by them that kindness which one brother ought to show unto
another. Ver. 31, ad 34.
And swear unto them, that he should offer him no wrong, if he discovered
himself unto him. Adad is received into favor by Achab* and dismissed upon
condition.
Whereupon they brought him from the place where he was hidden, and presented
him unto Achab, who was mounted upon a Chariot. Adad prostrated himself before
him: but Achab stretching out his hand, made him come up unto him into his
Chariot, and kissed him, willing him to be of good courage, assuring That he
should be no otherwise treated by him, than as became the dignity of a King.
Hereupon Adad gave him thanks, protesting, That during his lifetime, he would
never be forgetful of his favors: promising him moreover, to restore unto him
those Cities which his Predecessors, Kings of Syria, had taken from the
Israelites; and that he should have as free access to Damascus, as to Samaria.
After this Treaty confirmed by oath, Achab gave him many worthy Presents, Ver.
35. ad fi^^.
and sent him back into his kingdom. Thus ended the War betwixt Adad and the
King of the Israelites. After this, a certain Prophet called Micheas, came unto
another Israelite, commanding him to wound him upon the head, assuring him,
That God was so pleased, and had so commanded him. When this Israelite would in
no sort condescend hereunto, he prophesied unto him, That since he had
disobeyed Gods commandment, he should meet with a Lion* which should rent him
in pieces. Which coming to pass, according as it was foretold, the Prophet
addressed himself again unto another, commanding him to do the like: and when
he had wounded him in the head, he bound up the wound, and came unto the King,
Achab was reproved for dismissing Adab.
telling him, That he had been in the Wars, and had received a Prisoner in
charge from his Captains hands, and that (his Prisoner being fled from him) he
feared lest he that had committed him to his charge, should for that cause take
his life from him; the rather, for that he threatened no less. Achab answered
him, That he was justly condemned. Whereupon Micheas discovered his head, and
made it known who he was. And to this intent used the Prophet this artifice,
that his words might be of greater force and value. For he told the King, That
God would chastise him, because he had permitted the blasphemer to depart
unpunished; assuring him, That God would cause him to be slain by Adad, and
suffer the people of Israel to be slaughtered by the Syrian Army. The reward of
learned Preachers.
The King displeased with the liberty and free speech of the Prophet, commanded
him to be cast into Prison; and being vehemently affrighted with this his
Prediction, he departed home unto his house.

CHAP. IX.
The exemplary Piety of Jehoshaphat King of Juda, his Prosperity, his Military
power. He marries Joram his Son, to a Daughter of Ahab King of Israel, and
assisteth him
HItherto have we spoken of Achab, but now I must return unto Jehoshaphat King
of Jerusalem; Jehoshaphats piety.
who having enlarged his kingdom, and planted Garrisons in those Cities that
were subject unto him, (and in those likewise which his Grandfather Abiah had
possessed in the Tribe of Ephraim, 2 Chronicles. 17. 1.
at such time as Jeroboam reigned over the ten Tribes) the King had perpetual
assistance and favor at Gods hands, in that he was a just and virtuous Prince,
studying day and night for nothing more, than how he might please and honor
God. The Kings his Neighbors round about him, honored him with Presents: so
that his riches and reputation were very great.

Moses, training them up in the observance thereof, and in the study of piety.
The peace in Jehoshaphats time.
Which all the Citizens embraced and entertained so willingly, that they seemed
to emulate and strive one with the other, which of them should exceed the rest
in the service of God. Jehoshaphats Army.
The Nations likewise that dwelt round about him, loved Jehoshaphat* and were
at peace with him. Ver. 13.
The Philistines also paid those Tributes which were imposed on them. And the
Arabians furnished him every year with six hundred and threescore Lambs, and
the like number of Horses. He fortified also other great Cities of importance,
and made preparation of Munition of War and Arms against the Juda Three hundred
thousand Men, over whom he placed Edraus General, and Two hundred thousand
under the conduct of Johanan, who besides these had Two hundred thousand
Archers on foot of the Tribe of Benjamin. Another Chieftain called Ochobat, The
year of the World, 3047. before Christ's Nativity, 917.
levied and led for the King One hundred and fourscore Joram, to Athalia the
Daughter of Achab King of the ten Tribes. And not long after (resorting to
Samaria) Achab received him very courteously, and magnificently entertained his
Army with bread, wine and flesh in abundance; desiring him to yield him his
assistance against the King of Syria, Jehoshaphats expedition with Achab
against the Syrians.
to the intent he might recover the City of Ramath in the Country of Galaad,
which Adabs father had won, and conquered from his father. Jehoshaphat promised
to assist him; and being no ways inferior unto him in force, he sent his Army
from Jerusalem to Samaria. When these two Kings were departed out of the City,
1 Kings 22. 2, ad 8.
and each of them were seated upon their Thrones, they Jehoshaphat commanded* 2 Chronicles. 18. 1, ad 8.
That if at that present there were as yet any Prophets amongst them, they
might be sent for, to give notice what the issue should be of this their War
against the Syrians: and whether they thought it good to make War against them,
by reason that at that time there was amity and peace betwixt Achab and the
Syrians, confirmed for the space of three years, since the time that he took
Adad Prisoner, and delivered him.

CHAP. X.
Achab fights against the Syrians, and is overcome and slain in the battle.
HEreupon Achab called for the Prophets, (who were in number four hundred) and
commanded them to enquire of God, 1 Kings 22. 6.
Whether he would give him the victory in that War which he undertook against
Adad? 2 Chronicles. 18. 5.
And whether he should recover the City which he intended to besiege? The false
Prophets prophecy plausibly.
Who answered and counseled him to hazard the Battle: For he should over come
the Syrian, and should take him Prisoner as he had done before. Jehoshaphat
understanding by their words that they were false Prophets, asked Achab, If he
had not any other Prophet of God, who might more exactly certify him of that
which should follow? Achab answered, That he had one as yet remaining, but that
he hated him, because he prophesied naught else but mishap and misery unto him,
and had foretold him, That if he should fight against the Syrians, 1 Kings 22.
14. ad 28.
he should be overcome and slain; and for that cause he held him at that time
in Micheas the son of Imlah. Jehoshophat desired that he might be brought into
his presence, 2 Chronicles. 18. 13, ad fin.
which was accordingly performed by one of his Eunuchs; Micheas the true
Prophet.
who by the way certified Micheas, That all the other Prophets had prophesied
to the King victory. But Micheas told him, That it was not lawful for him to
lie against God, but that it concerned him to speak that which God should
inform him of, concerning the King. As soon as he came before Achab, and was
adjured to speak the truth, he said, That God had showed him the Israelites put
to flight, and dispersed by the Syrians, that pursued them no otherwise than
sheep without their shepherd. All which signifies no less, (said he) but that
the rest of the people returning home in safety, Achab only should be slain in
the battle. When Micheas had spoken after this manner, Achab turning himself
toward Jehoshaphat, said unto him, I told you before, how this fellow was
affected toward me. But Micheas constantly avowed, That he prophesied nothing
but that which God had commanded him to speak, assuring Achab that he was
solicited by the false Prophets unto War, under hope of victory, whereas he
should assuredly perish in the Battle. These words of his made Achab much
discomforted. But Sedechias, one of the false Prophets, stepped forth, and
exhorted him to set light by Micheas's words, because he spoke untruly. And for
confirmation of this, he appealed to Elias, (who was a far more skilful Prophet
in foretelling things to come, than Micheas was) yet that the same Elias had
foretold, that the Dogs should lick Achabs blood in the City of Jezrael in the
field of Naboth, because Naboth had been stoned to death at the instance of
Achab. Whereby it appeared manifestly, that since he contradicted a Prophet so
(said he) it shall appear whether he be truly sent from God or no, if as soon
as he shall receive a buffet from me, he cause my hand to wither, according as
Jadon made Jeroboams hand shrink, at such time as he thought to apprehend him.
For I think (said he) O King, that thou art assuredly informed hereof: which
said, he struck him; and because no inconveniency fell upon him, by reason of
that his audacious attempt, Achab assured himself, and recovered his courage,
and set forth against the Assyrian Army. For as it is to be supposed, the Will
of God was such, that it caused the false Prophets to triumph over the true:
which was the cause that the false Prophets were trusted more than the true, to
the intent that Gods preordained Will might be fulfilled. But Sedechias made
him iron horns, and said unto Achab, that God by them signified unto him, that
he should lay waste all Syria; but Micheas prophesied to the contrary, that
within very few days Sedechias should walk from Cave to Cave to hide himself,
and avoid the punishment of his falsehood. Achab displeased hereat, commanded
that he should be led thence, and kept Prisoner with Achmon the Governor of the
City, allowing him nothing but bread and water for his sustenance. Thus marched
these two Kings with their Armies against Ramath which is in Galaad: Hed^o and
R^ffinus, cap. 15.
which when the King of Syria understood, he drew his Army into the field, and
came out to meet them, and encamped near unto Ramath. 1 Kings 22. 28, ad 38.
Now it was concluded betwixt these two confederate Kings, that Achab should
enter the battle in a private habit, 2 Chronicles. 18. 28* ad fin.
and Jehoshaphat should be invested with the Royal ornaments, and supply Achabs
place, to the intent that Micheas prediction might be made frustrate. Achab and
Jehosaphat War against the Syrians.
But notwithstanding this disguise, Gods justice prevented him: for Adad King
of Syria commanded his Army, that they should put no one of the Enemy to the
sword, but only the King of Israel.

As soon as the battle was begun, the Syrians perceiving Jehoshaphat in the
front of the Army, and conjecturing that it was Achab, they made head all
together against him, and having environed and pressed him very nearly, they
perceived that it was not he: for which cause they retired back again. But
although they had fought from the morning until the evening, Ver. 34.
and had the upper hand; yet slew they no man (because they sought after no
other but Achab to put him to the sword) whom notwithstanding they could by no
means meet withal. Achab, wounded by an arrow in the battle, dies.
At length, one of Adads servants called Aman, shot at random amongst the
Enemies, and hurt Achab in the breast, and shot him through the lungs. Ver. 38.
and although he were in much pain, yet sat he in his Chariot until Sunset,
The dogs li^^ Achabs blood, according to Elias prediction.
at which time he gave up the ghost. When night came, the Syrian Army withdrew
themselves into their Camp, and receiving tidings by an Herald, that Achab was
dead, every one retired home unto his house: but Achabs body was conveyed to
Samaria, and interred in that place. As for his Chariot, it was washed in the
fountain of Jezrael, 1 King. 22. 28.
because it was bloody, by reason of the Kings hurt, whereby the truth of Elias
Prediction was ratified and confirmed, 2 Chronicles. 18. 27.
for the Dogs lickt his blood* and from that time forward, The oracles of the
Prophets are to be reverenced.
the common Women continually washed themselves in that Ramath (according as
Micheas had prophesied.) Whereas therefore all things fell unto Achab,
according as two Prophets had foretold him it appears that we ought to honor
and magnify the Majesty of God, and to reverence his Prophesies, and to
ascribe always more credit unto them, than to the vain and plausible speech of
flatterers; and no less to respect them, than things of infinite profit, since
by them we are divinely admonished what we ought to take heed of. It behooves
us also to consider what force the Decree of God is of, by examining those
things which befell Achab. For it is impossible to avoid what God has
fore-ordain'd, notwithstanding that Men flatter themselves with vain hopes,
which inveigle them so far, that finally they are overtaken in the snares
thereof. The matchless necessity of fate.
For this careless inconsideration was fatal to King Achab, Ochozias.

The Ninth Book of the Antiquities of the JEWS; The year of the World, 3048.
before Christ's Nativity, 916.

Written by FLAVIVS JOSEPHVS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Ninth Book.
1. Joram, Achabs Son, overcomes the Moabites in battle. 2. Joram King of
Jerusalem obtaining the Crown, kills his brothers and his fathers friends. 3.
Jorams Army is overthrown by his Enemies, and his Sons are slain, only one
excepted, at 4. The King of Damascus warreth against the King of Israel. 5.
Joram with all his posterity is slain by Jehu. Ochozias King of Jerusalem is
slain also. 6. Jehu reigns amongst the Israelites in Samaria, and his
posterity after him till the fourth generation. 7. Athalia reigns five years
in Jerusalem; and is slain by the High Priest Joas. Ochozias Son, is Proclaimed
King. 8. Azael King of Damascus gathers an Army, first against the
Israelites, and afterward against Jerusalem. 9. Amasias King of Jerusalem,
makes War against the Idumaeans, and Amalechites, and obtains the victory.
10. Amasias making war against Joas, King of the Israelites, is overcome. 11.
Ozias overcomes the Nations round about him. 12. Rasin, or Rabe, King of
Damascus vexes the inhabitants of Jerusalem with War, Achar their King is
compelled to call the King of Assyria to assist him. 13. The King of Assyria
takes Damascus by force, and slays the King, and translateth the people into
Media, and planteth other Colonies in their City. 14. Salmanazar taking the
King of Israel captive, translateth ten of the twelve Tribes into Media, and
causes the Cuthaeans to inhabit their Country.


CHAP. I.
Joram, Achabs Son, overcomes the Moabites in battle.
AS soon as King Jehosaphat was returned back again to Jerusalem (from the War
wherein he had assisted Achab against Adad the King of Syria, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2,
v. 2.
as we have before related) the Prophet Iehu (in his return) came forth and met
him, Jehu the Prophet reprehended Jehosaphat for helping Achab.
and reproved him, because he had given Achab (who had been an impious man) his
assistance, assuring him that God was displeased with that his confederacy; yet
notwithstanding that he of his goodness had delivered him from his Enemies,
Jehosaphat renews the true service of God.
although he had provoked him to anger. After this admonition, Jehosaphat v. 5.
giving order that the people should be instructed in those ordinances which
were delivered from God by the hands of Moses, Jehosaphat placed Judges and
Magistrates in every City.
and exhorted his Subjects to the practice of piety. He placed Judges likewise
in every City, commanding them to execute justice without respect of persons.
He charged them likewise, that they should not be corrupted with rewards, or
seduced by dignity, riches, or Nobility; but that they should do justice
indifferently to all men, knowing that God sees all things, how secretly
soever they be carried or contrived. Having in this sort ordered every thing in
each City of the two Tribes, he returned again to Jerusalem, where he likewise
chose Judges from amongst the Priests Amasias the Priest, and Zabadias, of the
Tribe of Juda. After this manner did the King order his affairs.

About this time the Moabites and Ammonites (with their confederates, 2 Chronicles.
20. 1, 2,
a great number of Arabians) assaulted and assembled themselves against him,
The Moabites and Ammonits War against Jehosaphat.
and encamped themselves Engaddi (a City situate near unto the Lake
Asphaltites, and distant from Jerusalem three hundred furlongs) in which place
flourished those goodly and wholesome Jehosaphat had intelligence that the
Enemies had past the Lake, and were already far entered into his Country, he
was afraid and assembled the people of Jerusalem in the Temple, and standing
up, and turning his face toward the Propitiatory, he besought and requested God
that he would give him power to overcome his Enemies. For such had been the
form of their supplication, v. 5. ad 13.
who in times past built the Temple: namely, that it might please him to fight
for that City, Jehosaphats prayer in the Temple of Jerusalem for victory.
and oppose himself against those that durst attempt or assault that place, to
dispossess them of that Country which he himself had given them in possession;
and in pronouncing this prayer he wept; and all the people likewise, both men,
women, and children, made their request unto God. Presently upon this, a
certain Prophet Jaziel arose up in the midst of the Congregation, and cried
out, and assured the people and the King, that God had heard their prayers, and
promised them to fight for them against their enemies, v. 14, 15, etc.
enjoining them the next day to sally out in Arms, Jaziel the Prophet assures
them of victory.
and to make head against their adversaries, whom they should encounter in the
mountain situate betwixt Jerusalem and Engaddi, in a place called the hillock
of Sis (which place in Hebrew, signifies Eminency) willing them not to fight
against them, but only to stay in that place, and see how would God fight for
them. When the Prophet had spoken these words, v. 16, 17.
the King and all the people prostrated themselves upon their faces, giving
thanks unto God; The manner and weapons whereby Jehosaphat overcame his Enemies.
in the mean while the Levites sung Hymns* with instruments and voices. About
the beginning of the day, the King departed into the desert that is under the
City Thecoa, advising the people to believe all that which the Prophet had said
unto them, and not to range themselves in battel-array: he commanded the
Priests to march before them with their Trumpets, and the Levites that they
should ^ing Hymns of thanksgiving unto God, as if their Country were already
delivered from their enemies.

This advice of the Kings pleased them all; so that they performed whatsoever
he counseled them. But God sent a great terror and disorder among the
Barbarians: so that supposing themselves to be enemies one against the other,
v. 22, ad 24.
they slew one another in such sort, The Ammoni^es and their confederates kill
one another.
that of so great an host, there was not one that escaped. But Jehosaphat
looking down into the valley (wherein the enemies had pitched their tents) and
seeing it full of dead men, rejoiced greatly at the unexpected succors that
God had sent him, who The spoils of the Ammonites.
and so great was the multitude of them that were slain, that they could
scarcely take the spoils of them in three days space. On the fourth day, the
people assembled together in a valley, where they blessed God for the succors
he had sent them, by reason whereof the place was called the valley of
Benediction. From thence the King led back his Army into Jerusalem, and for
diverse days he spent the time in offering sacrifices and making feasts. v. 25.
26.
After this discomfiture of his enemies was published amongst foreign Nations
they were all of them afraid, The ^ame and praise of Jehosaphat in every place.
supposing that God did manifestly express his power, and extend his favor
toward him. And from that time forward, Jehosaphat lived in great glory; He
likewise was a friend to the King of Israel that reigned at that time, Hedio
and Ruffinus, chap. 2.
who was Achabs Son, with whom he adventured in a voyage by Sea, intending to
traffic with certain Merchants of Tarsis, Ochozias Acabs Son King of Israel*
but he received great loss: for his ships were cast away because they were so
large, that they could not easily be governed; and for this cause he had never
more mind to exercise Navigation. 2 King 1. 1, 2, 3, etc.
Hitherto have we spoken of Jehosaphat King of Jerusalem.

But as touching Ochozias, Achab's Son, who reigned over Israel, and resided at
Samaria, he was a wicked man, and resembled his father and mother every way in
his impieties, and was nothing inferior to Jeroboam in wickedness, who first
fell from God, and made the Israelites revolt from him. The tenth year of his
Reign, the King of the Moabites rebelled against him, and denied to pay him
those tributes which he was wont to pay unto Achab his Father. But it came to
pass that as Ochozias ascended the stairs of his Palace, v. 2, 3, etc.
he fell down from the top thereof, and being indisposed by the fall, he sent
to Accaron unto the god called Myiodes, Ochozias having a grievous fall,
seeks to be informed of a false Oracle, and is reproved by Elias.
or the Fly, to enquire whether he should recover of that sickness or no. But
the God of the Hebrews appeared to Elias the Prophet, and commanded him to go
and meet those Messengers that were sent by Ochozias, and to ask them if the
people of the Israelites had not a God, that the King sent to foreign gods to
enquire of his health? and to charge them to return and declare unto their
King, That he should not escape that sickness. Elias did that which God had
commanded; and the Messengers of the King having understood that which was
declared unto them, returned

Ochozias marvelling much at their sudden return, asked them the cause,
whereupon they answered him, that a certain man came unto them, and forbad them
to pass any further, but to return, The year of the World, 3048. before
Christ's Nativity, 915.
and let their Master know from God, that his sickness should wax worse and
worse. That he was an hairy Man, girded with a leathern girdle. And
understanding hereby that it was Elias, he sent a Captain with 50 Soldiers unto
him, Ver. 8.
commanding him to bring the Prophet prisoner unto him. This Captain that was
sent, Elias (...) an^ habit.
perceiving Elias sitting on the top of a Mountain, commanded him to come down
and repair unto the King, who had sent for him; which if he performed not
presently, Ver. 9 10.
he threatened him to make him do it by force. (...) Sol^iers sent to fetch
Elias, are consumed with lightning
Elias answered him, To the end thou may know by thine own experience that I
am a true Prophet, I will pray, that fire may fall from Heaven, and consume
both thee and thy Soldiers. And incontinently after Elias had prayed, lightning
fell down from heaven, and consumed both the Captain and his Soldiers.

When the King had tidings of this loss, he was sore displeased, and sent
another Captain to Elias, with the like number of Soldiers, who threatened the
Prophet, that if he would not willingly come down, he would violently pull him
thence; but Elias prayed that fire might fall from Heaven, and incontinently
both he and his were consumed in like manner as the first. When the King had
understood likewise how his second messenger had sped, he sent a third; but he
being a discreet man, when he came to the place where Elias was, he saluted him
very courteously, and said unto him, That contrary to his own will, and to no
other purpose but to fulfill the Kings pleasure, he was come unto him; and that
they that were sent with him, came not thither voluntarily, but by the same
command: He therefore required him to have compassion both of him and his
Soldiers, and to vouchsafe to come down, and to come after them to the King.
Elias being moved by his discreet and courteous demeanor, came down and
followed him. As soon as he came into the Kings presence, he prophesied, Ver.
17.
and told him that God said, That since he had despised him, and so lightly
accounted of him, (...) dying without issue, J^ram his brother reigned in his
stead.
as if he had been no God, or else such an one as had no power to foretell him
any truth touching his sickness; but that he had sent to the gods of Accaron,
to enquire after the success of his sickness: know (said he) that thou shall
dye. And not long after (according to the Prophecy) he dyed, as Elias had
foretold him, and his brother Joram succeeded him in the Kingdom, because he
departed without issue.

This Joram was a wicked man also, 2 Kings 2. ^ 1.
and as impious as his father: for abandoning the service of the true God,
Elias, according as Eno^h, was taken from the sight of men.
he set up strange gods. In all things else he was a man fit for Elias was no
more seen amongst men, and until this day no man knows what his end was. But
he left a Disciple behind him called Elizeus (as we have heretofore declared.)
It is written in Holy Writ touching Elias, and Enoch who was before the Deluge,
Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 3.
that they disappeared: for no man has known the manner of their d^^ths. 1
Kings 3.
After that Joram had taken possession of the kingdom, Elizeus.
he resolved to make war upon Misa the King of the Moabites, Ver 11, 13.
(who paid Achab his father before him the tribute of two hundred thousand
sheep bearing wool.) J^ram asks aid against the Moabites.
When he had assembled his Forces, he sent unto Jehoshaphat, requiring him,
That since he had been his fathers friend, he would likewise second him, and
send him aid in his War intended against the Moabites, who had then newly
revolted from his government. Jehoshaphat not only promised him to afford That
he would draw the King of Idumaea (who depended on him) into their association.
When Joram understood these things by those whom he had sent unto Jehoshaphat,
he took his Army with him, and repaired to Jerusalem, where he was
magnificently received and entertained by the King of that City: where, after
they had concluded to march through the Desert of Idumaea, and that way to
charge the Enemy, Ver. 17.
(in that they expected nothing less than to be endangered on that side) these
three Kings departed together from Jerusalem, namely, Wan^ of water in the
Hebrews Army.
the King of Jerusalem, the King of Samaria, and the King of Idumaea. When they
had marched seven days journey, they found a great scarcity of water amongst
them, both to water their Horses, and to refresh their whole Army, by reason
that their Guides had led them astray out of Joram, who, by reason of the
necessity wherewith he was pressed, cried unto God, expostulating with him for
what offense of his he would deliver up three such Kings into the hands of the
King of Moab. But Jehoshaphat, who was a virtuous man, encouraged him, and sent
into the Army, to know whether there were any Prophet of God that had followed
them to the battle, Ver. 13.
to the intent (said he) that we may understand from God what we ought to do:
The Kings (...) for (...) at Elizeus's hand.
and whereas one of the servants of Joram said, that he had seen Elizeus the
Son of Saphat, the Disciple of Elias, all the three Kings (by the persuasion of
Jehoshaphat) resorted unto him. When they drew near unto the Prophets Tent
(which he had pitched apart from the rest of the company) they asked him* what
should become of the Army, and Joram especially? Elizeus answered. That he had
no reason to solicit him in this sort, but to repair unto his fathers and
mothers Prophets, who would certify him the truth. Notwithstanding, Joram
entreated him, The year of the World, 3049. before Christ's Nativity, 915.
that he would prophecy, and preserve the Army, and his life: but Elizeus
swear by the living God, That he would answer him nothing, except for
Jehoshaphats sake, who was an upright man, and one that feared God. Afterward
calling unto them a certain Man that could cunningly play upon Instruments (for
so had the Prophet commanded) whilst he sung, Elizeus was filled with the
Spirit of God, and enjoined the Kings to make certain Trenches in the Channel
of the River: Ver. 17.
For (said he) you shall see the River full of water, Elizeus fore-prophesieth
store of water, and their victory.
without either wind, cloud, or rain; so that both the whole Army and all their
Cattle shall be saved, and sufficiently sustained: and God will not only bestow
these benefits on you, but will give you the upper hand of your Enemies also;
and you shall surprise the fairest and strongest Cities of the Moabites; and
you shall cut down their Trees, ruinate their Country, and fill up their
Fountains and Rivers. When the Prophet had spoken thus, the next day before
Sunrise, the River flowed abundantly with water: for three days journey off,
Ver. 22, 23.
God had suffered a very violent rain to fall in Idumaea, so that both the
Soldiers and their Horses were sufficiently refreshed and watered. A wonderful
blindness of the Enemy, grounded on the redness of the water that flowed.
When the Moabites were informed that the three Kings came out against them,
and took their way through the Desert, their King assembled his Army, and
commanded them to keep the passage of the Mountains, to the end they might
hinder the Enemy from entering their Country unawares. But beholding about the
Sunrise, that the water of the River was blood-red, (for at that time it arose
in the Country of Moab, and at this hour the water is red) they conceived a
false opinion, that the three Kings being pressed by thirst, had Moabites,
destroyed their Cities, pillaged the Country, broke down their Enclosures,
filling them with stones and mud taken out of the River; cut down their fairest
Trees, stopped up the sources of their Waters, and levelled their Walls with
the Moabites himself, Ver. 24.
seeing himself pursued and besieged, and that his City was in danger to be
taken by force, The victory of the Hebrews against the Moabites.
sallied out very valiantly with 700 Men, hoping by the swiftness of his Horse,
to break through the Israelites Camp on that side where he thought it was least
guarded. Which when he had attempted, and could not execute, Ver. 27.
because he charged on that side which was best defended, The King of the
Moabites sacrifices his own son.
he returned back again into the City, and committed a desperate action: for he
took his eldest son, who ought in right to succeed him in the kingdom, and set
him on the wall of the City, and in the sight of all his Enemies, offered him
for a burnt-sacrifice unto God. The Kings beholding this woeful spectacle, were
moved with compassion, and overcome with humanity, left the siege, and returned
back again to their Countries. After that Jehoshaphat Jerusalem, Jehoshaphats
death.
he enjoyed a peaceable Government, but lived not long after, but dyed when he
was 60 years old, in the 25th year of his Reign, and was magnificently buried
in Jerusalem, according as the Successor to David's virtues and his kingdom
ought to be interred.

CHAP. II.
Joram obtaining the Kingdom of Jerusalem, slays his brothers and his fathers
friends.
JEhoshaphat, King of Juda, left behind him diverse children, the eldest of whom
he appointed his Successor in the kingdom, Joram, Jehoshaphats son, King of
Jerusalem.
who was called Joram (as his Uncle was, who Achabs Son, lately King of
Israel.) The King of the ten Tribes turning back unto Samaria, kept with him
the Prophet Elizeus, whose actions I will here recite, because they are
notable, and deserve to be registered in writing, according as we have gathered
them out of the Holy Scripture. The widow of Obadiah, (who was sometime steward
of Achabs house) came unto him, and told him, That he was not ignorant that in
that persecution wherein Jezabel sought to murder the Prophets, her Husband
saved one hundred of them, for whose private maintenance he had borrowed much
money of other men; and that now being dead, his Creditors strove to draw both
her and her children into bondage: 2 Kings 4. 1, ad 7.
For which cause she besought him, in consideration of this act, to have
compassion on her, Elizeus commands the Widow to fill her empty vessels with
oil.
and to yield her some succor. Hereupon Elizeus asked her, If she had any thing
in her house? she answered him, That she had nothing but a very little oil left
her in an earthen Pot. Whereupon the Prophet commanded her to depart, and to
borrow diverse empty vessels of her Neighbors: that done, he willed her to lock
up her doors, and to pour oil into the vessels, The year of the World, 3050.
before Christ's Nativity, 924.
because it was Gods pleasure to fill them all. The Woman did according

By this means Elizeus discharged the Widow of her Debts, 2 Kings 6. 9, ad 12.
and that trouble which her Creditors intended against her. He admonished Joram
likewise, by certain Messengers, Elizeus advises Joram to avoid Adads ambush,
who lay in wait to kill him.
that he should take heed of a certain place wherein the Syrians lay in ambush,
intending to slay him: by means of which admonition, the King went not out on
hunting. But Adad being sore displeased, because his ambushment was discovered
began to suspect his own followers: whereupon calling unto him his household
servants, he maliciously That he ought not to conceive that false opinion of
them, neither suspect that they had discovered his intended ambush to cut off
his enemy: but rather that he ought to conceive, that the Prophet Elizeus had
discovered all that which was intended against him. V. 13 14, 15.
Whereupon he sent out his Soldiers with an express charge, to know in what
City Elizeus made his ordinary abode; Elizeus besieged in Dothaim by his enemy.
who returning back, brought him news that he remained in Dothaim: For which
cause, Adad sent a great number of Horsemen and Chariots to Dothaim, to lay
hold on Elizeus, who begirt the City by Night, and laid watch round about the
walls, that no Man might escape them. Early in the morning, Elizeus, he
fearfully hasted, and discovered their intent to his Master, who encouraged
him, and commanded him not to be afraid, because he was assured of Gods help:
whereupon he prayed to God, that at that present he would show his power and
assistance both toward the relief of his necessity, Ver. 16, 17.
and the confirmation and encouragement of his servant. The Angels about
Elizeus the Prophet.
At that time God hearing his prayer, represented to the Prophets servant a
great number of Chariots and Horsemen that environed Elizeus; so that he laid
his fear aside, and was assured, when he perceived these succors. That done,
Elizeus besought God again, That he would blind his enemies eyes, and cause a
thick cloud to fall upon them, to the end they might not discover him. Which
done, he presently thrust himself Whom they came (...) seek for? They answered
him, That they sought for the Prophet Elizeus: he promised them to deliver him
into their hands, Ver. 18, 19.
if so be they would come with him into the City where he was. Elizeus leads
the Syrians blinded into Samaria, where by his persuasion they are courteously
entertained and presented by Joram, and sent home.
They being blinded in eyes, and depraved in their understanding, followed the
Prophet willingly, who marched before them. When therefore Elizeus had brought
them into Samaria, he willed King Joram to lock the gates, and to inviron the
Syrians with his Soldiers. This done, he prayed God that he would open the eyes
of the Syrians; and they being delivered from their blindness, perceived that
they were in the midst of their enemies. Whereat being sore astonished, and
uncertain whence this divine and unexpected act had befallen them, King Joram
asked the Prophet, Whether he should kill them with darts? But Elizeus forbade
him to do so: For (said he) it is a just and convenient matter, that they who
are taken in War, should lose their life; but that they had done no evil unto
his Country, but by Gods providence came thither, without their own knowledge:
for which cause, he counseled him to give them Presents, and refresh them, and
afterward to suffer them to depart without any injury.

Joram giving ear to the Prophets words, entertained the Syrians magnificently,
and with great humanity, and sent them back unto Adad their King; to whom, upon
their arrival, they declared all that which had happened unto them. Adad
astonished at this unexpected event, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 4.
and wondering at the power of the God of the Israelites, and admiring the
Prophet whom God so wonderously assisted, he concluded from that time forward,
Israel in secret, because he feared Elizeus; but concluded to make open War
against him, hoping to have the upper hand of his enemies, by means of the
great number and force of his Army: so that he issued out with a mighty power
against Joram, who supposing himself to be overmatched by the Syrian Army,
locked himself up within Samaria, putting his trust and confidence in the
fortification and strength of the walls thereof. Ver. 24.
Adad hoping to take the City, if not by force, at leastwise by famine, Samaria
besieged by the Syrians.
and default of things necessary, drew near unto Samaria to besiege it. But
Joram was so destitute of convenient supplies, that by reason of the incredible
want of victuals, an Asses head was sold in Samaria for 80 pieces of silver,
and a measure of Pigeons dung at five pieces of silver, which they used instead
of Salt: neither The year of the World, 3050. before Christ's Nativity, 914.
and visited the Sentinels of the City, for fear lest any one should lie hidden
within: and with all care and diligence he gave order, That if any one had such
a sinister intent, the means to execute the same should be taken from him. And
whereas a certain Woman cried out unto him, Have mercy upon me, O King; he
incensed with wrath, and supposing that she asked him some meat, began to rail
on her, telling her, That he had neither Grange nor Wine Press, whereby he
might any ways supply her necessity.

The Woman answered him, Ver. 28.
That she had no need thereof, The famine so great in Samaria, that Women eat
their own children.
and that she was not troubled for want of food, but only desired that he
would determine a debate betwixt her and another Woman: whereupon he commanded
her to express and declare what she required. Hereupon she said, That she had
made an agreement with another Woman her Neighbor and Friend, that since the
famine and scarcity was such, as they could find no redress for the same, that
they should kill their children, (for each of them had one) and in this sort
should nourish one another. As for my self (said she) I have first of all
strangled mine, and we have both of us yesterday eaten thereof: but now she
will not do the like, but breaks the accord betwixt us, and concealeth her
child. Joram was grievously tormented to hear these words, and rent his
garments, and cried out with a loud voice, and afterward wholly enraged
against the Prophet, he devised in his heart to put him to death, because he
prayed not unto God to grant him means to escape those evils that environed
them round about: so that he sent a Man presently to cut off his head; Ver. 31,
32.
who prepared himself with all expedition to the slaughter. Joram threaneth
Elizeus's death.
But Elizeus was not ignorant of this resolution of the Kings: for sitting at
home with his Disciples in his house, he told them, That Joram the murderers
son sent a Man to take away his head: Ver. 33.
but (said he) when he that has the matter in charge shall come hither, suffer
him not to enter, but make him attend and stay at the gate; for the King will
follow him, and will resort to me in his own person, having altered his
resolution: and they, according as they were commanded, shut him out of the
doors whom the King had sent. Joram repenting himself of that displeasure which
he had conceived against the Prophet, and fearing lest he that had the
commission to murder him, should speedily execute the same, hasted himself all
that he might to hinder the slaughter, and save Elizeus. When therefore he came
into his presence, he accused him, For that he had not promised him the next
day, (about the same hour that the King came unto him) That he should have so
great abundance of victuals, that two measures of barley should be sold in the
market for a shekel, and a measure of flower for a shekel.

By these words of his, 1 King. 7. 1, 2* 17, 18, 19.
the King, with all his attendants, were wonderfully comforted, and made no
difficulty to believe the Prophet, because that before-time they had been
ascertained by their experience of the truth of his Prophesies; and the
expectation of this day, was the cause that the necessity and misery of the
present was more patiently endured. But a certain friend of the Kings, and the
Governor of the third part of his Army (on Prophet, thou tellest us incredible
matters: for as it is impossible that God should rain down heaps of barley and
flower from Heaven, so cannot that which thou speak come to pass, To whom
the Prophet replied, Thou thy self (said he) shall see the issue hereof, but
shall not partake of it. Which Prediction of his had a most certain effect,
according as hereafter it appears.

It was a custom in Samaria, that they that were defiled with a leprosy,
should live without the City-walls, Ver. 3, 4.
for fear lest their conversation might infect others: and at that time also
there were some who for this cause had their dwelling without the gate. These,
for that (by reason of the extreme famine that reigned within the City) they
received Syrians, and to fill their ears with a noise of Chariots and Arms,
Ver. 5, 6, 7.
as if an Army had violently charged them. The enemies flight, by reason of a
terror that God sent among them.
Whereupon they grew suspicious, and were so moved, that they forsook their
Tents, and ran unto Adad, and told him, That Joram King of the Israelites had
entertained the King of Egypt, and the King of the Isles for his Confederates,
whom he led out against them, and how already they had heard the noise of them
that approached to bid them the battle. Adad (whose ears were filled with no
less rumor than those of the People) was amazed at their sayings: so that all
of them abandoned their Camp, their Horses, Beasts of carriage, and riches, and
betook them to flight, Samaria into the Enemies Camp, (and of whom we have
heretofore made some mention) being near unto the Camp, perceived that there
was great silence in the same, and no less abundance of all things: for which
cause approaching the same, and entering into a Tent, they found no body
therein: whereupon they fell to eating and drinking, and that done, to bear
away a quantity of the raiment and gold which they took and hid without the
Camp. Afterward resorting to another Tent, they bare away likewise that which
was therein, and did the like by four others, without any opposition: and
conjecturing thereby that the Enemies were retired, they began to accuse
themselves, because they had Joram, and the Inhabitants of Samaria. For which
cause drawing near unto the Walls of the City, they cried out unto the Watch,
giving them to understand in what state they had found the Enemies Camp, Ver.
8, 9, 10.
who told it to Joram's guard, The Lepers certify the Samaritans of the flight
of their enemies.
so that at last it came unto his ears. Whereupon he presently sent for his
Friends and Captains, and told them. That the departure of the Syrians, made
him suspect some stratagem or ambush: for they (said he) having lost their hope
to surprise us by Famine, are retired, under an intent, that when we shall
issue forth, and fall a spoiling of their Camp, they may come upon us, and kill
us; and afterward take our City, without any stroke struck. For which cause
(said he) I advise you to keep good guard within the City, and let this retreat
of our Enemies make us the more considerate.

Some of his Council approved of this advice of his, and allowed his foresight,
advising Jordan, Ver. 11, 12, 13, 14.
to the end, that if they should be taken and slain by the Enemies ambush,
their fall might give warning to the whole Army to stand upon their guard,
Spies sent abroad.
(for fear lest they should be surprised in like manner) concluding that the
loss of two Horsemen would not be very great, since perhaps they might
otherwise have been cut off by famine. This advice was allowed by the King, and
assented to by the rest: so that presently there were two Spies sent out, who
rode along without encountering any Enemy; but they met with great quantity of
victuals, and arms, cast away and abandoned by the Syrians, to the intent they
might fly away with greater expedition. 1 Ver. 15, 16.
Which when the King understood, he suffered the People to issue out, The
enemies Camp spoiled by the Samritans.
and spoil the Camp; who took therein Ver. 17, 18, 19.
and a measure of wheat flour for a sicle, according as Elizeus had
prophesied. Now the measure which we call Sat, The truth of Gods Oracles.
contains an Italian bushel and an half. But the Captain of the third part of
the Army, The punishment of Incredulity.
was he only that enjoyed no part of this benefit; for being appointed by the
King to have the keeping of the gate, and to restrain the multitude from
headlong pressing out, for fear lest thrusting one another, some of them should
be trodden under foot, and slain, he himself was trodden upon, and slain,
(according

When Adad King of the Syrians was safely returned to Damascus, and knew that
God had suffered such a confusion and fear to fall both on him and his Army, 2
Ki^gs 8. 7.
and that it had not happened by reason that the Enemy sallied out upon him; he
was much discouraged, to see that God was so displeased with him, and through
anguish and agony of mind, fell sick: and for that (at that very time) Elizeus
was come unto Damascus, Adad being informed thereof, sent Azael (who was one of
his most trusty servants) unto him, to present him, and consult with him
concerning his sickness, whether he should recover or Azael loaded 40 Camels
with the fairest and most honorable Presents, Ver. 8, 9.
that either Damascus, Eliz^us is sent unto by Adad, to enquire counsel of him
a^ touching his sickness.
or the Princes Royal Court afforded; and repairing to Elizeus, saluted him
very courteously, telling him, That he was sent unto him by King Adad, to
present him, and to ask counsel of him touching his malady, Whether he should
recover? The Prophet told him, That he should certainly dye; but advised him
not to carry the King any tidings thereof. Azael hearing thereof, was much
grieved; and Elizeus himself began to weep, so that the tears fell from his
eyes abundantly, Ver. 11, 12, 13.
in that he foresaw how many evils the People should suffer after the decease
of Adad. The Prophecy of Adads death, and Azaels government.
And when Azael demanded him the cause, wherefore he was so discomforted? I
weep (said he) for the compassion that I have of the People of Israel, by
reason of those calamities which they shall endure by thy means. For thou shall
kill the better sort of them, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 5.
and shall burn their strongest Cities: thou shall murder their Infants, and
dash them against the stones, and shall open the Women's wombs that are with
child. Azael answered, The year of the World, 3207. before Christ's Nativity,
757.
What force is there in me to execute these things? Elizeus said unto him, That
God had certified him that he should be King of Syria. When Azael was returned
back unto Adad, he signified nothing unto him but glad tidings, touching his
sickness: but the next day he cast a wet cloth upon him, and strangled him, and
seized the kingdom into his own hands. This Prince was a man fit for
government, and well-beloved among the Syrians, Ver. 18.
and common People of Damascus, who even until this day honor Adad and Azael
his Successor as gods, Joram's impiety.
by reason of their benefits, and those Temples which were built by them, which
adorn the City of Damascus. For every day do they celebrate feasts in memory of
these Kings, and honor of them, by reason of their antiquity, not knowing that
they were modern, and such as reigned not past 1100 years since. But Joram,
Israel, hearing of the death of Adad, began to give over his fear, and cast off
that suspicion which he had conceived of him, rejoicing that yet at last he
might have liberty to live in peace. The other Joram, King of Jerusalem, (for
he likewise was so called, as we have heretofore declared) by murdering of his
brethren and his fathers friends, who were Governors, obtained the Kingdom, and
became so wicked and impious, as he differed in nothing from the Kings of
Israel, who transgressed the first laws and ordinances of the Hebrews, and
perverted the service of God. For Athalia, Achabs daughter, (his Wife) taught
him to execute diverse mischiefs, and, amongst the rest, to adore strange gods.
This notwithstanding, God would not altogether abolish his race, by reason of
his promise made unto David: yet he omitted not daily to introduce new The
Idumae^ans revolt.
and corrupt the ancient laws of his forefathers. Meanwhile it came to pass,
that the Idumaeans revolted, Ver. 22*
and slew their King, who had been before-time subject unto Jehoshaphat, Jorams
father, and in his place established another to their own liking. For which
cause, Joram invaded Idumaea by Night with his Horses and Chariots, and spoiled
the Country round about his Kingdom, without passing any further: yet profited
he nothing in so doing; for all of them revolted from him, and, amongst the
rest, the Inhabitants of the Country of Labia. But so great was the fury of
this Man, that he constrained the People to ascend the high mountains, 2 Chro^
21. 12.
and adore strange gods. Yet whilst he behaved himself in this manner, Joram's
wickedness reproved by Elias'^ Letters.
and utterly rooted out of his thoughts the laws of his forefathers, there was
a Letter brought unto him from the Prophet Elias, which certified Israel,
constraining the Tribe of Juda, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, to forsake
the service of their God, to serve Idols, as Achab had constrained the
Israelites to do: Furthermore, because he had murdered his brethren, and slain
upright and virtuous men. The Prophet likewise certifi'd him by Letters, what
punishment he should suffer; namely, the ruin of his People, the death of his
Wives and Children, and lastly his own death: which should happen unto him by a
sickness in his belly, wherewith he should be so tormented, that his intrails
strangly rotting within him, should drop out, and that he himself should see
his misery, which should be such, as neither might be recovered by medicine, or
should ever leave him, until Elias denounce unto him by his Letters.

CHAP. III.
Joram's Army is discomfited, all his sons are slain except one: and himself,
finally, dies a miserable death.
NOT long after, The expedition of the Arabians against Joram.
the Arabians that dwell toward Ethiopia, confederating themselves with other
Barbarians, invaded Joram's Country, and spoiled the same, and ran-sacked the
Kings House, and slew his Sons and Daughters, and left him but one only Son
called Ochozias, 2 Chronicles. 21. 16, 17, 18.
who escaped from his Enemies hands. After this adversity, he himself was
stricken with a long sickness, according as the Prophet had foretold him; and
God Ver. 19, 20.
whereof he dyed miserably: the People likewise handled his body ignominiously;
supposing, that being cut off in that sort by Gods displeasure, he was unworthy
of a Royal Funeral, for he was not buried in the Sepulcher of the Kings,
neither was any honor done unto him. He lived 40 years, and reigned eight: they
made Ochozias King.

CHAP. IV.
The King of Damascus makes War against the King of Israel.
JOram King of Israel, 2 Kings 8. 25: ad finem.
hoping to recover Ramath in Galaad from the Assyrians, after he had made great
preparations for War, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 6.
led his Army against it. In this siege he was hurt Syrian, and retired himself
into the City of Jezrael, until he should recover of his wound, Joram's
expedition against ^amath:
(leaving Jehu with his Army at Ramath, who took the City) intending to make
War against the Syrians. But Elizeus sent one of his disciples to Ramath, gave
him holy oil, The year of the World, 3060. before Christ's Nativity, 904.
willed him to anoint Jehu, and to say, That God had chosen and anointed him
for King: and after he had given him some other instructions, he commanded him
to depart, as one that flies, making no man privy to it. When this disciple of
his came to the City, he found Jehu in the midst of the Captains of War, (as
Elizeus had told him) and drawing near, 2 Kings* 9. 1. ad 6.
he told him, That he would communicate certain secrets unto him; for which
cause he arose and followed him. Whereupon the young man taking out the oil,
poured it on his head, Jehu, by Gods commandment anointed King.
saying, That God had chosen him to exterminate the race of Achab, and revenge
the blood of the Prophets unjustly murdered by Jezabel: and that both he and
his house might be brought to naught in like sort, as the sons of Jeroboam, the
son of Nebat, and the children of Basa, were extinguished for their impiety; so
that no one of the race of Achab might survive in the world. As soon as he had
spoken thus, he issued out of the chamber, that he might not Ver. 11.
Now when Jehu came out, he returned to his place to his Captains, who besought
him to declare unto them, wherefore the young man came unto him? (alleging,
that they supposed him to be out of his wits.) Truly (said he) you have divined
well; for he has talked unto me after the manner of a mad man; wherein he told
them what he had said unto him, namely, how God had chosen him to be King over
the people.

As soon as he had spoke, Ver. 13.
every one of them cast off their garments, and spread them before him, and
sounding a Trumpet, they proclaimed Jehu King; who assembling his Army,
determined to conduct them toward the City of Jezrael against Joram (who lay
there to recover his wound which he had received at the siege of Ramath, in
Galaad, as we have heretofore declared.) Thither also resorted in the way of
friendship and consanguinity, Ochozias King of Jerusalem to visit Joram, and to
see how he was recovered of his wound: for he was his nephew, and son unto his
sister, as we have said before. Jehu desirous to surprise Joram and his
followers, on the sudden gave command, that none of the Soldiers should run
before, to give any intelligence of his repair unto Joram, alleging, that it
should be a demonstration of their good will toward him: whereas contrariwise,
they that did otherwise, declared that they held him not for their King.

CHAP. V.
Joram with all his Race is slain by Jehu: Ochozias King of Jerusalem is
likewise slain.
THE Men of War were very joyful to execute this his command, Ver. 17. ad 23.
and guarded the ways, that no Man might secretly steal into Jezrael, and bare
tidings of that which had happened. Meanwhile, Jehu, attended by his choicest
Horsemen, and mounted in his Chariot, marched toward Jezrael. And when he drew
near unto the City, the Sentinel that was appointed by Joram to discover those
that repaired to the City, perceived Jehu resorting thither with a multitude of
attendants, and told Joram that a Troop of Horsemen were at hand. Whereupon a
Scout was sent out to discover who they were; who drawing near unto Jehu, asked
him what News there was in the Army? telling him, that the King was desirous to
know the same. Jehu willed him to take no care thereof, but to fol^ow after
him. The Sentinel perceiving this, certified Joram, that the Messenger Jehu
commanded him to attend him, as he did the first: which the C^ntinel signified
to Joram likewise, who thereupon took his Chariot to meet them, accompanied
with Ochozias, King of Jerusalem, who (as we have said) was come to the City,
to see how the King was recovered of his hurt, because he was allied unto him.
But Jehu marched on in good array, till Joram meeting him in the field of
Naboth, asked him how the Army did? who instead of returning an answer, reviled
him bitterly, and called him the son of a Poysoner, and of an Harlot. For which
cause, Joram (fearing his turbulent spirit, and suspecting he designed some
Treason against him) fled away as swiftly as his Chariot could be driven;
telling Ochozias, that they were both of them betrayed: but Jehu flung a Dart
at him, and pierced him through the heart* Ver. 24.
Whereupon Joram instantly fell on his knees, Jorams slaughter.
and dyed. Hereupon Jehu commanded Badac to cast Jorams body into Naboths
field, remembering him of the Prophecy of Elias foretold to Achab, Ver. 25, 26.
who murdered Naboth: The truth of Elias Prophecy.
namely, That he and his Race should dye in that field. For sitting behind
Achabs Chariot, he heard these words pronounced by the Prophet: in effect it so
fell out as he had prophesied. When Joram was fallen down, Ochozias was afraid
to be slain: for which cause, he turned his Chariot to take another way, Ver.
27.
hoping that Jehu would not discover him. The death of Ochozias King of
Jerusalem, and his burial.
But he was overtaken in a steep way, and was hurt with an Arrow: whereupon he
forsook his Chariot, and being mounted on a swift Horse, posted to Maggedo,
where, after his wounds had been dressed Jerusalem, and buried there, after he
had reigned one year, and surpassed his father in wickedness.


Jehu reigns over Israel, and keeps his Court in Samaria; and after him,
his Progeny, to the fourth generation.
AT such time as Jehu arrived at Jezrael, Jezabel being on the top of a Tower
in her Princely Robes, cried out; O trusty Servant (said she) that has slain
his Master! He looking upward, asked her what she was, commanding her to come
down unto him: at length he charged her Eunuchs to cast her down from the top
of the Tower: in her fall, v. 10. 30, 31.
she besprinkled the walls with her blood, and as soon as she came to ground A
famous example of Gods Judgment.
until she died. That done, Jehu repaired to the Palace with his friends, and
reposed himself there, commanding his servants that they should bury Jezabel;
(in respect of the Royal Race from whence she was descended) but they to whom
the charge of the obsequies were committed, found no part of her body, but her
hands and head, for all the rest was devoured by dogs. Jehu certified hereof,
wondered at the prophecy of Elias, who had foretold that Jezabel should die in
that sort in Jezrael.

Now Achabs seventy Sons being brought up in Samaria, 2 King. 10. 1, ad 7.
Jehu sent two Letters, the one unto the Masters of the infants, the other to
the Governors of the City, giving them to understand, that they should choose
one of the most virtuous amongst Achabs children, Samaritans were affected
toward him.) When the Governors and Tutors had received these Letters, they
were afraid, and made account that they could prevail nothing against him, who
had prevailed already against two mighty Kings. For which cause they wrote back
unto him, acknowledging him for their Sovereign; and offering themselves in all
duty, Achabs 70. children slain in Samaria.
to be under his subjection. Whereupon Jehu sent back unto them again
commanding them, that (to express their obedience) they should send him the
heads of Achabs children, divided from their shoulders. Which command of his
they Jezrael. As soon as they were brought thither, tidings thereof were
carried to Jehu, as he sat at supper with his friends, who commanded that they
should be laid in two heaps, at the City gates, on either side thereof. Which
done, he issued out as soon as it was day, to see them; and beholding them, he
began to tell those, that accompanied him, that he had voluntarily Armed
himself against his Master, and slew him: but as touching those whom they saw
there, The rooting out of Acabs line.
he had no ways laid hands on them. His only intent was, that all men should
know, that all that which happened unto Achabs race, was done by the ordinance of
God, and that his house was destroyed according as Elias had foretold. v. 12.
13, 14.
And after he had slain and dispatched both these and all those that were Acabs
race amongst the Israelites, The slaughter of Ochozias servants.
he went unto Samaria: and meeting by the way with Ochozias household Servants
(who was King of Jerusalem) he asked them, whither they went? Jonadab.
who answered him, that they went to salute Joram and their King Ochozias, (for
they knew not as yet that they were both of them slain.) Hereupon Jehu
commanded his Servants to lay hands on them, and put them to the sword,
notwithstanding, they were forty two in number. After them, he met with a
virtuous man called Ionadab, (who in times past had been his ancient friend)
who embracing him, praised his forwardness, in that he had performed all things
according to the Will of God, in abolishing Achabs house. Jehu caused him to
come up to him, into his Chariot, and accompany him to Samaria, telling him,
that he should see that he would spare no wicked man, but would punish all the
false Prophets, and tellers of lies, and abusers of the people, who had made
them forsake the true service of God, and adore strange gods: because that
which is most acceptable to a good man is to behold the punishment of the
wicked. Jonadab persuaded by these words, mounted up into his Chariot, and went
with him to Samaria; and after Jehu had sought out Achabs kindred, he put them
to death: and intending that no one of his false Prophets and Priests should
escape his hands, he assembled them together by a subtle policy. For gathering
the people together, he protested that he would have twice as many gods as Acab
had: willing that all the Priests that belonged unto them, should present
themselves, for that he intended to celebrate most magnificent sacrifices to
Acabs gods; protesting that whatsoever Priest should be absent, he should lose
his Acab honored, was called Baal. Having in this sort assigned a day wherein
he would offer sacrifice, he sent through all the Country of Israel charging
all Baals Priests to repair unto him, and commanding that each of them should
have their vestments given them. The year of the World, 3061. before Christ's
Nativity, 405.
As soon as they were apparelled, he resorted Jonadab, and commanded that a
search should be made amongst them, to epsy whether any one of a contrary
quality or condition were mixed with them; for that he intended that no
stranger should be amongst the Priests. v. 18, ad 28.
When therefore he understood that none but the Priests were in that assembly,
even at such time as they began to offer sacrifice, ^he slaughter of Baals
Priests.
he caused them to be enclosed by fourscore Soldiers (whom he esteemed to be
most trustly) commanding them to kill the false Prophets, and to punish them
according to the custom of their forefathers* which had already too long been
neglected; dreadfully threatening all those, who should any ways omit to root
out the name and memory of these wretches out of the world. They therefore slew
all those Priests, and guarded the Kings Palace; and in so doing, cleared
Samaria of foreign gods. This Baal was the god of the Tyrians (for whom Achab
built a Temple in Samaria, v. 30.
intending thereby to content Ithobaal the King of the Tyrians and Sidonians)
to whom he assigned Priests, Baal god of the Tyrians.
and honored him with all sorts of sacrifice. After this Idol was
exterminated, Jehu suffered the Israelites to adore golden calves. When this
execution was performed in punishing the wicked, The Kingdom promised to J^hues
posterity.
God (to whom this action of his was acceptable) told Jehu, by his Prophet,
that his children should enjoy the Kingdom of Israel to the fourth generation.
This was Jehu's state.

CHAP. VII.
Athalia reigned five years in Jerusalem: and after she was slain by the
AThalia, Hedio and Ruf^^^us, cap. 7.
Achabs daughter, hearing news of the death of her Brother Joram, and her Son
Ochozias, together with he utter ruin of all the Royal posterity, bethought
her self to extinguish David's memory, 2 King. 12. 1, 2, 3.
and in such sort to root it out, that no one of that line should remain alive
to enjoy the Kingdom hereafter: Athalia rooteth out all the royal blood, only
Joas Ochozias Son is saved.
which when she had concluded in her heart, she began to put in execution. Yet
notwithstanding, one of Ochozias Sons escaped her bloody hands, by this means.
Ochozias had a sister by his fathers side, whose name was Josabetha, who was
married to Joiada the High Priest; who entering into the Kings Palace, and
finding Joas at that time but one year of age, hidden with his Joiada her
husband and she did secretly preserve them for the space of five years, during
which time Athalia reigned in Jerusalem over the two Tribes.

About the seventh year, v. 4, ad 12.
Joiada conferred with five Centurions, and persuaded them to oppose themselves
with mutual consent against Athalias proceedings, Joas by Joiada's means, who
was the High Priest, is created King.
and to secure the Kingdom for little Joas. Whereupon giving and receiving
promises of secrecy the one unto the other they confidently addressed
themselves to execute their intended purposes, after this manner. They whom the
High Priest had chosen to execute this fact, went through all the Country, and
gathered the Priests and Levites together, with all the Governors of the
Tribes, and afterward returned and brought them to Jerusalem Joiada opening
the Arsenal, (which in times past was prepared by David) distributed amongst
the Centurions, Levites and Priests, all the javelins, quivers, and all other
sort of Arms that were therein, and disposed all them that were armed, round
about the people, joined hand in hand to hinder any one from entering in
amongst them that were not of that faction. Afterward bringing out the infant
Joas into the midst of the company, they set the Royal Crown on his Joiada,
after he had anointed him with oil proclaimed him King: whereupon all the
people rejoiced, and clapping their hands, cried out, God save the King.

Athalia hearing this noise and applause, The year of the World, 3067. before
Christ's Nativity, 897.
beyond all hope, was greatly troubled, and with those soldiers which she had
about her, she hastily issued out of the Palace; and coming to the Temple, the
Priests admitted her: as for the rest of the men of War that followed her, they
that by the High Priests ordinance begirt the Temple, would not suffer them to
enter with her. v. 13. ad finem.
Now when Athalia saw the child standing before the Tabernacle with the Royal
Crown on his head, Athalias punishment*
she rent her garments, and storming through despite, she cried out and
commanded that the Traitor should be slain, that had thus betrayed her, and
sought to dispossess her of her Kingdom. But Joiada called the Centurions and
commanded them to carry Athalia out to the brook Cedron, and there to kill her
(because he would not permit that the Temple should be defiled with her cursed
v. 17.
Hereupon, they (that were appointed to execute this his command) took her, The
King and the people joined by oath to serve God.
and led her without the gates of the Kings Mules, and there slew her. After
that Athalia was in this manner executed, Joiada assembled the people, and the
men of War in the Temple, binding them all by an Oath, to yield the King their
faithful service, and to procure the prosperity of the Kingdom. Secondly, he
made the King swear in like manner, that he would maintain the service of God,
and in no manner disanul Moses Laws. That done, they ran unto Baals Temple
(which Athalia and her husband Joram had built to the dishonor of God, and
their forefathers, and for the honor of Achab) and levelled it with the
ground, and put to death their High Mathan. The charge and guard of the Temple,
Joiada committed to the Priests and Levites, v. 18.
according to the other established by David, with commandment twice a day to
offer their ordinary burnt offerings, The restoring of Gods service.
and to make perfumes, according to the Law. He appointed also certain of the
Levites to be porters to guard the Temple, to the intent that no unclean thing
should enter the same unespied: and after he had ordained these things, with
the Centurions and Governors, and with all the people, he took Joas and led him
out of the Temple, and attended him to the Palace, and having placed him on the
Royal Throne, all the people cried, God save the King, and banquetted and
feasted for diverse days. Thus after the death of Athalia, the City was at
quiet. 2. King. 12. 1^ ad 16.
Joas was seven years old at such time as he was made King, his mother was
Sabia, Joas piety during Joi^das time.
and was of the Town Bersabe. He carefully observed the Laws, and highly
affected the service of God all his life time: and when he grew to man's estate,
he married two Wives which the High Priest gave him, by whom he had Sons and
Daughters. This is all that I have thought good to declare as concerning Joas,
both how he escaped Athalias treasons, and obtained the Kingdom.

CHAP. VIII.
Azael King of Damascus levyeth an Army, and first of all assaulteth the
Israelites; and after marches forward against Jerusalem.
Azael King of Syria making War against the Israelites, and against their King
Jehu, 2 King, 12. 18.
destroyed the Country on the other side of Jordan, and all the Eastern tract
inhabited by the Reubenites, Hedio and Ruffinus cap. 8.
Gadites, and Manassites. Furthermore, he burnt and spoiled Galaad, The War
between Azael and Jehu.
and Bathanaea, violating and outraging all those that he met withal. For Jehu
went not out against him to resist him, but (being become a contemner of God,
and his Laws) he died after he had reigned seven and twenty years over the
Israelites: he was buried in Samaria, and left behind him Joas his Son to
succeed him in his Kingdom. But Joas King of Jerusalem was desirous to repair
the Temple: for which cause, calling unto him Ioiada the High Priest, he
commanded him to send, through all the Country the Levites and Priests, and to
levy upon every one of their heads half a sicle of silver, for Joram, Athalia,
and her successors times. 2 Cho^. 24. 4. ad 14.
But the High Priest would not obey him herein, knowing well no man would
willingly disburs money. But in the three and twentieth year of his reign, The
restoring of the Temple.
the King sent both for Joiada, and the Levites also, and expostulated with
them for disobeying his commandment, enjoining them from that time forth to
provide for the bulding of the Temple. Whereupon the High Priest used present
dispatch in levying the money, wherewith the people were well pleased. He
therefore made a chest of wood closed on every side (except that on the upper
lid thereof, there was a little cranny left open) which he placed near unto the
Altar, commanding that every one should offer according to his devotion, and
put in his offering through the cranny into thereof taken and summed up by the
Secretary and High Priest in the Kings presence, The year of the World, 3089.
before Christ's Nativity, 97^.
Joiada, and King Joas hired Masons, and Carpenters, and prepared great beams
of excellent Timber.

After that the Temple was repaired, they employed the remainder of Gold and
Silver (which was of no small quantity) to make cups, pots, and vessels, and
other utensils: and every day offered they sacrifice of great value upon the
Altar, and this custom was continued so long as Joiada lived. But after his
decease (which happened in the hundred and thirtieth year of his age, Joas
impiety after Joiadas death, and how he was reproved by the Prophet.
after he had lived a just and upright life, and was interred in the sepulcher
of David in Jerusalem, because he had established the Kingdom in David's
posterity) King Joas had no more care to serve God, and with him the rest of
the Governors of the people were corrupted, so that they broke the laws and
ordinances of their forefathers. For which cause God being provoked by this
change, and incensed against the King and the rest, 2 Chro^. 24, 17. ad 20.
sent his Prophets unto them, to protest against them, and expostulate with
them for their offenses, and to withdraw them from their iniquity. But they
pursued sin the more vehemently; so that neither the punishments, by which
they, who had offended God before-times, had been plagued, with all their
posterities; neither all the advertisements given them by the Prophets, could
induce them to amend: or to forsake those sins wherein they were engaged: but,
that which is worst, King Joas stoned Zachary, v. 21.
Joiadas Son, Z^chary stoned to death.
and put him to death in the Temple, forgetting himself most ungratefully
Zachary having received a charge from God to prophecy, came into the midst of
the people, and coun^elled both them and him to follow justice, foretelling
them that they should be grievously punished, except they did believe. This
Zachary did at his death call God to witness to judge of those calamities he
endured, suffering a violent death for the good counsel which he had given
them, and the benefits which his Father had in times past done unto Joas. But
many days passed not, before the King suffered due punishment for these
misdeeds. For Azael King of the Syrians invaded his Country, and after he had
first of all ruinated Girta, he marched forward with an intent to besiege him
at last in Jerusalem. Joas desperate of all succors, emptied all the treasures
of the Syrians raising the siege by this means, lest he should be drawn into
hazard to lose all. The spoil of the Temple.
The Syrians, pacified with so great riches, and abundant treasure, Joas death.
suffered not his Army to pass to Jerusalem. After this, Joas was seized with a
grievous sickness, and (to the intent that the death of Zachary the Son of
Joiada might not escape unrevenged) his friends conspired against him, and he
died by their hands. He was entombed in Jerusalem, but not in the sepulcher of
his Ancestors, because he had fallen from God: He lived seven and forty years.

CHAP. IX.
Amasias King of Jerusalem made War against the Idumaeans and Amalechites, and
obtained the victory.
AMasias his Son succeeded him in the Kingdom. 2 King, 14. 1, ad 15.
But in the 21 year of Joas's reign, Ioachas, the Son of Jehu, took possession
of the Kingdom of Israel in Samaria, and reigned for the space of seventeen
years. Amasias King of Jerusalem.
But he followed not his Fathers steps, but rather behaving himself impiously,
according as his predecessors in the Kingdom, and contemners of God had done:
The forces of Israel weakened and restored by God.
For which cause the King of Syria subdued him, and cut off a great part of his
dominions, and took his greatest Cities from him, and defeated his Armies: so
that at length he had but ten thousand footmen, and five hundred horsemen.
Israelites according to the prophecy of Elizeus, which he foretold unto Azael,
at such time as he prophesied unto him, that he should reign over the Syrians,
and them of Damascus, after that he had murdered his master. Ioachas being in
this extremity, had his recourse to God in prayer and supplication, beseeching
him that it might please him to deliver him from the hands of Azael, and not
suffer him to be under subjection and thraldom unto him.

God (that regards the penitent as if they had been innocent, and that gently
chastises those whom he might utterly exterminate, if he so pleased) gave him
assurance against the War and danger, so that the Country (having obtained
peace) recovered her former state and prosperity. When Ioachas was dead, his
Son succeeded him in the Israelites in Samaria, in the 37 year of Joas King of
Juda. (For this King of Israel was called Joas, as well as he that reigned in
Jerusalem:) The year of the World, 3089, before Christ's Nativity, 875.
he governed the Kingdom sixteen years. He was a good man, and was not like
unto Ioachas his Father. About this time Elizeus the Prophet was very old, and
fell sick: the King of Israel came to visit him, and finding him in the
extremity, and past hope of recovery, he began to weep and lament, calling him
his Father, and his armor, because that during his life, he had never occasion
to use the sword against the Enemy; Joas King of Israel and Samaria.
but that by means of his predictions he had always the upper hand of them
without fighting: that now he departed this life, and left him disarmed to the
mercy of the Syrians, and other his enemies; so that he was not secure of
liberty, nor life, but that he rather wished to die with him than live in those
dangers.

Elizeus being moved with these complaints, Elizeus foretells that Joas
should overcome the Syrians thrice*
comforted the King that lamented in this Elizeus said unto him, 2 King* 13.
20, 21.
Draw, and he shot three Arrows, and gave over at the fourth. Oh said Elizeus
if thou had shot more Arrows, thou had utterly ruined the Kingdom of the
Syrians: Elizeus death and the raising of a dead man to life, that was cast
into his Tomb.
and since thou have contented thy self with shooting thrice only, thou shall
overthrow the Syrians in three battles, which thou shall fight against them,
and shall recover the Country they have taken from thy Father. After the King
understood these things, he departed, (and not long after the Prophet died) who
was renowned for his justice, and beloved of God, who showed miraculous and
incredible works by his prophecies, and such as the Hebrews ought to keep in
perpetual remembrance, and was buried magnificently, according as it behoved a
man, who was so highly favored

It chanced about that time, 2 Chronicles. 25. 18* ad 25.
that certain thieves having cast the body of a man that was murdered by them,
Joas tr^bble victory.
upon the body of the Prophet where he lay buried, the dead body returned to
life. Which made it appear that God had given him a power of working miracles
not only in his life time, but also after his death. After the death of Azael
King of Syria, Adad his Son obtained the Kingdom against whom Joas King of
Israel made War, and having overcome him three times, he recovered all that
Country and those Cities, and Towns, that Azael his Father had conquered
before him. (All which came to pass according as Elizeus had prophesied.) After
that Joas was dead, the Kingdom fell to Jeroboam his Son.


Amasias making War against Joas King of Israel, is overcome.
THe tenth year of the reign of Joas King of Israel, Hedio and Ruffi^^s, chap.
9.
Amasias reigned over the Tribe of Juda in Jerusalem: his mother was called
Judah, and was a Citizen of Jerusalem. Amasias King of Jerusalem.
He was very careful to maintain justice (notwithstanding he was very young.)
2 King* 14* 1, 2.
And having taken upon him the Government of the Kingdom, he resolved with
himself, that he ought first of all to revenge the death of his father Joas,
who was traitorously slain by his friends: he therefore laid hands on them, and
put them Moses; 2 King. 14.
which faith, that it is not lawful to punish their children for their Fathers
offenses.) Deuteronomy. 24. 16.
He afterward levied an Army of the Tribes of Juda and Benjamin, and chose
such as were in the flower of their years, and about twenty years of age: the
number of which amounted to three hundred thousand men, whom he divided into
Centuries. He sent also to the King of Israel, and hired an hundred thousand of
his armed men for an hundred talents of Silver, because he intended to make War
upon the Amalechites, Idumaeans and Gabelites. Now whilst he made this
preparation, and was in a readiness to undertake this exploit, a certain
Prophet counseled him to dismiss the Israelites that he had with him, because
they were wicked men, Israelites their wages) but the Prophet ceased not to
exhort him to do that which was pleasing in Gods sight, The dismission of the
Is^aelites.
who would give him silver in abundance. Hereupon he dismissed them, telling
them that he freely gave them their pay; and he with the forces of his own
Kingdom marched out against those Nations, 2 Chronicles. 25. 11, 12, 13.
and fought with them, and overcame them, and slew ten thousand of them, and
took no less number of Prisoners (whom he afterward caused to be led to a high
Rock that bounded upon Arabia, Amasias v^ctory over the ^malechites*
and from thence cast them down headlong) and

Whilst Amasias stood upon these terms, the Israelites (that had taken wages
of him, and were cashiered by him) conceived a displeasure against him,
supposing themselves to be injured by him, The year of the World, 3106. before
Christ's Nativity, 858.
as if he had dismissed them for want of courage, For which Bethsemer, and
carried away a great quantity of Cattle, and slew three thousand men. But the
victory and success made Amasias proud, so that he began to forget God, who was
the Author thereof, and gave honor to those gods which he brought from the
Country of the Amalechites. v. 15, 16*
Whereupon a Prophet came unto him and said, Amasias is reprehended by a
Prophet for his Idolatry.
that he wondered that he should esteem them for gods, who had so little availed
them who honored them, and had delivered them into his hands, so that diverse
of them were put to death, and diverse led away Prisoners, which they themselves
had brought unto Jerusalem, according to the custom of War. These words moved
the King unto displeasure, so that he commanded Amasias (not able to keep a
moderation amidst his affluence and prosperity but waxing more insolent against
almighty God, by whom he possessed the blessings he enjoyed) in the height of
his pride wrote to Joas King of Israel, commanding him to yield him homage
according as in times past the Israelites were subject to David and Solomon;
threatening him, that if he refused to do him service, he would enforce him to
decide the controversy by Arms: to whom the Israelite replied thus King Joas to
King Amasias. There was in the mountain of Libanus a Cypres Tree of great
height* to whom a little thistle wrote, demanding of him his Daughter in
marriage for his Son. But during this treaty, there came a certain wild beast,
that trod down the thistle. Let this example admonish and diswade thee from
attempting of too mighty matters, neither grow proud of thy last victory,
against the Amalechites, lest through thy presumption, thou expose both thy
Wife and fortune to the uncertain hazard of War. When Amasias had perused this
answer of his, he was more enraged: (God also as it seemed pricked him forward,
to the intent to chastise those iniquities that were committed by him.) Amasias
expedition against Joas King of Isr^el.
When therefore he had drawn his Army into the field, and both the Armies were
upon the point to join Battle, a sudden fear and discouragement seized him
(such as God in his displeasure is accustomed to inflict) which made Amasias
Army turn their backs: v. 17, 18.
so that (by the apprehension they had conceived) they were scattered before
they came to handy strokes; and Amasias being left alone, was taken prisoner.
Joas threatened that except he persuaded the inhabitants of Jerusalem to open
their gates, and to receive both him and his Army into the City, he would put
him to death. For which cause Amasias (constrained by necessity and fear of
death,) wrought so far that his enemies were received into Jerusalem, v. 23.
who made a breach of three hundred Cubits in their wall; through which Amasias
was led captive into Jerusalem. Amsias taken prisoner by the King of Israel.
In this manner Joas was made master of the City, who afterward carried away
the Treasures of the Temple, and took away the Gold and Silver that Amasias had
in his Palace: Jerusalem ruinated.
and having in this sort ransomed him from captivity, The Temple spoiled.
he returned back again into Samaria. This happened in the fourteenth year of the
reign of Amasias, who afterward fled into the City of Lachis to avoid the
conspiracy v. 24.
by whom notwithstanding he was surprised, and slain: his body was royally
intombed in Jerusalem. Am^sias slain*
Thus died Amasias, for introducing innovations in contempt of God; v. 27, 28.
he lived fifty four years, and reigned twenty and nine: and his Son Ozias
succeeded him in the Kingdom.

CHAP. XI.
How Ozias overcame the neighboring Nations.
BUt in the fifteenth year of the reign of Amasias, 2 King 14. 21.
Jeroboam, Joas Son, began to reign over the Israelites in Samaria, 2 Chronicles.
24* 1. 2. 3*
and enjoyed the Kingdom for the space of Israelites heads. To him there came a
certain Prophet called Jonas, who prophesied unto him, that he should make War
against the Syrians, and that he should overcome them, and enlarge his Kingdom
to the Northward, as far as the City of Amatha; and to the Southward as far as
the Lake Asphaltites (for these in times past were the limits of the Country
of Canaan, Hedio and Ruf^^^us, cap. 11.
according as Joshua had set the bounds thereof.) Jeroboam, encouraged by his
prophecy led forth his Army against the Syrians, The enlargement of the kingdom
of (...).
and spoiled all their Country (according to the prophecy of Jonas.) And since
I have promised to give an exact History in writing of all those things that
happened in our Nation, Hebrew Chronicles. This man being commanded by God to
repair unto the Kingdom Ninus, The year of the World, 31^^* before Christ's
Nativity, 944.
and proclaimed that which should happen to the City of Ninivie (namely, that
the government thereof should be abolished:) through fear which he conceived
repaired not thither, but fled from Gods presence into a City called Joppa;
where finding a Ship he entered the same, and sailed toward Thar^s in
Cilreicia. But their arose so vehement a tempest upon the Sea that the vessel
was ready to be drowned, 2 King 14* 25.
and both the Mariners, Jon^s. 1. per (...).
Master and Owners of the ship, made their vow of thanksgiving unto God, if
they might escape from this tempest: Jonas sent unto Ninivi^, flies the
presence of God* and ascending a Ship is cast in a storm into the Sea.
but Jonas hid himself and covered his face taking no notice of the rest. When
therefore the turbulent waves, raised by violent winds, increased more and
more; the Mariners and passengers began to imagine amongst themselves, that
some one of them in the Bark had caused that tempest: Whereupon Jonas: who
being demanded whence he was, and for what business he traveled? answered
them, that he was an Hebrew by Nation, and a Prophet of the most High God; and
counseled them, that if they would be secured from that danger, they should
cast him into the Sea, because it was he only that was the cause of that
tempest. Notwithstanding this confession of his, they durst not perform that
which he desired, supposing that it would be an act of great impiety, in that
sort, to thrust a stranger into that manifest perdition, whose life had been
committed to their trust. But since the storm more and more increased and grew
so vehement, that they wanted very little of being shipwrackt; and being
besides that, incited by Jonas himself, and likewise by the fear they
conceived, to lose their lives, they cast him into the Sea; Jonah 2. per totum.
whereupon suddenly the storm ceased. It was likewise said, that being
swallowed up by a great fish for the space of three days and three nights,
Jon^s cast into the Sea, is devoured by a W^ale: and cast upon the coa^t of
Ninivie, foretells them of the loss of their Empire.
he was at the last vomited out, and cast by the same fish on shore of the
Euxine Sea alive, and without any maim in any of his members. There besought he
God, that he would pardon him the sin which he had committed: and afterward he
went to the City of Ninivie, where going up to a place from whence he might be
heard; he published, with a loud voice, unto them, that they should lose the
Empire of Asia: which after he had pronounced, he returned back again. This
recital have I made according as I have found it registered in writing.

Jeroboam having passed all his life time in prosperity, and reigned for the
space of forty years departed his life, and was intombed in Samaria, and
Zachary his Son succeeded him in this Kingdom. At the same time, Ozias the Son
of Amasias reigned in Jerusalem over the two Tribes, 2 Reg. 14. 23.
after that Jeroboam had already reigned fourteen years; his Mother was called
Achia, Jeroboams death.
and was of the City of Jerusalem. He was a man of good nature, Ozias King of
Juda.
and such an one as loved justice, of a noble courage, and very laborious in
providing for all occasions: he made War against the Philistines, and after
that he had overcome them in battle, he took Ita, and Amnia, two of their
strong Forts, and razed them. This exploit being past, he set upon the Arabians
that bordered upon Egypt, and after that (having built a City upon the Red Sea)
he planted a Garrison Ammonites, constraining them to pay him tribute, and
subdued all as far as the marshes of Egypt. Ozias expedition, and the repairing
of the City.
After that he began to provide for the City of Jerusalem: for he built it
anew, and repaired the walls thereof, that had been beaten down, or decayed
either by continuance of time, or by negligence of those Kings who were his
predecessors: 2 Chronicles. 26. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
he repaired those also which the King of Israel had beaten down, at such time
as having taken Amasias prisoner, he rode in triumph into the City. Besides
this, he erected a number of Towers, each of them one hundred and fifty Cubits
high. These enclosed he with walls to set Garrisons therein, and in diverse
barren places he caused diverse fountain-heads to be made: Ozias riches and Army.
for he had an infinite multitude of beasts of carriage and other cattle, v. 8,
9, 10.
in that the Country was fit for pasture.

He taugh^ his soldiers to march in square battle (in manner of the Macedonian
Phalanx) arming each of them with Swords, Targets and Corselets of Brass, with
Arrows and Darts. He made also great preparation of diverse Engines to batter
Cities, and to shoot Stones and Darts, besides diverse hooks, and other such
like instruments. But whilst he was intent on these studies and preparations,
he grew insolent and proud, and being puffed up with arrogance, v. 6.
he contemned that which endures for ever (that is upon a certain solemn
Feast Day, The year of the World, 3120. before Christ's Nativity, 944.
wherein all the People were assembled together, he Azarias (accompanied with
fourscore Priests) forbade him, telling him, That it was not lawful for him to
sacrifice, in that it was only allowed in those that were of the posterity of
the High Priest Aaron.

Whilst after this manner Azarias expostulated with him, commanding him to go
out of the Temple, Ver. 17, 18, 19.
and not to contradict the ordinances of God; the King waxed wroth, and
threatened to take his life from him, except he kept himself quiet. Whereupon
there fell a great trembling and earthquake, and the Temple cleft in twain, and
a great light Ver. 20, 21.
and reflected on the Kings face in such manner, that all his body was
instantly covered with a leprosy; Ozias transgresses his vocation, and is
punished with a leprosy, and compelled to depart out of the City.
and before the City (in a place called Eroge) the half of a Mountain (that
stood to the Eastward) brake and fell, and removed for the space of four
stadia, toward the Oriental Mountain, where it rested: so that the public
ways were shut up, and choked, and the Kings gardens of pleasure were wholly
ruinated and disfigured. When the Priests beheld the Kings face covered with a
leprosy, they told him what inconvenience had happened unto him, and enjoined
him to depart out of the Town, according to the custom of Men that were
polluted. Whereupon he (wholly confused at so grievous an accident, and having
no more courage to speak) obeyed the commandment that was given him, enduring a
lamentable punishment for his pride, and for that he committed such impiety
against God. He therefore Jotham succeeded him in the kingdom. Finally, he dyed
through grief and discontent, after he had accomplished 68 years, whereof he
reigned 52, and was buried in his Garden.

Zachary, Jeroboams son, having reigned six Months over the Israelites, was
slain by Treason complotted against him by a familiar friend of his called
Sellum, 2 Kings 25. 7, 8, 9.
the son of Jabes, who possessing the kingdom after him, Zacharias sl^ughter.
enjoyed not the same above 30 days. For the General Manahem, being at that
time in the City of Tharsa, and understanding of that which had happened to
Zachary, departed thence with all his Force, and came to Samaria, and in a
battle which he fought, he slew Sellum: And afterward obtaining the Crown,
Tapsa, 2 King. 15. 14.
the Inhabitants whereof locked and barred their gates against him, Manahem
King of Israel.
and would not receive him: in revenge whereof, he spoiled all the Country
round about, and took the City by force, and (being highly incensed against the
Tapsians for their insolence) he put them all to the Sword, not sparing their
little children (which was an incredible and barbarous cruelty.) Manahem
reigned in the manner for the space of ten years, The Tapsians slaughter.
continuing a most cruel and unbridled tyranny over this people. Afterward
being assailed by Phul King of the Syrians, he went not out against him,
neither practiced to resist him, but procured his peace for the sum of 1000
talents of silver, which by way of composition he paid unto him. The people
furnished Manahem with this sum, Peace bought with money.
by way of contribution, paying fifty drachms apiece.

After his death, he was buried in Samaria, leaving behind him a Son to succeed
him in Phaceias, who imitating his Fathers cruelty, enjoyed the Sovereignty but
two years: for he was slain at a feast in the midst of his friends, by a
Treason practiced against him by Phaceias the son of Romelias, Phaceias.
who enjoyed the kingdom for the space of 20 years, The translation of the
Isra^lites.
addicting himself to all impiety and wickedness. But Teglaphalasser King of
Assyria, led forth his Army against the Israelites, and spoiled all the
Country of Galaad, and that beyond Jordan and Galilee, Cidida and Asor also,
and made all the Inhabitants thereof Prisoners, and translated the kingdom to
himself. This is that which we have thought good to write, touching the King of
Assyria.

Jotham the son of Ozias, reigned in Jerusalem over the Tribe of Juda: he was
the son of a daughter of Jerusalem called Jeresa. There was no virtue wanting
in this King, for Jothams piety.
just toward Men, and careful to repair the City: for he willingly employed
himself in restoring that which had need of reparation and ornament. Ver. 34.
He built Galleries and Porches about the Temple, and repaired the walls that
were fallen down: he erected huge and impregnable Towers: in a word, he
restored all that which was deficient in his kingdom. He made War upon the
Ammonites; and overcoming them in battle, he made all their Nation tributary,
and constrained them to pay him yearly 100 Talents, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 7.
and 10000 Cores of Wheat, and as many of Barley: and his kingdom in such sort
increased, The prophecy of the destruction of Ninivie.
as he was redoubted abroad, and happy at home. Now about the same time there
lived a certain Prophet called Naum, who prophesied the overthrow of the
Assyrians, and of the City of Ninivie, and spoke to this effect: All the people
thereof shall be troubled, Naum 2. 8, 9, 10. ad finem.
and put to flight, and shall say the one unto the other, Stay and abide, take
gold and silver, and there shall be none that will receive it. For they shall
have more The year of the World, 3204. before Christ's Nativity, 760.
than their goods: for there shall be a great debate amongst them with
lamentation: their members shall lose their vigor, and their faces shall be
pale through fear: whither shall the Lions retreat? or where shall the mother
of the Lions whelp rest her self? Ninivie (God says unto thee) I will destroy
thee, neither shall the Lions that issue from thee, govern the world any more.
To this effect did he prophecy, and spoke many other things to this intent,
which it is not material to repeat. For I have omitted it purposely, because I
would not be troublesome to the Readers. But all those things which he foretold
touching Ninivie, came to pass 115 years after.


Rasin King of Damascus, makes War against Jerusalem: Achaz sends for the
King of Assyria to assist him.
AFter that Jothan had lived One and forty years, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 13.
and reigned sixteen, he dyed, and was buried in the Sepulcher of the Kings;
Achaz impiety.
after him, the Kingdom fell to Achaz his Son, who was a contemner of God, and
a Transgressor of the Ordinances of his Forefathers, 2 King. 15. 38.
and conformed himself to the Customs of the Kings of Israel; The sacrifice of
his son.
for he erected Altars in the City of Jerusalem, and sacrificed unto Idols,
offering up his own Son unto them (after the manner of the Canaanites) and
committed diverse such like offenses. 2 Kings 16. 1, 2, 3, 4.
During these impious Idolatries of his, Rasin King of Syria and Damascus, and
Phaceias Israel, made War against him (for these two were Confederates:)
leading therefore both their Armies against Jerusalem, they besieged it a long
time, yet without any success, The punishment of impiety.
by reason the Walls were very strong. But the King of Syria having seized the
City of Elath, near unto the Red Sea, and slain all the Inhabitants thereof,
planted Syrians therein, Esaias 7. 11.
putting all the Garrison likewise to the Sword, and all the Jews round about,
and carried away with him a great booty unto Damascus, and afterward returned
home with his Army. The King of Jerusalem understanding that the Syrians were
retired, 2 Chronicles. 28. 18, 19.
and supposing himself to be sufficient to fight against the King of Israel,
led forth his Forces against him, The slaughter of the Army of Juda.
and was overcome in battle (because that God was incensed against him for his
impieties, which were without number.) For in that battle, the Israelites slew
Zacharias the son of Achiaz, whom the General of the Army of the Israelites,
called Amias, slew, with Ericam the Governor of the whole Realm, and took Elcan
the General of the Tribe of Juda prisoner also. They led away likewise a great
number of Women and Children, with a great booty, and afterward returned to
Samaria. At that time there was a certain Prophet living in Samaria, whose name
was Obel, who coming out to meet the Army, cried with a loud voice unto the
people, That the victory which they had obtained, was not through their own
valor, but by reason of the wrath of God conceived against Achaz King of Juda.
He further reproved them, for that not contenting themselves with the good
success of that victory, they had so far presumed, as to make them of Juda and
Benjamin Prisoners, who

After this admonition, 2 Chronicles. 28. 9, ad 16.
the Israelites assembled themselves together to consult upon this matter, at
which time Barachias, one of the principal Governors of the State, and three
others with him, The Israelites by the Prophets advice, dismiss those prisoners
they had taken of the Tribes of Juda and Benjamin.
alleged, That it was not lawful for the Citizens to lead their Prisoners into
the City, for fear (as they said) that God should utterly extinguish them all.
For those sins (said they) which we have already committed, and against which
the Prophets have exclaimed, are cause enough to incense God; so that we have
no cause to add new Impieties to the precedent. When the Soldiers heard these
words, they permitted them to execute Jericho; and when they drew near unto
Jerusalem, they returned back to Samaria.

CHAP. XIII.
The King of Assyria takes Damascus by force, kills their King, translateth
the People into Media, and planteth new Colonies in Damascus.
Achaz had received this overthrow by the Israelites, he sent unto
Theglaphalazar, King of Assyria, requiring him to assist him in the War, which
he intended against the Israelites, Syrians, and them of Damascus, promising to
give him great Sums of money, The year of the World, 3055. before Christ's
Nativity, 909.
and at that present also he sent him very large Presents. Who, Achaz: and
spoiling Syria, and sacking Damascus, he slew Rases their King also, and
transported them of Damascus into the higher Media, and sent certain people of
Assyria into Damascus. He wrought much mischief likewise in the Country of
Israel, 2 Kings 16. 7, 8, ad 16.
and led away a great number of Prisoners from thence. After that the Syrians
had been subdued and weakened after this manner, The translation of the
Israelite.
Achaz took all the gold and silver that was in the Kings treasury, and in the
Temple of God, and carried it unto Damascus, and gave it to the King of
Assyria, according to the promise which he had made him; Achaz gives the gold
and silver of the Temple to the King of the Assyrians.
and after much rejoicing, he returned back again to Jerusalem.

This King was so senseless and ignorant of his own profit, that although he was
vanquished in War by the Syrians, yet ceased he not to adore their gods, but
persisted to honor them, Achaz shuts the doors of Gods Temple, and
honors strange gods.
as if he expected the victory by their means. And although he were overcome
the second time, yet he continued to worship the Assyrian gods; choosing rather
to reverence any, than the true God, whom his Forefathers worshipped: yea, so
far grew he in contempt, and neglect of all true piety, and at length he shut
up the Temple-gates, and prohibited the ordinary Sacrifices, Ver. 20.
having before that, taken all the precious Presents out of the same. Achaz
death.
After he had in this sort committed these outrages against God, he died, when
he was 36 years old, and after he had reigned 16 years, and left his son
Ezechias to succeed him in the kingdom. At that very time died Phaceias King of
the Israelites, by means of a certain conspiracy, 2 Kings 17. 1, ad 6.
which Oseas his intended friend wrought against him: Oseas's impiety and
punishment.
Against him Salmanasar King of Assyria raised a War, and overcame him, because
God was not favorable unto him, neither assistant to his enterprises: he was
therefore subdued, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 14.
and constrained to pay a certain tribute imposed upon him. The fourth year of
the Reign of Oseas, 2 Kings 18. 1, etc.
Ezechias the son of Achaz, and Abia a Citizen of Jerusalem, reigned over the
two Tribes. He was a man of a virtuous disposition, and one that loved justice
and piety; 2 Chronicles. 29. 1, etc.
for as soon as he came unto the kingdom, he resolved with himself first of
all, that there was nothing more necessary and advantageous, than the
establishment of the service of God. When therefore he had assembled the
People, the Priests, and the Levites, he began to discourse with them in these
or such like words: There is no one of you but knows, that for my fathers
offenses, and for your irreverence and disregard to the service of God, ye are
fallen into many calamities, because through your extreme madness, you have
suffered your selves to be persuaded to adore those, whom he esteemed to be no
gods. Since therefore you have learnt (to your own misery) how pernicious a
thing impiety is, I exhort you, that you purify both your selves, your
Priests, and your Levites, from your former pollutions, that yet at length you
may assemble together, and open the Temple, and cleanse the same with ordinary
Sacrifices, to the end it may be restored to the ancient honor which
heretofore it enjoyed: for by this means God will be favorable unto us, when
his wrath shall be appeased that was kindled against us. As soon as the King
had spoken after this manner, the Priests opened the Temple, and after they had
gathered the sacred vessels, and cast all Jerusalem, to celebrate the feast of
unleavened bread (which had been intermitted a long time, through the impiety
of the Kings Predecessors.) He sent also unto the Israelites, exhorting them to
forsake the customs which of a long time they had wickedly observed, and to
return to the true and ancient manner of serving God, certifying them, that he
would permit them to repair to Jerusalem, to celebrate the feast of unleavened
bread, promising them that he himself would solemnize the same with them also;
protesting that he did this, not in respect of his own profit, but through the
desire he had to promote their felicity, who should be happy, if they obeyed
this his counsel.

When Ezechias Ambassadors came unto the Israelites, Ezechias Ambassadors that
were sent to the Israelites to exhort them to celebrate the feast of unleavened
bread are slain by them.
and had delivered unto them the message that they had in charge: so far were
they from complying with them, that they mocked them, and esteemed them to be
mad, and spit upon those Prophets that exhorted them to piety; and foretold
them the evils they should suffer, if they served not the true God: and finally
they laid hold on them, and put them to the sword. And not contenting
themselves with this presumption, they attempted yet far worser things, and
never gave over, until that God (for a punishment of their impiety) subjected
them to their enemies, 2 Chronicles. 29.
as shall appear hereafter: But diverse of the Tribes of Manasses, Zabulon, and
Issachar, The Word of God is never without fruit.
(respecting the good counsels of the Prophets) submitted themselves to the
service of God, and repaired all together to Jerusalem, to King Ezechias, to
honor Ezechias went up into the Temple, accompanied with the Governors and all
the People, and offered there seven Bulls, seven Rams, The year of the World,
3618. before Christ's Nativity, 746.
and after that he and all the Governors had laid their hands upon the heads of
the Sacrifice, they delivered them to the Priest, according as it appertained
to them, and they sacrificed, and made burnt-offerings of them. The Levites
also (assisting round about with Instruments of Music) sung Hymns and Songs
unto God, according as they had been taught by the ordinance of David.
Ezechias's sacrifice.
The other Priests had Trumpets, which they used in consort to the tune of
their Hymns. Which done, the King and all the People cast themselves prostrate
upon the ground, 2 Chronicles. 29. ^^ 20, 21.
and adored God; and afterward sacrificed seven Oxen, an 100 Sheep, and 200
Lambs. The King likewise bestowed 600 Oxen, and 3000 sheep, upon the People, to
feast withal. And when the Priests had joyfully performed all things
(according to the custom contained in the Law) Ver. 30, 31.
they offered up their other Sacrifices. The King gave, in way of gratuity,
unto the People (besides that which had been offered) 2000 Oxen, Reformation of
Gods service.
and 7000 Sheep. The Governors did the like, and gave the People a 1000 Bulls,
and 1400 Sheep: and thus was the feast solemnized, which had not been so
magnificently and devoutly celebrated since Solomon's time. When the solemnity
of this feast was past, they journeyed, and went through the Country, and
purified it. They purged the City likewise of all Idols, and the King ordained
that the daily Sacrifices should be made according to the Law, upon his charge.
He enacted also, That the People should pay the Tenths to the Priests and
Levites, with the first fruits; to the intent they might wholly intend piety,
and never estrange themselves from the service of God. By which means it came
to pass, that the People brought all kind of fruit to the Priests and Levites:
The King overcomes the Philistines.
which the King put up in certain storehouses, which he had built, to be
distributed to every one of them, their Wives and Children, and by this means
they returned again to their former purity in Religion. After the King had
disposed all things in this sort, 2 Kings 19.
he made War upon the Philistines, Ezechias forsakes the service of the King
of Assyria.
and overcame them, and seized all their Cities (between Gaza and Geth.) About
this time the King of Assyria sent unto him, and threatened him, That if he
would not pay those Tributes which his father before him had paid unto him, he
would destroy all his Country. Nevertheless Ezechias set light by his threats,
assuring himself in that piety and zeal he bore Esaias, by whom he was exactly
instructed touching all those things that were to succeed.

CHAP. XIV.
Salmanasar slays the King of Israel, and leads the Israelites captive into
the Country of Media.
WHen tidings was brought to Salmanasar, King of Assyria, that the King of
Israel had privily sent unto Soan, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 5.
King of Egypt, to request his assistance against the Assyrians, he was sore
displeased, and drew forth his Army against Samaria, in the seventh year of the
Reign of Oseas. But the King of Israel withstood his entrance into the City, by
which means he was besieged therein for three years space, and finally Samaria
was taken by force, 2 Kings 17* 24.
in the ninth year of Oseas, and the seventh of Ezechias's Reign. At which time
all the Kingdom of Israel was destroyed, and all the People transported into
the Countries of Media and Persia; and, amongst the rest, King Oseas was taken
Prisoner. The King of Assyria caused certain Nations of a Country called Chut,
so styled, from a River of that name, to remove their habitation, and to dwell
in Samaria, and inhabit the Country of Israel. As for the ten Tribes of
Israel, they were transported out of their Country 947 years, The Israelites
removed from their possessions, are translated into the Region of the Chuthites.
since their Predecessors (departing out of Egypt) possessed Canaan, 800 years
after the government of Joshua, and 240 years, seven months, and seven days,
since they revolted from Roboam, David's Nephew, to give the Kingdom to
Jeroboam.) This was the end of the Israelites, who transgressed the Laws, and
disobeyed the Prophets, who foretold them of that calamity which should happen
unto them, except they repented them of their impieties. The sedition that they
raised against Roboam, in taking his servant for their King, was the original
of their mischiefs. For Jeroboam committing impiety against God, and they
imitating his wickedness, caused God to be displeased with them, so that he
punished them according as they deserved. But the King of Assyria ravaged and
spoiled all Syria and Phoenicia with his Army, and his name is found written in
the Chronicles of the Tyrians: for he made War against the Tyrians, Eulaleus
reigned in Tire, whereof Menander makes mention, who wrote the History of
Tire, which has been Translated into the Greek Tongue. The King Eluleus (says
he) reigned 36 years, The year of the World, 3224. before Christ's Nativity,
740.
and pursued the Chutheans that were revolted from him by Sea, and made them
subject. Against whom the King of Assyria sent forth his Army, and invaded all
Phoenicia, and afterward having made a Peace with them, he returned back again
into the Cities of Sydon, Arce, and old Tire, and diverse other Cities revolted
from the Tyrians, and submitted themselves to the King of Assyria.

For this cause, The Tyrians Chronicles touching the Wars of Salmana^ar against
the Tyrians, written by Menander.
and for that they of Tire did not obey him, he drew his Army forth once more
against them; and he was furnished by the Phoenicians with 60 ships, and 800
rowers. The Tyrians charging their ships with 12 of their vessels, overthrew
the Navy of the Assyrians, and took about 500 men Prisoners: which act of
theirs, wonderfully increased their honor. But the King of Assyria returning
back again, planted a Garrison upon the River, set a guard upon the fountain
heads, to the intent the Tyrians might draw no water; which act of

These things are written in the Registers of the Tyrians themselves, as also
the exploits of the King of Assyria against them. But these Chutheans from the
Region of Chut, which is in Persia, Gods displeasure against the idolatrous
Chuthites.
(where there is a River of that name) for that they were of five several
Nations, they brought with them each of them the god whom they honored in
their Nation, to the number of five gods, whom they served after the manner of
their Country. Whereupon the true God was displeased, and provoked against
them, for a Plague fell amongst them, that consumed them in such sort, that
they could find no remedy, until they were told that they ought to adore the
God of the Hebrews, The Chutheans embrace the service of God, and in prosperity
claim kindred of the Jews.
and that therein consisted Assyria, requiring him to send them Priests from
amongst the Israelites, whom he had led away Prisoners in War. By whose
assistance they learnt the Law, and the manner of Gods service, and began very
diligently to observe both: by which means the Plague ceased. And now even unto
this day continue they in the same Religion, and are called by the Hebrews,
Chutheans, and Samaritans by the Greeks. These, as often as they find the Jews
in prosperity, call them their Cousins, (according to the variety and changes
of time;) but if they perceive their fortunes to be on the declining hand, then
adjure they consanguinity, and renounce their relation to them, and say, That
they were planted in the Country, and drawn thither from a foreign Nation. But
in time and place convenient, we will speak of them more largely.

The year of the World, 3231. before Christ's Nativity, 733.

Written by FLAVIVS JOSEPHVS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Tenth Book.
1. Senacherib King of Assyria, besieges Ezechias in Jerusalem. 2. Ezechias
having lived for a certain time in peace, dies, and leaves his Son Manasses
3. The Kings of the Chaldees, and the King of Babylon make War against
Manasses, and lead him away Captive. 4. The History of King Josias. 5. Josias
death in battle; he hinders the King of Egypt from leading his Army against
the Babylonians, and the event thereof. 6. The Army of Nabuchodonosor comes
into Syria. 7. Nabuchodonosor puts Joachim to death, and makes Joachin
King. 8. Nabuchodonosor changes his purpose, besieges Joachim, and is
reconciled upon composition. Sedechias is appointed King over Jerusalem. 10.
Jerusalem is taken, and the people translated into Babylon by Nabuchodonosor.
11. The Successors of Nabuchodonosor: the destruction of Babylon by Cyrus, King
of Persia.


CHAP. I.
Senacherib King of Assyria, besieges Ezechias in Jerusalem.
IN the Fourteenth year of the Reign of Ezechias King of the two Tribes, 2
King. 18, 19.
Senacherib, The destruction of Judea.
King of Assyria, drew forth a huge Army against him, and surprised all the
Cities of Juda and Benjamin by strong hand. To him Ezechias sent Ambassadors,
promising him obedience, and such a Tribute as it should please him to impose.
When Senacherib had heard the Ambassadors, he resolved on Peace, and accepted
Ezechias offer, promising that he would depart, as soon as he should have
received Three hundred Talents of silver, and Thirty Talents of gold; swearing
unto the Ambassadors, The oath of Senacherib, and his breach thereof.
That upon these conditions he would depart away, without committing any
outrage. Ezechias giving credit to these words of his, emptied the Treasuries,
and sent the prefixed sum to Senacherib, hoping to be delivered from his enemy,
and the hazard wherein his Country stood. But the Assyrians having received
the money, set light by their promises, Senacherib went in person to make War
against the Egyptians and Ethiopians, and left Rapsaces his General in Judaea
with a great power, accompanied with two of his chief Minions and Courtiers,
with commission to spoil Jerusalem: The names of these two were Tharata and
Anacheris. As soon as they were encamped near unto the Walls, they sent unto
Ezechias, and commanded him to come and speak with them: but he through fear
which he had conceived, went not unto them, but sent three of his most familiar
friends, Eliacim the Superintendent of his Realm, Sobna, and Joachas, that had
the commission of his Registers.

These three presented themselves before the Chieftains of the Assyrian Army,
whom when Rapsaces beheld, he commanded them to return unto their Master, and
to tell him, Senacherib was desirous to know, upon what hope he slighteth his
Summons, and refuses to admit his Army into the City? Is it perhaps, because
he hops the Egyptians will have the upper hand of the Kings Army? If that be
his hope, doubtless he is deceived, showing himself to be like unto a man that
stays himself upon a broken reed; by which he is not only not supported, but
in his fall has his hand pierced therewith. He likewise wished him to
conceive, that this his expedition was not without the Will of God, who, as in
times past, has given them the victory over the Israelites; so now also is
pleased to humble Ezechias, and to make both him and his Subjects stoop under
the Assyrian government. Whilst Rapsaces spoke thus in the Hebrew language,
Ver. 17.
(wherein he was very skilful) Eliacim (fearing lest the multitude should be
stricken with fear upon the hearing of these words) besought him to speak in
the Syriack Tongue. Rapsaces persuasion to cause Ezechias to submit.
But he sufficiently instructed what it was that he feared, answered him with a
louder voice in the Hebrew Tongue, and told them, They ought to give ear unto
the Kings commandment, and to yield themselves to his mercy, because it
concerned their security. The year of the World, 3231. before Christ's
Nativity, 737.
I am not ignorant (said he) that both you and your King do flatter the people

When both the Ambassadors and the People had heard what the Assyrian had
spoken, 2 Kings 19. 1, 2.
they reported the same to Ezechias, who incontinently cast his royal garments
off, and clothed himself in sackcloth, Ezechias in adversity has recourse to
God, he is comforted by Esaias.
discovering his trouble and sorrow in his countenance; and casting himself
prostrate upon the earth, after the manner of their Country, he besought God
to be assistant unto him, since all other hope was vain. He sent also certain
of his friends, and some Priests, unto the Prophet Esaias, requiring him to pray
unto God, That since Sacrifice was offered unto him for public security, it
might please him to frustrate the enemies hopes, and to have pity and
compassion on his people. When the Prophet had performed what was required, he
received an answer from God, by which he assured the King, and all that were
about him, foretelling them, that the enemies should be overcome without stroke
stricken, and should retire with shame, and not with that advantage which they
promised to themselves at present, because God had already determined
Senacherib himself (the King of Assyria) should fail of his enterprise in
Egypt, and that upon his return to his own Court, he should be slain. At that
very time the Assyrian wrote Letters to Ezechias, in which he called him fool
and madman, to think that he could secure himself from being his slave, yea,
his in especial, who had conquered diverse and far greater Nations: threatening
him with utter ruin at such time as he should surprise the City, if he opened
not the gates of Jerusalem willingly, to entertain his Army. When Ezechias had
read these Letters, he set light by them, by reason of the confidence he had in
God: and having opened them, he spread them in the Temple. And whilst he
renewed his prayers unto God for the salvation of the City and his Subjects,
Esaias the Prophet told him, That his prayer was heard: that hereafter likewise
they should manure their lands in peace and security, and should enjoy their
possessions without fear. Not long after, the King of Assyria having but cold
success in his expedition against Egypt, turned back again without doing any
thing, for this cause that ensues. He had lost much time in the siege of
Pelusium: and at such time as he had already raised certain Bulwarks as high as
the Wall, so that he wanted nothing but to give the assault; News was brought
him that Thargises, King of Ethiopia, A v. 20. ad fin.
brought an Army to rescue the Egyptians, with an intent to take his way through
the Desert, Herodotus of Senacherib.
and suddenly to charge the Assyrian Army. Senacherib troubled with these
tidings, speedily departed thence with his Army. But Herodotus says, That he
made War with Vulcans Priests, (for so he styles this King of Egypt, because
he was a Priest of that Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 11.
That besieging Pelusium, for this cause he gave over the siege: The King of
Egypt called to his God for assistance, by whose power the Arabians suffered
much misery. But in this also he erreth, in that he sets down the Arabian
for the Assyrian.

There came one night so great a number of Rats into the Army, that they gnawed
to pieces all their Bowe-strings, and made the rest of their Arms
unserviceable: whence it came to pass, that the King being disarmed, Ver. 35,
36, 37.
withdrew his siege from Pelusium. But Berosus, a Writer among the Chaldees,
The punishment of Senacherib, for displeasing God.
makes mention of Senacherib, and how he reigned among the Assyrians, and
troubled both Asia and Egypt with War, and declares the manner in these words:
But Senacherib returning from the Egyptian War, came before Jerusalem, and
received the Army that Rabsake, and God caused a pestilent sickness to fall
upon his Army, which was so violent, that the first night of the siege, there
dyed an hundred fourscore and five thousand men, with the Governors and
Chieftains. With which loss he was so affrighted, Pa^^icides.
and troubled, that fearing to lose his Army, he fled with those that remained,
and retired himself into his Kingdom to the City called Nineve, where after he
had lived for a time, he was traitorously slain by Adramelech and Selenar his
two elder sons; and being dead, was carried into his own Temple called Arusche,
and his children were driven out of the Kingdom for committing the murder, and
retired themselves into Armenia, and Asseradochus his youngest son succeeded
Senacherib. Such was the end of the Assyrian Army that came before Jerusalem.

CHAP. II. The year of the World, 3241. before Christ's Nativity, 733.

Ezechias having for a time remained in peace, dies: and leaves his son
Manasses to succeed him.
KIng Ezechias (being in this sort beyond all hope delivered from his fears)
offered thanksgiving and sacrifices unto God, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 3.
with all the people: acknowledging that there was no other cause that had
slain part of his enemies, 2 Kings 20. 1, ad 11.
and put the rest to mortal fear, nor delivered Jerusalem from thraldom, but
only Gods succor and assistance. And whilst he altogether intended and was
occupied about the service of God, he fell sick Ezechias sickness, and the
prolongation of his life assured by miracle.
and his kingdom desolate. In this affliction he besought God, That it would
please him to lengthen his life a little time, until he had children to succeed
him; and that he would vouchsafe that his soul might not be taken from him,
before he were the father of a son. Hereupon God taking compassion of him, (and
the rather, because he was not grieved for that the pleasures of his kingdom
were taken from him; but for that he sought for a lawful heir to succeed him)
he sent the Prophet Esaias unto him, to assure him, that after three days he
should be recovered of his sickness; and that after he had lived Esaias's
hands, to the intent that he might certainly believe, that he was sent as a
messenger from God unto him: for the truth of those things which either exceed
our hope, or reason, are wont to be confirmed by these means. Whereupon Esaias
asked him what sign he required, and it should be given him. He answered, that
he desired to see the shadow of the Sun go back ten degrees upon his Quadrant.
On this occasion the Prophet besought God, that it would please him to confirm
the King by this miracle: Ver. 14, 15.
who seeing that which he desired, was The Assyrian Monarchy destroyed.
and went up into the Temple to worship and praise God. At that time it happened,
that the Monarchy of the Assyrians was destroyed by the Medes, The Embassage of
the King of Babylon to Ezechias.
(whereof I will speak in another place.) Not long after, Balad King of Babylon
sent an Ambassador to Ezekias with Presents, calling him his ally and friend:
who receiving his messengers, he feasted them, and showed them his treasures,
his arsenal, and all other magnificence that he had of gold and precious
stones: and after he had given them Presents for Balad, he dismissed them.
Whereupon the Prophet Esaias came unto him, asking him from whence those
Ambassadors came? To whom Ezechias answered, That they were of Babylon, and
came unto him from their King; telling the Prophet how he had showed them all
that which he had, to the end that having seen and observed his Ver. 16, 17, 18.
they might afterward certify the King thereof. The captivity of Babylon
foreprophesied by Esaias.
Whereunto the Prophet replied, saying, Know thou, that within a little time
thy riches shall be transported into Babylon, and thy children shall be made
Eunuchs, and (being no more men) shall be slaves unto the King of Babylon. All
which God gave him to understand before it happened. Ezechias was troubled to
hear these tidings, saying, That he desired that his people might not fall into
those miseries: but since it was impossible to change the Decree of God, he
required that he might have peace during his lifetime. Hedio and Ruffinus,
cap. 4.
Of this Balad King of Babylon, Berosus makes mention. This Prophet truly
divine and admirable for the verity of his Prophesies, is accounted to have
spoken nothing that was untrue, but to have left in writing all that which he
prophesied: the truth whereof has afterward, in effect, appeared to
posterity. Ver. ^^.
but besides him, twelve others have done the like: 2 Chr. 32. 33.
and all that which is happened unto us, Ezekias death.
either good or evil, has fallen out truly according to their Prophecies. But
hereafter we will speak of every one of them. Now when Ezechias had lived his
prefixed time* (according as we have before related) and governed his kingdom
in peace, he died when he was 54 years old, and in the 29 year of his Reign.

CHAP. III.
The Kings of Chaldaea and Babylon war against Manasses, and take him Prisoner.
Manasses (the son of Achiba, a Woman born in Jerusalem) succeeded him in the
Kingdom. This Man forsook his fathers ways, and abandoned himself to all
manner of viciousness and debauchery; but addicting himself to all the
iniquities of the Israelites, The year of the World, 3147. before Christ's
Nativity, 717.
who were destroyed, because of their heinous sins committed against Jerusalem
was overflown with blood. For which cause God being provoked unto wrath by his
heinous offenses, 2 Kings 21. 1, etc.
sent diverse Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 33. 1. ad 10.
the one after the other, both to the King and the people, by whom he threatened
to inflict the same calamities upon them, Manasses impiety and cruelty.
which (for contempt of Religion) the Israelites their Brethren had a little
before suffered. But they not giving heed to their Predictions, (whose
admonitions had they resepcted, they might have prevented their imminent evils)
at length experimented the truth thereof. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 5. alias
cap. 4.
For whereas they persevered in their Chaldaea and Babylon against them; who
sending their Armies into Judaea, and spoiling the whole Region, at length
surprised and led away Manasses Prisoner, and made him liable to what
punishment it should please them to inflict. 2 Chronicles. 33.
Then this miserable Prince (taught by his own experience) acknowledged his
sin, A v. 1. ad 13.
and humbly besought God to have compassion on him. His prayer was heard;
Manasses surprised, and led Prisoner into Babylon, and after his repentance*
restored to his kingdom.
and after some space of time, the Babylonian sending him home, restored him to
his former government. As soon as he was returned back to Jerusalem, he made it
appear, by the change of his life, that his repentance was sincere, and
endeavored nothing more, than to abolish the memory of his former actions, and
employed his whole care to establish the service of God. He purged the Temple
also, and cleansed Ver. 14, 15, 16.
and from that time forward, he addicted himself wholly to think how he might
give God thanks, Manasses purifieth the City, and consecrateth the Temple again.
for that he had thus delivered him from ruin, and how he might pass all the
remnant of his life in his favor. He taught the People likewise to do the
like, telling them what miseries they had endured within a few years, because
they had demeaned themselves impiously. He repaired the Altar also, and
according to Moses Prescript, Manasses death.
offered thereon solemn Sacrifices: and after that he had provided those things
that concerned the service of God, 2 King. 21. 18.
he took care likewise for the security of the City of Jerusalem, 2 Chr. 33. 2^.
and repaired the old and ruined walls, Amos King of Juda, a wicked Prince.
and built some anew, for the enlarging of the City; he erected high Towers
likewise, furnishing the same with munition, and victual sufficient for a City
of defense. And so much was he changed during 2 Kings 22. 1. ad 8.
that he was held most happy; and after that he began to serve God, 1 Chronicles.
34. 1. ad 14.
he invited many to the imitation of his virtues. After he had lived 67 years,
he dyed in the 55th year of his Reign, and was buried in his garden. His
kingdom came into the hands of his son Amon, the son of Emalsema, of the City
of Jabath; who imitating the Impieties to which his father addicted himself in
his youth, was slain in his own house, by a conspiracy plotted by his own
houshold-servants, after he had lived 24 years, and reigned two. After his
death, the people slew his murderers, and he was buried with his father, and
the kingdom was given to his son Josias, who was eight years old.

CHAP. IV.
The History of Josias.
THE Mother of Josias, King of Juda, was of the City of Bosceth, and was called
J^da: Josias King of Juda.
This Prince was by nature so excellently disposed to all virtue, that during
the whole course of his life, he proposed to himself no other example but that
of his Predecessor King David. 2 Chronicles. 34. 8.
When he grew to be twelve years old, he gave a manifest proof of his piety and
justice: Josias restores the true service of God
for he drew the people to a conformable course of life, and to the detestation
and abolishing of Idols, that were no gods, and to the service of the only and
true God of their forefathers. And considering the actions of his Predecessors,
he began to rectify them in that wherein they were deficient, with no less
circumspection, than if he had been an old man; and that which he found to be
advisedly 2 Kings 22. v. 4, 24.
(both in respect of public policy, as also in religion) he walked uprightly,
in that by observing them, he could not err. He made a particular inquiry both
in Jerusalem, Josias rooteth out Idolatry.
and the Country round about, for those places where they had set up the
worship of false gods, and overthrew their altars; and all those gifts that had
been offered to them by his Predecessors, were defaced: and in this manner
caused he the people to return to the service of God, and to forsake the honor
they did unto Idols. He offered likewise the ordinary sacrifices and
burnt-offerings upon the altar, and established Judges and Magistrates to
determine public debates, and to do each man right; charging them The year of
the World, 332^. before Christ's Nativity, 643.
toward the reparation of the Temple, should bring in their benevolence,
according to their abilities. And when all the money was gathered together, he
appointed Superintendents, both over the Temple, as also over the charges that
were defrayed in the reparation thereof: namely, Amasias, who was Governor of
the City, and Saphan the Secretary, and Joata, who was over the Registers, with
the High Priest Elcia: who with all expedition and diligence provided workmen,
2 Chronicles. 34. 9. ad 14.
and all that which was requisite for the building, The zeal of the people in
the reparation of the Temple.
and began the work. This sudden and speedy reparation of the Temple, gave a
manifest testimony of the Kings piety: who, when he had attained to the 18th
year of his age, sent Elcia the High Priest, and caused him to melt down the
remainder of the money that was given toward the building of the Temple, and
to make vessels, cups and 2 Kings 22. 8.
should be brought forth, and employed after the like manner, in cups and other
vessels. 2 Chr. 14. 15.
Now whilst the High Priest searched the Treasury, he found the sacred Books
of Moses in the Temple, Moses sacred books found in the Temple.
which he brought and delivered to the Scribe Saphan; who, after he had perused
the same, presented them unto the King, giving him to understand, 2 King. 32.
13.
that all that which he had commanded, was accomplished: besides that, he read
the Books unto him, 2 Chr. 34. 21.
which when the King heard, Olda the Prophetess sent unto by Josias.
he rent his clothes, and called Elcia the High Priest unto him, and the Scribe
Saphan, with certain other of his inward friends, 2 King. 22. 15. ad finem.
and sent them unto the Prophetess Olda, the wife of Sallum, a man in high
dignity, and famous for his Nobility: commanding them, That when they came unto
her, they should endeavor to appease Gods wrath, 2 Chronicles. 34. 23. ad 28.
and labor to recover his favor, because it was to be feared, The Prophecy of
the Jews miseries.
that by reason that their ancestors had transgressed the Laws of Moses, they
should be in danger to be dispossessed of their Country, and abandoned by all
men, should at length perish miserably.

When the Prophetess had heard the Kings commandment, she willed those that
were sent unto her, to return unto the King, and to certify him from her, That
God had given sentence against them, which might not be revoked by any prayers
whatsoever; namely, that since they had transgressed the Law of Moses, the
people should perish, and should be cast out of their Country, and deprived of
all their goods, because they had not repented of the violation of his most
holy Laws; notwithstanding the Prophets had exhorted them to repentance, and
had foretold the punishment of their impieties, which should happen unto them
to the end that they might believe that God is God, and that he fails not in
any thing that he has foretold by his Prophets. Furthermore she said, That he
forbore as yet to send these afflictions upon them for Josias sake, who was a
virtuous man, but that after his decease, God would pour out his wrath upon the
people. This Prophecy of the Woman they signified unto the King, who sent into
all parts, and assembled the People in Jerusalem, commanding the Priests and
Levites, and generally all men, 2 Chronicles. 34. 29. ad finem.
without distinction of age or person, to be present in that Convention. Now
when they were assembled, A lively image of a godly Prince.
he first of all caused the sacred books to be read, and afterward standing
aloft upon his Throne, he caused all the people to swear and promise, that they
should serve God, and keep Moses Laws. Whereupon all of them did willingly
Aaron) he put them to death. The truth of the divine oracles.
When these things were thus executed in Jerusalem, he came afterward to the
plain Country; and all that which Jeroboam had erected there in honor of
Idols, 1 Kings 13. 1. ad 4.
he utterly defaced it, and the bones of Jeroboam had built. This had the
Prophet foretold that came to Jeroboam at such time as he offered Sacrifice,
and told him in the presence of all the people, all that which should happen:
namely, That one of David's posterity called Josias, should do th^se things:
which Prophecy took effect 361 years after. After this, King Josias applied
himself to the Israelites, (who had avoided the captivity and servitude of the
Assyrians) and persuaded them to forsake their impieties, and the services they
had performed to strange gods, and to honor the sovereign and true God of
their fathers, and to cleave unto him. He made a search also through every
house, borough and city, fearing lest as yet there should be an Idol hidden. He
likewise sought out the Chariots that were made by his ancestors, in honor of
the Sun, Jerusalem, where he celebrated the Feast of unleavened bread, which we
call Easter. Toward the performance whereof, The year of the World, 23^^.
before Christ's Nativity, 643.
he gave the people young kids and lambs, to the number of 30000, Moses, (the
Priests taking charge thereof, 2 Kings 23. ^. 11.
and confirming the rest of the people by their example.) Neither was there
ever such a solemnity kept by the Hebrews, since the time of Samuel the
Prophet; because all things were done according to the Laws and the ancient
Customs, The celebration of the P^sseover.
which were observed in the time of their Fathers. After this, Josias lived in
peace, riches, honor, and estimation amongst all men: Ver. 21, etc.
and thus ended his life. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 9. (...) cap. 5.


CHAP. V.
Diverse Exploits of Nechao.
Nechao, The E^yptians (...).
King of Egypt, having gathered great Forces, conducted his Army toward the
River Euphrates, to war against the Medes and Babylonians, who had destroyed
the Empire of Assyria: for Nechao affected the government of all Asia. Now when
he drew near unto the City of Mende, (which was under Josias subjection) King
Josias denied him passage, and would not suffer his Army to march through his
Country. For which cause Nechao sent an Herald unto him, to let him
understand, That it was not against him that he made War, (...).
but that he bent his course toward Euphrates: for which cause 2 Chr^n. ^5.
22, 23, 24.
lest thereby he should be constrained to make War upon him. An Epit^ph written
by Jeremy on Josi^^.
But Josias regarded not this demand of his, but resolved himself to hinder his
passage through his Country: And I am persuaded that his evil Genius put him
upon making this resistance, to the end that he might have some occasion to do
something against Nechao. Ver. 25.
For whilst he set in order his Army, and rode from one Band to another, Which
was the (...).
being mounted upon his Chariot, he was stricken with an Arrow that was shot by
a certain Egyptian, which put a stop to his proceedings: For feeling himself
oppressed with pain, (...).
by reason of his wound, he commanded his Army to retire, and returned himself
to Jerusalem, where he dyed of his wound, and was buried with his Fathers with
great magnificence, after he had lived 39 years, and reigned 31. For him (...).
lamenting for many days. The Prophet Jeremy also made an Elegy upon him in
verse, (...).
which is as yet extant even in these days. This Prophet foretold in writing
those evils which should afterward happen unto the City, and the Captivity
wherewith we are entangled at this present, (...).
and the surprisal of Babylon. (...).
Neither has he alone foretold the same, but the Prophet Ezekiel has likewise
done the like, who first left two Books written of the same Argument. These two
Prophets were of the race of the Priests. ^span ^.
But Jeremy kept in Jerusalem, from the 14th year of the Reign of Josias, (...).
until the destruction of the City and Temple, as in time and place convenient
we will declare, setting down those occurrences that happened to this Prophet.
After the death of Josias (hitherto mentioned) his son Joaz succeeded him
Jerusalem, and his mothers name was Ametala: he was a man full of impiety, and
of a malignant and perverse nature. The King of Egypt returning from the War,
sent unto Joaz, commanding him to meet him in Samath a City of Syria, where he
was no sooner arrived, but he kept him Prisoner, committing the Kingdom to
Eliachim his brother, (on the Fathers side) who was his elder brother likewise.
He changed his name likewise, and called him Joachim: he imposed a Tribute also
on Judea, of 100 Talents of silver, and a Talent of gold, which Joachim paid;
and as touching Joaz, he led him into Egypt, where he finished his days, after
he had been King three months, and ten days. Now Joachims mother was called
Z^buda, of the City of Abuma. He was a wicked person, and of a malignant
nature,

CHAP. VI.
Nabuchodonosors Army comes into Syria.
IN the fourth year of the Reign of Joachim, (...)
a certain man called Nabuchodonosor, possessed the Kingdom of Babylon, who at
that time went out with a great Army against (...), (a City situate near unto
Euphrates) resolving with himself to fight against Nechao King of Egypt, under
whose power all Syria was subject. Nechao understanding Babylonians intent, and
how great his Army was, made very little account thereof, but with a huge Army
advanced toward Euphrates, with an intent to repulse Nabuchodonosor. The year
of the World, 33^6. before Christ's Nativity, 928.
and lost diverse thousands of his men. Whereupon, the Babylonian (passing
Euphrates) seized all Syria, as far as Pelus^um, (Judea only excepted.) The
fourth year that Nabuchodonosor reigned over these conquered Countries, and in
the eighth year of the Reign of Joachim over the Hebrews, the Babylolonian led
forth his Army against the Jews with a mighty power, threatening them to use all
hostility, 2 Kings 24. 11. ad 20.
except Joachim would pay him Tribute. Joachim fearing his threats, bought his
peace with silver, and paid for three years space the Tributes that were
imposed on him. Joachim pays Nabuchadnezzar tribute.
But in the third year (understanding that the Egyptian was up in Arms against
the Babylonian) he denied the payment of the Tribute, notwithstanding he was
frustrated of his hope, for the Egyptians were not so hardy as to make War. All
which the Jeremy daily foretold him, signifying unto him, That he built his
hope in vain upon the Egyptians; and that it would fall out, that the City
should be overthrown by the King of Babylon, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 8.
and Joachim himself should be delivered Prisoner into his hands. But because
there was no means for them to escape this justice* all that which he said,
Joachim revolteth from the King of Babylon.
was nothing available. For notwithstanding the People and Governors heard
thereof, yet made they no reckoning of the same, but were displeased with those
counsels which he proposed unto them, accusing Jeremy, as if he took pleasure
to utter and publish ominous and adverse Presages against the King; they
likewise called him in question before the Kings Council, and required that he
might be condemned. Whereupon some of them gave sentence against him: But
others took a more discreet course, and persuaded them to cause Micheas, and
diverse others; and yet that no one of them had suffered any evil by the Kings
of their time, but that contrariwise Micheas had been honored as a Prophet
sent from God. By these words they appeased the People, and delivered Jeremy
from the death intended against him. This man wrote all his Prophesies, Jeremy
foretells the destruction of Jerusalem.
and read them to the People in their Fasts, when they were assembled in the
Temple in the ninth month of the fifth year of the Reign of Joachim, which book
he had composed touching that which should happen unto the City, the Temple,
and the People. When the Governors heard the same, Jer. 22. 24.
they took the book from him, and commanded Baruch should withdraw themselves
out of the sight of men: and they took the book, and presented it unto the
King; who, in the presence of his Friends, commanded his Secretary to read the
same: and after he had heard the contents thereof, he waxed wroth, and renting
it in pieces, cast it into the fire, intending that it should never be seen. He
sent out likewise a strict Commission to seek out Jeremy, and his Secretary
Baruch, and to lead them out to be punished. But they were already fled, that
they might prevent his indignation.

CHAP. VII.

NOT long after this, Nabuchadnezzars entertainment into the city, and cruelty.
he went out to meet the King of Babylon, who was marched out to make War
against him: and being incredulous and careless of the Prophets Predictions, he
opened the gates unto him, supposing that he intended him no evil. But when the
Babylonians were entered into the City, the King observed not his promises, but
put all such to death as were in the flower and strength of their years, 2
Kings 24. 1, ad 11.
and spared none of the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Joachin of Jochonias King of
Juda.
with them also he slew their King Joachim, and caused his body to be cast from
the top of the walls, and vouchsafed him no Sepulcher, establishing Joachin his
son King of the Country, and of the City. Moreover, he took 3000 of Jerusalem
Prisoners, and led them to Babylon with him, amongst whom was the Prophet
Ezekiel, at that time very young in years. This was the end of King Joachim;
who lived 36 years, and reigned 11. Joachin that succeeded him in the Kingdom,
was the son of Nosta of Jerusalem, and reigned three months and ten days.

CHAP. VIII. The year of the World, 3346. before Christ's Nativity, 618.

Nabuchodonosor changes his purpose, and besieges Joachin, and receives him
upon composition.
AS soon as the Babylonian had bestowed the Kingdom of Judea on Joachin, he was
seized with a sudden fear, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 9.
which made him suspect lest Joachin remembering himself of the injuries he had
done unto him by the murder of his father might draw the Country into
rebellion, 2 King. 25. 27.
and revolt against him. For which cause he sent out certain Forces, and
besieged Joachin in Jerusalem: who being a man of a good nature, and of an
upright Nabuchodonosor a Truce-breaker.
receiving an oath from them, that neither they nor the City should receive any
harm. But this promise continued not a year: for the King of Babylon observed
it not, but commanded his Captains to imprison all the youth and artificers
that were in the City, and to bring them bound unto him. The number of them was
10832 persons, besides Joachin, his Mother, and his near Allies, whom they took
Prisoners.

CHAP. IX.
Sedechias is made King over Jerusalem, by the Babylonians.
INstead of Joachin, he appointed Sedechias his Uncle King of Jerusalem, whom
he bound by an oath that he should govern the Country without any innovation,
2 King. 24. 17.
and that he should hold no intelligence with the Egyptians. Sedechias King of
Jerusalem, seduced by his Courtiers and false Prophets, gives no ear to Jeremy.
This Sedechias was 21 years old, at such time as he came unto the Kingdom, and
was Joachims brother by the mothers side: he was a contemner of all laws, and a
preverter of ordinances. For the young men that were about him, were without
the fear of God, and all the people under his dominions, Jeremy came unto him,
protesting oftentimes against him, and denouncing, That if he would not forsake
his impieties, and addict himself to that which was just, (but gave ear unto
his Governors, amongst which there were many wicked men, nnd to those false
Prophets that misled him, trusting that the Babylonians should not make War
against his City, but that the Egyptians should levy an Army, and overcome
them) that then he should suffer much misery: For (said he) they have no truth
in their sayings, and they will always mislead you by false reports. Whilst
Sedechias gave ear to these discourses of the Prophet, he was persuaded, and
acknowledged all that to be true which he had spoken, and very profitable both
for him, Ezekiel prophesies the destruction of the Temple.
and his people; but anon after, his friends corrupted him, and diverted him
according Ezekiel also at the same time had prophesied in Babylon concerning
all those calamities which were to fall upon the Temple, and sent notice to
Jerusalem of that which he had received from God. Notwithstanding Sedechias
gave no credit to his Prophesies, by reason that all the Prophets were
accustomed to accord in all things the one with the other, as touching the
surprisal of the City, and the imprisonment of Sedechias: but Ezekiel differed
in this, that he said that Sedechias should not see Babylon; notwithstanding
that Jeremy had prophesied, that the King of Babylon should lead him away
Prisoner in bonds: Ver. 20.
because therefore these two accorded not in all their sayings, Sedechi^s
revolts from the Babylonian.
he concluded that the matter wherein they agreed, was of no consequence.
Notwithstanding all things happened unto him according as the Prophets had
pronounced, as Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 10.
After that he had continued his alliance and friendship with the King of
Babylon for the space of eight years, 2 Kings 25. 4. ad 12.
he brake the league that was between them, and confederated with the Egyptians
(under hope that they should overcome the Babylonians.) The King of Egypt
coming to rescue the King of Jerusa^em, is overthrown by Nabuchodonosor with
all his Army, and driven out of Syria.
Which when the King of Babylon understood, he led forth his Army against him,
and destroyed his Country to the uttermost; so that after he had taken his
Cities of defense, he brought his Army before Jerusalem, and besieged it. The
Egyptian perceiving the state wherein his Ally Sedechias was, levied an huge
Army, and came into Judea, with an intent to raise the siege. Whereupon the
Babylonian withdrew his Army from Jerusalem, to encounter with the Egyptian,
and fought with him, and overcame him in battle, and pressed on him with such
courage, that he put him to flight, and drove him Syria. As soon as the
Babylonian was dislodged from Jerusalem, the false Prophets deceived Zedechias,
telling him, That the Babilonian should never more return to make War either
against him, or his Nation, and that he should never any more depart from his
house in Babylon; and that they who had been led away captives, should return
home again, laden with those vessels of the Temple which the King of Babylon
had taken from them*

But the Prophet Jeremy presenting himself before the King, prophesied the
contrary to these Impostors, Zedechias seduced by false Prophets.
assuring both him and the People, That no profit could befall them by means of
the Egyptians, for that the Babilonians should overcome them, and should return
and encamp before Jerusalem, The Prophecy of the captivity of Babylon, and the
delivery.
and besiege the same, and destroy the People by Famine, and lead them away
Prisoners that were remaining, and carry away all their substance; and that
after they were seized of the riches of their Temple, they should finally burn
the same. As for the City, they should raze it; Jer. 25. v. 1. ad 12.
and (said he) they shall keep us captive for the space of 70 years: And
Persians and Medes shall deliver us, at such time as they have gotten the
Empire out of the hands of the Babilonians; Jer. 29. 1, ad 10.
then shall they send us back again into our Country, C. 37. per tot.
and we shall build our Temple anew, and establish the City of Jerusalem.

Diverse men gave credit to these words of Jeremy; but the Governors, and such
as contemned God, entreated him very cruelly, as if he had been a man beside
himself. And whereas he had an intent to visit his Native Country Anathoth,
some 20 furlongs from Jerusalem, one of the Magistrates encountering him in his
journey, and laying hold on him, retained him, loading him with this slander,
That he stole away, to submit himself to the Babilonians. But Jeremy answered,
That he was falsely accused, and that he repaired only to the place where he
was born. This Prince giving him no credit, arrested him, and brought him
Jerusalem besieged.
where he sustained all sorts of outrages and torments, and was shut up in
Prison to be punished, and remained there for a time, suffering the extremity
of wrong and injury. 2 Kings 25. 1, ad 10.
The ninth year of the Reign of Zedechias, and on the tenth day of the ninth
month, Jer. 39. 1, ad 19.
the King of Babylon came and encamped the second time before Jerusalem, Two
mighty enemies, Famine and Pestilence.
and entrenched himself round about the same, for the space of 18 months, and
laid siege thereto, using his utmost endeavor to make himself Master of the
place. And they that were besieged therein, were afflicted with two of the
greatest calamities, Famine, and a most grievous Pestilence. Jeremy persuadeth
them to yield.
At this time the Prophet Jeremy being in Prison, held not his peace, but cried
with a loud voice, and preached and exhorted the People, willing them to
entertain the Babilonians, and to open their gates unto them: because that in
so doing, they might secure themselves with their families, whereas otherwise
they were assured of destruction.

He foretold them also, That if any one remained in the City, he should most
assuredly either perish by famine, or the enemies fury; but if so be they
submitted themselves to the enemies mercy, they should escape from death. But
those Governors that heard him speak after this sort, gave him no credit, in
that they were not as yet pressed with the danger: for which cause they came
unto the King, and after a despiteful manner, told him all that which had been
spoken, accusing Jeremy, and reproving him for a mad man; urging this, That he
had abated their courage; and by his woeful predictions, had weakened the hearts
of the people, which were otherwise ready to fight for him and their Country,
by reason that he flying unto the enemy,

The King, in regard of the natural humanity and justice that was in him, was
not any ways hereby provoked against Jeremy; Jer. 39. 11, 12.
yet to the intent that he might not seem utterly to oppose the Governors, The
reward of godly Preachers in this life.
he delivered the Prophet into their hands, to deal with him howsoever they
pleased. Who, having obtained this liberty from the King, entered the Prison on
the sudden, and laying hold on Jeremy, they let him down into a Pit full of
mud, to the intent he might die in that place, and be strangled by the filth;
in effect, he was set therein up to the neck. But one of the Kings servants (an
Ethiopian by Nation) certifi'd the King of the Prophets affliction, assuring
him, That his Friends and Governors did not justly, so to thrust and bury the
Prophet in the mud, and cursedly to conspire against him, tiring him with bonds
and tortures worse than death. Whereupon the King hearing this, was sorry that
he had delivered the Prophet to the Governors, and commanded the Ethiopian to
take 30 men of his Court with him, (with cords, and such other things
necessary, as might concern the safety of the Prophet) charging him with all
expedition to deliver him from that captivity. Hereupon the Ethiopian furnished
with men and necessary means, drew the Prophet out of the mud, and dismissed
him without any guard. That done, the King sent for him in private, demanding
of him, If he had any message to deliver him from God, Zedechias neglects the
Prophets good counsel, for fear of the Governors.
praying him to let him understand whatsoever he knew as touching the success
of the siege? The Prophets answer was, That although he should tell him, yet it
would not be believed; and that if he should exhort him, he would not give ear,
or listen unto him. But (said he) O King, thy friends have condemned me to
death, as if I had been a most wicked Malefactor. But where are they now at
this present that have deceived thee, and born thee in hand, The year of the
World, 3354. before Christ's Nativity, 610.
saying, That the Babylonian would not come and besiege thee? Now will I take
heed how I tell thee the truth, for fear lest thou condemn me to death.

Hereupon the King swore unto him, That he should not die, neither that he
would deliver him into the hands of the Governors: For which cause, Jeremy
grounding himself upon the faith which he had plighted unto him, counseled the
King to yield up the City to the Babilonians; because that God had willed him
to signify unto the King, that if he would save his life, and avoid the
imminent danger, and save his City from utter ruin, and preserve the Temple
from burning, he should submit; or otherwise, that none but he should be
reputed to be the cause of all those evils that should happen unto the City and
Citizens, and of that calamity that should confound both him and all his
family. When the King heard this, he told him, Babylon, would do him ill
offices with that King, and that by their means he might be accused, and
delivered unto death. But the Prophet encouraged him, telling him, That his
fear was in vain; assuring him; that he should suffer no evil, if so be he
yielded up the City: and that neither his wife, nor children, nor the sacred
Temple should suffer any mischief.

Upon these words the King dismissed Jeremy, charging him to communicate the
counsel that was held between them to no one of the Citizens, no not to the
Princes, if they should ask of him wherefore the King had sent for him?
advising him to answer, if so be they were inquisitive, That he resorted to the
King, to request him that he might be no more imprisoned: all which the Prophet
performed; but they pressed him very much, to know

CHAP. X.
Jerusalem is taken, and the People carried into Babylon by Nabuchodonosor.
Meanwhile the Babylonian continued his violent siege against the City of
Jerusalem, 2 Kings 25. 1. etc.
and having raised Towers upon certain Bulwarks, Jerusalem besieged eighteen
months, and at length taken.
he drove away by this means Babylonians and Jews, seemed to be a trial both of
valor and art, whilst these do assuredly hope to surprise the City; Ver. 5, 6,
7.
and the other thought their safety consists herein, Zedechias flies by
night, and is surprised by the enemy.
if they ceased not by new inventions to frustrate their enemies endeavors. And
in this state continued they both, for the space of 18 months, until they were
consumed by Famine, Babylon, (in the eleventh year of the Reign of Zedechias,
the ninth day of the fourth month) who were put in trust by Nabuchodonosor to
manage the siege; for he himself made his abode in the City of Reblata. Now if
any man be desirous to know the names of them that had command at such time as
Jerusalem was surpised, these they be, Nergelear, Aremantus, Emegar, Nabosar,
and Echarampsor. The City being taken about midnight, the Princes of the
Enemies Army entered into the Temple; which when Zedechias understood, he took
his wives and his children, with the Princes and his friends, and fled through a
great valley by the desert: which when the Babylonians understood by certain
Jews that were revolted, and had submitted themselves Jericho. Whereupon those
Princes and friends of Zedechias that had taken their flight with him, seeing
the Enemies near unto them, forsook him, and scattering themselves here and
there, endeavored each of them to save himself. When therefore the Enemies had
apprehended him, attended by a few followers only, and accompanied by his
children and wives, they brought him unto the Kings presence; who no sooner
beheld him, but he called him wicked and perfidious, and upbraided him with
breach of his promise, and contempt of his Majesty. Furthermore, he reproached
him for his ingratitude, in that having received the Royalty from his hands
(which he had Joachin, to bestow on him) he had, notwithstanding, employed all
his Forces against his Benefactor.

But (said he) that great God that hates thy Treachery, The year of the World,
3356. before Christ's Nativity, 6^8.
has delivered thee into my hands: and when he had spoken these words, he
caused Zedechias Friends and Children to be slain before his eyes, with all his
other prisoners: afterward commanding his eyes to be plucked out, he led him
to Babylon. All which happened unto him, according as the Prophets, Jeremy and
Ezekiel had foretold him: V. 5. 6. 7.
namely, that he should be surprised and brought before the King of Babylon,
Zedechias has his eyes pulled out, and his Children slain before his face.
and should speak with him face to face, and should see him with his eyes (for
so had Jeremy prophesied) but being made blind and conducted to Babylon, he
should not see the City of Babylon (according as Ezekiel had foretold.) All
which may sufficiently express to those that know not the nature of God, how
diverse and admirable his judgments be, in disposing all things in good order,
and pre-signifying those things that are to come, even as in this place there
appears a most signal example of humane error and incredulity, How many and
how long the Kings reigned, that were of David's Line.
by which it was not lawful for them to avoid their future calamity, nor shun
their unalterable destiny. Thus was the Race of the Kings extinguished that
descended from David, who were in number, One and twenty, that Reigned after
him. All of them together governed Five hundred and fourteen years, V. 9. ad 18.
six months, and ten days: adding thereunto the twenty years of the first King
Saul, The Temple, the Palace, and the City spoiled and burnt.
who was of another Tribe. After this, the Babylonian sent Nabuzaradan. General
of his Army, unto Jerusalem, to spoil the Temple, giving him in charge, to burn
both it and the Kings Palace, and to raze and level the City with the ground;
and afterward to transport the People unto Babylon. Nabuzaradan arrived there
the eleventh year of the Reign of Zedechias, and spoiled the Temple, and
carried away the Vessels that were consecrated to Gods service, both those of
Gold as also those of Silver: he took likewise the great Laver that was given
by Solomon; the Columns and Pillars of Brass, with their Chapters likewise, and
the Tables and Candlesticks of Gold: and after he had born away all things, he
burned the Temple the first day of the 5th month, of the eleventh year of
Zedechias Reign, which was the eighteenth of Nabuchodonosor's. He burned also
the Kings Royal Palace, and razed the City. This Temple was burned 470 years,
six months, and ten days after the foundation thereof: and in the year 1062.
six months, and ten days after the departure of the people out of Egypt: and
1950 years, six months, and ten days, after the Deluge: from the Creation of
Adam, V. 18. ad 22.
until the ruin of the Temple, there were three thousand five hundred and
thirteen years, six months, and ten days. The captivity of Babylon.
Thus have we set down the number of the years, and Babylon having destroyed
the City, and transported the People, took prisoner the High Priest Sareas, and
his Colleague, the Priest Saphan, with the Governors and Keepers of the Temple,
which were three; the Eunuch also which had the charge over the rest, and seven
of Zedechias friends, and his Secretary, besides sixty other Governors: all
which (together with the Vessels which he had pillaged) he sent to Reblatha, a
City of Syria, unto the King of Babylon; who commanded in that place, that the
High Priest and Governors should be beheaded: as for the rest of the
prisoners, and Zedechias the King, he carried them with him to Babylon; he sent
also in Bonds, with the rest, Josadoch, the Son of Sareas the High Priest, whom
he had put to death in Reblatha Juda, and given an account how long they
Reigned, it will not be unnecessary to recite the names of the High Priests,
The high Priests in Jerusalem.
and to report who they have been, that have administered the Priesthood under
the Kings. Sadoc was the first High Priest of the Temple, built by Solomon.
After him his Son Achimas succeeded in that Honor, and after Achimas, Azaras,
after whom succeeded Joram, and after Joram, Joschua, after Joschua, Axioram,
who had for his successor Phideas; to Phideas succeeded Sudeas, to Sudeas,
Julus, to Julus, Jotham, to Jotham, Vrias, to Vrias, Nerias, to Nerias, Odeas,
to Odeas, Saldum, to Saldum, Elcias, to Elcias, Sareas, to Sareas, Josadoch,
who was carried away prisoner into Babylon: all which have succeeded in the
Priesthood by lineal descent. Jer. 52. 10. 11.
When Nebuchodonosor was come to Babylon, he shut up Zedechias in prison, where
he kept him until he died, Zedechias death.
and after his death, he honored him with a Royal Tomb. He likewise offered
the Vessels that he had taken out of the Temple of Jerusalem unto his gods,
Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 11.
and caused the people to inhabit the Country of Babylon, delivering the High
Priest from his Bonds. The General Nabuzaradan that led the people away
captive, left the poorer sort in the Country of Judea; and those also that
voluntarily yielded themselves unto him, over whom he appointed Godolias, the
Son of Aicam, Governor (a man that was both upright and noble) commanding them
to till the Land, and to pay their assigned Tribute to the King. C. 40. v 4.
He delivered the Prophet Jeremy also out of prison, Godolias, Captain of the
Fugitives.
persuading him to repair with him to the King of Babylon: telling him, that he
had Babylon, he should declare unto him in what place he would make his abode,
to the intent he might certify the King thereof. But the Prophet would not
follow him, or sojourn in any other place, desiring rather to live amidst the
ruins of his Country, and among the pitious Relics of his poor Nation.

When the General Nabuzaradan understood his resolution, he gave charge to the
Governor Godolias (whom he left in Judea) to have care of him, Jeremy set at
liberty by the Babylonian, and richly offered and presented.
and to furnish him with all that which he wanted, and after he had gratified
him with Presents he departed. In mean while, Jeremy dwelt in the City of
Masphath, he desired Nabuzaradan, that he would send him his Disciple Baruch
(the Son of Neria, a man of a Noble Family, and excellently Learned in that
Country Language,) Now when those, that during the Siege of Jerusalem, Ba^uch
dismissed out of prison. v. 6. ad finem. the Jews resort to Maspha^th to
Godolias.
were retired out of the City, understood the retreat of the Babylonians,
Masphath to Godolias, under the conduct of John the Son of Careas, and Jezanais
and Sareas, and others. And besides these a certain man called Ismael, of the
Blood Royal, a wicked and fraudulent man, who during the Siege of the City, had
retired himself to Bathal, King of the Ammonites, and had sojourned with him
during all the troubles. When they were come together, Godolias advised them to
remain in that Country, without any fear of the Babylonians, promising that in
manuring their Land, they should incurr no inconvenience. All which he
confirmed unto them by an Oath; adding further, that if any disturbance were
offered to any man, he would readily assist him. He gave each one this advice
likewise, to inhabit any City that they liked best: promising them to send them
thither, Judea, that Godolias had thus courteously entertained those that were
Fugitives, and now he had permitted them to Inhabit and Till the Country
(provided that they paid their Tribute to the Babylonian) diverse of them
repaired to him, and inhabited the Country. And John and the other Governors
being with him, and assured of his clemency, began entirely to love him.
Wherefore they told him, that Bathal King of the Ammonites, had sent Ismael to
murder him by Israelites that remained, in that he was of the Bloud-Royal;
persuading him, that the only means to escape this Treason, was, to permit them
to kill Ismael in secret: assuring him on the contrary, that they feared, that
if Ismael should happen to kill him, their whole Nation that remained, was like
to fall to utter ruin. But Godolias replied, that it was not probable that
Ismael, who had received nothing but kindness from his hands, should make any
attempt upon his life; and that having never been guilty of any unworthy action
in the time of his necessity, he should now make himself guilty of so great a
Villainy against his Benefactor, whom he ought, even with the hazard of his own
life, to secure from the attempts of others. Yea, said he, although those
things were true, which you inform me of, yet had I rather dye, than murder a
man that had committed his life to my trust. For which cause, John and the rest
(seeing their persuasions were in vain) departed from him. Some thirty days
after, Ismael (accompanied with ten Men) came to Masphath to Godolias, who
received them with Presents and magnificent Entertainment; so that to express
to Ismael and his companions, how heartily they were welcome, Godolias drunk so
hard, that he was somewhat overcame with Wine. Now when Ismael perceived him
overloaden with Drink and Sleep, he stepped unto him with his ten associates, and
cut both his throat, and theirs, who kept him company at the Banquet; after
which murder, he issued out by night, and slew all the Jews that were left in
the City, and those Babylonian Soldiers also that were left in Garrison in that
place. The next day there came Godolias with Presents, being utterly ignorant
of that which had happened. Ismael knowing them, called them unto him, as if he
intended to bring them to Godolias, and as soon as they were entered, he locked
the Court-Gates, and slew them, and afterward cast their bodies into a deep
Ditch, to the intent they might not be discovered. Of this number there were
some that escaped, who besought him that they might not be put to death, before
they had delivered certain Movables, Garments and Corn that they had hidden in
the field: which when Ismael understood, he spared them: but he kept them
prisoners that were in Masphath, with their Wives and Children, in the number
of whom were the Daughters of Zedechias, whom Nabuzaradan had left with
Godolias. This done, he retired back again to the Ammonites. John, and the
Governors of his company, hearing what was done by Ismael in Masphath, and
above all, of the murder of Godolias, they were wonderfully enraged. so that
each of them assembling his forces, issued forth to pursue Ismael, whom they
overtook near unto a Fountain in Hebron. The prisoners that were with Ismael,
seeing John and his Confederates, took courage, supposing that it was some
succors that came to help them, and forsook him that led them, and began to
join with John's followers: and thus fled Ismael with his eight Men, to the King
of the Ammonites, John gathering together all those whom he had rescued from
Ismaels hands, Ver. 12. ad ^inem.
both Eunuchs Women, and Children, retired into a certain place called Mendra,
where he sojourned all that day, John releaseth Ismaels Captives.
resolving from thence to depart into Egypt, fearing lest the Babylonians
should put him to death, if they should remain in Judea, for that they would be
displeased with the death of Godolias, whom they had placed in the Government.

In this perplexity and distress, John asks counsel of God, and being
informed* refuses the same.
they addressed themselves to the Prophet Jeremy, beseeching Jeremy should
command them. Hereupon the Prophet promised that he would ask Counsel of God
for them: and some ten days after God appeared unto him, and willed him to
certify John, the Governors, and the rest of the people, that if they inhabited
Judea, he would assist them, and take care of them, and secure them so, as the
Babylonians (whom they feared) should do them no harm: but if they departed
into Egypt, he would abandon them, and deliver them over to the like misery, as
their brethren had endured in times past. Whilst the Prophet thus warned them
from God, they would not believe him, in that he commanded them to remain in
that place, but they imagined, that under a false pretext of Baruch, persuading
them to stay there, to the end they might be consumed by the Babylonians:
Contemning therefore the counsel which God gave them by the Prophet; Jer. 42.
per totum.
both John and the rest of the multitude went into Egypt, and led with them
both Baruch and Jeremy. The Prophecy of the Babylonian Army, and the Jews
captivity.
Whither they were no sooner come, but God told the Prophet, that the
Babylonian should lead his Army into Egypt; for which cause he willed him to
foretell the people, that Egypt should be destroyed, and that they should
partly be slain in that place, and partly led captive to Babylon. Which came in
like manner to pass: for in the fifth year after the destruction of Jerusalem
(which was the three and twentieth year of the Reign of Nabuchodonosor)
Nabuchodonosor in his own person Coelosyria, and having conquered the same, he
made War upon the Ammonites and Moabites. And after he had brought these
Nations under his obeisance, he went and fought against the King of Egypt, and
overcame him: and after he had slain their King that governed at that time, and
planted another in his place, he afterward took the Jews that he found in that
Country, and carried them prisoners into Babylon. By this means we have
learned, that the estate of the Hebrews, has been translated twice to the
other side of Euphrates. For the people of the ten Tribes, during the Reign of
Oseas, were carried away captive by Salmanazar, King of the Assyrians, after he
had taken Samaria; and the two Tribes by Nabuchodonosor, King of the
Babylonians and Chaldees, upon the taking in of Jerusalem. True it is, that
Salmanazar, after he had displeased Israelites, planted the Chutheans in their
place, who before-time inhabited the innermost of the Countries of Persia and
Media, and were called Samaritanes, according to the name of the place which
they inhabited; but the Babylonian having led the two Tribes prisoners, has
not planted any other people in their places.

For this cause, Judea, Jerusalem, and the Temple, remained desert for the
space of seventy years: and all the time that passed between the captivity of
the Israelites, until the destruction of the two Tribes, was an hundred and
thirty years, six months and ten days; but Nabuchodonosor chose the noblest
young men amongst the Jews (and such as were allied to King Zedechias, and
esteemed likewise for the good disposition, and fair proportion of their Bodies
and Faces) and committed them to Masters to be instructed, Chaldee Tongue.
These were very apt to learn Wisdom: and for that cause he commanded that they
should be Trained up in the exercise thereof. Hedio and Ruffinus, Chap. 12.
Of these were four of Zedechias kindred, fair in Body, and virtuous in their
Nature, Dan. 1. v. 6. 17.
who were called Daniel, Ananias, Misael and Azarias; whose names the
Babylonians changed, and appointed that they should be called by other names,
distinct and different from their own: Daniels forwardness and his fellows
towardnes^ in studying Wisdom and good Letters.
Daniel was called Balthazar; Ananias, Sidrach; Misael, Misach; and Azarias,
Abednag^. These did the King esteem very highly for their Daniel and his
kinsman thought good to live austerely, and to ababstain from those Meats that
came from the Kings Table, The year of the World, 3^61. before Christ's
Nativity, 603.
and in general from all things Askenas the Eunuch (who had the care and charge
over them) beseeching him to convert those Meats to his own use, which were
sent from the Kings Table, and allow them Herbs and Dates, and such things as
had no life; because they intended to hold that course of life, and to forsake
all others. Askenas told them, that he was ready to condescend unto their
demands; but that he feared, lest being called for by the King, they should be
found to be lean in Body, and discolored in Face (for without doubt, following
that Diet, they must needs lose their Beauty and Complexion) which might bring
him in damage of his Head. They perceiving that Askenas intended naught else
but his security, persuaded him to allow them but ten days of approbation,
under condition, that if by that regiment of Diet, their habitude of body
Daniel and his companions made show, as if they had been nourished with
Dainties, and brought up in abundance. From that time forward, Askenas took all
that which was allowed the four young Men from the King Table, and kept it to
himself, giving them instead thereof, the Diet that they chose and delighted
in. They Hebrews and Chaldees: Daniel especially having profited in Wisdom,
studied the interpretation of Dreams, and God appeared unto him. Two years
after the Egyptian War, King Nabuchodonosor dreamed a wonderful dream, the
explication whereof, God gave unto him in his sleep, but he forgot the same
when he arose out of his Bed. Dan. 2. 1. ad 16
And for that cause sent he for his Chaldees and Divines, Nabuchodonosor
dreaming, forgets his Vision, sends for the Magicians not able to discover
his doubt, he threateneth them with death.
telling them that he had dreamed a dream, but that he had forgot the same,
commanding them to declare unto him what the dream was, and the signification
Nabuchodonosor threatened them with death, except they represented his dream
unto him; and they protesting that they could not fulfill his request, he
commanded them all to be slain. But Daniel hearing how the King had condemned
all the Sages to death, and knowing that both he and his companions were
concerned in that danger; addressed himself to Ariochus, the Captain of the
Kings Guard, requiring him to inform him, for what cause the King had adjudged
the Chaldees and Sages to be put to death: and having told what had happened,
as touching the dream, and how the King forgetting the Ariochus to go unto the
King, and to procure one nights reprieve on the behalf of the Egyptians and
Chaldees, in that he hoped during that night to beseech God, and entreat from
him both the Dream and the signification thereof. Hereupon Ariochus told the
King what Daniel had requested, and he thereupon respited the execution of the
Magicians for that night, until he might see what would become of Daniels
promise: who retiring himself with his companions into his chamber, besought
God all the night long to manifest unto him the dream, and deliver the
Magicians* and Chaldees from the Kings wrath, with whom, both he and the rest
of his companions were Daniels wisdom) signified unto him both the dream, and
the signification thereof, to the intent the King might be resolved of the
meaning thereof.

Daniel having received the truth from God, a v. 20. ad 24.
arose very joyfully, and certified his Brethren (who had already lost all hope
of life, The Vision and the Revelation thereof opened to Daniel.
and thought on nothing but death) and gave them courage and hope. Having
therefore rendered thanks unto God, for that he had had compassion of their
younger years, as soon as it was day, he went unto Ariochus, requesting him
that he might be brought to the Kings presence, assuring him, that he would
open unto him the dream which he had seen the night past. Now when Daniel was
brought unto the Kings Presence, he besought him that he would not esteem him
to Chaldeans and Magicians, The year of the World, 3363* before Christ's
Nativity, 601.
in that, whereas none of them could expound his Dream, he did attempt to
express the same: for that came not to pass, by reason of his experience, or
for that he was more industrious than they were; but (said he) God has had
compassion on us that were in danger of death; and at such time as I requested
him to grant me, and my Contrymen life, he has certified me both of your
Dream, and the signification thereof. I was not so much aggrieved, for that in
our innocence we were adjudged to death by thee, as concerned for thy
reputation and renown, which was hazarded by condemning so many, and so
innocent, and just men to death: whereas that which you have required of them,
a v. 26 ad finem.
savoureth nothing of humane wit, but is the only work of God: Whilst
therefore thou thoughtst in thy self, Daniel tells the King his Dream, and
the interpretation thereof.
who it was that should command the whole world after thy Nebuchodonosors Dream
of the four Monarchs of the world.
and the Legs and Feet of Iron. Thou beheldest after that, a great Stone (that
was drawn from a Mountain) that fell upon the Statue, and beat down and burst
the same, and left no whole piece thereof; so that the Gold, Silver, Iron and
Brass, were powdered as small as dust: whereupon a violent wind seemed to blow,
which by the fury and force thereof, was born away and scattered into diverse
Countries: on the other side the stone grew so mighty, that it seemed to fill
the whole Earth, This was that Vision that appeared unto you; the signification
whereof is expressed after this manner. The Head Babylon that have been before
you.) The two Hands and Shoulders signify, that your Empire shall be restored
by two Kings, the one part by the King of the East, clothed in Brass, whose
force shall be abated by another power resembling that of iron, and he shall
have the power over the whole Earth, by reason of the nature of Into, a v. 46
ad finem.
which is more strong than Gold, Silver, or Brass; he told the King also what
the Stone signified. But for mine own part, I thought it not expedient to
express in this place: Daniel and his fellows advanced to honor.
because the only design, and intent of my Writings, is to register such things
as are past, and not such matters as are to come. But if any man be so curious
as to enquire into these things; and to understand such matters as are hidden,
let him read the Book of Daniel, which he shall find amidst the Sacred
Scriptures. When King Nabuchodonosor had heard those things, and remembered
himself of his Dream, he was astonished at Daniels wisdom, and casting himself
prostrate on the Earth, after the manner of those that adore God, he embraced
Daniel, giving direction that sacrifice should be offered unto him, as if he
were God. Moreover, he called him by the name of God, and committed the
administration of his whole Kingdom, to him and his companions, who, by reason
of the conspiracies of their malignours and detractours, The Kings Edict for
honoring the Golden Statue.
happened to fall into most imminent and dreadful danger, upon the occasion
that ensues. The King built a Golden Image, sixty Cubits high, and six in
bigness, and erected it in a great Plain, near unto Babylon: and being ready to
dedicate the same, he assembled all the Governors and Princes of his
Countries, commanding them first of all, Dan. 3. 1. ad 9.
that as soon as they should hear the Trumpet sound, they should prostrate
themselves on the Earth to adore the Statue; threatening that whosoever should
do the contrary, a v. 19 ad finem.
he should be cast into a burning Furnace: whereas therefore all of them adored
the Statue upon the sound of the Trumpet; Daniel and his companions utterly
refused to perform that duty; Daniel and his kinsmen refusing to adore the
Statue, are cast into the Furnace.
alleging for their justification, that they would not transgress the Laws of
their Country: for which cause, being apprehended, they were instantly cast
into the Furnace of Fire, (and protected therein by Gods providence) escaped
death beyond all men's expectation. For the fire touched them not, neither could
it burn, during their abode in the Furnace. For God so defended their Bodies,
that they could not be consumed by fire; which miracle made them in great
estimation with the King, for that he saw that they were virtuous, and beloved
of God: and for that cause they were highly honored by him. Not long after
this, the King saw another Vision in his sleep, which signified unto him, that
being cast from his Empire, he should converse with Savage Beasts, and that
having lived in that estate in the Desert, for the space of seven years, he
should recover his Kingdom again. Having had this Dream, he assembled the
Magicians once more, demanding their answer, and the signification thereof. But
it was impossible for any one of them, either to find out, or declarethe
meaning of this Dream unto the King: Only Daniel discovered the same, and the
effect was answerable to his prediction. For the King passed the fore-limited
time in the Desert, Dan. 4. 1. ad 29.
so that no man durst intermeddle with the affairs of Estate during seven
years. The Dream and exposition hereof.
But after he had called upon God, that it would please him to restore him to
his Kingdom, he repossessed the same again. Let no man in this place accuse me
for reporting these particularities, according as I have found them written in
Holy Books: The year of the World, 3381. before Christ's Nativity, 5^3.
for in the entrance of my History, I have answered those objections: so that I
have openly protested, that I will only faithfully translate the Hebrew
Histories into the Greek tongue: and according to my promise, relate that which
is contained therein, without adding any thing of mine own, or concealing ought
of another man's. Nabuchodonosors death.
After that Nabuchodonosor had reigned forty three years, he dyed: he was a
man of good Conduct, and more happy than any of his Predecessors. Berosus
makes mention of his acts, in the third Book of the Chaldaique History, where
he speaks thus. His Father Nabuchodonosor, having notice that the Governor
whom he had appointed over Egypt, and the neighboring parts of Coelosyria and
Phoenicia, was revolted from him (being at that time in himself unable to
endure the troubles of War) committed apart of his Forces unto his Son
Nabuchodonosor, who was in the flower of his age, Berosus of Nabuchodonosor.
Hedio and Ruffinus chap 13.
who encountering the Rebels, and fighting with them, overcame them, and brought
the Country under his subjection. Mean while, Nabuchodonosor the Father died
of a sickness in Babylon, after he had Reigned One and twenty years.
Nabuchodonosor the Son, having notice of his Fathers death, gave order to the
affairs of Egypt, and the rest of the Country: and committing the care and
transportation of the Jews, Syrians, Egyptians, and Phoenicians to his friends,
to bring them to Babylon with his Army and Carriage, he with a few Men, made
hasty journeys through the Desert. And when he had taken the administration of
the Kingdom upon him (which in his absence, was in the hands of the Chaldees,
and by their Chieftain was reserved until his return, unto his use) he became
Lord of all his Fathers Empire. When his prisoners were arrived, he assigned
them convenient Babylon; and with the spoils of War, he magnificently repaired
and decked the Temple of Bell, and other places. He enlarged the old City, and
repaired and beautified it with other buildings; by means whereof, they that
would besiege the same, were hindered from cutting off the current of the River,
to the prejudice of the Inhabitants. He environed it within with a treble Wall,
and outwardly with as mighty and as many enclosures, and made all of burnt
Brick. The Walls were magnificently builded, and the Gates bravely adorned in
manner of Temples. He caused a Palace to be builded near unto his Fathers
ancient Palace: the magnificence and ornaments whereof, I am not able to
express; only this thing most memorable, I have thought good to note, that
these great and pompous Buildings were finished in fifteen days. In this Palace
he had Vaults Media) desired at Babylon, Megasthenes of Nabuchodonosor.
to see some resemblance of her own Country. Megasthenes, in the fourth Book
of his Indian History, makes mention of this Garden in that place, where he
enforced himself to prove, Diocles.
that this King surpassed Hercules in valor and execution of worthy actions.
Philostratus.
For he said, that Nabuchodonosor overcame the chief City of Lybia, and a great
part of Spain. Diocles in the Second Book of the Persian History, and
Philostratus in his Phoenician and Indian History, make mention of this King,
saying, that he overcame the City of Tire, at the end of thirteen years, at
such time as Ithobal Tyrians. This is the sum of all that which the
Historiographers write, as touching this King.

CHAP. XI.
Nabuchodonosors Successors: the destruction of Babylon by Cyrus, King of
Persia.
AFter Nabuchodonosors death, Evilmerodach releaseth Jechonias from his long
imprisonment
his Son Evilmerodach obtained the Kingdom, who incontinently delivered
Jechonias King of Jerusalem out of prison, and held him in the number of his
most esteemed friends, and gave him Presents, and committed Babylon into his
hands. For his Father had not kept his promise with Jechonias, 2 King 25. 27.
when he surrendered himself, his Wife, Children, and Friends into his hands,
Jer. 52. 31. ad finem.
in the behalf of his Country, and to the intent that the City of Jerusalem
should not be razed by those that besieged it, Niglisar.
as we have heretofore declared. Labophordach.
Evilmerodach died in the eighteenth year of his Reign, Balthazar, or
Naboandel, King of Babylon.
and Niglisar his Son obtained the Kingdom, which he possessed forty years,
and afterward died. After him the succession of the Kingdom came unto his Son,
called Labophordach, which continued in him but for the space of nine months,
and after his death it came unto Balthazar, who by the Babylonian was called
Naboandel. Against whom Cyrus, King of Persia, and Darius King of Media made
War; at such time as he was besieged in Babylon, there happened

Balthazar sat upon a certain Festival day in a Royal Chamber, The year of the
World, 3421. before Christ's Nativity, 543.
where he was served with great store of Vessels fit for his Majesty; and with
him at the Banquet there sat his Concubines, and most intimate friends. At
which time (to show his Magnificence) he caused those Vessels to be brought out
of the Temple of his God, which Nabuchodonosor his predecessor (fearing to
employ to his own use) had stored up in his Idols Temple. Dan. 5. 5, 6, 7, ad
30.
But Balthazar was so puffed with pride, Ba^thasar sees a hand thrust out of a
Wall, and writing certain Sy^lables.
that he drank out of them, and employed them to his own use. Now came it to
pass, that whilst he quaffed, and blasphemed the Name of God, he saw a hand
issuing from a Wall, which wrote on the same certain words: by which Vision
being somewhat terrified, he assembled his Magicians and Chaldees, and all that
sort of people (who amongst those barbarous Nations made profession to
interpret Chaldees wore) and besides all this, the third part of his Empire.
After this Proclamation the Magicians assembled tegether with a great
concourse, and were far more diligent and inquisitive to find out the
signification of the Writing: but they advanced nothing more than at the first.
Mean while, the Kings Grandmother seeing him wholly dejected in mind, began to
comfort Juda, led thither at such time as Nabuchodonosor destroyed Jerusalem,
whose name was Daniel, a man wise and expert in searching out of things that
were only known unto God, who evidently expounded that which Nabuchodonosor
required, at such time as no other man could satisfy his demand. Whereupon the
King called him unto his Presence, and telling him what proofs he had heard of
his Wisdom, and of that Divine Spirit that was in him, and how he only was fit
to interpret those things which were concealed from other men's knowledge; he
prayed him to inform him what that handwriting signified, promising him in
reward thereof, a Purple Garment, a Golden Chain, and the third part of his
Empire: to the end, that being honored with these rewards for his wisdom,
Daniel (refusing all these Presents of his, in that the wisdom that is given
from above, is not corrupted thereby, but is freely imparted to those that have
need thereof) told him that that Writing did foretell the end of his life,
because he had not learned to fear God, neither to lift up his thoughts higher
than humane nature, notwithstanding he had seen the chastisement wherewith his
predecessor had been punished, for the outrages he committed against God. For
that Nabuchodonosor having been driven to lead his life amongst Beasts, by
reason of his Impieties, after diverse requests and supplications, had obtained
mercy, and was returned unto humane conversation, and into his own Kingdom, for
which cause all the time of Mane (which is as much to say, as number) shows
that God has numbered the days of thy Life and Reign, which shall endure but a
little while; Thekel signifies a balance; God therefore (said he) weighing the
government, shows that it shall be overthrown: Phares, this word signifies a
fragment, God shall break thy Kingdom, and divide it among the Medes and
Persians. When the King had heard this interpretation, he was very sorrowful
(according v. 2. ad 29.
considering with himself, Daniel interprets the Writing to the King.
that it was his own destiny that he ought to accuse, and not Daniel, who like
an honest man had declared the Truth, notwithstanding it were very unwelcome to
his ear. Not long after this, Balthazar and the City were overthrown and taken
by Cyrus King of Persia and his Army; The King performed his promises to Daniel.
For this was that Balthazar, under whom, and in the seventeenth year of whose
Reign, the surprisal of Babylon hapened. This as far as I could gather, was the
end of King Nebuchodonosors posterity. v. 31.


Darius, Babylon surprised by Cyrus, King of Persia.
who (with his ally Cyrus) had destroyed the state of the Babylonians, was
threescore and two years old at such a time as he took Babylon. He was Astyages
Son, and is otherways called by the Greeks. He took the Prophet Daniel, and led
him with him into Media, The year of the World, 3425. before Christ's Nativity,
539.
and kept him near unto him, doing him much honor, for he was of the number
Darius commanded it. Now Daniel being thus honored and beloved by Darius, and
trusted by him in all things, for that God was with him, was much hated; as
they usually are, The force of envy.
who have the greatest interest in Princes favors. Whereas therefore they that
were jealous of the good esteem which he had with Darius, sough^ occasion to
calumniate and backbite him, Daniels honor and uprightness.
he warily cut off all opportunity thereof; for he would neither be bribed with
Silver, nor corrupted with Presents, supposing it to be an act of much
dishonesty to receive gifts after a man had done any courtesies. Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 14.
He therefore gave his maligners no manner of ground to detract from his
reputation. But they still persisted in their malice, Dan. 6. a v. 4. ad 15.
and all other attempts failing, they thought upon one at last, by Daniel did
thrice every day make his Prayers unto God, they supposed that they had found a
just pretext to work his ruin. Whereupon they came unto Darius, certifying
him, that the Princes and Governors had concluded together, to this effect:
that for 30 days space, an intermission should be granted to the people; during
which time, it was neither lawful for them to demand any thing, neither of
himself, or of any man or God whatsoever; and if any man should attempt any
thing against this common decree, it was ordered, that he should be cast into
the Lions Den. But the King not perceiving the drift of their malice, nor how
they sought by this device to entrap Daniel, told them, that he liked of the
decree, and promised to confirm the same, and made a public Edict, wherein the
Princes Daniel set light thereby, and according to his accustomed manner,
standing in all men's sight, he worshipped his God, and prayed unto him.
Whereupon the Princes (having got that occasion which they long expected) came
readily unto the King, and accused Daniel, for that he only amongst the rest,
had presumed to infringe their Decree: urging moreover, that he did it not for
his Religion sake, but in contempt of the Kings Edict. And because they feared,
lest Darius, by reason of the great affection he bare unto Daniel, should be
ready to pardon him (notwithstanding he had transgressed their Edict) they
pressed him earnestly to inflict the punishment which was threatened by the
Law, and to cast him into the Lions Den, according to the Darius hoping that
God would deliver Daniel, and that no harm should befall him by the jaws of
wild Beasts, v. 16.
exhorted him patiently to endure that Trial. Daniel cast into the Lions Den.
Now as soon as he was cast into the Den, the King sealed up the Stone that
closed the mouth thereof, and departed, spending all that night without repast
or repose, so much was he concerned in Daniels behalf. And when the day was
come, as soon as he arose, he came unto the Den, and finding the Seal unbroken,
wherewith he had marked the Stone, he opened the same, and called unto Daniel
with a loud voice, asking him if he were in safety? He hearing the King speak,
answered, that he had received no hurt. Whereupon Darius commanded that they
should draw him out of the Lions Den. His adversaries perceiving that Daniel
had escaped without harm (because that God had taken Daniel, because they had
been fed and gorged before. For which cause the King displeased with their
injurious malice, commanded a quantity of flesh to be cast unto the Lions; and
when they were glutted, he commanded that Daniels enemies should be cast among
them, Daniels enemies rent in pieces by the Lions.
to the intent he might know, whether the Lions would touch them or no, when
they were gorged. At which time Darius saw very manifestly, v. 24. ad finem.
that God had by his power protected Daniel from death. For as soon as the
Nobles were cast into the Den, the Lions spared not one of them, but tore them
all in pieces, as if they had been hungry and without meat. I suppose that
these Lions having been a little before glutted with meat, did not slay these
men to satisfy their hunger, but I rather judge that their crimes provoked the
rage and fury of the Beasts: for when God pleases, he makes even unreasonable
creatures to execute his vengeance against wicked men. Daniels adversaries
being thus destroyed, Darius gave notice hereof to all the Subjects of his
Provinces, praising that God whom Daniel had adored; saying that he was the
only true God, who had all power: he honored Daniel likewise with especial
regard, esteeming him amongst the chiefest of his Familiars. He therefore being
thus renowned (because he was beloved by God) built in Ecbatane in the Country
of the Medes a magnificent Castle, and a mavelous Monument, that remains
even unto this day, which seems to those that look thereon, that it is but
newly built, and made but that very day which they behold the same; the Beauty
Media, and Parthia, are entombed in this Castle, and the charge thereof is
committed to a Priest, who is a Jew: and this custom continues even until
this day. Neither is that to be buried in silence, which is worthy especial
admiration in this man: For all felicity that could be expected by a famous
Prophet, attended him; and during his whole lifetime, Daniels Prophecies.
he was both most highly honored by Kings, and reverenced by the common sort:
and after his death, his memory is immortal. For all the Books which he left in
writing, are read amongst us even at this present; and we have been persuaded
by the reading thereof, that Daniel had conference with God. For he has not
only Prophesied of things to come (as other Prophets have done) but also has
determined the time wherein those things should happen. And whereas other
Prophets, were Daniel foretold them always good successes; so that he has
drawn unto him the good will of all men, by reason of those pleasing
Predictions that he pronounced; and by the issues thereof, he has obtained a
testimony of Truth, and a reputation, to have had in time, a Spirit that was
truly Divine and has left us certain Writings, by which he has manifestly
declared the immutability and exact certainty of his Prophecies.

It is said, that being at Susa, the Metropolitan City of Persia, at such time
as he walked abroad, attended by his Familiars, that there happened an
Earthquake, with a great noise: so that he was left alone, and all his
companions fled from him. And that Dan. 7. 3. ad 27.
Being therefore raised upright, there was a great Ram showed unto him, Daniels
Vision of the Ram and Goat* by whom the Kings of Media and Persia were
prefigured.
that had diverse Horns, the last whereof was the greatest of all. Afterward he
looked toward the West, and perceived a Goat carried through the Air, that
butted at the Ram, and having encountered him twice, had beaten and trampled him
under his Feet. Thirdly, he saw a Goat, in whose forehead there grew one great
Horn only: which being broken, four others brake out instead thereof, bending
each of them toward the four Winds of the World. He has written also, that
from them, there shall arise another little one also, which as God

Daniel writes that he saw these things in the field of Susa, and has
declared that God himself told him what that Vision signified; which was, that
the Ram signified the Kingdoms of the Persians, and the Medes: His Horns
signified the Kings that were to Reign in those Kingdoms; and that the last
Horn signified the last King, who should surpass all the rest in Riches and
Glory. That the Goat signified, that there should come a certain King among the
Greeks, who should fight at two several times with the Persian, Hebrew Nation,
and their Laws, and should overthrow their policy, spoil their Temple, and be a
let that for three years space, the Sacrifices should not be solemnized. Now
so has it Antiochus the famous, as Daniel had foreseen, and has written
diverse years before, all that which should happen.

At the same time Daniel wrote concerning the Empire of the Romans, Daniels
Predictions of the Roman Empire.
how it should destroy our Nation: and has left all these things in writing,
according as God declared them unto him; so that they who read and consider
those things that have happened, Dan. 9. per totum:
admire Daniel for the Honor God dignified him with, and find thereby, that
the Epicureans are mistaken, who exclude all Divine Providence from
intermedling with the concerns of humane life, and affirm, that God Governs
not the affairs of the World; or that the World is ruled by a happy and
incorruptible Essence, which causes all things to continue in their Being: but
say, that the world is managed by The Epicures error convicted.
and that it were destitute of a Sovereign Governor (as we see Ships destitute
of their Pilots to be drowned by the Winds; and Chariots that have no Drivers
to conduct them, The year of the World, 3416. before Christ's Nativity, 538.
to beat one against another) even so should it perish, and ruinate Daniel has
foretold, I judge, that they are far estranged from the Truth* that affirm,
that God has no care of humane affairs; for if we see that all things happen
casual, then happen they not according to his Prophecy. The Epicures error
convicted.
But I have written hereof, according as I have found and read: and if any one
will think otherwise, let him continue his opinion as long as he pleases.

The Eleventh Book of the Antiquities of the JEWS;
Written by FLAVIVS JOSEPHVS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Eleventh Book.
1. Cyrus, King of Persia, dismisseth the Jews from Babylon, and permits
them to return into their Country, and contributeth toward the reparation of
the Temple. 2. The Kings Governors hinder the building of the Temple. 3.
Cambyses commands the Jews that they should not build the Temple. 4. Darius,
Hystaspis Son, builds a Temple for the Jews. 5. The bounty of Xerxes (Darius
Son) toward the Hebrew Nation. 6. How during Artaxerxes Reign, the whole Nation
of the Jews were almost extinguished through Amans treachery. 7. Bagoses,
General of Artaxerxes the younger's Army, does much injury to the Jews. 8. How
bountiful Alexander of Macedon was unto the Jews.


CHAP. I.
Cyrus, King of Persia, dismisseth the Jews from Babylon, and permits them
to return into their Country, and contributeth toward the building of the
Temple.
THE first year of the Reign of Cyrus (which was the 70 after that our Nation
was translated from Judea to Babylon) God had compassion on the captivity and
calamity of his afflicted People: The end of the Babylonian captivity, after 70
years.
and accomplished that which he had foretold by the Prophet Jeremy, Ezra 1. per
totum.
before the destruction of the City, The Edict of Cyrus, King of Persia.
viz. That after they had served Nabuchodonosor and his posterity

For he awakened the Spirit of Cyrus, and put it into his heart to write
Letters throughout all Asia, to this effect: Thus says King Cyrus, since
Almighty God has made me King of the whole world, I am persuaded that it is he
whom the Jewish Nation do adore: for he has declared my name by his Prophets,
before I was born, and has said, that I should build his Temple in Jerusalem,
which is in the Country of Judea. Now Cyrus knew these things by Reading of a
Book of Prophecies, Esaias. Chap. 44. Ver. 5. ad 10.
written by Esaias, two hundred and ten years before his time. For (he says)
that God did secretly reveal these things unto him, Chap. 45. Ver. 1. ad 8.
speaking to this effect; I will that Cyrus, whom I have declared King over
many Nations, shall send my people back into their Country of Judea, and shall
build my Temple. Prophecy of Cyrus.
These things did Esaias foretell one hundred and forty years before the ruin of
the Temple. Cyrus in reading these things (being ravished in admiration of the
Majesty of God) was carried on with a great affection and zeal, to finish that
which was written. He therefore called for all the Men of greatest account
among the Jews that were in Babylon, and told them that he gave them License to
return into their Country, Ver. 3.
and to repair the City of Jerusalem, Cyrus permits the Jews to return into
their Country to build their Temple and City.
and to rebuild the Temple of God; promising them that he himself would assist
them. And to that effect he wrote unto his Governnours, and Princes of those
Countries that confined upon Judea: charging them to contribute both Gold and
Silver toward the building of the Temple, and to furnish them with Cattle for
the Sacrifices. After that Cyrus had certified the Israelites of this his
intent, the Princes of the two Tribes of Juda and Benjamin, with all the
Levites and departed thence, and repaired to Jerusalem: Nevertheless, diverse of
the Jews remained in Babylon, because they were loath to abandon those
Possessions they had gotten. Those unto whom Cyrus had directed his Letters,
afforded them their assistance, and furnished them with all things necessary to
build the Temple, some of them with Gold, V. 7. 8.
others with Silver, and the rest with a certain number of Oxen and Horses.
Thus paid they their Vows unto God, The Vessels belonging to the Temple sent
back from Babylon to Jerusalem.
and offered Sacrifices according to the ancient custom, as if they had but now
first begun to build the City, and this were the third time of practicing those
Ceremonies, which our Fathers had observed. Cyrus sent them back also those
Vessels, which were consecrated to God, (which King Nabuchodonosor had sent
unto Babylon, after he had spoiled the Temple) and delivered them to
Mithridates his Treasurer, commanding him to commit them to Abassars hands, who
should have the custody thereof, until the Temple were built, to the end, that
a such time as it should be complete, he might deliver them to the Priests and
Princes of the people, to be restored again to the service of the Temple. He
sent Letters also to the Governors of Syria to this effect: V. 9. 10.
Cyrus the King to Sisine, and Sarabasme, health. I have permitted those Jews
that inhabit my Country, Cyrus's Mandate to the Princes of Syria.
to return into their native Country, and to reedify their City, and erect the
Temple of God in Jerusalem, in the same place where it stood before. I have
also sent my Treasurer Mithridates and Zerobabel* the Prince of the Jews, with
express charge and authority, to lay the foundation of the same, and to build
it sixty Cubit sin height, and as many in breadth; making three Isles of hewn
stone, and another of such Timber as the Nabuchodonosor took out of the Temple,
and have delivered them to the Treasurer Mithridates, and to Zerobabel the
Prince of the Jews, to be conveyed to Jerus^lem, and restored to the Temple
of God: the number whereof, I have hereunder subscribed. Fifty Lavers of Gold,
and four hundred of Silver; Fifty pots of Gold, and four hundred of Silver;
Fifty golden Sieves, and five hundred of Silver; Thirty Ewers of Gold, and
three hundred of Silver; Thirty great Viols of Gold, and two thousand four
hundred of Silver; and besides all these, One thousand other great Vessels. We
grant also unto the Jews, the same Revenues which their Predecessors have
enjoyed; and we do allow them 205200 Darchmes, for the purchasing C. 2. v. 1,
2. a^ finem.
Wine and Oil; and we give them 2500 measures of Wheat, to make fine Flower,
which we appoint to be taken out of the Country of Samaria; and the Priests
shall offer up these Sacrifices in Jerusalem, The number of the Jews that
returned from the captivity of Babylon to Jerusalem.
according to the ordinance of Moses: and during their Sacrifice, they shall
make Prayers unto God, for the preservation of the King, and his House, to the
end, that the Empire of the Persians may be still permanent. And my Will is,
that they that disobey and oppose these Commands, shall be hanged on a Gibbet;
and that their Goods shall be confiscate. These were the Contents of his
Letters. Now the number of those that returned from the captivity into
Jerusalem, was Forty two thousand, four hundred sixty two,


The Jews begin to build the Temple at Jerusalem; but after the death of Cyrus,
the Samaritans, and other neighboring Nations writ to King Cambyses, his Son,
to cause him to put a stop to the Work.
Whilst according to the King's Order, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 2.
the Jews laid the foundation of the Temple, and were very busy about the
building thereof; Esd. 4. 2. ad 11.
the Nations that bordered upon them, and especially the Chutheans, (whom
Salmanazar, King of Assyria, sent from Persia and Media, The Samaritans inhibit
the Jews from building the Temple.
to inhabit in Samaria, at such time as he carried away the Jews from repairing
their City, and re-edifying the Temple. These Men, corrupted with Silver, sold
their negligence and delay to the Chutheans, Alias C. 3. v. 11. ad. 17.
which they used in those Buildings. For Cyrus intending his other Wars, was
ignorant hereof, and having conducted his Army against the Massagetes, The
Letters of the Samaritans and others, written to Cambyses, as touching the
re-edifying of the City, and Temple of ^^rusalem.
he ended his days in that expedition. When as therefore Combyses his Son, had
obtained the Kingdom, they of Syria and Phoenicia, the Ammonites, Moabites, and
Samaritans, wrote their Letters to Cambyses in these terms:

O King, thy Servants, Rathymus the Chancellor, Semelius the Scribe, and those
Men that are Counselors in Syria and Phoenicia, have thought themselves
obliged to advertise thee, that those Jews that were led Captive into Babylon,
are returned back into this Country, and are Tributaries, The year of the
World, 3435. before Christ's Nativity, 529.
but will oppose themselves against their Kings, holding it more fit to
command, Jews have been Rebels, and enemies to their Kings; and that the City
has been for this cause laid desolate unto this present. We have thought good
to signify thus much to your Majesty, which perhaps is unknown unto you,
because, that if this City be once more re-inhabited and enclosed with a Wall,
they will thereby obstruct your passage into Coelosyria and Phoenicia.

CHAP. III.
Cambyses forbids the Jews to proceed in re-building the Temple
WHen Cambyses had read this Letter (being by nature, V. 17. ad 22.
wicked and malicious) he grew jealous and displeased at the Contents thereof,
Cambyses answer, wherein he inhibiteth the Jews from building the City or
Temple.
and wrote back again after this manner: The King Cambyses to Rathymus the
Chancellor, and to Belsen and Semelius, Scribes, and to all his other
Counselors and Inhabitants of Samaria and Phoenicia Health. Having read your
Letters, I have commanded the Records of mine Ancestors to be examined, and I
find that the City of Jerusalem has been always an enemy to their Kings, and
that the inhabitants thereof have always raised Sedition and Wars. I have
likewise found, that their Kings have been mighty, and that they have exacted
from Syria and Phoenicia continual Tributes. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 9. alias
cap. 4.
For this cause I have ordained, that the Jews shall not be permitted to
re-edify their City, for fear, lest the boldness of that people being thereby
encouraged, they should, according to their former custom, Darius the Son of
Hystaspis made Emperor of the Persians.
practice a new Rebellion. After the receipt of these Letters, Rathymus and the
Scribe Sem^lius, and those of their faction, took horse, and rode speedily to
Jerusalem* leading with them a great number of People, and prohibiting the Jews
from the building their City or Temple. Thus was this work interrupted, until
the second year of the Reign of Darius, Ezra 5. v. 6. ad finem.
King of Persia, for the space of nine years. For Cambyses reigned six years,
during which time he subdued Egypt, and upon his re-return from thence, he dyed
in Damascus. And after the death of Cambyses, the Magi that held the Empire of
the Persians, for the space of one year, being taken away, the Persia, made
Darius (the Son of Hystaspis) King.

CHAP. IV.
Darius gives leave to Zerobabel a Prince of the Jews, to re-build the Temple,
a great number return to Jerusalem under his conduct, and apply themselves to
the work; The Samaritans and others write to Darius to forbid them, but he acts
contrary to their desires.
Darius, Darius voweth to send the sacred Vessels to Jerusalem.
during the time that he lived a private life, made a vow unto God, that if he
obtained the Kingdom, he would send back unto the Temple of Jerusalem, all
those Vessels which were as yet remaining in Babylon. It fell out that about
the same time that he was made King, Zerobabel.
Zerobabel, who was appointed Governor over the Captive Jews, came unto him
from Jerusalem. And being the Kings ancient friend: he, with two others, had
three of the Principal Offices of the King's House conferred upon them, and
were placed the nearest about his person. The first year of the Reign of
Darius, he entertained all his Courtiers with great pomp and magnificence, both
those of his Household, and those also that were his Governors and Princes of
Media and Persia, and the Commanders in India, confining upon Ethiopia, with
all the Chieftains Darius propounds three questions to three of his Guard.
but King Darius being laid in his Bed* reposed very little all the night long,
but passed the time without sleep: Whereupon, seeing he could not compose
himself to rest, he began to discourse with these three great Officers,
promising unto him that should most truly and aptly answer those questions that
he should demand, to grant him license, by way of reward, to wear a Purple
Garment, and to drink in a Golden Cup, to lie on a Golden Bed, and to ride in a
Chariot, whose Horses should be harnassed with Gold and to wear the Tiara or
linen Wreath, and a Golden Chain about his neck, and sit in the next place to
the King; and should likewise Whether the King were stronger? The year of the
World, 3443, before Christ's Nativity, 521.
of the third, Whether Women, or Truth, were the strongest of the three? As
soon as he had delivered them these questions to deliberate upon, he laid him
down to rest. Upon the morrow he sent for the Princes, Chieftains, and
Governors of Persia and Media, and afterward sitting aloft in that Throne from
whence he was accustomed to determine controversies between his subjects, he
commanded those three young men, in the presence of that Princely Assembly,
publicly to resolve those questions which he had proposed.

Whereupon the first of them began after this manner to express the force of
Wine: The first expresses the power of wine.
Noble Princes, when I consider the force of Wine, I find nothing that can
surpass it: for Wine disturbeth the judgment, and makes the Princes
understanding like to that of a Child, who has

When the first of them had spoken thus in favor of Wine, The second extolleth
the Kings power.
he that had undertaken to show, that nothing was equal to the power of Kings,
began after this manner: Kings (says he) have dominion over men, Esdr. 3, 4.
who govern the earth, and at their pleasure can command the Sea to serve them:
Kings have power and dominion over those men who master and command the most
untamed and mightiest creatures; it therefore appears that their force and
puissance exceeds that of all these. If they command their subjects to wage
War, and to expose themselves to danger, they are obedient; and if they send
them out against their enemies, they willingly obey them, by reason of their
force: By their command they level Mountains, beat down Walls, and raze Towers.
And if they command their subjects to kill or be killed, they resist not, for
fear lest they should seem to transgress the Kings commandment. When they have
obtained the victory, all the glory and profit of the War redoundeth unto the
King. They likewise

After he had spoken to this effect, Zorobabel, the third, expresses the power
of women, and at length attributes the palm unto truth.
Zorobabel, who was the third, began to speak of the power of Women and Truth,
after this manner: True it is, that Wine has much force, and no less true,
that all men obey the King; yet far more mighty is the power of a Woman. For by
a Woman the King was bred, and brought into this world; and those men that
plant the Vineyards where Wines do grow, are born and nourished by Women; and
generally there is not any thing which we enjoy not by their means. For they
weave us garments; they have the care and custody of our houses; neither is it
possible for us to be severed from Women. Yea, they that possess much gold, and
abundance of silver, and other things of great and inestimable price, only upon
the sight of a fair Woman, forsake all these things, and will follow after the
beauty which they beheld, and for the possession thereof, content themselves to
lose all things. We forsake likewise our Father and Mother, and the Country
that has bred us, and forget our Friends Apame the daughter of Rhapsaces his
Concubine, and patiently suffer her to take the Diadem from his head, and set
it on her own. When she laughed, he laughed; and when she was displeased, he
was displeased: and according as her passion changed, so he complied, and
humbly submitted his affection to her pleasures, according as he saw her
passionate or pleased.

But whilst the Princes, in way of admiration, beheld one another, he began to
discourse of Truth, saying: I have already declared what the force of Women is;
yet notwithstanding both the King and they are more feeble than Truth. For
whereas the earth is huge and vast, the heaven likewise of an immeasurable
height, and the sun of unspeakable celerity; and whereas the Will of God both
governs and moves these things (because God is just and Zorobabel obtained
both praise and great rewards, by his good discourse.
fortune, or alteration, but continue equal, and separated from all stain of
injustice. When Zorobabel had spoken after this manner, he made an end of his
discourse: whereupon, all the Assembly began to pronounce that his Assertions
were of most value, and that only Verity had an immutable force, and an
undeterminable continuance. Whereupon the King commanded him to ask what he
would, Ezra 6. 1. ad 15.
as touching that which he had promised to give, because he intended to grant
it him, as to the wisest, and best learned amongst the (said he) thou shall sit
henceforth next unto me, and shall be called my friend.

When the King had spoken thus, Zorobabel called to remembrance the vow that
the King had made, Darius being put in memory of his vow, commands that the
Temple should be restored.
if so be at any time he obtained the Kingdom: namely, That he would build
Jerusalem, and the Temple of God, and restore those vessels likewise, which
were taken away by Nabuchodonosor, and carried into Babylon. For this (said he)
O King, is my request, which you permitted me to ask, and you promised me to
grant, at that time when I was judged wise and well-learned by you. The King
was well-pleased at his words, and rising from his Throne, Hedio and Ruffinus,
cap. 4.
he kissed him. He wrote also to his Governors and Princes, that they should
send away Zorobabel, and those of his company, to build the Temple. Moreover,
he sent Letters to them of Syria and Phoenicia, commanding them to cut down the
Cedars Libanus, and to send them to Jerusalem, toward the building of the
City; publishing a Law, that all Jews should be made free, if they would resort
unto Judea; forbidding all Commissaries and Princes, to impose any charge upon
the Jews, for the necessities of the Kingdom; and commanding that all the
Country which they should inhabit, Darius Letters for the liberty, possession
and erection of the Temple, granted to the Jews.
should be exempt from Tribute: appointing the Idumaeans, Samaritans, and
Coelosyrians, to restore those lands unto the Jews which they unlawfully
withheld, which their Ancestors had heretofore possessed. And besides that, to
deliver them by way of contribution 50 Talents of silver toward the building
of the Temple, permitting them to offer their ordinary Sacrifices. 1 Esd. 6. v.
7, 8, ad 16.
He likewise commanded, that all the Necessaries and Vestments which either the
High Priest, or the other Priests used in the service of God, should Cyrus
heretofore had resolved to restore unto Jerusalem.

When Zorobabel had obtained these things abovenamed at the Kings hands, he
went out of the Palace, Ver. 22.
and lifting up his eyes unto Heaven, he began to give God thanks, That he had
enabled him to appear more discreet than others before the King, Glad tidings
brought to the Jews.
and for the good success which he had given him in Darius 's presence. For
(said he) O Lord, if thou had not been favorable unto me, I had not obtained
it. After he had in this manner given thanks for the present, and prayed God to
show himself always favorable hereafter; he repaired to Babylon, and told his
Countrymen what encouragement he had received from the King: who hearing
thereof, gave God thanks also, who had restored them once more to the
possession of their native Country: and they fell to feasting and banqueting
for seven days space, The Jews depart from Babylon to Jerusalem.
for the restoring unto their Country, as if they had solemnized the feasts of
their birth-days. Hereupon the heads of the several families made choice of
those, that (with their wives and children) should return unto Jerusalem, who,
by the assistance of Darius's Convoy, performed that journey with great joy,
playing on their Psalteries, Flutes and Cymbals, and were after this manner
conducted on their way, by Jews that remained in Babylon. Thus went they
forward, being a certain and determinate number of every family. I have not
thought it necessary to repeat these families by name, 3 Esd. 5.
lest I should perplex the Relation, and the Readers should be interrupted
thereby. The number of the Jews that went out of Babylon.
Notwithstanding, the whole number of those that went, and were about 12 years
old of the Tribes of Juda and Benjamin, were four millions, six hundred and
eight thousand. There were likewise four thousand and seventy Levites: And of
their wives and children together, forty thousand, seven hundred, forty and
two. Besides these, there were of Singers of the Tribe of Levi, one hundred,
twenty and eight; of Porters, one hundred and ten; and of those that attended
on the Sanctuary, three hundred twenty and two. There were certain others
likewise, that pretended that they were Israelites, but could give no testimony
of their descent, the number of whom was six hundred fifty and two. Of the
number of the Priests, they that had espoused Zorobabel Chieftain, and Jesus
High Priest of this company.
was Zorobabel, the son of Salathiel, descended of David's Line, and of the
Tribe of Juda; and Jesus the son of Josedech the High Priest; besides which,
were Mordochaeus and Serabaeas, who were chosen by the people to be their
Governors, who contributed 100 pounds of gold, and five hundred of silver. Thus
the Priests and Levites, and part Jews which were then in Babylon, were
conducted to dwell in Jerusalem; the other part of them following a little
after, returned every one into his own Country.

The seventh month after their departure out of Babylon, the High Priest Jesus,
and the Governor Zorobabel, 1 Esdr. 3. 6. ad finem.
sent Messengers through all the Country, and assembled the people from all
quarters of the Region, who, with all alacrity and expedition, repaired to
Jerusalem. There erected they an Altar in the same place, where heretofore it
was built, to the end they might offer Sacrifices thereon, according to Moses
Law; but hereby they gave offense to their neighboring Nations, who, in
general, were incensed against them. They celebrated also at that time the
feast of Tabernacles, according as the Lawmakers C. 3. v. 4, 5.
afterward they offered oblations, and continual sacrifices, observing their
Sabbaths, The feast of Tabernacles.
and all holy solemnities. And they that had made any vows, performed them, and
sacrificed from the New Moon until the seventh month. After this, they began to
build the Temple, and delivered great sums of money to the hewers of stone, and
Masons, and gave strangers their ordinary diet, who brought them stone and
timber. For it was an easy matter for the Sidonians, The Temple began to be
built, ver. 8.
to bring wood and timber from Libanus, and binding it up, and gathering it
together in rafters, to ship it, and land it at the Port of Joppa. For Cyrus
had heretofore given them that commandment, and now the second time they were
enjoined thereunto by Darius.

The second year after their arrival in Jerusalem, the Jews assembled together
in the second December. Over this work, those Levites that were above 20 years
of age, were overseers: with them also was Jesus, and his sons and brothers
joined, and Zolimiel the brother of Juda the son of Aminadab, and his sons. And
through the diligence that these overseers of the Temple used, it was sooner
finished, than it was expected. As soon as the Sanctuary was built, the
Priests, apparelled in their accustomed habits, and the Levites, and the sons
of Asaph arose, and with Trumpets praised God, and sung several Hymns and
Psalms composed by King David. The Priests and Levites, with the Elders of the
Tribes, calling to mind how great and magnificent the first Temple was, and
beholding that which was built at present, far inferior to the former, and
perceiving The Samaritans desirous to further the building of the Temple, are
rejected.
and the joyful applauses of the people their mournings.

The Samaritans hearing the noise of the Trumpets, ran out to know the cause
thereof, because they were ill-affected toward the Tribe of Juda and Benjamin;
and understanding that the Jews which were returned from Babylon, had
re-edifi'd the Temple, they addressed themselves to Zorobabel and Jesus, and to
the chief Governors of the families, requiring them that it might be lawful for
them to repair the Temple with them, and to have part in the building thereof.
For (said they) we honor God no less than you, we pray unto him, and adore
him; we conform our selves to your customs, ever since the time that Salmanazar
King of Assyria removed us out of Chuthea and Media hither. To these demands of
theirs, Zorobabel, and Jesus the High Priest, and the Governors of the Tribes,
answered, The Samaritans suppose to hinder the building of the Temple.
That it was impossible for them to admit of their assistance in the building
of the Temple, because they had received their first commandment from Cyrus to
perform it, and afterward from Darius: notwithstanding they gave them license
to worship therein, offering them C. 4. v. 1. ad 6.
if they pleased: yea, and accessible to all other Nations that would repair
thither to adore God. The Chutheans (for so were the Samaritans called) hearing
this, were much offended; and persuaded the other Nations of Syria, to require
the Princes (who continued their authority since the time of Cyrus, The year of
the World, 3^44. before Christ's Nativity, 520.
and afterward ruled in Cambyses time) to hinder the building of the Temple;
and to delay the Jews, who were so intent and busy in their work. Whereupon
Sisin Governor in Syria and Phoenicia, and Sarabazan, accompanied with others,
came unto Jerusalem, and demanded of the Chieftains of the Jews, By whose
permission they built the Temple, which rather seemed to be a Fort than a
Temple? The Syrian Princes examine the cause why the Jews repair their City and
Temple.
and for what cause they fortified their City with gates, and so strong walls?
Zorobabel and Jesus the High Priest answered, That they were the servants of
the living God, and that their Temple had been built by one of their Kings, who
was rich, and surpassed all other in virtue, that afterward it had continued so
long time in venerable estimation; but by reason their fathers had been guilty
of impiety against God, Nabuchodonosor, King of Babylon and Chaldaea, 1* Esdras
5. v. 3. 4, 5, 6.
having taken the City by force, destroyed the same; Babylon. But after that
Cyrus King of Persia had obtained the Kingdom of Babylon, he commanded by his
express Letters sealed with his Royal Seal, that they should re-edifie the
Temple, and ordained that all those Treasures which Nabuchodonosor carried from
thence, and of the consecrated vessels, should be delivered to Zorobabel and
the Treasurer Mithidrates, to be conveyed to Jerusalem, and placed again in the
Temple, as soon as it should be built. And he commanded also, that it should be
presently re-edified, appointing Abassar to repair to Jerusalem, and give order
for all that which was requisite; who hastening thither as soon as he had
received Cyrus's Letters, did speedily lay the foundations anew. From that time
forward, until this present, it has been hindered by the subtilty and malice
of the neighboring Nations, who have always been Darius, to the end, that
examining the Registers of the Kings, he may find that all things have
proceeded after the manner which we have related.

When Zorobabel and Jesus had answered to this effect, Sisin, and they that
accompanied him, thought not good to hinder the building, until such time as
they had certified Darius hereof, V. 1, 2, 3.
for which cause they wrote unto him presently. Aggeus and Zachary the Prophets.
Hereupon the Jews were much discomforted and troubled, fearing lest the King
should change his mind, and put a stop to the building of Jerusalem and the
Temple. But two Prophets, Aggeus and Zachary, (who were amongst them) began to
persuade them, willing them to fear no ill Persians, because God had assured
them, that they should receive no harm; hereupon the people gave credit to the
Prophets, and diligently intended their building, without intermission.

When the Samaritans had after this manner written to Darius, C. ^, a v. 7. ad
finem.
and accused the Jews unto him for fortifying their City, and re-edifying their
Temple, and informed him how it seemed rather to be a Fort, The Samaritans
endeavoring to hinder the reparation of the Temple and City, do further it the
more.
than some sacred place; and had further alleged, that it would be no profit
unto him: and moreover, had produced Cambyses letters, by which they were
forbidden to build the Temple, he understood that the re-establishment of
Jerusalem stood not with the security of his state. But when he had read Sisins
letters, and his associates, he commanded that the Chronicles of the Kings
should be searched, Echatane, a City of the Medes, in a Tower, a certain Book,
in which these things were written. C. 6. 4 5, 6.


The first year of the Reign of Cyrus, Cyrus decree as (...) the Temple and the
Jews.
commandment was given to build the Temple of Jerusalem, and the Altar therein.
It was likewise decreed, that the height of the Temple should be sixty cubits,
and the breadth as many; three stories of hewed stone, and one story of the
wood of that Country: and it was ordained, that the expense of that building
should be deducted out of the Kings Revenues. Moreover, he commanded that
restitution should be made unto the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, of those vessels
that were taken away by Nabuchodonosor, and carried away to Babylon: And the
commission to effect all these things, was given to Abassar Governor of Syria
and Phoenicia, and his companions, to the end that they might depart from Jews
might be permitted to build therein. Furthermore, he ordained that the charge
of this building should be gathered out of the Tributes of his Countries, and
that they should furnish the Jews with Bulls, Weathers, Lambs, Goats, Flower,
Oil, and Wine, and all other things which the Priests should think meet to
offer sacrifice, to the intent that they might pray for the preservation of the
King of Persia: commanding that they that should transgress or oppose this
commandment, (...) 3. 4.
should be laid hold on, and hanged on a Gibbet, and that their goods should be
confiscate to the Kings use. Moreover, he besought God, that if any man went
about to hinder the building of the Temple* that he would execute his vengeance
upon that person, and punish him for his wickedness. When Darius had found
these things written in his Registries, he wrote back to Sisin and his
companions in this form: Darius to Sisin and Sarabazan, The year of the World,
3450. before Christ's Nativity, 514.
with their Associates, health.

Having found amongst the Memorials of Cyrus, the Copy of his Instructions for
the building of the Temple, Ver. 7, 8.
I have sent it you, and my pleasure is, that the Contents thereof be executed.
Farewell. Darius Epistle to the Prefects of Syria.


Sisin and his Associates being certified of the Kings pleasure, resolved to
conform themselves unto it: and taking the care of the sacred buildings upon
them, they assisted the Princes and Magistrates of the Jews, Ezra 6. 17.
in such sort as the building of the Temple was finished The finishing of the
Temple.
by the instigation of the Prophets Aggeus and Zachary, according to Gods
commandment, and by the directions of the Kings Cyrus and Darius; so that it
was finished within seven years. In the ninth year of the Reign of Darius, and
the three and twenty of the eleventh month, called by us Adar, and by the
Macedonians Distre; the Priests and Levites, and all the rest of the people
offered sacrifices, and gave thanks for the renovation of their former
felicity, after their captivity, and for their new Temple also: sacrificing 100
Bulls, 200 Sheep, 400 Lambs, 12 Goats, according to the number of the 12 Tribes
of Israel, and for the sins of each of them. The Priests and Levites also
(according to the laws of Moses) appointed Porters to every gate. For the Jews
had built Galleries round about, and within the Temple.

Easter) drew near, Ver. 15.
in the first month called Xanthicus by the Macedonians, The Temple dedicated
23 of March, or as it is in the 1 of Esdras 6. dedicated the third of March
Ver. 16, etc.
and Nisan by the Hebrews, all the people of the Towns round about Jerusalem
resorted thither, and celebrated the Feast, purifying themselves, their wives
and children, according to the ordinance of their Forefathers: And after they
had solemnized the Feast called Easter, or the Passover, in the 14th Moon,
they rejoiced for seven days space, sparing no cost how great soever. They
offered burnt-offerings also, and sacrifices of thanksgiving, The Passover
celebrated.
acknowledging Gods goodness that had brought them home into their native
Country, to live according to the laws of their Forefathers, The form of
Commonweal in Jerusalem.
and had caused them to find favor in the eyes of the King of Persia. Thus
dwelt they in Jerusalem, sacrificing unto, and serving God, and living under
Asmonaeans obtained the Kingdom: for before the captivity of Babylon, they were
under the Government of Kings, who began from Saul and David's times, about some
532 years, six months, and ten days; and before their Kings, certain Governors,
called Judges, reigned: and under this sort of Polity lived they more than 500
years, The Samaritans mighty enemies of the Jews.
from the death of Moses and Joshua. And this was the state of the Jews after
their captivity, during the days of Cyrus and Darius. True it is, that the
Samaritans were their mighty and malicious adversaries, and did them many
mischiefs, trusting in their riches, and pretending to be the Persians kinsmen,
because their original proceeded from thence. For they refused to pay Jews to
make their sacrifices, and the Governors of Syria and Phoenicia lost no
opportunity which might promote their design. For which cause, the Jews
determined to send Ambassadors unto King Darius, The Embassage of the Jews to
Darius.
to accuse the Samaritans; and to that intent, Zorobabel, and four others were
sent. As soon therefore as the King understood by these Ambassadors, what
crimes and accusations they had brought against the Samaritans, he dispatched
his letters, and addressed them to the Governors and Council of Samaria, the
tenor of which letters was to this effect: King Darius to Tangara and Sambaba
Governors of Samaria, to Sadrach and Bobelon, Samaria, health.

Zorobabel, Ananias, and Mardocheus, Ambassadors in the behalf of the Jews,
accuse you to be disturbers of the building of their Temple; C. 7. v. 11, 12.
alleging, that you refuse to discharge that, which by my decree you ought to
furnish them with, A commandment to supply the charge of the building of the
Temple and Sacrifices.
for the charge of the Sacrifices. My will is therefore, that upon the sight of
these Letters, you deliver out of the Royal Treasury in Samaria, appointed for
the Tributes, all that which shall be necessary for them to perform their
Sacrifices, upon the requests of the Priests, to the intent they let pass no
day without sacrifice and prayer unto Persians. This was the contents of his
Letters.

CHAP. V. The year of the World, 3506. before Christ's Nativity, 458.

Xerxes succeeds his Father Darius in the Kingdom; he permits Esdras to
return with a great number of Jews to Jerusalem. Esdras obliges those that had
taken strangers to Wife, to send them back. His Praise, and his Death. Nehemiah
obtains leave to build the walls of Jerusalem, and finisheth that great work.
AFter Darius death, his son Xerxes succeeded him, not only as Heir in the
government of his Kingdom, but also as Successor unto his piety and devotion
toward God: for he changed not those institutions of his Father that concerned
religious service, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 5.
but Jews. 1 Esdras 7.
During his Reign, Joacim the son of Jesus was High Priest; Xerxes King of
Persia.
amongst them also that remained in Babylon, there lived a Priest with the Jews
in that place called Esdras, Esdras learned in the law.
a just man, and one of great reputation amongst the people: and whereas he was
very skilful in the laws of Moses, he was much esteemed by the King. This man
intending (with certain other Jews of Babylon) to return to Jerusalem, besought
the King that he would vouchsafe to bestow his letters of commendations to the
Governors of Syria in his behalf. Nehem. 2. 1. ad 11.
Whereupon the King gave him letters of recommendation to the Governors, Xerxes
favors the Jews.
certifying them of his favor toward Esdras, and to the Princes in those
parts, to this effect: Xerxes King of Kings, to Esdras the Priest, and Reader
of the Divine Law, health.

It is decreed by me, and seven other of my Council, that whosoever in my
kingdom of the Israelites, their Priests or Levites, will repair with thee unto
Jerusalem, may freely do it with my license, and may settle themselves in
Judea, there to serve the God of their Fathers; bearing with them those
Presents unto the God of Israel, which I had my friends have vowed to offer
unto him. I likewise give thee license to take with thee all the gold and
silver which any of thy Nation living here in Babylon will offer up unto God,
to buy offerings to be sacrificed upon the Altar of thy God: and to make
whatsoever vessels of gold or silver, which either thou or thy Brethren shall
think meet. Those sacred vessels also which are given thee, thou shall dedicate
unto Syria and Phoenicia, and have written to them, that whatsoever Esdras the
Priest, and Reader of the Law of God shall require, they shall presently
deliver it to him. And to the end that God may be favorable to me and my
posterity, my will is, that an hundred measures of wheat be offered unto God,
according to the Law. I command you also that are Magistrates, that you exact
nothing, neither impose any taxations on the Priests, Levites, Singing-men,
Porters, or holy Officers. But thou Esdras (according to the wisdom given thee
from above) shall appoint Judges, who shall in Syria and Phoenicia execute
justice unto the people, according to your Law. Teach thou likewise freely all
such as are ignorant, so that whosoever violateth either

When Esdras had received this Letter, he was well-pleased, and gave thanks
unto God, Ver. 16 17, 18.
confessing that it was he, Esdras assembled the Jews that dwelt in Babylon.
who was the Author of that favor he had received at the Kings hand: And after
he had read this Letter unto the Jews that were at that time resident in
Babylon, he kept the original, but sent a copy to all those of his Nation,
being in the Country of the Medes: who being informed of the King's zeal to
the service of God, and his favor toward Esdras, were very joyful; and diverse
amongst them took their goods, and came unto Babylon, desiring to return to
Jerusalem: but the rest of the Israelites would not abandon or leave their
dwelling. Whereupon it came to pass, that two Tribes were under the obedience
of the Romans in Asia and Europe: but the ten Tribes were on the other side of
Euphrates, even until this day; and it is incredible, how exceedingly they are
there multiplied. With Esdras there departed a great number of Priests,
Levites, Porters, Singing-men, and servants of the Temple. Now after he had
assembled those of the captivity, that inhabited on this side Euphrates, and
sojourned there three days, he commanded them to solemnize a Fast, and to pray
unto God for his preservation, that no evil might happen unto him; and that
neither their enemies, nor any other might do them any violence: For Esdras had
foretold the King, that God would be their Protector, and that therefore he
required no Convoy of Horsemen at Xerxes, and arrived in Jerusalem in the fifth
month of the same year. Whereupon he incontinently presented unto the
Treasurers (who were of the race of the Priests) the sacred depositum wherewith
he was entrusted, which consisted of 650 Talents of silver, and of silver
vessels an 100 Talents, of vessels of gold to the value of 20 Talents, of
brazen vessels (more precious than gold) the weight of 12 Talents. These were
the Presents of the King and his Friends, Esdras repaireth to Jerusalem, and
commits the vessels and other precious Presents to the Treasurers hands.
and of the Israelites that dwelt in Babylon.

When Esdras had delivered these Presents into the hands of the Priests, he
offered burnt-offerings unto God, according to the Law, namely, 12 Bulls for
the public conservation of the people 72 Rams and Lambs, and 12 Goats for a
sin-offering. And afterward Coelosyria and Phoenicia: who being constrained to
execute that which was enjoined them by the King, honored the Nation of the
Jews, and supplied them every ways in their necessities. We owe unto Esdras the
honor of this Transmigration, for he not only laid the design of it, but his
virtue and piety were undoubtedly the cause that God gave him so good success
in the undertaking.

Not long after, there came certain Men unto him, complaining that some of the
people, Priests and Levites, had transgressed against their Ordinances, and
broken the Laws of the Country, in that they had espoused certain strange
women, and corrupted the purity of the Sacerdotal race; requiring him, that he
would have a regard to Gods Ordinances, Esdras prayers for the Levites that had
married strangers.
Esdras hereupon was so much afflicted, that he rent his clothes, and tore his
hair, and pulled his beard, and cast himself upon the ground, because the chief
among the people were concerned in that offense. And because he feared left if
he should command them to forsake their wives, Esdr. 9. per totum.
and those children which they had begotten by them, he should not be obeyed,
he continued in grief, and lay continually upon the ground. Whereupon, all
those resorted unto him who were not guilty, and wept and lamented with him,
because of that which had happened. In this affliction of mind, Esdras (raising
himself from the earth, and lifting up his hands to Heaven) said, That he was
ashamed to look thereupon, because the offenses of the people were so heinous;
and that they had so soon lost the memory of those calamities wherewith their
Forefathers had been visited for their sins. Nevertheless, O Lord, (said he)
since thy mercy is infinite, have pity, I beseech thee, on the remnant that
has escaped that long captivity, and which thou have brought back into their
native Country. Spare them, O Lord; and though they have deserved death, yet
let thy mercy appear, in the sparing of their lives. Whilst thus both he and
those that came unto him, lamented with him, with their wives and children, a
certain man called Achonias, one of the principal men of Jerusalem, came to
him, and said, That they had sinned, because they had espoused strange women;
and persuaded Esdras to command them all, to banish both them and the children
begotten by them; advising, that they who obeyed not the Law, might be
punished. Esdras (persuaded by these words) Israel, swear, That they would
dismiss their wives and children, according to the counsel of Achonias. And as
soon as he had received their oaths, he departed from the Temple unto John's
house the son of Eliasib, and there spent he all the day, without tasting any
meat, by reason of the grief which he had conceived. Hereupon an Edict was
published, That all they that were returned from the captivity, should repair
within two or three days to Jerusalem (under the penalty that they who
defaulted, and came not within the prefixed time, should be held as
excommunicate, and their goods confiscate to the public treasury of the
Temple, by the ordinance of the Priests:) They of the Tribes of Juda and
Benjamin came thither within three days, on the 20 day of the ninth month,
called by the Hebrews, Thebeth; and by the Macedonians, Appellaeus. Esdr. 10.
v. ^, 10, 11.
Esdras arose and reproved them, because they had transgressed the Law, in
taking wives who were not of their Nation: For which cause he told them, that
if they would do that which were agreeable unto God, and profitable for
themselves, they should dismiss such wives. Whereupon, with a loud voice, they
all cried, That they would do it willingly; but that there was no small number
of them, and that it was the winter-season, and the matter of that consequence,
as one or two days could not end it: For which cause they thought it very
needful, that the execution were deferred for a while; and that at the length,
some of the Princes who were free from that crime, with certain other chosen
Elders of every place, should make inquisition after them that had married
Jesus the High Priest, Priest, The year of the World, 3516. before Christ's
Nativity, 458.
and of the Priests, Levites, and Israelites, that (making more account of the
observation

When Esdras had in this manner reformed the abuse committed by such marriages,
he so corrected the evil custom thereof, that this confirmation continued firm
and irrevocable for ever. In the seventh month, they solemnized the Feast of
Tabernacles: whereto when all the people were resorted, they all came together
in an open place in the Temple, The reading of Moses Law.
toward the gate that looks Eastward, requiring Esdras, that he would read
Moses's Nehem. 8. v. 1. ad 11.
he read the Law unto them, from the morning until noon. By which reading, not
only for the present, but for the time to come, they were informed of their
duty; and calling to mind that which was past, they were so sorrowful, that the
tears fell from their eyes, when they considered, that if they had kept the
Law, they had not suffered any of those evils wherewith they had been
afflicted. But Esdras beholding them in that state, advised them to repair
home, and to weep no more, because that day was a solemn and holy day, wherein
they ought not to weep, because it was forbidden. But he commanded them rather
to intend their feasts and pleasures, and to make this good use of their
remorse for their former sins, that they might not fall into the like for the
time to come. They following Esdras exhortation, began to celebrate the
Solemnity, and continued Esdras for the reformation of those unlawful marriages
which had been contracted with strangers; after he had gotten great honor
among the people, he finished his days in an happy old age, and was buried
honorably in Jerusalem. About the same time also died Joacim the High Priest,
whose son Eliacim succeeded in his place.

After this it came to pass, Nehem. 1. 1. ad 5.
that a certain man that was one of the captive Jews, and King Xerxes Butler,
called Nehemias, walking before the City of Susa, (which was the Metropolitan
City of Persia) heard certain strangers that came from far, upon their entrance
into the City, talking with one another in the Hebrew Tongue; whereupon he drew
Whence they ^ame? They answered, That they came from Judea: which as soon as he
knew, he inquired after the state of Jerusalem, their native City, and how the
people fared. To whom they answered, That they were in very bad state, and that
their City-walls were demolished, and that the Nations round about them,
afflicted the Jews with many outrages, making inroads into their Country, and
spoiling them daily, so that diverse of them were led away Prisoners; yea, some
Citizens of Jerusalem: and that the Highways were found full of dead bodies.
Hereupon Nehemias began to weep, (through the compassion he had of his
distressed brethren) and looking up toward Heaven, How long (said he) O Lord,
will thou see our Nation thus afflicted, without taking care of us? Behold how
we are made a prey to all men! Whilst thus he walked before the gate, and
Nehemias, (whom he perceived to be heavy and disconsolate) he asked him what he
ailed? Nehemias (after he had besought God to give him persuasive words to
discourse unto the King) answered, O King, how is it possible but that I should
be afflicted, when I hear that the walls of Jerusalem, (which is my native
Country) are levelled with the ground, and the Sepulchers and Monuments of my
Predecessors are defaced, and the gates of the City are burned? Do me therefore
this grace, that I may go thither, and repair it, and finish the rest of the
building of the Temple.

The King gave ear to his request, and promised him his Letters, assuring him,
That he would address them to the Governors, commanding them to do him honor,
and to furnish him with all things necessary, to accomplish that which he
intended. For which cause (said he) cease to be afflicted, and give thy
attendance cheerfully. Hereupon Nehemias adored God, and thanked the King for
the promise he had made him; and therefore by the joy he conceived, he cleared
that confusion and sorrow, that before he bare in his countenance. The next day
the King called for him, and gave him Letters unto Sadeas the Governor of
Syria, Phoenicia and Samaria, in which he commanded him to honor Nehemias, and
to furnish him with all things necessary for that building which he intended.
As soon as he came to Babylon, he took diverse of his Countrymen with him, who
willingly followed him, and went with him unto Jerusalem, in the 25 year of the
Reign of Xerxes; and after Sadeas, and the other Governors, he assembled the
people of Jerusalem, and standing up in the midst of them, he spoke unto the
whole Congregation The year of the World, 3519. before Christ's Nativity, 445.
You men of Jury, there is none of you but know what care God Almighty has
been pleased to take of our Forefathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in regard of
their piety and love to justice; and he does still make it evident that he will
not abandon us, in that I have obeained favor of the King and permission (by
his assistance) to rebuild the Walls of our City, and finish the rest of the
Temple. I therefore pray you (who are assuredly persuaded of the envy and
hatred the neighboring Nations bear unto you, Nehemias having gotten license
and authority to build the walls of Jerusalem, inciteth the people thereunto.
who hearing that we are intent upon our building, will overpress us, and
labor by all means possible to hinder us) first to rely upon Gods Providence,
who will oppose himself against the hatred which they bear us, and afterward
to intermit neither day nor night in prosecution of the building, but with all
care continue the work, in that the opportunity does require our diligence.
After he had spoken Nehem. 2. v. 1. ad 11.
according to the Buroughs and Towns, and to every man's ability: and after he
had promised to employ both himself, and all his family therein, he dismissed
the Assembly. Hereupon the Jews (incited by his authority) addressed themselves
to the work, and then it was that they first began to give the name of Jews to
those of our Nation who returned from the Captivity; and to the Country the
name of Judea, because it had been heretofore inhabited by those of the Tribe
of Juda.

The Ammonites, Moabites, Samaritans, and all the Inhabitants of Coelosyria,
understanding that the walls were raised with such haste and diligence, Nehem.
4. 1. ad 15.
were much troubled, and resolved Jews, and sought the means likewise to
murder Nehemias himself: and having hired certain strangers with money to
commit the fact, they ^ay in wait for him. V. 16. ad fin.
They endeavored also to terrify the Jews with vain reports, The ardent care
in building the walls of Jerusalem.
and by spreading certain rumors, that diverse Nations intended to make War
against them: by which reports (being much troubled) they desisted for a time
from the prosecution of their building. Yet none of these things could weaken
Nehemia's diligence or resolution, but that (keeping a guard round about him)
he diligently prosecuted his design, setting light by all occurrents: so great
was his affection to accomplish the work. And therefore he carefully stood upon
his guard, not that he feared death, but because he was persuaded,

Moreover, he gave order that they should have their Targets by them; and he
placed certain Trumpetters, some 500 foot distant the one from the other,
charging them, that as soon as they discovered the Enemy from any part, they
should incontinently sound the alarm, and give notice unto the people to arm
themselves, and prepare for the fight, for fear they should be surprised, and
found unprovided. He himself also walked the round, about the City by night,
The walls of Jerusalem finished.
with an indefatigable courage, and without either eating or Jerusalem was
built again in that time, in the 28 year of the Reign of Xerxes, and in the
ninth month. After the City was fortified, Nehemias and the people offered
Sacrifices unto God, Provision for the Priests.
and spent eight days in feasting. When the rumor was spread abroad that this
building was finished, the Inhabitants of Syria were sore displeased. But
Nehemias perceiving that the City was weakly manned, besought the Priests and
Levites to forsake their dwellings without the City, and to come and dwell
within, and to that intent he built them houses upon his own charge. He
ordained likewise, that they that intended their Husbandry, should bring the
Tenths of their fruits unto Jerusalem, to the intent that the Priests and
Levites by enjoying their continual 1 Esdras 10.
might omit no time in the service of God: The death of Nehemias.
wherein he was readily obeyed. By this means, the City of Jerusalem was very
well peopled. After that Nehemias had honorably accomplished diverse other
worthy actions deserving praise, he died in a good old age. He was a man so
good, so just and highly affectionate toward his Country: and one to whom
they are so much obliged for the benefits which they have received, that his
memory will remain for ever among the Jews.

CHAP. VI. The year of the World, 3543. before Christ's Nativity, 421.

Artaxerxes succeeds his father Xerxes in the Kingdom of Persia, he repudiates
Queen Vashti his Wife, and espouseth Esther the Niece of Mardocheus. A man
persuades Artaxerxes to banish all the Jews, and to apprehend Mardocheus; but
he is hanged, and Mardocheus established in his place.
AFter the death of Xerxes, Hedio and Ruffinus. cap. 6.
the Kingdom fell to Cyrus his son, who by the Grecians was called Artaxerxes.
Under his government all the race of the Jews, both Men, Women and Children,
were in danger to be utterly exterminated: the cause whereof, I Esther 1, 2.
that he married an Hebrew Woman of the Blood Royal, by whose means (as it is
said) our Nation was preserved. After that Artaxerxes had taken the Kingdom
upon him, and established Governors over 127 Provinces, from India as far as
Aethiopia: in the third year of his Reign, he entertained and feasted all his
Friends with great magnificence, the Nations of Persia likewise with their
Governors for 180 days. He feasted after this, for the space of seven days, the
Ambassadors of all Nations in the City of Susa, after this manner. There were
several Pavilions erected, whose pillars were of gold and silver, covered with
linen and scarlet vails, which were of that extent, that diverse thousands of
Men might take their refection therein. All the entertainment Persians, but to
permit every one of the guests to drink according to his discretion. He sent
also throughout all the Country, commanding a cessation from all labor, and
that every one should make Holy Day for many days, and think of nothing but
rejoicing, C. 1. v. 10, 11. ad finem.
and wishing him an happy Reign. The Queen Vashti also made a banquet unto her
women in the Royal Palace. Now whereas the King was desirous to show, that she
surpassed all other women in beauty, Ahasuerus sends for Vashti to grace his
feasts; she refuses, and therefore is cast off by him.
he sent unto her, commanding her to come to the banquet in more Royal manner
than the rest of her Attendants: but she, too curiously tied Persians, (which
forbids women to be seen by strangers) went not unto the King; and
notwithstanding he sent his Eunuchs diverse times unto her, yet persisted she in
her refusal to come unto him. Whereupon the King (moved with displeasure) gave
over his banquet, and arising, he called unto him his seven Counselors, to
whom (according to the custom of the Persians) it belonged to expound the Laws;
and accused his wife, telling them how much he had been slighted by her, since
having sent for her diverse times to accompany him at his banquet, she had
refused to obey him: he therefore commanded them to declare their opinion, what
punishment appertained to her. One amongst them, called Muchaeus, answered,
That the injury was not only offered unto him, but to all the Persians, who
should likewise be all in danger of being after that manner despised by their
wives; for that no one of them would acknowledge duty toward their husbands,
taking their example from the Queens disobedience, which she showed toward
him, who was the Governor over all. Whereupon he concluded, That she that had
thus dishonored him, should be severely punished: which done, he thought fit
that this ordinance of the Kings, might be published through all Nations, that
Queen Vashti should be separated from his bed, and another woman chosen in her
place. This determination, confirmed by the consent of the rest of the Magi,
very much afflicted the King, because on the one side he was unwilling to act
contrary to the Laws of his Country, and on the other, he knew not how to put
away his Queen, for whom he had so great a passion, by reason of her beauty.
Which when his Friends perceived, they counseled him to forget the memory
Vashti, might be extinguished. The King approving of this counsel, sent out
certain Messengers and Deputies, commanding them to bring unto him the fairest
Virgins that were to be found in his Kingdom: when therefore they had assembled
a great number of them, they found in Babylon a young Orphan, (without either
father or mother) who was brought up under her Uncle (whose name was
Mardocheus) of the Tribe of Benjamin, and one of the greatest men among the
Jews. The beauty and modesty of this Virgin were so extraordinary, that she
raised the admiration of all that beheld her. She therefore was delivered The
year of the World, 3546. before Christ's Nativity, 415.
and after this manner were 400 Virgins entertained for the space of six
months. Now when he that was put in trust with this Commission, thought these
Virgins to be sufficiently prepared, and that they were fit to come to the
Princes bed, he sent every day one unto the King to keep him company: who,
after some embraces, sent her presently back again unto the Eunuch. But when
Esther came into his presence, he settled his affection more on her, The Maiden
Esther made Queen.
than all the rest; and being surprised with her beauty, he took her for his
lawful wife: and the Nuptials were solemnly celebrated in the seventh year of
his Reign, Esther 2. 7, 8, 9, 10.
and in the 12 month, called by us Adar, that is February. And he sent
Messengers through all his Kingdoms, Mardocheus came from Babylon to Susa.
to proclaim a Feast in honor of his marriage: he himself also feasted the
Persians, and Medes, and the Princes of the Nations, for a whole months Esther
entered into the Royal Palace, he set a Diadem upon her head, and so lived with
her, that he never questioned her either of her Birth, or Nation. Her Uncle
came from Babylon to Susa, The Kings command that no man should approach his
Throne, except he were called.
(the chief City of Persia) where every day he walked before the Palace-gate,
enquiring how Esther did: for that he loved her as dearly as if she had been
his own daughter. Now the King had made a Law, That no man should approach his
presence, upon pain of death, except he were called, during the time that he
was on his Throne; Esther 4. 11.
and round about his seat there stood certain Officers with their Arms,
Mardocheus discovers the Traitors.
ready to punish those who being uncalled should attempt to approach the
Throne. The King himself sat aloft, and holding in his hand a golden Scepter,
whenever he intended to save the life of any one that approached his Throne
uncalled, Esth. 2. 21, 22.
and touched him therewith: who being thus touched, by that means escaped
death. And as touching these things, we have sufficiently spoken in this place.

Not long after this, when as Bagathous and Theodestes, two of the Kings
Eunuchs, had conspired against him; Barnabas, who was of the Hebrew Nation, and
one of their servants, being acquainted with their Treason, discovered it to
the Queens Uncle Mardocheus, who, by her means, informed the King of their
conspiracy. Who finding out the truth by their examination, he commanded them
to be executed on the Gibbet; he for that time gave no recompense to Mardocheus
for saving his life, but only commanded his name to be registered in his
Records, permitting him to have access to his Palace, as if he had Haman being
honored by all men, is neglected by the Jews.
Now as often as Haman (the son of Amadath an Amalechite) came unto the Palace
to visit the King, all those that were either Persians or strangers, (according
to the Kings especial direction) did him honor: But Mardocheus showed him no
honor (because the laws of the Jews forbade it.) Which when Haman had
observed, Esther 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.
he demanded whence he was? And understanding that he was a Jew, he was much
displeased, C. 5. 9.
saying in himself, That the Persians who were of a freer condition, cast
themselves prostrate before him, and he that was but a slave, disdained to do
the like. Intending therefore to revenge himself on Mardocheus, he thought it
not sufficient to procure his punishment at the Kings hands, but resolved
wholly to exterminate his Race (for he was by Nature an Enemy to the Jews, by
reason that the Amalechites, from whom he descended, That there was a certain
cursed Nation spread through his whole Kingdom, insociable, and abhorring the
customs of other men, who used diverse laws and ceremonies, contrary to those of
all other Nations, and destructive of the fundamentals of his Kingdom, so that
the greatest favor he could do to his Subjects, would be utterly to
exterminate them. And lest your Majesty's Tribute should be any ways impaired
by these means, I promise you of mine own Revenues forty thousand talents of
silver, Ver. 6.
desiring rather willingly to forbear so much money, The destruction of the
Jews granted unto Haman.
than that your Kingdom should be unpurged of such a cursed Race of men. When
Haman had made this his request, the King answered, That he forgave him the
money, and that he permitted him to deal with that Nation as he thought fit.
When Haman had obtained

The great King Artaxerxes, unto his Governors of an Hundred and seven and
twenty Provinces, extending from India as far as Ethiopia, health. Having
obtained the Empire over so many Nations, and extended my dominion over the
World, according to mine own pleasure, and being so little inclined to treat
any of our Subjects with rigor, that we rather take great pleasure in
affording them some signal marks of our favor and goodness, causing them to
enjoy an happy peace, it remains that we seek after those means Haman, (who for
his wisdom and justice is more honored than all other by me; and for his
approved fidelity, has the second place in authority under me) that there is a
certain race of men intermingled among you, The year of the World, 3549. before
Christ's Nativity, 415.
enemies to all mankind, using none but their own laws, and such Haman shall
have made known unto you this our pleasure, (a man whom we hold as dear as our
father) they be slain, with their wives and children, so as you spare none of
them; not permitting your compassion toward them, to prevail over your
obedience to us: And this command we to be done the 14th day of the 12th month
of this present year; that in one day cutting off all our enemies, hereafter ye
may live in peace and security.

This Edict being spread through all places of the Country, and published in
every Jews, and no less diligence was there used in Susa the Metropolitan City.
Meanwhile, the King and Haman feasted, and made good cheer, whilst the City
hung in suspense, being troubled with the expectation of the event of that
which should follow. But Mardocheus having intelligence hereof, rent his
garments, put on sackcloth, and cast ashes on his head, walking through the
City, and crying, That their Nation had not committed any crime deserving
death: The lamentation of the Jews, upon the hearing of this Edict.
and using these, or such like speeches, he came unto the Kings Palace, and
stood before the gate, because it was unlawful for him to enter thereinto in
that habit: The like also did the Jews that were in the Cities where those
Edicts had been published against them, weeping and lamenting their miseries.
But when the News Esther 4. 1, 2, etc.
that Mardocheus stood before the Palace-gate in a deplorable condition, she
was much troubled, and sent certain of her servants unto him, to command him to
change his attire, but they could not persuade him to put off his sackcloth,
for the cause of his sorrow still remaining, he could not think of laying aside
the marks of it. She therefore called unto her her Eunuch Acra^heus, and sent
him unto Mardocheus, to know what accident had befaln him, that made him put on
his mourning habit, and to afflict himself after that manner, and not at her
entreaty to lay aside those marks of his sorrow. Hereupon Mardocheus told the
Eunuch of the Edict made against the Jews, and sent by the King unto all his
Provinces; the offer of the money that Haman likewise had tendered to the King,
whereby he had bought the utter Susan, to be delivered unto Esther: whom he
entreated to beseech the King, and to esteem it no dishonor to become a
Suppliant, to save her Nation, and to preserve the Jews from that death
whereunto at that time they were exposed: since Haman, the next in honor to
the King, had accused the Jews, and incensed his Majesty against them. When
Esther understood this, she sent again unto Mardocheus, giving him to
understand, That she was not called for by the King; and that whosoever entered
unto him, and was not called, should die, except the King would secure him, by
stretching out his golden Scepter; for he, unto whom the King was pleased to
grant that favor, although he were not called unto him, yet suffered he not
death, but obtained pardon. When these things were reported Esther unto
Mardocheus, he commanded him to tell her, That she ought not so much to tender
the particular respect of her life, as the lives of her whole Nation; assuring
her, that if at that present she had not care of them, their succor should
only proceed from God by some other means than this: Ver. 16, 17.
but she and her fathers house should be destroyed by them whom she had
contemned. Fasting and praying unto God, for the safety of the people.
Upon this reply, Esther sent the same messenger back again unto Mardocheus,
commanding him to repair unto Susan, and to call a general Assembly of all the
Jews that remained there, willing them for three days space to fast and abstain
from all kind of meat for her safety, and that both her self and her servants
would do the like; promising them, that at that time she would present her self
unto the King, notwithstanding his contrary Edict; and that if she must needs
die, she would willingly suffer it.

Mardocheus observed her orders, caused the people to fast, and to pray unto
God for her safety; he likewise himself besought him, That it might please him
at that present to have compassion on their desolate and distressed Nation, as
he had done oftentimes heretofore: and that as he had pardoned them at such
time as they had offended, so now also at this present he would deliver them
from that perdition which was denounced against them. For that they were not in
danger to die infamously for any offense of their own, but because he only had
incensed Haman, in that he would not adore him, or perform that honor unto
him, which is only due to God: for which cause, in revenge, he had contrived
this mischief against them, who would not transgress the divine ordinances. The
People likewise prayed to the like effect, beseeching God. That he would have
care of their preservation, and preserve the Israelites in what place soever
they were, from the misery at hand, which was before their eyes, and already
expected by them. Esther also besought God, (according to the manner of her
Country) The year of the World, 3554. before Christ's Nativity, 410.
clothed in sackcloth, and abstaining for three days space from meat and
drink, and what thing soever else was delectable, beseeching God to have
compassion on her, That when she presented herself before the King* she might
have words fit to persuade and mollify him, and grace and beauty far more
amiable than ever she had, to the end that by those means she might be the
better enabled to appease the King, if so be he were displeased with her; C. 5.
1, 2, etc.
and to succor her brethren in extreme danger, whereby the King might turn his
anger against the enemies of the Jews, Esther resorteth to the King to solicit
him in the behalf of the Jews.
and take compassion of their imminent danger, which, without his prevention,
would surely fall upon them. After she had in this sort for three days space
fasted and prayed, she cast off her mourning attire, and changed her habit,
attiring herself as became the Majesty of a Queen, having two of her servants
Praying her to be of good courage, and not to suspect any misfortune, for that
she came unto him without any motion of his: That the ordinance was only made
for his Subjects, but that she (who was equal with him) should fear nothing:
whereupon he took his Scepter in his hand, and laid it on the Queens neck,
whereby he delivered her from all fear; so that she recovered her vigor and
courage, and spoke after this manner: O King, I cannot easily express unto you
the inconvenience that is suddenly fallen upon me; for as soon as I beheld the
great and redoubted Majesty of your person, my spirits forsook me, and my heart
failed me. Now whilst she spoke these words with pain and feebleness, the King
was touched with compassion; so as he animated and encouraged her, and
commanded her to expect nothing but good; yea (said he) if thou demandest the
half of my Kingdom, Ver. 4. 8.
I will grant it thee. But Esther only requested this at his hands, that only
he and his friend Haman would vouchsafe to grace her with their presence at her
banquet: which the King readily granted her. Now when they were come unto the
banquet, and in the midst of their cups, Ver. 9.
the King commanded Esther to ask what she would, and he would grant it her,
assuring her, That he would refuse her in nothing; yea, although she demanded
the half of his Kingdom. But she deferred to discover her suit until the next
day, requiring him once more to repair with Haman unto her banquet.

When the King had promised to visit her again, Haman departed with great joy,
for that he alone had the credit to banquet with the King and Esther, and no
other had ever obtained the like honor amongst any Kings of those Dominions.
But in his return, Mardocheus in the Court, he was moved, because that
(notwithstanding he had looked upon him) he had not done him honor: when
therefore he came home unto his house, Hamans hatred against Mardocheus.
he called Zaraza his wife, and his friends, and told them what honor not only
the King, but the Queen also had done him; and how he only with the King had
supped that day with the Queen, and was invited the next day also to banquet
with the King: notwithstanding he told them that he was discontented, because
he saw Mardocheus the Jew in the Court. Zaraza his wife told him, That he
should cause a gallows to be raised fifty cubits high, and that the next day he
should demand license of the King, that Mardocheus might be hanged on the
gibbet. Haman approving of his wives counsel, commanded his servants to prepare
the Timber, and erect the gallows in his Court, to hang Mardocheus thereon:
Ver. 14.
which they diligently performed. But God, who knew what would come to pass,
mocked at Hamans cursed hope; for the very same night he deprived the King of
sleep, who being not willing to spend the time idly whilst he was awake, but
to employ it in something that might be profitable for his Kingdom, he
commanded his Secretary to bring him the Chronicles of the Kings his
Predecessors, and of those things that were done by himself, and to read them
to him. When therefore they were brought and read, A laudable custom in a King.
he found that a certain man whose name was there set down, had received a
great possession for reward of his virtue. He read likewise of another, that
had obtained a recompense for his fidelity, Esth 6. 1, 2.
and the like; till at last he came to the place where the Eunuchs Bagotheus
and Theodestes, were noted down for a secret conspiracy Ver. 3. 4.
and how it was discovered by Mardocheus. Now when the Secretary (having only
recited this accident) turned over to another History, the King stayed him, The
year of the World, 3554. before Christ's Nativity, 410.
and asked, If he found therein written, that he had given any recompense to
Mardocheus? That he found nothing set down. Whereupon the King commanded him to
give over, and inquired of those to whom that office appertained, what hour of
the night it was: and knowing that the morning was already discovered, he
commanded that some one should certify him, which of his friends attended
before the Palace. At this time it happened that Haman was found there, who came
thither sooner than he was accustomed, with an intent to beseech the King, that
he might put Mardocheus to death.

When the officers had brought the King word that Haman was before the Palace,
they were commanded presently to call him in. As soon as he came into the Kings
presence, he said unto him, Since I am assured that no man has so great an
affection for me as thou have, I prithee give me thy counsel, how I may
condignly honor him, as becomes my self, whom I do most affectionately love?
Haman thinking the advice he should give, should be given for himself, (because
he supposed that he only was beloved by the King more than all others)
counseled him that which in his opinion was the best, after this manner: If
your Majesty shall think fit to express the favors toward the man for whom you
pretend an extraordinary kindness, Ver. 7, 8, 9.
cause him to be mounted upon a brave Horse, and let him be apparelled in a
Royal habit, and put a chain of gold about his neck, and let some one of thy
chiefest friends march before him, and proclaim throughout the City, That thus
is the man honored, whom the King loves. The King with great satisfaction
received this counsel which Haman thought he had given in favor of himself, and
turning toward him, spoke thus unto him: Take one of my Horses, a garment of
purple, and a chain of gold, and seek out the Jew Mardocheus, and give them
unto him, and march thou before him, making proclamation after that manner
which you lately proposed: For (said he) thou art my nearest friend, and it is
very fit that the execution of this thing be committed to thy trust, which thou
have so faithfully counseled. And this command I to be done, because
Mardocheus has been the preserver of my life. Haman, upon the hearing of these
words, beyond all expectation, was no less amazed, than if he had been
Thunderstruck; but finding a necessity of giving obedience to a command that
was so positive and express, he went out, having with him the horse, the purple
habit, Ver. 10.
and the chain of gold, and meeting with Mardocheus before the Palace, who was
clothed in sackcloth, Honor offered to Mardocheus.
he appointed him to lay his mourning habit aside, and to cloth himself in
purple. But he (who was wholly ignorant of that which had happened, and O thou
most wicked amongst men, do thou thus mock at our afflictions?
Notwithstanding being afterward informed, that the King had bestowed this
honor on him, for saving his life, and discovering the treachery of those
Eunuchs that would have slain him, Ver. 11.
he put on the purple robe that the King wore ordinarily, and put the chain
about his neck, and afterward mounting on his Horse, he went round about the
City, Haman walking before him, and crying, Thus shall it be done to the man
whom the King shall think fit to honor. Ver. 12.
Now after they had gone round the City, Mardocheus gave his attendance on the
King, but Haman came not into the presence, so much was he ashamed at that
which had happened: Ver. 13.
but going home, he told his wife and friends, with tears, all that which had
happened; who told him, That it was no ways possible for him to revenge himself
as yet on Mardocheus, because God did visibly afford him his assistance.

Whilst they were thus speaking Esthers Eunuchs came to hasten Haman to the
banquet, Esther 7. 1.
and Sabuchadas, one of the Eunuchs, seeing the Gibbet erected in Hamans
lodging, (whereon he intended to execute Mardocheus) demanded of one of the
servants, wherefore it was raised up? And understanding that it was for the
Queens Uncle, whom Haman would require at the Kings hands to the end he might
put him to death, for that time he held his peace. But when the King being
seated with Haman at the banquet, required the Queen to declare what she would
require that he might grant her, Ver. 2.
she began to lament the danger of her people, saying, That she, with her whole
Nation, were made a prey to the sword, and that for that cause she brake out
into that discourse: For (said she) I had not troubled your Majesty, Ver. 3, 4.
nor been so much grieved, if you had commanded that all the Jews should be
sold, and led away Captives to extreme misery; for that affliction might have
been born: but since the utter destruction of our whole Nation is designed, I
could not but in this case have recourse to your Majesty's clemency. Ver. 5, 6.
The King much surprised with this discourse, demanded who it was that formed
that design? whereupon she began publicly to accuse Haman, saying, That he
alone was that wretched and envious man, who had contrived their tragedy.
Hereupon the King was much troubled, and arose from the banquet, and went into
the garden: then began Haman to pray, and beseech Esther to forgive him his
offense. And whilst he was fallen upon her bed to beseech her favor, the King
entered, and grew the more displeased at that he saw, and said, O thou cursed
amongst men, dare thou attempt to violate my wife? Haman was wholly
confounded with this question, so as Sabuchadas steping forth, accused him for
that he had found him in his lodging erecting a gibbet for Mardocheus, assuring
the King that one of his household Servants had told him it at such time as he
was sent to call him to the Banquet; alleging moreover, that the gibbet was
fifty Cubits high. 7, 8 9, 19.
Which when the King understood, he adjudged Haman to no other death but that
which he intended against Mardocheus; Haman having all his treacheries and
crulty discovered in the banquet, is adjudged to the gallows.
and thereupon presently commanded that he should be hanged upon the same
gibbet, until he were dead. And here we cannot but admire the Providence of
God, in considering his wisdom and justice in that he not only punished the
wickedness of Haman (as he had deserved) but also caused him to fall into the
same snare which he had prepared for another man. Thus died Haman, who had
unjustly abused the Kings friendship: as for his goods, they were given unto
the Queen.

After this the King called Mardochus unto him (for already he had notice that
he was his Wifes Uncle) and gave him the ring which he had given unto Haman:
Hesther 8, 1, 2.
the Queen likewise gave him his goods, Hamans goods bestowed on Mardocheus.
and entreated the King to deliver her from those apprehensions into which she
had been cast by those Letters which were sent out by that wicked man Haman in
his Majesty's name, to the Governors of the several Provinces, with
instruction to Massacre the Jews, extirpate and their whole Nation; assuring
him that she could not live to behold the death of her brethren, and the total
ruin of her Country. The King made no difficulty in granting her request,
assuring her that Jews; promising that when she had done the same, he would
Seal it with his own Seal, and give her authority to send it through all his
Provinces: to the end that they that read those Letters, confirmed by the Kings
Seal, should not any ways oppose the execution of them. Whereupon he sent for
his Secretaries of State, commanding them to write unto the Magistrates of all
the Nations touching the Jews, and to the Princes and Governors, of one
hundred, twenty and seven Provinces, from India as far as Ethiopia. The
Contents of which Letters were these.


Many men being puffed up withpride, av. 5, ad finem.
by reason of the many benefits and honors, The Kings Letters for the security
of the Jews.
which they receive through the liberality of their benefactors, do not only
exercise their pride toward their inferiors, but also are not afraid to wax
insolent against those who are the authors of their benefits, extinguishing as
much as in them lies, all manner of gratitude amongst men, and believing that
it is in their power to deceive God himself, and rob him of his Justice: so
that when the favor of their Princes has given them power and authority in the
Government of their affairs, in stead of applying themselves to the benefit of
the public, they have given Haman the Son of Amaeath (an Amalechite by Nation,
and by that Persian blood, but entertained by us) has in all things enjoyed
the fruit of our bounty hitherto; so that he has been called our father,
honored by all men, and obtained amongst all men, and in all things, the
second place after us: yet could he not make a moderate use of his happiness,
nor prudently entertain the greatness of his felicity; but has sought means to
deprive Mardocheus of his life, who preserved mine; seeking by his fraud and
malice to practice the ruin of Esther, the companion of our life and Kingdom;
and by this means striving to dispossess me of my most faithful friends, he
determined to transfer the Kingdom unto others. Touching my self, in that I
know that the Jews, who are by this wretch destinated to die, are no wicked
men, but such as live under a strict and holy disipline praying God continually
that it would please him to continue the Kingdom Haman (which by these presents
I utterly disanul) but my pleasure likewise is, that they be had in all honor.
As for him that practiced these things, against them, I have caused him and all
his race to be hanged before the gates of Susan, according to the just Jews be
suffered to live according to their own Laws, in peace; and that assistance may
be given them, to the end they may revenge themselves of those who have offered
them outrage in their adversity. And I command that this be done the thirteenth
day of the twelfth month called Adar, which is the day that God ordained for
their preservation (when they were appointed to be slain) which day I wish may
be fortunate to those that love us, and a monument of revenge on those that
intended our ruin. My pleasure likewise is, that all men, Cities and Nations
should know, that whosoever shall neglect, through obstinacy, to fulfill the
tenor of this my Mandate, he shall be pursued with fire and sword: and let
these Coppies be set up


As soon as the Posts had received these Letters, they presently mounted on
horsback and rode each of them his appointed way; The Jews reveng them on their
enemies.
and Mardocheus being clothed in a Royal habit, and adorned with a crown of
Gold on his head, and a chain of Gold about his neck, came forth: and the Jews
of Susan, seeing him thus honored by the King, supposed that his good success
was an assurance of their own: and when the Kings Letters were published; The
Jews looked upon them as a favorable ray of light which portended their
deliverance, and their enemies were in so great fear that diverse of other
Hebrews called Adar, and by the Mecedonians Distre) the posts that carried the
Kings letters certified them, that they should exterminate their enemies on
that very day whereon they themselves were in danger to be exterminated. The
Governors likewise of the Provinces, the Lords and chief Magistrates, did
honor to the Jews: for the fear they had of Mardocehus, and after the Kings
Letters were published, it came to pass that the Jews slew about five hundred
of their enemies. Within the City of Susa the King declared unto Esther the
number of the dead that perished in the City, Esther 9. v. 2. 5, 10, 13.
and suspecting what might happen through the whole Country, he asked her if
she requested any further matter, promising her that Jews to revenge themselves
yet once more the next day upon their enemies, and to hang Hamans ten Sons upon
the gibbet: which the King (being loath to contradict Esther) permitted, so that
on the 14. day of the Month Distre, they slew about three hundred more of their
enemies; without taking the smallest portion of their goods. Furthermore the
Jews slew in the Country, and in the Cities, about sixty five thousand of
their enemies, whom they dispatched the thirteenth day of the month, and
solemnized the day following in mirth and feasting. The Jews that were at Susan
assembled themselves likewise on the fourteenth day of the month, and
banquetted that whole day. Whence it comes to pass, that all the Jews which
are throughout the world, keep and solemnize Mardocheus also wrote unto the
Jews, who lived under the Empire of Artaxerxes, commanding them to observe
those days, and to solemnize them; willing them to charge their Successors to
do the like, to the end that this feast might continue for ever. For since on
that day they should have been destroyed by Haman, they should do well if after
they had escaped that danger, and taken revenge on their enemies, they should
observe the same day to give thanks to God: For this cause the Jews keep a
solemn feast on these days, and call it Purim, that is to say, Lotts. But
Mardocheus was great and powerful with the King, Governing the whole Kingdom
under him, and had also all the power that could be conferred on him by the
Queen; and for this cause the affairs of the Jews had Artaxerxes which happened
to be of greater importanance than this which we are going to relate. C. 10 per
totum Puraea festa. Mardocheus authority


The year of the World, 3584. before Christ's Nativity, 380.

John the High Priest, kills Jesus his brother in the Temple. Manasses the
brother of Jaddus the High Priest, espouseth the daughter of Sanaballath
Governor of Samaria.
AFter the death of Eliasib the High Priest, Judas his son succeeded in the
office. And Judas being dead, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 7.
John his son obtained the place, and was the cause that Bagoses, General of
Artaxerxes Army, The revenge taken of John for slaying his brother.
polluted the Temple, and made the Jews tributaries; so John had a brother
called Jesus, whom Bagoses favored, and promised to give him the
High Priesthood. One day these two Brethren being in the Temple, they fell out
about the succession, and the quarrel rose so high, that John slew his brother
Jesus in that holy place. It was a thing very strange, that John being a
Priest, should commit such an impiety against his brother; and yet far more
strange, in that so cruel an act, and an offense so impious, has neither
happened amongst Greeks nor Barbarians. But God left it not unpunished, in that
for the same sin the people lost their liberty, and the Temple was polluted by
the Persians. When Bagoses had intelligence, that John (the High Priest among
the Jews) had slain his brother Jesus in the Temple, Jaddus High Priest, whose
brother Manasses marries Sanaballaths daughter.
he came thither in all haste, and began to break Jews, Have you (said he) been
so bold as to commit murder in your Temple? And when he attempted to enter,
they hindered him. Whereupon he replied. Am I therefore more polluted than the
body that lies dead in the Temple? And having spoken thus, he entered
thereinto, and for the space of seven years Bagoses being thus incensed against
the Jews, punished them for murdering Jesus. After that John was deceased,
Jaddus his son was made High Priest, who had a brother called Manasses:
Sanaballath sent by the late King Darius to govern Samaria, (for he also was of
the race of the Chuteans, from whom came the Samaritans) knowing that Jerusalem
was a famous City, and that the Kings thereof wrought much trouble unto the
Inhabitants of Assyria, and Coelosyria; he willingly marries his daughter
Nicasis to this Manasses, with Jews.

CHAP. VIII.
Alexander the great King of Macedonia, passes out of Europe into Asia,
destroys the Empire of the Persians; and when it was believed that he would
have demolished the City of Jerusalem, he pardons the Jews, and treats them
very favorably.
Philip King of Macedon died in the City of Aegaea, being traitorously slain by
Pausanias the son of Cerastes, Alexander made King after Philip his father King
of Macedon.
of the race of Orestes, and his son Alexander succeeded him in the kingdom;
who passing over the Hellespont, gave battle unto the huge Army of Darius near
the River Granic, and there obtained a famous victory. And hereupon also
invading the Country of Lydia, (after he had conquered Jonia, and overrun
Caria) he fell upon the quarters of Pamphilia, as is declared in another place.
But the Elders of Jerusalem were much displeased, that Jaddus's brother, who
was at that time High Priest, and had married a foreign Woman, should be
companion and associate with him in the Priesthood, so as they mutined against
him. For they supposed that that Marriage would be but a means to animate those
who had a mind to profane Marriages,

They therefore commanded Manasses either to forsake his Wife, or else never
more to approach the Altar. The High Priest likewise being incensed against his
brother, as well as the People, drove him in like manner from the Sacrifice.
For which cause, Manasses (addressing himself to his Father-in-law Sanaballath)
told him, Manasses under hope of greater fortunes, retains the foreign wife
he had.
That although he loved his daughter Nicasis very entirely, yet would he not
condescend for her sake to be deprived of the Priesthood (which was the
greatest dignity that could be among their Nation, and which had ever continued
in his race.) Whereupon Sanaballath answered and promised him, That he would
not only continue him in the Priesthood, but also would give him the power and
dignity of the High Priesthood, and make him Governor of all places that he
commanded, provided the Marriage solemnized betwixt his daughter and him, The
year of the World, 3630. before Christ's Nativity, 334.
were continued. He furthermore assured That he would build a Temple,
resembling that in Jerusalem, upon the Mountain of Garzim, which was the
highest in all the Country, permitting him to do the same with Darius 's
consent. Manasses puffed up by these promises, remains with Sanaballath, and
grew in hopes that he should obtain the Priesthood by Darius's means: for
Sanaballath was very old. The Apostasy of the Priests.
Whereas diverse others, both Priests and common People among the Israelites,
were entangled in such Marriages, there arose no small commotion in Jerusalem.
For all they of this condition retired themselves to Manasses, whom Sanaballath
furnished with money, and lands to till, and houses to inhabit, to favor the
ambition of his Son-in-law.

At the same time Darius understanding that Alexander having passed the
Hellespont, had Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 8.
whom he had placed near unto the River Granicus, and that he passed further,
spoiling his Country; he gathered together his Horsemen and Footmen, resolving
to make head against the Macedonians, before they should gain all Asia: he
therefore passed Euphrates, and Mount Taurus in Cilicia, to encounter his
enemies. Sanaballath joyful at Darius's approach, incontinently told Manasses,
that he would fulfill his promise, as soon as Darius should return from the
conquest of his enemies. For not only he, but also all the Asians persuaded
themselves most assuredly, that the Macedonians would not abide the battle
against the Persians, Alexander's victory against Darius.
by reason of their great multitude; but it fell out altogether contrary to
their expectation. For the Persian encountering with the Macedonians, was
overcome; and after he had lost the greater part of his Army, and Persia.
Alexander arriving in Syria, seized on Damascus, took Sidon, and besieged Tire:
and by his letters sending unto Jaddus the High Priest of the Jews, he required
him to send him some supplies, and to sell his Army victuals for their money;
assuring him, That if he desired the friendship of the Macedonians, he would
give him that tribute which he paid to Darius, and he should have no cause to
repent of the choice which he should make. The High Priest answered Alexanders
Messenger, That he had sworn unto Darius never to bear Arms against him, during
his lifetime; against which oath of his, he could not act. Which when
Alexander heard, he was displeased, but resolved notwithstanding to continue
the siege at Tire, until such time as it should be taken; yet threatened he,
that as soon as he had taken it, he would lead Tire; and after he had given
order for the settlement thereof, he came unto Gaza, and took it with Bahemeses
the Captain of the Garrison that held it. But Sanaballath finding a fit
opportunity to make himself great, forsook Darius, and followed Alexander,
leading with him eight thousand of his Subjects: and coming to him at the
beginning of the siege of Tire, he offered to surrender to him all those places
wherein he commanded, acknowledging him for his Lord more willingly than he had
Darius. Alexander received him graciously: whereupon, Sanaballath informed him
of his condition, and let him understand, that Manasses (who was brother to
Jaddus the High Priest of the Jews) was his Son-in-law, Jews would be
dismembered into two parts, and they could not conspire together to make any new
insurrection or trouble, as in times past they had done during the Government
of the Kings of Asiria.

When Sanaballath had permission from Alexander to build his Temple, with the
greatest speed he might he finished the same, Manasses enjoys his desire.
and made Manasses the High Priest thereof, supposing that it was the greatest
advantage that might happen to his daughters children. Seven months after the
surrender of Tire, and two after the taking of Gaza, Sanaballath died.
Alexander also razed Gaza, and prepared himself to come suddenly upon
Jerusalem. Jaddus understood, he was much grieved, and afraid, not knowing how
to gain the favor of the Macedonians: and on the other side, knowing that the
King was displeased with him, (because heretofore he had disobeyed him:) He
commanded the people to make their prayers unto God, and he in his own person
offered sacrifice; beseeching God that it would please him to be a shield of
defense and succor to their Nation, and to deliver them from those imminent
dangers wherewith they were threatened. But the next night following, whilst he
slept, God appeared unto him, and commanded him to be of good courage, and that
as soon as he had gone about the Wall, he should open the Gates boldly, and
command the rest of the people to attire themselves in white; and that
accompanied with them, he should march forwards Alexander, without any
apprehension of future evil, because he would protect them. As soon as he
awaked from his sleep, he was very joyful; and related this Revelation from
God; and performing that which had been commanded him, he expected in this
manner the approach of the King; and when he knew that he was not far off from
the City, he marched forth to meet him, accompanied with the Priests, Alexander
intending to besiege Jerusalem, meets with the High Priest and people in
white, and is honorably received by them, and do^^ them honor in memory of his
vision that appeared unto him in the like habit.
and a multitude of other people, giving him a most Royal entertainment, and
far different from that of other Nations, near unto a place called Sapha, which
word signifies a Watch, (by reason that from that place a man may discover the
City and Temple of Jerusalem.) The Phoenicians and Chaldeans that were in
Alexanders Army, grounding their hopes upon his displeasure, doubted not but
that he would give Alexander espying the People from afar in white Rayments,
and the Priests going before them in their Rochets, and the High Priest attired
in a Robe of Purple, broidered with Gold, having his Mitre on his head, and his
plate of Gold wherein the Name of God was written, Alexander himself marched
forward before the rest of his company, and fell prostrate on his face before
that Name, saluting first of all the High Priest; and at the same instant, all
the Jews together saluted the King with one voice, and encompassed him round
about. The Kings of Syria and the rest that saw that which happened, were
wonderfully astonished, and thought that the King was out of his wits: Parmenio
only drew near unto him, and asked him, what he meant, to adore the Priest of
the Jews, whereas all other men adored him? To whom he answered, I do not adore
him, but that God whom the Priest worshippeth: for in my sleep I saw him in
such a habit, as I see him in at this present, at such time as I was in Dio a
City of Macedonia: and whilst I consulted with my self by what means I might
attain to the conquest of Asia, he counseled me to make no delay, but to march
forward boldly, assuring me, that it would be he that would guide both me and
mine Army, and would deliver the Empire of the Persians into my hands. Since
that time, I have not seen any one attired after the same manner: and at this
present beholding this man, and calling to mind the vision and exhortation that
he gave me in my sleep, I hope that mine Army being conducted by divine
providence, I shall overcome Darius, and discomfit the Persians, and that my
designs shall have a happy issue.

Parmenio, Alexander's sacrifice in the Temple, the confirmation of his
conquest by Daniel's prophecy, his bounty to the Jews.
he gave the High Priest his hand, and went with him into the City, being
conducted by the Priests: after this, when he came into the Temple, he offered
sacrifice, according to the Highpriests direction, whom he honored likewise
with very great reverence. And when Jaddus showed him the Prophecy of Daniel,
wherein he declared that a certain man of the Nation of the Greeks, should
destroy the Empire of the Persians, and that in his opinion he was the man;
Alexander was very joyful, and dismissed the multitude that attended him, for
that time. The next day assembling the Jews, he commanded them to let him know,
what favors they desired at his hands. Whereupon the High Priest answered, That
he desired that they might be permitted to live according to the Laws and
Customs of their Forefathers, and that every seventh year they might be
exempted from tributes. Which was granted them fully. They besought him
likewise, That by his permission, the Jews that were in the Countries of
Babylon and Media, might live according to their laws. And he promised them
willingly to do all that which they desired. He made Proclamation also among
the People, That if any one of them would bear Arms under him, (and live
according to the custom of their Nation) he was ready to receive them:
whereupon diverse listed themselves under him in the Wars.

After that Alexander had thus behaved himself at Jerusalem, he marched with
his Army against the neighboring Cities; and wheresoever he went, he was
received with great affection. But the Samaritans, whose Metropolitan City at
that time was Sichem (situate near unto the Mountain of Garizim, in which
there dwelt diverse Jews also, that were Alexander had received those of
Jerusalem, they resolved to profess themselves to be Jews. For such is the
nature of the Samaritans, (as we have declared heretofore) that when the Jews
are in affliction, they renounce all alliance with them, (wherein they confess
the truth:) But when they perceive our Affairs to be in prosperous condition,
The Samaritans be kinsmen to the Jews in prosperity, strangers in adversity.
they endeavor to persuade the World that we are both sprung from the same
original, and are descended of the race of Ephraim and Manasses, the sons of
Joseph. They came therefore to the Kings presence, and met him near unto
Jerusalem, with great magnificence, and demonstration of singular affection
toward him. And after that Alexander had entertained them, they of Sichem
approached near unto him, (being accompanied with those Men of War that
Sanaballath had sent That he would visit their City, and honor their Temple
with his presence: whereupon he promised, That at his return he would visit
them. They required him also, The year of the World, 3632. before Christ's
Nativity, 332.
That he would acquit them of the Tribute of the seventh year, because they did
not sow in the same. He asked them, Who they were that made that request? They
answered him, That they were Hebrews; but that they were called Sichemites by
the Sidonians. He asked them again, If they were Jews? And they said, They were
not. Well (said he) I have made this grant unto the Jews: The Temple on the
Mount of Garizim.
when therefore I shall return, and be more particularly informed, I shall do
that which shall be requisite. Thus dismissed he the Sichemites, but he
commanded Sanaballaths Men of War to follow him into Egypt, Onias, son of
Jaddus High Priest.
promising in that place to give them possessions by lot; which afterward he
did, (enjoining them to live in Garrison in the City of Thebais, to make good
that Country.) After Alexander's death, his Empire was divided amongst his
Successors, and the Temple built near unto Mount Garizim, remained entire. And
if any one were accused in Jerusalem for eating unlawful meats, or for breaking
the Sabbath, or for any such like fault, he fled unto the Sichemites, saying,
That he was accused unjustly. In that time deceased the High Priest Jaddus: and
Onias, his son, succeeded him. This was the state of the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem at that time.

The Twelfth Book of the Antiquities of the JEWS; The year of the World, 3643.
before Christ's Nativity, 321.

Written by FLAVIVS JOSEPHVS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Twelfth Book.
1. Ptolomey the Son of Lagus is made Governor of Jerusalem, and the rest of
Judaea, by a stratagem, and leads diverse Jews with him Prisoners into Egypt.
2. Ptolomey Philadelphus translateth the Laws of the Jews into the Greek
tongue, and dismissing diverse Captives of that Nation, he dedicateth many
presents to the Temple of God. 3. In what estimation the Jews were with the
Kings of Asia, and how the freedom of those Cities which they built, was
granted them. 4. Joseph the Son of Tobias drives away the Jews imminent
calamity, by reason of his friendship with King Ptolomey. 5. The friendship and
society between the Lacedaemonians, and Onias the High Priest of the Jews. 6.
The Jews distracted by seditions, call Antiochus to their assistance. 7. How
Antiochus leading his Army to Jerusalem, and taking the City, spoiled the
Temple. 8. Antiochus forbids the Jews to use the Laws of their forefathers,
the Son of Asmonaeus, called Matthias, contemned the King, and put his Captains
to flight. 9. Mathias being dead, Judas his Son succeeded him. 10. Apollonius,
a Captain of Antiochus, is overcome in Jewry, and slain. 11. The overthrow and
death of Lysias and Gorgias sent out against the Jews. 12. How dividing their
Armies, Simon overcame the Tyrants, and Ptolomaidans, and Judas the Ammonites.
13. The death of Antiochus Epiphanes among the Persians. 14. Antiochus Eupator
overthrowing the Army of the Jews, besieged Judas in the Temple. 15. Antiochus
giving over his siege, plighteth a league of friendship with Judas. 16.
Bacchides a Captain belonging to Demetrius, being sent with his Army against
the Jews returns back to the King, without success. 17. Nicanor elected
Captain after Bacchides, and sent out against the Jews, is slain with his whole
Army. 18 Bacchides sent out once more against the Jews, overcomes them. 19.
How Judas being overcome in battle, is slain.


CHAP. I.
After the death of Alexander the Great his Army is divided amongst his
Captains.
ALexander King of Macedon having overcome the Persians and established the
state of the Jews (according as has been related) departed this life. The
death of Alexander, and the Wars of his succssors.
Whereupon his Dominions and Kingdoms fell into diverse men's hands; Antigonus
made himself Governor of Asia: Seleucus of Babylon, and the bordering Nations:
Jerusalem surprised by policy, and the Jews lead way captive.
Lysimachus had the Hellespont: Cassander Macedon: and Ptolomey the Son of
Lagus held Egypt* Now when these men were at discord amongst themselves
(whilst each of them affected the sovereignty, and fought the one against the
other) they raised diverse great and bloody Wars, which ruined many Cities and
destroyed great numbers of their Inhabitants. Syria had sufficient experience
of all these miseries under the Government of Ptolomey the Son of Lagus
surnamed Soter a Title which he little deserved. He it was that seized on
Jerusalem by a stratagem; for he entered the City upon a Sabbath day, under
pretext to offer sacrifice; and whilst the Jews suspected nothing but spent the
day in ease and idleness, he surprised the City without resistance, and made
the Citizens captives. Agatharchides the Cnidian (who wrote the Acts of
Alexanders successors, testifies the same) reproaching us of superstition; as
if by that means we lost our City. Jews who inhabit a City which is called
Jerusalem, both strong and mighty. They suffered it to fall into Ptolomeys
hands, because they would not stand upon their guard; and through their
unseasonable superstition they permitted themselves to be subdued by a Tyrant
conqueror. The year of the World, 3634. before Christ's Nativity, 321.
See Agatharchides says in this place of our Nation: But Ptolomey leading away
with him diverse prisoners from the better quarters of Judaea, and the places
near unto Jerusalem, of Samaria and mount Garzim, sent them into Egypt to
inhabit there: and being assured that those of Jerusalem were most firm in
maintaining their oaths and promises, according as it appeared by their answer
made to Alexander, when after the discomfiture of Darius, he sent Ambassadors
unto them: he put diverse of them into his Garrisons, giving them the same
privileges in the City of Alexandria, which the Macedonians had. After he had
received their oath, that they should be faithful unto him and his successors,
in memory of the great trust and favors he had bestowed on them, many of the
other Jews likewise of their own accord went into Egypt, partly Sedition
betwixt the Jews and Samaritans as touching the Temple.
partly by the liberality of Ptolomey toward their Nation. Yet were there
continual quarrels betwixt their posterity and the Samaritans: because they
would keep and maintain the customs and ordinances of their forefathers;
whereupon diverse wars arose amongst them. For they of Jerusalem said that their
Temple was the true Sanctuary of God, and would have the offerings and
sacrifices sent thither; the Samaritans on the other side commanded them to be
brought to the mount Garazim.

CHAP. II.
Ptolomey Philadelphus caused the Laws of the Jews to be translated into
AFter the death of Ptolomeus Soter his Son Ptolomeus Philadelphus succeeded in
the Kingdom of Egyptt, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 2.
and held it for nine and thirty years space, he it was that translated the law
into the Greek tongue, and delivered the Jews from that servitude, wherein they
were inthralled in Egypt to the number of sixscore thousand upon this occasion.
(...) library of Ptolomey Phyladelphus.
Demetrius Phalereus Master of the Kings Library, endeavored to make a
collection of all sorts of Books that were in the world, and brought all which
he thought would be agreeable to the King, who was very curious in his
collection of Books. Jews wherein many things touching their Laws and policies
were written which were worthy to be known and deserved a place in so memorable
and famous a Liberary but that it would be very difficult to translate them
into the Greek tongue, for their characters seem to have some relation to the
Syriack, and their pronunciation likewise is not much different from it;
notwithstanding they have their phrase proper and peculiar unto themselves. But
nevertheless he believed it might be done, since his Majesty would Jews to help
him to these books. In the mean time a certa^n man called Aristaeus, who was
entirely beloved by the King by reason of his modesty and had diverse times
resolved with himself to solicit the King, to dismiss all the Jews that were
in his Kingdom, supposing that at that instant he had a fit oppertunity to make
his request, he spoke unto Sosibus to Terentin, and Andrew the chief Captain of
the Kings guard, beseeching them to favor him in that which he intended to
move to the King. Having found how they stood inclined, he addressed himself
unto the King, and spoke unto him after this manner. Since your Majesty has
resolved not only to transcribe, but also to translate the laws of the Jews I
should not speak to your Majesty with that freedom and sincerity which I ought
to use, if I should not inform you that I know not how this can be fairly done
at the same time that detain as your slaves so great a number of Jews within
your Kingdom of Egypt? You will therefore do a work answerable to the greatness
of your courage and benignity if you deliver them from their misery,
considering that he who gave them their law is God, who governs your Kingdom
(as by diligent inquiry I have certainly learnt) for both they and we adore one
God, Creator of all things, whom we call by the name of Jupiter, for as much as
he preserves our life and the lives of all men. For that honor therefore
which you owe unto God, send back these people into their Country, and permit
them to inhabit it, who amongst all men are most singularly affected to their
Religion. Neither has your grace occasion to suspect, that I make this address
unto you, because I am either allied or descended of any of their Tribes; But
only for this reason because I am assured that there is but one God, who is the
Maker of all men, and that he takes pleasure in those that The year of the
World, 3684. before Christ's Nativity, 280.
When Aristeus had spoken thus, the King beholding him with a cheerful
countenance, asked him, How many thousands he thought they were, whose liberty
he desired? Andrew (being nigh at hand) answered, That there were more than
120000. Whereupon the King replied, Is this demand, Aristeus, a matter of small
consequence, which thou requirest? Sosibius and Tarentin replied, That he could
do nothing more worthy of himself, then by such an action, to acknowledge the
great obligations which God had laid upon him, in raising him to the Throne.
The King being well-pleased to see them so unanimous in their request, promised
that the Jews should be set at liberty, and that he would pay unto his Soldiers
120 drachmes for each Jew that was his slave: and touching the request made by
them, he promised them to dispatch his Letters Patents, in most ample Aristeus
suit; or rather to satisfy the Will of God, which was chiefly to be regarded.
Hereupon he sent out his Proclamation, declaring, That he not only set them at
liberty, who had been brought thither by his Father, or those of his Army who
attended him; but those also who heretofore had been in his Kingdom, or lately
had been brought thither: And notwithstanding it was told him, that the money
that would be required for their ransom, would amount to more than 400 Talents,
yet ceased he not to confirm that which he had promised. But that it may more
plainly appear how great his Royal magnificence was, I thought good to insert
in this place the Copy of the Edict, which he sent abroad, to this effect:

Syria and Phoenicia, The King of Egypts Proclamation touching the liberty of
the Jews, solicited by Aristeus.
and after the conquest of Judea, have taken any Prisoners, and brought them
into our Cities and Countries, with intent to sell them: All they also, who
have heretofore detained any, or at this present have any such Captives in
their possession, they are commanded hereby, to set them at liberty that live
under their thraldom, receiving for the ransom of every person 120 drachmes; if
they are Soldiers, at such time as their wages shall be paid them: as for the
rest, they shall receive their money out of the Kings Treasury. For I am
persuaded, that it was contrary to my Fathers intent, and against all right,
that they have been taken Prisoners, and that their Country has been harassed
by the insolency of the Soldiers, who have thought to make their profit and
merchandise by them by bringing them into Egypt. Having therefore Jews who are
detained in servitude be discharged, and that they who hold them captive,
receive the ransom promised by us, so as no deceit or fraud be used therein.
And to the end that our ordinance be exactly and fully observed, our Will is,
That this Edict of ours be publicly proclaimed three days after it shall come
unto your hands; and that those who hold such Prisoners in their possession,
declare how many Prisoners they have. Moreover, it shall be lawful for any man
that will, to accuse such as obey not this Edict; and our pleasure is, that
such as shall not observe it, shall have their goods confiscated to the Kings
use.

When this Edict of the Kings, published to this effect, was proclaimed abroad,
and

Demetrius to make a Decree, touching the Translation of the Books of the Jews.
For the King did nothing rashly, but administered all things with great wisdom
and circumspection; and therefore the Copy of Demetrius Proposal, and the
Letters sent to this effect, are registered, and recorded in writing: the number
likewise of the Presents that were sent, and by whom they were offered. So that
whosoever shall behold them, he will judge by the curious workmanship, the
great skill of the Workman; and by the excellencies of the pieces, he will know
by whom each of them was fashioned. The Copy of the advice given by Demetrius,
is this:

Demetrius to the great King, Health.
Most mighty Prince, since you have committed the trust unto me to find out
such Books as are wanting to your Library, Demetrius exhortatory Letter to
Ptolomy, touching his Library.
and to search for such Volumes as hitherto have been hid from my sight, to the
end that I might gather them together after that I had used herein all the care
that was possible; I have found, that amongst others, we want the Books of the
Laws of the Jews. For they being written in Hebrew Characters, we have no
notice thereof; nor have we taken the pains to inquire after them, because your
Majesty has not as yet thought fit to desire them. But I think it necessary,
that your Majesty should have them procured, and that they be faithfully
Hecateus the Abderite says, That neither Poets nor Historians have made any
mention of them, nor of those that have been governed under the same: because
in themselves they are pure, and are not to be published by the mouth of the
profane. May it therefore please your Majesty to write unto the High Priest of
the Jews, commanding him to send you six of every Tribe, such as he shall know
to be most expert in their Law, by whom we may clearly apprehend the sense
contained in those Books, to the end that having the faithful interpretation of
those things that are contained therein, we may collect and gather them
together, to the satisfaction of your Majesty.


When the King had in this manner been advised, he wrote unto Eleazar the
High Priest Jews, The Kings liberality toward the Jews.
touching this matter: letting him know what liberty was by him granted unto
the Jews that were in his kingdom: He sent him also 50 Talents of gold, to make
cups, ewers and vessels, with an infinite number of precious stones, commanding
his Cofferers, who had the charge of his Jewels, to suffer the Workmen to
choose what stones they liked best. Furthermore, he appointed that a hundred
Talents should be given for the sacrifices and oblations, and other uses of the
Temple. But after that I have declared what was the Copy of the Letter sent
unto Eleazar the High Priest, and the manner how he obtained that Sacerdotal
dignity, I will give an account of the rich Presents, and their curious
Workmanship.

After the death of Onias the High Priest, his son Simon surnamed the Just,
succeeded Simon dying, and leaving behind him one only son, of young and
tender years, who was called Onias: his brother (which was this Eleazar of whom
we speak at this present) took upon him the Priesthood, and to him wrote
Ptolomy, in such manner as is hereafter expressed.

King Ptolomy to the High Priest Eleazar, Health.
Whereas diverse Jews dwelt in my kingdom, whom my father had honored, (though
during the Reign of the Persians they were sent thither as Prisoners) and made
some of them Ptolomy's Epistle to Eleazar for Interprete^s to translate the
Bible.
allowing them honorable wages and conditions: To others born in his time in
Egypt, he has committed his Forts and Garrisons, which made them much honored
and feared among the Egyptians. Since my coming to the Government, I have
behaved my self graciously toward all men, and especially toward those of your
Nation, of whom I have delivered more than 100000 out of Captivity, paying
their ransom out of mine own Coffers: I have likewise listed some of those that
were of age in the companies and bands of my men of War: I have received some
into my Court, whom I took to be faithful and loyal, and in my opinion well
worthy of such preferment; supposing this to be the most acceptable Present
that I could offer up unto God, for his Providence in advancing me to the
Kingdom. And being desirous not only to gratify them, but also all those Jews
that are in the whole world, I have determined to cause Hebrew into Greek, that
I might put it in my Library. You shall therefore do well, if you choose out
six discreet and learned men of every Tribe amongst you, and send them unto me,
such as by reason of their age shall be well instructed in your Laws, and
sufficiently enabled to expound the same. And I doubt not but that (the work
succeeding as I hope it will) I shall thereby gain great glory. Wherefore I
send unto you Andrew the chiefest Captain of my Guard, and Aristeus also, (whom
we especially honor) to confer with you: by whom I have sent you 100 Talents
of silver, as the first fruits of those gifts and sacrifices, which we intend
to offer in the Temple. You will do us an especial favor, if you signify your
mind unto us by your Letters.


As soon as Eleazar had received the Kings Letters, he returned him an answer
full of respect, as follows.


If your self, your Queen Arsinoe, and your children be in health, we do very
much rejoice thereat. We have received your Princely Letters with no small joy,
and have read and considered the contents thereof; we have also published them
in the presence of all the People, and have declared unto them your piety
toward God, and have showed them those vessels which you sent us, twenty of
Gold, and thirty of silver; with five vessels, and a Table which you have sent
us as Presents. We have likewise showed them those hundred talents which Andrew
and Aristeus (virtuous and excellently learned men, Eleazars Letters in answer
to Ptolomey.
and honored by you amongst your Arsinoe, your children and friends: the
people likewise have prayed that God would send you happy success in whatsoever
you desire, that your Kingdom may be continued in peace, and that the
translation of our Law may be accomplished at your desire, for our own
satisfaction. To that intent we have chosen six Elders out of every Tribe, whom
we send unto you, together with the original of our Law. Our request is, that
according to your accustomed piety and justice, you return us both our Laws and
these interpreters in safety, as soon as they have answered your expectation.
Fare


This is the answer which the High Priest sent unto him. I have not thought it
necessary to set down the names of the seventy two Elders in particular, who
were sent by Eleazar together with the law, although they were all mentioned in
the Letter sent by the High Priest. Yet I think it not amiss to recite the
excellency of those Presents that were sent by the King, and offered up unto
God; to the end that all men may know how zealous he was toward the service of
God. For in performance thereof, he spared no expense, but continually assisted
the workmen and examined their workmanship; The description of those Presents
which Ptolomey dedicated in the Temple of Jerusalem.
to the end that nothing might be carelessly finished, or negligently performed.

The King desirous to make it surpass that at Jerusalem inquired after the
dimensions of it, to the intent that he might make it far greater. And having
certain notice how large it was, and that there was no let but that he might
make his far greater, he said that he would have it five times greater than the
other: but that he feared lest being so great it would be unfit to offer
sacrifice thereupon; and his intention was, that the present which he offered,
should not only serve for show, but that they might also be The Golden Table.
and commanded them to make and finish them, having always an eye to the
model, which he had given them to work by. He undertook therefore to make the
Table of two Cubits and a half in length, of one in breadth, and of one and a
half in height all of massy Gold: about which there was made a border, of a
hand breadth; enriched with moving waves, on which there was a figure graven
with hung down, The year of the World, 3684. before Christ's Nativity, 218.
the ears of Corn stood upright, and all was enclosed with Pomegranats, Two
golden standing Cups.
to the end that the excellent and curious workmanship might the better be
seen, and on what side soever it were turned, it might always seem Two silver
standing cups.
upon which there were certain pieces of Crystal and Amber, enchaced and
placed one by the other in equal distance, Thirty viols.
and proportion: which gave a marvelous satisfaction to the beholders.
Ptolomeys charge and diligence in the (...) of his presents.
The Corniches of the feet were made after the form of a Lilly; the leaves
whereof bent themselves under the Table, and the stalk seemed to be stret^hed
out straight. The base of the same was an hands breadth

See here what this was, which the King presented: wherein the price of the
stuff, the diversity and beauty of the workmanship, and the excellency of the
engraving was very excellent; so that the richness of the materials, and the
great variety of ornaments of this magnificent present made it evident that
though this great Prince could not for the reasons, before mentioned, make this
Table larger than the former, yet he spared no charges to make it surpass it in
all other respects. He gave besides this, two vessels of Gold, scaled from the
bottom as far as the half part of the Cup; and besides that, enriched with
diverse precious Stones curiously enchased. And in the midst of them there was a
labyrinth a Cubit high, made of all sorts of precious Stones, and at the foot
thereof were engraven spires, after the manner of twigs, and

And these were the presents which were sent by this King to be dedicated in
the Temple of Jerusalem. The 70 Interpreters (...).
All which being consecrated and laid up in the Temple by the High Priest
Eleazar, after he had greatly honored those that brought them thither, and
given them certain presents to be tendered in his behalf unto the King,
Alexandaria, but the King (having notice thereof, and how the seventy two
Elders were come with The year of the World, 3684. before Christ's Nativity,
280.
Andrew and Aristaeus, who came and presented him with letters from the
High Priest Eleazar, and answered him to all which he demanded of them. And
being desirous to communicate with the Elders that came from Jerusalem to
expound and interpret the Law, he contrary to his ordinary custom and manner
dismissed all those that came to him about private business, to whom he was
accustomed to give audience every fifth day; as he used monthly to foreign
Ambassadors. Having therefore for that time dismissed them, he kept those by
him whom Eleazar had sent unto him; who coming to his presence (accompained
with those presents which the High Priest had delivered them to present unto
him, with the Original where in the Law was written in Golden Letters) he asked
them naturally extreme joy as well as great griefis the cause of tears. After
he had commanded that these books should be committed to their trust who were
deputed to that office, at length he saluted Antigonus by Sea.) His pleasure
was also, that they should be his guests, and he caused diverse goodly lodgings
to be assigned them under the Castle.

Nicanor likewise, who had the charge to entertain strangers, commanded
Dorotheus (who was ordinarily employed in the same) to prepare for every one of
them such things, as were necessary for their diet and entertainment. For so
was it ordained Dorotheus's care and exact diligence, who in his own person
disposed all that which was necessary for (...) hospitality. He prepared two
places to banquet in, in two several parts (according as the King had commanded
him) so that some of them might sit on either side of him and the rest might be
placed near unto his Table, omitting nothing of that which concerned their
honor. When they were in this manner placed, the King commanded Dorotheus
Judaea. Hereupon he dismissed the Egyptian Priest, and others that were wont to
make the ordinary prayers: which done he commanded that one of the Elders
called Elisaeus (who was a Priest) should bless the Table: whereupon he
standing upright in the midst of them all, besought God to bless both the King
and his Subjects with all happiness. Whereupon there arose an applause and
acclamation of all men, which being ceased, they fell to their banquet, and
made good cheer with that which was set before them. When the King had kept
silence so long as he thought convenient, he began at last to Play the
Philosopher, The banquet that Ptolomey made for the Jews and their prayers
before meat.
asking of every one of them certain questions in Physic, praying them to
discuss the same; and when each of them in order had very pertinently Aristaeus
has written to that effect. The King was astonished at their answers, and the
Philosopher Menedemus confessed that they confirmed him in his opinion that all
things were administered by divine providence and that they furnished him with
resons to maintain his sentiments. The Translation of the Bible into the Greek
tongue.
But the King protested in their presence, that their conversation had
infinitely contented and instructed him, in that by their means he had obtained
the good hap to be informed by them how to govern his Kingdom. Whereupon he
commanded that each of them should have three talents given him, and that they
should Demetrius took them with him, and led them over that trench of the Sea
that contains seven furlongs, and that Bridge which joyneth the Island to the
continent, and toward the Northern part thereof, he assigned them a loding
remote from all noise, The year of the World, 3684. before Christ's Nativity,
380.
and fit for contemplation: to Dorotheus presented them with a part of diverse
dishes which were prepared for the King; for so had his Majesty commanded it.
Thus every morning entered they the Kings Palace, and after they had saluted him
they retired themselves to their accustomed Demetrius assembled all the Jews in
that place where the law had been translated, and caused it to be read over in
the presence of the interpreters themselves. Which done, the Assembly approved
the Exposition of the Interpreters; and praised Demetrius, by whose suggestions
they enjoyed so great a good. They requested likewise that this Exposition
should be perused and over-read by the Nobles and Governors. After this, both
the Priest, the Elders the Interpreters, and the Magistrates of the People
required, that since this translation was so happily achieved, it might remain
unaltered; so

Which resolution being allowed by all men, it was ordered, that if any man
perceived any thing in that translation, which was either exuberant or
deficient, he should consider thereupon and give notice thereof, to the end it
might be corrected: dealing herein very discreetly, to the end that that which
had once been adjudged good, should continue inviolable for ever. The King
therefore was highly contented, seeing his endeavors and purpose in that
behalf so happily and profitably finished; but above all things, he took
pleasure in reading the Law, admiring at the profound wisdom of the Lawmakers,
and began to question with Demetrius, by what means it came to pass, that
neither any Poet not Historiographer had made mention of that Law,
notwithstanding that in it self Demetrius gave this answer: that no man was so
hardy to touch that work, by reason that it was Divine, and every way
venerable: assuring him also, that certain men who had attempted to set their
hands thereto, had been punished by God: giving him to understand, how
Theopompus, intending to reduce some part of that Law into his History, Gods
justice upon those Ethnicks that intermedled with the sacred Scriptures.
had ran mad for more then thirty days, and that having some intermission of
his fit, he appeased God by prayer; thereby easily conjecturing what was the
cause of his malady. Moreover, he was certified by a Vision that appeared unto
him in his sleep, that this inconvenience befell him, because he had too
curiously searched into sacred and divine matters, and had intended to
communicate the same unto profane and wicked men from which enterprise when he
had desisted, he recovered Theodestes the Tragic Poet, intending to make
mention in some of his Poems of a certain History written in the sacred
Scriptures, was stricken blind; and acknowledging the cause hereof to proceed
from his audacious presumption, he was restored to his sight after he had
appeased Gods displeasure.

When the King had considered on these words, according as Demetrius had
discoursed them unto him, he prostrated himself on the earth, and commanded
that the books should be carefully kept, to the end they might continue free
from corruption. Furthermore, he exhorted the Translators to repair oftentimes
unto him from Judea, assuring them that in so doing, the matter would redound
both to their honor and profit; telling them that for that time he thought good
to dismiss them: but when they should return unto The presents which the King
bestowed upon the Interpreters, and those he sent to Eleazer.
after he had given each of them three several suits of apparel, two talents of
gold, and a cup that was, in value, worth a talent, and a certain Bed or
curious Couch to sit and banquet upon. This gave he them for themselves. But to
Eleazer the High Priest he sent, by them, ten Couches, whose feet were of
silver, and the furniture answerable, and a vessel of thirty Talents; Ten
Purple Robes likewise, and a magnificent Crown, and one hundred pieces of fine
linen: and besides that, he sent, by way of present, unto the Temple Ewers,
Basins and two Golden vessels: beseeching Eleazer, by his letters, that if any
one of his subjects had an inclination to come unto him, he would permit
Ptolomey Philadelphus esteem and honor the Jews

The year of the World, 3984. before Christ's Nativity, 280.

Favor, received by the Jews from the Kings of Asia, Antiochus the great,
contracts an alliance with the Ptolomey King of Egypt, and gives him Cleopatra
his Daughter in Marriage, with severel Provinces for her Dowry, and amongst the
rest Judea. Onias the Chief Priest insenseth the King of Egypt by refusing to
pay the Tributes which was due.
THe Jews received honor likewise at the hands of the Kings of Asia, because
they had born Arms under them. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 3.
For Seleucus surnamed Nicanor, highly respected them, The immunities and
privileges granted to the Jews by Seleucus Nicanor, King of Syria.
and permitted them to dwell in those Cities which he built in Asia and lower
Syria; and in Antioch which was the Metropolitan chief City. Moreover he gave
order, that Macedonians or Greeks that inhabitted therein: so that even unto
this day that order is continued as (it appears by this) for that the Jews
refusing to anoint themselves with foreign oil, do receive a certain sum of
money from the Masters of the exercises in lieu of the Oil. Which when the
people of Antioch intended to abolish, during the present War, Mutianus at that
time Governor of Syria, The privilege in Antioch continued to the Jews.
opposed himself against them. Again, when Vespasian and his Son Titus had
conquered the world, although the Alexandrians and Antiochians desired that the
privileges which the Jews enjoyed might continue no longer; yet could they not
obtain it. Whereby the humanity and valor of the Romans may appear, and
especially of Vespasian and Titus, that notwithstanding they had received so
great Alexandria, and Antioch: wherefore they granted nothing in favor of
them, nor ordained any thing to the prejudice of those whom they had overcome
in War, so as to abolish one jot of those privileges which they had in times
past; but said that they that had resisted them by Arms, and who had been
overcome, were sufficiently punished for their obstinacy: and as touching those
that had not committed any offense, they saw Marcus Agrippa was of the same
opinion touching the Jews. For whereas the Jonians were seditiously bent
against them, and besought Agrippa, that it might be only lawful for them to
make use of the privileges which Antiochus Seleucus's Nephew (whom the Greeks
entitled by the Name of God) had given them; requiring, that if the Jews were
of their blood, they might be tied to adore the same gods which the Jonians
worshipped: When therefore this matter was referred to the determination of the
Judges, the Jews had the better, and obtained the liberty to live according to
their own Laws and Customs: and he that at this time pleaded their cause, was
Nicholas Damascene. For Agrippa pronounced, That it was unlawful for them to
innovate any thing. And if any man desire Nicholas. Neither ought this judgment
of Agrippa's, to seem in any sort strange: for at that time our Nation had not
by any Wars procured the Romans displeasure. But upon just occasion may a man
admire the magnanimity of Vespasian, and of his son Titus, who behaved
themselves with such moderation after so great a War, and such doubtful Battles
as they had fought against us. Antiochus the great King of Asia and Syria
vexes the Jews.
But to return to my purpose, from whence I have digressed. At such time as
Antiochus the great reigned in Asia, the Country of Jewry was much harassed,
and both the Jews and Inhabitants of Coelosyria endured many miseries. For
Antiochus making War against Ptolomey Philopater and his son, called Ptolomey
the famous, they were miserably perplexed. For whether Antiochus overcame, or
was overcome, they were continually spoiled: so that betwixt the prosperity and
adversity of Antiochus, Antiochus had overcome Ptolomey, he conquered Jewry.
After the death of Philopater, his son sent a great Army into Coelosyria, under
the conduct of Scopas, who seized a great number of those Cities; and falling
upon our Nation also, he conquered it. Not long after this, Antiochus fought
with Scopas, near unto the River Jordan, and obtained the victory, discomfiting
the greater part of the Enemies Army; at which time Antiochus recovered again
those Cities of Coelosyria, which were before taken by Scopas. He took Samaria
also: which when the Jews perceived, they submitted themselves of their own
accord unto him; and having received him into the City of Jerusalem, they gave
both his Army and his Elephants abundance of provision, and willingly assisted
him with their Forces, to subdue those Garrisons which Scopas had placed in the
fortresses of the higher City. Whereupon Antiochus supposing it to be for his
honor, to acknowledge and remunerate the affection and forwardness which the
Jews had expressed in his service, wrote unto his Captains and Friends,
signifying unto them how forward the Jews had been in his Wars: and to let them
know, that he was resolved to gratify them for their service.

Hereafter I will insert the copy of his letters which he wrote in favor of
them, after Polybius the Megalopolitane, writes, to this purpose, which I will
recite out of the sixteenth Book of his histories. Scopas (says he) the
General of Ptolomey; Army, marching toward the mid-land, did in one winter
overcome the whole nation of the Jews. Ptolomey Epiphames King of Egypt wareth
against the King of Syria
He recites also in the same Book that after that Scopas had been overcome
Antiochus seized Bathanaea, Samaria, Abila, and Gadra; and anon after the Jews,
which dwelt at Jerusalem where the Temple was, joined themselves with him: and
although we are to speak more amply and particularly of that appartition that
happened near unto the Temple; yet we shall defer the recital hereof until
another time. This is that which Polybius has written. But to return unto our
purpose: I will recite

King Antiochus to Ptolomey, Health.
Whereas the Jews have given us most apparent testimony of there affection
toward us, Polybius the Megalopolitane of Scopas Ptolomeys Captain.
since the first time of our entrance into their Country, and have
magnificently entertained at such time as we were in person before their City,
by presenting themselves before us, with all their Elders; Antiochus Epistle to
Ptolomy, as touching the liberty of the Jews.
and have also furnished us largely with all that which was necessary for our
Soldiers and our Elephants; and have likewise taken Arms with us against the
Egyptian Garrison: we have thought fit to afford them some satisfaction in
repairing their City, ruinated by casualties, to the intent it might be
inhabited and Peopled again, by gathering together Jews that are scattered
abroad in diverse places, and planting them again in the same. And in especial
(to the end that the service of God may be renewed) we have set down a certain
sum of money, to be employed in sacrifices, and in buying Beasts for their
offerings, Wine, Oil, and incense; that is to say, twenty thousand sicles of
Silver; and for sine Flower, according to the law of the place, one thousand,
four hundred and sixty measures of Wheat, and three hundred, seventy and five
measures of salt. And my will is, that all these things that are abovenamed,
be delivered unto them according to the form of our ordinance. We likewise
command, that the work of the Temple be finished with the galleries, and other
necessary buildings; and that all the Timber be brought out of Judea and other
places, and especially out of Libanus, without any tax or tallage: which
exemption also shall October, to inhabit the same with exemption from all
charges for three years space. We forgive them moreover the third part of their
tributes, to the intent they may recover their losses. We will also that those
Citizens that have been forcibly led from thence into servitude, be set at
liberty, both they themselves, and also those that are of their


These are the contents of this Letter. The Edict of Antiochus the great in
honor of the Temple.
And to yield the more honor unto the Temple, he sent an edict through all his
Kingdom to this effect.

That it should not be lawful for any stranger, to enter within the enclosure
of the Temple without the Jews permission; except those that should be purified
according to the law and custom of the place. That no man should bring into the
city any flesh of Horses, Mules, wild or tame Asses, Leopards, Foxes, or Hares,
or Generally of any Cattle prohibited to be eaten by the laws of the Jews. That
it should not be lawful likewise for any man to bring their Skins into the City
or to nourish any such beasts in the same, but that it might be only lawful to
use these beasts which might be sacrificed unto God, according to the law of
their ancestors. That Phrygia and Lydia, he wrought also unto Zeuxis Governor
of one of the higher Provinces, and his entire friend, commanding him to send
certain of our Nation from Babylon to Phrygia, writing unto him unto this
effect.

The year of the World, 3790. before Christ's Nativity, 204.
Health.
Understanding that those of Lydia and Phrygia are newly fallen into Rebellion,
I have thought good (according to my duty) to prevent the same: and whilst I
consulted with my friends what was to be done, Antiochus's Epistle to Zeuxis,
in which he makes honorable mention of the Jews.
it has been thought fit that two thousand Families of the Jews should be sent
thither; all which should be drawn out of Mesopotamia and Babylon, to plant
them in Garrisons, and places of security. For I am persuaded of their good
affection and zeal toward us, both in respect of their devotion toward God,
as also from the testimony which our Predecessors have given them, namely, that
they are faithful, and ready to execute that wherein Farewell.


Antiochus the Great bare unto the Jews. Antiochus's friendship and confederacy
with Ptolomy.
After this, Antiochus contracted an alliance and friendship with Ptolomy, who
gave him his daughter Cleopatra in marriage, and assigned him for her dowry
Coelosyria, The Samaritans molest the Jews.
Samaria, Judea, and Phoenicia; and because these two Kings divided the
Tributes between them, the chiefest in authority in every Province, collected
from their Country, and paid the Sum agreed upon to the Kings Treasury.

At that time the Samaritans puffed up with their prosperity, vexed the Jews,
spoiling their Country, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 4.
and leading them away Prisoners by force. This happened under the High Priest
Onias. Onias the High Priest, provokes the King of Egypt for non-payment of
his Tribute.
For after the decease of Eleazar, Manasses his Uncle obtained the Priesthood,
Manasses, Onias the son of Simon, surnamed the Just, enjoyed this dignity.
Simon was brother to Eleazar, as I have heretofore related. This Onias was of
no great capacity, and withal was very covetous: by which means he failed to
pay the twenty Talents of silver which his Predecessors were wont to pay to the
Kings of Egypt, of the Tribute which the People paid unto him. Whereupon
Ptolomy Evergetes, the father of Philopater, was grievously incensed against
him; so as he sent an Ambassador to Jerusalem to accuse him, because he failed
to pay his accustomed Tribute, threatening him, that if henceforth he received
it not, he would divide the Country amongst his Soldiers, and send them to
inhabit it. When the Jews heard this they were much troubled: but Onias was no
whit moved thereby because he was wholly given over to covetousness.

CHAP. IV. The year of the World, 3774. before Christ's Nativity, 194.

Joseph, the Nephew of the High Priest Onias, obtains pardon for his Uncle, of
Ptolomy King of Egypt, gets the favor of that Prince, and raises a very
considerable fortune for himself. Hircanus, the son of Joseph, becomes a great
Favorite of Ptolomy. The death of Joseph.
BUt a certain man called Joseph, The Taxation of the High Priest for offending
the King.
the son of Tobias and of Onias sister, who was the High Priest, being young in
years (but honored in Jerusalem for his wisdom, foresight and justice) having
certain notice by his mother of the arrival of this Ambassador, came unto the
City (for he had been absent in the Village of Phicala where he was born) and
sharply reproved Onias his Uncle on the mothers side, because he did not any
ways provide Onias answered, That he would no more execute the Government; and
that if it was possible for him, he was ready to give over the Priesthood,
rather than repair unto the King. Whereupon Joseph asked him, If he would
permit him, in the peoples behalf, to go Ambassador to Ptolomy. Onias answered,
That he gave him leave. Upon this occasion, Joseph went up into the Temple, and
summoned the people to a general Assembly, exhorting them to be no ways
troubled, and to conceive no fear through the negligence of his Uncle Onias,
wishing them to be of good courage, and promising them that he himself would go
Ambassador unto the King, and faithfully plead their Cause before him, and
persuade him that they had committed no insolent neglect or contempt against
his Majesty; which when the people understood, they gave Joseph hearty thanks.
Whereupon he presently came down from the Temple, and honorably entertained the
Ambassadors that came from Ptolomy, and having presented them with gifts of
great value, and feasted them magnificently for many days, he sent them back
to their Prince; assuring them, that he would in person follow Egypt, under
such assurance, that he would obtain all his requests at Ptolomy's hands; the
rather, for that he was won with the young man's free spirit and noble
entertainment. The Kings Ambassador honorably entertained, who reports
Joseph's liberality upon his return into his Country.


As soon as the Ambassador returned into Egypt, he certified the King of
Onias's ingratitude, and Joseph's humanity: certifying him, that he would come
in person to entreat pardon for the People for that offense they had committed
against him; and the rather, for that he was in especial authority among the
People: and he so far enlarged himself in the praise of Joseph, that both the
King and Queen Cleopatra had a good opinion of him, although he was as yet
absent. But Joseph sent unto Samaria to his Friends, and Alexandria.

At that time it happened, that the Princes and Governors of Phoenicia and Syria
repaired thither to farm their Tributes; for the King was accustomed every year
to sell them to the men of most respect in every City: these meeting with
Joseph on the way, began to mock at his baseness and poverty. But when he came
to Alexandria, and had intelligence that the King was at Memphis, he set
forward, and went out to meet him. When therefore the King, accompanied with
the Queen, and Athenion his Friend, who had discharged the place of Ambassador
in Jerusalem, came riding in his Chariot; Athenion (who had been Joseph)
perceiving him upon the way, certified the King that it was he of whom he had
spoken upon his return from Jerusalem: protesting on his behalf, that he was a
virtuous and honorable young man. Whereupon Ptolomy received him with more
kindness than the rest, and made him come up into his Chariot; where he was no
sooner seated, but the King began to accuse Onias for what he had committed.
But Joseph said unto him, Pardon him, O King, and have respect to his old age.
For you know that ordinarily old men and young children have one and the same
understanding; but from our selves who are young, you shall have what you
please to require, without any pretext or cause of discontent.

The year of the World, 3770. before Christ's Nativity, 194.
whereupon he commanded that he should be lodged in his own Palace, and that
daily he should accompany him at his Table.

As soon as the King came back to Alexandria, the Lords of Syria seeing Joseph
sitting near unto the King, were displeased: and the day drawing near wherein
they were to know what they should pay for their tribute, they that were of the
greatest quality in their country farmed it; so that the Tributes of
Coelosyria, Phoenicia, Judea, and Samaria, amounted together to eight thousand
talents. Whereupon Joseph arising, blamed the farmers, because they had
designed amongst themselves to beat down the price of the tributes, promising
to give double; and that he would likewise return the The tributes of
Coelosyria committed to Joseph.
which were farmed together with the tributes. The King gave ear to this
discourse of his with great content and said, that he approved the sale of
these tributes unto Joseph, who would hereby so considerably augment his
revenue. When therefore he was asked whether he could give surety? he made him
answer with great confidence: O King (said he) I will give thee such pledges as
are both worthy and honorable, and such as you cannot mistrust. When therefore
the King desired him to produce them: I will (said he) O King, present thee for
sureties, thy self and the Queen thy Wife, that one of you may be surety for me
to the other. Ptolomey smiling hereat, granted him the farm of the tribute,
without farther surety. This favor of his displeased those Governors of the
Cities that were come into Egypt, in that Joseph obtained 2000 footmen from the
King; that he might by their assistance levy the tribute from those Cities, who
were negligent in their payments: and after he had borrowed five hundred
talents of the Kings friends in Alexandria, he departed into Syria.

As soon as he came to Ascalon, he demanded the payment of the tribute at the
Citizens hands, which they not only refused, but moreover upbraided him with
injurious words. Whereupon laying hold on about twenty of the principal among
them, he put them to death: and having gathered their substances together, he
sent the King some thousand talents, certifying him of that which he had done.
Ptolomy admiring The Ascalonites and Scythopolitanes punished for their con^mpt.
and approving what he had done permitted him to dispose of all things at his
pleasure. The Syrians when they heard this began to fear the like severity; and
perceiving that the Ascalonites were slain by Joseph, they opened their gates,
and received him willingly, and paid him their tributes. Whereas also the
Scythopolitanes contumaciously refused to lay down, according to order, their
accustomed tributes, he slew the chiefest amongst them: and sent the
confiscation of their goods unto the King. When therefore he had gathered much
silver and made great gains of the farming of the tributes, to the intent he
might establish and make his power of longer continuance, he liberally employed
his gains, considering with himself, that it was a part of wisdom to secure his
good fortune, by those riches which he himself had gotten: For he sent
Hircanus, by another Wife who was the Daughter of his Brother Solymius, whom he
married upon this occasion.

Going once to Alexandria in the company of his brother (who carried with him
his daughter already marriageable, Joseph's wealth and children,
intending to bestow her upon some Jew of good quality whilst he sat at meat
with the King, a fair Damsel coming into the room danced so well that she
gained the heart of Joseph, whereupon, he told his brother of it, praying Jew
to marry a stranger, that he would hide his fault, and be an assistant unto
him, that he might procure her for his Mistress. His brother promised him his
assistance and in the mean time he dressed up his own daughter, and brought
her, by night, unto his bed: whereupon he lay with her (not knowing who she
was, because he had drunk over much,) and had her company. His love still
increased, and not knowing how to conquer his passion he told his brother that
he feared the King would not bestow this Damsel on him. His brother told him
that he need not trouble himself, promising that he should enjoy her whom he
loved, and that already she was his wife; letting him know the whole
contrivance, and how he had rather wrong his own daughter than to suffer his
brother to fall into dishonor. Joseph had commended the kind and natural
affection of his brother toward him, Herican^^ offspring and towardness*
he took his daughter to Wife, who bare him a Son called Hircanus, as it has
been said. Who being thirteen years old, gave testimony of that natural spirit,
and dexerity that was in him; The year of the World, 3750. before Christ's
Nativity, 944.
by reason whereof his brethren conceived an hatred against him Joseph was
desirous to know which of his children had the ripest Judgment, and
understanding; he sent them one after another to those masters, who were most
renowned for Science in that time; but all of them returned back unto him rude,
and illiterate, because they were negligent and idle. Whereupon he sent
Hircanus the youngest of them into a desert place distant from the high way
some seven days journey, and gave him with him three hundred couple of Oxen,
to sow the ground in that barren place, concealing from him the yokes that
should couple them together.

When therefore he came unto the place, and perceived that the yokes were
missing he asked advice of some of the husbandmen: who counseled him to send
some one back unto his Father to fetch the couples. But he supposing he ought
not to lose so much time as would be spent in sending back a messenger, he made
use of a contrivance which seemed much beyond his years. For he caused ten
couple of the oxen to be slain, and distributed the flesh amongst his workmen,
and made them cut the Skins, and fashion couples thereof, and having yoked his
Oxen, he caused the land to be manured, according to his Fathers direction; and
afterward returned home unto him. Whereupon he loved him the more entirely, by
reason of his wisdom and the subtlety of his understanding; and esteemed him as
if he had no other child but him alone, but this increased the malice and envy
of his brothers.

When news was brought unto Joseph, Joseph sends his Son Hircanus to Ptolomey.
that about that time King Ptolomey was blessed with a young Son, and how all
the chiefest Lords of Syria, and the Countries under his obeisance, repaired to
Alexandria in great pomp to celebrate the birthday of the Kings Son; he being
of himself unable (by reason of his age) to go thither, he asked his Children,
whether any one of them would go and compliement the King. When therefore the
eldest Sons had excused themselves, and refused to undertake the journey,
pretending they were unfit to perform the message, and understood not the
manner of living at Court, all of them advising that their brother Hircanus
might be sent: Joseph was well pleased thereat, and calling for Hircanus asked
him if he would go to King Ptolomy: he promised to undertake the journey, and
told his Father he needed no great sum of Joseph was very glad to hear of his
Sons prudence; and after Hircanus had kept silence for a while he advised his
Father, that he should not present the King with any thing out of Judea, but
that he should write unto his factor in Alexandria, commanding him to deliver
such sums of money as he thought convenient to buy that which he found to be
most magnificent and of best esteem in the City. Joseph imagining that perhaps
he would employ about ten talents in presents and approving of his Sons
Counsel, wrote unto his factor Arion (who had the use of almost three thousand
talents of his in Alexandria.) For gathering up his money in Syria, he was wont
to send it thither; and as often as the prefixed time came Treason intended
against Hircanus.
he commanded Arion to pay them. Having therefore letters of Credit unto him,
he went toward Alexandria. Whereupon his brethren wrote presently unto all the
Kings friends, that by some means they would make him away.

As soon as he was arrived in Alexandria, and had delivered his fathers Letters
to Arion; Arion asked him how many talents he would have? Hircanus apology for
his actions.
hoping that he would desire but ten, or thereabout: but when Hircanus had told
him he had need of a thousand, he waxed wroth, and reproved him for his
prodigality, telling him how his Father had gathered his goods with much labor
and frugality, and refusing to give it him, he prayed him to imitate his
fathers example: and in a word he told him, that he would deliver him Hircanus
was offended and caused Arion to be kept in Prison. Whereof his Wife informed
Queen Cleopatra and desired her that the young man might be chastised for his
insolence (for Arion was in great esteem with the Queen, so that she acquainted
the King with the matter.) Whereupon Ptolomey sent for Hircanus, and said unto
him; That he marveiled, that being sent unto hin by his Father, he had not as
yet visited him; and besides that he had committed his Fathers Agent to Prison:
he therefore commanded him to yield him a reason thereof. Whereunto he
answered, that there was a law among the Jews that no man should taste of the
sacrifices that had not first of all visited the Temple, and sacrificed unto
God; and that in that respect he had not hitherto visited his Majesty, because
he expected certain presents to present unto his Majesty from his Father, who
was his Servant. Furthermore, he alleged that he punished his Fathers Servant,
because he had disobeyed his commandment, The year of the World, 3780. before
Christ's Nativity, 184.
whether his Master were noble or ignoble: and if (said he) we chastise not
such men, as they have deserved, expect (O King) that you also shall be
neglected, by your Subjects.

When Ptolomey heard these words, he rose well pleased, and wondered at the
magnanimity of the young man. Arion perceiving that the King rose satisfied,
and that he was like to have no assistance at his hands, Hircanus apology for
his actions.
delivered Hircanus the thousand talents, and by this means he was set at
liberty. Some three days after, Hircanus came and saluted both the King and
Queen: who entertained him graciously, and feasted him, for the kindness which
they bear unto his Father. He enquiring among the Merchants, bought one hundred
young Lads well learned, and in the flower of their age, paying a talent
Hircanus, so that the table was covered round about him whereupon a certain
Droll called Triphon (in whose railery the King took some delight) to divert
the company, said,

See here Sir what store of bones lie before Hircanus whereby you may
conjecture after what manner his Father has fleeced all Syria. Hircanus jests.
The King laughing at Tryphons words, asked Hircanus, how he came by so many
bones before him? Not without good reason (said he) O The King was so well
pleased with his discreet answer that he commanded the rest not to offer him
any affront for the future.

The next day he sought out all the Kings friends, and the principal Courtiers,
and saluted them one by one, Hircanus sounding what other men would give, gave
more than the rest, for which he receives another kingly reward.
enquiring of their Servants, what presents they would court the King with upon
the birth of his Son? Who told him that some of them would give twelve Talents,
and others that were in dignity, would present them according to their ability.
Whereupon Hircanus seemed dissatisfied as wanting power to offer such a
present, pretending that he had no more than five Talents. All which these
Servants Hircanus. Now when the day of solemnity was come, and they that
pretended to present the King most magnificently, offered no more than twenty
Talents: Hircanus presented the hundred young Lads he had bought to the King,
and the Virgins unto Cleopatra: for whom he had paid a talent by the pole. At
this unexpected magnificence, all men were amazed: but besides this, he gave
gifts of diverse Talents to the King and Queens favorites and Servants, and
their attendants; whereby he secured himself from the danger that might fall
upon him by their means. For the brothers of Hircanus had written unto them to
murder him. Ptolomey was much pleased with the great magnificence of this
young Hircanus brothers assailing him on the way, are sl^in and discomfited.
and in that manner sent him away. His brothers hearing how he had in all
things highly pleased the King, and that he returned with great glory, they
went out to meet him, with an intent to murder him, with their fathers
knowledge. For he being displeased with him, by reason of his above mentioned
large expense, took no care to secure him: yet concealed he his discontent for
fear of the King. But when his brothers came and encountered him on the way he
slew diverse of those that accompanied Jerusalem unto their Father. And when
upon his coming unto Jerusalem, he perceived that no man welcomed him, he was
afraid, and departed presently from thence to the other side of Jordan, Joseph's
death.
where he past his life in receiving and gathering the tributes of the
Barbarians. Onias, and after him Simon his Son High Priest.
In that time Seleucus surnamed Soter, the Son of Antiochus the great, reigned
in Asia. At that time also died Joseph, Hircanus Father, who was a man of good
repute and great courage; who established the people of the Jews in a lasting
Peace, Hedio and Ruffinus, cha^. ^.
and freed them from poverty and many disasters, and collected the Tributs of
Syria, Phoenica, and Samaria, for the space of twenty two years. His Uncle
Onias died also about the same time; leaving the Priesthood to his Son Simon;
after Onias was made High Priest: to whom Arius King of Lacedemon sent an
Embassage and letters, the copy whereof heareafter ensues.

CHAP. V The year of the World, 3780. before Christ's Nativity, 144.

Arius King of Lacedemon writes to Onias the High Priest to contract an
Alliance with the Jews, pretending that the Lacedaemonians were descended from
Abraham, Hircanus builds a magnificent Paliace and kills himself for fear of
falling into the hands of Antiocus.
Arius King of Lacedemon, The Letter of the King of Lacedemon to the High
Priest of the Jews.
to Onias Health:
WE have found out a certain writing wherein it is recorded, that the Jews and
Lacedaemonians are of the same race, 1 Mac. 12.
and both of them desended from Abraham. It is Demoteles our messenger brings
you our letters written on a square leaf the seal whereof is an Eagle holding
a Dragon in her talons. Sedition among the people, after Joseph's death.
These were the contents of the Lacedaemonians letters.


After the death of Joseph it came to pass, that the people began to mutiny in
the quarrel of his Children, For the elder brethren made War against Hircanus,
who was the younger, by means whereof the People were divided: The greater part
of them followed the Elder faction, Hircanus afflicts the Arabians with
continual war.
and the High Priest Simon also, by reason of his affinity with them, followed
their party. Whereupon Hircanus resolved to repair no more unto Jerusalem, but
fixing his habitation on the other side of Jordan, he made continual War
against the Arabians, Hircanus builds a strong Tower.
slaying a great number of them, and taking many prisoners. He built an huge
Tower of white Marble from the bottom to the top and on it he placed the
figures of many living Creatures in sculpture of greatheight. About the same he
cut a deep trench of water; and having hewed the front of the Rock that stood
over against the bulding, he made diverse caves therein, many furlongs long. He
also made diverse chambers therein, Antiochus Epiphanes, King of Syria.
both to eat and sleep and dwell in. He drew thither likewise currents of
springing water, in so great abundance, that it gave much delight to those that
dwelt there, The Sons of Ptolomey Epi^hance, philometor and Physcon.
and great ornament to the whole bulding. The mouth of every Cave was so
little, that but one only man could enter at once: which he therefore Hircanus
kills himself.
he might avoid the danger of surprisal. Moreover, he built within his Castle
many large halls, which he adorned with great and goodly Gardens: Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 6.
and this place thus built, was called by him Tire and is situate between
Arabia and Judaea, 1 Mac. 1.
on the other side of Jordan, not far from the Country of Essedon. He
commanded in this Country seven years, all that time that Seleucus reigned in
Syria. After whose death, his brother Antiochus, surnamed Epiphanes, obtained
the Kingdom. Ptolomey also King of Egypt (who was likewise called Epiphanes)
died and left two children very young behind him, of whom the eldest was called
Philometer, and the younger Phiscon. But when Hircanus perceived that Antiochus
grew very powerful Arabians whereupon he slew himself with his own hands; and
Antiochus enjoyed all his goods.

The year of the World, 3790. before Christ's Nativity, 174.

Onias, surnamed Menelaus, seeing himself excluded from the High Priesthood,
retires to Antiochus, and renounceth the Religion of his forefathers; Antiochus
enters Egypt, and being ready to make himself Master of it, the Romans force
him to retire.
ONias the High Priest being dead about this time, Antiochus gave the
Priesthood to Jesus, surnamed Jason, his brother. For that son unto whom Onias
had left the succession, Onias sirnam'd Menelaus, substituted in his place.
was as yet very young (of whom we will speak in convenient time and Jesus,
(Onias brother) was deprived of the Priesthood, through the Kings displeasure
conceived against him, who gave it shortly after to his younger brother called
Onias: The Wars betwixt Jason and Menelaus.
For Simon had three sons, who, as we have declared, successively possessed the
Priesthood: this Jesus caused himself to be called Jason, as his other brother
caused himself to be called Menelaus, Apostates from the Jewish Religion.
whereas his name was Onias. But Jesus, who had first of all been established
in the place of the High Priest, arose against Menelaus, who was elected into
the place after him. So that the People were divided into Factions, and Tobias
sons were on Menelaus side; but the greater number of the People followed
Jason: so that Menelaus, and the sons of Tobias, being much troubled by them,
retired to Antiochus, telling him that they intended to forsake the Religion
and Ordinances of their fathers, Greeks; exhorting him to give them license to
erect a place of Exercises in Jerusalem. Which when Antiochus had granted them,
they so behaved themselves, that there appeared no more sign of Circumcision in
them: so that at such time as they were naked, there was no difference between
them and the Greeks; and neglecting all the ordinances and customs of their own
Country, they conformed themselves to the behavior and manners of other
Nations. Antiochus having all things in his kingdom according to his hearts
desire resolved to make War upon Egypt: he contemned Ptolomy's son age (who
were not as yet capable to manage their affairs.) Arriving there near to
Pelusium with a great power, he circumvented by a stratagem, the young Ptolomy
Philometor, and subdued Egypt: for after Memphis, Antiochus enforced to depart
out of Egypt.
and taken it, he came to Alexandria, with an intent to besiege the City, and
to lay hold of the King, who was therein. But he was driven, not only from
Alexandria, but also out of all Egypt, by the summons that were sent him by the
Romans, The History of Antiochus Epiphanes.
who commanded him to depart, and withdraw his Army out of that Country, as we
have heretofore declared in another place. Now will I more largely and
particularly discourse the acts of this King who overcame Judea, and spoiled
the Temple: for having only made a brief mention of him in my former works, I
think it necessary in this place to make a more exact recital of his History.

CHAP. VII.

AFter that King Antiochus was returned out of Egypt, and for the fear of the
Romans had forsaken that Country, Antiochus entering Jerusalem, spoileth the
Temple.
he led his Army against Jerusalem, and encamped before the City, and took it
by surrender, the Gates of the City being set open unto him by those of his
Faction: which happened in the 143 year since the beginning of Seleucus. When he
saw himself Lord and Master of Jerusalem, he slew diverse of the contrary
Faction; and after he had gathered together many great and rich spoils, he
returned back to Antioch. Two years after, in the 145 year of the Reign of that
Family, on the 25 day of that month which we call Chasleu, and the Macedons
Apellaeus, the Romans December: in the 153 Olympiade, he returned again to
Jerusalem; at which time, he spared not them who gave him peaceable entrance,
and opened the Gates. But his insatiable avarice transported him so far, that
he feared not to violate the Temple, and to spoil it of all those riches which
he knew to be there laid up; being no less insolent toward his friend, than to
the offender, he spared neither. For having seen what quantity of Gold was in
the Temple, and how great a number of Presents Table of the Shewbread, The
year of the World, 3789. before Christ's Nativity, 164.
the Censers, and pulled down the Curtains made of fine linen Jews, he forbade
them to offer their usual and daily sacrifice unto God, according to the order
of the Law: and after he had spoiled the whole City, he slew a great part of
the Inhabitants, and carried away the rest of them into captivity, with their
wives and children, to the number of 10000. Furthermore, he burnt the fairest
buildings of the City, and razed the walls, and raised a Fortress in the lower
City. For the Temple was as it were a high Citadel, commanding the rest. For
this cause, having enclosed it with high walls and towers, he placed a Garrison
of Macedonians therein, with whom remained the rabble and scum of the wicked
Apostate Jews, who were given over to all impieties, and who also afflicted
their Fellow-Citizens Antiochus abrogating Gods Law, through extreme tyranny
enforces the Jews to Idolatry, and fortifieth the Temple
on which he caused Swine to be slaughtered, offering Sacrifice contrary to the
Religion and Ordinances of the Jews. He constrained them likewise to forsake
the worship of the true God, and to adore those Idols whom he reverenced for
gods, building in every City and Borough both Temples and Altars, on which he
ordinarily caused Swine to be offered. He forbade them likewise to circumcise
their children, threatening to punish him whosoever he were that was found to do
the contrary. Moreover he chose certain overseers that should compel them to
observe his commands, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 7.
so that a great number of Jews, some of their own accord, others for fear of
punishment, conformed to the Kings commands. But those men who were of upright
hearts, and valiant

The Samaritans seeing this affliction of the Jews, The Devil seeks to
abolish the Bible.
pretended no further alliance to Garazim no more the Temple of God, but (as we
have heretofore declared) they showed their own corrupt and unconstant natures,
The variable wits of the Samaritans, which made them so odious in the sight of
the Jews.
and derived their descent from the Medes and Persians, as in effect they were;
wherefore they sent Ambassadors to Antiochus, with Letters to this effect:

To King Antiochus the visible God, the request of the Sidonians that dwell in
Sichem.
Our Ancestors enforced by the continual Pestilence that reigned in their
Country, and induced by a certain ancient Superstition, have been accustomed
to observe that day as a festival, which the Jews call their Sabbath, and
having built on the Mount of Garazim a Temple, and Jews, according as their
wickedness deserves, the Commissaries of the King, supposing that we were tied
to their customs, (by reason of some Alliance between us) join us with them,
and charge us with the same Accusations: whereas we are born Sidonians, as
appears by our public Records. We therefore beseech you, who are our
Benefactor and Savior, to command your Governor Apollonius, and your Steward
Nicanor, not to molest us any more, by charging us with those Accusations which
are peculiar to the Jews: who neither are tied to us by Alliance, nor agree
with us in Customs; but that our Temple, which has not hitherto born the name
or title of any god, may now be called the Temple of Jupiter of Greece: by which
means, we shall be delivered from all trouble; and being at liberty to To this
request of the Samaritans the King answered, sending them back their own Letter:


King Antiochus to Nicanor, Health.
The Sidonians of Sichem have sent us this request, to which we annex unto
these our Letters* Since they, who were sent unto us to this intent, have
sufficiently made appear both to us and our Council, that they are utterly
strangers unto those Crimes wherewith the Jews are charged, and are desirous to
live according to the Laws of the Grecians, we absolve them in as much as
concerns this Cause, and their Temple, which hereafter shall be called by the
name of Jupiter of Greece: We have written to the like effect also to Apollonius
their Governor. Given the 46th year, and the eleventh of the month
Hecatomhaeon, which signifies August.


The year of the World, 3799. before Christ's Nativity, 165.

Matthias and his sons s^ay those that were sent by King Antiochus to compel
them to offer abominable Sacrifices, and after betake themselves to the Desert.
They are followed by many others, of whom a great number are stifled in their
Caves, because they would not defend themselves on the Sabbath Day. Matthias
abolisheth that Superstition, and exhorts his sons to assert their privileges,
and deliver their Country from bondage.
AT this time there dwelt a certain man in Modin (a village of Jury) whose name
was Matthias, who was the son of John, who was the son of Simon, the son of
Asmonaeus Joarib, born in Jerusalem. This Matthias had 5 sons, John called
Gaddis, Simon called Matthes, Judas called Machabeus, Eleazar named Auran,
Jonathan called Aphus. This Matthias oftentimes complained unto his sons, of
the deplorable condition to which their Nation was reduced, of the ruin of
their City, the desolation of their Temple, The zeal and piety of Matthias and
his sons.
and the miseries of the People, telling them, That it were better for them to
die in the defense of the Laws and Religion of their Forefathers, than to live
dishonourably amidst so many calamities. When therefore the Commissaries,
deputed by the King, came unto Modin, to constrain the Jews to perform that
which was enjoined them, and to command them to sacrifice, according to the
ordinance; requiring Matthias (who surpassed the rest in honor, and other
qualities, but especially in excellency of descent and nobility) That the King
would testify his being well-pleased with his compliance, by the rewards which
he would suddenly send him. Matthias answered, That he would by no means commit
that Idolatry; assuring them, That although all other Nations of the World,
either for love, or fear of punishment, should obey the Edicts of Antiochus;
yet that neither he, nor any of his children, would be induced to forsake their
fathers Religion. As soon as he had returned this answer, he held his peace,
and a certain Jew stepped forth to offer sacrifice according to Antiochus
ordinance; An Apostate slain by Matthias.
wherewith Matthias was so much displeased, that both he and his sons fell upon
him, and with their swords hewed him in pieces. He slew Apelles the Kings
Captain likewise, and the Soldiers which he brought with him, to compel If
(said he) any one be affected to the Laws of his Fathers, and the service of
God, Matthias with his sons flies into the desert.
let him follow me: And this said, he presently retired into the Desert with
his sons, leaving the Borough utterly unpeopled. The rest, after his example,
retired also into the Desert, with their Wives and Children, and made their
habitation in Caves. The Kings Captains having intelligence hereof, gathered
those Forces that were at that time in the Citadel of Jerusalem, and pursued
the Jews into the Desert. And having overtaken them, they labored first of all
to make them submit themselves, and to make choice of that which was most for
their advantage, rather than to endanger themselves, and enforce them to
chastise their disobedience with blood. But the Jews nothing Jews on a
Sabbath Day, and burnt them within their Caves; who neither resisted their
Enemies, nor so much as closed up the mouths of their Caves, forbearing to make
any resistance, by reason of the day, resolving with themselves, not to violate
the Sabbath Day (for we are commanded to cease from all labor on that day.)
The Jews are slain on the Sabbath Day, which slaughter makes Matthias more
wary.
There were therefore about a thousand stifled in their Caves, with their Wives
and Children. Yet notwithstanding diverse escaped, and joined themselves with
Matthias, whom they chose for their Captain; who declared unto them, That they
ought to fight on the Sabbath Day: assuring them, That if they did not, but
scrupulously observed the Law, they themselves should be enemies unto
themselves, if perhaps the Enemy should assail them on that day, and they
should not stand upon their guard: for by that means they should be destroyed
without resistance. Hereby he persuaded them to do as he had said: and until
this day, it is a custom among us, that if need require, we make no difficulty
to fight on the Sabbath Day. Matthias rooteth out all Idolatry.
Matthias therefore having assembled a sufficient number of men about him,
destroyed the Altars, and slew those that had forsaken their Religion, as many
of them as he could lay hands on. For diverse were scattered here and there
among the Nations, for fear; he commanded these to circumcise their children
that were not circumcised, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 8.
driving those from every place whom Antiochus had ordained to see his Law
executed.

After that Matthias had governed for the space of one year, he fell sick of a
dangerous disease; whereupon he called for his sons, and spoke unto them after
this manner: My is in danger to be overthrown, and hold no correspondence with
those that would betray it to the Matthias exhorts his sons to piety,
fortitude and concord.
and will permit you to live again after the manner of your Ancestors. True it
is, our bodies are mortal, and subject unto destiny, but the memory of our
virtuous actions will never perish: being therefore stirred up with the love
thereof, strive and bestir your selves to obtain honor, to the end that
projecting mighty things, you make no difficulty to hazard your lives in the
execution of the same. Above all things, I exhort you unto concord, to the end
that in whatsoever one of you shall be found more naturally apt and fitted than
another, he may prosecute it, without any contradiction of the rest. I charge
you also to observe Simon (who is a politic and valiant man) in whatsoever he
shall counsel you. And for your Captain, you shall choose Machabeus, because he
is both valiant and strong: for he shall revenge the injuries and outrages
which have been done to our Nation, and put our enemies to flight: And assure
your selves, that there is no man that has any love to Virtue and Religion,
who will not join himself unto you in so holy an enterprise.

CHAP. IX.
The death of Matthias. Judas Machabeus one of his sons, takes upon him the
management of the public Affairs. He delivers his Country, and purges it
from the Abominations
AFter Matthias had thus spoken unto his sons, 1 Mac. 3.
and prayed God to favor their enterprises, Matthias death.
and to restore the People to their ancient policy, and their accustomed manner
of living, Judas Machabeus appointed Governor.
which they had in former times observed; he dyed, and was buried in Modin.
After the People had mourned for him for a certain time, and performed
publicly such honor at his funerals, as was agreeable to his quality, his son
Judas Machabeus took upon him the management of the War, in the 146 year; and
by the assistance of his brethren, and other Jews, he drove the Enemies out of
the Country, and put those of his own Nation to death who had forsaken their
Religion, and purged the Country of all abominations

CHAP. X.
Apollonius General of Antiochus's Army, comes into Jewry, and is discomfited
and slain; and also Serron Governor of the lower Syria.
WHen Apollonius, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 9.
who was Antiochus's General in Samaria, heard hereof, he gathered his Army
together, Judas Machabeus overcomes Apollonius in battle.
and invaded Judea: against whom Machabeus made head, and overcame him in a
battle, wherein there died many, and amongst the rest Apollonius, Machabeus got
as his part in the spoil. There were a great number of them also wounded,
Seron, Governor of Coelosyria, is put to flight in Judea.
and much booty was taken in the Enemies Camp: after which victory, enriched
with spoils, he retreated. But Seron, Governor of Coelosyria, hearing hereof,
and understanding that diverse had joined themselves with Judas, and that he had
already about him a sufficient power to keep the field, and give him battle; he
thought that it concerned him to begin to punish those who obeyed not the Kings
Edicts. Whereupon, after he had assembled all the Forces that he had, and
besides them, hired certain Apostates, or fugitive Jews, he marched forth
against Judas, and came as far as Bethoron, a village in Jewry, where he
encamped. Judas also came out to meet with him, resolving to give him battle:
and seeing that his Soldiers would hardly be drawn out to fight, (both by That
the means to obtain victory, and to have the upper hand over their Enemies,
consisted not in the greatness of their number, but in their dependence upon
God: whereof they had a most eminent example in their Forefathers, who had
oftentimes defeated with a small number of men, diverse thousands of their
Enemies, because they fought for the defense of their Laws, and for their
Children: for the greatest power (said he) that a man can have, is to be
innocent, and without offense. By these words persuaded he his Soldiers, so
that without any fear of the multitude of their Enemies, they all together ran
upon Seron, and encountering with him, they discomfited the Syrians. For their
Chieftain being slain, all the rest betook themselves to flight, in which thing
only consisted the safety Judas therefore pursuing them as far as the Champain,
slew about 800 of them. The rest saved themselves in those quarters that
bounded upon the Sea.


Judas Machabeus defeats a great Army which King Antiochus sent against the
Jews. Lysias the next year returns with a much greater power. Judas kills five
thousand of his men, and causes him to retreat. He purifieth the Temple, and
sets it in order. Other great Exploits performed by him.
WHen King Antiochus heard these things, Antiochus's preparation to invade
Judea.
he was much displeased at that which had happened: whereupon he mustered all his
Forces, and hiring diverse strangers and Judea about the Springtime. But after
the muster of his Army, when he found that his treasure failed him, and that he
was in great scarcity of money, (for his Tributes were not duly paid him,
because the Nations were rebellious) being likewise in his own nature a man of
great and magnificent spirit, which put him upon great expenses, he resolved
first of all to go into Persia, to gather his Tributes. Antiochus committing
his Kingdom, Provinces and son to Lysias's charge, departs into Persia.
He therefore left the charge of his affairs with Lysias, (a man very much
esteemed by him, and one that governed all the Country from Euphrates, as far
as the borders of Egypt, and the lower Asia) giving him likewise a part of his
Army, and some of his Elephants. To him had the King given charge to see his
son Antiochus carefully trained up, until his return: commanding him expressly,
That when he had conquered he should make the Inhabitants thereof his slaves,
and sell them to those that would give most, and destroy Jerusalem, and utterly
abolish that race. The King having given this charge to Lysias, led forth his
Army toward the Country of Persia, in the 147 year: And after he had passed
Euphrates, he marched onward toward the upper Provinces.

Lysias chose Ptolomy the son of Dorymenis, Nicanor and Gorgias, (men of great
power and authority amongst the Kings friends) and gave them 40000 Footmen, and
7000 Horsemen, to invade Jewry. Who marching as far as the City of Emaus,
encamped in the Plain near unto it, and strengthened their Army with diverse
Allies out of Syria, and the Countries thereabouts, and with diverse Jews also
who were Apostates. There came also certain Merchants with them, with an intent
to buy those that should be taken Prisoners,

When Judas had viewed the Camp, and numbered the Enemy, H^dio and Ruffinus,
cap. 10.
he encouraged the Soldiers, exhorting them to repose their confidence and hope
of victory in God, willing them to invocate and call upon him, Ptolomy,
Gorgias, and Nicanors War in Judea.
according to their Law; and that clothing themselves in sackcloth, they
should humble themselves according to their accustomed manner in such extreme
dangers, and call upon God with supplications and prayers; and that in so
doing, God would have compassion on them, and give them power to stand against
their Enemies, and put them to flight. When therefore he had ordered his battle
according to the custom of his Country, by thousands and hundreds, and sent
away those that were

My Countrymen and Companions, never have we hither to had any occasion more
necessary, wherein we ought to show our courage, Judas's Oration to his
Soldiers.
and contemn our dangers, than at this present. For at this time, if you fight
courageously, you may recover your liberty: which of it self is so acceptable
unto you all; and ought the rather to be desired, because thereby you will
enjoy the free exercise of your Religion. As therefore you shall behave your
selves at this time, you may obtain the victory, and enjoy a happy life, (which
consists in living according to our Laws and ancient customs) but if you
prove Cowards, you are to expect nothing less than the extremest infamy, Thus
spoke Judas to his Army, to encourage them.

Whilst he was intent upon the battle, certain tidings was brought him, that
Gorgias was sent with 1000 Horsemen, and 5000 Footmen, 1 Match. 4*
to the end that under the conduct of some fugitives, he might by night, and
when he least suspected him, set upon him: whereupon he resolved the very same
night to break into the Enemies Army, especially since he knew that their
Forces were divided. Having therefore refreshed both himself and his Emaus.
Gorgias perceiving that the Jews had forsaken their Camp, supposed they were
retired for fear into the Mountains to hide themselves: so that he resolved to
proceed, The year of the World, 3800. before Christ's Nativity, 164.
and search for them diligently. But early in the morning, Judas, accompanied
with 3000 Men, (who were ill armed by reason of their poverty) came up unto his
Enemies, who were at Emaus; and after he had seen their warlike discipline, and
mighty number, and how Soldier-like they were encamped, he exhorted his
followers, telling them, That they ought to fight, although they were naked:
for although they were in that condition, yet God (who took pleasure in the
greatness of their courage) had already given them the victory against a number
of armed Soldiers. And forthwith he commanded the Trumpets to sound; so that
rushing in upon his Enemies on the sudden, the surprise and astonishment was so
great, that he slew diverse of them who resisted, and put the rest to flight; he
pursued them as far as Gadara, and the Plains of Idumea, of Azor, and of
Jamnia. Judas overcomes Lysias's Army.
In this Encounter there dyed about 3000 of the Enemy. Notwithstanding, Judas
would not permit his Soldiers as yet to take the benefit of the spoil, because
they were to fight against Gorgias and his Army, assuring them, That as soon as
they should have defeated him, they might take their booty, without fear,
because they should have no more Enemies to expect.

Whilst he thus spoke unto his Soldiers, they that were with Gorgias,
perceived from the top of an hill, that the Army that was left behind them, was
put to flight, and that their Camp was on fire: for although they were far off,
yet did the smoke assure them of it. Which when they understood, and perceived
Judas and his fellows in battle array, expecting their coming, Judas gathers a
huge prey.
they feared, and betook themselves to flight. When as therefore Judas
perceived that Gorgias Troops were discomfited, without stroke stricken, he
went Lysias once (...) invadeth Judea, and loses 5000 of his Soldiers.
But Lysias, to repair the dishonor which he had suffered by this defeat,
raised the next year another Army of almost 60000 chosen Men, and 5000
Horsemen, to invade Judea. After he had therefore made his entry by the
Mountains, he encamped in Bethsura, a village of Judea.

Judas having notice thereof, came forth against him, accompanied with 10000
Men; and discovering the number of his Enemies far to exceed his, (after he had
besought God by Prayer, That it would please him to assist him in the battle)
he charged the Vanguard Lysias knowing the resolution of the Jews, and how they
were resolved to dye, except they might enjoy their liberty; and fearing their
desperation, more than their force, he gathered together the rest of his Army,
and returned back to Antioch: The Temple of Jerusalem.
where he sojourned, hiring many Foreign Soldiers, to make a greater Army to
invade Jewry. After that Antiochus's Captains had been discomfited so many
times, Judas assembled the People together, and told them, That after they had
obtained so many victories through the mercy of God, it behoved them to go up
to Jerusalem, and to purify the Temple that was left desolate, and to offer
those Sacrifices ordained by the Law. When he came thither with a multitude of
people, he found the Temple like a Desert, and the Antiochus, he built a new
one of all sorts of stones, neither hewn, nor hammered, according to art. The
25 day of the month of Chasleu, (with us September) there were lights set upon
the Candlesticks, and perfumes The Temple left desolate for 3 whole years space.
All which happened the same day three years, wherein the sacred Religion was
changed into profaneness and impiety. For the Temple was ruinated and left
desolate by Antiochus, and remained in that state for the space of three whole
years. For this desolation happened in the 145th year, (...).
and the 25th day of the month called Apellaeus or August, in the 153 Olympiad:
and the Temple was purified the same day, in the year 148, and the 154
Olympiad. This desolation of the Temple happened, according as Daniel had
foretold, four hundred and eight years before: for he declared that the
Macedonians should destroy it.

After that Judas had reestablished the service of the Temple, (...)
both he and his Countrymen The year of the World, 3801. before Christ's
Nativity, 163.
seeing that contrary to all hope, after so long time, they had recovered the
customs of their Country, and their ancient Religion: so that a Decree was
made for those that should come after, whereby it was commanded, That for the
space of eight days the rebuilding of the Temple should be solemnized, with
the ceremonies and ancient ordinances: And ever since that time, until this
day, we celebrate this feast, called the Feast of Lights, for this reason, in
my opinion, because this so great felicity began to shine unto us as a light,
contrary to all hope. He enclosed the City likewise with a wall and built high
Towers thereon, in which he placed Garrisons against the incursions of the
enemies. He fortified the City of Bethsura also, that it might serve as a Fort
against the enemy.

Hedio and Ruffinus* cap. 13.
the Nations round about displeased with the re-establishment and power of the
Jews, Machab. 5.
slew diverse of them, whom they surprised by ambushes and treachery. Judas
makes continual War with the neighboring Nations.
On those Judas made continual War, to hinder their incursions, and to make
them partakers of those evils they had inflicted upon the Jews. So that
invading Acrabathan, he slew the Idumaeans that were descended from Esau, and
brought away a great prey out of their Country, and shut up the sons of Baan
their Prince, who lay in wait for the Jews; and having besieged them, he
overcame them, setting fire on their Towers, and killing all the men that were
therein. After this, he departed from thence, and made War upon the Ammonites,
who had a great and mighty Army, under the conduct of Timotheus: These he
encountered and overcame, and took their City of Jazor, Judea. The neighboring
Nations hearing of this, assembled themselves together in Galaad against the
Jews, who inhabited the frontiers of Galaad; who having retired to the Fort of
Dathema, sent Letters unto Judas, to let him know, That Timotheus intended to
surprise the place whereunto they were retreated, and requested him to deliver
them from this danger. And whilst he was reading of these Letters, certain
messengers came unto him out of Galilee, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 11.
to inform him, that they were assaulted by the Inhabitants of Ptolemais, Tire,
Sidon, and other People thereabouts.


The Exploits of Simon the brother of Judas Machabeus in Galilee. Judas,
accompanied with Jonathan his brother, obtains a victory over the Ammonites.
Some other performances of Judas.
JVdas, that he might send relief to these two parties that were assaulted both
at the same time, commanded his brother Simon to take 3000 chosen men with him,
and to go and succor those Jews that were assailed in Galilee: and himself,
accompanied with Jonathan his other brother, and 8000 fighting men, repaired
unto the Country of Galaad, leaving the government of the rest of the Forces
in the hands of Joseph the son of Zachary, and Azarias, commanding them to have
a careful and diligent eye to Judea, and not to engage with any one until his
return. Simon coming into Galilee, fought against his enemies, Simon overcomes
his enemies in Galilee, delivers the Jews that were captive.
and discomfited them; and afterward pursuing them that fled as far as the
gates of Ptolemais, he slew about 3000: and after he had gathered the spoils of
such as were slain, he set many Jews at liberty who were Prisoners; and having
restored them to their goods, he retired back again to his Country. But Judas
Machabeus, and Jonathan his brother, having past Jordan, and marched on the
other side thereof for the space of three days, Judas and Jonathan succor the
Jews besieged in Galaad.
came at length to the Nabathaeans, who peaceably came out to meet them; by
whom he understood the state of those that were in Galaad, and how diverse of
them were in extreme want, enclosed and besieged in Castles and Cities of the
Country by Bosra, and took their City, and set it on fire, Bosta taken and
burnt.
killing all the men that were therein, who were able to bear Arms. Neither was
he contented therewith, but when night drew on, he marched toward another
Castle where the Jews were enclosed, and shut up by Timothy and his Army; and
coming up to them about break of day, he surprised the Enemy at such time as
they were raising their ladders to scale the walls, and made ready their
engines for battery: whereupon he caused the Trumpets to sound, and after he
had encouraged his People to fight valiantly and faithfully for their kinsmen
and friends, Judas succoreth the besieged Jews.
being in great danger, and had distributed his Timotheus's Soldiers perceiving
that it was Machabeus, whose valor and good fortune they had already
experienced to their great loss, they, without delay, betook themselves to
flight. But Judas, with his Army, followed after them, and slew about 8000 of
them; and marching toward Malla, Chaspoma, Bosor, and diverse other places in
Galaad.

Shortly after, Timothy's Soldiers slain.
Timothy levied another great Army, and drew out with him all his Allies to his
succor, and a number of Arabians, whom he had hired: with this Army of his
passed he the River, Malla taken and burnt.
and encamped near unto a Town called Rapha; exhorting his Soldiers to behave
themselves like valiant men against their Enemies the Jews, Chaspoma and Bosor
taken.
and to hinder their passage, because all their hopes of victory depended upon
the securing of that Pass. Judas understanding that Timotheus was prepared to
fight, Timothy gathers new Forces, and is overcome by Judas.
took with him all his Forces, and marched hastily against the Enemy; so that
having passed the River, he set upon them, Carnain, where they were in hope to
be secured, and so to escape: but after that Judas had taken the City where the
Temple was, he slew them, and burnt it, and caused all his Enemies to perish
either by the sword or by fire. After this overthrow, he led away with him from
Galaad all the Jews, their wives and children, The Jews are brought out of the
Country of Galaad into Judea.
and substance, and brought them with him unto Judea. When as therefore he drew
near unto the Town of Ephron, which was situate directly in his way, so that
it was impossible for him to march any other ways in his return home, without
going very much about, and putting himself to great inconveniences; he sent
Messengers Ephron besieged and burnt.
to pray them to open their gates, and to grant him free passage through their
City: for they had made barricadoes of stones to cut off the passage. But when
therefore the Ephronites would give no ear unto him, he besieged their City for
a day and nights space, and took and burnt it, and slew all the men that were
therein, and afterward went onward on his way; and so great a number was there
of those that were slain, that he marched upon the bodies of dead men.

After they had past Jordan, An admirable victory of Judas Machabeus, who, in
all these conflicts, lost not one man.
they came into a great Plain, wherein the City of Bethsan (by the Greeks
called Scythopolis) stood; from whence they departed, and came into Judea with
joy and gladness, singing and praising God, and using their accustomed pastimes
and songs of victory. This done, he offered up sacrifices of Thanksgiving for
their happy Jew. Joseph and Zachary overcome by Gorgias, lose 2000 Soldiers.


In the mean while two Captains, to wit, Joseph the son of Zachary, and
Azarias, who were left for the guard of Judea, (whilst Simon went into the
Country of Galilee against those of Ptolemais, and Judas and Jonathan his
brother were in Galaad against the Ammonites) desirous also to obtain the
honor and reputation of valiant men by some notable exploit, marched with the
Forces under their command toward Jamnia. Against these came forth Gorgias,
who was Governor in that place, and charged them in that manner, that the Jews
lost 2000 men, and fled as far as the Marches of Judea. This mischief fell upon
them, because they had disobeyed Judas's commandment, who had prohibited Jews.
Judas and his brethren making War against the Idumeans, Chebron and Marissa
besieged.
gave them no respite, but continually charging them on every side, they took
also the City of Chebron, and destroyed all the fortifications thereof, and
burnt the Towers, spoiling all the Country of the enemies, and razed the City
of Marissa likewise. Afterward coming to Azor, they took and spoiled it, and
carried away a great quantity of booty from thence, and returned back into
Judea in safety.


King Antiochus Epiphanes being forced shamefully to raise his siege from
before Elymais a Town in Persia, (where he designed to pillage a Temple
consecrated to Diana) and troubled for the defeat of several of his Captains
which he sent against the Jews, dies for grief.
AT this time Antiochus passing through the upper Provinces of his Kingdom,
understood that there was a very wealthy City in Persia called Elymais, Hedio
and Ruffinus, cap. 13.
in which Diana, 1 Mac. 6.
full of all sorts of Presents: wherein also he was informed, Antiochus
desirous to spoil Diana's Temple, besieges Elymais, and is shamefully repulsed
to Babylon.
that the shield and Cuirasse of Alexander was kept, who was Philip King of
Macedons son. Hereupon he resolved to make himself Master of the place, and
forthwith besieged it. And the Inhabitants thereof being neither affrighted
with his approach, nor terrified with his siege, made a stout resistance, so
that he failed of his purpose. For they drove him from their City; and sallying
out upon him, they pursued him so hotly, that he fled back to Babylon, and lost
a great number of his men. After this defeat, Antiochus Epipiphanes burdened
with cares, falls sick.
and frustration of his hope, news was brought him of the overthrow of his
Captains, whom he had left to War against the Jews, and how they of Jewry were
now the stronger, and had the upper hand. This trouble seconding his former
discontent, Polybius Megalopolitane of the cause of Antiochus sickness.
that he fell sick; and his disease, aggravated with other accidents,
increasing, he knew well that he should die: and therefore he called for his
most familiar friends, and told them, That his sickness was violent and
desperate, and that he deserved this affliction, because be had persecuted the
people of the Jews, and destroyed their Temple, committed horrible Sacrilege,
and contemned that God which they adored: And whilst he thus spoke unto them,
he gave up the ghost. So that I wonder at Polybius the Megalopolitane, (who is
in other things a good Historian) who writes, That Antiochus died, because he
would have spoiled the Temple of Diana in the Country of Persia. For since he
had only intended to commit Sacrilege, but had not effected it, he merited not
to suffer punishment for it. And if it seems good unto Polybius, that
Antiochus was punished by death Jerusalem. But our purpose is not to argue
against those that maintain, that Polybius's reasons are of greater truth and
consequence, than ours are.

CHAP. XIV.
Antiochus Eupator succeeds his father Epiphanes. Judas Machabeus lays siege to
the Citadel at Jerusalem. Antiochus comes against him with a great Army, and
besieges Bethsura; they both raise their sieges, and come to a pitched Battle.
The wonderful
BEfore Antiochus gave up the ghost, Antiochus appoints Philip Governor of
his kingdom and commits his son Antiochus to his charge.
he called for Philip one of his chief friends, and made him Governor of his
kingdom. And having delivered his Diadem into his hands, his Royal Robe, and
his Ring and Jewels, he charged him to deliver them to his son Antiochus,
entreating him to take care of his education, and to secure the kingdom
Antiochus died the 149 year of the kingdom of Syria. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap.
14.
After that Lysias had certifi'd the people of the Kings death, he proclaimed
his son Antiochus (whom at that time he had in his protection) King, sirnaming
him Eupator, Lysias creates Antiochus the younger King, and sirnameth him
Eupator.
(according to the instructions that were given him.) About that time, the
Garrison and Apostates that were in the Fortress of Jerusalem, did much mischief
unto the Jews. For setting upon them that went up to the Temple to worship and
offer Sacrifice, The Macedonians in the Castle of Jerusalem, do much harm to
the Jews.
they slew them: for the Fortress commanded the Temple. For this cause, Judas
resolved to cut off these Garrisons, and to that intent he assembled all the
people, and besieged it. This enterprise was undertook in the year 150, after
that Seleucus had usurped the government of those Countries. Having therefore
made him certain Engines, Judas Machabeus besieges the Castle.
and of that Garrison, came out by night, and assembling together such men as
were as malicious as themselves, they came unto King Antiochus, beseeching him,
The year of the World, 3803. before Christ's Nativity, 161.
That he would not suffer them to be abused by those of our Nation; nor to be
neglected by him, since their sufferings proceeded only from their having
devoted themselves to his fathers service; for whose sake they had forsaken
their own Religion, and followed his Laws and Ordinances. Furthermore they told
him, That the Fortress was in danger to be surprised by Judas, and his
Associates, The fugitive Jews fly out of the Castle, and require Antiochus's
assistance.
except some present succors were sent unto them. When Antiochus the younger
had notice hereof, he was displeased, and sent for his Captains and Friends,
commanding them to hire strangers, and to list all those in his kingdom who
were of years to bear Arms; so that he gathered in short time an Army of 100000
Foot, and 20000 Horse, and 32 Elephants: and with this equipage marched out of
Antioch, committing his Army to Lysias. Antiochus marches into Judea with his
Army.
As soon as he came into Idumaea, he went up unto Bethsura, a walled City,
Bethsurians resisting him valiantly, Bethsura besieged.
and sallying out upon him, burnt those Engines which he had prepared for the
battery of the Town. When therefore a long time was consumed about the siege.
Judas with his forces encountreth the King at Beth-zacharia.
Judas having intelligence of the Kings approach, raised his Camp from before
the Castle of Jerusalem, and marching forward to meet the Enemy, he encamped in
a certain straight, in a place called Beth-zacharia, about 70 furlongs from the
Enemy.

The King having notice thereof, raised his siege from Bethsura, and marched
toward the straight where Judas's Army was encamped, and about the morning he
set his Soldiers in battle array. He first of all caused his Elephants to march
one after another through the straight, for that it was impossible for them to
march in a square body. About every Elephant were 1000 Footmen, and 500
Horsemen. These Elephants bare high Towers on Jews: whereupon, the mountains
resounded with the fearful cries of Antiochus Army; yet was not Judas any ways
discouraged at it. Eleazar, Judas's brother, kills an Elephant.
For receiving the charge with a great courage, he slew almost 600 of the
forlorn hope. But Eleazar surnamed Auran, Judas's brother, seeing a huge
Elephant among the rest with trappings somewhat extraordinary, and supposing
that the King was mounted thereon, Judas returns to Jerusalem, and Antiochus
follows him.
he made toward him with a mighty courage; and after he had slain diverse of
those that environed the Elephant, and scattered the rest, he thrust Eleazar,
slew him with his weight: and thus honorably diedthis worthy man, after that
he had slain a great number of his Enemies, and sold his life at a dear rate.
Judas seeing his Enemies Forces so great in number, retired back to Jerusalem
to continue his siege: and Anti^chus sent part of his Army to Bethsura to take
it, and with the rest he himself marched toward Jerusalem.

The Bethsurites being afraid of this mighty Army of the King, and seeing their
necessary provisions failed, The Bethsurites yield up their City.
yielded up their City, after they had taken the Kings oath, that he would
offer no violence; so that when Antiochus was Master of the City, he offered
them no injury; The Temple of Jerusalem besieged.
only he thrust them out disarmed from the City, and placed a Garrison
Jerusalem, for they who kept it, defended it valiantly. For against every
Engine the King built and raised up against them, they erected a contrary
Engine. They only wanted victuals, because their old provision was consumed,
and the ground had not been manured that year, because it was the seventh; in
which, according to the Law, the Country ought not to be tilled; which was the
cause that diverse of those that were besieged, fled away privately for want of
victuals, insomuch that very few remained for the defense of the Temple. In
this condition were they who were besieged in the Temple.

But when King Antiochus and Lysias the General had received notice, Antiochus
hearing news of Philips intent to invade Persia, gives over his siege to meet
him.
that Philip coming out of Persia, intended to make himself Lord of the
Country; they concluded to give over the siege for that time, and to march
forwards against Philip, without giving any notice thereof to his Soldiers. He
only commanded that Lysias should call a Council of his Captains, and without
discovering of his design against Philip; to tell them, That he raised the
siege, because the place was very strong, and his Army began to want victuals,
and the public affairs required his presence in other parts of his Dominions.
Furthermore, he thought it expedient to capitulate with the besieged, and
contract friendship with all the Nation of the Jews, promising them the free
exercise of their Religion, because they rebelled only that they were deprived
of it; and he was assured, that having the grant thereof, they would live
peaceably, and he might safely return into his own Country. When Lysias had
declared these Reasons, all the Army and the Captains approved thereof.


King Antiochus Eupator makes peace with the Jews, but, contrary to his
promise, he demolisheth the Wall that encompassed the Temple. He cuts off the
head of the High Priest Onias surnamed Menelaus, and confers that honor upon
Alcim. Onias the Nephew of Menelaus retires into Egypt, where the King and
Queen Cleopatra his Wife, permit him to build a Temple at Heliopolis, in
imitation of that at Jerusalem.
IN pursuance of this resolution, Antiochus makes peace with Judas.
King Antiochus sent a Herald to Judas, and those that The wall of the Temple
defaced.
Which conditions they willingly embraced: and having taken an oath of
assurance from the King, they surrendered up the Temple. Whereupon Antiochus
entered into it, Onias, otherwise called Menelaus, led away Prisoner.
and seeing it to be a place so well fortified, he, contrary to his oath,
commanded his Army to level the Wall that environed it even with the ground:
which done, he returned to Antioch, leading away with him the High Priest
Onias, who was called Menelaus. For Lysias had counseled the King to murder
Menelaus, if he intended that the Jews should live in peace: and the rather,
because it was he only who was the Author of all those evils, by reason of the
counsel he had given to Antiochus his father, to enforce the Jews to forsake
their Religion. The King for that cause, sent Menelaus unto Beraea, Syria,
where he commanded him to be put to death, after he had enjoyed the
High Priesthood ten years. Alcim or Jacimus made High Priest.
He was a wicked man, and to raise himself to that great honor and authority,
had caused several of our Nation to violate our most holy Laws. As soon
therefore as Menelaus was dead, Alcim was made High Priest, who was called
Jacimus. Now when Antiochus found that Philip had already conquered a great
part of his Country, he fought with him, and taking him Prisoner, he put him
to death. But Onias the son of the High Priest, Philip slain by Antiochus.
(whom, as we have heretofore declared, was left an Orphan in his infancy)
seeing that the King had slain his Uncle Menelaus, Onias the Highpriests son
built a Temple in Egypt, resembling that at Jerusalem.
and given the Priesthood to Alcim, who was not of the race of the Priests, and
had transferred this honor into another family at the persuasion of Lysias, he
fled unto Ptolomy King of Egypt, where being honorably entertained by the King
and his Queen Cleopatra, he obtained a place at Heliopolis, where he built a
Temple like unto that which was at Jerusalem: whereof we shall hereafter have a
more fit opportunity to speak.

CHAP. XVI.
Demetrius the son of Seleucus, escapes from Rome, comes into Syria, and
causes himself to be crowned King, and puts to death King Antiochus and
Lysias. He sends Bacchides with an Army into Judea, to exterminate Judas and
his party, and to establish Alcim in the High Priesthood; he proceeds with
great cruelty, but Judas compels
AT that time Demetrius the son of Seleucus fled from Rome, Hedio and Ruffinus,
cap. 15.
and took possession of Tripolis in Syria; and after he had set the Diadem upon
his own head, and had levied and hired certain Soldiers, 1 Machab. 7.
he invaded the kingdom: Demetrius seizes Tripolis, and other Cities of ^yria,
and kills Antiochus and Lysias.
where he was received to the general content of all men, who submitting
themselves unto him, laid hold on the King Antiochus and Lysias, and brought
them alive unto him; but he forthwith commanded that they should be put to
death, after that Antiochus had reigned two years. To this new elected King,
diverse Jews, (banished for their impiety) and with them the High Priest Alcim
resorted; Alcim the High Priest, with Apostates accuses Judas before Demetrius.
who in general accused their own Nation, and principally Judas Judas and his
brethren. Demetrius was much moved by these reports, and for that cause sent
Bacchides (who was in times past much esteemed by Antiochus Epiphanes for his
valor, and to whose government at that time all Mesopotamia was committed:) To
whom he gave an Army, joining with him the High Priest Alcim, with Commission
to kill Judas, and his Confederates. Bacchides departing from Antioch with his
Army, came into Judea, and sent an Herald unto Judas Judas suspecting his
design, gave little heed unto him: for in that he came thither with so great an
Army, he easily conjectured that he intended no Peace, The year of the World,
3804. before Christ's Nativity, 160.
but to make War: notwithstanding some of the People gave eat Bacchides; and
supposing that there was no ill design in Alcim, who was their Countreyman,
they submitted themselves unto his government. And having received an oath from
them both, that neither they, nor any of their followers, Bacchides kills
diverse that trust his oath.
should any ways be endamaged by them, they committed themselves to their
protection. But Bacchides setting light by his oath, slew 60 of them; and by
this breach of his faith toward these, he caused others (who intended to
submit themselves) to forsake and flee from his government. Bacchides uses
great tyranny in Bethzeth.
As soon as therefore he had removed his Army from Jerusalem, he came unto the
village of Bethzeth, and there apprehending many of those which had fled, and
some others among the People, he slew them all, commanding Alcim, Alcim uses
popularity and familiarity to win the peoples hearts, and kills all such as
were of Judas's faction.
to whom he left in that place, for the guard of his person, a part of his
Army: and that done, he returned unto Antioch to King Demetrius. In the mean
while Alcim intending to secure his government, and supposing that it would be
so much the better confirmed, if he could obtain the good will of the People,
he used all kind of plausible and familiar speech unto them; and conversing
with every man pleasantly and graciously, he joined in a short time great
Forces to those which he had before: Judas resists Alcims power.
amongst whom, there were many fugitives and ungodly men, by whose help and
assistance he marched through the Country, killing all those whom he found to
be of Judas's faction. Judas perceiving that Alcim having gathered great
Forces, had already slain diverse of the most worthymen, and such as feared God,
he prepared himself also to overrun the Country, and slew as many of Alcim's
party as he could Judas, he thought fit to seek after the assistance of
Demetrius. Alcim accuses Judas to Demetrius.
For which cause, he repaired to Antioch, and incensed Demetrius exceedingly
against Judas, accusing him for offering many injuries unto him: protesting
that he should suffer many more, except he were prevented and punished by a
good Army sent out against him.

CHAP. XVII.
Demetrius, at the instance of Alcim, sends Nicanor with a great Army against
Judas Machabeus, whom he endeavors to surprise. They come to a Battle, and
Nicanor is slain.
Demetrius imagining, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 16.
That if Judas should increase in power, it would be some prejudice to his
state, sent Nicanor his most faithful friend, to make War against him: (who was
one of them who accompanied him in his flight from Rome.) Demetrius sends
Nicanor against Judas.
And having furnished him with a sufficient Army, and able to make head against
Judas, he commanded him to spare no one of that Nation. Nicanor dissembling
with Judas, labored to surprise him.
When Nicanor came to Jerusalem, he would not proclaim an open War against
Judas, but designed to surprise him by some subtilty: to this intent he sent
him a peaceable message, telling him, That he knew no reason why he should
engage himself in the dangers of a tedious War, since he was ready to assure
him with an oath, that he would offer him no injury; and that he came thither
with his friends, only to express the good affection of the King Demetrius
toward him, and his kindness to the Nation of the Jews. Judas and his brethren
believed this delusion of Nicanor, and suspecting no harm, they gave credit to
him, and entertained both him and his Army. When therefore Nicanor had saluted
Judas, he conferred with him, and in the mean while gave a sign unto his
Soldiers to lay hands on him: who perceiving his Treason, brake from him, and
fled unto his Soldiers. When Nicanor saw that his intentions were discovered,
he resolved to make open War upon Judas, and to give him battle near unto a
borough called Caphar-salama: in which place obtaining the victory, he
constrained Judas to retreat into the Fortress at Jerusalem. Nicanor came down
from the Fortress, and went toward the Temple at Jerusalem, Nicanor threatens
the people, that except they yield up Judas, he will destroy the Temple.
certain of the Priests and Elders went out to meet him, and after they had
done their reverence, they showed him those Sacrifices, which (as they said)
they intended to offer unto God for the Kings prosperity and health. But he
blaspheming, threatened them, That if the people did not deliver Judas into his
hands, he would destroy the Temple upon his return; and with these menaces he
departed out of the City. Which when the Priests heard, they wept bitterly, and
entreated God, That it might please him to defend his sacred Temple, together
with those which called on his Name therein, from the violence and outrage of
their Enemies.

Nicanor departed from Jerusalem, and came unto Bethoron, and encamped there,
where Syria. Now Judas was encamped in another village called Adas, about 30
Furlongs distant from Bethoron, Judas and his followers, put Nicanor and his
Soldiers to flight.
Whereupon assailing Nicanor, there arose a dangerous conflict between them,
wherein, Judas had the better; for he slew a great number of the enemy: and
finally, Nicanor himself fighting courageously, was slain; and as soon as he
fell, his Army betook themselves to flight. For having lost their Captain, they
dispersed themselves, and cast away their weapons: Judas speedily pursuing
them, made a great slaughter, and by sound of Trumpet, certifi'd those of the
neighboring villages, That he had discomfited the enemy. Whereupon the
Inhabitants betook themselves to their weapons, and meeting with those that
fled, they slew them, so that not one escaped from this battle, although the
Syrian Army consisted of 9000 Men. This victory happened on the 13 day of the
month Adar, Adar, March.
as our Countrymen call it, and the Macedonians Distre: And hereof each year
there is a solemn feast and memorial observed. From this time forward, the
Nation of the Jews were in quiet without any invasion, and lived in peace for a
little time: Alcim the High Priest dies.
but afterward they were troubled with the like incursions. Whereas therefore
the High Priest Alcim intended to beat down an old wall of the Sanctuary, which
had been built by the holy Prophets, he was suddenly stricken by God; so that
he lost his speech, and fell to the ground; and after he had endured many
torments, at last

After his death, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 17.
the people with a general consent conferred that office upon Judas; who
hearing of the great power of the Romans, 1 Match. 8.
and how they had conquered Gaul, Spain, Judas covenanteth a peace with the
Romans.
Carthage, Greece, and the Kings Perseus and Philip; and besides all these, the
great King Antiochus, he resolved to procure their friendship, and to that
purpose he sent Eupolemus the son of John, and Jason the son of Eleazar, his
two most intimate friends, unto Rome, to entreat the Romans to be their Allies
and Confederates, and to write unto Demetrius, That he should forbear to make
War against the Jews. When the Ambassadors that were sent from Judas were
arrived at Rome, the Senate received them; and after they had discoursed with
them upon the occasion of their coming, they accepted their alliance, Judea,
and the original reserved in the Capitol, engraven on a Table of brass. Which
Decree of the Romans, concerning their alliance with the Jews, contained these
Articles:

That no man under the obedience of the Romans, The decree of the Romans
touching society and friendship of the Jews.
should maintain War against the Nation of the Jews: nor should furnish those
with victuals, ships, or money, that should make War against them. And if any
enemies should assail the Jews, the Romans should give them succor to the
utmost of their power: and that likewise if any one should make War against the
Romans, the Jews should succor them. That if the Jewish Nation would add or
diminish any thing of that association, it should be done with the common
advice of the people of Rome; and that that which should be ordained, should
remain irrevocable.

Eupolemus the son of John, and by Jason the son of Eleazar, at such time as
Judas was High Priest, and his brother Simon General over the Army. Thus the
first amity and alliance was contracted between the Romans and the Jews.

CHAP. XVIII.
King Demetrius sends Bacchides with a new Army against Judas Machabeus, who
resolves to give him battle, although he had but 800 men.
WHen Nicanor's death, and the defeat of his Army was told Demetrius, he sent a
Judea, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 18.
under the conduct of Bacchides: who departing from Antioch, 1 Match. 9.
and coming to Judea, encamped in Arbela a City of Galilee; where having taken
captive a great number of those that were retired into Caves, Demetrius sends
Bacchides with Forces into Jury.
he departed from thence, and went to Jerusalem: And understanding that Judas
was encamped in the village of Berzeth, he marched out against him with 20000
Foot, and 2000 Horse. Judas had not on his side in all above 2000 men,
Bacchides meets Judas with 20000 Soldiers.
the greater part whereof being afraid of the numerous Army of the Syrians,
forsook their Camp, and fled away: by which means there remained no more with
Judas, than 800 men. He seeing himself abandoned by so many of his men, and
pressed by his enemies, who gave him no time to reinforce his Army, he Judas
replied to this effect: God forbid (said he) that the Sun should see me turn my
back upon mine enemies. And if by this means I meet with my death, and that I
must needs spend my last blood in this battle, I will never sullie so many
notable actions so worthily achieved, nor diminish that glory which I have
obtained, by one ignominious flight. And having in this manner exhorted the
small remnant of those Soldiers that were with him, Judas with a small Army,
intends to assail a mighty Host.
he commanded them that without any apprehension of danger, they should make
head against the enemy.

CHAP. XIX.
Judas Machabeus with 800 men, engages against the whole Army of Demetrius. He
is slain, after he had performed actions almost incredible. His praise.
BAcchides drew out his Army, and ranged them in battle, placing the Horsemen
on both the wings, Bacchides disposes his Army, and fights with Judas.
his light-armed Soldiers and Archers in the front of the Army, and after these
a strong Band, called the Macedonian Phalanx; and he himself led the right wing
of the battle. And in this array he approached Judas's Camp, and caused the
Trumpets to be sounded, commanding his Soldiers to give a great shout, and to
charge their enemies. Judas did the like, and encountered Bacchides; so that on
both sides there was a most cruel conflict, which continued until the Sunset.
And when Judas perceived that Bacchides, and the flower of his Army fought in
the right wing, he chose out a certain number of his most resolute Soldiers,
and drew toward that quarter, and setting upon Judas disperseth the enemies
Army, kills some, and at last is slain himself.
he brake their squadron; and afterward thrusting into the midst of them, he
forced them to fly, and pursued them as far as the Mount Aza. They of the left
wing perceiving the flight of those in the right, went after Judas, and
enclosed him behind. So that being unable to fly, and seeing himself enclosed
by his enemies, he resolved to fight it out. And after having slain a great
number of his enemies, he found himself so feeble by the wounds which he had
received, that he fell to the ground, and crowned all his other great and
immortal actions by a glorious death. His Soldiers seeing him dead, and having
no Commander of note left amongst them, after the loss of so valiant a Captain,
betook them all to flight. Simon and Jonathan his brothers, upon entreaty,
recovered his body, Judas buried in Modin.
and carried it to Modin, (a place where his father was buried:) there was he
interred Judas's end, who was a valiant man, a great warrior, and very
respective of the commandments of his father Matthias, having done and suffered
all that was possible, to recover the liberty of his Country. Being therefore
after this manner accomplished, he had left behind him a perpetual renown of
his worthy acts, and an honorable memory of himself obtained by the liberty,
in which he re-established his Nation, delivering them from the servitude of
the Macedonians: He died, after he had discharged the office of the High Priest
for the space of three years.

The year of the World, 3085. before Christ's Nativity, 159.

Written by FLAVIVS JOSEPHVS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Thirteenth Book.
1. Jonathan, after his brother Judas's death, succeeds in the Government. 2.
Jonathan having wearied Bacchides by War, compels him to make a League, and
draw 3. Alexander, the son of Antiochus Epiphanes, makes War upon King
Demetrius. 4. Demetrius sends an Ambassador to Jonathan with Presents,
persuading him to be of his party. 5. Alexander, by greater Presents than
Demetrius, and by offering the High Priesthood to Jonathan, draws him over to
his party. 6. Of the Temple of God built by Onias. 7. How Alexander, after the
death of Demetrius, highly honored Jonathan. 8. Demetrius, the son of
Demetrius, overcoming Alexander, possesses the Kingdom, and makes an alliance
with Jonathan. Triphon Apamenus, after he had overcome Demetrius, reserved the
Kingdom for Antiochus, Alexander's son, who receives Jonathan into favor. 10.
Demetrius being overcome by the Parthians, Triphon breaks his covenant of
peace, and laying hold on Jonathan, traitorously kills him, and afterward
assaulteth Simon his brother. 11. How the Nation of the Jews committed both the
Priesthood and the Government of the Army to Simon. 12. Simon driving Tryphon
into Dora, besieged him, and makes a League with Antiochus, surnamed Pius. 13.
A debate arising between Antiochus and Simon, Cendebaeus the Kings Captain is
driven 14. How Simon was traitorously slain at a banquet, by Ptolomy his
father-in-law. 15. How Ptolomy's endeavors being made frustrate, Hircanus
obtains the Government. 16. How Antiochus, surnamed the Just, leading an Army
against Hircanus, for 300 Talents, is reconciled, and enters into a League.
17. Hircanus 's expedition into Syria. 18. How Antiochus Cyzicenus assisting
the Samaritans, is conquered, and enforced to fly. 19. Aristobulus causes
himself to be crowned King. 20. The acts of Alexander the King of the Jews. 21.
The victory of Ptolomy Lathurus against Alexander. overcomes Alexander in
battle. 23. The expedition of Antiochus Dionysius into Jewry. 24. Alexander
being dead, his wife Alexandra succeeded him in the Kingdom.


CHAP. I.
After the death of Judas Machabeus, Jonathan his brother is by the Jews chosen
General of their Army. Bacchides, the Commander of Demetrius's Army, attempts
to kill him treacherously; but failing, he assaults him openly. A great battle,
and a fair retreat, managed
WE have declared in the former Book, how the Nation of the Jews (after they
had been under the subjection of the Macedonians) recovered their liberty: we
have likewise related the great wars of Judas their Captain, and in which he
was at last slain in the defense of their liberty: how likewise (after the
death of Judas) all the wicked Apostate Jews, who had revolted from their
Religion, took courage, molesting and doing many injuries Macedonians. In the
mean while, Bacchides gathering together the Apostates, (who were fallen from
the Religion Jews, with an intent to live after the manner of the Heathen)
commits the government of the Country unto them, who laying hold on Judas's
friends and partakers, betrayed and delivered them to Bacchides: who first of
all tormented and beat them, The Jews compelled by the Apostates, and by
famine, submit themselves to the Macedonians.
and afterward put them to death. This so great affliction (than which, the
Jews had never endured a worse, since their return from Babylon) was the cause
that those of Judas's faction, who were yet alive, fearing the total ruin of
their Nation, addressed themselves to Jonathan his brother, exhorting him to
imitate his brother Judas 's virtues, and to have no less care of his Country,
than him who dyed in the defense of it: beseeching him, that he would not
suffer his Nation to perish for want of a Captain, Bacchides murthereth those
of Judas's faction.
since he himself was so well qualified to command them. Jonathan answered
them, That he was ready to dye for them; and being in all things esteemed no
less valiant and politic than his brother Judas, he was proclaimed General and
Captain of the Jews.

Bacchides having notice hereof, Jonathan, by the public instigation of the
Jews, undertaketh the government.
feared lest Jonathan should be no less troublesome to the King and the
Macedonians, than his brother Judas before him had been, for which cause he
sought means to make him away by Treason. But both Jonathan and his brother
Simon gat intelligence thereof, and having discovered his practice, they took
all their families with them, Bacchides complo^teth to betray Jonathan, and his
brother.
and fled into the desert that confined upon the City of Jerusalem: and
retiring near unto a water called the Lake of Asphar, they remained in that
place. When Bacchides perceived that they mistrusted him, and were driven
thither; he went out against them with all his Forces, and being encamped on
the other side of Jordan, he gathered Jonathan knowing well that Bacchides came
out to seek him, sent his brother John (surnamed Gaddis) unto the Arabians and
Nabatheans, to commit the trust of their goods into their hands, Bacchides
draws out his Forces against Jonathan.
until the end of the War betwixt him and Bacchides: for the Arabians were his
friends. Whilst therefore John marched toward the Nabatheans, (who were of
the City of Medaba) the sons of Amareus laid an ambush for him; and after they
had furiously set upon him on the way, and laid hold on whatsoever he brought
with him, John, the brother of Judas, is slain by Amars son.
they at length slew him, and all his company: for which fact of theirs, they
were shortly after punished by his brethren, as we shall relate hereafter.

When Bacchides knew that Jonathan was encamped in the Marshes of Jordan,
Bacchides assaileth Jonathan on the S^bbath-day, and loses 2000 of his men.
he made Bacchides assaulted him with great fierceness, he stretched out his
right hand to strike him; but he preventing the stroke, by stepping aside,
Jonathan and his companions leapt into the River, and so saved Jordan, because
the Enemy durst not pass the Water to pursue them. Whereupon Bacchides returned
incontinently to the Castle of Jerusalem (after he had lost about 2000 of his
men.) After this, he fortified diverse Cities (which were before ruinated)
namely, Jericho, Emaus, Bethoron, Bethella, Thamnata, Pharathon, Techoa, and
Gazara, and built in every of them certain Towers, and great and strong Walls,
and afterward he planted Garrisons therein, to sally out upon the Jews, and vex
them; but especially he fortified the Citadel of Jerusalem, in which he kept
for hostages the children of the principal men of Judea.

About that time there came a certain man to Jonathan and his brother Simon,
bringing them news, The Castle of Jer^salem (...).
that the sons of Amareus, would solemnize their Nuptials, and were to lead
Arabians, from the City of Gabatha: and it was intended that she should be
conducted with great magnificence and pomp. Jonathan and his brother supposing
that a fit opportunity was offered them to revenge their brothers death, Simon
revengeth his brother John's blood on the sons of Amaraeus.
and to punish the Medabanes for the wrongs they had done unto their brother,
they took with them the greatest Forces that they could, and marched toward
Medaba, where they lay in ambush under the side of an hill. But when they saw
them that led the Bride, and accompanied the Bridegroom, and a great Troop of
their Friends likewise, according to the manner of Marriages, they brake out of
their ambush, and put them all to the sword; and after they had seized their
jewels, and all the other booty of that company that followed them, they
retired back again joyfully, John, upon the sons of Amareus. For not only these
alone, but their friends that accompanied The year of the World, 3880. before
Christ's Nativity, 156.
were all of them slain, to the number of 400. And in this manner Simon and
Jonathan returned into the marshes aforesaid, and abode there. But Bacchides
having fortified all the Garrisons of Judea, returned back unto the King. And at
that time the state of the Jews was in peace, for the space nigh two years.

But the wicked, Demetrius, by the solicitation of the fugitives, sends
Bacchides against Jonathan, with an Army.
and such as were revolted from the Religion of the Jews, seeing that Jonathan
and his followers conversed in the Country with great assurance, by reason of
the Peace; they sent certain Ambassadors unto King Demetrius, requiring him to
send them Bacchides, who might apprehend Jonathan; declaring that it might
easily be done: and that in one night breaking in upon them, he might murder
them all before they Bacchides, by the King's commandment, came into Jewry, he
wrote unto all his Friends, Bacchides displeased with the Apostates, for that
they could not surprise Jonathan, kills 50 of them.
both Jews, and also his other Allies, requiring them to lay hold on Jonathan:
but when by no policy, nor prowess of theirs, they were able to apprehend him,
(for that Jonathan having notice of their ambushes, stood upon his guard)
Bacchides the Macedonian was displeased with the Apostates and Fugitives,
objecting against them, that they had deceived both the King and him: and
laying hold on fifty of the principal of them, he put them to death. But
Jonathan and his brother, with those of their company, Jonathan and his brother
besieged in Bethalaga.
retired themselves into Bethalaga, (a certain village in the desert) for fear
of Bacchides; in which place he built Towers and Walls to keep his Garrison in
more security. Bacchides having notice of it, took the Army that he had with
him, and those Jews that were his Confederates, and marched forward against
Jonathan; and approaching those fortifications that were made by him, he
besieged him for many days. But Jonathan, Jonathan stealing out of the City,
assaileth Bacchides by night.
for all his siege and violence, was not a whit terrified, but stood out
valiantly; and leaving his brother Simon in the City to make head against
Bacchides, he secretly stole out, and gathered a great number of Soldiers that
favored his proceedings, and in the nightime courageously brake into
Bacchides Camp; and after he had there slain a number of his men, Bacchides
revengeth himself on the fugitives, and is enforced to retreat.
he gave his brother Simon notice of his coming: who, as soon as he heard the
noise in the Enemies Camp, hastily issued forth with his Soldiers, and burnt
all the Macedonians Engines, and made a great slaughter of them. Bacchides
seeing that he was circumvented by his Enemies, and that both before and behind
he was pressed

CHAP. II.
Jonathan constrains Bacchides to make peace with the Jews, and to depart out
of the
WHen Jonathan knew his intentions, 1 Mac. 9.
he sent an Ambassador unto him to conclude a Peace betwixt them, Bacchides
makes peace with Jonathan.
with this condition, That they should each of them deliver up those Prisoners
that were taken on either side. Bacchides judging the Proposal to be
honorable, Jonathan lives at Mac^mas, punishing the wicked.
and that a fit occasion was now offered him, whereupon he might raise his
siege without any disgrace, promised Jonathan his friendship; so that both of
them swore from that time forward, never to make War the one against the other,
and each of them restored their Prisoners. Thus returned Bacchides into Antioch
unto his King, and after that retreat, he never made War again upon Judea. But
Jonathan having, obtained his Machmas: where, during his government, he
executed such severe justice on those that were revolted from the Religion of
their Country, that he purged the Nation from Apostates.

CHAP. III. The year of the World, 3813. before Christ's Nativity, 151.

Alexander Ballez, the son of King Antiochus Epiphanes, enters with an Army
into Syria. The Garrison of Ptolemais set open their gates to him, by reason of
their hatred to King Demetrius, who prepares himself for War.
IN the hundred and sixtieth year, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 11.
Alexander, surnamed Ballez, the son of Antiochus Epiphanes came into Syria,
and seized the City of Ptolemais, by the reason of those Soldiers that were
therein, Alexander, the son of Antiochus Epiphanes, comes into Syria, and
seizes Ptolemais.
who were ill-affected toward Demetrius, by reason of his arrogance, which was
such, that he granted no man access unto him: for being locked up Antioch) he
suffered no man to approach his presence, but was careless, and wholly
negligent in his affairs, living in pleasure and idleness: whereby he was much
hated by his Subjects, as we have already declared in another place. Now when
Demetrius knew that Alexander had seized Ptolemais, he gathered all his Forces,
and marched forth against him.

CHAP. IV.
King Demetrius desires the Alliance of Jonathan, who makes use of this
occasion, to repair the Fortifications of Jerusalem.
JN the mean time he sent Ambassadors unto Jonathan, Demetrius's War against
Alexander.
that might make an alliance, and ratify a friendship betwixt them: for he
determined with himself to prevent Alexander, 1 Mac. 10.
for fear lest he capitulating with him first of all, should obtain his
assistance. And this did he especially for the fear he had of Jonathan, lest
remembering those injuries he had before received at his hands, he should oppose
himself against him. He therefore sent unto him, requiring him to assemble his
Forces, and to make preparation for the War: commanding likewise, that those
Jews should be delivered into his possession, whom Bacchides had shut up for
hostages in the fortress of Jerusalem. After that Demetrius had demeaned
himself in this sort, Jonathan came to Jerusalem, and in the presence Jews that
were in the fortress were afraid, seeing that the King permitted Jonathan to
levy an Army, and to receive hostages. But he receiving them into his hands,
restored each of them to their fathers and mothers: and by this means remained
Jonathan in Jerusalem, where he made diverse reparations, and built according as
he pleased. For he built the City-walls of hewn stone, The Macedonians
forsaking their Garrisons, resort to Antioch.
to make them more durable against the assaults of War. Which when they
perceived who were in the Garrisons throughout all Judea, they forsook them all,
and retired back to Antioch, except they that were in the City of Bethsura, and
those in the Fortress of Jerusalem: for they consisted for the most part of
those Jews that had abandoned their

CHAP. V.
King Alexander Ballez desires the friendship of Jonathan; and to oblige him,
confers on him the office of High Priest, void by the death of his brother
Judas Machabeus. King Demetrius on the other side, makes fairer Proposals unto
him, and those of his Nation. The two Kings come to a battle, in which
Demetrius is slain.
BUT Alexander knowing what promises Demetrius had made unto Jonathan, Hedio
and Ruffinus, cap. 8.
and being Macedonians, and how he was persecuted by Demetrius, and his
Lieutenant Bacchides: he told his friends that it was impossible for him to
meet with a better Ally at that time than Jonathan, who had approved himself a
valiant man against his enemies, and particularly hated Demetrius, from whom he
had received many injuries, and on whom he had several times taken revenge:
wherefore if they thought it good to draw him unto their side against
Demetrius, the time was very fit to make an Alliance between them; which advice
of his being approved by his Favorites, he sent a Letter unto Jonathan to this
effect:

King Alexander to Jonathan his Brother, Health.
We have long since heard of your valor and fidelity, which has caused us to
send our Ambassadors Jews, and receive you into the number of our chiefest
friends. Moreover, as a Present, I send you a Purple Robe, and a Crown of Gold,
exhorting you, That since you are thus honored by us, you will likewise yield
us an answerable respect and friendship.


Jonathan having received this Letter, Alexander endeavors to draw Jonathan
to his party, by making him High Priest.
invested himself in the habit of the High Priest, on the day of the feast of
the Tabernacles, which was the fourth year after the death of his brother
Judas. (For during all that time there had not been any High Priest.) He
assembled also a great number of Soldiers, and caused a great quantity of arms
and

When Demetrius heard this, he was much troubled, and accused himself of sloth,
and too much negligence in his affairs, Demetrius studieth by promises, to
assure himself of Jonathans friendship.
because he had not prevented Alexander, by drawing Jonathan to his party, but
had suffered him to take the benefit of this occasion. Nevertheless he forbore
not to write to Jonathan, and the rest of the people of the Jews, as follows.

King Demetrius to Jonathan, and to all the Nation of the Jews, Health.
Since you have observed the friendship that you bear unto us, and have not
engaged your selves Judea, and the three Provinces annexed thereunto, Samaria,
Galilee, and Peraea, are bound to pay me; willing Jerusalem be held sacred, and
enjoy the privilege of a Sanctuary; and that it shall be exempt from the
payment of tithes, and all manner of impositions. And I commit the fortress in
the same to the hands of Jonathan the High Priest, permitting him to place such
a Garrison therein, as he shall think fit, and such as will faithfully keep it
for his use. I will also that all the Jews, who are imprisoned in my Country,
be set at liberty. Moreover, it is my pleasure, that no Horses of the Jews be
taken up to run Post for us: I grant also that the Sabbaths, and festival
days; and three days also before every one of those feasts, be days of
liberty and freedom. And my will is, that the Jews, who inhabit within my
dominions, be likewise freed from all molestations. The like privilege grant I
them that will bear Arms with me, to the number of 30000: who, in what place
soever they shall be, shall have Judea, be made subject unto the same laws. My
pleasure is, in like manner, that the High Priest shall take order, that no Jew
shall worship in any other Temple than that of Jerusalem; and of my own charge
I give every year an 150000 sicles of silver, to be employed in Sacrifices: and
that which shall be over and above those Sacrifices, my pleasure is, that it
shall be your profit. Moreover, I acquit the Priests and Ministers of the
Temple, of the 10000 drachms of silver, (which the Kings levied on the Temple)
because they appertain unto the Priests who serve in the Temple, as I have been
rightly informed. I grant Jerusalem for refuge, and within the precincts
thereof, (whether it be for money due unto the King, or for any other cause)
that they be acquit thereof, and receive not any damage in their goods. I
permit also, that the Temple be repaired and built at my charge. My will is
also, that the walls of the City be re-edified, and that certain Towers be
built about the same, at my expense. Furthermore, if there be any places fit to
build fortresses and strong holds in, through all the Country of Judea, and to
place Garrisons in them, my will is, that all this be done and fortified, at the
charges levied out of mine own coffers. These are the promises and offers that
Demetrius made unto the Jews.


But King Alexander having gathered great Forces, as well of strange and hired
Soldiers, Syria had revolted from Demetrius, led forth his whole Army against
the Enemy; and after the Ensigns were displayed, and the onset given, the left
wing of Demetrius compelled Alexanders Soldiers that fought against it to fly;
and his men pursuing them, spoiled their Camp. But the Right Wing, in which the
King himself Demetrius fighting valiantly, slew some of his enemies; and in
pursuing others, who could not endure his fierce assault, was in the end, by
setting spurs to his Horse, The battle between Alexander and Demetrius, and of
Demetrius's death.
carried into a deep and muddy Bog, whereinto by chance his Horse fell, and
being unable to get out, he was slain in that place. For being discovered by
his enemies, they turned back upon him; and having enclosed him, they
altogether shot their arrows against him: so that he being on foot, and
fighting valiantly, was at length slain, after he had received diverse wounds,
and was no longer able to resist. Thus died Demetrius, who departed this life
the eleventh year of his Reign, as we have related in another place.

CHAP. VI.
Onias the son of Onias the High Priest, builds a Temple in Egypt, of the same
form with that at Jerusalem. A contention between the Jews and the Samaritans,
before Ptolemy Philometor, King of Egypt, concerning the Temple of Jerusalem,
and that of Garizim. The Samaritans lose the cause.
BUT Onias the son of the High Priest, Hedio and Ruffinus cap. 4.
called also Onias, (who flying out of his Country, Onias the son of Onias the
High Priest, seeks to build a Temple in Egypt.
lived in Alexandria, with Ptolomey Philometor, as we have heretofore declared)
Judea destroyed by the Macedonians, and their Kings; and intending to acquire
immortal praise, determined to beseech the King Ptolomey, and the Queen
Cleopatra, by Letters, That it might be lawful for him to build a Temple in
Egypt, resembling in all things that at Jerusalem; and that he might have
liberty to place Levites and Priests in it of his own kindred: And hereunto was
he especially moved, by a certain Prophecy of Isaiah, who more than 600 years
before, had foretold that a Temple should be assuredly built in Egypt, in
honor of Almighty God, by a Jew. Being therefore encouraged by this
Prediction, he wrote a Letter to Ptolomey and Cleopatra, to this effect.

During the time that I was employed in your Wars, and by Gods favorable
assistance have Coelosyria and Phoenicia, and have been in the City of
Leontopolis (which is in the Territories of Heliopolis:) I have also visited
diverse other places, wherein the Jews have built Temples, without observing
those Rules that are necessary upon such an occasion, which is the cause that
they agree not among themselves: as also the like has happened among the
Egyptians, through the multitude of Temples, and the great diversity of
Religions. And having found out a very convenient place near a Castle called
Bubastis in the Plain, where there is store of all sorts of materials for
building, and Cattle fit for sacrifice; I beseech you that it may be lawful for
me to purify the Temple that is ruinated in that place, and dedicated to no
sacred power: and that in stead thereof, to erect a Temple in honor of
Almighty God, according to the form and dimensions of that Temple which is at
Jerusalem, where Jews within the Kingdom of Egypt, for they will all in this
place assemble to celebrate the praises of God, according as it has been
foretold by the Prophet Isaias, There shall be (says he) a Temple for our Lord
God in Egypt: many other things also has he foretold touching this place.

This is the substance of that which Onias wrote unto King Ptolomey. And by his
answer which he made hereunto, a man may easily conjecture what piety was both
in him, and Cleopatra his sister, and wife. For they have returned the sin and
transgression of the Law, which through this means fell upon Onias's head, by
this answer that ensues.

King Ptolomey and Queen Cleopatra to Onias the High Priest, Health.
We have perused your Letters, by which you desire us to give you leave to
cleanse the Temple that is defaced at Leontopolis, in the seignory of
Heliopolis, in the place called Bubastis in the Plain. We marvel very much,
that a Temple built in a place so unclean, and full of execrable Beasts, should
be acceptable unto God: but since that you inform us, that the Prophet Isaiah
did long since prophecy the same, we give you liberty, if it may be done
according to the Law, and with this condition, that we commit not any sin
against God.


Upon this answer, Onias (taking possession of the place) built therein a
Temple, and erected an Altar unto God, according to the model of the Temple of
Jerusalem; but Jews: neither wanted there some Levites and Priests, who being
of the same opinion with Onias, officiated at the celebration of Divine
Service. A Temple built in Egypt by Ptolomey's consent.
But let this suffice for the present, touching the Temple.

But it came to pass, that the Jews of Alexandria, and the Samaritans that
brought in the Service and Worship of the Temple upon the mount Garizim, under
Alexander the Great, The Wars of the Jews, lib. 7. cap. 37.
dissented from one another, and debated their differences before Ptolomey. For
the Jews said, That the Temple in Jerusalem built according to Moses laws and
ordinances, Sedition betwixt the Jews and Samaritans, as touching their Temple.
was the lawful Temple; but the Samaritans maintained, That that which was
built Garazim, was the true Temple. They therefore besought the King, That it
would please him to sit in judgment, with the assistance of his friends, to
hear their allegations in this behalf, and to condemn the party unto death, who
should be found faulty in his process. Now the advocates which pleaded for the
Samaritans, were Sabbeus and Theodosius: and Andronicus, the son of Messalem,
defended the cause of those of Jerusalem, and the other Jews. And both of them
swore both by God and the King, That they would bring their proofs according to
the Law, beseeching Ptolomey to adjudge him to death, whom he should find to
have falsifi'd his oath. The King therefore sat down with his friends, to hear
the cause, and determine their differences. But the Jews of Alexandria were
much displeased with them that had drawn the pre-eminence of the Temple
Jerusalem into question, and were highly discontent, that a Temple so ancient
and famous, and so esteemed and honored through the whole World, should be so
disparaged. When therefore the day of Audience was come, Sabbeus and Theodosius
suffered Andronicus to speak first: who began to prove the lawfulness,
holiness, and religion of the Temple in Jerusalem out of the Law; and by the
successive government of the High Priests, who from father to son, and from
hand to hand, had received this honor; therein alleging, That all the Kings
of Asia had honored the Majesty of that place with presents and rich
oblations: whereas neither in the record of men, nor course of antiquity, the
Temple of Garizim had been in any estimation. Hereunto he added such other
reasons, as persuaded the King, that the Temple of Jerusalem was built
according to Moses, and caused him to adjudge Sabbeus and Theodosius to death.
This may suffice to have spoken concerning the differences of the Jews of
Alexandria, and such things as befell them during Ptolomey Philometors time.

CHAP. VII.
Alexander Ballez finding himself, by the death of Demetrius, in the peaceable
possession of the Realm of Syria, espouseth the daughter of Ptolomey
Philometor, King of Egypt. Great honor is done by Alexander to Jonathan the
High Priest.
Demetrius was slain in the field (as we have already related) Alexander made
himself King of Syria, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 5.
and wrote to Ptolomey Philometor, 1 Mac. 11. 1.
desiring his daughter, Alexander, King of Syria, marries Cleopatra, Ptolomeys
daughter.
the Princess Cleopatra, in marriage, telling him, That it was not below his
dignity, to contract affinity with him, since he had obtained his fathers
Empire by the favor of God, and had overcome Demetrius. Ptolomey yielding a
willing ear to his request, wrote back, That he was very glad that he had
recovered his fathers kingdom, promising him to give him his daughter in
marriage; assuring him, that he would meet him at Ptolomais, and bring his
daughter unto him to that place, and there celebrate the Nuptials. After he had
written these Letters, Ptolomey made haste to Ptolomais, and led with him his
daughter Cleopatra, where meeting with Alexander, (according to their
appointment) he delivered him his daughter, Alexander, by Letters, invited the
High Priest Jonathan, commanding him to come to him to Ptolomais. He went
thither, and presented magnificent Presents to both the Kings; he was highly
honored by both, insomuch as Alexander constrained him to put off his ordinary
garments, and to put on a purple robe, and after that to sit upon a royal
Throne: commanding his Captains to march before him through the City, and to
command by public Edict, That no man should dare to speak anything against
him, nor offer him any cause of discontent. All which the Captains performed;
so that they, who purposely and maliciously came thither to accuse him, seeing
the honor that was done unto him by the King, fled away, lest the mischief
which they designed for him, should fall upon Alexander loved Jonathan so
entirely, that he afforded him the chief place amongst his dearest friends.

CHAP. VIII. The year of the World, 3818. before Christ's Nativity, 146.

Demetrius Nicanor, the son of King Demetrius, enters into Cilicia with an
Army. King Alexander Ballez gives the command of his to Apollonius, who, with
very ill success, sets upon Jonathan the High Priest, who defeats him, takes
Azot, and burns the Temple of Dagon. Ptolemey Philometor, King of Egypt, comes
to the relief of King Alexander his Son-in-law, who appoints Apollonius to lay
an ambush to surprise him. Ptolemey takes away his daughter, and marries her
to Demetrius, whom he causes to be received by the Inhabitants of Antioch,
from whence he had driven Alexander, but he returns with a great Army. Ptolemey
and Demetrius unite their Forces, and overcome him in a pitched Battle; but
Ptolemey dyed of his wounds which he received, after he had seen the head of
IN the 165th year (of the Reign of the Greeks) Demetrius, the son of
Demetrius, (accompanied with diverse hired Soldiers, whom Lasthenes, who was of
Crete, furnished him with) departed out of Candia, and came into Cilicia. Which
news, as soon as Alexander heard, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 6.
he was much troubled: whereupon he instantly posed from Phoenicia to Antioch,
Demetrius the son of Demetrius, passes out of Greece into Cilicia, and seeks
to make himself Lord of Syria.
with intent to secure the affairs of his Kingdom in those parts, before the
arrival of Demetrius. He left behind him for his Governor in Coelosyria,
Apollonius Danus: who coming unto Jamnia with a great Army, sent a messenger
unto the High Priest Jonathan, That it was very strange, that he only should
live at his own ease, and in quiet, without submitting himself unto the King;
who would not long pass by unpunished that affront which he offered him, in not
submitting to his obedience. Wherefore (said he) deceive not thy self, neither
hope thou by sculking in the Mountains, or depending on thy Forces, to continue
thy greatness; but if thou trustest to thy power, come down into the field, and
engage with me and my Army in the Plain, A man confident in battle.
to the end that the issue of the Victory may show which of us is most valiant.
Know thou not, that the chief Nobility of every City, bear Arms under one,
who has always overcome thy Predecessors? Wherefore I challenge thee to meet
me in that place where we may use our swords, and no stones; and where the
vanquished shall have no advantage by his flight. Jonathan provoked by this
bravade, chose out 10000 of his best Jerusalem, accompanied with his brother
Simon, and came unto Joppa, and encamped without the City, (because the
Citizens had shut the gates against him) for they had a Garrison placed in that
place by Apollonius. But as soon as he prepared to batter the City, the
Inhabitants were afraid, lest he should surprise it by force, and therefore
they opened the gates. Apollonius understanding that Joppa was taken by
Jonathan, he took 3000 Horsemen, and 8000 Footmen with him, and came into Azot;
whence he departed, leading out his Army with an easy march: and arriving at
Joppa, he retired back to draw Jonathan into the field, putting great
confidence in his Horsemen, and grounding his hope of victory upon them. But
Jonathan coming forth boldly, pursued Apollonius as far as Azot; who finding
himself in the open Country, Apollonius fights with Jonathan, and is put to
flight.
and charged him. Jonathan was not at all surprised to see the thousand
Horsemen that Apollonius had laid in ambush near unto a certain River, to the
end they might charge the Jews behind, but disposed his Army after such a
manner, that his Soldiers on every side turned their faces upon the Enemy;
commanding his men to defend themselves on both sides, fighting with those that
assailed them either in the Van or the Rear. After that the battle had
continued until evening, Jonathan gave his brother Simon a part of his Forces,
charging him to set upon the Enemies battle: as for himself, he drew his
Soldiers into the form of a Battalion resembling a Tortoise, to the end that
being covered with their bucklers, joined the one with the other, they might
defend themselves against the Horsemens arrows; to which all of them were
obedient. Simon perceived they could charge no further, he set upon their
Infantry so courageously, that he put them all to flight. The Horse of
Apollonius perceiving that the Foot were disordered, Jonathan pursues the
enemy as far as Azot, and burns Dagons Temple, and kills 8000 men.
grew heartless likewise; and having lost the hope they had in their Foot, they
betook themselves to flight in great disorder and confusion: so that they brake
their ranks of themselves, and were scattered through all the Plain. Jonathan
also pursued Azot, and taking the City by assault, he slew diverse of them,
constraining the rest that were in despair, to fly into the Temple of Dagon,
which is in Azot; and taking the City by assault, he burnt it, with the
Villages Dagon, but burnt it, and all those that were therein. The number as
well of those that were slain in the battle, as of those that were consumed by
fire in the Temple, was 8000 Men. Having, after this manner, discomfited this
Army, he departed from Azot, and marched toward Ascalon: and as he was encamped
without the City, the Ascalonites came out unto him, and offered him Presents;
which he received, and departed from thence, and marched toward Jerusalem,
laden with great spoils.

As soon as Alexander heard that Apollonius the General of his Army was
defeated, Alexander sends Presents to Jonathan.
and forced to fly, he made a show that he was glad thereof, pretending that
it was without his knowledge that Jonathan had been assaulted, who was both his
friend and his allie. Accaron, and the Country thereabout, to him and his
heirs for ever.

About the same time, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 7.
King Ptolomey Philometor set out an Army by Sea, and another by Land, to go
into Syria, and to succor his Son-in-law Alexander: and in his way all the
Cities received him with great joy, Ptolomey Philometor repaireth unto Syria
with an Army, to assist his Son-in-law Alexander.
according as Alexander had commanded them, and conducted him as far as the
City of Azot; but that place made great complaints unto him, and demanded
justice at his hand, because the Temple of Dagon was burnt and destroyed,
accusing Jonathan for the firing thereof, and the slaughter of many People
therein. Ptolomey hearing these accusations, answered not a word: But when
Jonathan came to meet him at Joppa, Jonathan meets with Ptolomey, and is
honorably entertained by him.
he courted him with Royal Presents, and all the Honor that was possible; and
after he had conducted him as far as the River called Eleutherus, he dismissed
him, and sent him back to Jerusalem. When Ptolomey was come to Ptolomais, he
hardly escaped death, and that contrary to all expectation, by the contrivance
of Alexander, Treason intended against Ptolomey, and discovered; for which
cause he takes away his daughter from Alexander, and gives her to Demetrius
for his wife.
and his friend Ammonius: which Treachery being discovered, Ptolomey wrote unto
Alexander, requiring him, That Ammonius might be punished for his Treason and
Conspiracies practiced against him, according to the heinousness of the
offense. But seeing that Alexander delivered him not up into his hands, he
conjectured and concluded, that he himself was the Author thereof, and
conceived a great displeasure against this perfidious Antioch, by protecting
this same Ammonius, from whom they had received a great deal of mischief: but
in the end, Ammonius was punished for these his outrages, and disgracefully
slain like a woman, whilst in a woman's attire he sought to hide himself, as we
have related in another place.

At that time Ptolomey began to repent of bestowing his daughter in marriage on
Alexander, and for refusing Demetrius to be his friend and confederate; so that
he broke off the affinity that he had with him: and after he had withdrawn his
daughter from him, he presently sent Ambassadors unto Demetrius, to confirm a
league of peace and amity with him, promising him to bestow his daughter upon
him in marriage, and to establish Demetrius very joyful to hear of this
Embassage, accepted both of the league and the marriage. There only remained
one difficulty for Ptolomey to surmount, which was, how he might persuade the
Antiochians to admit Demetrius, against whom they were so much incensed, for
the indignities which his father Demetrius had offered them; but this
difficulty he overcame by this means. The Antiochians hated Alexander, because
of Ammonius (as we have related before) and by that means were the more easily
drawn to drive him out of the City. He perceiving himself to be thrust out of
Antioch, came into Cilicia. Whereupon Ptolomey came unto Antioch, and was both
by the Citizens and Soldiers therein proclaimed King, and was constrained to
take two Diadems, the one as King of Asia, the other as King of Egypt. But he
being a man naturally Romans, Ptolomey persuaded the Antiochians to accept
Demetrius for their King and refused the Diadem of Asia.
he called together the Inhabitants of Antioch, and prevailed so far with them,
that at last he persuaded them to accept of Demetrius for their King; assuring
them, That if he should receive that kindness at their hands, he would no more
keep in memory those things that had fallen out betwixt them and his fathe;
protesting, for his own part, that he would instruct him both how to order the
course of his life honestly, and to manage his public affairs with justice:
and promising them, that if he attempted to do any thing that should be
unworthy of a good Prince, he himself would be the most ready to chastise him;
for his own part, he would content himself to be King of Egypt. And by this
means the Antiochians were induced to receive Demetrius.

Alexander was departed out of Cilicia, with a great Army, and was come into
Syria, and had burnt and spoiled the Country of Antioch, Ptolomey, accompanied
with his son Demetrius, The year of the World, 3814. before Christ's Nativity,
146.
(for he had already married his daughter unto him) came forth Alexander, who
was constrained to fly into Arabia. It came to pass in that battle, that
Ptolomies Horse hearing the noise of an Elephant, was troubled, and stumbled in
such a manner, that he threw his Master on the ground: Alexander being
overcome, fl^eth into Arabia, and is slain in that place.
which when his Enemies perceived, they ran all together upon him, and gave him
diverse wounds in the head, whereby he was in danger to have been slain, unless
his Guard had rescued him; notwithstanding he was so dangerously wounded, that
for four days he remained without any sense; on the fifth day, when he began to
come to himself, Zabel the Prince of Arabia, who had beheaded Alexander, sent
his head unto Ptolomey; Ptolomey's death.
wherewith he was well-pleased: but this joy lasted not long, for some few days
after he died himself. This Alexander, surnamed Balls, reigned for the space

Demetrius, surnamed Nicanor, having obtained the kingdom, quickly discovered
his ill nature, and treated Ptolomies Army very unworthily, forgetting both the
confederacy and affinity that he had contracted with him, by Cleopatra his
wife, who was Ptolomey's daughter. But the Men of War hating his ingratitude,
fled into Alexandria, for their own security, notwithstanding they left the
Elephants in his power and possession.

But the High Priest Jonathan having assembled an Army of all the Country of
Judea, Jonathan appeaseth Demetrius by Presents.
began to besiege the Castle of Jerusalem, where there was a Garrison of the
Macedonians, and a great number of wicked Apostates that were fallen from the
Jewish Religion, who, in the beginning, slighted the Engines that Jonathan had
raised to take that Demetrius, and told him of the siege; at which he was
displeased, and taking a strong Army with him, he departed from Antioch, to
make War upon Jonathan. When he came to Ptolomais, he wrote to Jonathan, and
commanded him to come unto him: notwithstanding Jonathan gave not over the
siege, but took the Elders and Priests with him, with gold and silver robes,
and a great quantity of Presents, intended for Demetrius; and when he had
delivered them to him, he appeased his wrath: and after he had received many
honors at his hands, he obtained the confirmation of his Priesthood, in as
ample manner as he enjoyed it during the time of his Predecessors; and although
the wicked Jews accused him, yet did not Demetrius give any credit to them.
Moreover, Jonathan requiring, that for the whole Country of Jewry, and for the
three governments of Samaria, Joppa, and Galilee, he might pay no more than 300
Talents for Tribute, he granted him a full exemption, and wrote his Letters
Patents in these terms:

King Dometrius to Jonathan his brother, Demetrius's Letters to Lasthenes, in
which he bestows many privileges on the Jews.
and to all the Nation of the Jews, Peace and Joy.
We have sent you the Copy of the Letter that we have written to Lasthenes, our
father, to the end you may know the Contents thereof, which is this:


King Demetrius to Lasthenes, his father, Joy and Peace.
Because the people of the Jews are our Confederates, and observe our
Ordinances, my intent is to requite their good affection, and to assign them
the three governments of Apherema, Lydia, and Ramatha, with their
appurtenances, which have been taken from Samaria, and annexed to Judea.
Secondly, we remit all that which our Predecessors received of them that
sacrificed in Jerusalem; and other Tributes likewise, which were gathered for
the fruits of the earth, and the trees; the tribute of the Salt likewise, and
the Gold that was levied for the Crown: so that it is our pleasure, that hence
forward nothing hereof be exacted at their hands. See you therefore Jonathan,
to be affixed in some open and conspicuous place in the sacred Temple.


Demetrius perceiving that the Country was in peace, Demetrius incurreth the
hatred of his Soldiers, by (...) their (...) in time of Peace.
and that he lived without fear of any War, he dismissed his Army, and
disbanded his Soldiers, hiring only certain strangers, (who were mustered out
of Candy, and other Isles;) whereby it came to pass, that his own Soldiers
conceived an hatred against him, in that he gave them no wages: whereas his
Predecessors maintained them as well in Peace as in War, to the end that they
might be the more affectionate toward them; and that if need required to
employ them, they might show themselves more ready and courageous to fight for
them.

The year of the World, 3820. before Christ's Nativity, 144.

Tryphon undertakes to establish Antiochus the son of Alexander Ballez, in the
Kingdom of Syria. Jonathan besieges the Citadel at Jerusalem, and sends
supplies to King Demetrius Nicanor, who, by their assistance, subdues the
Inhabitants of Antioch that had besieged him in his Palace. His ingratitude to
Jonathan. He is vanquished by young Antiochus, and flies into Cilicia. Great
honors are by Antiochus conferred on Jonathan, who assists him against
Demetrius. A renowned victory is obtained by Jonathan against the Army of
Demetrius. He renews the Alliance with the Romans and Lacedaemonians. The
several
WHen Diodorus, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 8.
surnamed Tryphon, (an Apamean by Nation, and General of Alexanders Army) heard
of the mutiny amongst Demetrius's Soldiers, he came to Malchus the Arabian, 1
Maccab.
who had the care of the education of Antiochus, Diodorus called Tryphon.
Alexander's son, and endeavored to prevail with him to commit Antiochus to
his trust, to the intent he might make him King, Apamenus requires Malchus to
commit Antiochus, Alexander's son, to his charge.
and establish him in the government which belonged to his father. And although
upon the first motion he could hardly be drawn to believe it; yet, at last,
Tryphon, he suffered himself to be overcome by his entreaties. See here what
this man pretended at that time. But Jonathan the High Priest, desiring that
they within the Citadel of Jerusalem, and those wicked and apostate Jews, and
in general all those that were in Garrisons throughout all the Country,
Jonathan sends Ambassadors with Presents to Demetrius, to request him to
cashiere the Forces in the Castle of Jerusalem, and the^ Fortresses thereabout.
might be removed; he sent Ambassadors with rich Presents unto Demetrius,
beseeching him to dismiss those that were in garrison in the fortresses of
Judea: he not only granted this, but promised things of far greater moment,
after that War which he had then in hand, should be ended. For the present
troubles at that time gave him no opportunity to do what he intended: he
therefore prayed, at present, to send him some of his Forces, because his own
Army was revolted. Whereupon Jonathan chose out 3000 fighting men, and sent
Antiochians hated Demetrius, both because of the injuries they had endured
under him, as also for the hatred they had conceived against his father, who
had, in like manner, done them much wrong; so that they only expected an
opportunity to cast him off. The rebellion of the Citizens of Antioch, and the
revenge taken on them by Demetrius.
Understanding therefore that the succors that Jonathan sent unto Demetrius
were at hand, and foreseeing that in a short time he would gather a great Army,
if he were not timely prevented; they betook themselves to their Arms, and
beset the Kings Palace after the manner of a siege, and secured all the gates,
with an intent to lay hold on the King. Who seeing himself beset by the armed
multitude of the Antiochians, took those hired Soldiers, (with those whom
Jonathan had sent him) and charged them; but he was forced to retire, being
overpowred by the number of the Inhabitants. Jews perceiving that the
Antiochians had the upper hand, they mounted upon the battlements of the
Palace, and from thence shot against them, without any danger to themselves (by
reason of the distance and height of the place where they were) yet they much
annoyed the Inhabitants, insomuch as they drove them from the houses near
adjoining, which they incontinently set on fire, whereby the flame was spread
through the whole City; so that the houses that were close built the one by the
other, and for the most part framed of Wood, were burnt down to the ground. The
Inhabitants perceiving that they could not put out the fire, betook themselves
to flight, and the Jews chased them from house to house. When the King
perceived that the Citizens of Antioch ran here and there to save their Wives
and Children, and had given over the battle, he Demetrius's mercy, who
pardoning their rebellion, appeased the sedition. After this, he rewards the
Jews with part of the pillage, thanking them as the only Authors of his
victory. Whereupon he sent them back to Jonathan, with no small acknowledgment
and testimony of their prowess and virtue. But afterward he discovered his
evil nature toward him, and broke his promises, threatening him to make War
upon him, unless he paid him those Tributes which the people of the Jews ought,
and were wont to pay unto the Kings Ancestors heretofore. And that he had
certainly done, had not Tryphon hindered him: for he was forced to turn those
Forces that he had prepared against Jonathan, Demetrius thrust out of Anti^ch.
to make War upon Tryphon: Arabia into Syria, with the younger Antiochus, (who
at that time was under age) he set the diadem upon his head. All the Army
likewise that had abandoned Demetrius, for contracting their Pay, came and
followed him, and made open War against their Master, The year of the World,
3820. before Christ's Nativity, 144.
and under Antiochus and Tryphon fought with him, and overcame Antioch.
Whereupon Demetrius being wholly discomfited, fled into Cilicia. But the
younger Antiochus sent Ambassadors and Letters to Jonathan, calling him his
Allie and Friend, confirming the Priesthood unto him, Jonathan, for the favors
and benefits he received at Tryphons and Antiochus's hands, offers and
performs his best endeavors against Demetrius.
and assigned him the four governments annexed to Judea; and besides these, he
gave him vessels of gold, a robe of purple, with permission to wear the same:
he gave him also a pendent of gold, and assured him, that he esteemed of him as
one of his friends, and created his brother Simon General of his Army, from the
marches of Tire as far as Egypt. Jonathan finding such honors as these heaped
upon him, sent Ambassadors both unto him and Tryphon, protesting, That he was
their Friend and Allie, and that he would fight on his side against Demetrius,
of whom he had so great reason to complain, in that he had made no other return
but ingratitude, for all the services which he had done him.

But after that Antiochus had granted him leave to levy a great Army out of
Syria and Phoenicia, to fight against Demetrius, he went into the neighboring
Cities, and was by them very kindly received; yet did they not afford him any
Men of War. Coming from thence unto Ascalon, the Citizens in honorable array
came out to meet him with Presents; whom together with the Cities of
Coelofyria, he exhorted to forsake Demetrius's part, and to follow Antiochus,
to the end, that joining themselves with him, they might all of them combine
their Forces against Demetrius, and take vengeance of those mischiefs which
they had oftentimes endured by his means: and which if they prudently examined,
they had many reasons to prosecute their revenge. After he had persuaded
Demetrius, he came to Gaza, to induce them likewise, and reconcile them to
Antiochus. But he found the Gazeans to be of a far contrary disposition than
that which he expected, for they flatly resisted him: and although they were
intended to forsake Demetrius, yet would they not join their Forces, or submit
the City to his government. For which cause, Jonathan besieged their City, and
spoiled their Country: for with the one half of his Army he begirt Gaza, and
with the other half he overran the Country, spoiling and burning the same.
The Gazeans seeing these miseries which they were constrained to endure, and
perceiving that no succors came unto them from Demetrius, but that their own
overthrow was at hand, and their assistance far off: and that which was worse,
most uncertain; they thought it to be the Jonathan, protesting that they would
be both his friends and confederates. For men do unwillingly take knowledge of
their profit, before they have bought it to their sorrow; and that which they
neglected at first, and was most expedient for them to perform before they were
afflicted, that do they earnestly hunt after, at such time as they have been
chastised. Upon this submission of theirs, Jonathan received them into favor,
and took pledges of them, and sent them to Jerusalem, and from thence marched
he along the Country as far as Damasco. And whereas an huge Host sent by
Demetrius, came out against him, as far as the City Cedasa, near unto Tire and
Galilee, making their reckoning to divert Jonathan from Syria, by succouring
and relieving those of Galilee, who were their confederates: Jonathan Judea to
the charge of his brother Simon. Simon, Jonathan's brother, takes in Bethsura.
Who assembling all the power that was possible to be gathered throughout all
the Country, encamped before Bethsura, a strong Fort in Judea, and besieged it
(for Demetrius being before-time seized thereof, kept Garrison therein, as
before this we have declared.) When as therefore Simon raised his Bulwarks, and
fitted his Engines to assault the City, and employed all his study to surprise
the same, they that were besieged waxed afraid, lest if he should take the Town
by force, they should lose their lives. For which cause, they sent an Herald
unto Simon, requesting him, that he would permit them to depart out of
Bethsura, with the safety of their lives and goods, and go unto Demetrius: who
satisfying their demands, they presently departed out of the City, Macedonians.
In the mean while Jonathan, who was in Galilee, caused his Army to dislodge
from a place called the waters of Genezareth, where he was encamped, and
marched toward the Plain of Azot, without any suspicion that his Enemies had
been planted thereabouts: When as therefore Demetrius's Soldiers had
intelligence the day before, that Jonathan should march forward against them,
they laid an ambush for him, which they placed near the mountain, preparing the
rest of their Forces to bid him battle in the Plain. As soon as Jonathan
perceived their preparation to the battle, he arranged his Army as conveniently
as was possible; but when they that lay in ambush arose, and charged the Jews
upon their backs, they fearing to be enclosed, and consequently easily slain,
began to fly, so that all of them Jonathan, except some few, to the number of
50, with Matthias the son of Absalom, and Judas the son of Chapsaeus,
Lieutenant-Generals of Jonathan; who boldly Jonathan perceived, they rallied,
and pursued them as far as Cedasa, where the Enemies were encamped.

When Jonathan had obtained this glorious victory, Jonathan puts Demetrius's
Soldiers to flight.
wherein there fell about 2000 of the Enemy, he returned to Jerusalem, and
(seeing that all things fell out according as he desired) he sent Ambassadors
unto Rome, to renew the ancient league that was made betwixt the Romans and the
people of the Jews: commanding his Ambassadors upon their return from Rome, to
go likewise to Sparta, and renew their alliance with that City. As soon as they
were come to Rome, and had presented themselves before the Senate, Jonathan,
Jonathan renews his friendship and confederacy with the Romans and
Lacedaemonians.
who desired to renew their alliance. Whereupon the Senate granted all which
they demanded, and gave them their Letters of recommendation to all the
Governors of Asia and Europe, and to those of each particular City, commanding
them to grant them free passage to return into their Country; in their return
they went to Lacedemon, and delivered those Letters which Jonathan had written
to that State, which were to this effect:

Jonathan the High Priest of the Senate and People of the Jews; To the Ephores,
Senate and People of Sparta, Health.
Demotheles, written from Arius your King, to Onias our High Priest, making
mention of that alliance which is between you and us (the Copy whereof we have
here under inserted) we received those Letters with great joy, and testified
the same both to Demotheles and Arius, (notwithstanding we were not ignorant of
this consanguinity long before, because we were informed thereof by our sacred
Scriptures:) And whereas we have not first of all acknowledged our alliance, it
was for no other reason, but that we might give you the opportunity of
preventing us. Since which time wherein we have contracted friendship with you,
we have on our holy and solemn days sacrificed unto our God, beseeching him to
continue and keep you in prosperity; and forasmuch as we have been environed
with many Wars, caused by the inordinate desires of our Neighbors, we have not
Numenius, the son of Antimachus, and Antipater, the son of Jason, Men
honorable amongst our Counselors, both to the Romans, and to you also; to
whom we have given our Letters to be presented unto you, in our behalf, to the
end they might renew the amity which is between you and us: you shall therefore
do well if you write back unto us, and certify us wherein we may serve you,
there being no good office which we are not ready to perform:

These Ambassadors were kindly entertained by the Lacedaemonians, who made a
public ordinance touching their association and amity with the Jews, which
they delivered

At this time there were three Sects among the Jews, who had different and
contrary opinions touching humane affairs: Three Sects of the Jews.
the first was that of the Pharisees, the second of the Sadduces, and the third
of the Essenians. The Pharisees affirm, That some things are directed by
destiny, and others are left to our liberty. The Pharisees.
The Essenians said, The Essenians.
That destiny governed all things; The Sadduces.
and that nothing happened amongst men, that was not disposed thereby. The
Sadduces avow, That there is no destiny, and that humane affairs cannot be
governed and disposed thereby, but that all things, depend upon our selves; so
that we are the Authors of all the good or evil that happens unto us, The wars
of the Jews, l. 2. c. 12*
according as we follow good or evil counsels. But hereof have I treated more
exactly in my second Book of the Wars of the Jews.

Demetrius's Captains being desirous to wipe off the dishonor of their defeat,
and recover the loss that had lately befaln them, gathered together a greater
power than the former, and went out against Jonathan; who having intelligence
of their coming, marched speedily to encounter them near unto the Plain of
Amath: for he resolved to prevent their incursions into Judea. Whereupon he
encamped about 50 Furlongs from the Enemy, and sent out Spies to discover of
what force they were, and how they were encamped. Who, when they had by a most
diligent view known all that possibly they could, returning, took certain
Prisoners, and brought them away by night with them: by whose confession, the
design of the Enemies was discovered to Jonathan; which was, to set upon him on
the sudden. But Jonathan, with a provident care, speedily fortified But when
the Captains of Demetrius understood that their design was discovered Jonathan,
The year of the World, 3821. before Christ's Nativity, 143.
and knew that they were not strong enough to give him battle in the open
field, they decamped in the Night, and left a great number of fires burning,
that they might the better conceal their retreat. On the morrow, when Jonathan
came to attack them in their Camp, Demetrius's Captains once more make War upon
Jonathan, and seeing their purposes discovered, fly by night.
and saw it abandoned, and conjectured thereby that they were fled, he followed
after them; but he could not overtake them, because they had already past the
River Eleutherus, and were retired into their strong holds and places of
security. Returning therefore from thence into Arabia, and making War on the
Nabatheans, he spoiled their Country, took great Booties, and led away many
Prisoners: and from thence came to Damascus, and there sold all that he had
taken. About this time, Simon (his brother) marching throughout all Judea and
Palestine, as far as Ascalon, placed his Garrisons in such Joppa, which he took
by force, and planted a great Garrison therein, because he was advertised,
Jonathan marches to Arabia, and spoileth the Nabatheans.
that they of Joppa intended to surrender the City to Demetrius's Forces. When
Simon and Jonathan had signalized themselves by so many great actions, they
returned to Jerusalem, and assembled the People together in the Temple, and
persuaded them to repair the Walls of the City, and to rebuild that of the
Temple that was ruinated, Simon his brother takes Joppa.
advising them to fortify the same with strong Towers: and besides this, he
caused another Wall to be built in the midst of the City, to secure it against
the Garrison of the Citadel, Jonathan and Simon repair the City of Jerusalem,
and the Fortresses of Jewry.
to the intent that by that means they might cut off and stop up the passages
to victual the Fort. He advised them likewise, to build far stronger Simon. But
Demetrius passing the River, came into Mesopotamia, with a design to make
himself Master of Babylon, intending to make that the seat of the Empire, when
he should have subdued the other Provinces. For the Greeks and Macedonians, who
inhabited that Country, had solicited him often by Ambassadors to come unto
them, promising him to submit to his authority, and to serve him in the War
against Arsaces King of the Parthians. Demetrius makes War upon Arsaces. King
of the Parthians, and is taken Prisoner.
Demetrius flattering himself with those hopes, marched toward them with great
speed, presuming that if he could overcome the Parthians, he might easily
vanquish Tryphon, and drive him out of the kingdom of Syria. Being therefore
entertained by those of the Country with great joy, he levied a great Army,
and made War against Arsaces, but he lost the day, and was himself taken
Prisoner, as we have elsewhere declared.

CHAP. X.
Tryphon seeing Demetrius ruined, contrives how he may quit himself of
Antiochus, that he might reign in his stead, and likewise how he may destroy
Jonathan. He deceives him, causes a thousand of his men to be put to death at
Ptolemais, and keeps him Prisoner.
WHen Tryphon understood that Demetrius was utterly ruined, Hedio and Ruffinus,
cap. 9.
he forsook Antiochus, and contrived how he might kill him, 2 Mac. 11. 13.
and make himself King. But the fear that he had of Jonathan Antiochus's
friend, Tryphon laboring to transfer Antiochus's kingdom unto his own hands,
and fearing Jonathans opposition, traitetously complotteth his death.
hindered his design; whereupon he resolved first of all to deliver himself of
Jonathan, and afterward to kill the young King Antiochus. Having therefore
resolved to kill Jonathan by some Treason, he came from Antioch to Bethsan,
(which the Greeks call Scythopolis) whither Jonathan came to meet him with
40000 chosen men, supposing that Tryphon came thither to make War upon him. But
he knowing that Jonathan came thither with so great a strength, and imagining
that he could not prevail upon him by open force, he had recourse to fraud, he
made him rich Presents, and accompanied them with a great deal of civility; and
that he might free him from all Jonathan to come to Ptolomais, and to bring
with him some few of his Soldiers, promising to deliver the City into his
hands, and resign all the Fortresses that were in the Country into his
possession; assuring him, That he came into that Country to no other purpose.
Jonathan suspecting no sinister dealing, and believing that Tryphon spoke what
he intended, disbanded his Forces, and took only 3000 men with him, whereof two
he left in Galilee, and with 1000 he came to Tryphon at Ptolomais. But the
Inhabitants of the City shutting the gates as soon as he was entered, (according
as Tryphon had commanded them) took Jonathan Prisoner, and slew all those that
attended upon him. Hereupon Tryphon presently sent part Galilee, to the intent
to put them all to the Sword; but they having notice of that which had befaln
their Chieftain, took up their The year of the World, 382^. before Christ's
Nativity, 124.
and departed out of Galilee, without any loss. And although the Soldiers of
Tryphon exceeded them far in the number, yet were they not so hardy to attack
them; because they knew that the Jews were ready to expose themselves to all
dangers, to defend their lives: and so they returned back to him that sent
them, without doing any thing.

CHAP. XI.
The Jews make choice of Simon Machabeus for their General, in the place of
Jonathan his brother, who was kept Prisoner by Tryphon; who, after he had
received an hundred and
WHen the Inhabitants of Jerusalem heard of the surprizal of Jonathan, 2 Macch.
14.
and the loss of his Soldiers, Jonathans want lamented by all men.
they were much troubled, that so great a man was taken from them, for they
feared, (and that not without cause) that being deprived of his valor and
conduct, the neighboring Nations would invade them with Jonathan. The
neighboring Nation and Trypho^ invade Judea.
Neither did their expectation deceive them. For they understanding Jonathan's
death, began presently to invade the Jews on all sides, as those who had no
longer any Captain under whose conduct they might make War* and show their
valor. And Tryphon having likewise gathered Forces, was resolved to march into
Judea, to make War against the Inhabitants thereof. Simon perceiving that the
Citizens of Jerusalem were alarmed with the fear which they apprehended of
those Rumors and new Tumults of War, and being desirous to animate them against
all incursions and attempts intended by Tryphon, assembled the People in the
Temple, and began to exhort them after this manner:

You are not ignorant (men and brethren) how both I, Simon, Jonathans brother,
assembleth the people, and animateth them.
my father, and brethren, have voluntarily exposed our selves to all dangers
for your liberty. Since therefore I have abundance of such like examples, and
that it is the ordinary course of our family to die for our Law and Religion,
there is no fear so great as to hinder me to, prefer my honor and duty to my
life. Wherefore since you have a Commander who despises all danger, to procure
and maintain your safety, you ought to follow me courageously to what place
soever ^ shall conduct you. For I am of no better account than my brethren, to
value my life more than others; neither am I less than they, to be backward and
cowardly to follow their footsteps, but I shall rather glory to imitate them in
dying for the defense of our Country, Laws and Religion, I will make manifest
therefore by Simon succeeds his brothers, Judas and Jonathan.
and I know already that they are marching forward to fight you.

By these words Simon heartned the People, who were distracted with fear, so
that they revived their spirits, and conceived better hope. Simon sends
Jonathan, Absalons son, to Joppa, to expulse the inhabitants thereof Tryphon,
by fraudulent promises, under certain conditions, persuadeth Simon, that his
brother should be set at liberty*
Whereupon all of them cried with a loud voice, That Simon was their General,
and that he was to succeed his two valiant brethren, and Jonathan, in the
Government; and that as touching themselves, they would be obedient in all
things that he should command them. He therefore assembled in one instant all
the men at Arms in that Country, and hastened to repair the City walls,
fortifying them with high and strong Towers, and sent a certain friend of his,
called Jonathan the son of Absalon, with an Army to Joppa, commanding him to
turn out the Inhabitants of that City from thence, feraing they would submit
themselves to Tryphon: as for himself, he remained in Jerusalem to secure the
same.

Tryphon departing from Ptolomais with a great Army, came into Judea, leading
his Prisoner Jonathan with him. Whereupon Simon and his Army went out against
him as far as Addida (a City situate upon a Mountain, at the foot whereof
begins the Champain Judea.) Tryphon knowing that Simon was made Governor of
the Jews, sent messengers unto him, intending to circumvent him by Treason and
Policy, giving him to understand, That if he were desirous of his brothers
enlargement, he should send him one hundred Talents of silver, The year of the
World, 3821. before Christ's Nativity, 143.
and two of Jonathans children for hostages, to assure him, that being set at
liberty, he should not withdraw Judea from the obedience of the King. (For,
till that present he was held and kept Prisoner, by reason of the money which
he owed the King.) Simon was no ways ignorant of this cunning intent of
Tryphons, but knew well enough that he should both lose his money, if he should
deliver the same; and that his brother should not be enlarged, no, though his
children were delivered for hostages: on the other side he feared, lest the
People should judge sinisterly of him, as if he had been the cause of his
brothers death, both by not delivering the money, neither yet the children.
Having therefore assembled the Army, he declared unto them what Tryphon
demanded; telling them, That the whole scope of his actions were nothing else
but treacherous stratagems and subtilities: yet notwithstanding he told them,
That he had rather send both the money and the children to Tryphon, than by
refusing his conditions and demands, to be accused to have neglected the life
of his brother. Simon sent therefore both the money and children of Jonathan;
but Tryphon having received both, kept not his promise, but detained Jonathan;
and leading his Army through the Country, intended to pass by Idumaea to repair
to Jerusalem. He came therefore to Dora, a City in Idumaea; and thitherward
marched Simon to encounter with him, encamping always right over against him.
They that were in the Castle of Jerusalem, hearing news hereof, sent Tryphon
word that he should hasten and come unto them, and send them munition:
whereupon he addressed his Horsemen, pretending that very night to ride unto
Jerusalem; but the snow about that time fell in such abundance, that it covered
the way in such sort and was so thick, as the Horses could not Jerusalem. For
which cause he departed from thence, and came into Coelosyria, Jonathan is
slain by Tryphon.
and speedily invading the Country of Galaad, he put Jonathan to death in that
place; and after he had buried him there, he returned to Antioch. But Simon
sent unto Basca, and transported his brothers bones, and interred them in his
Country Modin, in his fathers Sepulcher, and all the People mourned and
lamented for him many days. Simon also built a great monument of white and
polished marble for his father and brethren, Jonathans Monument.
and raised it to a great height, and garnished it round about with galleries
and pillars all of one piece, which was an admirable Work to behold. Besides
that, he erected seven Pyramids for his father, mother and brethren, for each
of them one, so great and so fair, as they caused admiration in those that
beheld them; and are Simons care, that Jonathan and the rest of his family
should be honored with so magnificent a Sepulcher: which Jonathan dyed, after
he had exercised the place of High Priest, and possessed the Government for
four years. Thus much as touching his death.

As soon as Simon had taken possession of the High Priesthood, by the election
of the People; the very first year of his Government, he acquitted the People
of the Tribute which they were wont to pay to the Macedonians. This liberty and
exemption from Tribute, happened amongst the Jews, one hundred and seventy years
since the time that Seleucus, The Jews discharged of Tributes.
surnamed Nicanor, obtained the kingdom of Syria. And in so great honor was
Simon amongst the People, that in their private Contracts and public Letters,
the date Simons authority.
From the first year of Simon the Benefactor and Governor of the Jewish Nation.
For they prospered greatly under his Government, and had the victory of all
their neighboring Enemies round about them. For he destroyed the Cities of
Gaza, Joppa, and Jamnia: he demolished or slighted also the Citadel of
Jerusalem, and levelled it with the ground, Simon razeth the Castle of Jerusalem.
to the intent the Enemies might never seize on it any more, nor retreat
thither to endamage the City, as they had done before. Which when he had
brought to pass, he thought it not amiss, but very profitable, to level the
Hill whereon the Castle stood, to the intent the Temple might be the eminentest
place. All this he persuaded the People to do in a common Assembly,
representing to them how much they had suffered by the Garrisons, and how much
they were like to suffer hereafter, if a stranger should once Simon performed
hitherto.

The year of the World, 3824. before Christ's Nativity, 140.

Tryphon, caused Antiochus, Alexander Ballez son, to be put to death, and is
made King; his Vices rendered him so odious to his Soldiers, that they offered
themselves up to Cleopatra, Demetrius's Relict. She married Antiochus Sother,
Demetrius's brother, and made him be crowned King; heovercame Tryphon, who fled
to Dora, and from thence to Apamee, where he was taken by force, and killed.
Antiochus took a great liking to Simon the great Sacrificer or High Priest.
Demetrius, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 10.
Tryphon killed Antiochus the son of Alexander, 1 Mac. 15.
surnamed Good, notwithstanding he had the care and charge of his education for
four years that he reigned; Tryphon murdering Alexander, obtains the Kingdom.
and spreading abroad a certain report, That the young King in exercising
himself fortuned to dye; he sent his friends and familiars to the Soldiers,
promising them, That if they would choose him King, he would give them a great
sum of money; giving them to understand, that Demetrius was a Prisoner among
the Parthians; and that if Antiochus his brother should obtain the kingdom, he
would punish them diverse ways, and revenge the revolt and rebellion which they
were guilty of by forsaking him. The Army hoping that if they bestowed the
kingdom on Tryphon, Tryphon having obtained dominion, discovers his corrupt
nature.
it would redound highly to their profit, they proclaimed him King. But after
he had attained the fullness of his desires, he showed Tryphons Army submit to
Cleopatra, Demetrius's wife, who married Antiochus Soter, and committed the
authority to his hands.
and made show of moderation; and, by such allurements, he drew them to do what
he pleased: but after he had taken possession of the kingdom, he discovered his
hypocrisy, and showed plainly, that he was not unaptly called Tryphon, that is
to say, Trifler or Mocker. By which means, he lost the hearts of the better
sort: and as for his Army, it became so averse from him, that it submitted it
self to Cleopatra, Demetrius's wife, who had, at that time, confined both her
self and her children in Seleucia. And whereas Antiochus, surnamed the Devout,
and brother to Demetrius, was driven from place to place, Hedio and Ruffinus,
cap. 11.
and had not any City that would entertain him, for fear of Tryphon; Cleopatra
sent unto him, inviting him both to be her husband, and to take possession of
the kingdom. Antiochus having driven Tryphon out of Syria, besieged him in Dora.
And hereunto did she the rather draw him, partly for that she was thereunto
persuaded by her friends, and partly for the fear she had, lest some one of
Selucia should betray the City to Tryphon. As soon as Antiochus was arrived in
Seleucia, and that from day to day his Forces increased, Tryphon^ death.
he marched forth into the field, and fought with Tryphon, and overcame him in
battle, and drove him out of the higher Syria, and pursued him as far as
Phoenicia: where after he had retired himself into Dora, a strong and
impregnable Castle, he besieged him therein, and sent Ambassadors to Simon the
High Priest of the Jews, to confirm a friendship and confederacy with him.
Simon very courteously accepted his demands, and presently sent Antiochus both
money and victuals, sufficient to furnish his Army at the siege of Dora; so
that in short space he was accepted amongst the number of his Tryphon flying
from Dora to Apamea, was in that place besieged, taken and slain, after he had
reigned three years.

CHAP. XIII.
Antiochus Sother's ingratitude to Simon Machabaeus. They come to make War;
Simon gets always the better, and renews his alliance with the Romans.
BUT the innate avarice that was in Antiochus, and the malignity of his nature,
made him forgetful of those offices and services that Simon had done him: so
that he sent Sedebaeus, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 12.
his great friend, with a mighty Army to invade Jewry, and to surprise Simon.
But he having some privy intelligence of Antiochus's Treachery, notwithstanding
that at this time he was very old, was so provoked with the injuries that
Antiochus had done him, that animated with courage more than became his age, he
went himself to the War, as if as yet he had been but youthful: Simon and his
son expels Sedebaeus out of Jewry.
he therefore caused his son to march before, with the best Soldiers of his
Army; and having left a number of his Soldiers in ambush, in the hollow
retreats of the mountains, he executed all his designs, without failing in any
one of them: so that after he had every way obtained the upper hand of his
Enemies, he ever after enjoyed his Government in peace, during the remainder of
his life, and renewed likewise the confederacy with the Romans.

CHAP. XIV. The year of the World, 3830. before Christ's Nativity, 134.

Simon Machabaeus, Prince of the Jews, and High Priest, is betrayed and killed
by his Son-in-law Ptolomey, who, at the same time, makes his Relict and his two
sons Prisoners.
HE governed Judea for the space of eight years, and was at last slain at a
banquet, by the Treachery of Ptolomey his son-in-law; Hedio and Ruffinus, cap.
15.
who seizing on Simons Wife, and his two children, 1 Mac. 6.
and detaining them in Prison, sent out certain of his Train besides, to kill
John the third son, No faith nor trust, no not in sons-in-law.
surnamed Hircanus of Jerusalem. But the young man having some inkling of their
drift, retired himself speedily into the City, and avoided the danger that
Ptolomey; who intending to enter the City-gates, was sharply repulsed by the
Citizens, for they had already entertained Hircanus.

CHAP. XV.
Hircanus, Simon's son, besieges Ptolomey in Dagon Castle, but his great love
toward his mother and his brothers, (whom Ptolomey threatens to put to death,
if he stormed the Castle) made him forbear to assault it, and raised the siege;
after which, Ptolomey nevertheless put
WHereupon Ptolomey retired unto a certain Castle situate beyond Jericho,
called Dagon, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 14.
but Hircanus was made High Priest in his fathers stead: who, after he had
recommended himself to God, Ptolomey, besieged by Hircanus, knowing the power
of natural affection, keeps his mother and brethren prisoners, whippeth them
on the walls, and threatens to throw them down.
by the firstling Sacrifices that he offered, marched out against Ptolomey, his
brother-in-law, to make War upon him. Now when he was fully resolved to besiege
the place whither Ptolomey was retired, he had the advantage in all other
things; but only by the affection that he bare unto his mother and his
brethren, he was overcome. For Ptolomey having taken them, and whipped them upon
the Walls in all men's presence, threatened Hircanus, That unless he levied his
siege, he would cast them down headlong from the top of the Castle: now whereas
one way Hircanus had a great desire to force and surprise the place, so also on
the other side he was wholly disheartened, through the desire that he had to
redeem those whom he loved, from the Enemies Tyranny. True it is, That his
Mother stretching out her hands, besought him, That for her sake he would not
give over valiantly to assault the place; but that he should be the more
encouraged to surprise the Fortress, and to lay hold upon his Enemy, and to be
revenged of the wrong that was offered unto his dearest friends: alleging,
that she thought it better to die in the midst of a thousand torments, than
that the enemy should escape unpunished, who had been so manifest an occasion
of their misery. When Hircanus heard his Mother speak thus, he was more
furiously incensed to give the assault; but as soon as he saw his Mother so
beaten and sore wounded, his heart melted The end of the History of the Bible.
Whilst thus the siege was continued and prolonged, the year of Repose
celebrated amongst the Jews was come: For they observed the seventh year, as
the seventh day is observed in the week; so that by this occasion, Ptolomey was
delivered of this siege, who afterward slew both Hircanus's Mother and
Brethren; which done, he fled unto Zeno, surnamed Cotyla, who at that time
Tyrannized in the City of the Philadelphians.

The year of the World, 383^. before Christ's Nativity, 133.

King Antiochus Sother besieges Hircanus in the Castle of Jerusalem, and
raises the siege after a Treaty. Hircanus accompanies him in the War against
the Parthians, where Antiochus is killed; and his brother Demetrius (whom
Arsaces King of the Parthians had set at liberty) takes possession of the
kingdom of Syria.
ANtiochus calling to mind the manifold losses he had received by Simons means,
Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 15.
invaded Jewry in the fourth year of his Reign, Hircanus is driven into the
City by Antiochus.
and in the first of Hircanus's Government, Olympiade. And after he had spoilt
all the Country, he blockt up Hircanus within the City of Jerusalem, which he
had besieged with seven Camps; yet with no advantage at all, Pleiades the seven
stars.
both in regard of the strength of the Walls, and the valor of the Citizens,
besides the want of Water which he had in his Camp; which was notwithstanding
remedied by a great fall of rain, which fell about the setting of the Pleiades
in the beginning of April. On the North-side also where there is a great Plain,
Antiochus caused 100 Towers to be erected, every one three stories high, on
which he planted certain Companies of armed Soldiers, who daily fought with the
besieged, and who, by the means of a double and deep Trench, deprived them of
all conveniences. They on the other side made often sallies, and if they
chanced at any time to charge the Enemy The weaker fort are thrust out of the
City*
they made a great slaughter: but if they were discovered, they marched back in
order. But Hircanus considering the great number of People that were in the
City, who rather consumed Soldiers victuals, than performed any service, he
divided those that were unfit for War, and sent them out of the City, retaining
only those with him who were valiant and warlike. But Antiochus permitted them
not to have free liberty to depart; Antiochus affords seven days truce to
celebrate the feast of Tabernacles.
so that wandering here and there between the Walls and the Camp, they were
consumed with Famine, and died miserably. When as therefore the feast of
Tabernacles was to be celebrated during these affairs, they that were within,
had compassion of their Countrymen, and drew them within the Walls, and
entertained them within the City. At this time Hircanus sent a messenger to
beseech Antiochus to grant him Truce Jerusalem of Bulls with gilded Horns, and
vessels full of diverse Perfumes, with other vessels of gold and silver. Those
that had the charge of the gates, received the Sacrifices at their hands that
brought the same, and offered them in the Temple. Antiochus himself also gave
the Soldiers certain meats to grace their Festival, showing himself herein to
be of a far better disposition than Antiochus Epiphanes, who, after he had
taken the City, caused Swines flesh to be sacrificed upon the Altar, and
besprinkled the Temple with the Hogs blood, making a confusion of the
ordinances of the Law of God, which was the cause that this Nation rebelled,
and conceived a deadly hatred against him: But Antiochus, of whom devout,
because of the incredible affection that he had to the service of God. Hircanus
acknowledging the bounty and affection he had toward God and his Sacrifices,
Hircanus makes peace with Antiochus, and the siege is given over.
sent Ambassadors unto him, requiring him, that he would permit them to live
according to the ancient Laws and Customs of their Forefathers. Whereupon the
good King rejected their counsel who advised him to destroy the Jewish Nation,
for being contrary to the customs of all other People. And understanding that
all the conversation of the Jews was conformable unto piety, he answered the
Ambassadors, That if the besieged would yield up their Arms, and pay the
Tributes of Joppa, and the other Cities that were out of Judea, and would
receive a Garrison, such as he should appoint, he would discharge them of this
War. They accepted all other his conditions, but they consented Hircanus takes
a huge sum of money out of King David's tomb.
was Hircanus's brother: and after he had beaten down the Cope and Panes of the
Walls, with the other fortifications, he raised the siege, and departed. But
Hircanus opening David's monument, (who surpassed all other Kings in riches
during his time) drew 3000 Talents out of the same, Nicholas Damascene.
whereby he took occasion first of all among the Jews to entertain a foreign
Army. There was also a friendship and alliance betwixt him and Antiochus, whom
he entertained in the City with all his Army, and furnished him largely and
magnificently with all that which was necessary for the same; and that which is
Antiochus having undertaken an Expedition against the Parthians, Hircanus
marched also in his company. Nicholas Damascene bears witness hereof, writing
after this manner in his History: Antiochus erected a Pageant near the flood
Lycus, after he had overcome Indates General of the Army of the Parthians, The
year of the World, 3838. before Christ's Nativity, 126.
and abode there two days, at Hircanus the Jews request, by reason of a solemn
Feast at that time, in which it was not lawful for the Jews to travel, wherein
he is no ways mistaken. For the Feast of Pentecost was at that present the next
day after the Sabbath, and it is not lawful for us neither in our Sabbaths nor
Feasts, to journey any ways. Antiochus slain in the conflict against the
Parthians.
Antiochus fighting against Arsaces King of the Parthians, lost the greater
part of his Army, and was himself slain. His brother Demetrius succeeded him in
the kingdom of Syria, whom Arsaces had set at liberty, at such time as
Antiochus came into the kingdom of the Parthians, as we have declared
heretofore in another place.

CHAP. XVII.
Hircanus, after King Antiochus's death, took back again many places in Syria,
and renews his alliance with the Romans. King Demetrius is overcome by
Alexander Zebinus, who was descended of King Seleucus; is taken afterward in
Tire, and dies miserably. Antiochus Gripus, being his son, overcomes
Alexander, who is killed in the battle. Antiochus Syzicus, who was his brother
on the mothers side, being Antiochus Sother's son, makes War against him, and
Hircanus in the mean time reigns peaceably in Judea.
HIrcanus hearing news of Antiochus death, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 16.
led forth his Army with all Expedition against the Cities of Syria, Hircanus
surprizeth diverse Cities of Syria and lays desolate the temple that was built
on the hill Garizim.
hoping to find them unprovided both of garrisons and means of defense, as in
effect it came to pass. He therefore took the City of Medaba at the end of six
months, after that his Army had suffered many calamities. Afterward he seized
Samega, and the Cities thereabout; the Cities of Sichem, and Garizim also,
where the Cutheans dwelt, who had a Temple there made according to the model of
the Temple of Jerusalem, (which Alexander the great permitted Sanaballath to
build, in favor of his Son-in-law Manasses, The Idumaeans* conquered by
Hircanus, admit circumcision, and the laws of the Jews.
brother to the High Priest Jaddus, as we have heretofore declared) which
Temple was laid desolate 200 years after it was built. Hircanus also took
certain Fortresses and Cities of Idumaea, as Adora and Marissa; and after he
had subdued all the Idumaeans, he permitted them to inhabit the Country, under
this condition, That they should consent to be circumcised, and to live
according to the Laws and Religion of the Jews. They, through the desire they
had to live in the place where they were born, submitted themselves to be
circumcised, and to live according to the customs and ordinances of the Jews;
and from that day forward, they were comprehended within the number of the
Jews. Hi^canus makes a league with the Romans.
Whilst thus Hircanus was High Priest, he thought good to renew the amity
betwixt the Jews and the Romans, and to this effect he sent an Embassage with
Letters unto the Senate. As soon as the Senate had received his Letters, they
made alliance with him, to this effect ensuing. Fanius M. F. Pr. assembled the
Senate in the field of Mars the eighth day of February, in the presence of L.
Manlius, L. F. Mentina, and C. Sempronius, C. F. Falerna; concerning that which
Simon the son of Dositheus, Apollonius the son of Alexander, Diodorus the son
of Jason, men of good reputation and honor, and sent Ambassadors Jews, have
proposed; who have dealt with us as touching the confederation and amity that
this Nation had with the Romans, and have likewise conferred as touching the
affairs of State, namely, that Joppa and the Ports thereof, Gazara and the
Fountains thereunto belonging, and those other Cities of the Country, which
Antiochus took from them, contrary to the decree of the Senate, should be
restored unto them; and that it may not be lawful for the Kings Soldiers to
pass through their Country, neither any of those Provinces that are under
their government: and that those things which were attempted by Antiochus
during this War, contrary to the arrest and decree of the Senate, should be
declared void, to the end that the Ambassadors sent in the Senates behalf, may
provide for the restitution of those things which Antiochus had spoilt them of,
and may rate and set down the damages which the Country has Item, That
Letters of recommendation should be written in the behalf of the Jewish
Ambassadors, to the Kings and free People, for their secure and safe return
into their Country. It has been held convenient, to make and ratify this
ordinance, to the end to renew friendship and alliance with men of so good
respect, sent unto them by a Nation so good and faithful toward them. And as
touching the Letters, the answer was, That they should be written at such time
as the affairs of the Senate would permit them any leisure; and that from this
time forward, they would have care that no injury should be offered them. And
the Praetor Fanius was commanded also to deliver the Ambassadors money out of
the common Purse, to bear their charges home into their Country. And thus did
Fanius dismiss the Ambassadors of the Jews, after he had given them money out
of the common Treasury, with the decree of the Senate addressed to those that
should conduct them, and give them a sure convoy or safeguard to return into
their Country. And this was the state of the affairs during Hircanus
Priesthood.

Demetrius being sharply whetted to make War against Hircanus, The year of the
World, 3844. before Christ's Nativity, 120.
could have neither time nor opportunity to fulfill his desire, by reason that
both the Syrians and his Soldiers were become his Enemies, because of his
wickedness of life. For they sent Ambassadors to Ptolomey, surnamed Physcon, to
require him to send some one of Seleucus's race unto them, Demetrius being
overcome by Alexander, is slain.
to be established King. Whereupon Ptolomey sent them Alexander, surnamed
Zebina, accompanied with an Army; who giving battle to Demetrius, worsted him,
and constrained him to fly to his Wife Cleopatra, to Ptolomais; who neither
accepting, nor entertaining him, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 17.
he was constrained to retire from thence unto Tire, where he was taken: and
after he had suffered many miseries by the hands of his Enemies, he finally
died. Alexander having by this means obtained the Kingdom, Alexander slain in
the conflict betwixt him and Antiochus Gryphus.
made a league of amity with Hircanus. And whereas it fell out, that Antiochus,
surnamed Gryphus, the son of Demetrius, made War against him, he was overcome
and slain in the battle. When Antiochus had taken possession of the Kingdom of
Syria, he forbear to make War against the Jews, for that he had intelligence
that his brother, by the mothers side, (who was in like sort named Antiochus)
assembled an Army against him at Cyzicus. Remaining therefore in his Country,
he resolved to make preparation against his brothers coming, who was called
Cyzicenus, because he was brought up in that City, and was the son of Antiochus
called the Conserver, who died in the Country of the Parthians, and who was
brother to Demetrius the father of Gryphus; and it fell out, that both these
brothers were married to one and the same Cleopatra, as we have heretofore
expressed. When Antiochus the Cyzicenian Syria, he made War against his
brother, which continued many years: during all which time, Hircanus lived in
peace, (for presently after Antiochus's death, he revolted from the subjection
of the Macedonians) and from that time forward gave them no succors, Hircanus,
whilst the brothers weaken themselves by civil wars, lives in peace.
neither as Subject or Friend; but his fortunes both augmented and flourished
greatly, during the time of Alexander Zebina, and principally during the Reign
of these two brothers. For the War, wherein they consumed one another, gave
Hircanus an opportunity to levy all the Revenues of Judea, without any
contradiction, so that by the same means he gathered infinite sums of money.
For whilst the Cyzicenian destroyed his brothers Country, Hircanus also made
known his inclination and disposition; and seeing likewise that Antiochus was
destitute of those succors he expected out of Egypt, and

CHAP. XVIII.
Hircanus takes Samaria, and ruins it totally. How much this High Priest was
in God Almighties favor. He leaves the Pharisees, and betakes him to the
Sadduces. His happy death.
HIrcanus seeing himself so powerful, resolved to besiege Samaria, (which was a
strong Sebasta, because it was re-edifi'd by Herod, as we will make manifest in
time and place convenient. He therefore began to besiege and batter the same
with all diligence; Hircanus besieges Samaria.
animated thereunto, because of the extreme hatred he bare the Samaritans, who,
on purpose, to please the King of Syria, had offered many grievous affronts to
the Marissens, who were descended from, and allied with the Jews. He therefore
made a Trench round about the City, with a double Wall of 80 furlongs, and
committed the general command of this siege to his sons, Antigonus and
Aristobulus, who so diligently and valiantly behaved themselves, Antiochus
seeking to relieve the Samaritans, is overcome and put to flight by Aristobulus.
that the Samaritans being overpressed with extreme famine, were constrained to
eat such things as were unusual and unaccustomed amongst men, and to call
Antiochus the Cyzicenian to their aid: who readily repaired Aristobulus's
Soldiers; and being pursued by the two brethren as far as Scythopolis, he
hardly escaped; and they returning to their siege, freshly assaulted and
besieged the Samaritans within their own Walls: so that once more they were
constrained to send Ambassadors to Antioch for aid, who was their Ally; who
sent unto Ptolomey Lathyrus, for about some 6000 men, who furnished him with
them, contrary to his mothers mind, who therefore had almost thrust him out of
his dominion. As soon as he had received them, he made a road into Hircanus's
Country, and spoilt and forag'd the same as far as Egypt. For he durst not
give him battle hand to hand, because he had not competent Forces; but thought
that in spoiling the Country, he might cause them to raise the siege, and
forsake Samaria: but after he had lost a great number of his Tripoly,
committing the general charge of that War to Callimander and Epicrates, two of
his Captains. Callimander, more rashly than wisely, attempting to set upon the
Enemy, was himself slain, and his Soldiers routed. The year of the World, 3854.
before Christ's Nativity, 110.
And Epicrates, given over to covetousness, did openly yield up Scythopolis,
and Jews: so that it was impossible for either of them to raise the siege. At
last, after that Hircanus had continued his siege before the City for the space
of one whole year, he became master of it: and not contenting himself with the
taking hereof, Epicrates corrupted with money, sells Scythopolis, and other
places, to the Jews.
he utterly destroyed it, enforcing the Rivers through the midst thereof; yea,
he ruined the same in such sort, that the mud and soil both of the water and
earth took away all the appearance of the City, so that it seemed as if it had
never been. Of this Hircanus, there is a certain incredible matter committed to
memory, namely, how during his High Priesthood, God had conference with him.
For it is reported, That the very same day wherein his sons fought against
Antiochus the Cyzicenian, whilst being Hircanus takes Samaria.
he offered incense in the Temple, he heard a voice, saying, That his two sons
had at that present overcome Antiochus: Hircanus is foretold by a voice in the
Temple, of his sons victory.
all which he incontinently signified unto the people at the gate of the
Temple; and, according as he had said, so it came to pass. See here what
occurrences happened in Hircanus's time.

About this very instant likewise, the affairs of the Jews prospered not only
in Jerusalem and Judea, but also amongst the Inhabitants of Alexandria; and
finally, in Egypt and Cyprus: For Queen Cleopatra rebelling against her son
Ptolomey Lathyrus, appointed Chelcias and Ananias, Chelcias and Ananias,
Captains of Cleopatras Army.
the sons of that Onias who had built the Temple in Heliopolis (according to
the pattern of that in Jerusalem) her Generals. And having committed her Army
unto their hands, she acted nothing without their advice, according as Strabo
the Cappadocian witnesses, Strabo of Cappadocia, his report of the loyalty of
the Jews.
speaking after this manner: Diverse of those who came with us, and of those who
had been sent into Cyprus from Cleopatra, suddenly revolted to Ptolomey: only
the Jews that were of Onias 's faction, remained constant in their duty,
because the Queen made great account and reckoning of Chelcias and Ananias
their Countrymen. Thus far Strabo. This great felicity and prosperity of
Hircanus, Hircanus grows in discontent with the Pharisees.
moved the Jews to conceive a hatred against him, and especially the Pharisees
opposed themselves against him. These Pharisees were one of the Sects of the
Jews, (whereof we have heretofore treated) which Sect was so great in credit
with the common people, that when they disposed any thing, were it against the
King, or the Priest, they were presently believed. Hircanus had been one of
their disciples, and therefore was easily believed. He invited them to a feast,
and entertained them with all humanity: and seeing them in a merry vein, he
began to tell them, That they knew his mind, how that he desired nothing more
than to be just, and to square all his actions according to Gods will and
direction, according as they themselves taught. He therefore required them,
that if they perceived that he mistook himself in any thing, or that he wandered
from the right way, they would by admonition redress the same. Whereupon all of
them gave testimony of his perfect virtue, wherewith he was highly contented.
But one of the company, called Eleazar, a man of a malicious nature, and such
an one as delighted in mutiny, Elea^^r the Phar^^ee, upbraideth Hircanus, that
his mother was a slave.
said unto him, Since you desire to hear the truth, if so be, you affect the
estimation of a good man, give over the place of Priesthood, and content your
self with the government of the people. Hircanus demanded of him the cause
wherefore he should forsake the Priesthood? Because (says he) that we have
heard say by our Ancestors, that your mother was a Captive during the Reign of
Antiochus the famous (which notwithstanding was a false report.) Hircanus
hearing this, was sore moved against him, and also all other of the Pharisees,
who were present. Amongst the rest, there was a certain man called Jonathan, of
the order of the Sadduces, (who maintain a contrary opinion against the
Pharisees) who was an intimate and dear friend to Hircanus, with whom he
communicated the injurious speeches that Eleazar had spoken by him, The Sadduce
Jonathan, incenseth Hircanus against the Pharisees.
who told him, That (as he thought) Eleazar had spoken these words by the
public consent of the Pharisees; and that he might discover the same most
manifestly, if he enquired of them what punishment Eleazar had deserved for
speaking after this sort. Hircanus therefore talked with the Pharisees
concerning his punishment, telling them, That he should very well perceive,
that this injury had not been pronounced by the common consent of them all, if
they condemned the Offender to suffer a punishment proportionable to his
offense. Whereupon they decreed, That he ought to be punished by imprisonment
and scourging; for (said they) an injury done in word, required no capital
punishment: And, to speak uprightly, they in their thinking censured severely
enough of this fault, for that the Pharisees are naturally inclined to mercy in
matter of punishment. But Hircanus was sore offended with this their answer,
and imagined that this Eleazar had spoken after this manner, by the common
instigation of the rest. This displeasure, and conceived dislike of his,
Hircanus forsakes the Pharisees, and follows the Sadduces.
Jonathan aggravated to the uttermost, and handled the matter in such sort,
that he drew Hircanus to forsake the Pharisees, and to subscribe to the
opinions of the Sadduces, abolishing their ordinances, and causing them to be
sharply punished that Hircanus incensed the people against him and his sons; but
we will treat of this in another place. At present I will declare how the
Pharisees have made many ordinances among the People, according to the
Tradition of their fathers, whereof there is nothing written in the Laws of
Moses: for which cause, the Sect of the Sadduces rejects them, affirming,
That they ought to keep the written ordinances, and not to observe those that
are grounded upon the Tradition of the fathers. And great dispute and
dissentions have been raised among them upon this occasion, The constitutions
of the Pharisees.
because the richer sort only, and not the baser sort of People, adhered to the
Sadduces: but the Pharisees had the Commonalty on their sides. But of these two
sorts, and of the Esseans, I have more exactly Treated in my second Book of the
Wars of the Jews. But Hircanus finally appeased this mutiny, and lived
afterward in much peace and happiness; and after he had most discreetly
governed his Princedom for the space of 31 years, Hircanus's death.
he died, leaving Hircanus's Prophecy of his sons.
which he in such sort foretold, That he declared that his two eldest sons
should not possess the principality any long time: whose end it shall not be
amiss to set down in what manner it was, to the intent that the Prophecy of
their father may be the better known.

CHAP. XIX.
Aristobulus, eldest son of Hircanus, Prince of the Jews, makes himself be
crowned King;
ARistobulus, Hircanus's eldest son, resolved after his fathers death, to
exchange the Principality into an absolute Kingdom: Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 18.
and the better to attain thereunto, he first of all set the Crown upon his
head, Aristobulus, Hircanus son, was the first after the captivity of Babylon,
that set the Diad^m on his head.
481 years and three months after the People of the Jews were delivered from
the bondage of Babylon, and led again unto their Country. And for that
Aristobulus, amongst all his other brethren, loved Antigonus best of all, who
was the nearest unto him in age, he accepted him as a companion in the
government of the Hircanus had committed all things to her disposition) and so
far extended his cruelty, Aristobulus admits his brother Antgonus to be his
Copartner in the kingdom, and imprisoneth the rest of his brethren, and
famisheth his mother.
that he famished her to death in Prison. After he had thus used his mother, he
slew his brother Antigonus also; whom he pretended to love above all the rest,
and whom (as he made show) he had made partner of his Kingdom. From whom he
estranged himself, by reason of some slanders and false accusations raised up
against him; which at the first he gave no credit to, both for that the
friendship which he bare unto him, made him not regard the same, as also for
that he imagined he was enviously slandered. It came to pass that Antigonus,
returning upon a certain time from the Army with great magnificence, about the
time of Aristobulus happened to fall sick. Antigonus intending to celebrate the
Solemnity, ascended the Temple in great state, attended by some of his Army, to
pray for his brothers health. Whereupon certain malicious Wretches, desirous to
break the concord that was between them, made use of this occasion, and of
Antigonus magnificent pomp and good fortune; and came unto the King,
Antigonus's death complotted.
amplifying unto him in malicious words, what pomp and majesty he had showed in
that solemnity, telling him, That in his actions he demeaned himself no ways
like a private man, Aristobulus is incensed against his brother Antigonus.
but that all his actions were levelled at royalty: finally, that his intent
was to enter the Kingdom by force, and to kill him; for he made account, that
since he might be King alone, it was a great simplicity for him to have a
companion. But Aristobulus, although Antonia, commanding that no man should
offer violence, except to those who entered armed: giving a further charge to
his Guard, that if Antigonus entered armed, he should be slain. Which done, he
sent for his brother, desiring him to repair unto him without Weapons.
Aristobulus's Queen, contriveth Antigonus's death.
Which when the Queen, and they that complotted the murder of Antigonus,
understood, they persuaded the Messenger to tell him the contrary, namely, That
his brother expected (in regard he prepared for War) that in that state and
pomp he should come and visit him, to the end he might be an eyewitness of his
brave furniture and preparation. But Antigonus suspecting no harm, and relying
on the good will of his brother, marched all armed on foot toward Aristobulus,
to show himself in that bravery: and when he came right over against the Tower,
that is called Straton, where the passage was very dark, The year of the World,
3862. before Christ's Nativity, 102.
the Kings Guard killed him. By this accident a man may easily The force of
slander.
in respect of one that was called Judas, of the Sect of Esseans; who, in all
those things that he prophesied, varied in no sort from the Truth. He seeing
Antigonus come up into the Temple, Judas the Essean a Prophet.
cried out among his Disciples, (who frequented him to be instructed by him in
the method of Prophecy) That he was weary of his life, because Antigonus 's
security argued the vanity of his Prophecy, by which he had foretold, that that
very day he should be slain at Stratons Tower; whereas the place where he
should be murdered, was 600 furlongs off, and the better part of the day was
already spent: so that it could not be imagined, but that he should be in
danger to have made a false Prediction. Whilst he declared his doubts after
this manner, and was wholly overcome with choler, news was brought. That
Antigonus was slain in a certain place under ground, which was called the Tower
of Straton, of the same name with that other that stands near the Sea, which
was afterward called Caesarea; The punishment of Aristobulus, for the murder
of his brother.
which ambiguity troubled the Diviner. Incontinently after this accident,
Aristobulus repented himself, in that he had put his brother to death: and this
repentance of his was seconded by a most grievous sickness, proceeding from the
affliction of his spirit, and detestation of that cruel murder: so that with
grievous agony and torment he vomited blood, as if all his entrals had been
torn in sunder. This blood so vomited by him, it fortuned (in my opinion) by
the Divine Providence of God, Antigonus. The touch of Conscience.
By which means they that beheld the same, raised a great cry, exclaiming that
the Page had shed the blood in a convenient place. Aristobulus hearing this
outcry, demanded the cause thereof; and for that no man addressed himself to
satisfy him, he was the more earnest to know it, (according to the nature of
men, who are always more suspicious and desirous to know those things which
are most concealed.) At last, from words, he fell to Threatenings, and no body
durst tell him the Truth. Whereupon he altogether afrighted in his Conscience,
shedding abundance of Tears, and breathing out grievous sighs, began to cry out
in this manner, How then? My impious and detestable act is not hidden from God,
but the sudden punishment of my brothers murder pursues me: wherefore, O thou
shameless body of mine, how long will thou detain my soul, which is due, and
appertains to the ghosts of my mother and brother? Why do thou not take it
all at once* such as it is, without expecting that I should sacrifice my blood,
poured out so many times to those whom I have so treacherously killed? While he
pronounced these words, he dyed* after he had reigned one year. He was called
Philelles, that is to say, a Lover of the Greeks. Thus after he had profited
his Country many ways, and subdued the Itureans, and joined the greater part
of the Country to Judea; and had constrained them likewise, who should remain
in that Country, to be circumcised, and to live according to the Laws of the
Jews, Aristobulus compels the Itureans to be circumcised, and to observe the
laws of the Jews.
he died thus miserably. He was by nature courteous and shame* Strabo
testifies, speaking after this manner, by the authority of Timagines; This was
the courteous man, and profitable to his Countrymen the Jews in many things:
for he enlarged their Country, and conquered the part of the Nations of the
Itureans, whom he tied unto him by the bond of Circumcision.

CHAP. XX.
Salomey, otherwise called Alexandra, King Aristobulus Relict, takes Jannaeus
called Alexander, Aristobulus's brother, out of Prison, and made him King, who
caused him to kill one of his brothers, and besieges Ptolomais. King Ptolomey
Lathyrus (whom Queen Cleopatra
WHen Aristobulus was dead, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 19.
Salome his Wife (whom the Greeks called Alexandra) set his brothers at
liberty, Salome, surnamed Alexandra, Aristobulus 's Wife, makes Jannaeus
Alexander King.
(whom, as we have heretofore declared, he had made Prisoners) and made
Jannaeus (who was called Alexander) King, who both in age and modesty surpassed
all the other brethren; but he was so unfortunate, that from his birthday
upward, his father had conceived so great a hatred against him, that he never
admitted him to his presence so long as he lived. The cause whereof Hircanus
loved Aristobulus and Antigonus, who were his two eldest sons, with most entire
affection. God appeared unto him in his sleep, The year of the World, 3864.
before Christ's Nativity, 100.
Who should succeed him? Whereupon God presented unto his sight the resemblance
of Alexander: whereat he was displeased, that as soon as he was born, he sent
him out of his presence into Galilee, to be nourished and brought up in that
place. But God has apparently proved that he lied not to Hircanus. For after
Aristobulus's death, Alexander executes the one brother that affected the
crown, and honored the other.
he taking possession of the Kingdom, caused one of his two brethren to be put
to death, who endeavored to make himself King: and as for the other, who
resolved to live in idleness and pleasure, he honored him greatly.

After that he had settled his estate, according as he thought it most
expedient, he led forth his Army against Ptolomais: and having obtained the
upper hand in the battle, he blocked up the men within their City, Alexander
besieges Ptolomais.
and afterward besieged it. For amongst all the Ptolomais and Gaza, remained
as yet unconquered, Zoilus Tyra^^ of Straton and Dora.
and there was no adversary left but Zoilus, who had seized of the Tower of
Straton and Dora where he governed. Whilst Antiochus Philometor and Antiochus
Cyzicenus were thus at Debate and War the one against the other, and consumed
each others Forces, the Ptolemaidans had not any succor from them. But whilst
they were engaged in this Siege, Zoilus (who held the Tower of Straton and
Dora) assisted them with that Army he had under his command, and gave them some
succors, by reason that (seeing these two Kings were so eagerly incensed
against each other) he contrived how to advance himself to the crown and
sovereignty. For these two Kings seemed to neglect their own dangers,
resembling those Wrastlers, who, though being wearied with fighting, yet Egypt,
and in Ptolomey Lathyrus, who held the Isle of Cyprus at that time, (whither he
retired himself, after he had been driven out of his kingdom by Cleopatra his
mother.) To him the Ptolomaidans sent Ambassadors as unto their Ally, requiring
him to come and deliver them from Alexander's hands, into which they were in
danger to fall. These Ambassadors persuaded him, That if he would pass into
Syria, he should have both Zoilus to friend, and those of Gaza to his
followers, in rescuing of the Ptolomaidans: and moreover they assured him, That
the Sidonians, and diverse others would second him: and by this means so
encouraged him with promises, that he made haste to set sail.

Demenetus (who was both eloquent, and in great authority with the Citizens)
made the Ptolomaidans change their resolution, telling them, That it was much
better for them to hazard themselves in some uncertain danger, wherewith the
Jews threatened them, than to deliver themselves into the hands of such a
Master, from whom they could expect nothing but manifest slavery. And moreover,
not only to sustain a present War; but that which is more, an imminent War from
Egypt: that Cleopatra would not permit that Ptolomey should levy an Army of the
Neighboring Nations, but would come against them with a great power, and would
endeavor also to thrust her son out of Cyprus. And as for Ptolomey, if he were
frustrate of his hope, Zoilus and the Gazeans require aid against the Jews at
Ptolomey's hands.
yet he might notwithstanding once more return again to Cyprus; in this case
they were to expect no less than extreme danger. Now although that Ptolomey,
Ptolomaidans had changed their opinion, yet continued he his course onward, and
landing in the Port of Sicamine, he caused his Army (who were of Foot and Horse
to the number of 30000 Men) to take Land, and with them he approached
Ptolomais; and perceiving that upon his encamping, they of the City admitted
not his Ambassadors, neither in any sort gave ear unto them, he was wondrously
perplexed. But after Zoilus, and they of Gaza came unto him, entreating him to
grant them assistance, for that their Country was destroyed by the Jews, and
by Alexander: For which cause Alexander raised his siege from before Ptolomais,
for fear of Ptolomey; and retiring his Army into his own Country, he began to
use this stratagem. For covertly he incited Cleopatra against Ptolomey, and
openly he made show of amity and Ptolomey, Alexander persuadeth Ptolomey to cut
off Zoilus.
promising him to give him 400 Talents of silver, provided that he would
deliver him the Tyrant Zoilus, and assign those possessions held by him unto
the Jews. Ptolomey having made a peace and league with Alexander, did at that
time willingly lay hold on Zoilus: Zoilus taken*
but after that he understood that Alexander had sent and incensed his mother
against him, Ptolomais besieged by Ptolomey.
he brake all agreement, and besieged Ptolomais, that would not entertain him.
He left his Lieutenants at the siege with part of his Forces, and marched away
with the rest, Ptolomey takes Az^r a Town in Galilee.
to invade and pillage the Country of Judea. Alexander perceiving Ptolomey's
intent, assembled about 50000 fighting Men of his own Country, (or as some
Historians have written, 80000) with whom he went out to fight against
Ptolomey, who suddenly setting upon Azoch, a City of Galilee, on a Sabbath Day,
took it by

CHAP. XXI.
Ptolomey Lathyrus's great victory over Alexander King of the Jews, his horrid
barbarity, Cleopatra, Ptolomey's mother, comes to assist the Jews against him.
His attempt to subdue Egypt is frustrated, Alexander takes Gaza, and
practices great cruelties there; several Wars concerning the kingdom of Syria.
The greatest part of the Jews extreme hatred against their King Alexander. They
call Demetrius Eucerus to their aid.
HE afterward set upon Sephor a City near unto Azoch, Ptolomey assaulteth
Sephor.
from whence he departed with the loss of many men, with an intent to fight
with Alexander: who came Hecatontamachi, or the Warriors by hundreds.
and met with him near unto Jordan, in a place called Asophon, and encamped
right over against the Enemy. He had in his Vanguard 8000 men, but the rest of
his Forces not finding themselves so well armed, were fearful to engage, who
carried brazen Bucklers. Ptolomey's Vanguard also had Bucklers after the same
fashion. Philostephanus the Camp-master did not a little encourage them: For he
caused them to pass the River which separated the two Camps, which Alexander
would not oppose, promising himself the victory, if his Enemies could not
retreat. In the beginning of the skirmish, each one of them fought with
answerable valor; so that a great number of them fell on both sides.
Alexander's overthrow.
But Philostephanus perceiving that Alexander's Army had the better, he took a
part of his followers, and speedily seconded those who were ready to fly. The
Jews Vanguard seeing themselves freshly charged, and not succored by any
means, began to fly; and so far were those that marched next them from
yielding them assistance, that all of them became partners in one shameful
flight. But they of Ptolomeys side behaved themselves far otherwise: for they
pursued and slew them; and after they had put them in disorder, they charged
them so hotly, that they blunted their Weapons, and wearied their Arms with
killing them. It is reported that 30000 were slain in the battle (Timagenes
says, 50000) as for the rest, some of them were taken Prisoners, Ptolomey, to
the end he might afflict the Jews with more terror, causes his Soldiers to eat
man's flesh.
and othersome fled unto their Houses. After that Ptolomey had obtained this
victory, he overran and spoiled the whole Country, and in the evening, he
quartered himself in certain Villages of Judea, which he found full of Women
and Children, and Strabo and Nicholas report, Ptolomais taken by force.
that they demeaned themselves after this manner, as I have declared. And
Ptolomey took Ptolomais also by force, as I have made known elsewhere.

But Cleopatra perceiving how her son prospered, and how he had spoilt Jewry,
without any prejudice, Cleopatra prepares an Army against her son.
and subdued the City of Gaza: she concluded with her self, that she ought
Egypt, whose sovereignty he affected. For which cause, she suddenly marched out
against him, with an Army both by Sea and Land, committing the command of her
whole Forces to Chelcias and Ananias, both Jews; and sent the greater part of
her riches into the Isle of Coos, with her Nephews, and her Will, to be
reserved and kept there in safety. And after she had commanded her son
Alexander to set sail toward Phoenicia, with a great Navy, because the
Inhabitants of that Country were revolted, she her self came to Ptolomais, and
besieged it, when she perceived that they refused to grant her entry. Ptolomey
made haste to depart out of Syria, and to enter Egypt, hoping to be Master
thereof, when he should find the Country unarmed; but he was deceived. At that
time it fortuned, Ptolomey driven out of Egypt.
that Chelcias, one of the two Generals of Cleopatra's Army, dyed in
Coelosyria, being in pursuit of Ptolomey. Cleopatra having tidings of her sons
enterprise, and that the success and fortune he expected in Egypt had failed
him, she sent part of her Army to drive him out of the Country; so that he was
enforced to return back again out of Egypt, Ptolomais besieged and taken by
Cleopatra.
and to go and spend his Winter at Gaza. Meanwhile Cleopatra besieged and took
the City of Ptolomais, whither Alexander resorted unto her with great Presents,
she received him very kindly, in regard Ptolomey had used him so ill, he having
now no other recourse left him but to her favor and assistance. Upon his
arrival, certain of her familiars counseled her to lay hands on him, and to
seize the Country: and not to permit that so great number of Jews, and so
valiant men, should become Subjects unto one man. But Ananias gave That she
should commit an act of great injustice, if she should depose him, who was her
Allie, from the Government; who was beside that, very nearly allied unto her.
The year of the World, 3873. before Christ's Nativity, 91.
For (said he) I would you should know, that by committing this wrong you shall
raise in all the rest of the Jews a heinous hatred against you. Cleopatra
conforming her self to Ananias counsel, resolved with her self to offer
Alexander no injury; but in stead thereof, she entertained him as her allie and
friend, at Scythopolis a City of Coelosyria. Now when Alexander perceived,
Alexander's peace with Cleopatra renewed.
that he was freed from the fear which he had conceived of Ptolomey, he
incontinently drew his Army into Coelosyria, and after six months siege, took
Gada^a; he took shortly after Amath also, (which is a great Fortress belonging
to the Inhabitants about Jordan) where Theodore, Alexander takes Gadara.
the son of Zenon, had hoarded up the richest and best part of his substance:
who surprising the Jews unawares, slew about 10000 of them, and pill aged
Alexanders baggage.

Alexander: but notwithstanding the disaster, he marched forward toward the
Cities Raphia and Anthedon, which Herod afterward called Agrippias, situate on
the Seacoasts, and took them perforce; and seeing that Ptolomey was retired
from Gaza into Cyprus, and that Cleopatra his mother was in Egypt, he besieged
the City of Gaza, Alexander besieges Gaza.
and spoilt all the Country round about it, by reason of the displeasure which
he had conceived against the Citizens, Apollodotus by night invadeth the Camp
of the Jews.
for that they had sought Ptolomey's assistance against him. Apollodotus,
Captain of the Gazeans, made a sally by night, and entered the Camp of the Jews,
having only with him 2000 foreign Soldiers, and 1000 of his own followers. And
as long as the night lasted, the Gazeans had the upper hand, because that they
made their Enemies believe that Ptolomey was come to their rescue; but as soon
Jews* were assured of the truth, they turned back upon them, and charging the
Gazeans, they slew about 1000 of them.

Notwithstanding all this, the besieged stood out still, being neither daunted
with loss of Men, nor lack of Provision whatsoever, resolving rather to endure
any misery* than yield to their Enemies: Aretas, King of Arabia, flattereth the
Gazeans, with hope of rescue.
and that which made them more confident, was the hope of help which they
expected from Aretas, King of Arabia, who had promised no less. But it came to
pass, that Apollodotus was slain before his arrival, and the City taken. For
Lysimachus his brother conceived a jealousy against him, by reason of the good
opinion which the Inhabitants had of him, Lysimachus kills his brother
Apollodotus, and betrayed Gaza to Alexander.
and having slain him, and gathered those fighting Men that he Alexander, who
at the first made a peaceable entry, but afterward dispersed his Soldiers, and
gave them license to execute all hostility against the Citizens: so that they
acted their cruelty in every place, and slew many of the Gazeans. Neither died
these Citizens unrevenged, but so manfully behaved themselves, that they
butchered no less number of Jews, than they murdered Citizens among them. Some
of them likewise perceiving themselves to be alone, set their Houses on fire,
taking away first that which was therein, that the Enemy might not be (...)
with their spoils. Others killed their Wives and Children with their own hands,
to deliver them from the Enemies cruelty. But the Senators, to the number of
500, fled into the Temple of Apollo, for to save themselves, but that did not
secure them (for when the Enemy Alexander (...) them all to the sword, and
instantly razed and levelled that City with the ground: which done, he returned
to Jerusalem, after he had spent one whole year at the siege before Gaza.

About this time Antiochus, Antiochus Gryphus slain.
surnamed Gryphus, died by the Treason of Heracleon, in the 45 year of his age,
and in the ^9 of his Reign. His son Seleucus had the Kingdom after him,
Seleucus Gryphus son, makes War with Antiochus the Cyzicenian.
who made War against his Uncle Antiochus, surnamed (...) and having overcome
him, he slew him. Not long after, Antiochus the son of Cyzicenus, and
Antoninus, surnamed the De^out, came to Arade, and crowned them, and made War
against Seleucus, whom they overcame in one conflict; and drove him out of all
(...) who flying into Cilicia, and arriving again in the City of the Mopseates;
he exacted a sum of money from the Citizens. Antiochus Eusebes puts Seleucus
to flight.
that both he and his friends were burnt to dust. During the time that
Antiochus the son of Cyzicenu^ reigned in ^yria, another Antiochus, Seleucus's
brother, made War against him; but he was not only overcome, but both he and
his Army were put to the sword. Antiochus, Seleucus's brother, fights against
Antiochus the son of the Cyzicenian.
After him ^hilip his son took the Crown, and governed in certain places of
Syria.

Mean while Ptolomey Lathyrus sent to (...) for his fourth brother Demetrius
Eucaerus, and made him King of Damascus. Against these two brothers, Antiochus
made a manly and valiant resistance, but died very shortly after. For repairing
to Laodicea, to succor the Queen of the Galadenians, Demetrius Euc^rus made
King of Damascus, by Ptolomey La^^^rus.
who made War against the ^arthians, he was killed fighting valiantly; and his
two brothers, Demetrius and Philip, possessed Syria, as hereafter Alexander,
his own Subjects rebelled against him; for the people arose and mutined at such
time as he assisted at the Altar to solemnize the feast of Tabernacles; and
during the time that he intended the Sacrifice, they cast Citrons at him: The
year of the World, 3884. before Christ's Nativity, 80.
for (as we have declared elsewhere) the Jews have this custom, that on the
feast Citrons cast at Alexander.
he being moved by these disgraces, put to death about 6000 Men: and having
made an enclosure of Wood about the Temple and the Altar (as far as the place
whereinto it was lawful for none to enter but the Priest) he kept there, to the
intent the people might not apprehend him: he entertained also certain foreign
Soldiers, Pisidians and Cilicians. For being at odds with the Syrians, he made
no use of them.

After this, having overcome the Arabians, he constrained the Moabites and
Galaadites to pay him Tribute, and destroyed the City of Amath, whilst
Theodore for fear gave Amath destroyed.
But encountering with Obeda the King of Arabia, and being surprised and
betrayed by an ambuscado in certain miry places, Obeda King of Arabia.
he was thrust by the crowd of Camels into a deep Trench, (near unto Gadara, a
Village of Galaad) from whence he almost despaired to escape: notwithstanding
having overcome that danger, he came to Jerusalem. And besides this, the people
hated him, against whom he made War for the space of six years, and slew at
the least 50000 of them: and the more he entreated them to be quiet, they grew
worse against him, for what they had suffered: so that when he demanded of
them, What they would have him do to please them? They all of them with one
voice cried out, That he should kill himself. And thereupon they presently sent
messengers to Demetrius (...), requesting him of his favor and assistance.

CHAP. XXII.
Demetrius Eucerus, King of Syria, comes to assist the Jews against their King
Alexander, whom he defeats in a battle, and retireth. The Jews prosecute the
War alone against him; he overcomes them in several battles, and proves extreme
cruel to them. Demetrius besieges his brother Philip in B^roa. Mithridates
Synaces, King of the Parthians, sends an Army against him, takes him Prisoner;
he dies shortly after.
Demetrius coming onward with his Army, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 20.
and taking with him those who had incited Demetrius Euc^rus marches out
against Alexander.
came and encamped near unto the City of Siche^. But Alexander gathering
together some 20000 Jews (whom he knew to be well-affected toward him) with
6200 mercenary soldiers and strangers, marched forward against Demetrius,
Demetrius fights with Alexander, and had the upper hand.
who led with him 3000 Horsemen, and 40000 Footmen. Both on the one and the
other side there fell out many subtle stratagems: the one of them striving on
the one side to inveigle and withdraw the foreign Soldiers, who were Grecians;
and the other enforcing himself to reconcile those Jews that were of
Demetrius's followers to his faction: Alexander in this fight loses all his
hired Soldiers.
but neither the one no^ other prevailed at all by these devices, so that at
length they were driven to decide their quarrel by the sword, in which
encounter Demetri^s had the upper hand. For all the strangers that were on
Alexanders side, were every one Demetrius's Soldiers. But after that Alexander
had fled unto the mountains, Six thousand men resort unto Alexander.
diverse Jews (to the number of 6000) in commiseration of his desperate estate,
and through the fear they had of Demetri^^, resorted unto him; which when the
Conqueror heard, Alexander being assailed by the Jews, besieged the mightiest
of them in Bethom.
he retired himself* After this* the Jews made War against Alexander, and in
diverse losses which they received, there fell a great number of them in diverse
combats: At length, after he had (...) up the best amongst them in the City of
Bethom, he besieged them; and after he had taken the City, and brought them
under his subjection, he carried them to Jerusalem, where he committed an
unspeakable and cruel murder. Alexander crucifieth 800 Jews, and murthereth
their wives and children in their presence.
For whilst he banquetted with his Concubines, in the sight of them all, he
Arabians hands, the Countries and Cities that he had conquered from the
Mo^bites and Galaadites, for fear they should join with the Jews, and make War
against him; Alexander, surnamed Thracidas.
besides other innumerable injuries and outrages which they Thracidas: that is
to say, as cruel as Thracian: and Jews. The year of the World, 3887. before
Christ's Nativity, 77.
The Soldiers of the contrary party, who amounted to the number of 8000, fled
by night into strong and sure holds; and as long as Alexander lived, they were
in exile. But at last, he was delivered of all these Troubles, he lived in
quiet, and governed his kingdom peaceably all the rest of his lifetime. But
Demetrius marching from Judea to Beroea, besieged his brother Philip with 10000
Foot, and 1000 Horse. But Straton Lord of Beroea, allied to Philip, called
Zizus Duke of the Arabians, and Mithridates Sinaces Governor of the Parthians,
unto his help; who repairing unto him with great Forces, besieged Demetrius in
his own Trenches, in which they so enclosed him, by continual shooting of
Darts, and want of Water, that they constrained him, Demetrius besieges his
brother Philip in Beroea.
and those that were with him, to submit themselves to Demetrius, they sent him
prisoner to Mithridates, who at that time was King of Parthia. And as for the
Antiochians, as many of them as were found in the Camp, were suffered to be
gone with the safety of their lives and baggage, and to return to Antioch. But
Mithridates, King of Parthia, honored Demetrius, by all means possible, until
he was surprised with a sickness whereof he died. Immediately after the battle,
Philip came into Antioch, and having obtained the kingdom, ruled over Syria.

CHAP. XXIII.

AFter this, Antiochus called Dionysius (who was Philip's brother) came into
Damascus to make himself Master of it, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 21.
which he did quickly, in his brothers absence, who was gone against the
Arabians. Antiochus King of Damascus.
When his brother Philip (who had an Army in a readiness to invade the
Arabians) had tidings hereof, he came to Damascus with great speed, and made
him surrender up the City, Antiochus thrust out of his kingdom by his brother.
both by the means of Milesius, whom Antiochus had left Governor in the Castle,
and also by the consent of the Citizens themselves. Philip showed himself
ungrateful toward Milesius, performing nothing of that which he had promised
him, at the recovery of the City; that the World might think that the fear of
his power, and not Milesius's favor, was the cause of the surrender of
Damascus. Which act of his made Milesius suspect him, and was the cause that he
lost the City again. For departing from thence, to exercise himself at Tilt,
Milesius locked the gates against him, and kept the City for Antiochus. Who
having intelligence of that which had befallen Philip, Ca^p^^asa called
Antipatris.
returned out of Arabia, and at that very instant led his Army into Judea, in
which were 800 Foot, and 800 Horse. Alexander fearing his approach, made a deep
Trench from Caparsabe, Antio^hus's death, and the Famine amongst his Army.
(which is called at this day Antipatris) as far as the Sea of Joppa, (which
was the only straight whereby he might be assailed) and made Antiochus. But he
fired all his fortifications, and made his Army pass into Arabia through this
straight. The King of Arabia retired upon the first assault; but afterward he
presently came into the field with 10000 Horsemen, whom Antiochus charged very
valiantly, and in the onset lost his life, (yet with victory) whilst he sought
to succor a company of his men that were hard put to it. After Antiochus's
death, his Army retired to the borough of Cana, where diverse of them dyed for
hunger.

After him, Aretas reigned in Coelosyria, who was called unto that kingdom by
those that held Damascus, and hated Ptolomey the son of Mennaeus. Aretas led
his Army into Jewry, Alexander near to Addida: which done, he retired out of
Judea* Aretas King of C^oelosyria.
upon a composition made between them. Moreover, once more Alexander marched
toward the City of Dion, and took it. And afterward he led his Army against
Essa, where Zeno had hoarded up his chiefest riches: Certain Cities taken by
Alexander.
and before he assailed the Fortress, he environed the place with three huge
Walls, which he built round about it, and having taken it by force, he marched
to Gaulana and Seleucia: which having overcome, he made himself Master of a
valley called the valley of Antiochus, with the Fortress of Gamala. And
objecting many crimes against Demetrius, the Lord of those places, he
dispossessed him of his government. Then after he had made War for the space of
three whole years, he returned into his Country; where the Jews entertained
him willingly,

About the same time the Jews were already possessed of the Cities of Syria,
Idumaea, and Phoenicia; of the Tower of Straton, Apollonia, Joppa, Jamnia,
Azor, Gaza, Anthedon, Raphia, Rhinocura, all which were near unto the Sea: and
in the firm land on the one Idumaea, as Adora, Marissa, and all Samaria; the
Mounts Carmel and Itabyr; and herewith Scythopolis, Gadara, Gaulanitis,
Seleucia, Gabala; and of Moab, Essebon, Medaba, Lemba, Orona, Telithon, and
Zara; Antonia of Cilicia, and Pella. This last City was destroyed by them, The
Jews are Lords of the Cities of the Syrians, Idumaeans and Phaenicians.
because the Inhabitants would not promise to be converted to the Religion of
the Jews, with diverse others of the principal Cities of Syria also, which were
conquered by them.

After this, King Alexander fell sick, by the means of a surfeit and
drunkenness; and for the space of three years, he was sick of a Quartane Ague.
Nevertheless he continued always in the Camp, Pella destroyed and razed.
until such time that being wearied with toil, he died on the borders of the
Country of the Gerasens, Alexander's sickness.
as he besieged Regaba (which is a Castle situate on the other side of Jordan.)
The Queen perceiving that he was at deaths door, and that there remained
neither hope of life, nor recovery, she began to weep and lament, and to beat
her breasts, because both she and her children were likely now to be left
desolate, and in these words she bemoaned her self unto him: To whom will thou
leave both me and thy children, in the state wherein we are? Or why should we
survive or live one after another, considering that thou assuredly know,
that the hearts of thy people are averse from us? Hereupon the King comforted
her, and gave her this counsel, That if she would assure the Kingdom both unto
her self and her children, she should behave her self according to his
direction: Alexander instructs his wife, how she should reign securely.
which was first to conceal his death, and not to suffer his Soldiers to have
notice thereof, until she had taken this Castle. Which done, he advised her to
repair to Jerusalem Pharisees, The authority of the Pharisees among the people.
who would sound her praise, and obtain her the peoples favor. For (said he)
these kind of men are in great esteem and credit with the people, and can do
much hurt unto those they hate, and benefit them very mightily toward whom
they are well affected: For the people easily believes them, when they find
fault with any man, notwithstanding it be of envy; and that himself also had
incurred the displeasure of the people for their sakes, in that he had offended
them.

When as therefore (said he) thou shall arrive in Jerusalem, send thou for the
chiefest amongst them, and pray them to come unto thee; and after you have
showed them my dead body, use the most plausible speech that you can, and give
them permission to dispose of my body as they

Having given his Wife these advertisements, Alexander's death.
he gave up the ghost, after he had reigned 27 years, and lived 49.

CHAP. XXIV.
King Alexander leaves two sons, Hircanus who was High Priest, and
Aristobulus; their mother, Queen Alexandra, gains the favor of the People
through the Pharisees means; having given them great authority, she consents,
through their persuasion, to put the most faithful of the King her husbands
servants to death; and to please the rest of them, she gives them the
Government of the most considerable places. Tygranes, King of Armenias,
invasion into Syria, Aristobulus endeavors to make himself King. The death
of Queen Alexandra.
AFter that Alexander had taken the Castle of Ragaba, she conferreth with the
Pharisees, Alexander's funeral.
according to her Husbands counsel, and committed unto their discretion not
only that which concerned her Husbands funerals, but also the government of the
kingdom: whereby she not only appeased the displeasure which formerly they had
conceived against Alexander, but also obtained their good will and friendship.
They came and declaimed amongst the people, making an oration of the actions
and deeds of Alexander, lamenting everywhere that they had lost a good King,
Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 22.
and by praising him, they incited the people to great grief and lamentation:
Hircanus and Aristobulus, Alexander's sons.
so that they buried him with more magnificence than any King that reigned
before him. This Alexander left two sons behind him, the one called Hircanus,
the other Aristobulus, and by his Testament committed the government Alexandra
his Wife. For Hircanus was incapable to manage affairs, and rather delighted in
peace and quiet; and Aristobulus, who was the younger, The year of the World,
3890. before Christ's Nativity, 74.
The people were well affected toward Alexandra, because she had manifestly
expressed how greatly she misliked her Husbands misgovernment.

She appointed Hircanus High Priest, (both in regard of his age, as also for
that by nature he was addicted to peace and quiet) and committed all things to
the disposing of the Pharisees, Hi^canus High Priest.
commanding the people to obey and serve them. She also renewed and confirmed
that which Hircanus had disannulled, and the Pharisees (according to the
customs of their forefathers) had introduced; so that she bare the name, and
the Pharisees the Authority Royal. The Pharisees admitted to the administration
of the Commonweal, are greedy of revenge.
For they restored such as were banished to their estates, and delivered
Prisoners; and in all things they demeaned themselves like great Lords.
Alexandra Aristobulus and his followers accuse the Pharisees of Tyranny.
only the Pharisees troubled the Queen, persuading her to put those to death
who had counseled King Alexander to put those 800 to death (of whom we have
spoken before) and they themselves afterward slew one that was called
Diogenes, and after him diverse others, one after another: until such time as
those in authority came unto the Royal Palace, accompanied with Aristobulus
(who seemed to be displeased with that which had been done, and who, if the
occasion were offered, made show that he would not permit his Mother to govern
after that manner) and told her that which had happened, and in what dangers they
had been, to express their duty and loyalty which they owed to their deceased
Master, and how for that cause they had been greatly honored by him; requiring
of her, that she would not utterly frustrate them of their hopes, which they
expected for their service; that now they that had escaped from the danger of
their foreign Enemies, were in their houses murdered like Beasts, by their
private Foes, without any relief or succors from any one. They furthermore
urged, That if their Adversaries would content themselves with those they had
slain, they would endure their misfortunes patiently, by reason of the sincere
affection they bare unto their Lords: but if they must needs as yet suffer the
like, they required that they might have liberty to retire. For that they would
not procure their safety otherwise than by her consent; and would rather suffer
a voluntary death near unto her Royal Palace, if they might not be spared: for
that it would be a shame both for themselves, and for the Queen, if by her
toleration, those who had been her deceased husbands friends, should be thus
abused by them which were his Enemies.

That Aretas, King of Arabias, and other Princes, would be glad of this news,
to hear that she should deprive her self of those whose names have been
dreadful even amongst those neighboring Kings who have but heard of them. And
if she had resolved to make more account of the Pharisees favor, than of their
service, they entreated her that she would at least distribute them in several
Castles; that rather than any ill should fall upon their Sovereign Alexander 's
house, they were content to lead their lives in that contemptible and
despicable condition. Whilst thus they spoke, Alexandra commits the custody
of the Castles to the Jews.
directing their supplications to Alexander's soul, praying him to have
Aristobulus above the rest was heartily discontent, and expressed the same, by
finding fault with his Mother. But they themselves were the cause of their own
calamity, because that against all right and reason, they had permitted a
headstrong and ambitious Woman to reign over them, as if the King had no Heirs
reserved to succeed him in the kingdom. The Queen, uncertain how to determine
the matter at that instant, committed the charge of all her Castles into their
hands, reserving only Hircania, Alexandrion, and Machaeron, wherein the Princes
Movables and Wealth was kept.

Not long after, she sent her son Aristobulus with a strong Army, commanding
him to Damascus, Aristobulus is sent to Damascus against Ptolomey.
against Ptolomey, called Mennaeus, who was an ill Neighbor unto that City; but
he returned thence, without doing any memorable action. About the same time
news was brought, that Tigranes, King of Armenia, invaded Syria with 500000 Men
of War, Tigranes invading Syria, hears news of Lucullus's pursuit of
Mithridates, and returns home.
intending shortly to set upon Jewry. This rumor afrighted the Queen, and all
the Commonalty (and not without cause.) Whereupon she sent Ambassadors with
many Princely Presents unto Tigranes, who besieged the City of Ptolomais. (For
Queen Selena, otherwise called Cleopatra, reigned in Syria, and persuaded the
Syrians to deny Tigranes passage.) But Alexandra's Ambassadors met with the
King of Armenia, and prayed him to conceive a good opinion of their Queen, and
of all the whole Nation of the Jews; who received them willingly, commending
them for that Ptolomais, it was told Tigranes, that Lucullus pursued
Mithridates (who was not as yet apprehended, for that he was fled into Iberia,
which was the cause that Lucullus had entered Armenia, The year of the World,
3894. before Christ's Nativity, 70.
and plundered it.) Tigranes hearing this news, returned back into

After this, Queen Alexandra fell sick of a dangerous disease, whereby
Aristobulus took occasion to intermeddle with the affairs of State. Walking
therefore abroad one night attended by a trusty servant, Alexandra's sickness,
and Aristobulus's attempt.
he repaired unto those Castles which were committed to the custody of his
fathers friends: for he had misliked his Mothers government long, and feared
more than ever, that if she should die, all her posterity should be made
subject to the power of the Pharisees, For he perceived how unapt his elder
brother was to govern the kingdom, unto whom notwithstanding the succession
appertained: only his Wife, whom (accompanied with his Children) he had left
with Alexandra, had an inkling of this his intent. He therefore went first of
all to Agaba, where Galestes, one

The next day, Aristobulus seizes the Castles, and great concourse of people
resort to him.
the Queen heard that Aristobulus was departed from Court, she little suspected
at first, that he was retired, to work some alteration in the State. But when
Messengers came flocking one after another, and told her, that after the first
Castle, the second; and after the second, all the rest had consequently been
surprised by Aristobulus: at that time both the Queen and the whole Nation were
alarmed, fearing lest he should presently usurp the Sovereignty; but above all
they feared, lest he should revenge himself on those who had abused his
servants: and it was thought fit, that both his Wife and Children should be
committed to the Castle that adjoined to the Temple. But from all parts round
about, there resorted Soldiers to Aristobulus, so that he was attended Libanus
and Trachonitis: For the multitude had always resort (...) the stronger side,
supposing that if they submit thereunto willingly, and maintain and authorize
the same, that they shall draw some profit thereby, as being those that were
the occasion of the confirmation of his Monarchy.

Hereupon the ancient Jews and Hircanus repaired unto the Queen, Hircanus and
the Elders inform the Queen, and accuse Aristobulus.
humbly entreating her to take some mature counsel and good advice concerning
the present affairs, because that Aristobulus her son was already very near
Lord of the whole Country, since he had so many Forts under his command:
Besides, that it was inconvenient and undecent for them to consult without her
express order, Alexandra's death.
notwithstanding she were grievously sick, but that the present danger
compelled them. The Queen desired them to do that which they thought should be
most profitable for the Commonweal; telling them, That they had many means, for
that their Nation was mighty, great and strong, and had great store both of
money and riches in the common Treasury: showing them, that because she knew
that she had not long to live, she had no more reason to take care of those
affairs. Having spoken thus, she died, after she had reigned nine years, and
lived in all 73. This Woman was endued with greater excellency than could be
expected from one of her sex, and expressed both in her actions and ordinances
how fit she was to govern a kingdom, and how unworthy some Princes are of the
dignities they have amongst men. For making more account of the present than
future occurrences, Alexandra's Family incur much trouble.
and left the Kingdom destitute of such as were fit to govern: so that the
Government which she enjoyed during her lifetime, was after her death
distracted with infinite troubles and calamities, wherewith her family was
involved. And notwithstanding her Government after this manner, yet, during her
lifetime, she kept the kingdom Alexandra.

The year (...) World, 3899. before Christ's Nativity, 65.

Written by FLAVIVS JOSEPHVS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Fourteenth Book.
1. How after the death of Alexandra, her youngest son, Aristobulus, made War
against his brother Hircanus for the Kingdom: who, obtaining the victory,
compelled Hircanus Jerusalem. And how after it was concluded between them, that
Aristobulus should be King, and Hircanus live as a private man, without
dignity. 2. Of the race of Antipater, and how he purchased renown, great power
and authority both to himself and his children; and the flight of Hircanus to
Aretas King of Arabia. 3. Aristobulus, being vanquished, is pursued as far as
Jerusalem. 4. Hircanus and Aristobulus send Ambassadors to Scaurus, to request
his aid and succor. 5. Aristobulus and Hircanus present themselves before
Pompey, to debate their Titles touching the Kingdom. 6. Pompey is seized of the
Fortresses, by a warlike stratagem. 7. They of Jerusalem shut their gates
against the Romans. Pompey takes the Temple, and lower part of the City, by
force. 9. Scaurus makes War against Aretas; and by the persuasion and
solicitation of Antipater, makes a league with him. 10. Alexander being
overcome by Gabinius, retireth himself into a Castle, where he is shut up, and
besieged. 11. Aristobulus escaping out of Prison, flies from Rome: who being
taken again in Judea by Gabinius, is sent back Prisoner to Rome. 12. Crassus
warring against the Parthians, passes through Jewry, and spoileth the Treasury
of the Temple. 13. Pompey retireth into Epirus, and Scipio comes into Syria.
Caesar's voyage into Egypt, wherein the Jews do him faithful service. 15.
Antipater's valiant acts, and the amity betwixt him and Caesar. 16. Caesar's
Letters, and the Senates decree, as touching the friendship betwixt the Jews
and Romans. 17. Antipater commits the government of Galilee to his son
Herod, and that of Jerusalem to Phasaelus his other son: and how Sextus Caesar
advanced Herod to great honor and dignity. 18. Cassius afflicts Jewry, and
exacteth 800 Talents. 19. Malichus poysoneth Antipater. 20. Herod puts
Malichus to death, by Cassius's commandment. Antigonus, the son of Aristobulus,
seeking to recover his fathers Kingdom by the aid of the King of Tire, is
discomfited, and driven out of Judea by Herod. 22. Herod meeting Antonius in
Bithinia, wins his favor with a great sum of money, to the intent he should
give no ear to his accusers. 23. Antonius arriving in Syria, establishes Herod
and Phasaelus for Tetrarchs. 24. The Parthians make War in Syria, to restore
Antigonus to the Kingdom. 25. The Parthians take Hircanus and Phasaelus
Prisoners, and lead them away. 26. Herod, at Rome, is declared King of Jewry by
the Senate. 27. Herod returns from Rome, and fights against Antigonus:
Antigonus is discomfited by Sosius and Herod.


CHAP. I.
After the death of Queen Alexandra, Hircanus and Aristobulus, her two sons,
come to battle, Aristobulus gets the victory; and afterward, in a Treaty,
Aristobulus, though youngest, is to have the Crown, and Hircanus is contented
to live privately.
WE have already Treated, in our former Book, both of the Acts and Death of
Queen Alexandra: it now remains, at this present, to prosecute and continue
the sequel of our History, to the end that we The office and duty of an
Historiographer.
nor bury it in forgetfulness. For they that make profession to write
Histories, and to recite such things as are observed by Antiquity, ought not
only studiously to conform their style, but also to beautify the same with
ornaments of eloquence, that the Reader may peruse their

When as therefore Hircanus had taken upon him the High Priesthood, in the
third year of the Hundred seventy and seven Olympiade* and in the year that Q.
Hortensius and Q. Metellus (called the Cretensian) were Consuls at Rome,
Aristobulus suddenly undertook the War against Hircanus, Aristobulus and
Hircanus strive for the kingdom.
and fought with him near unto Jericho: where a great number of Hircanus's
followers submitted themselves of their own accord to Aristobulus. Through
which accident Hircanus was forced to fly to the fortress of the higher City,
where Alexandra, Aristobulus mother, had imprisoned both his Wife and Children
(as before is The peace betwixt Hircanus and Aristobulus.
where they were besieged and taken. After this, a Peace was Treated of betwixt
both the brethren, and their difference was decided in this manner. That
Hircanus should pass the rest of his life without meddling with State Affairs,
and Aristobulus should reign. This League was ratified between them in the
Temple, and confirmed with oaths, conjunction of hands and embraces, in the
sight of all the people: which being finished, Aristobulus retired himself into
the Palace, and Hircanus to Aristobulus lodging, to lead a private and quiet
life.

CHAP. II.
Antipater an Idumaean, persuades Hircanus to fly, and to retire himself to
Aretas, King of the Arabians, who promises to re-establish him in the Kingdom
of Judea.
BUT a certain friend of Hircanus, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 11.
(by Nation an Idumaean, and by name Antipater) being very rich, Antipater the
Idumaean, Hircanus 's friend.
and by nature both factious and industrious, was as much Aristobulus's Enemy,
as Hircanus's Friend. True it is, that Nicholas Damascene writes of this man,
That he was descended of the noblest amongst those Jews who returned from
Babylon into Jewry: Antipater of Judaea, as Nicholas Damascenus implies, first
called Antipas.
but this he did on purpose to gratify Herod, Antipater's son, who, by a
casualty, became afterward King of the Jews (as we will express hereafter in
time and place Antipater was at the first called Antipas, according to his
fathers name, who (as it is reported) was made Governor of all Idumaea by King
Alexander and his Wife: and afterward made a League with the Arabians,
Gazeans, and Ascalonites, corrupting them, and insinuating himself into their
favors, by diverse great Presents bestowed upon them. This young Antipater
considering with himself what Aristobulus power was, and fearing lest some
mischief might befall him, through the hatred the young King had conceived
against him, he communicated with certain of the greatest amongst the Jews, and
secretly and cunningly incensed them against Aristobulus, Antipater incenseth
the Princes of the Jews against Aristobulus.
telling them, That they had done amiss, both to see and suffer Aristobulus to
detain the Kingdom unjustly in his hands, and to dispossess his elder brother
Hircanus, to whom by right of inheritance it did belong. He likewise Hircanus
ordinarily with these words, telling him, That he lived in danger of his life,
and would doubtless be snared, except he sought his own security, and fled his
evident danger: alleging, That Aristobulus 's friends would never cease to
consult how they might shorten his life; to the end that he might live in more
security. To these instigations of his, Hircanus gave small credit, (for that
of his own nature he was courteous, and could not easily be induced or seduced
by detractions) but this negligence and carelessness in him, was the cause that
he was accounted a silly man. On the contrary side, Aristobulus was of a
different and more heroic nature, being more active in performance, and
careful to prevent.

Now although Antipater saw that Hircanus made small account of his
instigations, yet Aristobulus's hatred and practice to murder him: and
prevailed so by his importunity, that at last he persuaded him to fly to
Aretas King of Arabia, promising him, That in so doing, he would give him both
aid and assistance. Hircanus was the more easy to be induced to follow
Antipater's advice, for that Arabia was adjacent to Jewry. Whereupon he first
of all sent Antipater to Aretas, to take assurance of him that he should not
betray him into his Enemies hands, if he should submit himself unto him, and
require his assistance. When Antipater had received his assurance from the
King, he returned to Jerusalem unto Hircanus: and not long after that took him
away with him, and departed the City by night, and afterward with great
journies arrived at Petra, where Aretas kept his Royal Court. And being Jewry,
and did so much by his importunity and the Presents which he gave him, that he
Aretas to attempt the matter. The year of the World, 3900. before Christ's
Nativity, 64.
Whereupon Hircanus promised, That if he confirmed him again in his Royal
dignity, he would, upon the recovery of his Realm, restore unto him those
twelve Cities which his father Alexander had taken from the Arabians, the names
whereof are these that follow: Medaba, Nabello, Livias, Tharabasa, Agalla,
Athona, Zoara, Orona, Narissa, Rydda, Lusa, Oryba. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 3.


CHAP. III.
Aristobulus is enforced to retire into the Castle of Jerusalem, the King
Aretas besieges him: The cruelty of some Jews who stoned Onias, a just man, to
death. The punishment which
ARetas, Aretas makes War against Aristobulus, and inforceth him to fly to
Jerusalem.
induced by these promises, was content to send forth an Army against
Aristobulus, and himself in person conducted in that expedition 50000 Men Foot
and Horse, and had so much the upper hand of his Enemy, that diverse after this
victory, of their own accord, submitted themselves to Hircanus: and Aristobulus
perceiving himself to be destitute of all his friends and followers, The
Arabian besieges Aristobulus in the Temple.
fled unto Jerusalem The King of Arabia followed him with all expedition, and
besieged him in the Temple: in this siege the common people assisted Hircanus,
neither were there any but the Priests only that stuck to Aristobulus's side.
The Jews (...) into Egypt.
Whereupon Aretas drew up the Forces he had, and busily set the Army Jews and
Arabians about the siege. Whilst these things were thus, the feast of
unleavened bread, which we call the Passover, was at hand, and the Princes of
the Jews forsaking their Country, were fled into Egypt. About that time, a
certain man called Onias (such an one who for his virtue was beloved of God,
and in times past* had by his devout prayers and supplications, in a time of
drought, obtained rain from God) hid himself, perceiving that this sedition
would be of some continuance. This man therefore being surprised, and brought
into the Camp of the Jews, they required him that as by his prayers he had
obtained water, so at that time likewise he would by his imprecations, incense
God against Aristobulus, and his adherents. But whereas he refused and excused
himself, he was at last constrained by the people to perform their request; so
that standing

O God, King of the whole world, since they who are at this present here with
me are thy people, and those that are besieged are thy Priests, I humbly
beseech thee, that when they shall require thee to be incensed against their
brethren, thou will not hear them* and when as likewise they shall provoke thee
against the other, Onias contradicting the Jews petition, is stoned to death.
thou will not respect them.

Hereupon, a certain sort of reprobate Soldiers amongst the Jews, hearing these
words of his, stoneth him to death: But God immediately punished this cruelty
in them, and the murder of Onias so cursedly perpetrated, was revenged by this
means which ensues. Aristobulus and the Priests being besieged, the feast of
East^r, or the Passover fell out, during which time it was an usual custom
among the Jews to honor God with many sacrifices: Aristobulite, not having any
beasts to offer up in sacrifice, they requested the other Jews that were
without, That they might have some delivered unto them for their money.
Whereunto it was answered, That if they would give one thousand drachnis for
every head, they should have some delivered into them. To this demand of
theirs, Aristobulus and the Priests that were with him, willingly condescended,
and let down the prefixed price, and delivered the same from the wall* but the
others, after they had received the money, delivered them not those beasts
which they desired them to sell them to sacrifice; but they were so impious,
that they falsified their oaths not only toward men, Breach of faith, and the
revenge thereof.
but defrauded God also, in denying that which they had promised toward the
furnishing of their sacrifice. For which cause, the Priests (being defrauded in
this

CHAP. IV.
Scaurus being sent by Pompey into Syria, Aristobulus gained his friendship. He
forced King Aretas to raise the siege of Jerusalem. Aristobulus gains a
Battle against Aretas and Hircanus.
MEanwhile Pompey sent Scaurus into Syria (himself being in person detained in
Armenia, Hedio and Ruffinus chap. 4.
in pursuit of the War betwixt him and Tigranes.) When Scaurus came unto
Damascus, Hircanus and Aristobulus send Ambassadors unto Scaurus.
he found that Metellus and Lollius had newly taken the City* for which Jewry:
where being arrived, certain Ambassadors came unto him in the behalf of
Aristobulus, and others also in the name of Hircanus, requiring alliance and
confederacy in the behalf of them both, and offering from each of them a
Tribute of 400 Talents. But Scaurus preferred Aristobulus's promises, because
he was the ablest, Scaurus is presented.
and of the noblest spirit, and withal more moderate in his demand: whereas
Hircanus was poor and covetous, notwithstanding he demanded greater things than
his brother did: for it was a harder matter to subdue a City that was so
strong, than to beat a company of runnagate Nabatheans, and scarcely well
animated to prosecute that War. Aristobulus makes War against Aretas and
Hircanus.
For these causes therefore he (receiving his money) raised the siege,
commanding Aretas to return; which if he refused, he declared him an Enemy to
Rome. This done, Scaurus returned to Damascus, and Aristobulus led forth his
Army against Aretas and Hircanus; and fighting with them in a place called
Papyron, he obtained the victory, and killed about some 7000 of his Enemies,
amongst the number of which, was ^ephalius, Antipater's brother.

CHAP. V.
Pompey comes into the lower Syria. Aristobulus sends him a rich Present.
Antipater repaireth to him in Hircanus's behalf. Both the brothers case was
stated to Pompey, who defers the decision of it, till he reduce the Nabatheans.
Aristobulus without expecting till then, retired into Judea.
NOt long after this, Pompey comes into Syria, and Aristobulus sends a Royal
Present unto him.
Pompey came unto Damascus; and as he traveled through Coelosyria, diverse
Ambassadors resorted unto him from all parts of Syria, Egypt and Judea. For
Aristobulus sent him a Present of great value, namely, a golden Vine of 500
Talents price. Hereof Strabo the Cappadocian makes mention in these words:

There came an Ambassador out of Egypt, bearing a Crown of 4000 pieces of gold;
and another from Jewry, with a Vine or Garden, and the workmanship was called
Terpole, that is to say, Recreation. I have seen this Vine at Rome, in the
Temple of Jupiter Capitoline, having the inscription of Alexander King of the
Jews; Antipater for Hircanus, and Nicodemus for Aristobulus, come as
Ambassadors to Pompey.
and it was esteemed and valued at 500 Talents. It is said that Aristobulus
Prince of the Jews sent the same.

Straight after this, there came other fresh Ambassadors to Pompey, (Antipater
from Hircanus, and Nicodemus from Aristobulus) who accused those that had taken
money, namely Gabimus, for that he first of all had received 300 Talents,
besides other Presents: and secondly Scaurus, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 5.
who had received 400; alleging, that by that means they had incensed them
against him. A Castle destroyed in Apamea.
He therefore gave direction, that they should repair unto him about the
Spring, each of them to justify and maintain their several Rights: as for
himself, he drew his Forces from their wintering places, and marched toward
Damascus, destroying in his way a certain Fortress which Antiochus the
Cyzicenian had fortified in Apamaea. He visited also the Country of Ptolomey
Mennaeus (who was a wicked and perverse man, Ptolomey Mennaeus fined at a great
sum of money.
and no ways differed from Dionysius Tripolitane) who was punished Ptolomey
distributed among his Soldiers for their pay. He demolished likewise the Castle
of Lysias (wherein a Jew called Sylas tyrannized) and passing by the Cities of
Heliopolis and Chalcis, and having likewise ascended the mountain (which is
between them) he came to Coelosyria, and from Pella repaired to Damascus. In
which place he gave audience to the Jews, and their Princes Hircanus and
Aristobulus, who were at odds the one against the other, Aristobulus and
Hircanus accused by the Jews before Pompey.
concerning their particular interests: the Jews complained against Hircanus
and Aristobulus both, and alleged, that they would not be governed by Kings,
because their custom was to obey Gods Priests, whom they honored, affirming
that these Hircanus The year of the World, 3902. before Christ's Nativity, 62.
that being the elder born, he had been deprived of his inheritance by
Aristobulus, and had only but a small portion of the Country allotted him,
because Aristobulus had seized the rest by force. He complained likewise of
those incursions that both by Land and Sea Aristobulus's followers had
endamaged their Frontiers with. For the people had not revolted, if he had not
been a violent and turbulent man. To this accusation of his, Aristobulus's
Apology before Pompey.
a thousand of the principallest of the Jews (drawn on by Antipater's
persuasion) subscribed. But Aristobulus answered, That Hircanus was
dispossessed of the Kingdom, by reason of his incapacity, and natural defects,
alleging for himself, That the government was forced on him of necessity, lest
it should be transported to others: he protested that he challenged no other
title than that which his father Alexander Pompey had heard them, he condemned
Aristobulus's violence, but for that time he dismissed them (after some
favorable and gracious conference) promising them that he would come into their
Country, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 6.
and determine their differences, after he had seen the Region of the
Nabatheans: commanding them in the meanwhile to live in peace. He used
Aristobulus likewise very kindly, fearing lest he should incense the people,
and shut up his passage: which notwithstanding came to pass. For Aristobulus
came into the City of Delion, and from thence Judea, without regarding what
Pompey had commanded him.

CHAP. VI.
Pompey is offended at Aristobulus's retreat. He marches against him. Their
several meetings without taking any effect.
POmpey hearing this, was very much displeased; and taking with him his Army
which he had prepared against the Nabatheans (with the supplies he had in
Damascus, and the rest of Syria, Pompey marches out against Aristobulus.
besides the other Roman companies that he had) he marched forth Aristobulus:
when he had passed Pella and S^^hopolis, he came to Coreas (which is the
entrance into Judea) drawing toward the heart of the Country. There he found a
strong Castle situate upon the top of a mountain called Alexandrion,
Aristobulus descends from his Fortress, to confer with Pompey.
whither Aristobulus was retired. He sent to invite him to come and parley with
him: who, persuaded by the counsel of many of his best friends, by no means to
make War against the Romans, Aristobulus delivers the Fortresses to Pompey's
hands.
came down to him, and after he had debated his title with his brother,
concerning the Kingdom, Pompey permitted him to return again into his Castle.
And this he did two or three times, always flattering Pompey through the hope
he had of the Kingdom. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 7.
Meanwhile he retired himself, and fortified the place, and made preparation
for the War, lest Pompey should alot the Kingdom to Hircanus. Pompey commanded
him to Mithridates King of Pontus, slain by his son Pharnaces.
and to write with his own hand to the Captains of the Garrisons (who otherwise
would not have obeyed him.) Aristobulus submitted, but was so displeased, that
he repaired to Jerusalem, on purpose to make preparations for War. Immediately
after, Pompey marched toward him with his Army, and a messenger coming from
Pontus, brought him news of Mithridates's death, who was slain by his son
Pharnaces.

CHAP. VII. The year of the World, 3903. before Christ's Nativity, 61.

Aristobulus repents, comes to Pompey, and treats with him: But his Soldiers
refusing to deliver the money that he had promised, and to receive the Romans
into Jerusalem, Pompey keeps him Prisoner, and besieges the Temple where
Aristobulus's men were retired.
POmpey having encamped near Jericho, (where there was a number of Date-trees,
and where also grows that balm which is the most precious, Gabinius coming to
receive the money Aristobulus had promised, has the City Gates shut against
him.
of all other ointments, distilling from a little shrub, which is opened and
slit by a sharp cutting stone) the next morning he marched toward Jerusalem.
Aristobulus (being sorry for his misbehavior) came unto him, offering him
money: and promising him to receive Jerusalem, he entreated him to lay aside
all quarrels, and to order all as he thought fit, without coming to War.
Whereupon Pompey pardoned him, and condescended to his request, Hedio and
Ruffinus, cap. 8.
and sent Gabinius with his Soldiers, both to receive the money, as also to
enter the City, Pompey besieges Jerusalem.
but could do neither, for Aristobulus's Soldiers would not permit that any
promise should be performed: which Pompey took so ill, that after he had
committed Aristobulus to Prison, he went in person against the City, which was
strongly fortified on every side, except toward the quarter that extends
Northward, which was easy to be beaten down: for this side is environed with a
large and deep Valley, compassing the Temple, which is enclosed with a very
strong stone Wall.

CHAP. VIII.
Pompey, after a three months siege, took the Temple of Jerusalem by assault,
and forbeareth plundering of it. He lessens the Jews power. He leaves Scaurus
to command his Army; carries Aristobulus Prisoner to Rome, with Alexander and
Antigonus his two sons, and his two daughters. Alexander makes his escape out
of Prison.
IN the mean time the City of Jerusalem was divided, for some thought good to
yield up the City to Pompey; Jerusalem partly betrayed, partly besieged by
Pompey.
others (that were of Aristobulus's faction) counseled that the gates should
be kept shut, and preparation for War should be made, because the Romans
Aristobulus Prisoner. The last prevailing, seized the Temple: and breaking down
the bridge which was betwixt it and the City, resolved to stand on their
defense. But the others not only delivered the City into Pompey's hands, but
the Royal Palace also, who sent Piso his Lieutenant thither with his Forces to
take possession thereof, and to plant his Garrisons therein, and to fortify the
houses near the Temple. First therefore Pompey offered the besieged certain
conditions of peace, which when they refused, he shut them in on every side,
Pompey makes preparation to besiege the Temple.
being in all these his endeavors assisted by Hircanus. Pompey encamped with
his Army on the North-side of the Temple (which was the easiest to be
assaulted) on this side also there were certain high Towers, and a huge Trench,
besides a deep Valley that begirt the Temple. For on the City-side there was
such Precipices, that Romans wrought vigorously in cutting down of Trees to
make Bulwarks, which being done, they planted great Machines and Engines that
Pompey had caused them to bring from Tire, they threw great stone Bullets with
them to batter the Temple. The Romans had hardly got their Works accomplished,
if the strict keeping of the Sabbath had not hindered the besieged to make any
opposition that day. For the Law permits them to defend themselves against
their Enemies, being assaulted, but not to assail them when they intend any
other work. Which when the Romans understood, they neither gave assault, nor
proffered skirmish on those days which we call Sabbaths: but they built their
Fortifications and Towers, and planted their Engines, so that the next day they
were ready to put them in Jews. The Jews intermitted not their s^crifice,
notwithstanding the sie^e.
And hereby it is easy to conjecture, how incredible the piety of our Nation
is, and how studious and industrious it is in observing the Divine Laws. For
notwithstanding any present or imminent danger, they never desisted to offer
their solemn Sacrifices: twice a day, in the morning, and about the ninth hour,
the Priests offered duly upon the Altar. The^^ king of the Temple.
For when the Temple was taken (in the third month, and on a fasting day, in
the hundred seventy nine Olympiade, in the year wherein Cajus Antonius, and
Marcus Tullius Cicero were Consuls) the Enemy entered the Temple by force, and
killed all they met. Yet notwithstanding all this, the Priests ceased not to
offer their accustomed Sacrifice: and neither the hazard of their lives, nor
the great number of those that were killed, could force them to fly; they held
it more convenient for them The year of the World, 3093. before Christ's
Nativity, 61.
but the exact and perfect truth, all those that write the Histories concerning
Pompey and his acts, do witness no less: amongst the number of which, are
Strabo, Nicholas, and Titus Livius the Roman Historiographer, the most famous
among the rest. The greatest of these Towers was battered by these Engines, and
fell, bearing a great Pane of the Wall to the Earth with it, which was the
cause that the Enemies in multitudes brake in by the breach. The first that
ascended the Wall, was Cornelius Faustus, the son of Sylla, with his Soldiers.
After him mounted the Centurion Furius, accompanied with those that followed
him on the other side; and through the midst of the breach did the Centurion
Fabius enter with a strong Squadron. The whole circuit was filled with dead
bodies, and some of the Jews dyed by the Romans swords, others Jews, and very
few Romans. Absalom also, who was Aristobulus's Father-in-law and Uncle, was
taken Prisoner. Twelve thousand Jews slain.
The holiness of the Temple likewise was not a little profaned. For whereas
before that time no profane man either entered or beheld that which was in the
Temple, Pompey, and diverse others that accompanied him, entered the same, and
saw that which was not lawful to be beheld by any other but the Highpriests
only. But although he found a Table of gold, and a sacred Candlestick, with
diverse other vessels and perfumes, Pompey entering the Temple, neither touches
nor takes away any thing.
in great quantity; and whereas besides, there was about 2000 Talents of silver
Ali^^ cap. 9.
and to offer Sacrifices unto God, according to the Law; committing the
High Priesthood to Hircanus, ^ompey bestows the Priesthood on Hircanus.
both because he had been very useful in many things, and for having hindered
the Jews to join with Aristobulus. After this, he beheaded the Authors of this
War, and honored Faustus and the rest with gifts, suitable to their valor, for
having been the first that entered the breach. As for Jerusalem, he made it
tributary to the Romans, taking away from the Jews those Cities they had
conquered in Coelosyria, and assigning them a proper and peculiar government.
Jerusalem tributary to Rome.
After this, he enclosed the Nation within Gadara restored.
he repaired Gadara, that not long before was destroyed: all which he performed
in favor of Demetrius the Gadarenian, his late servant and bondsman. And as
touching Hippon, Cities taken from the Jews
Scythopolis, Dion, Samaria, Marissa, Azot, Jamnia, and Arethusa, he restored
them to the ancient Inhabitants thereof, all which were situate in the heart
of the Land: Besides Gaza, Joppa, Dora, and the Tower of Straton (Cities
situate upon the Seacoasts, and ruinated formerly with diverse Wars) he set at
liberty, and annexed them unto the Province. As for the Tower of Straton; it
was magnificently built by Herod, and adorned with Gates and fair Temples* and
the name thereof was changed, and called Caesarea. Thus Hircanus and
Aristobulus* through their dissentions and civil broils, were the cause Jews.
For we have lost our liberty, and have been subdued by the Romans. Besides that
we have been enforced to surrender up those Cities unto the Syrians, which we
had formerly conquered by force of Arms. And that which is to be lamented, the
Romans in a little time have drawn from us more than 10000 Talents: and the
Royalty which before-time was an honor reserved for those that were of the
Race of the Highpriests, has been bestowed on men of mean extraction; whereof
we will speak in place convenient. After that Pompey had given Coelosyria to
Scaurus, Scaurus President of Coelosyria.
from Euphrates to the frontiers of Egypt, with two Legions of the Romans, he
went into Cilicia, and from thence drew toward Rome, leading with him
Aristobulus in bonds, and his children (who were two sons, and two daughters)
one of which called Alexander, escaped; and as for Antigon^s, (who was the
younger) he was led to Rome with his sisters.

CHAP. IX. The year of the World, 3904. before Christ's Nativity, 60.

Antipater proves very useful to Scaurus in Arabia.
SCaurus led forth his Army against Petra a City in Arabia; Hedio and Ruffinus,
cap. 9.
and the ways being so bad that he could hardly get to it, he spoilt all the
Country round about; his Army was pressed with famine, Antipater, by the order
of Hircanus, furnished him with Corn, and all other necessaries, out of Jewry:
who being sent Ambassador to Aretas from Scaurus, persuaded him to contribute a
certain sum of silver to secure his Country from being pillaged, and he himself
also became pledge for 300 Talents. This done, Scaurus Aretas and his Country.

CHAP. X.
Alexander, Aristobulus's son, armeth in Judea, and fortifieth the Towns.
Gabinius overthrows him in battle, and besieges him in the Castle of
Alexandrion. Alexander delivers it up to him, with several other places.
Gabinius establishes Hircanus High Priest in his room, and reduces Judea to
be governed under the Nobility.
NOt long after this, Alexander, Aristobulus's son, made diverse inroads into
Jewry; for Gabinius came from Rome into Syria, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 10. al.
11.
and (besides other things worthy of memory which he achieved) he led forth
his Army against Alexander, for that Hircanus had not as yet sufficient power
to resist him, Castles fortified.
being otherwise exercised in building the Walls of Jerusalem that were beaten
down by Pompey; notwithstanding the Romans that were in Jewry hindered him from
performing the same. This Alexander traveling through the whole Country,
assembled diverse Jews; so that in short time having gotten together 10000 Foot,
and 1500 Horse, with good ammunition, he fortified the Castle of Alexandrion
near to the City of Coreas. He fortified Machaeron also in the mountains of
Arabia. Gabinius therefore came forth against him, having sent before him
Marcus Antonius, accompanied with other Commanders, who recruited the Romans
with their coming, and the Jews that were under their obedience, whose Captains
were Pitholaus and Malichus. They took also those Allies whom Antipater had
hired, and in this equipage they came against Alexander. Gabinius also seconded
them with his Troops. Hereupon Alexander drew nearer with his Army toward
Jerusalem, where giving battle to the Romans, he lost about 3000 of his
followers, and the like number of his men were led away Prisoners. After this,
Gabinius repaired to Alexandrion, and invited those that held it to yield,
promising them pardon for the Rebellion they had begun. And many of his Enemies
having encamped themselves before the Fort, the Romans charged them: in which
conflict Marcus Antonius behaved himself very valiantly, Gabinius causes
diverse Cities in Jewry to be repaired that were defaced.
having killed several Gabinius left a part of his Army in that place, to the
end that during the siege thereof, he might go and visit the Country of Judea:
he commanded therefore all those Cities which in his journey he found either
desolate or destroyed, to be repaired; for that Samaria, Azot, Scythopolis,
Anthedon, Raphia, Dora, Marissa and Gaza, with diverse others, were new built:
so that through the obedience that was given to Gabinius's command, it came to
pass that the Cities were safely inhabited, which had layen long time before
desert.

And after Gabinius had behaved himself in this manner in the Country, he
returned to Alexandrion. Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 11. al. 12.
Whilst he thus insisted about the siege, Alexander sent Ambassadors unto him,
demanding pardon for his offenses, and restoring into his hands the Castles of
Hircania and Machaeron, Alexandrion, and other Castles razed.
and finally that of Alexandrion, which Gabinius levelled with the ground. And
whereas Alexander's mother came unto him (who favored the Roman faction, and
whose husband and children were kept in Prison in Rome) she obtained all that
which she requested at his hands: and after he had carefully and friendly
disposed of her affairs, he led Hircanus to Jerusalem, to take charge of the
Temple and Priesthood. He ordained also five judgment seats and places of
session, Five pr^^^ial sieges in Jewry
and divided the Province into answerable parts: for the one answered in
Jerusalem, the second at Gadara, the third in Amatha, the fourth at Jericho,
and the fifth at Saphora, which is a Town of Galilee. By this means the Jews
were delivered of their Monarchy, and lived under an Aristocracy, or government
of the Nobility.


Aristobulus being Prisoner at Rome, makes his escape with Antigonus, one of
his sons, and comes to Judea. The Romans overcome him in battle. He retreateth
into Alexandrion, where he is besieged and taken. Gabinius sends him back
Prisoner to Rome. He defeats Alexander, Aristobulus's son, in a battle, returns
to Rome, and leaves ^rassus in his place.
BUt Aristobulus flying from Rome, Hedio. and Ruffinus cap. 12. al. 13.
returns to Jewry, and resolved to rebuild the Castle Alexandrion, which not
long since was ruinated. Against him Gabinius sent out certain Men of War with
their Captains, Aristobulus returning from Rome, seeks to reestablish
Alexandrion.
namely, Sisenna, Antonius and Servilius, both to keep him from the possession
of the place, and to apprehend and surprise him likewise. For many Jews
resorted unto him, being drawn thereunto by the ancient Reputation that he had,
who desired likewise revolutions and changes. Pitholaus also (who was
established Lieutenant General in Jerusalem) of his own accord came unto him,
with a 1000 Men well armed: but the other that were retired within, for the
most part were not sufficiently furnished with Arms; for Aristobulus making his
reckoning to seize Machaeron, dismissed those followers of his that were
disarmed, and were unapt for any execution, and retaining only 8000 well armed
Men, he marched thither. But the Romans Aristobulus overcome in battle by the
Romans.
fought desperately with him, and overcame both him and his; notwithstanding
their valiant resistance, about 5000 of them were killed, and the rest
dispersed, wandering here and there, where they could best secure themselves:
but Aristobulus fled to Machaeron with more than a 1000 followers, and
fortified the place. And though his affairs had very slender success, yet he
lost not his hope; but after he had endured the siege some two days, and
received many Wounds, he was taken Prisoner, and with his son Antigonus (who
fled from Rome with him) led away Captive by Gabinius Such was Aristobulus's
fortune, Aristobulus sent back again Prisoner to Rome, with his son Antigonus
that he was sent Prisoner back again to Rome, and there kept in bonds after he
had been King and High Priest three years and six months. A man in that dignity
both magnificent and magnanimous, yet the Senate sent back his Gabinius's
letters) who had promised their delivery to their mother, when she surrendered
the Castles into his hands: whereupon they returned into Jewry. Aristobulus's
sons discharged
But Gabinius, intending to make War against the Parthians, and having already
past Euphrates, changed his resolution, and determined to return into Egypt,
and re-establish Ptolomey, as it is declared in another place. In this
expedition also he was supplied by Antipater's means, with Victuals, Money and
Ammunition; and by his advice, those Jews that inhabit Pelusium (who kept as it
were the very entry into Egypt) were reconciled to him. When Gabinius returned
back out of Egypt, he found all Syria full of Tumult and Rebellion. Antipater
relieveth Gabinius in his journey to Egypt, to install Ptolomey.
For Alexander, Aristobulus's son, taking once more possession of the Kingdom,
caused diverse Jews from day to day to revolt; and foraging the Romans whom he
met withal, and besieged all those that fled into the mount Garizim. Gabinius
seeing the affairs of Syria in that state, sent Antipater before him unto them,
to appease these commotions; and to cure them of their phrenzy, Alexander,
Aristobulus's son, usurpeth the Monarchy.
and if it were possible to reduce them to a better mind: for Antipater was
really a very discreet man. He repairing unto them, moderated diverse of them,
Alexander, overcome by Gabinius.
and brought them under obedience: but it was impossible for him to reconcile
Alexander; for he having 30000 Men with him, came forth to meet with Gabinius,
with whom he fought, and was overcome, with the loss of 10000 of his Men, near
unto the Mount Itabyr.

After that Gabinius had ordered all things in Jerusalem by Antipater's advice,
he presently Nabathaeans, The conquest of the Nabatheans.
whom he overcame in battle. He sent back also Mithridates and Orsanes (Men of
good account among the Parthians) who had retired themselves unto him,
Mithridates and Orsanes.
causing a report to be spread, that they were fled with Gabinius. Now when
Gabinius had performed great and magnificent exploits in War, he returned to
Rome, surrendering the government to Crassus. Nicholas Damascene, and Strabo of
Cappadocia (who differs in nothing from Nicholas) have written of these
Expeditions of Pompey and Gabinius in Judea.

CHAP. XII. The year of the World, 3941. before Christ's Nativity. 53.

Crassus robs the Temple of Jerusalem. He is defeated by the Parthians.
Cassius retireth into Syria, and defends it against the Parthians. Antipater's
great credit, his marriage, and his children.
CRassus intending to make War against the Parthians, Hedio and Ruffinus chap
13. al. 14.
came into Jewry, and took away with him the sacred money (which Pompey had not
touched, which amounted to the sum of 2000 Talents:) Marcus Crassus in his
expedition against the Parthians, takes the Treasure out of the Temple of
Jerusalem.
He spoilt the Temple also of all the gold that was in it, to the sum of 8000
Talents. He took away a wedge of solid gold, to the weight of 300 Jews,
contains two pounds and an half. He that delivered him this wedge was a
Priest, and the Keeper of the sacred Treasure, called Eleazar, who gave him the
same upon no malicious intent (for he was a virtuous and just man;) but whereas
he had the custody of the Tapestries of the Temple committed to his hands
(which were both admirable to behold, by reason of their beauty and worth, and
withal were in like sort tied and fastened to this beam) and perceiving that
Cr^ssus used all means to gather all the money he could, he fearing lest he
should have seized on all the ornaments of the Temple, gave him this beam for a
Ransom to redeem all the rest: binding him, upon the delivery thereof, by an
oath, that he should not take any thing away that was in the Temple, but should
content himself with that only piece of Crassus breaks his oath.
so that no man knew thereof but only Eleazar. Crassus therefore took his beam,
Whence the Temple of Jerusalem grew so rich.
as if he determined to leave all other things in the Temple; yet
notwithstanding he falsified his oath, and carried away whatsoever was therein.
Neither is it to be wondered at, that there was so great Riches found in our
Temple, since all those Jews that were dispersed through the face of the whole
earth, Strabo of Cappadocia.
and all those that feared God (both in Asia and Europe) for a long time
offered their Presents in that place. The greatness and multitude whereof
wants no testimony: neither is it feigned in way of ostentation, but diverse
other Historians make mention thereof; and, amongst the rest, Strabo of
Cappadocia, speaks after this manner.

Mithridates sent Men into the Isle of Coos, to fetch from thence the money
that Queen Cleopatra had laid up there, and 800 Talents of the Jews. But we
have no public money, but that which is dedicated unto God. It is therefore a
thing most manifest, that the Jews that inhabit Asia* transported this money
into Coos* for fear of Mithridates: For it is not likely that they who
inhabited Judea, and had a City so strong, and a Temple so well fortified,
should send their money to Coos. Neither is it credible likewise, that the Jews
remaining in Alexandria should do it, for that they feared not to fall into
danger through this War of Mithridates.

The same Strabo also says in another place, That when Sylla passed through
Greece to make War against Mithridates and Lucullus, he sent Men unto Cyrene,
which was troubled by Cyrenians: one of them were Citizens, the second were
Laborers, the third were Strangers, and the fourth were Jews, who at this
present are intermingled through all Cities; neither is there an inhabited place
throughout the world; neither was there any Nation that inhabit the same,
wherein these have not set foot and fortified. For both Egypt and Cyrene (being
under the subjection of the same Princes, and diverse other Nations, conformed
themselves to their customs, and nourished assemblies of Jews, and advanced
them, and more and more used the Jewish ordinances. It appears therefore that
there was a Colony of Jews in Egypt. A great part likewise of the City of
Alexandria is assigned to the Jewish Nation. They have likewise their peculiar
Magistrate, who governs the people, ends, Egypt, for that the Jews had
their original amongst the Egyptians; and for that Judea is near unto Egypt,
from whence the Jews are descended: And as for Cyrene, they have entered it, in
that it bordereth with that Country which is under the obedience of the
Egyptians, (in like manner as Judea does) or rather for that in times past it
appertained to the same Kingdom. Thus far Strabo.

After that Crassus had disposed all things according to his own pleasure,
Crassus slain in Parthia.
he removed and marched forward to make War against the Parthians, Cassius
resists the Parthia^s.
where both he and all his Army were destroyed (as is declared in another
place) As for Cassius, he retired himself into Syria, and took possession
thereof, to the end he might affront the Parthians; who being Tire, he at
length arrived in Judea, where upon his first entrance he took the City of
Tarichaea, and led away from thence 30000 Prisoners. He put Pitholaus also to
death, for having maintained Aristobulus's faction. All which he did by
Antipater's procurement and persuasion, Antipater's Wife and Children.
who was in great credit with him, and who also at that time was highly
esteemed amongst the Idumaeans, amongst whom he married his Wife, who was
descended of one of the most famous families of Arabia, her name was Cypron, by
whom he had these four sons, Phasaelus and Herod (who after was made King)
Joseph and Pheroras; and one daughter called Salome. This Antipater also made
alliance with other Princes, and especially with the Arabian, to whose custody
he committed his children, during the time Aristobulus. But Cassius gathered
another Army, and marched toward Euphrates, to go against the Parthians, as it
is specified and recorded by other Writers.

CHAP. XIII.
Pompey causes Alexander to be beheaded, Aristobulus's son. Philippion, son of
Ptolomey Mennaeus, Prince of Chalcis, marries Alexandra, Aristobulus's
daughter. His father Ptolomey puts him to death, and marries this Princess.
Caesar (being Lord of Rome) Pompey and the Senate being fled on the other side
of the Ionian Sea, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 14. al. 15.
set Aristobulus at liberty, determining to send him into Syria with two
Legions, as being a sufficient man to govern the State Affairs in those parts.
Nevertheless, Aristobulus failed of his hopes and authority he expected at
Caesar's hands: Aristobulus delivered out of Prison, is poisoned.
For Pompey's adherents prevented and poisoned him, so that he was buried by
those of Caesar's faction. His body was kept embalmed with honey for a long
time, until that Antonius sent it into Jewry, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 15. al.
16.
to be entombed amongst the Kings and Princes.

Scipio, by Pompey's commandment, caused Alexander Aristobulus sons head to be
cut off, charging him with some misdemeanors which he had committed against the
Romans; he was executed in Antioch. The slaughter of Aristobulus's son.
Ptolomey, the son of Mennaeus, who governed in Chalcis (at Libanus) took his
brothers, and sent his son Philippion to Ascalon to Aristobulus's Wife,
commanding her to send her son Antigonus and his daughters; one of which,
called Alexandra, was beloved by Philippion, and married by him: but afterward
he being slain, Pompey Philippions father married her, and continued the
careful maintenance of his brother and sisters-in-law.

CHAP. XIV.
Antipater, by Hircanus's order, assisteth Caesar mightily in the Egyptian War,
and shows much valor.
Pompey's death, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 16. al. 17.
and that Victory which Caesar had obtained against him, Antipater (Governor of
Judea by the commandment of Hircanus) was very useful unto Caesar. Antipater
gathers Soldiers out of Syria for Caesar's service.
For whereas Mithridates the Pergamenian brought him certain supplies, and
could not bring them on, by reason of an arm of Nilus passing through Pelusium;
but was constrained to stay at Ascalon: Antipater came unto him, and brought
with him 3000 Soldiers, and dealt so with the Princes of Arabia to associate
them with Caesar, that by his means, all they of Syria gave him their
assistance, and never altered their affection that they bear unto Caesar. These
were Jamblicus a great Lord, and Ptolomey his son; and Tholomaeus, the son of
Sohemus, dwelling on the mount of Libanus, and well nigh all Mithridates being
departed from Syria, came to Pelusium, where being repulsed and excluded by the
Citizens, he besieged the City. Antipater in this War behaved himself
valiantly; Antipater helps Mithridates to take Pelusium.
and after he had beaten down a pane of the Wall, he first of all set forward
to enter the City. Whilst Pelusium was in this estate, the Jews that inhabited
Egypt in the Country of Onias, The Jews of Onias's Country, are confederated
with Caesar.
would neither grant passage to Antipater, nor Mithridates, that marched
toward Caesar. But Antipater, who was of their Nation, persuaded them to take
their parts, showing them the Letter of the High Priest Hircanus, in which he
invited them to be friends unto Caesar, and exhorted them to furnish his Army
with whatsoever they stood in need of; Memphis in Egypt.
so that seeing that Antipater and the High Priest were agreed together, they
submitted themselves. They that dwelt round about Memphis, Mithridates also
unto them, who came and received them into his favor.

CHAP. XV. The year of the World, 3917. before Christ's Nativity, 47.

Antipater continues to acquire great reputation in the Egyptian War. Caesar
comes to Syria, establishes Hircanus in the High Priesthood, and conferreth
great honors upon Antipater, notwithstanding Antigonus Aristobulus's sons
complaints.
WHen he was come to a place called Delta, The conflict of the Egyptians with
Mithridates at Delta.
he fought with the Enemies in a place which is called the Camp of the Jews: in
which battle, Mithridates led the right Wing, and Antipater the left. Being
hotly engaged, the Wing that Mithridates commanded, Alias cap. 18.
began to give ground, and was like to have been utterly routed, had no^
Antipater Egyptians that were Conquerors to flight, and restored Mithridates.
And pursued them so far, that he got their Camp, and called Mithridates to take
part of the prey that he had recovered from the fugitive Enemy. Mithridates
commends Antipater's service to Caesar.
Mithridates lost 800 of his men in this battle, but Antipater lost but 50.
Mithridates wrote hereof unto Caesar, and showed him that Antipater was the
cause of the victory, and of their preservation: so that Caesar ever afterward
highly commended him, and in all his War made use of Antipater in his most
dangerous attempts, so that Antipater was grievously wounded in diverse fights,
and behaved himself bravely.

Now after that the War was finished, Caesar came by Sea into Syria, and
bestowed great Hircanus, to whom he confirmed the High Priesthood, as on
Antipater, Caesar confirms Hircanus in the Priesthood, and makes Antipater a
Citizen of Rome.
whom he made a free Citizen of Rome, and granted him all other privileges
belonging thereunto. Diverse report that Hircanus himself was in this War, and
that he came into Egypt, which Strabo the Cappadocian affirms, speaking after
this manner, by the authority of Asinius; after that Mithridates had entered
Egypt, with Hircanus the High Priest of the Jews. The same Strabo in another
place speaks thus by the authority of Hypsicrates, Strabo.
That Mithridates went alone; and that Antipater was sent for into Ascalon,
where he prepared 3000 Soldiers, Asinius.
because he was Governor of Judea, and encouraged the rest of the Governors;
Hypsicrates.
and Hircanus the High Priest also had a part in this War. Thus far Strabo. At
that time came Antigonus, Aristobulus's son, to Caesar, lamenting his father,
who had been Scipio, beseeching him to have compassion of him, Antigonus,
Aristobulus 's son, accuses Hircanus and Antipater before Caesar.
being thrust out of his Kingdom. He accused Hircanus and Antipater also, for
their tyrannical and violent government over their Nation, and injuries offered
to himself. Antipater being at that time present, answered for himself to those
points wherein he was accused; declaring, That Antigonus and his friends were
factious and seditious men, Antipater's answer to his objection.
as for himself how much he had done, and how many exploits he had executed in
the late War, whereof Caesar himself was a witness. Moreover, he avowed that
Aristobulus had been justly led twice into captivity to Rome, Antipater made
Governor over Judea.
for that he had been always an Enemy, and no ways well affectioned toward
the Romans. And as for his brother, who was beheaded by Scipio, he averred that
he was justly punished by him for his Roberies, and not injuriously and
outragiously, as he pretended. After that Antipater had spoken to this effect,
Caesar declared Hircanus High Priest, and gave Antipater any government
whatsoever he liked best: who, according to his choice, was appointed Governor
of Judea.

CHAP. XVI.
Caesar gives leave to Hircanus to rebuild the walls of Jerusalem. Honors
conferred on Hircanus by the Republic of Athens. Antipater causes the
rebuilding the walls of Jerusalem.
MOreover, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 17. al. 18.
Caesar permitted Hircanus to repair the Walls of Jerusalem (according to his
humble suit.) For after that Pompey had beaten them down, they lay levelled
with the earth; Hirc^nus, by Caesar's permission, repaireth the walls of
Jerusalem.
and he commanded the Consuls at Rome, that his Decree should be Registered in
the Capitol, in these words following.

Valerius the son of Lucius the Praetor, has related to the Senate (assembled
in the Temple of Concord the 13 day of December) in the presence of L.
Caponius, the son of Lucius, and Caius Papyrius Quirinus; The Senates Decree,
as touching their league with the Jews.
the requests made by Alexander the son of Jason, Numenius the son of
Antiochus, and Alexander the son of Dorotheus, Ambassadors in the behalf of the
Jews, Men of good Repute, and our Allies, and proposed by them for renewing the
ancient favors they have received from the Romans: and in testimony of the
alliance, have brought us a vial and The year of the World, 3919. before
Christ's Nativity, 45.
and without any offense: And we have thought good to make friendship and
alliance with them, and to grant them all that which they require, in accepting
the buckler brought by them. This happened in the time that Hircanus was
High Priest and Prince, and in the ninth year of his Princedom, in the month of
July.

Hircanus was in like sort honored by the people of Athens, for many favors
that they received at his hands. They sent him also a Decree, which they
ratified in his behalf, the tenor whereof ensues:

The year wherein Dionysius the son of Asclepiades was Governor, Hircanus
honored by the Athenians.
and Priest, in the month of July, and on the 20 day, this Arrest or Decree of
the Athenians, was delivered to the Governors by the Praetor Agathocles. Eucles
the son of Menander the Alimusian, has written March in the general Assembly,
and placed it in the Theater, and the suffrages were gathered by Dorotheus the
High Priest, with the chief assistants of the people. Dionysius the son of
Dionysius published the same: Since that Hircanus the son of Alexander, the
High Priest and Prince of the Jews, continued his good affection toward all
the people, and in especial toward every Citizen of Athens, and has showed
them many friendships, receiving with all humanity those Athenians that come
unto him, whether they resort thither as Ambassadors, or for any other
particular occasion whatsoever, and sends them back after they have provided
them of safe conduct, whereof we have heretofore had testimony by the report of
Theodosius, the son of Theodorus Simeus; who has made recital unto the people
of his worthiness, and of the will he has to do us all the good that is
possible: We have thought good to honor Demus, and the Graces: Our will is
also, that this be proclaimed by a Herald in the Theater, during the
Bacchanals, when the new Tragedies are played. Likewise in the solemnities
Panathean and Eleusynian, and at the public Exercises: We will also that the
Governors provide, that all that which we have advised for the honor, favor,
affection and good will toward this man, as he has well deserved, be
diligently performed, to the end that thereby it may appear how our Nation
rewards, and entertains such men that are virtuous; and to the intent, that the
honor we impart unto him, may encourage others to be the better affected
toward us. It is likewise decreed, that amongst all the Athenians there be
certain Ambassadors chosen, who shall, bear this Decree unto him, and exhort
Let this suffice to express the honors bestowed on Hircanus by the People of
Rome, and the Citizens of Athens.

After that Caesar had given order for the affairs of Syria, Hedio and
Ruffinus, cap. 18.
he returned back by Sea. And as soon as Antipater had accompanied Caesar out
of Syria, Caesar departs out of Syria.
he returned into Judea, and suddenly built up the Walls of Jerusalem, which
Pompey had beaten down; and in riding a Circuit about the Country, he pacified
the troubles not only by threatenings, but by good advice also, Antipater
pacifieth all occasion of commotion in Judea.
which he gave every one to live in peace; assuring them, That if they
submitted themselves to Hircanus their Prince, they should live happily, and
enjoy their possessions without any trouble: and that if they hoped to advance
themselves by any new commotion, Hircanus a Tyrant; and instead of the Romans
and Caesar to be their Governors, they should find them to be their most
hateful Enemies: for they would not suffer, that any thing should be altered
that they had established. By these, and such like admonitions, he kept and
continued all the Country in peace.

CHAP. XVII. The year of the World, 3921. before Christ's Nativity, 43.

Antipater gains great repute by his virtue. His eldest son, Phasaelus, is
made Governor of Jerusalem; and Herod, his second son, is made Governor of
Galilee. Herod causes to be executed several Robbers. Some great men's
jealousy against Antipater and his children. They made Hircanus accuse Herod
for those that he had put to death. He compares in judgment, and then
retireth. He comes to besiege Jerusalem, which he had taken, if Antipater and
Phasaelus had not hindered him. Hircanus renews his alliance with the Romans.
The testimony of the Romans esteem and affection for Hircanus and the Jews.
Caesar is
ANtipater perceiving that Hircanus was slow and idle, he declared and
appointed Phasaelus, his eldest son, Alias cap. 20.
Governor over Jerusalem, and the Country thereabout: As for Herod (who was
very young, Antipater makes Phasaelus Governor in Jerusalem, and Herod in
Galilee.
for he was not at that time above 15 years old) he committed Galilee unto his
charge; who, although young in years, yet he was ripe in courage and conduct,
which he witnessed in apprehending Ezechias, who was the chief of those
Thieves, who ranged over all Syria; he put him to death, with diverse of his
Accomplices. Which act of his got him esteem and credit among the Syrians: for by
that means he freed their Country of all those Robbers, according as they
desired. He was therefore praised through the Villages and Cities for this
action, Herod executes Ezekias and his followers for robberies.
as he that had given them peace, Sextus Caesar, who was Uncle to Caesar the
Great. Furthermore, his brother Phasaelus was encouraged to follow his noble
actions, and enforced himself to obtain no less reputation than he had; Sextus
Caesar Governor of Syria.
for which cause, he strove to get the good will of the common People in
Jerusalem, and governed the City with such discretion, that he acted all things
to every man's content, The form of Phasaelus's government.
and abused not his power to any private man's injury: which was the cause that
Antipater was honored by the whole Nation, with no less respect than if he had
been their only Lord and Sovereign. Antipater, notwithstanding his high
authority, was always faithful to Hircanus.
Yet did not this eminency of estate so far distract him, that he forgot the
love and duty he ought to Hircanus (as in such like occasions it oftentimes
falls out) notwithstanding diverse of the greatest amongst the Jews (seeing
Antipater and his sons so highly advanced both by the public favor of the
whole Nation, as also by the Revenues that they drew both out of Jewry, as also
by the employment of Hircanus's money) were grievously incensed against them.
Antipater wins the Romans hearts by Hircanus's money, and draws the Jews
into hatred.
For Antipater had made friendship with the Emperors of Rome, and having
persuaded Hircanus to send them money, he had appropriated the same unto
himself, sending it not in Hircanus's name, but in his own; which though
Hircanus knew, yet he was not moved therewith, but rather well contented. But
that which most of all terrified the Princes of the Jews, was, to behold the
violent and audacious nature of Herod, who governed after a tyrannical manner:
The Jews accuse Antipater and Herod before Hircanus.
For this cause they addressed themselves to Hircanus, and accused Antipater
openly. How long (said they) will you dissemble, and wink at those things that
are daily practiced? See you not that Antipater and his sons, possess, in
effect, the Royal Power and Authority of the Kingdom, and that you have only
the name? Assure your self that you are not out of danger, in contemning thus
both your self and your Kingdom. For Antipater and his sons are not now your
Substitutes, neither intend they your profit, or your Countries good
(whatsoever your opinion is of them) they are publicly acknowledged Lords and
Masters. For Herod (Antipater 's son) has already put Ezechias and his
Confederates to death, and thereby transgressed our Laws, which forbid to take
away any man's life (how wicked soever he be) except he be first of all
condemned to death by the Council: Herod called in question appears with a
great train.
and notwithstanding this, he has been so bold, as to do justice without your
authority. When Hircanus heard this, he grew angry (for their mothers, whom
Herod had slain, had incensed him by their continual Exclamations in the
Temple, Herod to account before the Council, of that which he had done.) So
that Hircanus moved by these Women, called Herod to answer unto those
accusations which were objected against him. Who made his appearance,
forewarned by his father not to present himself after the manner of a private
person, but well attended and accompanied to withstand all inconveniences.
Sextus Caesar writes to Hircanus to discharge Herod.
After he had taken order for the affairs in Galilee (according as he thought
fit) and that he himself was sufficiently accompanied to make his Voyage, with
such a Guard as neither might terrify Hircanus with number, nor leave himself
unsecured in danger, he resorted to Jerusalem. Moreover, Sextus, Caesar,
Governor of Syria, wrote unto Hircanus to absolve him, adding Hircanus occasion
to deliver Herod in despite of the Council: the rather also, for that he loved
him as entirely as his son. Therefore when Herod presented himself before the
Council The year of the World, 3922. before Christ's Nativity, 42.
all of them were astonished, and none of those that accused him in his
absence, durst open their mouths to speak one word, but all of them kept
silence, not knowing what do. Now whilst they stood upon these terms, a certain
man, called Sameas, who was of upright dealing, and for this cause was not
daunted, arose and spoke to this purpose, Sameas one of the Judges foretells
Hircanus and his counselors of their imminent death by Herod's means.
Dread King, and you honorable assistants, I could never yet remember, that
ever any man which was called in question to defend his cause before us, has
appeared in this equipage; and I suppose that none of you can say, that the
like has ever happened: but whosoever comes into this place to receive
judgment, he presented himself with humility and fear, with a countenance
prepared to implore mercy, having his hair long, and his garment black: but
this gallant Herod, accused of murder (and this for occasion called before us)
who could imagine that he should appear before us in a purple robe, having his
hairs trimmed; and besides that, a guard of armed men about him? with an intent
that if we condemn him, according to Law, he may put us to death without Law,
that after he has violated all right, Herod honors Sameas.
he may escape and save himself. But I blame not Herod in this action, for that
he has a more inward regard of his particular profit, than of the Law: but I
accuse both you and the King, Herod admonished by Hircanus, saves himself by
flight, and appears no more in judgment.
who have given him such assurance. Know therefore, that there is a sovereign
God, that will one day punish both you and the King, and him whom you will
deliver by the Kings means. And so fell it out as he had said: For as soon as
Herod had obtained the Kingdom, he put all those of the council to death, and
Hircanus himself likewise, only Sameas was exempted: for he esteemed him
mightily, because of his wisdom and Herod and Sosius, Sameas persuaded the
people to receive Herod, telling them, that by reason of their sins and
offenses, they could not escape from him; whereof we will speak in time and
place. Hircanus perceiving that the Judges were inclined to condemn Herod,
deferred the sentence till the next day, and sent secretly unto Herod,
counselling him to fly out of the City, assuring him, that there was no other
means to save his life. Thus he posted to Damascus (as if he had fled from the
Kings presence) and presenting himself before Sextus Caesar, after he had
assured his person, he resolved with himself, that if the council should call
him once more to answer, he would not obey them. But after his departure the
council was displeased with Hircanus, and endeavored to persuade him, Alias,
chap. 11. Sextus Caesar sells his Presidents place to Herod for ready money.
he was so negligent and void of foresight. When Sextus had made Herod Governor
of Coelosyria (which estate he sold unto him for ready money) Hircanus was
afraid lest Herod should make War against him: neither passed there long time
before the effect grew answerable to his fear. For Herod marched forth against
him, with a great Army, supposing himself to be much wronged by the assignation
he had sent him, and in that he was summoned to give a reason of his actions
before the council. Herod marches against Hircanus with a great Army, and is
dissuaded from War, by his father Antipater, and his brother Phasaelus.
But his father Antipater, and his brother Phasaelus came forth against him, to
hinder his approach toward Jerusalem, striving to appease his fury, and
counselling him not to attempt any thing by way of action; but that contenting
himself that he had threatened and affrighted Hircanus, he should not attempt
Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 10.
and no displeasure: who though he made some appearance and shadow of severity,
Hircanus Ambassadors to Caesar.
touching the accusation intended against him; yet notwithstanding, it
proceeded not so much from him, as from his evil counselors. Herod in some
sort pacified by these persuasions, The Jews much honored by the Kings of
Europe and Asia, Julius Caesar testifies in a brazen Pillar, that the Jews
were free citizens of Alexandria.
obeyed his father, supposing that it sufficed him, in regard of his Jews at
that time. But Caesar arriving at Rome, prepared himself to set sail toward
Afric, with an intent to make War against Scipio and Cato. Hircanus sent
Ambassadors to him, beseeching him to confirm the amity and alliance that he
had with him. But now I think it very convenient to declare all the
Prerogatives and alliances that the Romans and the^^ Emperors made with those
of our Nation, to the end that all other people might know, that the Kings of
Asia and Europe have been well affected toward us, and have made great account
of our valor and fidelity. And although diverse men ill affected to wards us,
Julius Caesar's Decree as touching the honors, immunities and privileges
granted to the Jews.
believe not that which the Macedonians and Persians have written of us,
because the same matters are not extant in all places, neither set down in
public writings. Barbarians; yet it is manifest that they cannot contradict
the declarations made by the Romans which are manifestly affixed in public
places in Cities; as likewise at this present they are engraven in the Capitol
in brazen pillars. Julius Caesar in like manner in a brazen pillar erected by
him, has declared unto the Jews that inhabited Alexandria, The year of the
World, 3922. before Christ's Nativity, 24.
that they were free Citizens therein, Julius Caesar, made in the favor of
Hircanus and our Nation.

Caius Julius Caesar Emperor, High Priest, Dictator the second Time, To the
Governors, Senate, and People of the Sidonians, Health: If you are well, we are
in health, both our selves and our Army.
I have sent you the copy of an inscription, registered in favor of Hircanus,
Alexanders son, High Priest, and Prince of the Jews, to the end it may be
placed among public Hircanus, Alexanders son, the Jew, both at this present,
as also heretofore, as well in Peace as in War, has expressed his fidelity
toward us and our estate, as diverse Commanders of our Armies yield testimony
of him, and for that in our last Alexandrine War, he seconded us in the battle
with Fifteen hundred Men; and having been sent by us to Mithridates, has
surmounted all those of his Company in valor. For these causes my will is, That
Hircanus, Alexanders son and his successors, be Princes of the Jews: and
further, that they continue always in the High Priesthood, according to the
ordinance and custom of their Country: and that both he and his children be
our associates; and be enrolled likewise, as our chiefest friends: and all
Jews, be attributed to him and his, and if there happen any difference touching
the discipline of the Jews, our pleasure is, that it be determined by him. And
as for the munitions of War, and the money to be levied for the entertainment
of Soldiers, we think it not fit that they should be charged. The Decrees made
and granted by Caius Caesar being Consul, are these:

That the sons of Hircanus be Princes over the Nation of the Jews, and enjoy
the places granted unto them. That the High Priest and Prince of the Jews give
favor and aid unto those that are offended. That Ambassadors be sent to
Hircanus, the son of Alexander, High Priest of the Jews, to treat of amity and
association with us. That a brazen table be erected in the Capitol: and
likewise at Sidon, at Tire, and at Ascalon in the Temples, wherein

Caius Caesar Emperor, Dictator, Consul, for the good of the Senate and people
of Rome, has granted to the honor, virtue, and humanity of Hircanus the son
of Alexander, that both he and his children shall be Highpriests in Jerusalem,
and of the whole Nation according to the Rites and Customs whereby their
ancestors have enjoyed the Priesthood.

Caius Caesar, Consul the fifth time, has ordained that they shall inhabit
Jerusalem, and build again the Walls of the City; and that Hircanus (Alexanders
son, the High Priest and Jews) shall govern as he thinks fit, and that every
second year of their tribute, there be a part deducted out of the rent they
owe, and that they be exempt from all other impositions and tributes.

Caius Caesar, twice Emperor, has ordained, that the Jews shall contribute
every year for their Cities, except Joppa; he acquitteth them also every
seventh year (which they call the year of the rest) because that therein, they
neither reap nor sow, neither gather the fruit of Trees. His further pleasure
is, That every second year, they bring their Tributes unto Sidon, which shall
be the fourth part of that which shall be sown; and besides this, that they pay
the tenths to Hircanus and his sons, which they have paid unto their
Predecessors unto this day. Commanding that no man, whether he be Governor,
Captain, or Ambassador, or Judaea, or draw any therehence: neither exact any
money, whether it be for Garrisons in Winter, or for any other cause, but that
the Jews be exempt from all troubles in all places, and enjoy all that which
they have had, bought, and possessed, It is our pleasure also, that the City of
Joppe be under their government (which they have ever enjoyed since the
beginning of their league with the Romans.) We further grant, that Hircanus,
Alexanders, son and his children, receive the tribute of that City (as well by
them that till the land, as by the gates, entries, and customs of merchandises
that are transportod unto Sidon) Twenty thousand, six hundred seventy and five
bushels every year, exempting the seventh year, which is called the year of
rest, wherein they neither labor nor gather any fruit of the Trees. It is the
Senates pleasure also* that Hircanus and the Jews have those Villages which are
in the great champain, The year of the World, 3922. before Christ's Nativity,
42.
Their will is likewise, That the same Laws which have from the beginning been
respectively observed between the Jews, and their Highpriests, be continued;
and whatsoever benefits were granted them, by consent of the Senate and People
of Rome. Moreover it shall be lawful for those of L^dda, to use the same Rites
and Privileges also. And as touching the demains, places, and habitations that
have appertained to the Kings of Syria and Phoenicia, by the gift made unto
them at such time as they were allied to the Romans: the Senate (I say)
ordains, That Hircanus the High Priest and Prince of the Jews possess the
same. It is lawful also for Hircanus and his sons, and their Ambassadors sent
by them, to behold the tiltings and gladiators, and to sit among the Senators,
and that at all times, wherein they shall require to be brought into the Senate
by the Dictator, or by the Master of the Horse, they

Caius Caesar, Emperor, the fourth time Consul* and the fifth time Dictator for
the term of life, has ratified these things, as touching Hircanus the son of
Alexander, the High Priest and Prince of the Jews: Because that the Generals,
my Predecessors, have witnessed as well in the Provinces, as before the Senate
and People of Rome, both of the good deserts of Hircanus High Priest and Prince
of the Jews, and that Nation also, toardsw us and our State; and whereas both
the Senate and People of Rome have gratified them for the same: we think it
convenient also to have the same recorded, and to give order, that Hircanus
Rome, according to the measure of their loyalties and good deserts.

Julius Caius Caesar, Roman Consul, To the Governors, Senate and People of
Patras Health: The Jews are come unto us to Delos, with some of the Colonies of
their Countrymen, in the presence of your Ambassadors, and assure us of a
Decree made by you, whereby you forbid them the practice and ancient use of
their sacrifices and oblations: I think it not fit that you make any such
Decrees against our friends, and associates; neither that you forbid them to
live according to their fashions and customs; or to employ their purses
together in supplying their feasts and sacrifices; since in Rome it self they
are not interdicted or forbidden to perform the same. For at such time as Caius
Caesar Consul, had prohibited by Edict, That in celebrating the Bacchanals, no
one should dance about the City; yet were the Jews alone exempted from this
inhibition: and neither have they been prohibited to contribute, neither to
banquet together* My self also in like case, in the defense I have made to
forbid all other societies, have excepted the Jews therein, and have given them
leave to assemble and demean themselves according to the customs, ceremonies,
and ordinances of their Country. If therefore you have made any such Decrees
against our friends and associates, you shall do well to disanul them, by
reason of the virtue of the Jews, and the forwardness they have protested in
performance of our service.

After Caius Caesar's death, M. Antonius and P. Dolobella, bring Hircanue's
Ambassadors into the Senate.
the Consuls, Marcus Antonius, and Publius Dolobella, assembled the Senate, and
having brought in Hircanus's Ambassadors, they declared their request, and
contracted amity with them: The Senate likewise ordained, that each thing
should Dolobella having received Hircanus's Letters, sent them throughout all
Asia, to Ephesus (which is the Metropolitan City of Asia) in these The General
Dolobella to the Princes, Dolobellas's Letters to the Ephesians.
Senate, and People of Ephesus, Health: terms: [The General or Emperor
Dolobella; (this word Emperor was in those times a title of honor conferred on
those Generals who had obtained some great Victory.] Alexander the son of
Theodore, Ambassador to Hircanus, the High Priest and Prince of the Jews, has
given us to understand, that his Subjects cannot go to Wars, because it is not
lawful for them to bear Arms, nor travel on the Sabbath day; as also for that
they may not seek for their victuals and other necessaries on that day,
according to the custom of their Country: for this cause I grant them
exemption from the War, as my Predecessors have done; permitting them See here
how Dolobella honored Hircanus when he sent his Ambassadors unto him.

Lucius Lentulus Consul* pronounces that the Jews that are Citizens of Rome,
Lucius Lu^ulllus in the French, Lentulus in the Latin, being Consul, makes an
Edict in the behalf of the Jews.
and that observe and offer the sacrifices of the Jews in Ephesus before the
Tribunal, be exempt from warfare, by reason of their Religion. Given the
nineteenth of October. There are besides these many other Edicts and Ordinances
made to this purpose, by the same Generals, and by the Roman Senate, in favor
of Hircanus and our Nation, and some they consider those that we have here
inserted. The year of the World, 39^2. Before Christ's Nativity, 42.
For we have showed more express and lively Romans, and such as at this day are
affixed to Pillars, and engraven in Tables of Brass on the Capitol; and that
hereafter shall remain affixed for ever: For which cause, I have thought it to
be a frivolous and unnecessary matter to insert all in this place; Josephus's
conclusion concerning these Edicts.
and I think that there is not any man of so sinister judgment, that will not
believe how much we have been esteemed by the Romans, as they have given
testimonies by diverse Decrees published in our behalf; neither may any man
suppose that we lie, considering the truth of that which we publish.

Thus have we sufficiently declared the amity and league that in time past we
have had with the Romans. Caecilius ^assus murthereth Sextus Caesar.
About this time it came to pass, that the estate of ^yria was Caecilius
^assus, one of Pompeys followers, laid an ambush for Sextus Caesar, and slew
him, and seizing upon his Army, usurped the Government: Whereby there arose
great War near Apamea. For Caesar's Captains marched out against Caecilius, with
great force both of Foot and Horse, to whom Antipater sent his sons with forces
to second them (in remembrance of the benefits he had received at Caesar's
hands) supposing it to be an act of justice, that the murderer should be
punished for his so heinous offense. Marcus succeeds Sextus in Syria.
Now whereas this War continued a long time, C^sar slain by Cassius and Brutus.
Marcus came and succeeded Sextus. And Caesar was slain by Cassius and Brutus
in the midst of the Senate, after he had commanded three years, and six months,
as it is expressed in another place.

CHAP. XVIII.
Cassius comes from Syria, draws Seven hundred Talents out of Judaea. Herod
gains his favor. Malichus's ingratitude toward Antipater.
AFter Caesar's death, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 20.
the brand of Civil War began to flame, and the chiefest of Rome made it their
business to raise forces, Cassius comes into Syria, and exacteth more then 700
Talents of silver from the Jews.
But Cassius came into Syria, with an intent to take the Army that was near to
Apamea: and having raised the siege, he drew both Bassus and Marcus to be of
his faction, and traveling from City to City, he gathered a number of
Soldiers, and much warlike provision, and imposed huge Tributes: Herod wins
Cassius's heart by the money that he levieth in Galilee.
but especially he afflicted Jewry, and exacted of that Country Seven hundred
Talents of Silver. Antipater seeing the State in so great fear and trouble,
committing the exaction of a part of this money to his sons; the rest he
commanded to be assigned to Malichus, who was his Enemy. Herod first of all
gathered that which was commanded him in the Country of Galilee, and for this
cause was greatly beloved by Cassius: for he being prudent and discreet,
thought it no small policy at that time, to win the Romans good will on other
men's expenses. Under the other Governors the Cities were set to sale, together
with their Inhabitants: and amongst them, these four were the chiefest, namely,
Gophna, Emaus, Lydda, and Thamna: for Cassius sold the people thereof to them
that would give most. Besides, Cassius was so much transported with choler,
Malichus if Hircanus had not restrained his fury, by sending him One hundred
Talents of his own money by Antipater. But as soon as Cassius was departed out
of the Country of Judaea, he practiced Antipater's death, supposing that his
cutting off would assure Hircanus's state. But Antipater was not ignorant of
this his resolution; for having an inkling thereof, he got himself on the other
side of Jordan, and assembled an Army of Soldiers, both Jews and Arabians.
Hereupon, Malichus (who was a politic and subtle fellow) denied stoutly that
he had intended any Treason, Ma^ichus lays in wait to murder Antipater, but
forsweareth the same, and is reconciled.
clearing himself with an Oath before Antipater and his Children, that he had
never any such intent, especially seeing that Phasaelus held Jerusalem, and
Herod Antipater, and they agreed at that time, that Marcus governed Syria, who
perceiving that Malichus began to raise troubles in Jewry, resorted thither,
and there wanted little but that he had slain him, had not Antipater by earnest
request obtained his life.

CHAP. XIX.
Cassius and Marcus leaving S^ria, give Herod the command of the Army which
they had raised, promising to establish him King: Malichus causes Antipater to
be poisoned; Herod dissembleth with him.
BUT imprudent Antipater saved Malichus to his own mischief: Cassius and
Mar^^us make Herod Governor of Coelosyria.
For when Cassius Marcus had assembled their Army, they committed all the
charge into Herod's hands, and made him Governor of Coelosyria, and delivered
him great forces, both of The year of the World, 3923. before Christ's
Nativity, 41.
and Ships by Sea: They promised him likewise the Kingdom of Judaea, after they
had finished the War, that was at that time betwixt them, and Anthony, and
Caesar the younger. Whereupon Malichus mightily fearing Antipaters power,
determined to destroy him; and having corrupted Hircanus's Butler with Money
(with whom both of them celebrated a Feast) he poisoned him, Malichus causes
Antipater to be poisoned.
and afterward assembling many Soldiers about him, he made himself Master of
the City. When Herod and Phasaelus understood the traitorous conspiracy
attempted against their Father, they were grievously incensed against Malichus.
But he denied all, and especial abjured the intent or practice of the murder.
Thus died Antipater a just and virtuous man, and such an one as dearly loved
his Country. But Herod who was his younger son, immediately resolved to
Malichus: But Phasaelus, who was the elder, resolved to circumvent him by
policy, lest he should raise a Civil War. He therefore accepted of Malichus
justifications, and made a show that he supposed that he had in no manner
contrived Antipater's death, and only minded his Fathers Monument and
Funerals. Mean while, Herod resorting to Samaria, and finding it in a desperate
condition, restored the same, and pacified the dissentions that were amongst
the Inhabitants. Not long after (by reason of a Feast) he came to Jerusalem
with his Soldiers. Malichus being afraid of his access, persuaded Hircanus that
he should not permit him to enter into the City: whereunto Hircanus
condescended, alleging, that amongst the holy People it was not lawful to
intermix a Troop of polluted Herod slighted them that brought him this news,
and notwithstanding his command, entered the City by night: whereat Malichus was
much amazed. Whereupon, according to his ordinary dissimulation, he openly wept
and bewailed the death of Antipater his especial friend; but underhand he
prepared a guard for his own safety. Notwithstanding it was thought fit by
Herod's friends, to take no notice of his dissimulation; but to make show that
they were well-affected toward Malichus.

CHAP. XX.
Cassius at Herod's entreaty, sends orders to the Commanders of the Roman
Troops, to revenge
HErod having assured Cassius of Antipater his fathers death, he knowing very
well of what a wicked man Malichus was, wrote back unto Herod that he should
revenge the death of his father: besides, he sent secret Letters to the
Captains that were in Tire, commanding them to aid and assist Herod in that
just execution which he intended. After that Cassius had taken Laodicea, and
the Inhabitants of the Country came together, bringing with them Crowns and
Silver to present him. Herod expecting that Malichus should receive his
punishment there, but Malichus mistrusting their designs Tire in Phaenicia, he
contrived a greater enterprise. For whereas his son was an hostage in Tire, he
entered the City to draw him thence, and afterward return into Judaea; taking
that opportunity by reason of Cassius's troubles (who marched to meet with
Anthony) he resolved to draw the people to an insurrection, and to make himself
Lord of the Country: but God disappointed his unjust purposes: For Herod being
a man of a ripe judgment, immediately discovered his intention, and sent one of
his servants before, under the notion to prepare a banquet, because he had told
him formerly that he would entertein all his followers: but in effect, he sent
him to the Captains, to command them to go out with their Daggers, and to meet
Malichus; who marching forth, and meeting with him near the shore, he Hircanus,
that through amaze he grew speechless: and being much moved, he demanded of
Herod's men how this accident had happened, and who it was that had killed
Malichus; which having heard, and how nothing was done without Cassius's
commannd: he answered that all was well done, Malichus being a wicked Man, and
a Traitor to his Country. See here how Malichus was justly punished for the
wickedness he committed against Antipater.

When Cassius was gone out of Syria, there arose a new tumult in Judaea: for
Felix, who was left in Jerusalem with an Army, marched forth against Phasaelus,
and all the people were in arms. For which cause Herod speedily repaired to
Fabius, Governor of Damasco, and intending to succor his brother, was prevented
by a sickness: so that Phasaelus obtaining a victory by his own forces against
Faelix, enclosed him up in a Tower, whence afterward he dismissed him under
composition. Whereupon he grievously rebuked Hircanus, that being forgetful of
diverse good offices which he had received by him, The year of the World. 3924.
before Christ's Nativity, 40.
he had given aid unto his enemies. For Malichus's brother being at that time
Masada, which was the strongest of them all. As soon as Herod had recovered his
health, he drew forth his forces against him, and dipossessed him of diverse
places that he held, and after suffered him to depart with his life and goods.

CHAP. XXI.
Antig^nus, Aristobulus's son, gets an Army; Herod overcomes him, and
returns triumphing to Jerusalem. Hircanus promises him his Granddaughter
Mariamna, daughter of Alexander, Aristobulus's son.
ANtigonus, Ptolomey Mennaeus adopteth Antigonus, Aristobulus 's son.
Aristobulus's son, got an Army together, and hired Fabius; Ptolomey Mennaeus
adopted Antigonus for being of his near relations. He was also assisted by
Marion, whom Cassius had made Governor of Tire and tyrannized over Syria,
having put Garrisons in several places of it, and had taken possession of three
places in Galilee, which bordered with his Country. Herod expels Antigonus
out of Jewry.
Herod also marching forth against him, dispossessed him of them all; and
graciously dismissed those Tyrians that had the keeping thereof, bestowing
Presents on some of them, for the love he bare unto their City. And that done,
he came and encountered with Antigonus, and fought him, and overcame him before
he had scarcely entered on the marches of Judaea, and drove him from thence.
Jerusalem, Herod marries Mariamne, Hircanus's niece by his daughter.
Hircanus and all the People honored him with Crowns. For Hircanus looked upon
him as one of his Family, because he was to marry Mariamna, daughter of
Alexander, son of Aristobulus, and of Alexandra, Hircanus's daughter: on whom
he begat three sons and two daughters. Before her also had he married a Wife of
his own Nation, Doris, Herod's wife.
who was called Doris, on whom he begat Antipater his eldest son.

CHAP. XXII.
After Cassius's defeat near the City of Philippi, Antonius comes into Asia;
Herod obtains
ANtonius and Caesar having overcome Cassius, near unto the City of Philippi;
Caesar went from thence into France, and Antonius into Asia. And being in
Bithynia, The Judge corrupted with mon^^.
Ambassadors resorted to him from all parts: Thither also repaired certain
principal Men among the Jews, to accuse Phasaelus and Herod; saying that
Hircanus had only the name, but he the authority of the Kingdom. But Antonius
greatly honored Herod, Hircanus's Ambassadors present Antonius with a Crown of
Gold, and require the captive Jews liberty, sold by Cassius.
who came unto him, to answer those accusations that they had imposed on him:
for which cause, they that were his adversaries could obtain no Audience: for
Herod had bought that privilege from them with his Money. As soon as Antonius
was arrived in Ephesus, Hircanus the High Priest, and all our Nation presently
sent an Ambassador unto him, with a Crown of Gold; requiring him that he would
write unto the Provinces, that the Jews whom Cassius had taken Prisoners
(contrary to the law of Arms) might be set at liberty, and that their Country,
which was taken from them in Cassius's time) might be restored. Antonius
supposing that the demands which the Jews had proposed, were reasonable, wrote
back presently to the High Priest Hircanus and the Jews; and sent an Edict also
to the Tyrians, ta this effect:

Marcus Antonius Emperor, to Hircanus High Priest and Prince of the Jews,
Health:
Lysimachus the son of Pausanias, and Joseph the son of Mennaeus, and Alexander
the son of Theodore, your Ambassadors came unto me to Ephesus, and have renewed
the same Embassage which they heretofore brought to Rome, (...)
and at this present likewise they have duly and faithfully acquitted
themselves of the Embassage which they present in the behalf of you, and your
Nation, by giving us to understand what affection you bear toward us: so that
I esteem you for our friend, since I understand how friendly you have behaved
your self toward us, both in words and deeds. For when our adversaries and
enemies of the Roman Nation spoiled all the Country of Asia, and without
regard of their Oaths, spared neither Cities nor Temples; we have opposed our
selves against them, not only for our private Caesar. But we have gotten the
upper hand of their impious enterprises, which are fallen upon Macedonia, as on
the Country and Air, from whence proceed such detestable designs: and we have
likewise cut off the course of their desperate resolution, which made them
encounter us near to Philippi, a City of Macedonia, where we seized their
places fortified by nature, and enclosed with mountains as if it were with
walls, as far as the Sea, so that the passage was barred up, as it were with a
gate, had not the gods given us way by resisting their unjust exploits, and
furthering ours. Brutus is likewise compelled to fly to Philippi, where being
besieged by us, he suffered with his Consort Cassius, and since they have been
punished as they deserved; we hope for the Asia shall be delivered from all the
miseries of War, and as for your part, you may assure your selves, that both
you and your Country, shall have your share in this happiness, because we have
so great a kindness for you to lose any opportunity to procure your advantage,
and all the body thereof seems to be relieved from a grievous malady, by means
of our victory: We have already sent Letters from City to City, to the intent
that if any one among you, either captive or freeman, have been sold to the
utmost by Caius Cassius, or any of that Army, they may be set at liberty. And
our will is, that you reap the fruits of all the favors that we and Dolobella
have granted you; forbidding the Tyrians to molest you, and commanding them to
restore all that which they have taken from the Jews, in goods or possessions.
As for the Crown which you sent me, I accept

Marcus Antonius Emperor, Marcus Antonius writes to the Magistrates of Tire to
restore Hircanus and the Jews their Lands, Goods and Liberties.
to the Governors Senate, and People of Tire, Health: I have been informed in
Ephesus by Hircanus's Ambassadors (who is High Priest and Prince* ^ the Jews)
that you have seized on their Country and spoiled the same, when our
adversaries held that Province. But as we have undertaken the War for the
Empire, and in defense of Justice and Piety, we have punished these ungrateful,
disloyal and perfidious persons. Our will is, that you suffer our allies to
live in peace; and as touching that which you have obtained of our adversaries;
our pleasure is, that you restore the same to those that are dispossessed. For
none of them had obtained either Province or Army by the consent of the Senate;
but had usurped them by force, and afterward bestowed them on those who have
been Ministers of their impieties and injustice. But since they have been
punished according to their Hircanus Prince of the Jews (that were seized since
the time that Caius Cassius by an unjust War invaded our Provinces) restore
them unto him, without offering to hinder him from the possession of his own.
And if you have, or pretend to have any right in them, when I shall repair to
those places, it shall be lawful for you to debate your right, and we will so
judge, that our allies shall receive no wrong.

Marcus Antonius Emperor, to the Governors, Senate, and People of Tire, Health:
I have sent you my Edict, my pleasure is that you carefully consider it, and
that you register it among your public Records, in Roman and Greek letters,
and set it up in Writing in an

Marcus Antonius Emperor and Triumvir, in the presence of the Tyrians assembled
for their public affairs, has declared, That Caius Cassius during the
troubles, by the assistance of his Soldiers, has usurped another man's
Province; and has in like sort spoiled our Allies, and has ransackt the
Nation of the Jews, who are friends to the people of Rome: and for that by our
valor, we have repressed his insolence, by our Edicts and Judgments we will
correct his offenses, to the end that all things may be restored to our Allies,
and that all whatsoever has been sold, and appertained to the Jews (whether
they be Prisoners or Possessions) be restored to their Masters; to the end that
each Man may be at liberty as he was before, and that each man's possession may
be restored to his first owner. And my pleasure is, He wrote to the like effect
to the Sidonians, Antiochians, and Arabians; all which we will insert in a
convenient place, to testify what account the Romans made of our Nation.

CHAP. XXIII. The year of the World, 3924. Cefore Christ's Nativity, 41.

The beginning of Antonius's love for Cleopatra; he is very severe to those
Jews who came to accuse Herod and Phasaelas. Antigonus, Aristobulus's son
contracteth a friendship with the Parthians.
AFter this Antonius went into Syria, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 11.
and Cleopatra came forth to meet him near unto Silicia, Cleopatra comes into
Cilicia to Antonius.
and entangled him in her love. At that time also, One hundred of the chiefest
among the Jews came in Embassage to him to accuse Herod and Phasaelus: they had
chosen the most esteemed Orator that might be found. Messala likewise undertook
the Herod accuses by one hundred Jews before Antonius.
and made them answer. Hircanus also was there in person, who was already by
marriage allied unto them. After that Antonius had heard both the one and the
other in the City of Daphen, he demanded of Hircanas, which of both the parties
governed the Commonweal best? who returned him answer, That they who were on
Herod's side, were most studious of the public good. Antonius makes Phasaelus
and Herod Tetrarchs.
Antonius (who long since had born a good affection toward them, by reason of
the ancient hospitality that he had received of their father, during the time
Gabinius was in Judaea) established them both Governors of the fourth part,
committing to their hands the affairs in Judaea: and to this effect wrote
Letters, and committed fourteen of their enemies to prison; had not Herod
interceeded for their lives, he had Ten thousand Jews repair to Tire to accuse
Herod who are partly slain, partly wouned* and partly put to flight.
Notwithstanding this, as soon as they returned from their Embassage, they
could not contain themselves in quiet, but resorted once more unto Antonius, to
the number of 10000, to the City of Tire, where Antonius was* But Antonius
(already corrupted by store of money by Herod and his brother, who commanded in
that place ordained that the Ambassadors of the Jews should be punished, for
that they had attempted to make new disturbances, and he confirmed Herod's
Government. At that time Herod walking by the Sea side, came unto them,
advising both them and Hircanus (who at that present was with them) to give
over their appeal, lest some misfortune should befall them. Which they not
regarding, certain Jews and Inhabitants of that City, all at once ran upon
them, killed some of them, and hurt others, and the rest taking their Herod,
Antonius was so displeased, that he commanded all those whom he held prisoners
to be put to death.

The year after (...) the Kings son, and Barzapharnes a Prince among the
Parthians, invaded and seized Syria. About this time Ptolomey died, the son of
Mennaeus; and his son Lysias reigned in his stead, who plighted friendship with
Antigonus the son of Aristobulus, who obtained his favor at his hands, by the
council and solicitation of a certain Prince of great authority and credit
with him.

CHAP. XXIV.
Antigonus being assisted by the Parthians, besieges Phasaelus and Herod in
the Palace of Jerusalem, but in vain. Hircanus and Phasaelus are persuaded to
repair to Barsapharnes.
ANtigonus having promised the Parthians to give them One thousand Talents of
Silver, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 22.
and five hundred Women, Antigonus promises the Parthians a great sum of money
to (...) him in the Kingdom.
if so be they would deprive Hircanus of the Kingdom, and restore it unto him,
and withal, put Herod and his friends to death. The Parthians undertook it, and
marched toward Judaea, though they had not received as yet any of Antigonus's
Money. Pachorus led his Troops along the Seacoast, and Barzapharnes conducted
his more within the Land. The Tyrians shut their Gates against Pacorus, Pacorus
sends Horsem^n to Antigonus in Judaea.
but the Sidonians and Ptolomaidans received him into their City. He sent a
body of Horse into Jewry, to discover the estate of the Country, and to give
succors to Antigonus. The commander of these Horse was the Kings chief
Cup Bearer, who was also called Pacorus. The Jews inhabiting about Mount Ca^el,
join themselves with Antigonus.
Certain Jews (inhabiting about the Carmel) joined themselves with Antigonus,
and were prepared with him to invade his Enemies, he conceived some hope that
he might by their means reduce a certain part of the Country under his
Government, which is called Drymae: and other Jews joining with him in the way,
persuaded Jerusalem; where being seconded by others (and his followers already
much increased in number) they put themselves in a posture to assault the Kings
Palace. The two Brothers, viz. Phasaelus and Herod with their followfollowers
The year of the World, 3952. before Christ's Nativity, 39.
repulsed the Enemy, and drove him into the Temple. Which done, they sent armed
men into the houses near adjoining, to guard them; but the people rushing in
upon them, and seeing they were destitute of aid, burned both them and the
houses wherein they were. But this cruelty of theirs was presently revenged by
Herod, Pentecost.
who in a skirmish that he had with them, killed a great number of them. Herod
fights with his enemies in the suburbs.
And whereas there were daily skirmishes between both parties, the enemies
expected until the people (assembled from all parts of the Country) should
repair to Jerusalem, to celebrate the Feast of Pentecost. Which being come,
many thousands of men assembled about the Temple, both armed and unarmed, who
seized both the Temple and the City; except the Kings house only, which Herod
Phasaelus his Brother defended. Herod with a company of his followers sallied
out upon the Enmy, who were planted in the suburbs, and fighting valiantly
against them, he put diverse thousands of them to flight, whereof some retired
into the City; others into the Temple; the rest into a certain Bulwark near at
hand. In this battle Phasaelus showed no little valor.

Pacorus Conductor of the Parthians, Pacorus Chieftain of the Parthians entering
the City, persuades Phasaelus to go Ambassador to Barzapharnes.
came into the City with some few Horsemen at Antigonus's request, making show
that he came to appease the sedition; but the scope of his coming was, to
obtain the sovereignty for Antigonus. After that Phasaelus was come out to meet
him, and courteously entertained him in his house. Pacorus persuaded him to go
Ambassador with him to Barzapharnes, intending under this pretense to surprise
Herod misliked the course, who knowing the perfidious manner of the Barbarians,
exhorted him rather to assail Pacorus, and to assault and oppress his Forces,
when they were come unto him. Nevertheless, Hircanus and Phasaelus undertook
this Embassage, and Pacorus (leaving with Herod Two hundred Horsemen, and Ten
of those whom they call Freemen) conducted the Ambassadors. Now as soon as
they came into Galilee, the Governors of the Cities in that Country, came
forth armed to meet them: Barzapharnes also at the first gave them friendly
entertainment, and honored them with Presents; but shortly after he began to
practice treachery. The Parthians complot treacheries against Phasaelus.
For Phasaelus and his attendants were conducted to a lodging that adjoined the
Sea; where hearing tidings that Antigonus Parthians, he began already to
suspect the Barbarians. For a certain friend of his had given him an inkling
that there were treasons intended against him that very night, and that his
lodging was privily beset with a Guard. And surely they had been surprised, had
they not expected that the Parthians (who were round about Jerusalem) should
have seized on Herod, fearing lest he having an inkling of their disaster,
should betake himself to flight. This was shortly confirmed to be true by the
guards that arrived: For which cause there were some of Phasaelus's friends,
who counseled him, that without any more delay, he should betake him to his
Horse, and fly from thence: and amongst the rest, Ofilius was most earnest, who
had discovered this plot, by Saramalla a rich Syrian (who Phasaelus would
neither forsake Hircanus, nor leave his Brother Herod in danger, but repairing
to Barzapharnes, he told him, that he did him wrong to use these sinister
practices against him. For that if he had need of money, he was more likely to
receive it at his hands, than from Antigonus; and that it was an intolerable
injustice to put Ambassadors to death, who came unto him upon his honor, and
had no ways offended him. But the Barbarian hearing these things protested, by
an Oath; that not one point of that which he had suspected was true; whereupon
he presently went to Pacorus.

CHAP. XXV.
Barzapharnes detaineth Phasaelus and Hircanus Prisoners; sends to Jerusalem
to secure Herod,
AS soon as Barzapharnes was gone, Hircanus and Phasaelus surprised by the
Parthians.
some of the Parthians took Hircanus and Phasaelus prisoners, who mightily
detested his perjuries. But the Eunuch that was sent unto Herod, had
instructions given him to entice him without the City Walls, and afterward to
apprehend him. But Herod was forewarned of this treachery, by certain
Messengers (who were sent by Phasaelus to give him notice thereof) who being
intercepted by the enemy in the way, and Herod gets notice thereof, he
addressed himself to Pacorus (and those in greatest authority among the
Parthians) who subtly dissembled, Phasaelus was well. But Herod gave them no
credit, because he was already otherways advertised of his brothers surprisal,
and had also far greater suspicion of the Parthians, Hircanus's daughter, whom
he had married. And although the rest made no account of her advertisements,
yet Herod gave credit unto her, for that she was a most wise woman. The
Parthians l^y a plot to surprise Herod: he discovers i^, and preventeth them
by flight.
Now whilst the Parthians were in deliberation what were best to be done (in
that it was held no policy to make open assault upon such a man) they deferred
the whole matter until the next morning. Whilst thus they were debating of
their differences, Herod, who rather gaving credit to that which he had heard
as concerning his brother (and touching the treasons intended against him by
the Parthians) than to his adversaries; as soon as it was night, concluded to
make use of the time, and to make away, without staying any longer amongst
those uncertain dangers, which his enemies intended against him. For which
cause he fled Alexander's daughter) the niece of Aristobulus) and her mother
(who was Hircanus's daughter (and her younger brother, with all their family
and train, he departed into Idumaea without suspicion of the enemy. Amongst
whom there was not one so hard-hearted, who seeing such a pitiful spectacle,
could not be moved to compassion, beholding the mothers drag away their little
children, and abandon their Country with tears and complaints: and that which
was worse,to leave their friends in bondage, without any hope of comfort or
redress.

But Herod mastered these misfortunes by his invincible courage, Herod
comfort his friends in their flight.
and for that he was Herod seeing his mothers chariot overturned, is ready to
murder himself.
whereupon they for their part endeavored themselves to digest their griefs,
according to Herod's exhortation. Meanwhile he hardly refrained from laying
violent hands on himself, by reason of the Chariot wherein his mother rode,
which overturned, and had almost slain her; yea so much did this casualty
terrify him (for fear lest the enemy in pursuit should surprise him during
these delays) so that he drew and prepared his sword to kill himself, had not
some assistants and followers stepped in to him, and stayed the stroke,
beseeching him instantly not to forsake Massada; where in the way, he
oftentimes fought against the Parthians that charged and pursued him, Herod
retiring toward Massada, is assailed, by the Parthians.
but he always got the victory. The Jews also pursued him during his flight;
for scarcely had he traveled sixty furlogs out of the City, but that they Jews
(after he was made King) he builded a most sumptuous Palace, and a City, which
he called Herodium. Whilst he remained at Ressa (a borough of Idumaea) Joseph
his brother came forth to meet him, and to consult with him concerning their
present condition, and to know of him what should become of that great
multitude that followed him, considering that they had no Soldiers in pay, and
the Castle of Massada, (whither they intended too fly) was too little to hold
all the people: for which cause he sent away many, to the number of Nine
thousand, willing them to Idumaea, and for the better dispatch of their
journey, he furnished them with victuals. As for himself, he took with him his
most able Soldiers and Friends, and repaired to the Castle of Massada (in which
place he left the women and their train, to the number of Eight hundred, or
thereabouts, The Paathians s^oil the Cititizens of Jerusalem, and destroy
Marissa.
and furnishing the place with Corn, Water, and other Provisions necessary, he
went unto Petra, the chiefest City of Arabia. As soon as it was day, the
Parthians plundered all that Herod left in Jerusalem; and amongst other things,
they spoiled the Palace; but they meddled not with Hircanus's money, which
amounted to some 300 Talents. They left diverse other things them behind also
that appertained to Herod, and especially that which had been transported into
Idumaea by his providence. Neither Parthians content with the spoil of the
City, but they forraged all the Country round about, and ruined Marissa a very
rich City.

Antigonus, brought back into his Country by the King of the Parthians,
received Hircanus and Phasaelus that were Prisoners: yet he was vehemently
dipleased, because the women was escaped, whom according to his promise he
intended to have delivered with the money: and fearing lest Hircanus through
the favor of the people should be re-established in his Kingdom (who then was
Prisoner in the custody of the Parthians) he cut off both his ears, Antigonus
restored to the Kingdom by the Parthians, cutteth off Hir^arus's ^ars, to
prevent his reinstalment in the Priesthood.
depriving him by that means from enjoying the Priesthood any more, by reason
of that maim, because the Law commanded that they who are in that dignity
should be sound in all their members. But Phasaelus is to be admired for his
great courage at that time: for understanding that he must needs die, he was no
ways disheartened with death, but that which he esteemed most miserable
Phasaelus dasheth out his own brains.
and so ended his life (with as great honor as may be imagined in such a
desperate estate) depriving his Enemy of that power which he intended to
practice in tyrannizing over him at his pleasure: Antigonus puts poison into
Phasaelus's wounds instead of curing him.
It is said, that the wound being very deep, Antigonus sent privily Chirurgions
to cure him; and that under color of healing him, they should put poison into
the same, wherethrough he might die. But before Phasaelus gave up the ghost, he
understood by a certain woman's that his brother Herod had escaped from his
Enemies: for which cause Herod was no ways discomfited with the greatness of
those adversities which environed him round about, but was the more whetted on
to find out new inventions, and to adventure considerable attempts. Herod
flies to Malchus King of Arabia, to borrow money.
For he went unto Malchus King of the Arabians (to whom formerly he had showed
much courtesy) hoping to receive the like of him in this time of his great
necessity, and to draw some money from him, either by interest or gift. For
being ignorant of his brothers death, he endeavored to redeem him speedily
from his Enemies, by paying his Ransom (which amounted to Three hundred
Talents) and for that cause he led with him the son of Phasaelus, who was only
seven years old, to leave him in pledge amongst the Arabians for the sum that
was demanded. Malchus, Herod is commanded out of Arabia, and flies into Egypt:
from thence, after some storms, he repaired to Rome, where he certifieth
Antonius of that which had befallen him.
who charged him in the Kings behalf to retire back again, for that the
Parthians had enjoined him that he should neither receive nor retain Herod; And
used this colorable pretense, because he would not pay his debts: and hereunto
was persuaded by the advice of the greatest in authority among the Arabians,
who pretended thereby to make themselves masters of that treasure that
Antipater had committed to their custody. Herod answered them, That he repaired
not into their Country to give them cause of any trouble, but only to consult
with them about certain matters of great importance touching his own estate,
and that afterward he was resolved to depart, and withdraw himself into Egypt
as secretly as might be possible. He returned therefore to a certain Temple,
where he had left diverse of Rhinoc^ra, in which place he heard tidings of his
brothers death. But afterward Malchus repented himself of his ingratitude, and
speedily sent after Herod, but he could not overtake, him: for he had gotten
far on his way, and was already arrived near to Pelusium: where being denied
his passage to Alexandria, in those ships that were there, he addressed himself
to the Magistrates of the place, who highly respected and honored him, and
sent him to the City where Cleopatra was; who entertained him kindly: yet
notwithstanding she could not persuade him to remain with her. Whereupon he
repaired toward Rome (notwithstanding the Winter* and those grievous troubles
that at the very same time afflicted Italy, as it was reported.) Embarking
himself therefore to sail into Pamphilia, he was tossed with a most Rhodes,
having been enforced in the tempest to cast into the Sea great part of his
goods. There he met with Sappinas and Ptolomey, two of his endeared friends. He
found also the City of Rhodes had suffered much misery by Cassius's Wars: and
although his means were very short, yet he helped them in what he might, and
caused their Walls to be repaired, notwithstanding that by so doing he greatly
hindered himself. After that, he caused a little Frigot to be built, and
embarked himself with his friends to repair into Italy, and arrived at
Arundusium, and from thence went to Rome. The first to whom he discovered his
misfortunes, was Marcus Antonius: to whom he reported all the occurrances in
Judaea: and how his brother Phasaelus was taken by the Parthians, and slain;
and how Hircanus was imprisoned with him. The manner also how they had
established Antigonus King, under promise to give them One thousand Talents,
and Five hundred of the fairest Women, whom he intended to choose out of his own
race. Lastly, how he stole away by night, and rescued them; and escaping his
Enemies hands, had afterward endured

CHAP. XXV^^I
Herod, through Antonius's and Augustus's assistance, is declared King of the
Jews, at Rome. Antigonus besieges Massada, defended by Joseph, Herod's Brother.
ANtonius hearing of all those alterations that had befallen Herod, Hedio and
Ruffinus, cap. 23. al. 25.
had compassion of Antonius loved Herod, and hated Antigonus.
both in remembrance of the friendship he had with Antipater his father, and
also by reason of Herod's promises of certain sums of money, if he were made
King by his means, Caesar Augustus, Herod's friend.
as he had been formerly declared Tetrarch. But that which most moved him
hereunto, was the hatred which he bare unto Antigonus, whom he accounted to be
a mutinous man, and an Enemy to the Romans. On the other side, Caesar was well
inclined to succor him, both in regard of those Armies which Antipater had
brought into Egypt in his fathers service, as also because of the good
hospitality and kindness that he had showed him in all things; and especially
to gratify Antonius, who was well affected Herod. Whereupon the Senate being
assembled, Messala and Atratinus brought forth Herod, Herod admitted into the
Senate, and declared King,
and after they had praised him, and recited the favors which the Romans had
received by his father, and the great affection and good will which he bare to
the people of Rome; they accused and declared Antigonus the Romans Enemy, not
only for his ancient crimes, but also, that in contempt of the Romans, he had
received the Kingdom from the Parthians. Whilst the Senate was sore displeased
at the report of these things, Antonius arose, and declared openly before them
all, that in furtherance of the Parthian War, it were not amiss that Herod
should be made King: which opinion of his was generally allowed, and finally
ratified. The principal demonstration of the love and affection which Antonius
bare unto Herod, Herod intending the Kingdom for his Wifes brother, enjoys
the same himself.
was, that he Romans would grant that dignity unto him, who were wont to
reserve that honor to those of the Kings blood; and therefore he intended to
have demanded it for his Wifes Brother Alexander, Herod ascends the Capitol
with Antonius and Caesa^.
and Nephew to Aristobulus by the Fathers side, and to Hircanus by the Mother
(which Alexander, Herod afterward put to death, as shall be declared in time
and place) but also for that, within the term of seven days, he sent him out
of Italy, with the unexpected titles of his felicity.

As soon as the Senate was risen, Antonius and Caesar went forth, leading Herod
between them, and being accompanied by the Consuls and other Magistrates, went
up into the Capitol to do sacrifice, and to place there this Decree the Senate
had made as touching Herod's Reign Antonius feasted him; and after this manner
he was established King, the hundred and eighty fourth Olympiade, in the year
wherein C. Domitius Calvinus twice Consul, and Caius Asinius Pollio were
Consuls. Mean while Antigonus besieged those that were in the Castle of
Massada, who were plentifully furnished with all things necessary (except it
were water) for which cause Joseph, Herod's family besieged by Antigonus in
Massada.
Herod's Brother, that was within, and Two hundred of his friends, had
concluded to fly unto the Arabians: for that they understood that Malchus had
repented himself of the fault he had committed against Herod. But whilst they
stood upon these terms, God poured down a huge rain on a certain night, that in
short time filled their Cisterns, so that they had no more necessity to fly;
and from that time forward they took courage; and made Antigonus's Soldiers
after such a manner, sometimes in open field, sometimes by surprizal, that they
slew a great number of them. Ven^idius under (...) to help ^^seph, fsheth to
(...) money of Antigonus.
At that time Ventidius, a Roman Captain, was sent into Syria, to drive the
Parthians from thence, and after their departure he arrived in Jewry, making
show that he would assist Joseph: but in effect all his pretense was to draw
money from Antigonus. Being therefore encamped near unto Jerusalem, and having
drawn sufficient money from Antigonus, he retired himself with the greater part
of his Forces: and to the intent his deceitful dealing might not be discovered,
he left Silo with a company of his Soldiers: who likewise was honored by
Antigonus, lest he should be cause of some new trouble, before the Parthians,
whose coming he expected should yield him aid.

CHAP. XXVII. The year of the World, 3926. before Christ's Nativity, 38.

Herod being, returned from Rome, raises an Army, takes some places, and
besieges Jerusalem, but cannot take it; he defeateth the enemy in a great
battle; the art he used to draw several of his Jews, who had hid themselves in
dens, from Antigonus party; he marched with some troops to find out Antonius
who was making war against the Parthians. the five battles that he fought on
the way; Joseph Herod's brother is killed in a fight, and Antigonus caused his
head to be cut off. The manner how Herod revenged this death; he besieges
Jerusalem where Sosius joyneth him with a Roman
AFter that Herod was come from Italy by Sea to Ptolomais, and that he had
assembled no small number of Soldiers both strangers and his own Countrymen,
Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 24. al. 16.
he marched forward against Antigonus, and passed through Galilee. Silo and
Ventidius also gave him assistance in this action, having received direction by
Gellius from Antonius, Herod returning back out of Italy, leads forth his
army against Antigonus.
that they should assist Herod to recover his Country. But Ventidius was
employed in appeasing the troubles that were raised in the Cities by the
Parthians: and as touching Silo he kept in Judaea, having been corrupted by
Antigonus. But the further that Herod daily marched into the Country, the more
his forces did increase; and all Galilee (except a very few) submitted
themselves unto him. Herod assaulteth Joppe, and takes it.
Whilst he marched forward Massada, (being moved thereunto, for to relieve his
parents that were besieged therein) the City of Joppe would not grant him
passage: for the Citizens thereof were his Enemies: so that it behoved him
first of all to ruinate the same, to the end he might leave no retreat behind
him for his Enemy, if he made toward Jerusalem. Upon which occasion Silo laying
hold, dislodged his army and made thitherward: whom when the Jews did pursue
Herod sallieth out with a small company, and put them to flight, and saved
Silo: who could not resist any longer. Afterward having seized on Joppe, he
hasted forwards to deliver his friends that were besieged in Massada; but part
of the inhabitants submitted themselves unto him for the friendship they had
born unto his father: Many submit themselves to Herod.
and others of them, for the honor that they bear unto him: the rest admitted

Whilst thus he marched forward, Antigonus seized on those places that were
fittest to lay ambushes in, or to fight at advantages by the way
(notwithstanding that by those stratagems he did but small or no hurt at all to
his enemy; so that Herod raised the siege, and relieved his friends out of the
Castle of Massada: and after he had taken the Fort of Ressa, Ressa taken, and
Massada delivered from the siege, after which Herod marches toward Jerusalem.
he approached Jerusalem, being attended by Silo's Army, and by diverse Citizens
of the City, who were afraid of his power. And when he had Herod caused a
Proclamation to be made round about the Walls, Herod proclaims about the
walls of Jerusalem, that he repaireth thither for the good of the people, and
the common Weal.
signifying unto them that he resorted thither for the common good of the
people, and for the conservation of the City, without intent of revenge or
memory of any wrongs that his private Enemies had offered him, promising his
most free pardon to all those whosoever had hainously offended him. Hereunto
Antigonus made this answer (directing his speech to Silo and the Roman
Soldiers) that contrary to all justice they gave the Kingdom to Herod, who was
a private man, and an Idumaean (that is to say, a half Jew) whereas it has
been a custom to bestow the same on them that are of the line of the Priests,
Antigonus upbraideth Herod that he is but half a Jew, and of no Kingly Race.
For albeit at that present they were displeased with him, for that he had
seized on the Kingdom by the means of the Parthians, and had resolved with
themselves to dispossess him; yet that there were diverse others of that Royal
Race, who might be made Kings according to the law, The enemy repulseth Herod's
power from the wall.
who have no ways misdemeanded themselves toward the Romans; and moreover
there are Priests, who should not be justly and uprightly dealt withal, if
they should be deprived of that honor which appertains unto them. Whilst
they debated the matter after this manner between them, and grew to hot and
injurious taunts the one against the other, Antigonus commanded his men to
assail those that were near unto the wall: who shooting many Arrows with

At that time Silon gave manifest proof that he had been corrupted by money:
for he suborned diverse of his Soldiers, who cried out that they wanted
victuals, and demanded greater pay for their maintenance, and requested that
they might be placed in some convenient garrisons to winter in, The year of the
World, 3929. before Christ's Nativity, 35.
for that the places round about the City were desolate Antigonus Soldiers.
Thus was the whole Army discomposed; so that each of them prepared themselves
to dislodge. But Herod importuned and cried out upon the Captains and Soldiers
that were under Silons charge, telling them that it concerned them not to
abandon him whom Caesar, Antony and the Senate of Rome, had sent thither: That
for his own part he would give order that they should have abundance of
whatsoever they demanded; Silon suborneth some of his Soldiers, to take an
occasion to depart from Jerusalem.
and immediately after he deprived Silon of all color and pretext of flight,
for he caused an incredible quantity of victuals to be brought them; and
commanded his friends that inhabited the confines of Samaria, to bring them
Corn, Wine, Oil, Cattle, and all other such provision from Jericho, to the end
that from that time Antigonus was not ignorant thereof, so that he presently
sent men thorowout the Country, Herod procured and furnished the army with
victuals and abundant munition.
to intercept and surprise the purv^iors and victualars. Who following
Antigonus command, assembled a great number of Soldiers near unto Jericho, and
encamping in the mountains, espied and watched those that brought the victuals.
Meanwhile Herod lay still, but took with him ten companies, five of Roman
Soldiers, Antigonus sends out Soldiers to surprise Herod's victualers.
and five of the Jews, with home he intermixed some foreign Soldiers, with some
few horsemen, and came to Jericho; where being arrived, he seized on the Town,
which was abandoned by the inhabitants, of whom five hundred with their Wives
and Children were retired into the top of the mountains, whom he took, and
afterward set at liberty: but the Roman Soldiers, entering into their houses,
and finding them full of all sorts of movables, The Romans sent to their
Garrisons to winter.
they plundered them. And the King Jericho, dismissed the Roman Army to go and
winter in the Countries lately surrendered unto him; namely, in Idumaea,
Galilee, and Samaria. Antigonus also purchased his favor at Silons hands by
store of bribes, that part of his Army was lodged in Lydda, all which he did to
currie favor with Antony.

Whilst thus the Romans lived in all abundance and bare no Arms; Herod would
not be idle, but sent his brother Joseph in Idumaea, with a thousand foot, and
four hundred horse; and himself resorted to Samaria, where his mother and his
other praents kept, who were removed out of Massada. After this he went into
Galilee to surprise certain Castles which were held by Antigonus Garrisons, and
being arrived at Sephoris (during a great snow) after that Antigonus Garrisons
were gone out of the foresaid Robbers.
he found a great abundance of all sorts of necessary provision, And there
having notice of certain thieves, who inhabited in Caves, he sent a troop of
horse, with three companys of foot, Herod fights with his enemies in Galilee,
and overcomes them, and brings all Galilee under his subection.
against them: whom he commanded to punish those robbers the place where they
lay, was not far from a borough called Arbela: and forty days after, he
himself with all his Army marched thither, where the enemies charged him
fiercely that the left wing of his squadaon retreated; but he coming on with
his main battle, put them to flight, who were already almost masters of the
field, and made those of his followers that fled, face about and to pursue
their enemies as far as the flood Jordan: who fled some one way and some
another; so that he drew all Galilee under his subjection, except those that
lurked in the Caves. He distributed money

About this time Silon and his Captains, Antigonus refuses to victual the
Roman army.
who had passed the Winter in the said Garrisons, came unto him Antigonus would
no more furnish them with victuals: for he gave them maintenance for no more
time then a month, commanding those that dwelt round about them, to spoil the
Country, and afterward to retire themselves into the mountains, to the end
that the Romans might be destitute of necessary maintenance, and by that means
might be consumed with famine. Herod gave Pheroras his youngest brother the
charge of that provision, commanding him to enclose the fort of Alexandrion
with Ventius* sends for Silon to War against the Parthians.
re-edefied also the fort of Alexandrion which had been laid desolate. About
that time Antony was in Hthenes, and Ventidius was in Syria, who having sent
for Silon to accompany him against the Parthians, did first of all charge him
to assist Herod in that War: and afterward to excite the provincial
confederates to further his War. But Herod dismissing Silon and his company to
follow their destinated Wars with Ventidius, did in his own person lead out his
Soldiers against those thieves that lived in dens. These Caves were situate in
the most highest and inaccessible Mountains, impregnable through narrow paths
environed with sharp Rocks, wherein the robbers inhabited secretly, with all
their families. King Herod caused a certain number of Coffers to be The year of
the World, 3927. before Christ's Nativity, 37.
neither from above to creep downward against them.) These Chests were filled
with Soldiers, armed with great Hooks to draw these thieves unto them, and to
break their necks headlong from the height to the bottom. But the use of these
Coffers was dangerous, for it was necessary to let them down an infinite depth
into the caves, especially for that the thieves had necessary provision among
them: notwithstanding when they had gotten down none of the Thieves durst peep
out of the mouths of their Caves, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap 25.
but fear constrained them to hold themselves quiet. But a certain Soldier
having girt his Sword by his side, Herod leads his Soldiers against those
thieves that held the caves.
and taken hold of the chain with both his hands whereto the Coffer was
fastened, slid down as far as the entry of the Cave: and being displeased that
none came out, he shot diverse Arrows at those that were within, Herod lets
down his Soldiers from the top of the mountain in Coffers.
and wounded them; and after that, with his hook he drew those unto him who
resisted, and tumbled them down headlong from the steep Rock: which done, he
rushed in upon those that were within the Cave, and slew many of them, and
afterward returned and rested himself in his Coffer. Diverse hearing the groans
of those that were wounded, were surprised with fear and despair of their life,
but the nights approach was the cause that the matter was not fully
accomplished, and many of them getting notice of the Kings free pardon by a
Herald, submitted themselves. The next day they renewed and continued the same
manner of fight, and diverse went out of their Coffers to fight at the
enterances of the Caves throwing in fire, which there being much fuel in the
Caves, did great execution. Within these Caves there was a certain old man
apprehended, A certain old man kills his wife and seven of his sons, and at
last casts himself headlong from the Rock.
with his wife and seven Sons: who being desired by them that he would suffer
them to go and submit themselves to their enemies, took up the entrey of the
cave, and as his Sons advanced to get out he slew them all, and after them his
Wife; and at last, when he had cast their dead bodies down the Rocks, he threw
himself down headlong after them, prefering death to slavery. Yet before his
death he reviled Herod bitterly, and upbraided him with his ignoble extraction:
and although Herod (who saw all that which had happned) stretched out his hand
unto him for pardon, yet he would not give ear to him; and by this means were
all these Caves entered, and the thieves taken.

Now when the King had established Ptolomey General over the Army in that
Country, Herod retireth toward Samaria, to fight with Antigomus.
he retired into Samaria, with six hundred horse, and three thousand foot; with
a resolution Antigonus, and to end their quarrel. But Ptolomey had but very
slender success in his Government: for they that before-time had troubled the
Country of Galilee sallied out upon him, and defeated him. After which
execution they fled into the Marshes and unaccessible places, where they
robbed and spoiled all the Country. But Herod returning and setting upon them,
punished them: for he slew some of them, and the rest were constrained to fly
into strong places, where he besieged them and entering their fortresses
perforce, put them to the sword, and destroyed their fortifications: and having
brought this rebellion to an end, he condemned the Cities to pay him the sum of
one hundred talents. Mean while, Pacorus was killed in the War, and the
Parthians were defeated with him; Herod punishes the Rebels in Galilee.
which was the cause that Ventidius sent Machaeras to succor Herod with two
legions and 1000 horse by Antonius order corupted by Antigonus money. Ventidius
overcomes Pacorus and the ^arthians in ba^^el.
But Machaeras was notwithstanding Herod's disswasion, yet he went to him,
alleging that he did it to look into his actions. But Antigonus suspecting
his sudden approach, entertained him not, but caused him to be darted at and
driven thence, giving him to understand by his entertainment, what opinion he
had of him, who at that time perceived plainly that Herod had given him good
counsel, Machaeras kills many Jews.
and that himself had failed in misbelieving his advice: for which cause he
returned to the City Emaus, and killed all those Jews whom he met withal in
the way, Herod resolving to depart to Antonius, and to accuse Macharas, is
reconciled by him and leaves his brother Joseph with an army behind him.
being much troubled at it whether friends or enemies, he was so highly
displeased at that which had happned. Herod came to Samaria, resolving with
himself to go to Antonius to complain of these grievances; and to tell
Antigonus. But Machaeras, hasted after him, entreating him to stay, and to go
no further on that journey, and prayed him to leave his brother Joseph behind
him, to go with him against Antigonus. By these persuasions and instant
entreaties of Machaeras, he was somewhat appeased: so that he left his brother
Joseph behind him, with an Army,; charging him no way to hazard his fortune,
Herod repaireth to Antonius at the siege of Samaria, and in the way kills
many Barbarians.
or to fall at odds with Machaeras. As for himself he hasted toward Antony, who
at that time besieged Samotsata (a City situate near unto Euphrates) having
with him an Army of his associates, both horse and foot. When Herod was arrived
in Antioch he found diverse men assembled there, who were desirous to go and
seek out Antony: Barbarians should set upon them in their journey. Herod
encouraged them and offered himself to be their guide. When they were come two
days journey off Samosala, the Barbarians laid an ambush for them, and had
barred up the way with Hurdles, and had likewise hidden some Horsemen
thereabouts, until the Herod who was in the Rear; when they had broken the
first Ranks whom they had met, Herod, with his Troop that was about him,
immediately repulsed them; and after he had encouraged his followers, and
whetted them on to the fight, he did so much, that he made those* that fled, to
face about, and fight, so that the Barbarians were put to the sword on all
sides. The King also pursued them so long, until at last he recovered that
which had been taken by them, which was a certain number of Sumpter-horses and
Slaves. But being charged afresh by others, and they in greater number than
those who encountered him at first, he likewise

When he drew near unto Samosata, Herod was honorably entertained by Antonius
and his Host.
Antonius sent out the best of his Army to meet and honor him. As soon as he
came to Antonius's presence, he entertained him kindly; and after he had heard
that which had befaln him in the way, he embraced him, in admiration of his
virtue, and did him great honor, as to him whom a little before he had raised
to a Royal dignity. Not long after this, Antiochus surrendered the Fort of
Samosata to Antonius, and upon this occasion the War was ended. Whereupon
Antonius committed the Province with the Army to Sosius: and after he had
commanded him to succor Herod, he departed into Egypt. Sosius therefore sent
two Legions of Soldiers before Judea to succor Herod, and afterward he
followed with the rest of his Army*

In the mean while Joseph is killed in Jewry, Sosius has the army committed to
his charge by Antonius, who departs into Egypt.
on this occasion that ensues: For forgetting his brother Herod's command
which he gave him when he repaired to Antonius, he took five Companies of
Soldiers which Machaeras had left him, and marching toward Jericho to gather
in the fruits of the field, he pitched his Tents upon the Mountains: and for
that the Roman Troops were but newly levied, and consisted of those Men who
were untrained in the Wars, Joseph, Herod's brother, is slain by Antigonus.
and for the most part were gathered out of the Country of Coelosyria; the
Enemies having advertisement hereof, assailed and surprised him in certain
places of disadvantage, The Galileans revolt from Herod.
where there was a hot skirmish between them, in which Joseph died fighting
valiantly, and all his Army was defeated. The dead bodies being in Antigonus's
power, he cut off Joseph's head, notwithstanding that his brother Pheroras
proffered him 50 Talents for the whole body. Machaeras fortifieth Gath.
Which done, the Galileans revolting from their Governors, Herod departs from
Daphne, a Suburb of Antioch into Galilee.
drowned those of Herod's party in the Lake; so that diverse Commotions and
Troubles were raised in Jewry. Machaeras, he fortified the Castle of Gath. This
misfortune of Joseph's was reported to the King, in a certain Suburb of Antioch
called Daphne, Herod fights with the Galileans, and overcomes them, and
drives them into a Castle.
who, before the tidings, had already conceived some suspicion and fear,
grounded upon certain dreams, which gave him certain intelligence of his
brothers death. Departing therefore from thence with all expedition, he arrived
near to the Mount Libanus, where he took about 800 Men with him, and the Roman
Legion which he had, and from thence came to Ptolomais; from whence he departed
with his Army by night, and Galilee with them. Whereupon the Enemies came forth
against him, and were overcome by him, and shut up in a Fort from whence they
were come out but the day before, where Herod assailed them by break of day:
but being unable to do them any harm, The house wherein Herod solemnized his
Feast, fell down when the guests were gone, without any man's detriment.
by reason of the bad Weather, he led his Men into the Villages near adjoining.
But when Antonius's second Legion was come, and joined to his Forces, they that
were within the Fort grew disheartened, and forsook the same by night. So that
Herod marched with all diligence to Jericho, with an intent to revenge his
brothers death; and being encamped near unto the same, he banquetted and
entertained the Officers of his Army: and after the Feast was ended, and he had
dismissed his company, he withdrew himself into his lodging; in which place it
appeared, how much God loved the King: for the roof of Herod was beloved by
God, considering he had avoided so great and unexpected a danger.

The next day, Herod wounded by his enemies.
6000 Enemies came down from the top of the Mountains to fight with him, who
afrighted the Romans; and their forlorn hope chased Herod's Soldiers with darts,
Antigonus sends Pappus to Samaria
and stones, who was himself also hurt in the Thigh with an arrow. Antigonus
sent a Captain to Samaria, whose name was Pappus, with some Soldiers, intending
thereby to signify unto his Enemies, that he had more Forces than he needed.
Pappus drew near to Machaeras the Roman Captain; and as for Herod, he took five
Cities by force, and put Pappus, who was encamped in a Borough called Isanas.
The year of the World, ^9^9. before Christ's Nativity. 35.
Diverse that came from Jericho and Jewry submitted themselves to Herod; who
drawing near the Enemy (who marched forward with great boldness, he fought
them, and overcame them; and being inflamed with a great desire he had to
revenge his brothers death, he pursued them that fled, and killed them even
within their bor^ugh. These Houses were presently filled with Soldiers, Fight
in the houses.
and diverse fled and hid themselves upon the tops thereof, who were at last
taken; for the Roofs of the Houses were beaten down, whereby diverse were killed
by stones that were thrown at them from above; the most grievous spectable of
all those that had happened in those Wars, was, to see an infinite number of
bodies heaped up amidst the Rooms of the Houses.

This exploit of Herod did very much abate the courage of his enemies, who lost
all Herod had immediately entered Jerusalem with assurance of victory, which had
made an end of all that War. Herod being alon^ and naked in his house escaped
unhurt amongst many armed ^n^mies*
For Antigonus had no other thoughts but to fly away, and to forsake the City.
Now the night drawing on, Herod gave order for the Soldiers to eat; and himself
being weary, retired into his Chamber to bathe, where he escaped a most evident
danger through Gods providence; for being naked, and having no body within but
one of his servants, three of the enemies who had his themselves for fear,
started out with their Swords in their hands, Herod sends Pappus's head to
his brother Phaeroras.
and ran away, without daring to attempt any thing against the Kings person, so
terrible was his presence to them, The next day Herod caused Pappus's Head to
be cut off, and sent it to Phaeroras to comfort him for the loss of his brother
Joseph, Herod besieges Jerusalem.
whom this Pappus had killed. When the Tempest was over, he departed from
thence, and approached near to Jerusalem, and encamped near unto the City.
Herod repaire^h to Samaria to marry ^lexanders daughter.
This was about the third year after he had been declared King at Rome; and
encamping in the places which were fittest for battery, he took up his own
quarter before the Temple, as Pompey had done formerly. Having therefore
erected three bulwarks in three places, he built Towers thereon, by means of a
great quantity of Wood, which he caused to be cut down round about the place:
and having p^t the siege in a forwardness, he went to Samaria, to marry
Mariamna, who was Alexander's daughter, and Aristobulus's Granddaughter, with
whom he had been contracted, as we have already

CHAP. XXVIII.
Herod, assisted by Sosius, General of a Roman Army, takes Jerusalem by force,
buyeth the Plunder from the Soldiers, in favor of the City. Sosius takes
Antigonus Prisoner, and carries him away to Antonius.
AFter this Marriage was solemnized, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 26. Al. 27.
Sosius repaireth thither through the Country of Phoenicia; and having first
of all sent his Army through the Continent, he himself also resorted thither
with many Foot and Horse: thither also repaired the King from Samaria, Sosius
and Herod lead a mighty Army against Jerusalem.
with a considerable Army, to join with the old Bands; for he had about 30000
Jerusalem, and planted their siege nigh unto the Wall of the City that
extends toward the Northward. The Army consisted of eleven Legions of Foot,
with 6000 Horse, besides the Auxiliaries that came from Syria. Two Generals
commanded this Army: namely, Sosius, who was sent by Antonius to succor Herod:
and Herod himself, who made War for himself, with an intent that having
dispossessed Antigonus (whom he had proclaimed Enemy to Rome) he himself might
be King in his place, according to the Senates decree: Those Jews that were
within the Walls (that is to say, almost all the Nation) resisted the Herodians
with great courage, boasting much of the Temple of the Lord, and wishing all
good success to the people; namely, that God would deliver them from all
dangers: Herod preventeth the dearth
Which inconvenience Herod prevented, having laid ambushes to out them off. As
for victuals, he made much provision be brought from remote places; so that
within a very little space they had abundance of all that which was necessary
in the Camp. He erected also with no less care three bulwarks, by the diligent
labor of a great number of Workmen: for it was Summertime; and neither was
the air incommodious, or negligence of the Workmen such, but that they
presently furnished and finished them. Afterward having raised their Engines
upon them, they battered the Wall, with as much violence and diligence as was
possible: notwithstanding all this, they did no ways daunt The Jews without
fear resist those that besieged them.
they show no less valor than the Romans; but they were inferior to them in
skill and martial discipline. And when as the first Wall was beaten down, they
built up a new, and countermined against those Mines that were made by the
Enemy, so that they fought underground hand to hand. Thus using despair rather
than courage, they resisted to the uttermost; notwithstanding they were
besieged by a great Army, and pressed by famine and want of victuals: for the
year wherein the siege was continued was the seventh, in which the earth was
unmanured, which by us is called the year of rest. But at last, 20 chosen
Soldiers first of all mounted upon the Wall, and after them one of Sosius's
Centurions; for the first Wall was taken in the fortieth day after the siege,
and the second on the fiftieth, and some galleries were burnt which were near
unto the Temple: which (as Herod said) were burnt by Antigonus, to bring him
into more hatred among the Jews. When the outward part of the Temple, and the
lower part of the City were taken, The outward part of the Temple, and the
lower City taken.
the Jews fled into the Temple, and into the higher Town, lest the Romans
should hinder them from offering their daily and ordinary sacrifices unto God:
and they sent A^^^dors to their Enemies, to require that it might be lawful for
them only to bring in certain beasts to offer them for sacrifices. Which Herod
their King granted them* The Jews fl^e to the upper City and the Temple
Jerusalem taken.
hoping by this means that they would submit themselves, and yield up the
places. But perceiving that his opinion failed him herein, and that they
obstinately resisted him, to continue the sovereignty in Antigonus, he gave the
assault, and took the City by force: where all places were presently filled
with murders, in that the Romans were displeased, because they had continued
the siege so long; and the Jews that were on Herod's side, enforced them utterly
to destroy all those that were of the contrary party; so that slaughters ranged
and reigned everywhere, both in porches, and in the houses whereinto they
entered: Neither did the religious reverence of the Temple save those Suppliants
that resorted thither for safety, but without compassion both old and young
were put to death: neither did their murdering hand spare or refrain from
Women; nay, not so much as from young Infants. And although the King requested
Antigonus inconsiderate of that estate wherein he Sosius's feet; who having no
compassion of the change of that estate wherein he saw him, outragiously mocked
him, calling him Madam Antigona: yet he left him not without guard after the
manner of a Woman, Antigonus submits himself to Sosius.
but fast bound for his further assurance. But Herod was busied in devising how
he might moderate his associates and strangers, after he had the upper hand
over his Enemies: for the strangers swarmed into the City, and not only into
the Temple, but also into the Sanctuary. He therefore exhorted some, and
threatened others, and restrained the rest by force of arms; and he was more
troubled at that present in being a Conqueror, than if he had been conquered:
for that those things that were not lawful to be Sosius most instantly, to
preserve it to the utmost, asking him, Herod sore troubled in pacifying the
strangers.
If the Romans would leave him King of a Desert, after they had voided the City
of men and goods? alleging furthermore, That he esteemed the government of the
whole World of no value, The spoil of the City hindered.
in regard of the life of one of his Citizens. Sosius answered, That it was
reason that the pillage should be given to the Soldiers, who had born the
hazard of the siege: whereunto Herod answered, That he would satisfy every man
out of his own Treasury; and by this means, he ransomed the rest of the City,
by fulfilling those promises: for he gave many mighty gifts unto every one of
the Soldiers, and by proportion unto the Captains; but above Sosius: so that
every one of them departed very well satisfied.

These calamities happened in the City of Jerusalem, in the year wherein Marcus
Agrippa and Canidius Gallus were Consuls, When Jerusalem was taken.
which was in the 185 Olympiade, in the third month, on the days wherein the
solemn Fast was celebrated; as if this affliction had jumpt together in one
instant with that of Pompeys, which had happened that very day 27 years. Sosius
offered a Crown of gold unto God, and afterward departed from Jerusalem,
leading Antigonus Prisoner with him unto Antonius. But Herod fearing lest if
Antigonus should be kept by Antonius, and sent to Rome, he should debate his
Title with him before the Senate by protest, Herod bribeth Antonius with money,
to make away Antigonus.
that he was descended of the Royal Line; whereas Herod was but a Plebeian and
common person: and that although he had offended the Romans, and The end of the
Asmonean family, and the extinction of their Priesthood.
were not to be denied their Title: Herod, I say, fearing these things,
prevailed so much, by force of his money, with Antonius, that he caused him to
put Antigonus to death, so that at that time Herod was truly delivered from all
his fear. Thus ended the estate of the Asmoneans, after 126 years. This family
was famous both for their Nobility, and also by reason of their Sacerdotal
dignity, and for the noble actions and exploits which their Ancestors had
achieved for our Nation; but they lost their authority through their mutual
factions: which sovereignty was derived to Herod, Antipater's son, who was
ignoble by birth, and of mean friends, who were subjects and vassals to Kings.
See here what we have received from our Ancestors, as touching the end of
Asmoneans.

The Fifteenth Book of the Antiquities of the JEWS; The year of the World,
3930. before Christ's Nativity, 34.

Written by FLAVIVS JOSEPHVS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Fifteenth Book.
1. Jerusalem being overcome by Sosius and Herod, Antigonus is beheaded by
Antony's commandment* Herod makes away the chief friends of Antigonus. 2. How
Hircanus being dismissed by the Parthians, returns to Herod. 3. Herod, after
he had made Aristobulus (his wife Mariamnes brother) High Priest, 4. Cleopatra
thirsting after the Kingdoms of Jewry and Arabia, labors to beg a part of
them at Antony's hands. 5. The arrival of Queen Cleopatra in Judea. 6. Herod
makes War against Aretas, at such time as Antony was overthrown by Caesar in
the Actiac War. 7. Of the earthquake in Jewry. 8. Herod's Oration to his Army.
9. Herod intending to repair unto Caesar, does of necessity kill Hircanus. 10.
How Herod obtained the continuance of his Kingdom of Judea at Caesar's hands.
11. Herod makes away Mariamne, through false calumniations of her Enemies. 12.
Of the famine that afflicted the land of Jewry. 13. The building of Caesarea.
14. Herod builds a new Temple in Jerusalem.


CHAP. I.
Antony causes Antigonus, King of the Jews, to be beheaded.
IN the former Book I have declared how Sosius and Herod took the City of
Jerusalem by force, Herod prefers his Favorites, and kills his enemies.
and with it Antigonus Prisoner: Now we will also declare that which has
subsequently followed; for after that Herod had obtained the absolute
government over the whole land of Judea, he advanced all those among the common
people, The Pharisees honored by him.
who favored his proceedings: as for those who were opposed against him, there
passed not a day wherein some one or other of them suffered not punishment.
Pollio foreprophesied Herod's Tyranny.
But, amongst the rest, Pollio the Pharisee, and Sameas his Disciple, were
highly honored by him: For during the time of the siege of Jerusalem, they
counseled the Inhabitants to receive and entertain Herod; for which cause, he
respected them accordingly. Sameas made this Prediction. This Pollio heretofore
(when Herod was found guilty of death) foretold to Hircanus, and the rest of
the Judges, That being absolved by them, he should one day inflict punishment
on them all. Which Prediction God in process of time approved by the event: no
sooner therefore became he Master of Jerusalem, The slaughter of them that were
of Antigonus's faction.
but he gathered together all the rich Household goods that was in the Palace;
and furthermore having robbed the rich men of their goods, and by this means
raised a great sum of gold and silver, he sent great Presents to Antony and his
friends. Moreover, he condemned 45 of Antigonus's principal and noblest
Favorites to death, setting a Watch about their doors, that none of them might
be carried out under color of being dead. The dead bodies likewise were
trodden under foot: and all the gold, Antony having taken Antigonus Prisoner,
Antigonus beheaded.
resolved to keep him in Prison until the time of his triumph: Strabo of
An^igonus.
But after that he had heard the Jews were ready to rebel, and continued their
good affection toward Antigonus, in regard of the hatred they conceived
against Herod, he concluded with himself to take his head from him at Antioch:
for the Jews could scarcely contain themselves. Strabo of Cappadocia testifies
no less in these words:

Antony having brought Antigonus the Jew to Antioch, caused his head to be cut
off; and was the first among the Romans that has caused a King to be beheaded
in this manner, supposing Jews might never otherwise be induced to change their
opinions, and receive Herod: yet this opinion of his was not answerable to
equity. For notwithstanding whatsoever violence he did devise, yet could they
not be induced to call him King, in so high esteem and account held they their
former King. But Antony supposed that that infamy would obscure his renown, and
lessen the general hatred they bare to Herod. See here what Strabo writes.

As soon as the High Priest Hircanus (who was Prisoner among the Parthians)
heard that Herod had taken possession of the Kingdom, Hedio and Ruffinus, c^ap.
2.
he returned back unto him, Hircanus hearing tidings that Herod had obtained
the Kingdom, returns unto him.
being delivered after this manner following: Barzapharnes and Pacorus, Princes
of the Parthians, had taken Hircanus, who was first High Priest, and afterward
King, and with him Phasaelus, Herod's brother, and led them away Prisoners with
them into their own Country: Phasaelus

CHAP. II.
Phraates, King of the Parthians, lets his Prisoner Hircanus return into
Judea; Herod, to make sure of him, contributeth hereunto, and gives the
High Priesthood to a man of no account. Alexandra, Herod's Mother-in-law, and
Aristobulus's Mother, addresseth her self to Cleopatra, to obtain this function
for her son, through Antonius's means, Herod
PHraates, Hircanus heighly honor* in Babylon by the Jews.
King of Parthia, understanding how nobly Hircanus was descended* who was
brought Prisoner unto him, entertained him graciously* and for this cause drew
him out of Prison, permitting him to converse in Babylon, in which place there
were a great number of Jews, who honored Hircanus very much, and no less than
their High Priest and King. The like also did all they of that Nation
inhabiting as far as Euphrates, which did not a little content Hircanus. But
after that he was advertised that Herod was possessed of the Kingdom, Hircanus
leaving his Country, expects favor at Herod's hands.
he transferred his hopes another way, being of his own nature tenderly Herod
would requite him, for that he had delivered him from death whereunto he was
condemned, and in danger likewise of the penalty and punishment. He began
therefore to consult with the Jews about his journey, who, in way of duty and
love came to visit him, and who prayed him, and importuned him to continue with
them, offering him all service and honor; assuring him, that he should in no
less manner be respected among them than their High Priest and King: yea, in
far higher regard than he might any ways be in his own Country, by reason of
the maim he had in his body through Antigonus's tyranny; alleging, that Kings
do not ordinarily call to their remembrance those pleasures that they have
received in their mean condition, because that with their estates they change
both their manners Hircanus be withdrawn from the desire he had to repair
homeward. Herod also wrote unto him, That he should require Phraates, and the
Jews that inhabited his Kingdom, in no sort to envy his felicity, in that he
should partake with him both in dignity and royalty; alleging that the time
was now come, wherein he might acknowledge the kindness he had received, by
being heretofore nourished and preserved by him. Samaralla Herod's Ambassador to
Phraates.
With these Letters he sent Samaralla likewise, in quality of an Ambassador, to
Phraates, furnished with great and rich Presents, endeavoring by that means to
win him, that he in no ways should hinder his good intent toward one that had
so highly deserved it at his hands: yet his protestations were not answerable
to his pretense. For insomuch as he governed not with that uprightness Hircanus
under his power, or at least wise to dispatch him out of his life, which he
afterward performed. When therefore Herod had persuaded the Parthian to
dismiss Hircanus, Herod highly honors Hircanus.
and the Jews to furnish him with money sufficient to bear his expense in his
journey, he received him with all honor. In common Assemblies, he gave him
always the highest place; and in the time of Festivals, he made him always
sit down before him: and the more closely to deceive him, he called him
brother, Herod gives the High Priesthood to An^nel.
endeavoring by all means wholly to take away all color and suspicion of
treachery: neither omitted he any other stratagems, whereby he might any ways
further or promote his cause; and yet by these means occasioned no small
sedition in his Babylon for a certain man of a base extraction, called Ananel,
and gave him the Priesthood. For which cause Alexandra grew suddenly
displeased, not being able to endure that afront. The year of the World, 3934.
before Christ's Nativity, 34.
This woman was Hircanus daughter, and Alexanders wife, Aristobulus son, who
had two children by her husband, the one very beautiful, who was called
Aristobulus: the other was Mariamne, who was likewise fair, and married to
Herod. She was highly displeased to see her son so much undervalued, that
during his life another was called to the honor of High Priesthood: for which
cause she wrote unto Cleopatra by the means of a certain Musician, beseeching
her to beg the High Priesthood at Antonius hands for her son. Alexandra
solliciteth Antonius by Cleopatras mediation for the High Priesthood for her
son.
Which Cleopatra did most willingly, but Antonius made little reckoning of
those suits. A certain friend of his called Gellius, who was come into Jewry
about certain of his affairs, and who had seen Aristobulus, fell in love with
him by reason of his beauty: and admiring likewise his tall stature, and
allured by Mariamnes admirable beauty, he openly protested* that he accounted
Alexandra Antonius; for that if he should but behold them, he would refuse him
nothing wherein he should request his friendship. Alexandra persuaded by these
words, ^ent their pictures unto Antonius. Gellius also made the matter more
wonderful, telling him that the children seemed rather to be engendered of no
mortal strain, Antonius requires Arist^bulus at Herod's hands
but by some divine power, endeavoring as much as in him lay, that Antonius
might be allured to affection them. Who supposing it to be a matter ill
beseeming him to send for Mariamne, who was married to Herod, and desirous
likewise to avoid Cleopatras suspicions, wrote unto Herod, that under some
honest pretext he should send Alexandras son unto him (with this addition, if
it might not seem Herod understood, he thought it no ways safe for him to send
Aristobulus, (who was a hansome young man, and little more at that time then
sixteen years old, and so nobly born:) considering that Antonius was at that
present in such authority, that no one in Rome was in greater credit then he;
and who besides that, The causes why Aristobulus was not sent.
was very much addicted to his pleasures, which he openly hunted after without
fear of punishment in regard of his greatness and power. He therefore wrote him
this answer, that if the young man should but only depart out of the Country,
all the Land would presently be filled with War and Troubles, for that the Jews
pretended alteration in Government, and sought to innovate by prefering a new
King. When he had in this manner excused himself unto Antonius, he resolved to
entertain both the Aristobulus and his Mother Alexandra, with more respect.
Moreover his Wife Mariamne did continually importune him to give the
Priesthood to her brother, alleging that by that honor he might prevent the
occasion of his journey. For which cause assembling his friends together in
council, Herod inveigheth against Alexandra for pretending to usurp the Kingdom.
he grievously accused Alexandra before them, protesting that she secretly
conspired against the Kingdom, and that by the mediation of Cleopatra she
labored to dispossess him of the sovereignty, to the intent that her Son by
Antonius means might Govern in his sted. Which practice of hers was so much
the more unjust, because she deprived her own Daughter of that honor wherein
she was, and raised up troubles likewise in that Kingdom which he had conquered
with great labor, and extreme danger: Yet notwithstanding that he willingly
Aristobulus, alleging that heretofore he had established Ananel in that place
for no other respect, than for that Aristobulus was under years.

After that he had thus seriously and considerately discoursed in the presence
of the Ladies, Alexandra excuses her self and having promise of the Priest
H^od for her son, is reconciled to Herod.
and consistory of his friends, Alexandra almost beside her self, not only
through the joy she had conceived by this unexpected good fortune, but also for
the fear she had to be suspected, began to defend her self with tears and
protestations, saying, that all whatsoever she had either practiced or done,
was to prefer her Son unto the Priesthood whom she saw dishonored: but as
touching the Kingdom, that she had never pretended, neither would (if so be she
should be presented therewith) receive the same, thinking her self for the
present sufficiently honored, both for that she saw Aristobulus in that
estate, for the assurance that all her progeny should receive, in that he was
raised up in dignity above the rest. Being therefore overcome by those favors,
she accepted willingly the honor for her Son and showed her self obedient in
all things, requesting him that if she had committed any thing rashly and
through inconsideration or passion, either in respect of her children, or by
the looseness of her tongue, he would be pleased to pardon her. After these
debates and interchangeable discourses on both sides, they shook hands the one
with the other, in token of a more fixed and unfeigned friendship than was
before,

The year of the World, 3929. before Christ's Nativity, 35.

Herod deposes Ananel from the dignity of the High-Pristhood, and confereth
it upon Aristobulus, he causes Alexandra to be seized on and Aristobulus when
they were about to make their escape by going to Cleopatra; he feineth a
reconciliation with them and afterward causes Aristobulus to be drowned
bestowing a costly funeral on him.
Herod took away the Priesthood instantly from Ananel, Hedio and Ruffinus,
cap. 3.
who was not that Countryman born (as we have heretofore declared) but was
born amongst those Jews that inhabit and were planted beyond Euphrates by the
Assyrians. Herod takes the Priesthood from Ananel.
For diverse thousand Jews inhabited the Country of Babylon, and from thence
took he his Original also, being otherwise of the race of the Priests, and well
affected toward Herod for a long time before, with whom he had familiar
acquaintance. He had prefered him to this honor when he was made King, and
degraded him likewise, to appease the troubles of his famiely: demeaning
himself herein contrary to the law of the Country: for whereas any one has
once been installed in that degree, he is never to be displaced. The first that
transgressed this Ordinance, The Priesthood taken from three.
was Antiochus Epiphanes, who dispossessed Josuh and prefered his brother Onias
to this place. The second was Aristobulus, away from his Hircanus, and usurped
it himself. Herod was the third, who gave the Priesthood to Aristobulus
establishing him in Ananels place before he was dead: and by this means
supposing that he had found out a remedy to appease the discords of his family,
he notwithstanding all this lived not without suspicion what event would follow
after this reconciliation: for he feared Alexandra, lest demeaning her self as
she had done, she should seek occasion hereafter to raise new troubles.
Alexandra suspected by Herod, is spied and watched, and her actions observed.
He commanded her therefore to contain herself within the royal Palace, and to
do nothing of her own authority. Besides that he had appointed certain
intelligencers, who should diligently observe that nothing should be done
without his knowledge, no not concerning her particular expenses and table. All
which things exasperated her against Herod, for being full of Cleopatra to
complain and lament the insuportable miseries of her present estate, entreating
her according to her power, to give speedy relief. Whereupon Cleopatra sent her
word, that both she and her Son should resort unto her into Egypt with as great
secrecy as might be possible. Upon which advice she practiced this policy.
Alexandra pretending to fly into Egypt is betrayed by her servant.
She caused two Coffins to be made, such as men were wont to bury their dead
in, in which she hid her self and her son, comanding those servants of hers
that were privy to her design, to carry them out in the night time, and to go
directly toward Egypt. But Esop one of her household servants declared this
enterprise of hers to Sabbion on of Alexandras friends, supposing that he had
been made privy thereunto: who had no sooner inkling thereof, but (for that
beforetimes he was Herod's enemy, by reason he was suspected to have been one of
those that sought to poison Antipatar) he resolved by discovery of this secret
flight to convert Herod's hatred into friendship: and presently discovered
Alexandras secret enterprise to the King. Who dissembling the matter until it
was upon the point of execution, surprised her at such time as she thought to
fly, and yet notwithstanding* he pardoned her that fault (in that he durst not
decree any punishment against her, though he could have found in his heart to
have used severity) Cleopatra would not have contained her self, had she but
had such an occasion offered her to express her hatred against Herod. Herod
contriveth Aristobulus death.
For which cause, under the color of a high and magnanimous spirit, he made
show to pardon her of his mere clemency: yet inwardly resolved to destroy
young Aristobulus; yet not rashly upon the instant, lest the act should grow
apparent and palpable.

Now the feast of Tabernacles was at hand, which was one of those that was
ceremoniously and solemnly celebrated among us; for which cause he concealed
his intents during the festival days, intending both in himself, and in the
presence and company of the people, to follow all kind of pleasure and delight;
yet his envy incited him to hasten the execution of his will. Aristobulus was
at that time some seventeen in his countenance the dignity and Nobility of his
Race, The year of the World, 39^1 Before Christ's Nativity, 33.
drew the eyes and good affections Aristobulus his Grandfather. All the people
being therefore surmounted by their affections, and at that present time being
all of them overjoyed* they brake out by little and little into acclamations,
mixed with wishes and prayers: so that the good will the people bare to
Aristobulus discovered it self openly, and they manifestly (although too
hastily in such a Kingdom) declared what evils they generaly endured: For all
which causes Herod concluded to execute that which he had plotted against
Aristobulus. As soon therefore as the feast was over-passed, he went into
Jericho, where Alexandra entertained him. In that place he used Aristobulus
with all kindness to draw him to secure some place, playing with him, and
counterfeting to sport, after the fashion Aristobulus began to swim, being
persuaded thereunto by Herod. Whereupon Herod's confederates (who were deputed
to execute the murder) laid hands on him and thrust him under the water
pretending to duck him, in sport, and never gave him over until such time as
they had stifled him in the water. This happened about the evening, and after
this manner died Aristobulus, after he had lived in all for the space of
eighteen years, and administered the Priesthood one whole Aristobulus is
drowned by Herod's direction. Ananel restored to the Priesthood.
and after this, Ananel presently recovered his former dignity.

When this accident was reported to the women, all of them burst out in tears,
and were transported with strange lamentations, which they uttered over the
dead body. All the City also was mightily troubled, neither was there any
private family that thought not it self touched by this inconvenience, but
imagined the loss in particular to concern himself and no other. But above all,
when Alexandra had notice of this wicked deed she was more passionate and
perplexed than any other, being so much the more discomforted for that she knew
how all things had happened. But the fear of a far greater mischief constrained
her to repress her passion, so that diverse times she was ready to bereave her
of her own life, The lamentation for Aristobulus death.
and dispatch her self out of misery with her own hands. Herod, he labored by
all means to persuade the strangers, that this death had befallen Aristobulus
without his knowledge; and did not only prepare that which was requisite for the
funeral, but made show to be truly sorrowful; and it may be, that in
remembrance of Aristobulus beauty and flourishing young years, he was realy
touched with compassion, notwithstanding, Herod's counterfeit sorrow.
that he imagined that his death should be a means of his own security,

The year of the World, 393^* before Christ's Nativity, 165.

Herod is obliged to repair to Antonius, to clear himself from Aristobulus's
death; he wins him with Presents: He gave order, before his way-going, to
his Brother-in-Law Joseph, to put Mariamne to death, if Antonius should condemn
him to die. Joseph revealed it imprudently to this Princess; and Herod put him
to death, for being jealous of him, and Mariamne. Cleopatra's unsatiable
ambition and avarice.
BUT none of all these things could either move or mollify Alexandra, but
daily more and more she increased her sorrow, and in the height of her tears
kindled her wrath with a desire of revenge. Alexandra certifieth Cleopatra of
Herod's Treasons and her sons traitorous murder.
She therefore acquainted Cleopatra by her private Herod's Treasons, and her
sons most miserable, and untimely death: Cleopatra long before that time
desirous to assist her, and having compassion of her misery, undertook the
matter, and ceased not to incite Antony to revenge Aristobulus's death; telling
him, that it was an unpardonable error, that Herod being created King in such
a state, whereunto he had no right, should be suffered to practice such
conspiracies again the true and lawful Kings. Antony persuaded by these her
words (as soon as he came to Laodicea) sent for Herod, to the end, that making
his appearance he might answer that which might be objected against him,
concerning Aristobulus's death: for he disliked the act, notwithstanding, that
Herod himself had attempted it. But although Herod was afraid of this
accusation, and did not a little suspect Cleopatra's displeasure Antony against
him) yet he obeyed his commands, and transported himself thither (the rather
for that he durst not otherwise do;) notwithstanding he left his Uncle Joseph
behind him, committing the Government both of the Kingdom, Herod ready to
repair unto Antony, commands Joseph, to whose charge he committed the
Kingdom, to kill his wife.
and his private estate unto him; giving him secret instructions to kill
Mariamne, if so be, that Antony should happen to do him any mischief. For he
loved her so extremely, by reason of her beauty, that he supposed himself
wronged, if after his decease, she should be beloved by another; and he openly
declared, that all that misery which befell him, proceeded from Antonies
passion, and entire affection, and admiration of her beauty, whereof he had
formerly heard some report. As soon therefore, as he had disposed his affairs,
notwithstanding he had little hope of Antony.

But Josepth governing that Kingdom that was committed to his hands, conversed
diverse times upon this occasion with Mariamne, and communicated oftentimes with
her, not only about public affairs, but also to do her that honor which so
great a Princess deserved. Therefore as he secretly conversed with her,
witnessing the friendship, and ardent affection which Herod bare unto her; He
found, that neither she nor Alexandra did credit any such thing, but rather
laughed at it. For which cause, Joseph being too forward to express the Kings
good will toward her, proceeded so far, that he discovered the commands that
was given him; thereby to make manifest, that it was not possible for Herod to
live without her, and that if any inconvenience should happen unto Joseph's was
not interpreted by the Ladies, as a demonstration of his good will, but rather,
as a manifestation of Herod's wickedness; who dying, desired also that they
should perish; and interpreted, that which he had spoken, as the testimony of
his tyrannical and malicious heart. At that time there was a rumor spread in
the City of Jerusalem by Herod's Enemies, that Antony had so tormented him, that
he was dead. Whereupon all those of the Kings house were troubled, and
especially the Ladies; so that Alexandra incited Joseph to forsake the Palace,
A foolish rumor of Herod's death
and take the Ladies, and retire under the protection of the Roman Legion, who
at that time, was about the City, for the security of the Kingdom, under the
Conduct of the Tribune Julius, to the end first of all, that if any trouble
Romans to be-friend them; and afterward, for that they hoped that if Antony
should see Mariamne, she might obtain at his hands whatsoever she desired, and
that he would restore the Kingdom unto her, and deprive her of nothing that
concerned her, or was answerable to her Royal estate.

But whilst they were in these deliberations, there came Letters from Herod,
contrary to those reports, Herod appe^seth Antony by Presents, and certifieth
his friends by Letters of his health.
and all men's expectation. For as as soon he came unto Antony he compassed his
favor by his many Presents, which he had brought with him to that intent from
Jerusalem, and suddenly debated the matter with him, he appeased him so, that
he was no more displeased against him: and from that time forward, Cleopatra's
speeches Antony said, That there was no reason that a King should be answerable
for that which he had done in his Kingdom; for that in so doing, he should no
more be King: but that when the honor is once given him, The year of the
World, 3930. before Christ's Nativity, 3^.
he has the authority likewise left him to use his regal Power. Urging
further, That it concerned Cleopatra likewise her self, not to search too
curiously into the affairs and Government of Kingdoms. Herod showed all this by
his Letters, and signified further, what other honors he had received at
Antoni's hands in Assemblies and Feasts, to which he invited him always;
notwithstanding that Cleopatra seemed to be displeased therewith, detracting
him; and being desirous to get the Kingdom of Jewry into her hands, strove,
with all means possible, to put him to death: but that he had found Antony
always an upright man, and feared not henceforward that any evil should befall
him: and returning presently upon this, he brought with him a more ample
testimony of Antony's most assured affection, both in respect of his own
Kingdom, and of his particular affairs. Cleopatra, she pretended not to seek
any further than that which she had because that Antony had given her
Coelosyria instead of that which she had demanded, forbearing thenceforward to
mention Jewry any more, because that Antony wholly rejected those suits.

After these Letters came unto their hands, the trouble and disturbance wherein
they were, and the desire to retire unto the Romans, as if Herod had been dead,
was wholly extinguished. Yet their resolution was not hidden from the King; for
his sister Salome, and his mother informed him of every particular at his
arrival, after he had parted from Antonius, Joseph and Mariamne accused before
Herod.
who was marching against the Parthians. Salome likewise spoke against Joseph
her husband, and slandered him, objecting against him, that he had Mariamnes
company. All which she spoke through malice, for that in a certain debate,
Mariamne Herod (who was always inflamed with the earnest affection which he
bare unto his wife Mariamne) was suddenly troubled hereat: and although
jealousy pressed him forward, yet love restrained him, and kept him from doing
any thing rashly, for which cause he called Mariamne aside, and demanded of her
in secret, what familiar company she had kept with Joseph? She by solemn oaths,
and by all possible allegations in her own defense, appeased the King by little
and little, Mariamne excuses and purges her self before the King, and is
reconciled.
and pacified his choler. For he was so transported with the love that he bare
unto his wife; that he believed she had sufficiently purged her self of those
slanders, that had been forged against her; yielding her most hearty thanks for
her honest affection toward him, and declaring unto her openly, the great
esteem Mariamne said unto him: It is not the act of a Lover to have commanded,
that if any thing should befall thee otherwise than well with Antony, I should
presently be put to death, notwithstanding I have no ways offended thee. No
sooner were these words out of her mouth, but the King entered in a strange
passion, and giving over his embraces, he cried out with a loud voice, and tore
his hair, saying, That he had a most evident proof that Joseph had committed
adultery with her: for that he would not have discovered those things which he
had spoken to him in secret, except they had greatly trusted one another. And
in this emotion or rage Herod commands that Joseph should be slain, and
imprisoneth Alexandra.
But the force of love overcame him so much, that he bridled his rage,
notwithstanding it was grievous and irksome unto him. Yet he gave order that
Joseph should be killed without either audience or justification of his
innocence: and as touching Alexandra, who was the cause of all these troubles,
he kept her Prisoner.

About the same time there happened troubles and revolutions in Syria: for
Cleopatra continually solicited and importuned Antony, Hedio and Ruffinus,
chap. 9.
and whetted on his displeasure against all; persuading him to remove them from
their Governments, and bestow the same on her self. And for that Antony loved
her extremely, she was in great estimation and credit with him: and being in
her own nature inclined to covetousness, she abstained from no Cleopatra very
covetous.
For knowing that the Kingdom should descend unto her brother, Cleopatra
murdered her brother and sister.
she caused him to be poisoned, when as he was but fifteen years old; as for
her sister Arsinoe, she caused her to be slain by Antony's means, being at her
prayers in the Temple of Diana in Ephesus. Moreover, in what place soever she
understood that there was any hope to get money, whether it were in robbing of
Temples, or in breaking open of Sepulchers, she would be possessed thereof:
neither was there any religious place so sacred, from whence she took not away
the Ornaments. There was not any thing so profane and prohibited, which she
laid not hands on to satisfy her unbribled avarice. Neither was the whole
World sufficient enough to content this stately Lady, who was so much a slave
to her own desires, and her disordinate appetite, that Antonius to take from
others, to be liberal toward her: and therefore Syria with him, The year of
the World, 932. before Christ's Nativity* 32.
she presently contrived how she might get it into her possession. For she
caused Lysanias, Ptolomeys son, to be put to death, objecting against him, that
he had private intelligence with the Parthians. She begged Jewry also at
Antonius's hands, and required him besides that, to dispossess the Kings of
Arabia, He was so possessed by this Woman, Cleopatra contriveth Lysanias's
death.
that he seemed not only to be bewitched with her words, but also enchanted by
her poisons, to obey her in whatsoever she thought fit: yet he was ashamed to
commit so manifest injusties, lest being so far overruled by her, he should
happen to offend in matters of more consequence. Antonius gives Cleopatra a
portion deducted out of Jewry and Arabia.
Lest therefore, either by denying her, he should disoblige her, or by
condescending to her demands, he should seem to be the wickedest man alive; he
deducted a several portion of both their dominions, and presented her with the
same. He gave her likewise, those Cities that are situate between the flood
Elutherius and Egypt, except Tire and Sidon, which he knew to be free Cities of
long continuance: although by earnest solicitation, she thought to seize these
also.

CHAP. V.
Cleopatra goes into Judea, and used all her endeavors (but in vain) to make
Herod fall in love with her. Antonius having conquered Armenia gives her great
Presents.
Cleopatra had obtained all these things, Cleopatra comes to Herod, who
instateth her in that part of Arabia and those revenues of Jericho that were
given her.
and had accompanied Antonius as far as Euphrates, who at that time went to
make War in Armenia: she returned back again, and by the way, visited Apamea
and Damasco, and at last, took her progress into Jewry: where King Herod met
with her, and assured that portion which had been given unto her in Arabia,
with all the revenues of Jericho, unto her. This Country brings forth that
balm which of all other ointments is the most precious, and only grows in
that place; An intemperate woman given to lust.
and also the finest Palm Trees in the World. Being arrived in that place, and
grown inwardly familiar with Herod, she sought to allure and draw him to her
lust; being of her self naturally addicted to such pleasures and intemperance,
or rather (as it seems most likely) she laid this foundation to entrap him,
under color to Herod; but he was not so kindly bent toward Cleopatra; knowing
how badly she was inclined toward all men; and at that time he conceived the
greater hatred against her, Herod goes about to put Cleopatra to death, and is
dissuaded by his friends.
because, by that intemperance of hers, she pretended to destroy him: and
although, that from the beginning, he had rejected her solicitations; yet he
resolved to be revenged of her, if so be by these her subtle undermindings she
should continue her policies to betray him. He asked counsel of all his
friends* whether having her in his possession, he should put her to death. For
in so doing, all those should be delivered from diverse evils, whom either in
time past she had molested, or hereafter she should bring in trouble. Moreover,
that it should be profitable for Antonius also, whom without all doubt she
would forsake, if any occasion or necessity should enforce him to make trial of
her friendship. But whilst he debated and discoursed upon this resolution, his
friends dissuaded him; assuring him that it was far below a Prince of his
worth, to cast himself into so manifest peril, beseeching him to attempt
nothing rashly: Antonius conquereth Armenia.
For that Antonius would not endure the same, notwithstanding, it might be
approved that it stood with his profit: nay, rather, that by this means he
should increase his desire. Further, that no one color of excuse should be
left him, in that she was the Woman of the greatest Note and Nobility of that
time; and that whatsoever profit might redound unto him by her death, it would
be an affront to Antonius: Whereby it most evidently appeared, how great
damages would befall to the Kingdom, and the Herod brings Cleopatra onward on
her way toward Egypt.
By these, and such reasons, and probable conjectures, they deterred and
dissuaded him from adventuring upon this apparent danger, and attempting so
heinous an act: so that contrariwise they induced him to offer Cleopatra many
rich Presents, and to conduct her onward on her way toward Egypt.

As soon therefore, as Antonius had made himself Master of Armenia, he sent
Artabazes, Tigrane's son, with all his children, who were great Princes,
Prisoners into Egypt, and presented them to Cleopatra; with all those precious
Jewels likewise, which were taken by him or found in the Kingdom. But Artaxias
his elder son (who at that time had saved himself by flight) reigned in
Armenia: whom Archelaas and Nero the Empeperor Tigranes in his room, as it
shall be declared hereafter. As for the Tributes of the Countries which Herod
was bound to pay unto Cleopatra, for the lands bestowed on her by Antonius, he,
without deceit, The year of the World, 3933. before Christ's Nativity, 31.
justly paid them, supposing it to be very suitable to his security, to
continue Arabians, they seeing that Herod had the levying of such a Tribute,
paid him for some little time 200 Talents a year, but afterward they grew
slow and negligent in their payments, and scarcely satisfied the half.

CHAP. VI.
Herod intends to go to assist Antonius, against Augustus; but Antonius
obliges him to follow on his design against the Arabians: so he enters their
Country, gives them Battle, and gains it; but loses a second, when he
thought to have win.
ARetas demeaning himself thus ungratefully, and refusing to do that which in
right Herod made show to take Arms against him, but deferred his revenge, in
regard of the contentions amongst the Romans. For at that time nothing else was
expected but the Actian War (which fell in the hundred and eighty seven
Olympyade) in which Augustus Caesar determined to try his Title with Antonius
for the Monarchy. Herod levieth an Army, to assist Antonius against Octavian.
In the mean while Herod, who had already for many years been Master of a
peaceable and fruitful Country, from whence he drew rich Revenues, and many
Forces; gathered diverse Forces with the greatest expedition that he might, to
succor Antonius. But he by Letters signified unto him, that he had no need of
his assistance: notwithstanding, Herod is incited by Letters to the Arabian War.
he commanded him to make a road upon the Arabians, whose perfidious dealing
Antonius had not only understood by Herod himself, but also by Cleopatra's
advertisements. For she very cunningly conceived, that it would redound unto
her Herod according to these instructions from Antonius, returned back into his
Country, and retained his Army always ready about him, and presently invaded
Arabia, and with his Forces, both Horse and Foot, came directly to Diospolis,
where the Arabians (having notice of his intended War against them) came out to
meet him. They fought a most cruel Battle, wherein, at last the Jews had the
upper hand. After this, a great Army of the Arabians assembled themselves at
Cana, a certain place in Coelosyria. Whereof, when Herod was fore-advertised,
he marched forth against them, Herod's Battles and Conquests.
accompanied with the greater part of his Forces. As soon as he drew near to
Cana, he resolved to incamp in that place, and after he had well fortified and
entrenched his Forces, to set on the Enemy with the first opportunity: but Jews
cried out, requiring him without delay, to lead them forward against the
Arabians, and were so encouraged, both in respect of the confidence they had in
the good conduct and ordering of their Army, as in regard of their forwardness,
who had been actors in the former War, and partakers of the Victory; so that
they scarce gave their Enemies leisure to stand to their Arms. When Herod
perceived that the heat and forwardness of the Soldiers could hardly be
appeased; he thought good to make use of the readiness of his Army, and arming
himself, he marched on Head of his Army in battalia; This sudden approach
danted the Arabians: For although, for a while, they made head against them;
yet perceiving their Enemies full of heart, and themselves unable Athenio
endamaged Herod and the Jews. For he having the command of that Army which
Cleopatra had in that place; and besides that, Cleopatra's Chieftain
overthrows Herod.
bearing a privy grudge to Herod, disposed his Army in a readiness, and
expecting the event of the Battle, resolved with himself to contain his Forces
if the Arabians overcame the Jews; and so if they had the worst (as indeed it
came to pass) to set upon the Jews, who should be spent by that time; and
surprising them unawares, even in the height of their hope of good success, to
massacre them with fresh supplies. When the Jews had spent all their strength
against their Enemies, and expected nothing less than the assurance of the
Victory, The Arabians returning to the Battle, kill those that fly, and take
the Camp.
he charged, and overcame them, who had retreated Arabians, who returned back,
and set upon them, diverse of them that fled were killed; and of those that
escaped, few of them recovered the Camp. Herod losing the hope of this Battle,
posted on Horseback as fast as he could, to bring on fresh supplies: but
notwithstanding all his expedition and diligence, yet could he not recover the
place in time. The Camp of the Jews was taken and sacked, and the Arabians
obtained no small success, beyond their expectation. From that time forward
Herod began to make certain incursions into Arabia, preying on the Country,
and doing them much mischief. He encamped himself likewise upon the Mountains,
forbearing to draw his whole Forces into the field; and

The year of the World, 935. before Christ's Nativity, 19.

A terrible Earthquake happens in Judaea. The Arabians attack the Jews, and
kill their Ambassadors who were sent to treat of a Peace.
AT such time as Caesar and Antony made trial of their titles in the Actian
War, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 6.
and in the seventh year of the Reign of King Herod, An Earthquake in Judaea
kills ten thousand men.
there happened such an earthquake in the Country of Judaea, that never the like
was seen in any other place: so that diverse beasts were slain thereby, and many
men were overwhelmed with ruins of their Arabians hearing tidings thereof
which were far greater by report, than they were in effect, by such, who in
favor of the Arabians, and hatred of the Jews, reported the same, grew proud:
yea, so much was their courage increased hereby, as if all the Cities of Jewry
had been already overthrown, The Arabians kill the Ambassadors of the Jews.
and the men thereof extinguished; and as if they had no adversaries remaining
alive to oppose them. For which cause laying hold of those Ambassadors of the
Jews, who came unto them to Treat of Peace in their desperate condition, they
killed them, and afterward in the heat of their spleen, set upon their Enemies
Camp. But the Jews not daring to expect or prevent their assault, for their
present miseries had so dejected Herod comfort the Jews that were out of
heart for their former losses.
These thus affected did the King encourage, and called unto him the Captains,
and (as much as in him lay) reviving their drooping spirits; and when he had
restored some to better hopes, at length he attempted to speak unto all the
Army, who in the former overthrows would yield to no persuasion. These he did
both comfort and exhort in such manner as follows.

CHAP. VIII.
King Herod's Oration to his Soldiers, by which he does so encourage them that
they give
FRiends and fellow Soldiers, Herod comfort and exhoiteth his Soldiers.
there is not one of you but knows, how many misfortunes have hindered our
progress of late, which are able to weary and amaze men of the greatest
resolution. But since we must needs fight, and that all those things that have
befallen us unto this present, are of that nature, that by your own valor they
may be recovered; I have resolved to inform, and confirm you in those means,
whereby you may retain and continue your accustomed valor and courage.

First of all therefore (as to our War) it consists on just grounds, The
cause of War against the Arabians.
for we are enforced Arabians unjustice, and how perfidious they are to their
friends, and impious and barbarous toward all men; but especialy they have
always troubled us, provoking us through their extreme avarice and maligant
envy, with perpetual injuries. And yet to let slip all other our benefits to
that Nation, who is he that delivered them from their imminent peril and
thraldom, that was hazarded by Cleopatras means, but our selves? For the
friendship I had with Antony, Antony forbore to commit anything that might draw
us to suspicion.

Besides, after she had wrought him by her solicitation to cut off certain
portions of the two Kingdoms to be given unto her, the matter was so handled by
me, that by diverse presents particularly bestowed upon him by my hands, I have
obtained security for us both, and by disbursing two hundred talents of mine
own, and giving my word for two hundred more for others, for the Revenues of
that very Land which in time past was ours, and these now possess and enjoy.
Notwithstaanding, reason it were in my opinion, that we that are Jews should
not be tributaries, or give any portion of our Country to any man; and if we
must needs do it, it ill becomes us to pay it for these, who enjoy their lives
by our means. It should not be Arabians, who after they had confessed with many
plausible protestations and thanksgivings, that they enjoy their liberty by our
benefit, to have deprived and thrust us from our own, and to have unjustly
dealt with us; yea even with us, I say, who were not their Enemies, The year of
the World, 3935. before Christ's Nativity, 29.
but rather on the contrary side their chiefest friends in the time of Peace.
And if Grecians, and opinion of the Barbarians is most hateful and heinous,
this have they perpetrated in murdering our Ambassadors. Legates inviolable.
For the Greeks say, that Ambassadors are sacred and inviolable, and we our
selves have received our wholesome and holiest precepts of the Law of God by
Angels, that is, from

What Impiety therefore is more unpardonable, then to put those Ambassadors to
death, who bring tidings of right and justice? or what prosperity can they
expect either in their Wars, or felicity in their whole lives, after so heinous
a crime? Truly I cannot imagine any: But perhaps some man will say, With
whomsoever justice is, there is God also.
that right and equity is on our side; but that the greater number of men and
means are with them: but this their speech is unworthy of my followers. For
with those with whom justice is, with those also is God; and where God is,
there neither wants multitude nor fortitude. But let us wade further, and
weigh our own own forces by themselves. In the first Battle we had the victory,
in the second, upon the first charge we Athenio, not by lawful War, but by
subtle treachery assaulted us: But shall this be called their valor, or rather
their fraud and second iniquity? why therefore should we have less courage,
who ought to have the greater confidence? or why should we fear them who are
always inferiors, if they fight openly, and without fraud; and when they seem
to overcome, they do it by unjustice?

Moreover, if any man suppose them to be valiant, this should the rather incite
them more and more unto virtue; for it is no honor for a generous and noble
mind to overcome his inferior, but to have means and might to conquer his
superior, And if any one be terrified by our domestic and homebred miseries,
and by our late earthquake, first of all let him think Arabians by supposing
the same to be more grievous and terrible then indeed it was. And afterward
let him think, that it becomes them not to draw matter of fear from thence,
whence the other took occasion of courage. For as touching themselves they
conceive not any hope through any good that is in themselves, but only in the
trust they have that we are already dejected by our calamities. But when they
shall see us march forth against them, their courage will be weakened, and our
confidence by this means shall be awakened, for that we are not at this time to
encounter with desperate men: For neither are we overmuch afflicted; neither
(as some think) has this misery befallen us through Gods displeasure, but
these are the casualties of fortune. And if by the will of God these things are
come to pass, it is marvel if by the same will our calamity cease not; and that

These persuasions of his did not a little encourage the Jews to the battle,
and made them more forward then before. As For Herod, after he had offered
sacrifice, according to the custom, he drew his Army forth, and led them with
great confidence against the Arabians, and passing Jordan, he encamped near
unto the Enemy, with an intent to surprise a Fort Situate between them both;
making this account that it would further him much, either if presently he
should be drawn forth to fight, or if it concerned him to march forward, for
that this place should serve him to encamp in with more security. The same
resolution also had the Arabians, for which cause they fell to skirmish in that
place, The Arabians are overcome by Herod.
wherein the first on both sides that gave the charge, and afterward some
other followers were killed: so that those of the Arabians side being Jews, who
seeing the Enemies Army addressed to attempt any thing rather then to Arabian
in his trenches, and beat him from his camp. They being forced by these
assaults drew forward to their defense in great disorder, bringing neither
courage nor hope of victory with them: yet notwithstanding they defended
themselves, both in regard of their great number, as also in respect of that
necessity whereunto they were enforced by the Jews. The skirmish on both sides
was hot, and diverse on either party were put to the Sword: but in the end, the
Arabians being put to the worst, turned their backs. The slaughter was so
great, that they not only perished by their Enemies Swords, but they themselves
murdered one another in the crowd, and disorderly flight, in which they were
trodden under foot, and lay murdered in a manner by their own weapons. So that,
in that defeat there fell some five Rampire: but being overpressed with want of
victuals, and especially with lack of water, they had not any ground or
assurance to escape. After them posted the Jews, and being unable to recover
the fortress with them, they begirt the camp with a siege, and shut up all the
passages that no succor could come unto them, and took from them all
opportunity to escape, although they would have gone away.

When as therefore they saw themselves reduced into such extremity, they sent
Ambassadors unto Herod, first of all to demand a truce: and afterward for that
they were oppressed with thirst, to crave some remedy for their present
necessities. But he neither respected the Ambassadors, neither the proffered
ransom for the Captives, The Arabians enforced by thirst, require truce at
Herod^ hands.
and offered themselves to bonds and to be led away Captives; so that within
five days space four thousand of them yielded themselves Prisoners. On the
sixth day, all the rest determined to sally out, and assail the Enemy; rather
making choice of assured death, then thus lingringly and ignominiously to pine
away. When as therefore they had all concluded hereupon, they incontinently
brake out of their Trenches, but like unapt Soldiers for a skirmish, decayed
not only in body, but in courage; reputing their death for advantage, to Herod,
whom to their own sorrow they had approved to be a valiant Soldier.

CHAP. IX.
Antonius is overcome by Augustus in the Battle of Actium; Herod put Hircanus
to death, his pretense for it, he resolves to repair to Augustus; his orders
before his way going.
HErod puffed up with his successful fortune, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 7.
returned back into his own Country, having obtained great reputation by his
valor and virtue. But when he supposed his State to be most assured, Herod
dismayed at Antonies overthrow.
he grew in danger both to lose his dignity and life, by reason of that victory
that Caesar obtained against Antony in the Actian War. For at that time he not
only supposed himself to be utterly overthrown, but both his friends and
Enemies that were round about him lost their hopes, for that it was unlikely
that he should escape unpunished with Antony. Whereby it came to pass, that his
friends could not conceal their despair, and his Enemies under their colorable
and dissembled griefs, covered their joy, promising themselves thereafter a
better and Herod perceiving that except Hircanus, Herod determines to make
away Hircanus.
there was not any one of the blood Royal alive, determined to cut him off,
resolving with himself, that if he happened to escape the danger, a man who at
that time was worthier the Kingdom then himself, should not claim the Crown:
and if any misfortune should befall him in regard of Caesar, he desired to
dispossess Hircanus of the Kingdom, in regard of the envy which he bare him,
for that he was the only man who deserved to be advanced to that dignity.
Alexandra solliciteth Hiranus her father to require assistance at Malchus hands.
Whilst thus he was tormented in his thoughts, he had an occasion offered him
by Hircanus own followers to execute his intention. For Hircanus being of a
mild and gentle nature, during all his lifetime

But Alexandra being an ambitious woman, and unable to conceal with modesty the
hope she conceived of change, solicited her father that he should not any
longer endure the subjection of Herod, who was the very scourge of their
family, but rather Malchus, who had the Government of Arabia, requesting him to
grant him both protection and entertainment; for that if Herod should chance to
be cut off by Caesar's displeasure, doubtless the Kingdom would return unto him,
both in regard of his Nobility, as also of the peoples favor. These
persuasions of hers Hircanus, at the first repulsed, but afterward being
overcome by the importunity of the woman, Alexandra solliciteth Hircanus her
father to require assistance at Malchus hands.
who ceased not day and night to sing the same Song of future hope, and of
Herod's Treasons, he gave certain Letters to a friend of his, written to the
Arabian, wherein he required him to send him certain Horsemen, who might
conduct him to the Asphaltite Lake, which lies distant from the confines of
Jerusalem some three hundred Furlongs. And therefore he committed these Letters
to Dositheus trust, both Hircanus and his Daughter, Three hundred furlongs
contain nine Germane Miles.
and seemed likely for diverse causes to hate Herod: for he was Joseph's kinsman,
who was killed by Herod; and not long before, certain of his Brothers were put
to death amongst others at Tire by Antonies command: yet for none of those
considerations continued he faithful to Hircanus. For he preferring the present
favor of the King that then reigned to the rest, discovered the Letter unto
the King; who first of all giving him thanks, required one office of friendship
more at his hands; which was that folding up the Letter, and sealing it he
should conveigh and deliver the same to Malchus, and return his answer, for
that it nearly concerned him, if he knew his resolution also. Which when
Dositheus had diligently performed, the Arabian returned this answer, for that
it nearly concerned him, if he knew Hircanus by Herod's commands is put to death.
Which when Dositheus had diligently performed, the Arabian returned this
answer, that he was ready to entertain both himself and his whole family, and
all those Jews likewise which were of this faction, promising to send him a
band of Soldiers, who should be able to conduct him safely thither, and should
be obedient to his command in all things. Now as soon as Herod had seized on
these Letters, he called for Hircanus and demanded of him whether he had any
confederacy with Malchus: he denied it, but Herod protesting and bringing forth
his Letter in an open assembly, commanded him afterward to be put to death.
Thus are these matters Registered in Herod's commentaries: for by some they are
delivered otherwise, namely, that he was executed, not for this crime which he
had committed, but for some Treasons against the King. For Herod at a certain
banquet (dissembling his suspicion) demanded of Hircanus, whether he had
received any Letters from Malchus: and that he answered, that he had received
Letters, but such as contained nothing else but compliments. Hircanus dies
guiltless.
He asked him also whether he had received any present: and when he had
answered, that he had received nothing but four Coursers for his Saddle: the
King wrested this to a Capital offense of corruption and treason, Hircanus
life.
and commanded him presently to be led to death. Now that he died guiltless,
they allege this for a most approved argument; namely, his gentle disposition,
who evenin his youthful years never gave sign or appearance of rashness, or
pride, or signification of audaciousness, no not even then when he had the
royal government in his hands, but in the freedom Antipaters advice. But at
that time he was more then fourscore years old, and knew that Herod's estate
was secured: and that there is no likelihood that he would remove from beyond
Eufrates where he lived in great repute, to live under Herod's Jurisdiction, or
to engage in any trouble contrary to his humor, and so far different from his
nature; so that all these things seem to be fained by Herod.

Thus ended Hircanus life, after his variable and adverse fortunes, wherewith
during all his life time he was afflicted. For when his mother Alexandra lived
he was created High Priest of the Jews, and obtained that honor for the space
of nine years: and after his mothers death, he had scarcely governed the
Kingdom for the space of three Aristobulus; and afterward restored by Pompeys
assistance, and receiving all his former honors, he lived in full possession
of them for the space of forty years. After this he was once more dispossessed
by Antigonus; and being maimed in his body, lived certain years in captivity
among the Parthians: from whence not long after he returned home; and though he
had many things promised him by Herod, yet after so many alterations of
fortune, he obtained nothing at his hands; and that which amongst all the rest
is most of all to be lamented, as we have said, he was unjustly put to death,
an innocent, and in his old age. For he was a lover of justice, and an observer
of perpetual modesty, and governed his Kingdom for the most part by other men's
direction, being only guilty in himself of ignorance and the love Antipater and
Herod by this man's goodness obtained so great riches: For which deserts of his,
against all Law and right, he was cruelly put to death.

Herod, after Hircanus's death, addressed himself to perform his journey
toward Caesar: and having little hope of any good fortune, in regard of his
friendship with Antonius; he grew desperately jealous of Alexandra, lest she
taking opportunity of the time, should incite the people to rebel, and fill the
Kingdom with domestical sedition: for which cause, Herod's disposition of his
affairs before he repaired to Caesar.
committing the Government to his brother Pheroras, he left his mother Cypros,
his sister, and all his Kindred in the Castle of Massada, and commanded his
brother, that if any misfortune should befall him, he should retain the Kingdom
in his own hands, and maintain it. As for his Wife Mariamne, for that by reason
of certain dislikes betwixt her, his mother and sister, he left her with her
mother, in the Castle of Alexandrion, and committed them to the custody of his
Treasurer Joseph, and Sohemus the Iturean, Pheroras.

CHAP. X.
Herod speaks so generously to Augustus, that he obtained his favor; he
accompanies him
AFter he had in this sort given order for all his affairs, Herod comes to
Caesar, and declares unto him what pleasures he had done Antony* promising him
no less duty and love, if so be he might be received into his favor.
he took shipping to Rhodes, to meet with Caesar. And as soon as he arrived in
that City, he took the Crown from his Head, and laid it apart, but as for his
other Princely ornaments, he changed them not; and being admitted to Caesar's
presence, he gave a more ample testimony of the greatness of his courage than
ever: for he neither addressed his speech to entreat his favor (according to
the custom of suppliants) neither presented he any request, as if he had in any
sort offended him, but gave account of all that which he had done, without
being daunted

For he freely confessed before Caesar, that he had entirely loved Antonius,
and that to the utmost of his power he had done him service, to the end that he
might obtain the sovereignty and the Empire of the World; not by joining his
Forces unto his, in that he was otherwise employed in the Arabian War, but in
furnishing him both with Wheat and Money, and that this was the least office
which it behoved him to perform toward Antonius; for that being once his
professed friend, it behoved him not only to employ his best endeavors on his
so Princely benefactor, but also to hazard both his head and happiness to
deliver him from perils. All which (said he) I have not performed according as
I ought to have done; yet notwithstanding I know, that at such time as he was
overcome in the Actian Battle, I did not alter my affection with Antonius with
my presence and assistance in the Actian War, yet, at least I assisted him with
my counsel, assuring him, that he had but one only means left him for his
security, and prevention of his utter ruin, which was, to put Cleopatra to
death, for that by cutting her off, he might enjoy her estate, and might more
easily obtain his peace, and pacify thy displeasure against him. And for that
he gave but slender regard to these my admonitions by his own sottishness and
indiscretion, he has hurt himself and profited you, because, as I said, he did
not follow my counsel. Now therefore (O Caesar) in regard of the hatred which
you bear unto Antony, you condemn my friendship also. I will not deny that
which I have done; neither am I afraid freely and publicly to protest how much
I have loved him: but if without regard of persons

By these words (which were manifest testimonies of his resolute and noble
courage) he so inwardly indeared himself unto Caesar, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap.
8.
who was a magnificent and worthy Monarch, Caesar confirms Herod's authority.
that he converted this his accusation into an occasion to win and work him to
be his friend: for which cause Caesar, setting the Crown upon his head,
exhorted him that he should no less respect his friendship, than he had in
former times Antonies: and withal, did him much honor; certifying him
moreover, that Capidius had written unto Herod had assisted him in his Wars
that he had with the Monarchs of Syria. Herod seeing that he was thus
entertained, and that contrary to his expectation, the Kingdom was more surely
confirmed unto him, than before time, both by Caesar's bounty; and also by the
decree of the Senate, The year of the World, 3935. before Christ's Nativity, 29.
which he had practiced to obtain, for Caesar as far as Egypt, presenting both
himself and his friends with many rich gifts, beyond the proportion of his
estate: endeavoring, by these means, both to win their favor, and to show also
the greatness of his courage; requiring moreover at Caesar's hands, Herod
conducteth Caesar toward Egypt, and presents him with many sumptuous gifts.
that Alexander, who was one of Antonies dearest friends, might not be sought
out to be punished: yet notwithstanding, he could not obtain the same, by
reason of an Oath that Caesar had past before he solicited him. That done, he
returned back again unto Jewry, with greater honor and assurance than before;
whereby he struck them with wonderful amazement, who expected his contrary
success, as if by Gods special providence he always over-went his dangers,
Herod entertaineth both Caesar and his Army very heroically.
to his great honor. Therefore he prepared himself to entertain Caesar, who
returned out of Syria, Egypt, and received him at Ptolomais, with all Royal
honor, and gave his Army Presents with all abundance of Provision: so that he
was accounted for one of Caesar's most affectionate friends, and rode about with
him, when he took the view of his Army; he entertained him also, and his
friends with One hundred and fifty Men, adorned with most rich and sumptuous
apparel. And for that they were to pass through a Country, wherein there was
great scarcity of Water, he furnished them with both Water and Wine; so that
they needed neither of them. He gave Caesar also Eight hundred Talents, Herod
gives Caesar 800 Talents.
and so royally satisfied he all Men, that they confessed themselves to have
had a far greater entertainment, than the Revenues and Profits of his Kingdom
could afford them. By which means, he gave the more ample testimony of his
Romans in their return from Egypt.

CHAP. XI.
Mariamne gives Herod so cold a reception when he returned from Caesar, that
being joined to the aspersions which Herod's mother and sister laid upon her,
he had infallibly caused her to be put to death at that very instant: But he is
engaged to return to Augustus; he put-her to death at his back-coming. The
business of Alexandra, Mariamne's Mother.
BUT as soon as he returned unto his Kingdom, Mariamne and Alexandra displeased
with Herod.
he found all his Household troubled, and both his Wife Mariamne, and her Mother
Alexandra grievously displeased with him. For they supposed (and not without
cause) that they were not shut up in that Mariamne also supposed that her
Husband did but dissemble his love, rather for his own profit than for any
entire affection he bare toward her. But nothing more grieved her, than that
she had not any hope to live after him, if so be, he should happen to die,
especially for the order he had left concerning her: neither could she ever
forget what commands he had before that time left with Joseph; so that by all
means possible, she labored to win the affections of those that had the charge
of her, and especially Sohemus, knowing very well, that her safety depended
wholly on his hands. Who in the beginning behaved himself very wisely and
faithfully, containing himself Sohemus discovers the Kings secrets.
especially, for that he hoped not that he should return with the same power
and authority, which before he had: and for that cause he thought thus in
himself, that without incurring any danger in regard of Herod, he might greatly
gratify the Ladies; who in all likelihood should not be deprived of that
dignity wherein they were at that time; but would return them the like kindness
when Mariamne should be Queen, or next unto the King. Furthermore, he hoped,
that if Herod also should return with all things answerable to his desires,
that he would perform nothing without his Wifes consent; or upbraid him
Mariamne was very sore displeased to hear that there was no end of her
miseries, but they were altogether united and tied to the dangers of Herod; and
she oftentimes wished that he might never more return again in safety,
supposing that her life with him should be very intolerable: all which, she
afterward dissembled not, but openly confessed that which afflicted her with
discontent. For when as Herod, beyond all expectation, arrived in his Country,
being adorned with mighty fortune, he first of all, as it became him,
acquainted his Wife with his good tidings, and happy success, whom only
amongst all other his friends and Wives, he embraced and saluted, Herod but
coldly entertained by his wife Mariamne.
for the pleasing conversation and affection that was in her. But she, while he
repeated unto her these fortunate events of his affairs, rather entertained
Herod was sore troubled, Herod's sorrows to see his wifes affections distracted
and changed.
perceiving these things not only suspected, but also fully manifest: but
above all things, he was distracted, when he considered the incredible and
apparent hatred that his Wife had conceived against him, which incensed him so,
that he could not resist the love that had attainted him; so that he neither
could continue in wrath, nor listen long to peace, and being unresolved in
himself, he now was attempted by this; straight distracted by a contrary
affection: so much was his mind tossed between Herod's sister and his mother
incense the King by sland^rous reports against Mariamne.
through the desire he bare unto his deceased delight. Whilst thus he was
tortured in his passions, and conceived sinister opinions against Mariamne his
Wife; Salome his sister, and his mother, having an inkling of his discontents,
thought that they had gotten a fit opportunity to express and execute their
hatred toward Mariamne: for which cause they conferred with Herod, and whetted
his spleen and displeasure with variety of slanders, sufficient at one assault
to engender hatred, and kindle his jealousy against her. To these reproaches
of theirs he lent no unwilling ears; yet Anthony and Cleopatra being dead,
Anthony and Cleopatra slain.
Caesar was become Lord of Egypt: for which cause, Caesar Lord of Egypt.
hasting forward to meet and entertain him, he left his family in that present
estate. Upon his departure, he recommended Mariamne to Sohemus, giving him
great thanks for the care he had had of her, Sohemus honored by Herod with
dignities.
and granting him in way of gratuity a part of Jewry to govern.

Herod was arrived in Egypt, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 9.
and had friendly and familiarly conferred with Caesar, he was highly honored
by him: for Caesar gave him those four hundred French men that were of
Cleopatra's guard; Caesar enlarges Herod's dominions.
and restored that part of his Country unto him again, which was taken away,
and spoiled by her. He annexed also unto his Kingdom Gadara, Hippon, and
Samaria, and on the Sea Coasts, the Cities of Gaza, Anthedon, Joppe, with the
Tower of Straton: which when he had obtained, he grew more mighty than before:
and after he had accompanied Caesar as far as Antioch, he returned into his own
Country. Upon his arrival, he found that fortune which was favorable unto him
abroad, too froward at home, especially in regard of his Wife, in whose
affection he seemed to be most happy. For he was as inwardly touched with the
lawful love of Mariamne Mariamne, a froward woman.
as any other of whom the Histories make report; and as for her, she was both
chaste and faithful unto him; yet she had a certain womanly imperfection and
natural frowardness, which was the cause that she presumed too much upon the
entire affection wherewith her husband was entangled; so that without regard of
his person, who had power and authority over others, she entertained him
oftentimes very outragiously: All which endured he patiently, without any show
of discontent. But Mariamne upbraided, and publicly reproached both the Kings
mother and sister, telling them, that they were but abjectly and basely born.

Whereupon there grew a great enmity, and unincoverable hatred between the
Ladies; and from thence also, there arose an occasion of greater accusations
and calumniation Herod's return from Caesar; and at length, this long contrived
hatred brake out violently, upon this occasion that ensues: Whenas about
midday the King had withdrawn himself into his Chamber to take his rest, The
year of the World, 3936. before Christ's Nativity, 28.
he called Mariamne to him to Mariamne had prepared a drink for him to incite
and quicken him unto love. Charging him moreover, that if the King in hearing
him speak of this potion, should seem to be moved therewith, that then he
should proceed further in his discourse. He therefore (being in this manner
beforehand instructed Mariamne had bribed him to present his Majesty with an
amorous cup of drink. Now when he perceived that the King was troubled with
these words, he prosecuted his discourse, alleging that the potion was a
certain medicine which Mariamne had given him, the virtue whereof he knew not,
which he had received according as he had told him, knowing that it concerned
both his own security, and the Kings safety.

Herod, who before this, was highly displeased, hearing these words, was so
much Mariamne's most faithful servant to be examined by torments, as concerning
the poison, supposing that it was impossible for her to undertake any thing
whatsoever without his privity. He being tried and tormented after this cruel
manner, confessed nothing of that for which he was tortured; but declared unto
the King, that the hatred which his wife had conceived against him, proceeded
from certain words that Sohemus had told her. Scarcely had he finished these
words, but that the King cried out with a loud voice, saying, That Sohemus, who
before time had been most faithful, both to him and his Kingdom, would not
have declared these his privy commands, Sohemus suspected by Herod in Mariamnes
behalf is put to death.
except there had been some more inward familiarity and secrecy betwixt him and
Mariamne: for which cause he presently Sohemus, and to put him to death. As for
his wife, he drew her to her trial, and to this effect he assembled his most
familiar friends, Mariamne is accused by Herod, and condemned, and imprisoned.
before whom he began to accuse her with great spite and spleen, as touching
these potions and poisons aforesaid; wherein he used intemperate and unseemly
speches, and such as for their bitterness did ill become him in cause of
justice; so that in the end, the assistants seeing the scope of his desire,
pronounced sentence of death against her: Mariamne by Salomes instigations is
led to execution.
which being past, both he, and all other the assistants were of his opinion,
that she should not so speedily be executed, but that she should be kept close
prisoner in some sure place in the Palace. But by Salomes solicitations, Herod
was incited to hasten her death, for that she alleged that the King ought to
fear, lest some sedition Mariamne was led unto her death.

Alexandra her mother considering the estate of the time, and fearing no less
mischief from Herod's hands than her daughter was assured of; she undecently
changed her mind, and abjectly laid aside her former courage and magnanimity.
For intending to make it known, that she was neither party nor privy to those
crimes wherewith Mariamne was charged, she went out to meet her daughter, and
entertained her injuriously, protesting publicly that she was a wicked woman,
Alexandra undecently striveth to acquit her self of Mariamnes Treason.
and ungrateful toward he husband; and that she well deserved the punishment
that was adjudged her, for that she durst be Mariamne by the hair; the
assistants, according to her desert, condemned her generally for her
hypocrisy: but she that was led to be punished, convicted her self by her mild
behavior; for first of all, she gave her no answer, neither was any ways
altered by her reproaches, neither would so much as cast her eye upon her;
making it appear, that she discreetly concealed and covered her mothers
imperfections, and was aggrieved that she had so openly showed so great
indignity: expressing for her own part, a constant behavior, and going to her
death without change of color, so that those that beheld her, perceived in her
a kind of manifest courage and

Mariamne, having been a woman that excelled both in continence and courage*
notwithstanding that she failed somewhat in affability and impatience of
nature: for the rest of her parts, she was an admirable and pleasing beauty,
and of such a carriage in those companies wherein she was entertained, that it
was impossible to express the same, in that she surpassed all those of her
time; which was the principal cause that she lived not graciously and
contentedly with the King. For being entertained by him, who entirely loved
her* and from whom she received nothing that might discontent her, she presumed
upon a great and intemperate liberty in her discourse. She digested also the
loss of her friends very hardly, according as in open terms she made known unto
the King; whereby also it came to pass, Herod's mother and sister, and himself
likewise grew at odds with her.

After her death the King began more powerfully to be inflamed in his
affections, Herod's miserable estate and moan after the death of his wife.
who before as we have declared, was already miserably distracted. For neither
did he love after the common manner of married folk; but whereas almost even
unto madness he nourished this his desire, he could not be induced by the too
unbridled manners of his wife to allay the heat of his affection; but that
daily more and more by doting on her, he increased the same. And all that time
especially he supposed that God was displeased with him for the death of
Mariamne. Oftentimes he did invocate her name, using such lamentable
expressions that did not become the Majesty of a King. And notwithstanding he
devised all kinds of delights and sports that might be imagined, by preparing
banquets, and inviting A plague invadeth Jerusalem.
that oftentimes he commanded his servants to call his wife Mariamne, as if she
had been alive. Whilst thus he was afflicted, there came a pestilence within
the City, that consumed a great part of the people, and most of the nobility,
and all interpreted that this punishment was inflicted by God upon them, for
the unjust death of the Queen. Herod falls griev^usly sick.
Thus the Kings discontents being by this means increased, he at last hid
himself in a solitary wilderness, under pretext of hunting: where afflicting
himself incessantly, at last, he fell into a most grievous sickness. This
disease of his was an inflammation or pain in the neck: he seemed also in some
sort to rave and grow mad: neither remedies relieve him of his agony: but when
the sickness seemed rather to increase, all men at last grew almost desperate
of his recovery. For which cause his Physician, partly in respect of the
contumacy of his disease, partly, because in so great a danger there was not
any free election of diet, they gave him leave to taste whatsoever best pleased
his appetite, committing the uncertain event of his health to the hands of
fortune.

Whilst thus he continued in Samaria, Alxandra in Herod's absence, seeks to
get the possession of the Castles.
which now is called Sebaste, Alexandra, being at that time in Jerusalem,
having notice of this his condition, endeavored to reduce all the strong
fortresses that were within the City under her subjection: the one of which was
hard by the Temple: the other was situate within the City: for they that are
Masters of these keep all the rest of the nation under their awe: because that
without these, neither the usual and sacrifices may be performed: neither may
the Jews live without such sacrifices and oblations, who had rather lose their
lives than contemn their religion. She therefore solicited those that had the
government thereof, to surrender them up to her and Herod's children begotten of
her daughter Mariamne, lest he being dead, they should be seized on by others:
and if it should fortune him to recover his health, in the mean while they
might be kept and held by no man more securely, than such as were his nearest
friends. This suit and solicitation of hers was but coldly received: and the
Captains who at all times showed themselves always faithful, at that time were
the rather far more constant in their duty, both for that they hated Alexandra,
and also that they thought it a great offense to despair of the health of their
Prince. Herod's counselors certify him of Alexandras intent.
For these were the Kings old friends, and one of them was Herod's own Nephew,
Achiabus. For which cause they sent presently messengers unto him to show him
Alexandra's intent: who having heard these news, presently commanded her to be
put to death: Al^xandra put to death.
and at length overcoming his sickness, he grew so badly affected both in body
and mind, that he grew hateful unto all men: so that all those who offended
him, and for how little cause soever, were presently punished. In this his
intemperance he imbrued his hands in the blood of diverse of his friends, as
Costabarus, Lysimachus, Antipater, surnamed Gadias, and Dositheus, for this
occasion that ensues. Costabarus was an Idumaean, and one of the greatest
account amongst his countrymen, who was descended from the Priests of Cozas,
whom the Idumaeans esteem for a god, before that Hircanus had obliged them to
embrace the Jews Religion. Herod being made King of the Jews, appointed
Costabarus to be Governor in Idumaea Gaza, Costabarus, whom Herod had matched
with his sister Salome, usurpeth in Idumaea.
giving him Salome his sister to wife, after he had put Joseph to death, to
whom she had been married before, as we have declared. Costabarus seeing
himself in this estate beyond his expectation, grew more proud then this good
fortune required, and in a little time forgot himself so far, that he thought
himself dishonored, if he should perform that which Herod commanded him, and
scorned that the Idumaeans should be under the Jews subjection, notwithstanding
they had received their manner of government from them. He therefore sent
messengers unto Cleopatra, giving her to understand, that Idumaea had always
been under her ancestors subjection: and for that cause she ought upon just
cause to demand and beg that country at Antonius hands, and that for himself
he was ready to become her servant. All which he practiced, not to gratify
Cleopatra in any sort whatsoever, but to the intent that if Herod's fortunes
should be any ways weakened, he might more easily by this means both enlarge
and obtain the Kingdom of Idumaea. And with these foolish hopes was he
transported, in regard of his birth and riches, which he had heaped together by
such dishonest means as he continually practiced, as he that intended
Cleopatra's often and earnest petition to obtain his sovereignty, Costabarus
preserved by his wives intercession.
yet could she not obtain it at Antonius hands. When Herod had notice of these
covert and cunning practices, he was ready to kill Costabarus. But upon the
earnest supplications of his sister and her mother, he dismissed and pardoned
him; yet held him always insuspicion, by reason of this practice. Not long
after it happened, that Salome fell at debate with Costabarus, for which cause
she sent a Bill of divorce to her husband, notwithstanding it were against the
laws and ordinary customs of the Jews. For according to our ordinances, it is
only lawful for the husband to do the same; and as touching the wife,
notwithstanding she were separated, yet it is not lawful for her to marry
again, except her husband first give her license. But Salome without respect of
the laws of the country grounding husband: saying, that she separated her self
from her husband, by reason of the great friendship which she bare unto her
brother, for that she had received some notice that Costabarus conspired
against her with Antipater, Costabarus, Lysimachus, Antipater and Dositheus
accused before Herod.
Lysimachus and Dositheus. And this accusation she confirmed by Babas children,
whom he had already kept with him in all security for the space of twelve
years. All which was true, and at that time beyond all men's expectation
wonderfully troubled Herod, as soon as he heard it. Babas sons preserved by
Costabarus.
For as for Babas sons, he had heretofore resolved to cut them off, for that
they had been always disaffected toward him and all his enterprises; but all
that time he had let them pass, because by continuance they were grown out of
his remembrance. Now the cause of this enmity and hatred which he bare toward
them, was gathered from this Antigonus enjoyed the sovereignty; and Herod
besieged the City of Jerusalem with an army; those incommodities and
necessities that ordinarily happen unto those that are besieged; were the cause
that diverse acknowledged Herod, and fixed their hopes upon him. But Babas sons
being in authority, and besides that, attended by a great number of men,
persevered in their faithful observation of Antigonus, and blamed Herod
continually, encouraging the inhabitants to continue the Kingdom in those to
whom it app^r^^ined by descent: and they themselves followed that course, which
in their opinion was most profitable for the Commonweal. But after that the
City was surprised by Herod, and he grew master of the estate, Costabarus, who
was appointed to keep the City gates, and to lie in wait that none of those who
were accused to have forsaken the Kings side, should escape, knowing Babas were
greatly esteemed and honored among the people, and foreseeing that their
safety might be no small furtherance to himself, if at any time there might
ensue any alteration, he discharged and hid them within his own possessions:
and notwithstanding that at that time he had protested to Herod by an oath,
that he knew not what was become of them, yet though suspected of perjury, he
concealed them. And afterward when the King had by Proclamation promised a
reward to him that should discover them, and sought for them by all means,
neither then also would he confess the fact. For being afraid lest he should be
punished for his first denial, he concealed them still, not so much for their
sake as for his own interest.

Now when the King had notice hereof by his sisters report, Babas sons and
others are accused before Herod and slain.
he sent to the place where Hircanus kindred was now left alive, but all of
them being killed, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 10.
who excelled in nobility and dignity, he did what he pleased without any
contradiction: for which cause he by little and little forsook the ceremonies
and ordinances of his Country* Herod introduces diverse foreign customs.
and corrupted the decrees and institutions of their ancestors, which he ought
to have kept inviolable, by his new and strange inventions. In whose time there
was a very great change and alteration of the ancient and good manner of
living: The year of the world* 3939. before Christ's Nativity* 25.
for all fell from bad to worse: and the politic order, whereby the people
ought to be governed and kept within compass of their duty, went to decay. For
first of all, he ordained certain wrastlings from five years to five years, in
honor of Caesar: and builded a Theater for that purpose within Jerusalem. The
Theater and the Wrestling places.
He erected also a most huge Amphitheater within the Plain, which were two
Monuments worthy to be seen, by reason of the sumptuousness thereof: but wholly
contrary to the fashions of the Jews. For neither the use, nor the presentation
of these spectacles, has ever been practiced or taught by our Ancestors; yet
was it his pleasure to ennoble this assembly, to the end it might be continued
from five to five years, and this he proclaimed publicly in the Countries
round about, and to this fight he assembled all the nations. The wrastlers also
and all that which concerned their exercise, were sought out from all corners
of the world, under the hope to obtain the proposed palm and victory; and all
the most expedient in those exercises that were to be found, were invited to
that assembly: For he proposed most huge rewards, not only to those that
exercised wrestling, but also to those who are called Musicians, and to all
sorts of players on instruments, endeavoring to his utmost power, that all the
most famous in those professions should pastimes. He appointed also a reward of
great value for such as ran upon the chariots of three, four, or of one horse,
and all that which was both sumptuous and magnificent to behold; for every one
thing was most carefully provided; for he strove to have the honor of a most
magnificent preparation for his games. The Theater was hung all about with
Caesar's titles, and the trophies of those nations which were overcome by him,
altogether set out and shining with gold and silver. As for the instruments
thereof, there wanted neither furniture, costly vestments, or precious stones.
Thither also were drawn certain wild beasts, as Lions and other beasts, which
were worthy to be placed in this famous show, being admirable both for their
force and rareness of nature, who fought the one with the other, and against
such men likewise who were condemned to die: whereby the strangers conceived,
together admiration of his expense an uncomparable and unaccustomed pleasure.
Herod obtains no small honor by these expenses.
But his countrymen interpreted this thing for a manifest corruption of those
disciplines and manners which they had entertained and honored amongst them.
For it was an act most manifestly impious, to hazard men against wild beasts,
to delight the eyes of other men: It was also a matter as impious, to change
and profane the ordinances of the country, for foreign exercises: But the
most hated of all these were the Trophies; for in that they were certain Images
attired in armor, the use and veneration whereof were forbidden by our laws,
this displeased and grieved them more than any thing whatsoever: neither was
Herod ignorant of those troubles which they procured. But he thought it to be a
matter of danger to attempt the same for the present by force, and for that
cause he familiarly debated the same with superstition, The Jews suppose that
the Trophies covered with arms were Images.
but could not prevail. For all of them, with one consent, cried out against
the indignity which they saw him commit: telling him that although all other
things were to be tolerated, yet the Trophies, which were Images of Men, were
unsupportable, because they were unusual in their Country. Herod perceiving
that they were discontented, and that they would not be easily wrought upon,
except they had some contentment, he called the worthiest men amongst them, and
led them into the Theater, demanding of them what they thought these Trophies
were: and when they cried out that they were images of men; he incontinently
caused all the ornaments to be taken off from them, letting them see that they
were naught else but naked stocks of wood; so that suddenly their displeasure
was turned into a people, and moderated the fury of their discontent; so that
diverse of them changed their opinions, and were no more displeased.
Notwithstanding there were some of these that persisted in the conceit they had
of those exercises, supposing that the corruption of their ancient discipline
was an inducement to their grievous calamities; and they imagined that it
rather concerned them to undergo all dangers, than to endure any alteration in
their customs, by permitting that Herod should introduce new and extraordinary
fashions, who only in word was their King, but in effect an enemy of their
whole nation. Ten men conspire against Herod.
For this cause there were ten men amongst them, who bound themselves by oath
to hazard all extremities, and to this intent they had hid certain short swords
under their garments: amongst these there was one that was blind, who urged
resolution, repaired to the Theater, under hope that Herod should not escape
them, for that they intended to assail him unawares: at least if they failed of
him, their hope was to fall foul on some of his favorites and followers,
accounting this to be some comfort in their expected death, if in regard of
their violated religion they might bring the King in hatred with the common
people. Herod has intelligence of the conspiracy.
And these intending to offer themselves as Leaders unto the rest, resolved to
execute these things. But one of those intelligences that Herod had sent abroad
to pry and search into conspiracy, signified the same unto the King, when he
was ready to enter into the Theater. He knowing very well what hatred was
continually hatched against him, betook himself to his Palace, and sent for the
conspirators by their names: who being apprehended in the fact, and knowing
that there was no way for them to escape, resolved to endure their present
misfortunes with courage:

Now when with great confidence they had alleged these things for their
justification they were led away by the Kings Ministers to be put to death by
diverse sorts of torments. The ten men are executed, and the intelligencer is
cut in pieces.
Not long after this, that Intelligencer who had betrayed them, growing hateful
in all men's eyes, was stabd by certain men, and chopped in pieces with their
swords, and afterward cast unto the dogs in sight and presence of many. Yet
did no man discover this act, until after Herod, it was got out of certain poor
women (who were privy to the fact) with diverse torments. Then were all the
actors of that murder punished, with their whole families: and notwithstanding
all this, the common people was no ways daunted, but were ready to defend
their laws, except they were restrained by some greater power. Herod fortisieth
two castles within Jerusalem, Antonia, Samaria, or Sebaste.
Which when the King perceived, he resisted their endeavors with all diligence,
lest through these alterations in affairs, the people should be drawn to an
open rebellion. Whereas therefore he had two strong Castles within the City,
one wherein his palace was, another called Antonia, that adjoined near unto the
Temple, fortified by him; he thought good to strengthen a third called Samaria,
the name whereof he changed, and called it Sebaste (which was distant from
Jerusalem some days journey) to Stratons Tower or Caesarea.
And for the whole Nation he builded a Fort, Gabala.
which in times past was called Straton, and afterward he named it Caesarea.
H^rod planteth garrisons in the fortresses to withstand conspiracies.
He builded also a Fort in Galilee, which was called Gabala, in a large Plain,
where by turns he kept his horsemen. Besides these* he builded the Fort of
Esthmonites in the Country of Peraea on the other side Jordan.

Now when he had fitly disposed all these Castles through his whole Country,
for the security and safety of his Kingdom, the matter of rebellion was taken
from the common people, who upon every light cause are subject to commotions,
in that he had prepared a remedy against all privy conspiracies, by planting
such forces always near at hand, who Samaria with a wall, he brought to pass
that diverse of those who had born arms with him against his enemies, and diverse
of the people likewise that dwelt round about, came to inhabit it, both in
regard of the Temple, which he intended to build in that place, as also for
that he fortified the same for his own security (although that formerly it was
not in the number of famous Cities.) He therefore changed the name thereof, and
called it Sebaste, and distributed the lands that confined the City among the
inhabitants of the same (which was by nat^re a fruitful country) to the intent
that within a little space they might enrich themselves. He environed the City
also with a strong wall, being assisted by the natural strength and steepness
of the place: and besides the whole circuit,

CHAP. XII.
Judaea is afflicted with many miseries, but especially with a violent Plague
and a terrible Famine: Herod's wonderful care and liberality to remedy it: He
recovereth by this means the love of the people, whom he supplieth with
abundance of all things: He builds a stately Palace in Jerusalem: He marries
with the Daughter of Simon, whom he creates High Priest. Another brave Castle
is built by him in the same place where he had formerly routed the Jews.
THat very year, Hedio and R^^^inus, chap. 11. al. 10.
which was the thirteenth year of Herod's reign, very great calamities happened in
that country (either through Gods displeasure, or for that the revolution of
time would have it so.) (...)
For first of all, there were such continual droughts, that by reason thereof
the earth grew barren, and produced not those fruits which of it self it was
accustomed to bear. And after ordinary course of men's diets being altered by
reason of the want of corn, the want of food was accompanied with a b^d^ly
sickness (for that by custom these two plagues do ordinarily entertain one
another:) for this made the plague and sickness more vehement, The year of the
World, 3942. before the Nativity of Christ, 22.
as was expedient, nor get convenient nourishment for preservation of life: so
that many died daily, and those also that remained alive were in despair,
because they could not relieve their want and necessities, what diligence
soever they used. For which cause, after the old fruits of that year were
wholly consumed, and all the rest of their store was utterly spent, there
appeared not any means whereupon they might hope; namely, for that the misery
increased more than was expected; yea, and extended it self beyond that year:
so that they had nothing remaining by them, and the seed that was sowed at that
time mouldred away, and the earth for all their labors afforded them no
increase. The necessity therefore being King likewise was in no less
perplexity; in that he was deprived of those ordinary revenues which he
received by the fruits of the earth; and the rather, for that he had spent his
money in repairing his Cities, according as before this we have declared: all
things were wasted by diverse calamities, so that a man could conceive no hope
of remedy. Besides this, the people hated their King; for that it is their
custom ordinarily to accuse their Governors, as if they were the authors of all
their evils. Yet did the King bethink himself how he might remedy these
inconveniences, but he hardly could find the means, for their neighbors could
not sell them victuals, because they were no less afflicted than themselves:
and although he might have recovered some little for a great sum of money,
Herod makes (...) of all his rich ornaments and household stuff of gold and
silver* and buyeth corn.
notwithstanding in that he knew, that it behoved him to employ his uttermost
endeavors for a general remedy to such a violent oppression, he melted down all
those movables he had either of Gold or Silver within his Palace, and spared
nothing either for the matter, the excellency, or the fashion; no not so much
as the vessels wherein he was ordinarily served. This money was sent into
Egypt, where at that time, under Caesar, Petronius held the government. This
man being Herod's friend, in that he desired the safety of his subjects, at
such time as diverse of them retired themselves unto him, by reason of their
necessity, he permitted them to buy up corn, and assisted them in all things,
both in their bargains, and in their carriages: so that the greater or the
whole sum of their succors was attributed to him. But after their return,
Herod Herod distributeth the (...).
For, first of all, he distributed a certain quantity of corn to all those who
were not able of themselves to supply their own wants, using herein both great
care and diligence. After this, for that there were a great number of such, who
in regard of their age, or some other infirmity, were unable to prepare their
victuals, he took order for their relief, and appointed them certain Bakers,
who should furnish them with bread sufficient for their subsistence. He gave
order also, that they should not pass the winter without clothing, but
provided for such as were naked sufficient raiment, considering that the sheep
were partly dead, and partly devoured, and Syrians with seed-corn to sow their
lands, which yielded him no little profit: for the earth incontinently gave him
a large and plentiful tribute for that she had received, so that all of them
had abundance of victuals: and as soon as the harvest was ready, he sent fifty
thousand men into that Country which he had relieved: and by this means he with
all diligence restored his afflicted Kingdom, and comforted his neighbors, who
were oppressed with the like calamity. For there was not any man in necessity,
that according to his quality was not assisted and succored.

The Villages likewise and the Cities, and those of the common sort who
entertained Athenian bushels: and within the compass of his Realm he employed
eighty thousand: which care of his, and discreet favor, wrought so much in the
hearts of (...) Jews, The Jews favor Herod for his bounty.
and was so highly renowned amongst other Nations, that the ancient hatred
which they had conceived against him, for that he had altered certain customs
of their Kingdom, was wholly forgotten, and he was supposed by them to have
made a sufficient recompense, by the diligence he had showed in assisting them
in their necessities: and no (...) glory obtained he amongst strangers: so that
by these miseries the King's honor

About the same time also he sent Caesar certain supplies, The year of the
World, 3942. before Christ's Nativity, 22*
namely, five hundred chosen Ellius Gallus led into the Wars in Arabia, and had
often use of them in his most dangerous attempts. When therefore his Kingdom
was restored to its former felicity, he builded a Royal Palace in the higher
part of the City, furnished with many large buildings, and adorned with gold
and marble seats, so that they might receive a great number of men: H^rod
sends Caesar five hundred of his g^ard.
he named also each room of the house according to their several names, and
called one the lodging of Caesar, and another of Agrippa. After this, being
entangled with love, The Palace built in J^rusalem.
he married a wife, lest he should be distracted by vain desires; and the cause
of this his new marriage was this: There was amongst those that dwelt in
Jerusalem a certain Citizen called Simon, the son of Boethas the Alexandrine,
who was a Priest and Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 12.
this man had a daughter, the fairest and comliest creature of that age, whose
beauty being renowned by the common voice, it came to pass, that Herod was
taken with her good character, and afterward obtaining the sight of her, he
fell in love with her; yet would not use his authority, lest he should seem to
behave himself tyrannically, H^^od (...) from hi^ Priesthood, and places Simon
in his room, and marries his daughter.
but chose rather to accept her for his wife. Whereas therefore Simon seemed
unworthy of his affinity, and yet too worthy to be contemned, he made election
of a convenient means to obtain the fullness of his desire, which was, to raise
both Simon and his to higher dignities. For which cause he presently deposed
the high Priest Jesus, the son of Phabetes, and established Simon in his place;
and that done, he contracted affinity with him. After the marriage was
consummate, he builded Antigonus.

This place is distant from Jerusalem some sixty furlongs, or stades, strong by
nature, and fit for defense and fortification. For near it there is a certain
steep hill made by Art, after the manner of a round dug, environed with round
Towers, with a steep ascent of two hundred steps cut out of hewed stone. Within
the same there are diverse places builded with great and sumptuous workmanship,
made both for defense and delight. At the foot of this hill there are two
houses worthy to be seen, for diverse singularities, and namely, by reason of
those Conduits of water, which although they spring not in that place, yet
notwithstanding they are brought from far with great cost and expense. The
Caesar, and other mighty Magistrates of Rome, caused him to outstrip his
customs, and to alter diverse Ordinances of his Country in building Cities, and
erecting Temples in honor of them, although he builded them not in the Land of
Jury: for the Jews would not have endured it, because we are forbidden to
honor images and figures, formed according to the likeness of a man, as the
Greeks are accustomed to do; but he did this in the Country and foreign Cities,
and excused himself to the Jews: saying, that he did it not of his own head,
but performed that according to the charge which he had from others, H^rod
(...).
who were greater than himself: and in the mean while gratified Caesar and the
Romans, in that he respected their honor more than he did the ordinances of
his

CHAP. XIII.
Herod causes to be built a glorious City in honor of Augustus, which he
calls Caesarea. He sends his two Sons to him, whom he had by Mariamne,
their names were Alexander and Aristobulus. Augustus conferreth new favors on
him. The cause why Herod used the ^^sseniens so kindly.
WHen as therefore he had found out a fit and convenient place upon the
Seacoast to build a City on, (...)
which of long time had been called the Tower of Straton, he both magnificently
designed and set down the model and form thereof, and made many sumptuous The
year of the World, 3942. before the Nativity, of Christ, 22*
both Palaces and other private Lodgings, not builded after a slight manner, or
of weak and fading matter, but of Marble. But the greatest work of all, was the
Haven which he made exempt and free from storms and tempests, that in greatness
resembled that of Piraeus, and was so spacious, that it was able to receive
many great Ships into the Road, and had diverse Rooms and Warehouses to lay up
the Merchandise therein. And the more admirable was this Structure, Piraeus the
Port of Athens.
because the materials that were fit to finish this great work, were not gotten
in that place, but must needs be brought from other places, with great charge
and expense. Dora and Joppa ill Harbors.
This City is seated in Phoenicia, upon the Coast in the way to Egypt, between
Joppa and Dora, certain Villages situate upon the Seacoasts, unfit either
Afric wind, and driving the sand of the Sea upon the shore, gives not any
quiet road unto the ships, but that the Merchants are enforced for a long time
to ride at Anchor. To correct this incommodity of the place, he made the
circuit round about the Port so spacious, The Port of Caesarea.
that it was able to receive a great Fleet: and he cast down to the bottom
thereof, which was about some twenty sathoms deep, certain huge stones, that for
the most part were fifty foot long, eight foot broad, and nine foot high, some
more, That part of the Mole that kept off the Sea was called Procymation, that
is, Stop flood in Greek.
and some less. This Mole extended two hundred foot, of which one half served
to break the violence of the waves; on the other half was built a wall
fortified with Towers, whereof the fairest was called by the name of Drusus,
Livia, Augustus Empress Son, who died young: there was also many Vaults like
Arches, to lodge Seamen.

Augustus, which presented it self to their sight who sailed to the Port, there
being two Statues, the one representing Rome, and the other Augustus Caesar.
This City also Caesarea, as much to be wondered at for the matter whereof it was
built, as for the Art whereby it was erected: and no less cunning was there
showed in the Vaults and Conduits under ground, then in those buildings that
were about them: some of them were conveyed toward the Port, and discharged
themselves into the Sea: but there was one that went athwarts all the rest, to
the end that thereby the rainwater, and the cleansings of the City might be
conveyed into the Sea, and that when the Sea should flow, it might wash and
cleanse all the City.

He erected also a Theater of Stone, The Theater and Amphitheater.
and behind the same, to the Southward, an Amphitheater, that was able to
receive a great number of men, and so pleasantly and fitly situated, Herod
sends his sons, Alexander and Aristobulus to Rome unto Caesar.
that from thence a man might discover Ships at a great distance on the Sea.
This Sebasta was already inhabited also, he resolved to send his two sons,
Caesar gives Herod the Dominions of the Trachonites of Baranea and Auranita.
Alexander and Aristobulus, to Rome, to present them unto the Emperor Caesar.
Pollio, who was Herod's most intimate friend, had prepared them lodgings at his
house; but it was needless, because Augustus gave them an appartment in his own
Palace. This great Emperor received them with all the kindness and civility
imaginable; and gave their father the freedom to make choice of either of them
to succeed him in his Kingdom, enlarging it with the addition of three
Provinces, Trachona, Baranca, and Auranita, on this occasion that follows.
Zenodorus lives by spoil.
A certain man, called Zenodorus, had rented Lysanias lands; Trachona, which is
a Country the inhabitants whereof commonly live by pillage and spoil, which
they purchase from the Citizens and Merchants of Damasco. And so far was
Zenodorus from prohibiting these robberies, that he himself also was partaker
of the booty: so that the Nations neighboring about, seeing themselves thus
abused, sought for remedy at Varus hands, who was their Governor, requiring him
to acquaint Caesar with Zenodorus's proceedings. Which when he understood, he
commanded that such lawless ryoters should be punished, and that the Country
should be added to the Jurisdiction of Herod, to the intent that by his
vigilance, the inhabitants of Trachona should no more molest their neighbors.
For it was hard to restrain them, considering time, The year of the World,
3942. before Christ's Nativity, 22*
and maintain themselves in their caves, when their enemies assailed them
without.

The doors of these dens were so narrow, that they could be entered but by one
at once: but within it was incredible spacious and large: the upper part
thereof was not sleepy, but plain, and in form of a smooth earth: for the whole
place naturally consisted of a sharp and ragged rock with a hard and difficult
passage thereon, unless a man be guided through the paths. For the way was not
direct and straight, but full of winding and many turnings. At such time as
they wanted opportunity to spoil their neighbors, they robbed one another;
Herod punishes the Robbers.
and omitted no kind of wickedness. Herod having received the gift of this
Country from Caesar, resorted thither under the conduct of certain guides that
knew the ways, and having brought their power and proling to an end, Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 13.
he left the neighboring nations Agrippa is sent into Asia.
But Zenodorus being partly whetted on with envy, partly incited by the grief
which he conceived through the loss of his possessions, resorted to Rome to
accuse Herod; Agrippa sends the Gadareans bound unto Herod, who came to
accuse him.
yet could compass nothing of that which he intended.

When Agrippa was sent into Asia by Caesar to govern the Provinces beyond the
seas Herod, because he was his familiar friend, went to salute him at Mitylene
where he wintered, and afterward returned into Jewry. But certain Gadareans
came unto Agrippa with an intent to accuse Herod: Zenodorus Signiory sold to
the Auranites, and bestowed on Herod by Caesar, is the cause of the Wars.
but he sent them bound unto the King, and vouchsafed them no audience. On the
other side, the Auranites, who of long time hated Herod's government, stirred
up commotions, and endeavored to draw the country into rebellion, and that
upon a just ground, as it seemed, as that time: for Zenodorus despairing of his
affairs, went Auranita (which was comprehended within Caesar's donation to
Herod) for the sum of fi^ty talents of yearly revenue, wherewith they grew
discontented, for that they were unjustly deprived of their estates: and
hereupon they made often incursions, endeavoring sometimes to recover the same
by force; and otherwhile contending for the right of their possession by course
of justice. They drew also unto them certain needy Soldiers; Who according to
the custom of wretched men, expected their better fortunes by change and
innovation: which though Herod knew, and could have providently prevented them,
yet exhorted them to maintain their titles rather by good means than open
violence, being loath to give any occasion of new troubleor disquiet. Caesar
comes into Syria, before him the Gadar^^ans accuse Herod, and afterward
murder themselves.
At length, in the seventeeth (...) of his reign, Caesar came into Syria: upon
whose Gadareans began to exclaim against Herod, accusing him of his severity
and tyranny: which accusation they the rather attempted, because they were
chiefly incited thereunto by the instigations and false suggestions of
Zenodorus, who bound himself by an oath, that he would never give over, until
that delivering them from Herod's tyranny, they were reduced under Caesar's
protection. The Gadareans persuaded by these his protestations, began to
continue their exclamations, and somewhat the more audaciously, for that they
perceived that they lived as yet unpunished whom* Agrippa had delivered into
Herod's hands: for Herod had set them at liberty without any punishment,
notwithstanding that in regard of his own subjects he was inexorable as ever
man was; and most patient in enduring those injuries that were offered him by
strangers, The year of the World, 3942. before The Nativity, of Christ, 18*
whom he always dismissed Herod being nothing concerned thereat, presented
himself before the Emperor to justify his actions. But Caesar entertained him
very kindly, and diminished nothing of the good affection which he bare unto
him, notwithstanding all the uproars and insolent tumults of the people. Thus
was the first day spent in audience of their complaints, and in those days
that followed there were no further objections to be heard of: for the
Gadareans perceiving both Caesar's disposition and the inclination of his
Council, and fearing (as it was most likely) to be delivered into Herod's
hands, the next night after some of them killed themselves; others for fear of
torments brake their own necks; and some of them also drowned themselves in the
river. And thus whereas Caesar presently absolved Herod.

And this felicity of his was seconded with another of small cons^quence.
Ulatha, Pa^eas, and other regions are given to Herod*
For Zenodorus having his bowels broken through an extreme flux of blood,
finished his life at Antioch in Syria. Whereupon Caesar gave Herod his
Country, which was a large possession, and was situate between Trac^onita and
Galilee, Herod highly esteemed by Caesar, and Caesar makes Ph^roras a Tetrarch.
containing Ulatha, Paneas, and the Countries thereabouts. He made him one of
the Governors of Syria also, commanding them to execute nothing without his
advice. At this time he attained to the height of all worldly felicity: For
whereas within the mighty Roman Empire all things were disposed by Caesar and
Agrippa, Caesar honored no man more than Herod next to Agrippa: and Agrippa
respected him above all men next to Caesar. Whereupon he grew to be so
confident, that Tetrarchy at Caesar, hands, for his brother Pheroras: on whom
he bestowed one hundred talents of his revenue out of his own Kingdom, that if
he should happen to die, Pheroras estate might be assured and left no ways
subject unto his children.

Caesar as far as the Sea, The year of the World, 3942. before Christ's
Nativity, 22*
upon his return he builded a stately Temple of White Marble in honor of his
Name, in the country which belonged to Zenodorus, near to a place which is
called Panion, which is a huge cave in the heart of a Mountain, and a place of
great pleasure, under which there is a wide pool of immeasurable depth, Herod
builds a Temple near unto Panion.
which is full of standing Water, and the upper part of the Mountain is very
high. From under this cave springs the fountain heads of the flood Jordan. This
place of it self so famous and delightful, Herod remitteth the third part* of
his tribute.
was chosen out by Herod, and adorned also with a Temple which he built in
honor of Caesar. At that time also he released the third part of those
tributes which his subjects paid unto him, to the end (as he said) that he
might Herod with great discretion prevented it, and cut off all occasions of
insurrection, commanding every one to mind his business; forbidding them to
make any assemblies in the City, or to talk one with another under color of
walking abroad for pleasure or feasts sake. Moreover he had sent out certain
Intelligencers to discover all that which was done, appointing grievous
punishments for those that misliked his Government. For diverse of them were led
unto the Castle of Hircania, some openly, some privately, where they were no
sooner imprisoned, but they were put to death; and both in the City and in the
country, there were certain men appointed to take note of all such that used
any assemblies upon any occasion whatsoever. He was so concerned at his
subjects distastes, that as it is reported of him, he took the habit of a
private man, and thrust himself in the night time into the company of the
people, to understand and gather what they thought of his government; and those
whom he found to be untractable and obstinate, and would not be conformed to
his will, he dispatched them by one means or other, Herod binds the people by
an oath.
binding the rest of the people by an oath to serve him faithfully, and
constrained them to keep the oath they had sworn, and to acknowledge his
Sovereignty: whereunto courage, Herod excuses the Pharisees from swearing for
Pollio's and Samea's sakes.
and were discontented to see themselves constrained, he cut them off by all
means possible. He required also an oath of diverse of those Sectaries who
followed the Pharisees Pollio and Sameas: and notwithstanding they denied to
take the oath, yet he did not punish them as he did the other for their
refusal, The Esseans not much unlike the Pythagonists.
in respect and reverence of Pollio their Master. From this rigor also were
they exempt, who amongst us are called Esseans, which is a sort of men that
live after that manner that Pythagoras did among the Grecians, of whom I have
more expressly discoursed in another place.

I think it not a matter to be overslipt, neither varying from my History, to
report for what cause the King had so religious an opinion of those men. There
was a certain Essean called Manahem, who in his sect was accounted an upright
and just man, and one that had obtained from God the knowledge of things to
come. He seeing Herod one day at such time as he was very young and went to
School, saluted him and called him King of the Jews. Herod supposing that
Manahem knew him not, or that he mocked him, reproved him sharply for his
speech, saying, that he acknowledged himself to be one of the common sort.
Manahem smiling, hit him gently with his hand upon the back, and said unto him,
Thou shall be King, and shall have a happy reign; for such is Gods pleasure:
and at that time remember thy self of the words that Manahem spoke unto thee,
which shall serve for a test^mony to put thee in mind of thy mutable estate.
For it becomes thee nothing more, than by justice, piety, and equity, to win
the hearts of thy subjects: yet know I by revelation from God,

At that time Herod gave small regard to those his words, Herod questioneth
with Manahem about the continuance of his Kingdom, and loves the Esseans for
his sake.
in that he had no hope that any such thing should happen: but not long after,
as soon as he had obtained the Kingdom to the fullness of his felicity, he in
the greatness of his power sent for Manahem, and asked him how long he should
reign. But he returned him a doubtful answer. Which when Herod perc^ived, he
asked him anew if he should reign ten years. Whereunto Manahem answered, And
twenty, and thirty, without setting him down any prefixed term. Herod Manahem,
and gave him license to depart, and continued his affections toward the
Esseans for his sake. I have thought good to register these things,
notwithstanding they may s^em uncredible, to declare that diverse of our nation
have had communication with GOD by reason of their holiness.

CHAP. XIV.
Herod builds a New Temple in Jerusalem, The year of the World* 3947. before
Christ's Nativity, 17.
after he had pulled down the Old.
IN the eighteenth year of his reign, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 14. al. 11.
Herod, after he had finished these many and admirable actions, conceived in
his mind, a mighty project, which was to re-edifie Gods Temple of greater
bigness and answerable height, Herod intends to re-edifie Gods Temple.
hoping that this work, which was the most admirable of all those he had
undertaken (as indeed it was) being finished, would Herod certifieth the people
that he will re-edifie the Temple.
But fearing lest the people, in regard of the greatness of the enterprise,
would be hardly drawn thereunto, he determined to sound their intentions by his
discourse, and for that cause assembling them together, he spoke after this
manner:

Men and brethren, I hold it to be a matter both vain and superfluous, to
recount unto you what things I have performed, during the time of my
government. For they have been of that nature, that they have returned me but
little honor, and your self great profit and security. For you your selves
know, that in those adversities that have befallen you, I have been no ways
negligent in that which concerned your profit: and in those buildings I have
erected by Gods assistance, I have not so much regarded my self, as that which
concerns you all: and my hope is by the will of God, that I have brought the
estate of the Jews to that degree Babylon, builded a Temple in Honor of our
great and mighty God, which in height wanted sixty cubits of that which Solomon
first built: yet ought we not to object it as a blame, or ascribe this action
to any impiety in our Ancestors. For the Temple was not at their disposing, but
the measure of their Building was set down by Cyrus and Darius the Son of
Hystaspes, Macedonians: so that they had not the means and opportunity to raise
this religious Monument, according to the first pattern, to that requisite and
convenient height. But since at this present, by Gods permission, I have
obtained the Kingdom: and that for a long time hitherto we have enjoyed a happy
peace: and that neither money nor great revenues are wanting: and that which is
our greatest good, we are made happy by the favor of the Romans, who in a sort
are Lords of the whole world, and in effect are our entire friends: I will
enforce my self to repair that defect, which happened in times past through the
miseries of our noble predecessors: resolving with my self to perfect that
which is requisite for the service of God, in acknowledgment of the benefits
which I have received

This sudden and unexpected speech of Herod's filled all men's ears with wonder,
and hearts with expectation, in that he seemed to promise such a thing, as was
beyond their hope, and as they thought far greater than his power: and that
which most distracted them was, for that they had conceived a fear, lest after
he had pulled down the old, he should not be of abllity to erect a new. For
which cause his counsel seemed to be dangerous, The Jews fearing least Herod
should pull down the old Temple before he had prepared matter for the new, he
promises the contrary.
and attempt over difficult. But the King perceiving with what doubts they were
detained, encouraged them, promising in no sort to deface the Old Temple,
before all that was prepared and polished, which was requisite for the building
of the New. And in this he kept his word: For he appointed a thousand chariots
to draw Convenient st^ff is gathered for the building of the Temple.
This done, after he had prepared all things requisite, he caused them to fall
to their building. As soon as therefore the former foundations were taken away,
and new were planted in their place, the Temple was erected upon them, in
length one hundred cubits, and twenty cubits in height, above those hundred
cubits which the former contained, which twenty cubits were in some manner
sunck, after that by process of time the foundations began to be settled: and
during Nero's reign our Countrymen thought to have raised it to the first
height. How the Temple was builded (...) Herod.
The building was of white Solomon our King, who by Gods favor and labor of
diverse workmen, did first of all build the higher part: Herod also enclosed the
lower part thereof with another wall, under which to the Southward there lies
a most deep valley. This wall was made of huge stones, close fastened the one
unto the other with Lead, shutting all within his enclosure, and extending it
self very deep: so that the greatness Barbarians, which King Herod had placed
there, with all those spoils which he had taken from the Arabians. In a corner
on the North side there stood a very strong Fortress, builded by the Asmonians;
who were Herod's predecessors, and had been both Kings and High Priests, and
had imposed a name on that Tower which was Baris, in which they kept the
Priestly Vesture, wherewith the High Priest was wont to be adorned at that time
only, when he was to offer sacrifice. King Herod kept the same in that place,
and there remained it after his death, until the time of Tiberius Caesar, under
whom Vitellius Governor of Syria, came unto Jerusalem, where he was entertained
by all the people with as great magnificence, as was possible: and being
desirous to acknowledge the favor that he had received Tiberius Caesar to
grant them that favor: and till the death of King Agrippa the Jews had the
same in their possession. But after that Agrippa was dead, Cassius Longinus
that governed Syria, and Cuspius Fadus Lieutenant of Judaea, commanded the Jews
to return the same into the Fortress Antonia; saying, That the Romans ought to
be Lords thereof, as they had been in times past. For which cause the Jews sent
Ambassadors to Claudius Caesar, to request his favor therein, who arriving at
Rome, found the young King Agrippa there, who besought the Emperor that it
might be lawful for him to have the keeping of the habit: who commanded
Vitellius the Governor of Syria, to deliver it into his hands. It was formerly
kept under the Romans, and after they had opened their seal, they took the
habit: and after the Feast was past, they returned it back again unto the same
place, and shut it up under the same seal in the presence of the Captain.

After that Herod had in this manner builded this strong Tower for the security
and guard of the Temple, The Tower of Antonia.
he called it Antonia, for the love of Antonius his friend, and one of the
chiefest men in Rome. In the Western part of this porch, there were four gates,
whereof the one opened upon the Kings Palace, to which there was a direct way
through the midst of the valley: the two others led unto the suburbs: and the
fourth valley on the South side, The year of the World 3955. before Christ's
Nativity, 9.
where, on the very front of this square, there was also another The porch
builded aloft above the valley.
that but to look from the top thereof, and to consider the depth as well of
the Valley, as the height of the Porch, it would make a man giddy, and his eye
could not pierce unto the bottom of the same. Those Galleries The inward court,
into which and no further the Jews might enter.
and admirable to him that beholds it: for all the work seemed to be but one
stone. Such was the fashion of the circuit of the first Porch. In the midst,
and not far off from the other, stood the second: whereunto there was an ascent
made with few steps. It was enclosed with a separation of stone, with an
Inscription, forbidding any stranger to enter the same upon pain of death. This
inward porch both to the Southward and the Northward had three gates, in rank
equidistant the one from the other: and toward the eastward had one great gate,
by which those Herod durst not enter into the interior Sanctuary, because he
was not a Priest, he committed that Fabric to the Priests care, which they
accomplished in a year and a halfs time: Herod had been eight years about the
rest. The dedication of the Temple.
The people were replenished with the fullness of joy, and every one gave thanks
unto God for that the whole Work was finished so speedily, and wished all
happiness to the King for his cost and diligence in the execution and finishing
thereof: and they celebrated a great Feast in honor of the restoration of the

About the very time of the Celebration of this Feast, in the honor of the
Re-edification of the Temple, the Kings day of Coronation fell out, which he
was wont to solemnize every year with great joy: A Conduit under ground from
the Castle Antonia.
and for this twofold occasion the solemnity and joy was far more sumptuous
and complete. The King also caused a Conduit of Water to be made, and conveyed
by pipes under ground, drawing it from the Castle Antonia unto the East gate of
the Temple; near to which he builded another Tower also, to the end, that by
the Conduits he might ascend privily unto the Temple, if happily During the
building of the Temple, it never rained by day.
It is reported, that during the building of this Temple, it never rained by
day time, but only by night, to the intent the work might not be interrupted:
and our Predecessors have testified no less unto us. Neither is this thing
incredible, if we attentively consider those other effects of Gods Providence.


Written by FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Sixteenth Book.
1. Herod makes a Law which makes him be reputed a Tyrant: He goes to Rome,
and brings back his Sons Alexander and Aristobulus; his Sister Salome and those
2. How Herod gave Wives unto Alexander and Aristobulus. And how nobly he
received Agrippa in his Dominions. 3. Herod goes to meet Agrippa at Pontus
with a Fleet, by which he re-enforceth his Army, and returning back with him a
great part of his way, does much good to several Towns. 4. The Jews who lived
in Jonia complain to Agrippa, that the Grecians will not let them enjoy their
Privileges. Herod returned into Judea, and freed his Subjects from the payment
of the fourth part of the Taxes. 6. Salome, Herod's Sister, endeavors to
ruin his two Sons Alexander and Aristobulus, whom he begot of Mariamne: He
sends his Son Antipater, whom he had by his first Wife, to Rome. 7. Antipater
does so incense his Father against his Brothers Alexander and Aristobulus, that
Herod brings them to Rome, and accuses them before Augustus, for having
attempted to poison him. 8. Of Alexander's defense, and how the two Brethren
were reconciled to their Father Herod. 9. Herod having completed the building
of Cesarea dedicateth it to Augustus, and entertaineth the people with stately
Plays and Past-times: He causes other Towns to be built with several
Monuments. His extreme Liberality to Strangers, and his excessive rigor to his
own Subjects. 10. Testimonies of the Roman Emperor's Affection toward the
Jews. 11. King Herod causes David's Sepulcher to be opened to get money out of
it, for which God punishes him; strange Divisions and Troubles in his Family.
The Cruelties which this Prince's mistrustfulness and Antipater's malice
causes, together with his Son Alexander's Imprisonment. Archelaus King of
Cappadocia, reconciled Alexander to his Father. 13. Herod declares War against
the Arabians, for protecting Trachonites Robbers. 14. Syllaeus will perform
nothing of what Augustus's Lieutenants had ordained, but goes to Rome to him.
Herod enters into Arabia with an Army, and takes the Castle where the
Trachonites were retired. 15. Syllaeus does so incense Augustus against Herod,
that he refuses to give Audience to his Ambassadors, neither will he admit
those whom Aretas King of the Arabians sent. This Aretas succeeded Obodas, whom
Syllaeus caused to be poisoned, that he might Herod sends the third Embassage
to Augustus. 16. Herod more incensed than ever against his Sons Alexander and
Aristobulus by several Aspersions, causes them to be imprisoned. Augustus is
made sensible of Syllaeus's wickedness, condemns him to die, confirms Aretas in
the Kingdom of Arabia; he Herod, advises him to call a great Assembly at
Berite, where his Sons, after new complaints given in against them, are to be
judged. 17. How Herod's Sons were condemned in the Council of Berytum.


CHAP. I.
Herod makes a Law which makes him be reputed a Tyrant: He goes to Rome, and
AMongst the rest of the affairs of the Commonwealth, The year of the World,
3955. before Christ's Nativity, 9.
the King thought it behoved him to redress and hinder private injuries, both
in the City and Country: For the which purpose he made a new law unlike to the
former, that it should be lawful for such as were Wall-breakers, Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 1.
to be sold for slaves without the limits of his Kingdom: Which Law did not
seem so much to intend the punishment of Malefactors, Herod made a new Law,
that wall-breakers should be sold into Bondage out of the Kingdom.
as the dissolution of his The punishment of theft according to the law of
Moses Exodus 1. 22.
to wit, that a thief should restore four times as much as he stole: Which if
he was not able to do, that then he was to be sold; not unto strangers, nor
into perpetual bondage, but only for seven years; at which time he should again
be set free. So that the common people did interpret this new Law to set down
an unjust punishment, Deuteronomy. 12. 15.
and rather to savor of tyranny, than of Princely dignity, and to be enacted
not without contempt of their ancient Laws: So that

At the same time Herod sailed into Italy to salute Caesar, Herod sailed into
Italy, and brought home his Sons from Rome.
and to see his Children living at Rome. Where Caesar receiving him very
courteously, permitted him to take his Sons home with him, as being now
sufficiently instructed in the Liberal Arts. Who returning into their Country,
were joyfully received of all their Contrymen, both for that they were of
comely stature, and of courteous behavior, and in their very carriage did show
that they came of Kingly lineage. Salome and others falsely accused Herod his
Sons, and made their father hate them
Which things moved Salome and the rest, by whose false accusations their
Mother Mariam was destroyed, to envy them; fearing their power, and verily
persuading themselves that they would be revengers of their Mother's injuries.
So taking hereby occasion, they began also falsely to accuse

CHAP. II.
How Herod gave Wives unto Alexander and Aristobulus, and how nobly he received
Agrippa in his Dominions.
BUt the King as yet mistrusting nothing, Herod married his Son Aristobulus to
Bernice Salome's daughter, and Alexander to Glaphyra the daughter of the King
of Cappadocia.
moved with a Fatherly care over them, had them in such esteem as reason did
require, and for that they were now come unto man's estate, he married them
both: Unto Aristobulus he gave Bernice the daughter of Salome; and unto
Alexander, Glaphyra the Daughter of Archelaus King of Cappadocia. Which done,
understanding that Marcus Agrippa was returned out of Italy Asia, he went unto
him thither, and invited him into his Kingdom, requesting him to accept of his
Friend's entertainment. Which Agrippa yielding unto, Herod omitted Sebaste, as
at the Haven of Caesarea, and in the Castles he built, to wit, Alexandrium,
Herodium and Hircania. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 2.
He also brought him to Jerusalem, where all the people met him apparelled in
such rich and brave attire, as they were accustomed to adorn themselves withal,
Herod carries Marcus Agrippa all about his Kingdom.
when they celebrate their Festivals, and with many joyful acclamations
received and saluted him. Agrippa offered an hundred head of fat Oxen to God,
and feasted all the people; and although he would willingly have made a longer
abode there, Agrippa offered an hundred beasts at
yet Winter drawing on, fearing tempestuous weather, he was forced to sail away
Jonia, both he and his friends being honored with very great presents.

CHAP. III.
Herod goes to meet Agrippa at Pontus with a Fleet, by which he reinforceth
his Army; and returning back with him a great part of his way, did much good to
several Towns.
HErod having past the Winter at home, Herod sailed unto Agrippa to Chius, and
gave a great sum of money to re-edifie the porch.
and hearing that Agrippa was with an Army Bosphorus, the Spring time being now
at hand, he sailed unto him again, and taking his course by Rhodes and Cous, he
came toward Lesbus, thinking there to find Agrippa: But by a contrary wind he
was driven from thence, and forced to stay a while at Chius; where many
privately coming to salute him, he rewarded them with Princely rewards: and
perceiving that the City gate, destroyed in the Wars against Mithridates, was
not yet repaired, but still lay ruinated for want of money to repair it, he
gave so much money as largely sufficed to restore it to the former beauty and
bigness; exhorting them with all expedition to re-edifie and adorn the City as
it was in times past. Herod found Agrippa at Synope a City of Pontus, and was
by him honorably entertained.
At last the wind changing, he sailed first to Mitylene, and then to Bizantium;
and there understanding that Agrippa had already past the Rocks Cyanes, he
followed him with all speed, and overtook him at Synope a City of Pontus: Who
contrary to Agrippa's expectation arrived there with his Navy: Herod's coming
was very grateful unto Agrippa, and with especial affection they embraced one
another. It was an evident sign of friendship, that the King omitting his own
private business, would now come unto him in so convenient a time. Wherefore
Herod abode still with him in the Army, always present either to assist him
with counsel, or to bear part of the Labor with him. Herod still present with
Agrippa insports and serious affairs.
He was also present with him at such times as he meant to be merry, being his
only Counselor in difficult matters, for the benevolence he bare unto him, and
also in all his mirth, as being one whom he honored. Agrippa having dispatched
the business in Pontus for which he came, it pleased him not to return Agrippa
went by land to Ephesus.
but to go by Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, and the greater Phrygia, and so they
came by land to Ephesus: and there taking ship they came to Samos. And in that
whole Journey, almost in every City he gratified Herod, at his entreaty
relieving many of their necessities. Herod helped many in the way with money.
And Herod did in the way help many with money that wanted, and spent much upon
his Guests; and moreover, if any one had any suit unto Agrippa, Herod was the
only man that might obtain his suit for him. And though Agrippa also was both
nobly minded and easily entreated to grant all such things as were not
prejudicial to any man; Herod was a Mediator for many to Agrippa.
yet was it a matter of no small moment and importance in King Herod, to incite
him to use beneficence, being even of his own accord forward enough to put the
same in practice. The Citizens of Ilia are reconciled to Agrippa, and they of
Chius obtain a privilege.
For first of all he reconciled Agrippa, being angry against Iliensians, and
himself paid the money that the people of Chius were indebted unto Caesar's
receivers, obtaining for them an immunity: And he also assisted and pleasured
others in whatsoever they needed.

CHAP. IV.
The Jews who lived in Jonia complain to Agrippa, The Jews of Jonia complain
unto Agrippa of the injuries offered them by those Contrymen.
that the Grecians will not let them enjoy their Privileges.
Jonia, a great multitude of the Jews inhabiting that Country being gathered
together, expected him to speak unto him; and finding opportunity, they
complained unto him of the wrongs that those Contrymen offered them, The
year of the World, 3956. before Christ's Nativity, 8.
not permitting them to live according to their Laws; and that upon Festival
Jerusalem, and that they compelled them to do public business, and to spend
the Holy money in those affairs, contrary to the Privileges granted unto them
by the Romans. Herod endeavored to have the Jews complaints heard by Agrippa,
and desired one of his friends and followers called Nicholaus, Nicholaus did
make a speech unto Agrippa, in the behalf of the Jews.
to plead the Jews cause: Who made a speech unto Agrippa, sitting with the rest
of the Roman Nobility, and other Kings and Princes, in their behalf after this
manner: Most worthy Agrippa, true it is, that all men that suffer injury, are
constrained to fly for redress to the Higher Powers, and we, over and above,
hope to obtain our suit. For we ask nothing but that which your goodness has
already Agrippa, whereof we seek redress at thy hands, requesting thee that
hereafter we may live according to our Religion as formerly, and that our
adversaries may have no more authority over us than we over them: which is not
only justice and equity, but already also Antipater, who came in with 2000
Soldiers to assist Caesar in the Egyptian Wars, wherein he so valiantly
behaved himself, that neither by Sea nor Land any one in those Wars deserved
more commendations than himself. I will not repeat at this time how much good
he did Caesar in those Wars, and what and how great rewards he received; but
rather I should first of all put you in remembrance of the Letters that the
Emperor writ unto the Senate concerning this matter, wherewith he obtained for
Antipater the honors and privileges of the City. For this only argument had
been sufficient to have declared that we did not obtain such favor without
desert, and request thee now to confirm the same, of whom we might justly hope
for Judaea, how many offerings thou did there sacrifice unto our God, and
with what vows thou honouredst him; how thou feastedst the people, and wast
delighted in that mutual hospitality. All which was an argument of the
friendship confirmed between so great a Roman Prince and the Nation of the
Jews, even in Herod's house. By all these, we humbly request in the presence of
the King, nothing but this only, that thou would not permit us deceitfully
to be defrauded of that, which you your selves have already granted unto the
Nation of the Jews.

Now no one of the Greeks offered to oppose himself against that which
Nicholaus Agrippa understanding that they were wronged, Agrippa confirms the
Jews privilege.
answered thus: That he would not only gratify them for his friend Herod's
sake, but also for that they seemed to him to demand a reasonable matter.
Wherefore, though they had demanded a greater thing of him, he would have
granted them whatsoever he might, without prejudicing the people of Rome. And
now, seeing they only demand of him that which Herod arising, Agrippa departed
from Lesbus.
thanked him in all their names. And then, after mutual embracing one another,
they departed, taking their leaves from Lesbus.

CHAP. V.

THe King having a prosperous wind, Herod returned to Jerusalem, and made a
speech unto the people, and let them understand the cause of his journey, and
remitted the fourth part of his Tribute.
within a few days after arrived at Caesarea; from thence he went to Jerusalem,
and calling together all the people, as well the Citizens as also the Country
people there present, there he told them the cause of his journey, and how he
had obtained immunities for the Jews living in Asia, that they might converse
there among the Gentiles, without molestation. Then he told them what felicity
they had received and enjoyed by his reign, seeing that his greatest care was
so to provide for his Subjects, that they might want nothing. And to gratify
them

CHAP. VI.
Salome, Herod's Sister, endeavors to ruin his two Sons Alexander and
Aristobulus, whom he begot of Mariamne: He sends his Son Antipater, whom he had
by his first Wife, to Rome.
IN the mean time, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 3. al. chap. 7.
the discord of his house was daily increased, by reason of Salome's inveterate
hatred against Alexander and Aristobulus; she presumed so much on her success
against their mother, that she hoped to leave none of her children alive to
revenge her death: Salome persecuteth Mariamne's children with natural hatred.
And she wanted no occasion, for it seems the two young Princes were not Salome
and Pheroras, did renew their old hatred against them, who daily practiced, by
all means they could, Alexander and Aristobulus being by Salome and Pheroras
drawn into bad words, are by them accused to their Father Herod.
to overthrow them: The young men also hated them, but not with the like hatred
that they were hated of them. For they for their ingenuous manners and noble
race, dissembled not their anger, but freely declared their minds. But Salome
and Pheroras contrariwise, enviously and craftily prepared themselves a way by
calumniations; always provoking the magnanimous spirits of these young Princes,
whose fierceness might soon bring them into suspicion with their Father, that
he might gather hereby, that they wanted not will to revenge their Mother's
death; yea, even Salome not ceasing to gather by their own speeches probable
arguments of suspicion, that they did not only take their Mother's death
impatiently, but also raging like furies, did both bewail her death and their
own case, who were compelled to converse with the murderers of their
unfortunate Mother; and as it were, contaminate themselves with living amongst
them. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 4. al. chap. 8.
And the absence of the King greatly increased their dissension; who being
returned, having made a speech unto the people, he presently was admonished
both by Pheroras and Salome his Sister, Pheroras and Salome accuse Alexander
and Aristobulus unto Herod.
that he was in great danger by reason of his Archelaus King of Cappadocia
would help them to accuse their Father unto Caesar. Herod hearing this, was
greatly troubled; and so much the more, that he heard the same also reported
unto him by others: And hereby he was put in memory of that which was past, how
that for the dissension of his house he could not long enjoy his friends and
dearest wife, Herod was fortunate abroad and unfortunate at home.
And as it were foreseeing by that that was past what would ensue, and fearing
some greater calamity would befall him, he was altogether amazed. And truly, as
abroad he was most fortunate above all hope, so at home he was most unhappy and
unfortunate beyond men's opinion: So that one may well doubt whether Herod
advances Antipater to bridle the arrogance of his Sons.
he thought it good to call unto Court another Son of his, whom he begat when
he was a private man; and to grace him with honors, and to oppose him against
the other two Brethren, to the end to bring down and repress their fierce and
haughty minds; (this Son of his was called Antipater) not minded (which after
overcome by affection he did) to make him sole heir of all, but thinking
thereby to bridle Mariamne's Children, and to diminish their arrogance, by
letting them see that it was not needful to keep the inheritance of so
flourishing a Kingdom only for them; wherefore Antipater, one opposed against
them, that thereby the other two laying their pride aside, might show
themselves more tractable to their Father: And so thought by this means to
provide for their safety. Antipater inciteth his Father against his Brothers.
But it fell out far otherwise than he expected; for they esteemed this fact as
an injury done unto them: And Antipater was of that nature, that having gotten
promotion contrary to his expectation, he did endeavor all ways possible to be
in greater account with his Father than the other two, who was already, through
false accusations, alienated from them, and every day (as he also desired)
ready to believe any thing that might incense him against them.

Wherefore this was all his business: Yet he had an especial care not to be
thought Herod, And being many in number, and trusty one to another, the young
Princes were every day entrapped more and more: For many times they shed tears
for very grief of the contumelies and injuries that they suffered; and many
times they mentioned their Mother, and complained unto those whom they thought
to be their friends, of their Father, as one that dealt not well with them; all
which Antipater's Favorites maliciously noting, and adding thereunto something
of their own invention, they did presently tell it unto Herod; and so did
foment the dissension of his house. For the King being moved hereat, and
purposing to humble Mariamne's Children, Herod brought Antipater's Mother into
the Palace.
did daily increase and augment Antipater's honor; and at his entreaties, at
last brought his Mother into the Court; and many times writing secretly unto
Caesar in favor of Antipater, he especially commended him in particular unto
him: And being to sail to salute Agrippa, who was now to depart out of Asia,
having governed that Province ten years, he only took with him Antipater of all
his Sons; whom he also committed to Agrippa with many gifts, Herod delivers
Antipater to Agrippa to be carried to Rome.
to go with him to Rome, and to be brought into favor with Caesar: So that now
all things seemed to be done, as it were by his man's beck, and the other two
to be already dis-inherited.


Antipater does so incense his Father against his Brothers Alexander and
Aristobulus, that Herod brings them to Rome, and accuses them before
Augustus, for having attempted to poison him.
ANtipater's Journey to Rome, Antipater was honored at Rome.
with his Father's Letters of Recommendation to all his friends there, proved
both very advantageous and honorable to him; yet this was a great grief to
him, Antipater when he was present, incited his Father against his Brethren by
lies; and being absent, he did the same by Letters.
that he could not daily calumniate his Brothers; for he feared lest his
Father's mind should change, and so would affect Mariamne's Children Herod's
wrath against them, that he was become a deadly enemy unto them both. But
fearing rashly in his anger to commit any thing to prejudice them, he
determined to sail again to Rome, and there to accuse his Sons before Caesar;
lest he being led away through indignation and displeasure against them, should
seem to cast off all love and fatherly affection toward them. Herod sailed to
Rome, and followed Caesar to Aquileia.
And repairing to Rome, and not finding Caesar there, he followed him unto
Aquileia; and coming to speech of him, and requesting him to take notice of his
misfortunes, he presented his two Sons; and accused them Caesar of insolency,
Herod accused his Sons before Caesar.
and for having attempted to poison him; complaining their hatred to be gone so
far, that now by any wicked and execrable way whatsoever they sought their
Father's Kingdom, notwithstanding that Caesar had given him full power and
liberty to leave the Kingdom to him whom he found most dutiful unto him. And
that they, though thereby they might not gain the Kingdom, yet they could be
contented with their Father's death; and that they sought it with danger of
their own lives; and that this horrible and detestable hatred was now rooted in
their hearts. And that he having long endured this calamity, was now forced to
open it unto Caesar, and trouble his ears with these complaints. And spoke
after this manner: Have I, deserved this at their hands? what wrong have I done
them? or how can they think it reason, that I, who have exposed my self to so
many dangers, and undergone, so difficult labors for a long time, to obtain
the Kingdom, should not peaceably enjoy the same, and suffer me to be Lord of
my own Dominions, and permit me the liberty to leave it unto him who shall
deserve such honor in the best performance of a Son-like duty? So that the
beholders hereof, seeing piety so rewarded, might hereby be the more incited
hereunto; especially seeing that without violating the Law of Nature, it is not
lawful to think any such thought: For no man can affect his Father's Kingdom,
but he does also desire his Father's death, seeing it is not permitted men to
succeed those in the Kingdom who are yet alive. He alleged moreover, that for
his part he had had a care that they should want nothing convenient for a kind
Archelaus his Daughter King of Cappadocia: And which was the greatest matter of
all, he had not used the Caesar their common benefactor; and that forsaking his
own right of a Father, who had been injured; or of a King, against whom treason
had been wrought; he was now content to debate his matter with them before such
a Judge, as well knew how to decide the thing in question according to right
and equity; yet requested him that their offense might not be left unpunished,
nor he forced to lead the rest of his life still in perpetual fear; nor suffer
them to be so miserable, as never to enjoy themselves, nor desire to see the
light of the Sun, after having violated the most sacred Laws of God and nature.
Herod having with a vehement voice objected these accusations against his Sons
before Caesar, the two Princes were not able to abstain from tears whilst he
was Alias, chap. 9
Wherein they remained doubtful what to do, Alexander and Aristobulus moved all
that were present, even their Father and accuser to tears and compassion.
moving the auditors to pity them by their tears and lamentations; and fearful
withal, lest it should be thought that their guilty conscience did trouble
them, that they were not able to speak in their own defense; seeing that indeed
it was only for want of experience, by reason of their tender years. Which also
Caesar perceived, and all that were present were so moved to compassion, that
neither their Father, who was their accuser, could refrain from being moved
with compassion.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Alexander's defense, and how the two Brethren were reconciled to their
Father Herod.
THen the young Princes perceiving both their Father and Caesar to be
mollified, and they that were present partly to pity them, partly to shed tears
of compassion; the one of them named Alexander, who was the elder, directing
his speech to his Father, began thus to clear himself of the Crimes objected
against them: Father, Alexander speaks in his own, and his Brother's defense.
how well and friendly minded thou art toward us, this present judgment
declares; for had thou determined any heavy sentence against us, thou
would not have brought us before him, who is the preserver of us all: For
thou might, being a King, or for thy authority over us as a Father, have
punished us for our offense according to thy power: But in that thou have
brought us to Rome, and made Caesar our Judge, it is an argument that thou
seek to save us; for no man brings any one Caesar being living? Caesar (who
is Lord of all, and now our Judge) only this, that if thou can, O my father,
put away out of thy mind all suspicion of us, to suffer us to live hereafter,
how unhappy and unfortunate soever: For what is more miserable, than to be
rashly accused without cause? But if thou can not, we living, live without
fear of us, let us die condemned by our own

Caesar with these words, though before not greatly crediting such accusations
and slanders laid against them, was now more moved to believe that they were
guiltless, and the rather, that fixing his eyes upon Herod, he perceived him
also to be moved, and all that were present were sorry for the young Princes:
All men do pity the young men.
So that all who were present censured the King, for the absurd and frivolous
accusation framed against them; their youth and handsomness made all the
spectators so concerned at their misfortunes, that there was nothing wherein
they were not ready to assist them: And much more, after that Alexander had
ingeniously refuted his father's accusations, the accused remaining still
Caesar having a while deliberated with himself, Caesar pronounces the young
men herein to have offended, that they gave occasion of suspicion, and he
exhorts the Father to be reconciled to his Children.
pronounced that the Princes were innocent of the crimes laid unto their
charge: Yet herein they were too blame, that they had so behaved themselves,
that they gave their father occasion to suspect them. And as for Herod, he
requested him to lay aside all suspicion, and to be reconciled to his Children.
For it was unjustly done of him to believe such forged accusations against
those whom he had begotten; that he was fully persuaded that they would prove
so dutiful to him for the future, that he would not only forget that distaste
that they had given Caesar having thus admonished the young men, Herod is
reconciled to his Children.
they prepared themselves to entreat their Father's wonted favor: He, not
expecting so long, came and embraced each of them one after another, they
weeping exceedingly; and all those that were present, both servants and others,
did the like.

Then giving humble thanks unto Caesar, they departed together, and Antipater
with them, Antipater friendly does congratulate his brethren returned into his
Fathers favor.
counterfeiting himself to congratulate their happiness for being reconciled
unto his Father. Within a few days after, Herod gave Caesar three hundred
Talents, who Rome, and exercising his liberality upon the people. And Caesar
again bestowed upon him half of the revenues out of the Mines of the metal in
Cyprus; and the other half unto the overseer thereof; and gracing him otherwise
also, Herod did give Caesar 300. talents.
he gave him leave to choose which of his sons he pleased for to succeed him in
his Kingdom; or if he had rather, to distribute it amongst them all: which
Herod presently would have done, but Caesar would not permit him, affirming,
that during his life he should keep it all whole and undivided, Caesar gave
Herod half his revenues out of the Mines of Cyprus.
and his sons should be subject unto him.

After this, Herod returned again into Judea, in whose absence the Trachonites,
that were no small part of his Kingdom, The rebels are conquered.
were revolted, yet by the industry of the Captains, Herod and his sons were
sailing toward home, arriving at Eleusa a City of Cilicia, which is now called
Sabaste, he found Archelaus there, who was King of Cappadocia. Archelaus did
courteously entertain Herod, and was very joyful Alexander his son in Law had
so well cleared himself and his brother of the crimes laid unto their charge.
And so each one bestowing upon the other princely gifts, they departed taking
their leave one of the other. After this, Herod being newly returned into
Judea, and calling the people together into the Temple, told them all that had
past in his absence from them, and the courtesy of Caesar: And told them also
of other affairs that he thought fit for them to know; and turning the latter
end of his speech unto his Sons, and exhorting the Courtiers and common people
to concord, he told them that his sons should reign after him, and first of all
Antipater; and after him his sons that he had by Mariamne, Alexander and
Aristobulus: In the mean time every one of them should honor him as King and

CHAP. IX.
Herod having completed the building of Caesarea, dedicateth it to Augustus,
and entertaineth the people with stately Plays and Past-times: He causes other
Towns to be built and several Monuments. His extreme Liberality to Strangers,
and his excessive rigor to his own Subjects.
ABout this time Caesarea was finished, The year of the World, 3957. before
Christ's Nativity, 7.
the tenth year after it was begun to be built, the 28. year of Herod's Reign,
in the 192. Olympiad. In the dedication hereof; there was great pomp and
sumptuous preparations: For all Musicians were brought thither to strive one
with another, who was most excellent in their Art; and Champions Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 5. al. 10.
There was also a great many that fought with swords, and a great number of
wild Beasts; and all things else that at such times were used, and in account,
either at Rome or in other Countries. These sports were also consecrated unto
Caesar, Caesarea is finished.
and were to be renewed every fifth year. All this provision the King at his
own cost and charges provided to be brought from all places whatsoever,
Quinquennal^ certamen.
to show the greatness of his magnificence. Julia, Caesar's wife also bestowed
much of her own to the furnishing hereof, and sent many precious things out of
Italy; so that the worth of them all amounted to five hundred talents. And a
great company being gathered together to behold these sports, he received all
Ambassadors sent unto him from other Nations, to thank him for the benefits he
had bestowed on Caesar himself and Agrippa often did say, Caesar and Agrippa
commend Herod's magnanimity.
that Herod's magnanimity was greater than his present revenues could bear, and
that he well deserved an Empire as big as all Syria and Egypt. These sports
being ended, he builded another Town in a Field called Capharsaba, Antipatris
is built.
choosing for it a watery soil fit for plants: the City was compassed with a
River; and he also planted round about it a Wood full of fine Trees. This Town
he called Antipatris, after his father's name, Antipater. After which he also
builded a Castle about Jericho, Cypron is built.
called after his mother's name, Cypron, which was very strongly fortified, and
adorned within with rare and sumptuous edifices. And not forgetting his
brother, he dedicated unto him most stately buildings; for first he built a
Tower as big as Pharo in the City, The Tower and Town of Phasaelus is built.
in remembrance of his dead brother, and called it by his name, Phasaelus,
which also was the strongest Fort in all the City. After this, he builded a
Town near unto the Valley of Jericho, toward the North, whereby the fields
that before almost lay desert, were now tilled and inhabited by the townsmen;
so that of them it was named Phasaelus-field. It were hard to relate all his
liberality in particular showed, both unto the Cities of Syria and Gree^a, and
all other places wheresoever Apollo at Rhodes; and gave them many talents of
silver to build their ships. He also builded the greatest part of the public
houses and places in the City of Actium, which Caesar built for the
Nicopolitans there inhabiting, and that with his own proper cost and charges,
Herod built the Temple of Pythias.
He also, for the Antiochians inhabiting the greatest City of Syria, builded
Arches on each side of the greater street, that goes quite through the midst of
the City, and does as it were part it in two; and the street it self that lay
open, he paved with polished stone; which work was as great a convenience to
the inhabitants, as a beauty unto their City. He also helped to maintain the
sports at Olympus with yearly revenues, The sports of Olympus.
that for want of maintenance began to decay: Why Herod was liberal to
strangers, and cruel to his own nation.
It is admirable to see in one man such diversity of minds: For on the one
side, if we consider his liberality toward all men, we must needs say, he was
of a most free and bountiful nature; contrariwise, if we consider the injuries
and cruelty he showed against his subjects and dearest friends, we must confess
him to have been a hard man, and intractable, and who passed all bounds of
modesty; so that we would think him to have been of two contrary dispositions.
But I am otherwise persuaded, and think that both these did proceed from one
matter: For because he thirsted after glory and honor, and wholly applied
himself Herod greedy of honor.
And how greedy of honor he was, we may guess by the honors he did unto
Caesar, Agrippa and others of their friends: For he desired to be an example to
his subjects, that as he himself honored men better than himself, so they
should all honor him likewise; thereby declaring what thing he did naturally
most desire. But the Jews Religion does not permit them license to honor
Potentates, who of necessity ought to have greater care and respect of right
and equity, than of such officiousness toward superiors: for it was disprofit
enough unto the Jews, that they could not with Statues and Temples obtain the
King's favor, and with like flatteries satisfy the fond appetites of a
vainglorious man. And this Herod was unjust, and hard toward his friends, and
to those whom he made partakers of his counsels and enterprises; and free and
bountiful toward strangers.

CHAP. X.
Testimonies of the Roman Emperors Affection toward the Jews.
THe Asian and Cyrenian Jews were greatly afflicted by the Citizens of those
Countries, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 10.
who having had the same privileges granted unto them by the ancient Kings that
the Citizens had, The Jews of Asia and Cyrene being afflicted by the
inhabitants there, send an Embassage to Caesar, and do obtain of him immunity.
were now greatly injured by the Grecians; as though they carried money out of
the Country, and were prejudicial unto the rest of the inhabitants. And the
Grecians making no end of their injuries, they were constrained by Ambassadors
to complain of them unto Caesar: who wrote unto every Province, that it was his
pleasure, that the Jews should enjoy like privileges with the other inhabitants
of the country. The copy of which writing we have here set down, that it may
the better appear how the Roman Emperors of ancient times were affected unto
our Nation.

Caesar Augustus Pont. Max. Trib. potestatis, thus decrees. For as much as the
Nation Caesar the Emperor, under Hircanus their High Priest: I have ordained,
that according to the common sentence of the Senate, they shall live after
their Countrey-Laws, The year of the World, 3957* before Christ's Nativity, 7.
under which they lived in the time of Hircanus Jerusalem by certain persons;
and that they shall not be compelled to appear before any Judge upon their
Sabbath days, or the day before their Sabbaths, after nine of the clock upon
the preparation day. And if any one be known to steal their holy books or holy
money, laid up in their places appointed for Religion, he shall be guilty of
Sacrilege; and his goods shall be confiscate unto the Treasury of the people of
Rome, I also decree, for the good will I bear unto all men, that their Memorial
or request offered unto me by C. Marcus Censorinus, shall together with this my
Edict be published in the famous place, which all Asia has dedicated unto my
name, to wit, Argyra. And if any shall be so bold as to do contrary to our
Decree, he shall be punished extraordinarily. This was engraven in a pillar in
Caesar 's Temple. Caesar wishes health unto Norbanus Flaccus. Let it be lawful
for all Jews wheresoever living, to carry their sacred money to Jerusalem,
according to their ancient custom, and that no man should forbid them so to do:
And this did Caesar write in favor of the Jews.

Agrippa also wrote in the Jews behalf, (...).
as follows; Agrippa wishes health unto the Magistrates, Senate and people
of Ephesus: I will that the Jews living in Asia keep their sacred money, which
according to the custom of their Country, they usually send unto Jerusalem;
and if any one shall steal their holy money, the same person, if he fly to a
Sanctuary, shall be violently taken away from thence, as a sacrilegious person,
and delivered unto the Jews to be punished. He also wrote unto Syllanus the
Magistrate, that the Jews might not be constrained upon their Sabbaths to
appear before a Judge: M. Agrippa wishes health to the Cyrenian Magistrates
and Senate. The Jews inhabiting among you, for whom Augustus has already
written unto Flavius the President of Lybia, and unto other Magistrates of that
Province, are not to be hindered from sending their holy money to Jerusalem, as
their custom is; and they have now complained unto me, that they are molested
by the false accusations of some bad people, and forbidden to do it under
pretense of a certain Tribute, which notwithstanding they are not to pay.
Wherefore I command that they may be permitted to live after their custom, and
free in all such matters: And if in any of your Cities any sacred money of
theirs be intercepted, that by certain persons which you know to be fit for
that purpose, ye make choice of them, to send it again unto the Jews. Item C.
Norbanus Flaccus Proconsul: Caius Norbanus Flaccus writes in the Jews behalf.
Health unto the Magistrates of Sardinia; Caesar has written unto me,
commanding that no man hinder the Jews, according to their custom, to send
sacred money unto Jerusalem; wherefore I also write unto you of the same, that
you may not be ignorant both of my will and Caesar's also. Julius Antonius
Proconsul.
Moreover Julius Antonius Proconsul, did also write to this effect: Health unto
the Magistrates, Senate and people of Ephesus. The Jews of Asia in the Ides of
February, I sitting in the judicial seat at Ephesus, signified unto me, that
Caesar Augustus and Agrippa have permitted them to use their Countrey-customs;
and every one according as he thinks good, to contribute his first fruits for
Religion sake, to be carried without let or hinderance unto the Temple of the
most mighty God; and they desired me to ratify by my consent, that which they
had already granted them by Caesar's and Agrippa's Decrees and Ordinances, do
permit and grant them also to do all things they please, according to their
Countrey-customs, forbidding any man to hinder them therein.

I have thought good to add these Decrees, because I know, that these my
writings will come into the Grecians hands, that I may show them, that in
former ages we were so esteemed of the public Magistrates, that none were
permitted to hinder us from using our Countrey-rites and Ceremonies, and that
by their consent we worshipped God in our own Religion, which I do inculcate
the oftener, that I may move strange and foreign Nations, and take away their
hatred conceived against us, which is without


King Herod causes David's Sepulcher to be opened to get money out of it, for
which God punishes him; strange Divisions and Troubles in his Family. The
Cruelties which this Prince's mistrustfulness and Antipater's malice causes,
together with his Son Alexander's Imprisonment.
HHerod spending lavishly many sums of money, Hedio and Ruffinus* chap. 7. al.
7. 12.
both at home and abroad, hearing that Hircanus who reigned before him, opened
David's Sepulcher, and The desire of Gold.
and that there was left yet far more, able to defray any great charges
whatsoever; he purposed to do the like. And at this time, in the night season,
accompanied only with his most trusty friends; being very wary that none of the
people should know of it, he entered into the Sepulcher; but he found no money
there, as Hircanus did; but he took from thence a great deal of Silver and Gold
Plate, whereby he was enticed to make a more diligent search: And he sent two
of his company on purpose into the inner part of the Sepulcher, where the
bodies of Solomon and David were entombed, who were lost; and, as it is
reported, Herod lost two of his men in David's Sepulcher.
fire came out of those places, and consumed them. Whereat Herod being
terrified, departed out of it; and moved with Religion to make satisfaction, he
Nicholaus the Historiographer reproved*
of which building Nicholaus also, a writer of that time, makes mention; but
he speaks not how they went into the Sepulcher of David, thinking that
therein he should not keep Decorum, if he should make mention thereof. Wherein
he followed this accustomed order; for his Writings were to come to the ears of
the King yet living, wherein he did only curry favor, mentioning only that,
that might redound unto the King's credit: So that many of his open and wicked
pranks, he did either color under some other pretense, or else all ways
possible he endeavored to hide them. For he does, as it were, tell a tale of
Herod's cruelty against Mariamne and his Sons, as though he did thereby deserve
credit and praise; accusing her of Adultery, Joseph came of the Priestly Line
of the Asmonians.
and too diligently excusing his iniquities. But as I have said, we must pardon
him who did not so much write to leave a memory of things done unto after Ages,
as to gratify and please his King. But I, who come of the lineage of the
Asmonian Kings, and execute the office of a Priest, account it a shame to lie;
and do intend to relate the History of all things that were acted and done, yet
with a reverence for Herod's Posterity, who do also now bear sway and rule;
yet, with their pardon and leave, I must prefer the truth to their inclinations.

After the Sepulcher was thus violated, A discord in Herod's house*
Herod's house began to decay, whether revenge lighting upon that part which
was already scarce sound, or whether by mere Antipater's crafty plotting
against his Brethren.
But especially Antipater's politic practice against his Brethren was to be
noted, who entangled them by other men's forged accusations; himself oftentimes
seemed to take upon him their defense, that making a show of good will unto
them, he might secretly oppress them the sooner; and he did so craftily
circumvent his Father, that his Father esteemed him to be his only Conserver.
Wherefore the King commanded Ptolomens his chief Secretary of State, to conceal
nothing of the affairs of the Kingdom from Antipater, who imparted all to his
Mother, so that all things were done according as they pleased; and

But Mariamne's Children were every day more and more provoked, disdaining to
give place unto their inferiors; The women at discord and variance.
their Wives did the like: and Alexander's Wife Glaphyra, who was the Daughter
of Archelaus King of Cappadocia, did greatly envy and disdain Salome, and she
also her again, both for the love that she bare unto her Husband, and for that
she disdained (as women are wont) that her Daughter married unto Aristobulus,
should be in equal honor with her. Pheroras also the King's Brother had a hand
in this contention, Pheroras refused the King's Daughter offered him to Wife.
about a private cause of suspicion and hatred. For he fell so far in love with
one of his maids, that he refused the Kings Daughter offered unto him, rather
Herod took this in very ill part, seeing his Brother (who had received so many
benefits at his hands, and was almost his fellow in his Kingdom by his means)
not to show the like brotherly affection to him again as he ought. And seeing
he could not dissuade him from that madness, he married his Daughter unto
Phasaelus his Son: And afterward thinking that his Brother's mind toward his
maid was satisfied, he complained of his injurious dealing, in repulsing his
Daughter offered unto him to Wife, he offered him another of his Daughters
named Cypros. Then Ptolomeus advised Pheroras not to contemn his Brother's
offer, and persist in such folly still; telling him it was mere madness to
incur the King's displeasure on such an account. Pheroras understanding this
counsel profitable for him, having obtained pardon at the King's hands, sent
away his maid, by whom he had a Son, and promised the King to marry this his
other Daughter; and appointed the thirteenth day after to celebrate his
Marriage; making a solemn Oath unto the King, never after that time to use the
company of that woman whom he had put away. The time appointed being expired,

Then Herod, not able any longer to contain himself, used many speeches,
whereby he evidently showed his mind to be alienated from his Brother. And
there were many who taking this opportunity, did by forged calumnies increase
his aversion; so that now there was no day nor hour past, wherein he did not
still hear some new combustions and stirs amongst his dearest friends. Salome
enticed her Daughter to betray her husband's secrets.
For Salome being so offended at Mariamne's Children, did not permit her
Daughter married to Aristobulus, to enjoy mutual love and comfort of her
Husband, enticing her to bewray her Husband's secrets; and if there happened
any small occasions of offense (as often it falls out) she should the
Alexander were alone, that they were wont to talk of Mariamne their Mother, and
use reproachful words against their Father; and threatening, that if they ever
did obtain the Kingdom, they would make the Sons of the King, whom he had by
other Wives, Notaries and Town-Clerks, and so they might reap profit of their
Learning which they had attained to: and whenever they saw any of the Kings
Wives wear any of Mariamne's apparel, that then they vowed instead of that
attire, to cloth them with Sackcloth, and shut them up where they should
never see the Sun* Salome presently told all this to the King; who, though he
were

But presently the mischief was again set on foot; for Pheroras the King's
Brother, meeting Alexander, who (as we have said) was Glaphyra her Husband, who
was Daughter to Archelaus; he told him that he heard by Salome, that Herod was
so far in love with Glaphyra, that he could not shake off this affection. Herod
greatly moved against Pheroras, for affirming that he was in love with Glaphyra*
The young Prince hearing this, became jealous, and was in a great rage; and
now what honor soever or gifts Herod, for the love of his Son, gave her,
Alexander did interpret it in the worst sense: and not able to put up such
Pheroras had told him. Herod was never more surprised; and not enduring to be
falsely accused of so shameful a fact, inveying against the great malice of his
friends; who for his good offices he did them, so rewarded him. He presently
sending for Pheroras, very sharply began to chide him, saying; O most impious
that lives amongst men! art thou become so ungrateful, either to speak or
think such a matter of us? Think thou that I do not perceive thy drift; that
thou spakest not these words unto my Son to discredit me, but also to the
intent by this means thou might work some treason against me, and cause me
to be poisoned? For who but a good Son, as this is, would suffer his Father,
suspected for such a matter, to live, and not to be revenged of him for such
offense? Whether do thou think that thou did put these speeches into his
mind, or by them a sword into his hand to kill his Father withal? Or what was
thy intent, seeing thou hate him and his Brother; and only counterfeiting
good will toward me, to belie me, and to report that of me, that without
impiety could not be thought? Get thee hence, thou wretched Imp, seeing thou
have thus abused thy Brother, who has deserved so well at thy hands. Go basest
of men, I will leave thee to the gnawing worm of thy own perfidious Conscience,
to be thy Executioner all thy life time: And for your greater confusion, I will
content my self to confound your wickedness with my goodness, in not punishing
you according to your deserts; but treating you with that mercy, of which all
the world knows you to be so unworthy. The King having uttered his anger
against his Brother Pheroras, and he being taken in a manifest fault answered,
that that report was first devised by Salome, Salome excuses her self.
Which she (being then present) hearing, began to exclaim, saying, it was not
her device, and that they all labored to make the King hate her, and put her
to For (said she) I was the only cause that you did put away the woman whom you
so doted after, persuading you to marry the King's Daughter; and this is the
cause that you hate me. With these speeches, tearing her hair and striking her
breast, she made a show of innocence; but this gesture was a color to hide her
bad intent. So Pheroras was left in great perplexity, not knowing what to say
or do; and could find no pretense to excuse his fact: for on the one side, he
confessed that he told it unto Alexander; and on the other, he could not make
Herod believe that he heard it of Salome. This contention endured a good while;
at last, the King being wearied, sent away his Brother and his Sister; and

After this contention, The effect of calumniation.
Salome was hardly thought of, because she was judged to be the Author of this
ill report; and the King's Wives hated her, because they knew her to have
strange qualities; and so variable, that one while she would profess
friendship, and presently after hatred. Wherefore they still had something to
inform Herod of against her; taking occasion happening by chance, which was
this: There was a King of the Arabians, named Obodas, a slothful man, and one
given to idleness: And there was one Syllaeus that did govern all; this man was
a crafty fellow, and in the prime of his youth, and very beautiful. This
Syllaeus coming unto Herod about Salome, who then sat at supper with him, began
to set his mind upon her; and finding she was a Widow, he entered into talk with
her: and she finding her Brother now not so friendly unto her as before he had
been, and also entangled with the beauty of this young man, did not greatly
deny to marry him; and many Feasts being made at that time, they showed evident
signs of their mutual consent, and love one to another. The King's Wives told
the King of this in jest. Herod commanded Pheroras, at supper time to note if
he could espy any tokens of familiarity betwixt them; and Pheroras told him,
that by signs and mutual viewing one another, Syllaeus the Arabian desiring
Salome to wife, was denied.
they sufficiently showed their intents. After this, the Arabian being
suspected, departed into his own Country. But two or three months after, he
came again into Judaea only for this purpose, and talked with Herod touching
this matter, requesting him to let Salome be his Wife; affirming that that
affinity would be profitable unto him for the traffic between his people and
the Arabians, whose Prince he was to be; and did already enjoy a great part of
the Dominion. Herod told all this unto his Sister, and asked her if she would
marry him; and she answered, she would. Then they requested that Syllaeus
should become a Jew in Religion, or else it was not lawful for him to marry
her. He would not condescend hereunto, affirming that he should be stoned to
death by his people, if he did it; and so he departed without obtaining his
purpose. From that time forth, Pheroras, and especially the King's Wives,
accused Salome of intemperancy; affirming that she had had the company of the
Arabian. Now Herod Salome's Son, whom Pheroras refused for the love of his
Maid; which Son of Salome's was her eldest that she had by Costabarus; to show
his good will toward Salome his Sister. But he was dissuaded by Pheroras, who
told him that the young man would never love such a Father in Law, because of
his Father's death; persuading him rather to marry her to his eldest Son, who
was to succeed him in his Tetrarchy, which he easily persuaded the King unto,
and so obtained pardon for his former offense. Herod married his Daughter to
Pheroras's Son.
Wherefore, the match being changed, the Maid was married unto the young man,
who had a hundred Talents in dowry with her, more than otherwise should have
been given with her.

But all this while this dissension of Herod's house did not cease, but rather
increased; Herod had three Eunuchs, whom he greatly esteemed for their beauty;
one of them was his Butler, the other his Cook, and the third his Chamberlain;
whom also he was wont to employ in serious affairs of his Kingdom. Some one or
other informed the King, that these three Eunuchs were corrupted by his Son
Alexander, The Sons hatred toward their Father is bewrayed.
with great sums of money; and being upon Tortures examined if they had
accompanied with him, they confessed all; yet they affirmed that they knew no
practice of his attempted against his Father. But their torments being
increased by Antipater's Favorites, they were forced to confess that Alexander
secretly hated his Father; and he exhorted them to forsake Herod, who was now
good for nothing; who dissembled his age by painting and that then he would
advance them to the highest honors of the Kingdom: For he

Herod hearing this, fear and anger did seize on him, by reason that his Son's
words seemed both insolent and threatening; and being for both these causes in a
rage, he feared some greater matter to be put in practice against him, which he
could not suddenly, having so little warning, avoid: And not daring to make
open enquiry, he set secret spies a work, to tell him how all matters stood,
himself now mistrusting all men, and accounting it his security to mistrust
all, even them that deserved it not: and not moderating his suspicious mind;
now whosoever was the nearest to him, was the Herod crediteth all tales, and so
puts many to death unjustly.
as of most power to injure him. As for others, that were but only named by his
spies, he presently esteemed it his safety to put them to death. Then they of
his household, every one being careful to save himself, were one turned against
another, every one esteeming it his own safety to prevent others, by accusing
them unto Herod; which done, presently they incited other men's envy against
him, and every one of them to desire such measure as they had measured unto
others; and thus they also revenged their private Quarrels, and presently after
they themselves were taken, and did by other men's means suffer the like, being
entrapped in the same trap they set for their enemies. For the King did quickly
repent for having put very many to death, who were not convicted; yet for all
that, he was Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 8.
The Court was in such a lamentable condition, that he commanded many of his
dearest friends, and them especially, whose fidelity he had formerly
experienced, Herod denies to be familiar with Andromachus and Gemellus,
not to come in his sight, nor within his Court-gates. For he did now shake off
the friendship between Andromachus and Gemellus, and himself, who were his
ancient friends; and oftentimes had gone Ambassadors for him, and always been
of his counsel, and had been tutors unto his Children, in whom he had always
reposed more trust than in any others; the one of them, for that his Son
Demetrius was familiar with Alexander; and Gemellus, for that he knew him to
Alexander; for he was one of them that had brought him up, and had traveled
with him to Rome. And no doubt but he had censured them with some more heavy
sentence, had it not been that they were so eminent persons. Wherefore at that
time he was contented to have banished them, and deprived them of all their
authority, to the end, that having disgraced these good men, he might the more
freely play the Tyrant. Antipater the cause of all mischief.
Antipater was the cause of all this mischief; who from the first time that he
perceived his Father to be fearful and suspicious, still after that, joined
with him as Counselor; and as it were, increased his rage and cruelty; and
then he gallantly played his part, Many were tortured and examined for
Alexander's cause.
endeavoring that whosoever would resist him, should be made away. Wherefore
Andromachus and the rest of his friends being now banished the Alexander, to
see if they were guilty, or if they knew of any treason to be practiced against
him; but they knowing nothing to inform him of, died amidst their torments.
Where he so much the more tortured others, for that contrary to his opinion, he
found not so much as an evil thought against him; Antipater craftily
interpreting it, that they had rather in torments conceal the truth, than to
show themselves not trusty to their masters and friends; wherefore many being
taken, he caused them to be tortured to get something out of some of them. At
last one amongst the rest, not able to endure those torments imposed upon him,
said; that he had often heard Alexander say, when any one commended his tall
stature, or skilful shooting, and the rest of his virtues; that nature had
Alexander again, to have conspired with his Brother Aristobulus, to kill his
Father when he was hunting, and then to fly with speed unto Rome, and beg the
Kingdom of Caesar. There were also found some of Aristobulus his Letters
written unto his Brother, complaining of the injurious dealing of his Father,
who had given Antipater, the yearly revenues whereof amounted to two hundred
Talents. Then Herod thinking himself to have probability enough, his former
Alexander and cast him in prison; and again he began to doubt, because he did
scarcely believe the informations against him, neither could he devise any
cause wherefore they should seek to commit Treason against him. And those
complaints seemed childish; neither was it probable, that having openly killed
his Father, Alexander being in prison, his friends were tortured*
he would afterward have gone to Rome. Wherefore endeavoring to find some
stronger argument of his Son's impiety; and because he would not be thought
rashly to have committed his Son to prison, he caused the most noble and
eminent of all Alexander's friends to be tortured, and they confessing no such
matter as he expected, he put them to death.

Whilst thus all the Court did resound with fear, One accused Alexander to have
sent letters to Rome against his Father.
torments and contentions, a certain Alexander, to have sent letters to his
friends at Rome, to entreat them to cause him to be sent for by Caesar thither,
that he might accuse his Father of certain conspiracies against Caesar, and how
he more esteemed the friendship of Mithridates King of the Parthians, than the
friendship of the Romans; affirming also, that he had poison ready prepared at
Ascalon. Herod hearing this, was comforted by flatterers about him, as having
not done any thing rashly; and so he gave now full credit unto all: Alexander
confesses the treason, and who had a hand in it.
Yet the poison was diligently sought for, but could not be found. Alexander
being now oppressed with this calamity, he yet took courage; and because he
would more incite his Father's displeasure against him, he did not deny it:
Perhaps meaning to make his Father ashamed of himself, for giving credit so
easily unto forged Pheroras and his most trusty friends were herein
conspirators: And that in the night time Salome came secretly unto him, and as
it were, forced him to lie with her: And that all of them aimed at this mark,
to have him made away, that so they might enjoy their wished liberty. He also
accused Ptolomeus and Sapinnius of this conspiracy, who were more faithful unto
their King, than all others: So that now these men, who before were most
friendly one to another, began like mad men to rage one against another: and
punishment so Herod was so troubled with the contention in his house, that he
was weary of his life.
So that the King's Court was now greatly defaced with sorrow and heaviness,
wherewith the usual felicity thereof was destroyed. Herod himself amidst these
calamities, could not but be weary of his life; who, not daring to trust
himself in any bodies hand, he was tormented with a daily and hourly fear of
some untimely death, that would befall: And many times persuaded himself, that
he did see his Sons before him with a drawn sword ready to kill him; and this
was his cogitation night and day,

CHAP. XII.
How Archelaus King of Cappadocia, reconciled Alexander to his Father.
WHilst Herod was thus troubled in his mind, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 9* al.
13.
Archelaus King of Cappadocia careful of his Daughter, and the young Prince his
Son in Law, and pitying his friend Herod in such calamities; Archelaus the King
of Cappadocia feigneth displeasure against Alexander his Son in Law, and so
reconciled Herod unto him.
he thought it his duty to make a journey unto him. And Archelaus devised
another way to appease these troubles; he counterfeited indignation against the
young Prince, approving all the King's actions; affirming that he would break
the band of Wedlock between his Daughter and Alexander; and that if she knew of
the Conspiracy, and did not inform the King thereof, himself would punish her.
Then Herod, contrary to his expectation, seeing Archelaus so angry for the
offense committed against him, began to remit his anger: And now with just
consideration weighing what he had done, by little and little, Archelaus also
began to accuse him, then Herod's heart relented, and he with tears besought
Archelaus not to yield too much to anger, nor for the young Princes offense,
Archelaus perceiving him to relent, began to turn the matter against Herod's
friends, as the causes of all this mischief, who had corrupted Alexander, who
of himself was void of malice; and especially he aggravated the matter against
Pheroras the King's Brother. Archelaus lays the fault of Alexander's offense
upon others, and especially upon Pheroras.
Pheroras having now incurred the King's displeasure, perceived that none could
so soon reconcile him unto the King, as Archelaus; wherefore, clothed in black,
and making other signs, as though he despaired of his life, he went unto him,
who did not deny to help him what he could; yet he told him that it was no
easy matter for him to pacify the King, so highly offended, persuading him
rather himself to go unto the King his Brother, and crave pardon of him;
confessing himself to have been cause of all this mischief; by which confession
of his, Pheroras confessed himself to be the author of all mischief, and
obtains pardon of his brother.
Pheroras followed his counsel, which fell out happily for them both; for the
Prince, contrary to any ones expectation, was freed from all his troubles: And
Archelaus made Pheroras and Herod friends; and he himself having obtained great
friendship of the King in his adversities, he returned joyfully into
Cappadocia, being rewarded with rich gifts, and being accounted of as Herod's
chiefest friend. They also agreed amongst themselves, that Herod should go to
Rome, because he had already written unto Caesar, Herod accompanied Archelaus
unto Antioch.
concerning this matter: And they both went together to Antiochia, and there
Herod reconciled Titus the President of Syria unto Archelaus; and so he
returned into Judea.

CHAP. XIII.
Herod declares War against the Arabians, for protecting Trachonites Robbers.
Whilst Herod being gone to Rome, The year of the World, 3956. before Christ's
Nativity, 8.
was absent from his Kingdom, the Arabian Wars began, on this occasion: The
inhabitants of Trachon, whose Country Caesar taking from Zenodorus, gave it
unto Herod; being forbidden and hindered from stealing, were now forced to frame
themselves to live like husbandmen, more civily The cause of the Arabian War.
yet at first Herod compelling them thereunto, they abstained from injuring the
inhabitants bordering upon them, which did greatly redound unto Herod's credit,
Caesar gave Trachonitis to Herod, Alias chap. 14.
by whose diligence they were brought unto it. But when Herod was gone into
Italy to accuse Alexander, and to commend Antipater unto Caesar, the
Trachonites hearing a bruit of his death, revolted, and turned to their
accustomed robberies: Herod's Captains subdue the Rebels in Arabia.
Yet they were at that time again subdued in the King's absence by the Captains
that he left at home; and forty of the chiefest of the Thieves amongst them
being taken, the rest terrified by their example, left their own Country, and
fled into Arabia, where Syllaeus received them, in revenge that he could not
obtain Salome Judaea, but also of Caelosyria, and drove away the preys they got
into the place allotted them, Syllaeus protecting them and their villainies.
Herod returning from Rome, found that his people were greatly endamaged by
these Thieves; and seeing he could not subdue them, by reason the Arabians did
protect them; The Thieves taken and punished.
not enduring that injury, and entering into Trachon, he killed all their
Families: Whereby they were so much the more enraged against his Country; for
they had a Law amongst them, whereby they were commanded to revenge the death
of their Families; and so contemning all dangers, they came and wasted all
Herod's Country with continual incursions. Then the King complained Saturninus
and Voluminous then Presidents, Alias, chap. 15.
sent thither by Caesar; requesting that he might have the Thieves to punish
them. They hearing this news, with as much speed as they might, gathered their
Forces together; and making themselves stronger than they were before, with
sudden incursions wasted all where they came, destroying both the fields and
villages, and killing all they could find; so that now this resembled a War,
rather than a Robbery; for they were a thousand in number. Herod demanded the
Thieves to be delivered unto him, and the money he had lent to be repayed.
Wherefore Herod required these Thieves and Robbers to be delivered unto him,
and required the debt that Obodas owed him; for Herod had lent Obodas
threescore Talents, and sent them unto him by Syllaeus; and now the time was
expired wherein the money was to be repayed. But Syllaeus, who had taken all
the rule from Obodas, and himself governed all, denied that those Thieves were
in Arabia, and deferred the payment of the money: So that this matter was
debated before Saturninus Voluminous then Presidents of Syria. The year of the
World, 3958. before Christ's Nativity, 6.
At last it was by them determined, that within thirty days, the money due to
Herod should be paid, and the runaways of both Countries delivered each to
other. But there was no one Arabian that either had fled unto Herod for any
offense committed, nor for any other cause; Saturninus and Voluminous, the
Rulers of Syria, do reconcile Herod and the Arabians.
but the Arabians were convicted to receive the Thieves that fled from Herod.

CHAP. XVI.

WHen the day was come that was appointed, Herod, by the permission of
Saturninus and Voluminous, entered into Arabia with an Army, and destroyed the
Castle called Repta.
Syllaeus not minded to stand unto the agreement made, went in the mean time to
Rome: But Herod exacted his money, and the Thieves to be restored unto him.
Saturninus and Voluminous permitting him with force of Arms to persecute those
obstinate people: So he levying an Army, went into Arabia; in three days space
going as far as ordinarily men use to march in seven; and coming unto the
Castle wherein the Thieves kept, Repta; and did no other harm unto the
inhabitants. Nacebus with 25 Arabians slain.
And a Captain of the Arabians, named Nacebus, came to succor the Thieves, and
so fought with Herod's Army; in which Battle a few of Herod's men were slain;
but of the Arabians were killed five and twenty, with their General, Herod
carried 3000 Idumaeans into Trach^n.
and the rest were put to flight. Being thus revenged upon the Thieves, he led
three thousand Idumaeans into Trachon, to keep the inhabitants from robbing;
and sent Letters unto the Roman Governors who were in Phaenicia, that he had
only used the authority which they gave him against the rebellious Arabians
that resisted him, and nothing else; which afterward also, they making enquiry,
they found true.

CHAP. XV.
Syllaeus does so incense Augustus against Herod, that he refuses to give
Audience to his Ambassadors, neither will he admit those whom Aretas King of
the Arabians sent. This Aretas succeeded Obodas, whom Syllaeus caused to be
poisoned, that he might get the Kingdom. Herod sends the third Embassage to
Augustus.
THe Arabians sent messengers with all speed to Syllaeus at Rome, Hedio and
Ruffinus chap. 10. al, 16.
and informed him Syllaeus being a little before insinuated into Caesar's
acquaintance, Syllaeus accused Herod unto Caesar.
by chance was then also about the Palace; and hearing these news, he presently
changed his apparel; and clothing himself in black, he went in this manner unto
Caesar, informing him how Arabia was afflicted with Wars, and that the whole
Kingdom was wasted by Herod, who had entered into the Country with an Army, and
with tears complained that 2500 of the Arabian Nobility were killed, and
amongst them his friend and kinsman Nacebus; and great riches were taken away,
which were laid up at Repta; and that all this was done in contempt of Obodas,
who had no Army ready, nor a fit Captain for his Forces, he being not there.
Syllaeus having thus spoken; adding moreover, that he Rome, but that he was
persuaded that Caesar would have had a care of the common peace and tranquillity
of his Subjects; and that had he been at home, Herod to his cost should have
violated that Peace. Caesar hereat was greatly moved, and enquired of some of
Herod's friends who were then present, and of certain men that were lately come
out of Syria also, whether Herod had led an Army out of the limits of his own
Kingdom. Which they not denying, and Caesar not vouchsafing to hear the cause
why, his displeasure against Herod was greatly increased, so that he writ
threatening Letters unto him; telling him, that hitherto he had used him as a
Friend, The Arabians and Trachonites understanding that Caesar was offended
with Herod, rejoice thereat.
but hereafter he would use him as a Subject; which also Syllaeus signified
unto the Arabians. By which Letters they were made proud, and would Trachonites
hearing this, rebelled against the Garrison of the Idumaeans; and joining with
the Arabian Thieves, The year of the World, 3960. before Christ's Nativity. 4.
who wasted their Country; not so much respecting Herod did put up all
injuries, and durst not once mutter, Caesar being offended with him; for the
which cause he was not so courageous nor valiant as he was before. Caesar
offended with Herod*
For first of all, Caesar would not admit his Ambassadors, whom he sent to
plead his cause before Caesar; and Herod again sending other Ambassadors,
Caesar sent them back again, their business undone.

Wherefore Herod being in this perplexity, greatly feared Syllaeus; who being
now at Rome, did easily persuade Caesar any thing; for Caesar was very
credulous; and Syllaeus aimed at some greater matter. Obodas dying, Eneas
succeeded him in the Arabian Kingdom.
For Obodas dying, Eneas succeeded him in the Kingdom of Arabia, changing his
name, called himself Aretas; whom Syllaeus, by Caesar; whom he now perceived to
be angry against Aretas, for that, without his consent, he presumed to take
upon him the government of the Kingdom. But at last he also sent letters and
gifts unto Caesar, and amongst the rest a Crown of Gold worth many Talents; and
in those letters he accused Syllaeus, who as an impious and disloyal servant,
had poisoned his King Obodas; in whose lifetime he had also invaded the
Government of the Kingdom, committing Adultery with the Arabians Wives, getting
together other men's money, Caesar would not give Audience to the Arabian
Ambassadors.
thereby to obtain the Kingdom. Caesar would not permit these Ambassadors to
have Audience; but refusing their gifts, suffered Judea and Arabia every day
became worse and worse, every one seeking to trouble the estate of both
Kingdoms, and no man endeavoring to quiet them. For the King of Arabia was not
yet established in his Kingdom, and therefore could not control his Subjects.
And Herod feared that if he did defend himself, he should so much the more
incite Caesar against him; and so was forced to put up all injuries that were
done unto him: Herod sent Nicholaus Damas^^ne to Caesar*
And finding no end of his miseries, he at length determined to send again to
Rome Ambassadors, to see if, by the help of friends, Caesar might be persuaded
to think better of him; and so committed that Embassage unto Nicholaus of
Damasco, and sent him to Rome.

CHAP. XVI.
Herod more incensed than ever against his Sons Alexander and Aristobulus by
several Aspersions, causes them to be imprisoned. Augustus is made sensible of
Syllaeus's wickedness, condemns him to die, confirms Aretas in the Kingdom of
Arabia; he is sorry for having had so ill an opinion of Herod, advises him to
call a great Assembly at Berite, where his Sons, after new complaints given in
against them, are to be judged.
IN the mean time the dissension of Herod's house was much increased, Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 11. al. 17.
by the augmentation of hatred against his Sons Alexander and Aristobulus; and
although at all other times his Court was never void of suspicion, Eurycles a
Lacedemonian insinuates himself into Herod's familiarity.
which is a pernicious evil to Kings and Princes; yet, at that time especially,
this mischief was in his principal vigor and force. For one Eurcyles a
Lacedemonian, and a Noble man of his Country; but having a turbulent wit,
given over to flattery and pleasure, yet cunningly dissembling both vices,
coming unto Herod and giving him gifts, and receiving greater gifts at his
hands, was by him courteously entertained; and familiarly conversing with him,
brought it so to pass, that he was esteemed amongst his especial friends. This
Eurycles Antipater's house, Eurycles insinuated himself into Alexander's
friendship.
being also familiar with Alexander for their often meeting one another: For he
said that Archelaus King of Cappadocia and himself, was great friends, and
therefore he counterfeited himself to reverence Glaphyra very much; and all men
judging him indifferent in all parties, he diligently noted whatsoever past,
and every word that was spoken, seeking, by all means he could, matter to
gratify others carrying of tales; and with such flattering fair speeches he
insinuated himself into every man's friendship, that he seemed Alexander's only
trusty friend; and that all his endeavors with others, were only for to be
more serviceable to Alexander in his concerns. And by this his deceit, he so
insinuated himself into Alexander's favor, that the young Prince thought him
to be his only friend, unto whom he Alexander showed him how much he was
grieved for not being in his Father's favor; and related his Mother's
misfortune, and that Antipater had now gotten all authority and dignity from
him and his Brother, and was the only man that could do all; and that these
injuries were no longer tolerable, their Father being now incited against them,
that now he would neither admit them unto his Councils nor Banquets. And he
committed his griefs (as he then thought) into his friends bosom. Eurycles
observing all Alexander's words and actions, related them to Antipater and
Herod.
But Eurycles told Antipater all, affirming that thought it nothing concerned
him, yet he could not but speak of it for the greatness of the present danger;
desiring him to beware of Alexander, who did not stick openly to show what mind
he bare; but did, as it were, manifestly show that he desired to make away his
Father. Which done, he received of Antipater most rich gifts, and pledges of
his good will toward him; at length he persuaded him to Herod. The King gave
an attentive ear, whilst he related Alexander's malice; and was so moved with
the circumstances, that he conceived a deadly hatred against his Son, which
also without further delay, he did make manifest; Eurycles by craft got money
of Archelaus.
for he rewarded Eurycles for his pains with fifty Talents. Which he having
received, went unto Archelaus; and speaking well of Alexander, acquainted him
how instrumental he had been in reconciling him unto his Father: and receiving
of him also a sum of money, he departed before his malice was discovered, and
returned into his Country; and using the like shifts there also, he was at
last by his Countrymen banished from Lacedemonia. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 10.
Furthermore, Herod not content now, as before, to hear only that which was
told him of Alexander and Aristobulus, Herod does give ear unto the accusers of
Alexander and Aristobulus.
did himself also Evaratus of Cous had conspired with Alexander; and he seemed
now to hear no talk more willingly than this, and such like. But then greater
misfortunes than all the rest befell the two Princes, false accusations never
ceasing to be forged against them; and every one as it were, striving to accuse
them of some crime or other unto the King, pretending the care they had of his
safety. Herod had two Champions, Jucundus and Tyrannus confess that Alexander
did solicit them to kill Herod as he was a hunting.
Jucundus and Tyrannus; both acceptable unto him, for their strength, and tall
stature, and bigness of body: These two for some offense were banished the
Court, and received into Alexander's service, and placed amongst Alexander had
hired them to kill Herod, as he was a hunting wild Beasts: for so it might
easily be bruited abroad, that he falling off his horse, fell upon his own
Lance, and so was killed; which once before had almost happened unto him. They
also declared unto him, that certain gold was hidden and buried in the stable:
And they also accused Herod's chief Huntsman, that at Alexander's command he
had given Alexander's Servants the King's Lances and his Armor. After them the
Governor of the Castle of Alexandrium was taken, and examined upon tortures;
and it was objected against him, that he promised to receive How Alexander writ
unto the Captain of Alexandrium to receive him.
resembling Alexander's hand written to this effect: So soon as by God's
assistance we have done that which we intend to do, we will presently come unto
you; be careful therefore, that according to your promise you do receive us
into your Castle. Herod having had a view of these Letters, did now without any
doubt believe, that indeed some treacherous practice was plotted against him by
his Sons. Diophantus the Scribe does counterfeit other men's hands.
But Alexander affirmed that Diophantus the Secretary had counterfeited his
hand, and that the Letter was Antipater's device. For Diophantus was accounted
cunning in such matters, and afterward being taken with the like, he was
therefore put to death. And the King Jericho before the people to accuse his
Sons, where they were stoned to death; and the people hereat moved, would also
have killed Alexander and Aristobulus with the same death. But Herod, by the
means of Ptolomeus and Pheroras, did restrain them; Alexander and Aristobulus
are imprisoned; and Aristobulus warns his Mother in law*
and commanded the young Princes to be cast into prison, and there to be kept
so close that no man was admitted unto them; but many ^pies were set, who
should narrowly mark all their actions and words; and now they were accounted
as condemned men, both by other men's opinions, and also by their own. One of
them, to wit, Aristobulus, for grief inviting his Aunt, and Mother in Law, to
compassionate his present calamity, and to hate him that was the Author hereof;
affirmed that she also was in great danger, being accused in hope to Syllaeus,
to have signified unto him by Letters all that past in Herod's Court. Which
words the woman presently came and told to her Brother Herod. The King no
longer able to bridle his fury, commanded them both to be bound, and kept in
several places, The year of the World, 3960. before Christ's Nativity, 4.
one from another, and each of them to write what they had plotted against
Alexander confesses to Herod, that he purposed to fly to Archelaus.
and in continual care. At that time a Prince of Cappadocia came Ambassador
from Archelaus, named Mela, who was one of the greatest Lords of the Country:
And Herod desiring to show his Son's malice, he sent for Alexander out of
prison; commanding him to relate how, and after what order, or whither they
meant to fly: he answered, unto Archelaus, who had also promised them to send
them to Rome; Mela Ambassador of Archelaus, King of Cappadocia*
but that they had no further intent or purpose to effect any unlawful practice
against their Father, and that all other accusations were false. And that he
requested Tyrannus and the rest might have been better examined, but Antipater
prevented that; who, by his own forged rumors spread amongst the people, did
cause them to hasten their deaths. Which being said, Herod commanded both him
and Mela to be led unto Glaphyra, Claphyra Alexander's wife is demanded, if she
knew of any Treason against Herod.
that she might be asked whether she were any way privy to the conspiracy
against Herod: And coming unto her, the woman seeing her husband bound,
presently tore her hair; and being amazed, with great compassion, cried out.
The young man's cheeks were also bedewed with tears; so that a long time after,
those that were present amazed, and moved to compassion at this miserable
sight, could neither speak nor do the King's command. At last Ptolomeus, to
whose charge Alexander was committed, desiring him to speak, whether his Wife
was privy to his intent; he Alexander answered, Neither did I purpose any
impiety against my Father, as some suppose, who ought not to think so; neither
do thou know of any one: this thou know, that thou and I purposed to fly
unto Archelaus thy Father, and that he promised to convey us to Rome; which she
also affirmed.

Herod now thinking that Archelaus was disaffected toward him, Archelaus
excuses himself to Herod.
delivered Letters Olympus and Voluminous, commanding them in the way as they
went, to pass by Eleusa a Town of Cilicia, and deliver certain Letters unto
Archelaus himself to the same effect; and that from thence they should go to
Rome; and if so be when they came there, they found that Caesar had been
reconciled to him by Nicholaus his means, that then they should also deliver
certain Letters unto him; declaring all that was past between him and his Sons,
and the proofs alleged to convince the Princes. Archelaus writ again unto
Herod, that indeed he would have entertained the young men, for fear that any
greater mischance should befall them or their Father, by reason of the
suspicion against them; yet was he was he not minded to send them to Caesar,
nor to have confirmed them in any malicious course. Caesar and Herod made
friends.
The Messengers coming to Rome, found Caesar reconciled to Herod, and delivered
the Letters unto him. For Nicholaus his Embassage was to this effect: So soon
as he came unto Rome, and had entered the Palace, beside the charge he had given
him, he did also undertake to accuse Syllaeus. For he perceived the Arabians at
variance among themselves; and that some of them had declared all Syllaeus his
bad practices, and that by his means many of Obodas's Kinsmen were murdered,
as his adversaries manifestly proved by his Letters which they intercepted.

Now Nicholaus desirous to reconcile Herod unto Caesar, omitted not this
occasion by chance offered him; Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 12. al. 18.
for he well knew that if he began with the King's defense, he should then find
a hard and heavy Judge against him; but if he began to accuse Syllaeus, he
should find also a fit occasion to plead his King's cause. Nicholaus accuses
Syllaeus, and excuses Herod.
Wherefore Nicholaus taking Aretas's Ambassadors, accused Syllaeus as a
murderer of his Lord and King, and many other Arabians; and that he had
borrowed much money, to trouble the peace of the Commonwealth; and that he had
corrupted many women and honest Matrons, both at Rome and in Arabia. He added
hereunto a most grievous crime, to wit, that he, by his lies and false reports,
had deceived Caesar; whom in all things he had misinformed, concerning that
which Herod had done. Which when he once mentioned, Caesar commanded him to
omit the rest; and only to relate the matter concerning Herod; whether Herod
did not enter into Arabia with an Army, and did kill two thousand and five
hundred men, and carry away Captives, and rob and spoil the Country? Nicholaus
answered, that to these demands himself was able to answer, that Herod did none
of these; and that he did not deserve any displeasure. Caesar, contrary
Nicholaus said: And hereupon Nicholaus related unto Caesar, how Herod had lent
five hundred Talents, and that he had a Writing in pawn, wherein he was
permitted after the day appointed, if then it were not repayed him again, to
prey upon all the whole Country, and satisfy himself; A Narration of the
Arabian Wars, and the borrowed money.
and that this was no hostile invasion, but according to Law and equity, a
requiring of his right and debt due unto him. And that this was not rashly
done, though by the writing he was so permitted to do; but by the consent of
Saturninus and Voluminous Presidents of Syria; in whose presence Syllaeus swore
by Caesar's good fortune at Berytum, that within thirty days after, both the
debt, and also certain fugitives fled from the King, should be restored unto
him; and that Syllaeus performed none Herod went again unto the Presidents, and
they permitted him to go and take pledges for his money; and that so by their
permission he went into Arabia. And this is the War that his adversaries have
so tragically exaggerated; and yet how can it be called a War? seeing that it
was done by the consent of the Presidents, and that by Covenant after Perjury,
wherewith both God's and also Caesar's name was violated. The Thieves of
Trachon.
It now remains that I speak something concerning the Captives. There were
forty Thieves of Trachon, and afterward more that fled from Herod for fear of
punishment, and fled into Arabia, whom Syllaeus protected and succored to the
injury of all men, and gave them ground to inhabit, and was partaker of their
preys; notwithstanding that by his foresaid oath, he was bound to restore them,
together with the Arabia, and carried away Captive, and some of them also
escaped. This his forged tale concerning the Captives being thus refuted, hear,
O Sovereign Caesar, the lying invention, which to provoke thee to wrath,
himself devised. For I am well able to affirm this, that when the Arabian Army
assaulted us, and one or two of our men were killed, then at last Herod forced
to make resistance, he killed Nacebus, and with him five and twenty, and no
more; for every one of which Syllaeus falsely told Caesar a hundred, and so
told him that two thousand and five hundred were killed. Caesar hereat greatly
moved, with an angry countenance looking upon Syllaeus, he asked him how many
Arabians were killed in the fight? He amazed, and knowing not what to reply,
answered, Caesar commanded the Writings to be read, containing the conditions
between them; and the Writings of the Presidents, and the Letters of the Cities
containing the complaints of the Robberies. Syllaeus condemned to die*
And so the matter was brought to pass, that Caesar was reconciled unto Herod,
and condemned Syllaeus to die; and repenting himself to have written so
threatening Letters to Herod, he objected that also unto Syllaeus; affirming,
that by his false informations he had caused him to pass the limits of
friendship, in using his friend so hardly. And so he sent Syllaeus into his
Country, that after he had satisfied his creditors, he might be punished
according to the sentence. But he still continued angry with Aretas for that
without his authority, Caesar was purposed to give the Kingdom of Arabia to
Herod, and was altered by Herod's Letters.
he had usurped the Crown and Kingdom: and he was minded also Arabia upon
Herod; but the Letters which Herod sent him, changed his mind. For Olympus and
Voluminous, as soon as they understood that Caesar's wrath toward Herod was
pacified, presently they delivered unto him the Letters as they were commanded;
wherein were contained the Arguments whereby his Sons were convicted of Treason
against him. Which Caesar having read, he thought it not convenient to trouble
the old man (unfortunate with his Sons) with another Kingdom; and so he
admitted Aretas his Ambassadors; The year of the World, 3961. before Christ's
Nativity, 3.
and chiding them that their King had rashly usurped the Kingdom without his
Authority and knowledge, not expecting his pleasure; he received their gifts,
and confirmed him in the Kingdom by his Authority. This done, being now
reconciled unto Herod, he writ unto him, that he was sorry for him, that Hedio
and Ruffinus, chap. 3.
and that he should, if they had attempted any Treason against him, Aretas's
Ambassadors unto Caesar.
punish them as men that desired to murder their Father, for he gave him free
and full Authority; but if they only attempted to fly, he should also be
satisfied with a less punishment. Caesar allowed Herod to punish malefactors.
Wherefore he counseled him to call a Council at Berytum, together with the
Roman Presidents, and Archelaus King of Cappadocia, and the rest of his
friends, and the Nobility thereabout, according as they should advise him, so
to do. And this was the effect of Caesar's Letter.

CHAP. XVII.
How Herod's Sons were condemned in the Council of Berytum.
HErod receiving this Letter, rejoiced above measure; both for that he had
again obtained Caesar's favor, and for that Caesar had given him full
Authority to do what he pleased unto his Sons. And yet I know not how it came
to pass, that he who in his prosperity was a hard Father, yet did show himself
not rash in putting his Sons to death; and though his affairs were in a very
flourishing condition, yet he was very moderate in his revenge. Herod
assembleth all that Caesar willed, except Archelaus.
Wherefore by Letters he called together all those Caesar appointed, only
Archelaus excepted, either for that he hated the man, or else for that he
feared he would have withstood his purpose: And when they were all come
together, as well the Presidents as the rest, who were called out of diverse
Cities, he would not bring his Sons into the Council, but kept them in a
Village of the Sidonians, named Platan, not far distant from the City, to the
intent, that if they were called for, he might bring them forth. Then Herod
himself alone entering into the Council, before an hundred and fifty men there
assembled for that purpose, began to accuse his Sons before them; and used a
speech not only pitiful for his own calamities, but also little becoming a
Father. For he was very vehement in inveighing against their offense; neither
did he sufficiently express his mind, showing Herod accused his Sons.
neither did he deliver in writing any proofs of the Accusations unto the
Judges; but undecently himself alleged there, the Father against the Son;
himself also reading before them certain Letters written by them, wherein was
contained no impiety nor Treason, but only a consultation to flee away, and
certain hard speeches whereby they showed themselves offended; which when he
came unto, he exclaimed, as though hereby they confessed their treacherous
practices; greatly exaggerating the matter, and protesting that he had rather
die than hear such speeches. Lastly, affirming that both Nature and Caesar gave
him authority against them; and his Country Laws so commanded, that if any one
being accused, his Father or Mother should lay their hands upon his head, and
the standers Saturninus one that had been Consul, and had been adorned with
many Saturninus does pronounce an indifferent sentence.
pronounced an indifferent sentence, limited with circumstances, to wit, that
he condemned Herod's Sons, yet not to die; for (quoth he) my self have Sons,
and I would not add this calamity to Herod's misfortune past. After him also
his three Sons, who were their Father's Legates, pronounced the same sentence.
But Voluminous pronounced that they had deserved death* Voluminous and other of
Herod's friends pronounce Herod's Sons to be beheaded. Herod asked of Nicholaus
what his friends at Rome thought of his Sons.
who were so impious toward their Father; whose sentence after him the most
part followed; so that it seemed that they were now ordained to be put to
death. Presently Herod carried them with him to Tire, where he met Nicholaus
who was there arrived, returning from Rome; unto whom the King first relating
what was done at Berytum, he asked him what his friends at Rome thought of his
Sons? He answered that they judged the Princes intents impious, and that they
Rome. Then the King a long time pondered these words, and made no reply, but
commanded him to go along in his company. At his arrival in Caesarea all men
were doubtful what would become of his Sons, expecting an end of that Tragedy;
for they greatly feared that by reason of the old discord, he would cut them
off; and notwithstanding they were sorry for them, yet it was dangerous either
to speak rashly, or to hear any thing spoken freely concerning Tyro, others
dissembling their grief, The year of the World, 3961. before Christ's Nativity,
3.
This Tyro had a Son of Alexander's age, and beloved of him, whom Alexander
much accounted of. This fellow many times amidst the multitudes exclaimed, that
truth and equity were banished out of the world, and that in their stead,
malice and untruth reigned: Whereby there was such a mist and a fog caused over
the whole world, that no man could see his own errors. This his free Speech,
though it was not without danger, yet all men hereat were moved; for that he
had some reason to show his fortitude in so dangerous a time, and every one was
willing to hear his Speech: and though themselves for fear were silent, yet did
they not reprehend him for speaking freely. For the expectation of the event of
so great mischief was able to have wrested from every one of them words of
commiseration. Tyro with great audacity also came unto the King, and begged of
him that he might talk with him alone: Tyro speaks to Herod, and not
observing modesty, he and the Captains were imprisoned.
which the King granting, he used these words with great lamentation: I can no
longer, O my King, suppress this my grief, which causes me so boldly to speak,
though with my own peril; yet if it please thee, my King, that which I intend
to speak shall be for thine advantage.

Where now, my Lord, are thy wits? Where is thy courageous mind ever hitherto
able to match all difficult businesses whatever? How happens it that thou
have so few Friends and Kindred? For I account not them Kinsmen or Friends that
permit such wickedness and hatred in thy Court, which was most happy and
fortunate. And what art thou unto thy self? Will thou not look and see what is
done? Will thou put to death

The King at first took these words of Tyro in good part as being admonished of
the perfidious dealing of them about him, and his own calamity. But Tyro
immodestly and Soldier like urging the King, and for his own simplicity not
able to Tyro also, to be bound and kept in prison. Then one Tripho the Kings
Barber, taking hereat occasion, told the King, that Tyro had often solicited
him, Tyro is by his Son and a Barber accused to have practiced Treason against
the King.
as he shaved the King to cut his throat with his razor, promising him for
recompense great rewards, and that he should be one of Alexander's chief
Friends. Having spoken these words, the King commanded him to be apprehended,
and the Barber, and Tyro and his Son to be tortured. Tyro his Son seeing his
Father in most miserable torments, and that he still persisted in them (and by
the Kings displeasure, conjecturing that there was no hope of life) told them
that tortured Tyro with his own hand should have killed the King: for he could
get opportunity to come unto the King when no man else was with him, and so he
would kill him, and for Alexander's sake endure any torments whatsoever. This
spoken, he delivered himself and his Father from further tortures: but it is
uncertain whether the tale he told was true, or whether he devised it to free
them both from torments. Then Herod now laying all doubt aside (if before he
were in any) thought what death his Sons should die, Tyro with 300 Captains are
accused before the people and slain, Alexander and Aristobulus strangled at
Sebaste, and buried in Alexandrium.
and leaving no place to repentance and mercy, he hastened to execute his
purpose: and producing 300 Captains, and Tyro and Alexander and Aristobulus was
carried unto Sebaste, and there by their Fathers command were strangled: and
their bodies carried by night into the Castle Alexandrium, where there
Grandfather by their Mothers side, and many of their Progenitors lay buried.
But perhaps some will not marvel, that a hatred so long a breeding should in
the end so prevail, that it overcame natural affections. But one may justly
doubt whether the fault were in the young Princes, who exasperated by a hard
Father so long time, The cause of these calamities was Destiny and Gods
Providence.
fell into such a hatred of him, or whether it is to be imputed unto his
unkindness and immoderate desire of Honor and Rule, who could must have a
necessary event. And this inevitable force we call Fate, or fatal Destiny,
Wherein Alexander and Aristobulus offended.
Furthermore, touching the Princes fault, we may accuse their youthful
arrogance, and their pride, who did give too great ear to their Father's
accusers; and for that they were unjust searchers into his life and actions;
and that they maliciously suspected him, and could not rule their tongues;
Herod's shameful error not to be excused.
but hereby gave double occasion to their Adversaries, and matters unto those
tale-bearers that sought to get the King's favor. But their Father's shameful
fault cannot be excused, who suffered himself so to be overruled with passion,
that he Alexander the eldest of them. It had been enough for him, suppose he
had condemned them, either to have kept them in perpetual Prison, or banished
them into some far Country; seeing that he was assured of the Roman Power,
under whose protection he neither needed to have feared invasion, nor secret
Treason against him. For to put them to death, only to satisfy his own furious
will, what else does it argue, but only an impious liberty casting


Written by FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Seventeenth Book.
1. Antipater endeavors to hasten his Father's death, that he may reign in
his place. The Children that Herod had by his nine Wives. Zamaris a Babilonish
Jew, a man of singular virtue. 3. Antipater, Pheroras and his Wife conspire
against Herod, Salome acquainteth him with it, he causes some Pharisees who
were of this Conspiracy, to be put to death: He endeavors to make Pheroras
repudiate his Wife, but he cannot be persuaded to it. 4. Herod sends
Antipater to Augustus with his Will, by which he declares him his Successor.
Syllaeus bribeth one of Herod's Guards to kill him, but the plot is discovered.
5. Pheroras's death. Pheroras's Wife is accused, and Herod is advertised of
Antipater's Conspiracies. 7. Antipater being returned back unto Judaea from
Rome, is convicted in the presence of Varus Governor of Syria, for having
endeavored to poison the King his Father. Herod causes him to be imprisoned,
and writes to Augustus on that Subject. 8. The Golden Eagle that Herod had
consecrated, and fixed on the Portal of the Temple, is pulled off; the severe
punishment that he inflicteth for it. The King's terrible sickness, and the
cruel orders that he gives to his Sister Salome, and to her husband. Augustus
refers it to Herod, to dispose of Antipater as he pleases. Herod falling
into a relapse of his Torments, desires to kill himself; Achiavus one of his
Grandchildren hinders him: It is reported that he is dead; Antipater
endeavors in vain, to bribe his Keeper to set him at liberty; as soon as
Herod hears of it, he sends one to kill him. 10. Herod alters his Will,
declares Archelaus his Successor; he dies five days after Antipater. Herod's
glorious Funeral ordained by Archelaus; the peoples great acclamation in favor
of Archelaus. 11. Some Jews (who demanded satisfaction for Judas and Matthias
and others deaths, Herod caused to be burned, for having pulled down the Eagle
at the Portal of the Temple) make an Insurrection, which obliges Archelaus to
cause three thousand of them to be put to death: He goes afterward to Rome,
to be confirmed King by Augustus: His Brother Antipas, who pretends to have
right to the Crown, repaireth thither also; the Cause is pleaded before
Augustus. 12. A great Rebellion in Judea, whilst Archelaus was at Rome; Varus
Governor of Syria stops it. Philip, Archelaus's Brother, goes also to
Rome, in hopes to obtain one part of the Kingdom. The Jews send Ambassadors to
Augustus, Syria: They complain to him against Archelaus, and abhor the memory
of Herod. 13. Caesar confirms Herod's Testament, and appoints his Children to
be his Successors. 14. An Impostor counterfeits himself to be Alexander,
Herod's Son; Augustus finds out the Cheat, and sends him to the Galleys. 15.
Archelaus marries Glaphyra, his Brother Alexander's Widow. Augustus having
heard several of the Jews complaints of him, confineth him to Vienna in France,
and uniteth his possessions to Syria. Glaphyra's death.


CHAP. I.
Antipater endeavors to hasten his Father's death, that he may reign in his
place. The Children that Herod had by his nine Wives.
AFter that Antipater had made away his Brothers, through the extreme impiety
and unbridled fury, wherewith Herod their Father was incensed against them; yet
he did not immediately obtain that which undoubtedly he hoped for. For being
freed of Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 1.
he found it a difficult and dangerous matter to find the means how to obtain
it; Antipater, after he had made away his Brothers, grew hateful both to the
Soldiers and the people.
so strange and heinous a hatred had all the Nation conceived against him. On
the other side, in showing himself proud and lofty, he more and more increased
that hatred which the Soldiers had conceived against him, in whom the security
of the Kingdom consisted, if it should fortune to fall out that the people
should attempt any alteration. All which mischiefs were procured by his own
sins, and the unnatural murder of his Brothers. Antipater governed the Kingdom
with his Father.
Nevertheless, he governed the Kingdom with his Father, living only in less
Authority than himself: Herod also reposed more confidence in Antipater had
accused his Brethren, to continue his Father in security, and not for any
hatred he bore unto them more than to his Father; though indeed he hated them
for his Father's sake, being transported with fury. But all these were but as
so many stratagems to insinuate himself into Herod's Counsels and Favors; and
these did he craftily make use of, to cut off the occasion lest any should
prevent or accuse him of that which he pretended to do, and that Herod might be
deprived of all relief, if so be that Antipater should be^^ his Forces against
him. Antipater wishes his Father's death*
For the Treason he complotted against his Brothers, proceeded from the hatred
he bare unto his Father: But at that time he was the more egged on to prosecute
Herod should happen to die, it was most sure that the Kingdom should be his;
and should his life continue any longer time, and the practice Antipater went
about should be discovered, seeing himself environed with these dangers, he
should be enforced to make his Father his Enemy. For which cause he was very
liberal to all those that were about his Father; Antipater spared no cost to
win his Father's friends.
and through the great gifts he bestowed upon them, he extinguished that hatred
which all of them bare unto him: and above all things he continued himself in
credit with those friends which Herod had at Rome, by sending them diverse
Presents; and namely Saturninus, who was Governor of Syria. He hoped also, by
bribes and rewards, to draw his Father's Brother into his faction, and to
corrupt the King's Sister also, who was married to Antipater could not deceive
his Aunt*
he could not deceive Salome his Aunt, who of long time before had sounded his
inclinations, and who was not so simple as to suffer her self to be deceived;
but had already, by all cunning means that might be, prevented his malice,
although she had a Daughter married unto his Uncle by the Mother's side. This
Daughter was first of all wedded to Aristobulus, and afterward by Antipater's
means to his Uncle: For Callaeas her Husband's Son had married the other. But
neither could this affinity color the Herod constrained Salome Syllaeus the
Arabian) to marry with Alexas, and that by the mediation and persuasion of
Julia Caesar's wife, who advised Salome not to refuse that Marriage, lest he
should prove her mortal enemy; for Herod had made an Oath, that if Salome
condescended not to marry Alexas, Herod compels Salome to marry Alexas.
he would never make account of her: For which cause she followed Julia's
advice, who was Caesar's wife, and counseled her also to her profit and
preferment.

At the same time Herod sent his Daughter Glaphyra to King Archelaus, who had
been married to Alexander, Glaphyra sometimes Alexander's Wife is sent back to
Archelaus King of Cappadocia. Hedio and Ruffinus, c. 1.
presenting him a Dowry out of his own Treasury, lest there should any
difference arise between them, and he himself most carefully brought up his
Sons Children. For Alexander had two Sons by Glaphyra, and Aristobulus begat
Bernice, Salomes Daughter, three Sons and two Daughters. Sometimes he would
recommend them unto his Friends, and bewailing the misfortune of his Sons,
would beseech God that no such ill fortune might befall their children, but
rather that they might increase in virtue, and acknowledge their education and
bringing up, with all dutiful respects unto their Parents. Herod brings up
his Sons children.
He provided them also each of them with a wife, when they were ready for
Marriage; Namely, the Daughter of Pheroras for the eldest of Alexander's Sons;
and the Daughter of Antipater for Aristobulus's eldest Son: and one of
Aristobulus's Daughters was married to Antipater's Son; and the other to Herod
his own Son, whom he had begotten of the Daughter of the High Priest. For it is
lawful in our Country, and according to our custom, to have diverse Wives at
one Antipater to be their Friend. But Antipater conceived no less hatred toward
the children, than he had done malice toward their Fathers: Antipater hates
his Brothers children.
For the care that Herod had of them, increased his hatred, in that he
pretended to be the greatest among the Brethren; and he especially feared lest
when they should grow to man's estate, they would resist his power, being
assisted by King Archelaus, as his Sons in Law; and Pheroras who was a Tetrarch
should do the like, for that he had married his Son to Alexander's Daughter.
And so much the more was he incited, because all the people had compassion of
these Orphans, and had conceived a hatred against him, who never ceased to
express his malice against his Antipater labors his Father to break of the
Marriages he intended.
He therefore devised all the means that were possible to disanul the Decrees
which his Father had resolved upon to this effect, being very loath that they
should ever live to be partners with him in the Kingdom. So that at last Herod
condescended to Antipater's demand, which was, that he might marry
Aristobulus's Daughter, and his Son to Pheroras's Daughter: and thus were the
forementioned Marriages wholly cut off; Herod's nine Wives.
yea, even against Herod's former Decree. At that time Herod had nine Wives,
namely, Antipater's Mother, the High Priests Daughter, by whom he had a Son
that bare his name, and a Daughter of his Brothers, and a Cozen of his own, by
whom he had no children. He had another Wife also, that by Nation was a
Samaritane, by whom he had two Sons, Antipas and Archelaus, and a Daughter
called Olympias, Joseph the Kings Cozen. As for Archelaus and Antipas they were
brought up at Rome, with a certain private Friend of his. Moreover, he married
one that was called Cleopatra, that was born in Jerusalem, by whom he had Herod
and Philip, which Philip was brought up at Rome. By Pallas he had Phasaelus: by
Phedra and Helpia he had two Daughters, Roxane and Salome. As for his eldest
Daughters, Alexander's Sisters by the Mothers side, whom Pheroras had refused
to take in Marriage, he matched the one with Antipater his Sisters Son, and the
other he wedded to Phasaelus his Brothers Son, and this was Herod's Progeny.

CHAP. II.
Of Zamaris a Babylonish Jew, a man of singular virtue.
AFter this, Herod builds a Castle in the Region of the Trachonites, and
makes Zamaris the Jew that came from Babylon Governor therein.
intending to assure his Estate in the Country of Trachonite, he resolved to
build a Borough of the bigness of a City in the midst of the Country, as well
to secure his Country, as to be in better readiness to repulse his Enemies,
with more expedition. And having intelligence that a certain Jew was come from
Babylon with five hundred Archers on Horseback, and about one hundred of his
Kinsmen, Euphrates, and was in the Country adjoining to Antioch near unto
Daphne in Syria, where Saturnine General of the Roman Army had given him a
Castle, called Valatha, to inhabit, he sent for him and his followers,
promising to give him both Lands and Lordships in the Segniory of Batanea,
which Trachonite, intending that he should make head against those that would
assail him; and promising him that both his Lands and his Soldiers should be
exempt from all Tributes, and payments of Customs. This Babylonian Jew was
induced by these offers to come, and take possession of the place, where he
builded a Borough, called Bathyra. This man opposing himself against the
Trachonites, defended the Country, and those Jews that came from Babylon to
Jerusalem to offer Sacrifice, from all Incursions and Robberies of the
Trachonites; and diverse that observed the Religion of the Jews, resorted unto
him from all places; so that this Country was very well peopled, by reason of
the exemption of the Tribute, which continued during Herod's lifetime.

But Philip who succeeded him, exacted afterward some small Tribute of them,
and that but for a little while. But Agrippa the Great, and his Son of the same
name, charged them with great Taxations; yet permitted them to enjoy their
Liberty; whose Successors, the Romans imposed many grievous Tributes upon them,
yet continued their Freedom; of whom hereafter we will more particularly and
largely discourse in due place, and in process of my History. Now this Jew
Zamaris, to whom Herod had given the Possession of his Country, died, after he
had lived virtuously, and left a virtuous Offspring behind him; Jacim and
Philip the Sons of Zamaris.
amongst whom was Jacim, renowned for his dexterity on Horseback; who, with his
Troop of Horse, was of the King of Babylon's Guard. This Jacim died when he was
very old, and left his Son Philip to succeed him; a valiant Agrippa loved him,
and put his trust in him, and committed the trust and training of his Soldiers
unto him, who led them also forth, if occasion of service was proffered.

CHAP. III.
Antipater, Pheroras and his Wife conspire against Herod, Salome acquainteth
him with it, he causes some Pharisees who were of this Conspiracy, to be put
to death:
WHilst Herod's Affairs were thus disposed, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 3.
all men's eyes were fixed upon Antipater, after that Herod had given him full
power; which was granted him, in hopes that his Father had, that he would
behave himself faithfully and affectionately toward him: But he abused his
Authority more audaciously than could be expected; for he treacherously
colored his conceived malice, and easily drew his Father to believe him in
whatsoever he said. He was feared by all men, not only for his Authority, but
for his subtilties and policies. But above all the rest, Pheroras respected him
most, Pheroras deceived by women.
as greatly esteemed by him. For Antipater circumvented him by the means of
certain women, who favored his Faction; for Pheroras was commanded by his
Wife, his Mother, and Sister-in-Law, notwithstanding that he hated them, by
reason of the abuse they had offered to his Daughters who were unmarried;
nevertheless he was enforced to dissemble all things, because he could do
nothing but what they were always privy to, and had such power of his Affairs,
that they obliged him to perform whatsoever they pleased. Antipater was also
very intimate with them, both on his own account and his Mother's; for these
four women were of one mind in all things, and spoke, as it were, by one mouth:
Yet was Pheroras at odds with Antipater, upon some slight distastes, and she
that wrought this debate betwixt them, was Salome, who had a long time spied
all their drifts; knowing well, that their mutual friendship tended to the
overthrow of Herod, which she was ready to acquaint him. And they knowing well
that the King disliked this their inward familiarity, and that he was privy to
that which they pretended, which was his utter ruin; resolved between
themselves to refrain their public familiarity, and to make a show that they
were at odds one with another; to which intent they reproached one another,
especially at such time as they were either in Herod's presence, or there was
any one with them, Salome discovers to Herod the Conspiracies of the Ladies
and others.
who (as they thought) would acquaint him with it. But in secret they
intermitted not their accustomed friendship, and continued their correspondence
with more privy affability; yet was not Salome ignorant hereof, neither when
they first devised The Pharisees subtle and arrogant.
There was among the Jews a Sect of people that were called Pharisees, who were
too much addicted to self-opinion, and boasted themselves to be the exactest
observers of the Law in all the Country; to whom these women Caesar, The
Pharisees would not swear obedience, but were fined. Pheroras's Wife pays
their Fine; for which benefit, they promise her the Kingdom.
and to the estate of the King, these only refused to take oath; and of this
Sect there were to the number of six thousand For which cause the King having
imposed a penalty upon them, Pheroras's Wife paid it for them; for which cause
they pretending to gratify her, and being esteemed for such as were skilful in
foretelling such things as were to come, by reason of their often communication
with God, foretold her, that God had decreed to bring the Herod and his
Posterity to an end; and would bring to pass, that the Crown should descend to
Pheroras and his Sons. Salome had got an inkling hereof, and had told Herod no
less: And how they likewise corrupted every one of his Courtiers; Bagoas, Carus
and others are put to death by Herod.
for which cause he put those to death amongst the Pharisees, who were the
principal Authors of this Advice, and with them also the Eunuch Bagoas, and
Carus who was his darling, and one of the finest men of that time. He
afterward cut off all those amongst his household Servants, who were of the
Pharisees Faction; for the Pharisees had persuaded Bagoas, that this new King
whom they prognosticated, would not only consider him as his Benefactor and
Father; but that he himself should also marry, and find himself capable to
beget Children.

Herod had punished those amongst the Pharisees, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 4.
who were convicted to have been of the Conspiracy, Herod accuses Pheroras's
Wife, and commands him to put her away.
he assembled a Council of his friends; before whom he accused Pheroras's Wife,
and ripped up the injuries that were done unto his Daughters, as it has been
declared, ascribing the same to the pride of this woman, objecting it for a
crime against her, for having injured his Honor. Besides this, he accused her
that she had of set purpose, stirred up Mutinies, and by all means possible,
both in words and deeds, contrary to all Law of Nature, stirred up debate
betwixt him and his Brother; and that the Fine that he had imposed upon his
Adversaries, was satisfied at her charge; so that no jot of that Conspiracy was
contrived without her consent. For which causes (said he) Brother Pheroras, it
shall not be amiss for you of your own accord, to drive such a wretched woman
from you, before you be requested, and the Sentence be pronounced against her;
otherwise she will be the cause to kindle a War betwixt you and me. For if you
will continue the Friendship and Brotherhood betwixt you and me, separate your
self from her: In so doing, I will account you for my Brother; and you shall
lose nothing by the affection which I bear unto you. For the bond of Brotherly
love cannot continue safe and inviolable, unless you put her away. Now although
Pheroras was moved with the importance and weight of this discourse; Pheroras
refuses to put away his Wife*
yet he said, that for the love he bare unto his Wife, he would forget nothing
of that duty which Consanguinity required at his hands in regard of his
Brother; but that he had rather die, than live without her company, Herod
interdicteth Pheroras and Antipater their privy meetings, and forbids the
Ladies no less.
whom he loved more dearly than his life. Herod, although he took this answer
Antipater and his Mother, and in like manner Pheroras, to frequent the one with
the other any more. He commanded the women likewise, that they should give over
their familiar entertainments the one with the other, which all of them
promised to perform. Yet this notwithstanding, upon fit opportunities and
occasions, they visited one another; and Antipater and Pheroras feasted one
another by night. The report also went, that Antipater had the company of
Pheroras's Wife, and that his Mother was the means and instrument of their
privy meeting.

CHAP. IV.
Herod sends Antipater to Augustus with his Will, by which he declares him
his Successor. Syllaeus bribeth one of Herod's Guards to kill him, but the plot
is discovered.
ANtipater suspecting his Father's distastes, Herod sends Antipater to Caesar.
and fearing lest his hatred should bring him into hazard, he wrote unto his
friends in Rome, requiring them to write their Letters unto Herod, requesting
him to send Antipater unto Caesar, with all expedition as was possible. Which
being brought to pass, Herod sent him thither with diverse Royal Antipater. And
if it should happen that Antipater should die before him, then he bequeathed
the same to his Son Herod, whom he had by the High Priest's Daughter. About the
same time Syllaeus the Arabian repaired to Rome, notwithstanding he had
neglected those things which Caesar had commanded him. Antipater accused him
before Caesar, Antipater accuses Syllaeus at Rome before Caesar.
for the same faults wherewith he was charged by Nicholaus. Syllaeus also was
accused by Aretas, for murdering diverse of the best account in the City of
Petra, countrary to his mind; amongst the which was Sohemus (a man of much
virtue and honor) and Probatus, Aretas accuses Syllaeus for killing Probatus
and others.
Caesar's Servant; of which Crimes Syllaeus was accused upon this occasion
which ensues: There was a certain man of Corinthus, who was one of the King's
Guard, and one he put very great trust in: Syllaeus persuaded him by store of
money and Bribes, to kill Herod; which he promised to perform. Probatus made
privy to Syllaeus's mind, he presently told it to the King who caused him to be
apprehended and tortured, A Traitor that sought the King's death is apprehended.
who confessed the whole matter: He laid hands also on two Arabians, persuaded
by this Corinthian's confession; one of which was a man of Command in his
Country, and the other was Syllaeus's chief friend. They being examined,
confessed that they came thither to solicit, with many exhortations, the
Corinthian to execute the murder; and to assist him, if he stood in need of
them. Which being fully proved by Herod before Saturnine, he sent them to Rome,
there more amply to be proceeded against, and so to be punished.

CHAP. V.
Pheroras's death.
HErod perceiving that his Brother Pheroras did constantly continue his
affection toward his Wife, he commanded him to retire himself into his own
Dominions; whereupon he willingly departed to his Tetrarchy; An Oath solemnly
observed.
protesting by many solemn Oaths, that he would never more return into the
City, unless he were assured that Herod was Pheroras would not obey him in
regard of his Oath. Notwithstanding, Herod dealt more kindly with him, and
continued his love and affection toward him; Pheroras in his Sickness is
visited by Herod; and being dead, is honorably buried by him.
for he came to Pheroras, as soon as he heard of his first Sickness, without
being sent for: And after he was deceased, he sent his body to Jerusalem, and
honorably entombed him in that place, and grievously lamented his death. This
was the beginning of Antipater's mis-haps, who at that time was gone to Rome.
For it was God's pleasure, that at last he should be punished for the murder
of his Brethren. I will discourse of this at large, that it may serve for an
example to many Kings, how they ought to practice and follow Virtue in all
their

CHAP. VI.
Pheroras's Wife is accused, and Herod is advertised of Antipater's
Conspiracies.
AFter Pheroras's death, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 5.
two of his Freemen, who were Taphnites by birth; and such as Pheroras in his
life time, Pheroras's Freemen accuse his Wife for poisoning him.
both only trusted, and dearly loved, came unto Herod; requiring him not to
suffer his Brother's death to pass unpunished, but to Herod gave ear to their
suit, perceiving that the matters they importuned him in, were likely and very
Pheroras, the day before his unexpected sickness, had supt with his Wife; and
that having received an unaccustomed Poison with his meat, he was dead. That
this Poison had been brought thither by a woman of Arabia, who in her speech
protested that it was some Potion to increase love, but in effect it was to
bring Pheroras to his end. For the women of Arabia amongst all others are
skilful in Poisons, and are great Sorcerers; and she that was charged with this
fact, was esteemed a great friend and favourer of Syllaeus's best beloved. That
Pheroras's Mother and his Wife's Sister went into those Quarters, on purpose to
buy that Poison; and returned back, and brought this woman with them the day
before the Supper. Herod tortureth the Ladies Bond-women, and sounds out
Antipater's and their secrets.
The King moved by these words of theirs, tortured both those Maidservants
Antipater's Mother might feel the like torments, since she was the cause of all
these mischiefs which they endured.

These words of hers made Herod the more eager and inquisitive, so that by
force of tortures he wrought out all the secrets of these women; their
Banquets, their secret Assemblies, and those very words that Herod had spoken
apart betwixt his Son and himself, which had been reported unto the women that
Pheroras entertained; namely, Pheroras. Moreover, they reckoned up the hatred
that Antipater bare unto his Father, the complaints that he made unto his
Mother, of the too long life and continuance of his Father; for that in regard
of himself, he was already grown old; so that although the Kingdom should fall
into his hands presently, yet he could receive but very little contentment
thereby. Moreover, he alleged, that diverse Brothers, and Brothers Children
were brought up together with him, so that he might not securely hope for any
thing; for that already, if he should fortune to die, the Kingdom was to
descend not to his Son, but to his Brother: Besides this, he was accustomed to
accuse the King of diverse cruelties committed by him, and of that murder which
he executed Antipater had found out the device to be summoned to Rome, and
Pheroras withdrew himself into his Tetrarchy.

These words, which as he knew had reference to that which his Sister had often
informed him of, were not by him held incredible; so that being pressed with
the malice of Antipater, Herod thrusted Doris, Antipater's Mother out of his
Palace.
he sequestered Doris his Mother from his presence, robbing her before her
departure of all her Jewels, which were valued at many Talents; and from that
time forward he showed himself more favorable toward those women of
Pheroras's household. But nothing did more whet Herod's displeasure against
Antipater, than did a certain Samaritan, Antipater the Samaritan declares how
Antipater the King's Son had provided Poison for his Father.
who was also called Antipater, who had the ordering of Antipater the King's
Son. For he being brought in question, and tortured, declared among other
things, that Antipater had mixed a mortal Poison, and delivered the same to
Pheroras his Uncle, commanding him to practice the King's death in his absence,
and by that means least suspected. That this Poison was brought out of Egypt by
one called Antiphilus, Antipater's friend. That it was sent to Pheroras by one
called Theudion, Antipater's Mother's Brother. That this Poison was kept by
Pheroras's Wife, Pheroras's Wife confesses that she has the Poison, and casts
her self down headlong from the Roof.
and was committed by her Husband to her custody. She being examined by the
King hereupon, confessed no less; and hasting forth, as if she intended to
fetch the same, she cast her self down headlong from the top of the house; yet
she did not kill her self, because she fell upon her feet. After she was
recovered out of her swoun, and the King That Poison (said she) was brought by
Antiphilus out of Egypt, and bought there by the means of a Brother of his, who
was a Physician. After this, Theudion brought it to our house; and I having
received it from Pheroras 's hands, kept the same, but bought by your Son
Antipater, to poison you that are his Father. Now therefore, after that my
Husband fell sick, and you in kindness came to visit and comfort him, he being
moved with compassion, and conquered by your brotherly kindness, and by your
good affection and loving care in giving order for his health, called me unto
him, and said; Oh Wife, Antipater has circumvented me, whilst by his pestilent
counsels, and poisoning practices he desires to cut off his Father, and
deprive me of a kind Brother. Now therefore, since I perceive there is no part
of my Brother's love and natural affection diminished toward me, wherewith he
was wont to entertain me; and that my last hour of life approaches, God
forbid, that being ready to sleep with my Forefathers, I should present them
with a Ghost soiled and sweltered in my Brother's blood: Dispatch therefore,
and burn this poison before mine eyes. Hereupon (said she) I presently brought
it forth according as my Husband commanded me, and burnt the greatest part of
the Poison, and the rest I have reserved, that if after my Husband's death,
your Majesty should use me unkindly, it might serve me to escape those
extremities that would betide me.

After she had spoken thus, she brought forth before them the Poison, and the
box wherein it was kept. The year of the World, 3962. before Christ's Nativity,
2.
After her, another of Antipholas's Brothers, and the Mother The King puts
away his Wife, and blots his Son out of his Testament. He degradeth Simon, and
instateth Matthias in the Priestood.
was accused of confederacy and concealment of all these Treasons. For which
cause Herod put her away from him, and cancelled his Sons name out of his
Testament, wherein he had bequeathed him the Kingdom after his decease. He
displaced also his Father-in-law Simon the Son of Boethus from the Priesthood,
and placed Matthias the Son of Theophilus, who was born in Jerusalem. In the
mean time Bathillus, Antipater's Freeman returned from Rome; who being
tortured, confessed that he brought a Poison with him, to deliver it to
Antipater's Mother and Pheroras, to the end, that if the first Poison were not
effectual enough to dispatch the King, they might Herod's hands from his
friends at Rome, Archelaus and Philip are accused by Antipaters means
written and devised by Antipater's means, to accuse Archelaus and Philip, for
very often they had refreshed the memory of Alexander and Aristobulus's death,
contrived by their Father; and for that they lamented the miserable fate of
them, who were innocently betrayed; and that now also they themselves were
called back into their Country for no other cause, but upon their arrival to
be made partakers of their Brother's miserable destiny. These things did
Antipater's friends certify Herod of, in that by many and mighty Presents he
wrought them thereunto. He himself also wrote unto his Father colourably, after
a manner excusing the young men, and imputing their words unto their
indiscretion and young years. Syllaeus; and courted the chiefest Romans, buying
diverse Ornaments and Jewels to present them with, to the value of two hundred
Talents. And it is to be wondered at, that so great matters being in agitation
against him, seven months at least before his return into the Country of
Judaea, that no inkling thereof came unto his ears. But the cause partly was
the diligent search and watch that was kept upon the Highways, and partly the
hatred that all men had conceived against Antipater. For there was not any that
would put themselves in hazard to procure his security.

CHAP. VII.
Antipater, being returned back into Judaea from Rome, is convicted in the
presence of Varus Governor of Syria, for having endeavored to poison the King
his Father. Herod causes him to be imprisoned; and writes to Augustus on that
Subject.
HErod concealing his displeasure, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 6.
answered Antipater his Son's Letters; giving him a strict charge (as soon as
he had dispatched his affairs) to hasten homeward, lest his long absence should
prove hurtful to him. Herod writes friendly Letters to Antipater, and calls
him home from Rome.
He likewise, after a temperate manner, Rome, should contrive some treacherous
stratagem, to the prejudice of himself, and the overthrow of his Kingdom.
Antipater received these Letters in Cilicia, and had already received others at
Tarentum, by which he understood of Pheroras his Unkle's death, whereat he was
sore grieved; not for the love he bare to Pheroras, but for that he died before
he had murdered his Father, according as he had promised him. As soon as he
came to Celenderis a City of Cilicia, he grew doubtful whether he should return
or no, and was grievously troubled at his Mother's disgraces, Celenderis in
Cilicia,
and at last arrived in the Port of Sebaste, so called, and builded by Herod to
his great charge, in honor of Caesar.

And now already it manifestly appeared that Antipater was upon his downfall:
Sebaste a Haven builded by Herod in honor of Caesar.
For no man came out to salute him, no man entertained him, as they did upon
his departure, when as all of them accompanied him with prayers and happy
acclamations: but contrariwise they boldly and openly spoke against him, and
bitterly cursed him, telling Antipater upon his return is saluted by no man.


About the same time Quintilius Varus, who was sent to succeed Saturnine in the
Government of Syria was at Jerusalem, Quintilius Varus, Governor of Syria.
and drew thither at that instant upon Herod's request, to assist him with his
Counsels in his present and weighty occasions: Now whilst these two sat and
cousulted together, Antipater came in before any man expected him, and in that
purple garment and Royalty that he was accustomed to use, entered the Palace.
The Guard of the Gates suffered him to enter in, but they excluded all those
that were with him. This first of all affrighted and appaled his Spirits, in
that he already perceived into what calamity he was fallen; and now also Varus
should both hear and judge all his misdemeanors.

He altogether daunted at the greatness of that unexpected mischief, which he
both heard and saw, departed presently from them wholly amazed, and in the way
met with his Mother and his Wife (which was Antigonus's daughter, who had been
King of the Jews before Herod) by whom he was advertised of all that which had
happened, and for that cause more diligently prepared himself for his trial.
Herod calls his Son in question before Quintilius Varus.
The next day Varus and Herod sat in judgment, accompanied by their friends
on both sides; thither also Salome; and certain others, who could discover his
secret practices; some of which had been tortured, and namely Antipaters
mothers servants, who a little before his arrival, had been apprehended with a
letter to this effect: That he should take heed that he returned not into the
Country, because his Father was made privy to all his practices, and that for
the present he had no other refuge but only to Caesar, and to take care
likewise lest he should fall into his Fathers hands.

Hereupon Antipater humbling himself on his knees before the King his Father,
besought him not to condemn him before his cause was heard, but to suspend his
judgment until such time as he had heard his justifications. But Herod after he
had commanded him to Antipater. Antipater accused by Herod.
After this he reckoned up his cares in their education and institution, and
how bountifully he had bestowed upon him as much riches as he required: he
added that none of all these favors could preserve him from falling into the
hazard of losing his life by their policy, that they might unjustly possess the
Kingdom, before either the Law of Nature, or the will of their Father, or their
own rights could challenge the same. But above all the rest, he wondered at
Antipater, with what hope he could possibly be puffed up to attempt so
audacious and wicked an enterprise. For by his Testament he had made him the
Heir of his Kingdom, and in his life time also had made him his equal in
Dignity, Rome had three hundred talents given him. Moreover, he accused him for
his slanderous accusations against his murdered and slaughtered Brothers: Who
if they had been wicked, why did he imitate them? But if they were innocent,
why without cause produced he is slanderous accusations against those, who were
his natural Brethren? For in his own respect he had never found any thing
against them, but by his report, neither had be given Sentence against them,
but by Antipaters advice, who for the present were absolved by him, because he
was become the Author of their Parricide. In uttering these words he began to
weep, being unable to insist any further; for which cause he besought Nicholaus
Damascene, who was his dear friend, and conversed ordinarily with him, and was
privy to all that which had passed, to prosecute the rest of his Indictment.

But Antipater turning himself toward his Father, began to justify himself,
urging the same Testimonies, and Favors that his Father had showed unto him,
and the honors he had received at his hands, which he would never have showed
him, if he had been unworthy of the same, and had not by his virtue deserved
these favors. He alleged also, that by his virtue he had prevented all that
which might have happened; and that where the cause required his labor or
diligence, Antipater's answer to his Father's objection.
he dispatched all things with his own industry; that it was unlikely that he,
who had delivered his Father from those Treasons which were intended against
him by other men, should himself attempt the like: And as far from probability
that he should go to extinguish that virtue (whereof even until that day he had
given testimony) to the end that always hereafter he might be defamed for such
baseness. For long before this time he was named and entitled to succeed him,
and to enjoy those very honors, whereof already he enjoyed no small part;
whereby he protested (as he said) repented he himself of that which he had
done; for that action of his might be an argument to prove how incorruptly he
loved his Father. And as touching that which he had dealt in at Rome, Caesar
himself was witness thereof, who could be no more deceived, than God himself;
whereof those Letters bore record, which were written by him; which in Upon
these Protestations, all the Council and Assistants were confounded. For all of
them had great compassion of Antipater, who was wholly drowned in his tears; so
that his very enemies began to pity him. And Herod himself

But Nicholaus, Nicholaus Damascene prosecuteth the King's Accusation.
according as he was requested, prosecuted that Accusation which the King had
begun; urging all things to the uttermost, and producing all the Witnesses, and
those manifest Proofs, that were gathered from their Examinations that were
tortured. Especially he discoursed at large of the King's Virtue, which he had
fatherly expressed in the education and instruction of his Children; for which
he had been so unkindly and unnaturally requited. Moreover, that his first
Children's foolish rashness was not so much to be wondered at; for that being
young, they had been corrupted by the malice of their Counselors, and had
blotted out of their hearts all tue Laws of Antipater's boldness was both
wonderful and wicked, who, more cruel than the cruelest Beasts (who toward
their Benefactors acknowledge each good turn) was nothing mollified by his
Father's so great indulgence, nor terrified by his Brother's calamity; but must
needs emulate them in their cruelty. And thou thy self (said he) O Antipater,
were the Judge of their attempted Treasons, by thy inquisition they were
indicted, thou did execute the justice against them being convicted. Neither
do we disallow that thou did prosecute them with just indignation, but rather
admire thee for that thou imitatest their intemperance: And we easily gather,
that those acts of thine were not attempted for thy Father's security, but
intended for thy Brother's overthrow, that by detesting their malice, thou
might insinnate Herod's virtue, but according to your own appetite and
malice, intending to deprive such a Father of his part, who granted you the
whole; and seeking in effect to murder him, whom in words you pretended
heretofore to protect from injury. And not content your self to practice these
treacheries, you have infected your Mother also with no less corruption, and
instead of love that should have been amongst Brethren, you have filled your
Family with mutinies and hatreds: And besides all these things, thou have been
so audacious, as to call thy Father beast, being of thy self more malignant
than those beasts which are most venomous, using thine own venom against thy
dearest friends, and such as have best deserved at thy hands, strengthening thy
self with his Guard, and diverse treacheries both of men and Varus, equity, and
all whatsoever is Justice in the world. Do thou therefore accuse them of
falsehood, who were examined in torments, to the end thou might endanger
their credit, who were the preservers of thy Fathers life? Shall we believe
thee more than them in their torments? Will thou not, O Varus, deliver the King
from the injury of those, who are his own flesh and Parricide that public
injury of life and nature.
but a public injury to life and nature, which is no less loathsome in the
thought, than it is in the act: which whosoever punishes not, is of himself guilty
of an injury offered to our common mother nature.

After these Speeches, he added certain points concerning Antipater's Mother,
which through feminine frailty had been blabbed out by her, to wit, that she
had asked counsel of Soothsayers and Conjurers, to whom the Kingdom should
befall: and Antipater had played with Pheroras's women, in banqueting and
amorous and wanton dalliances. The informations likewise that were presented by
such as were tortured, with sundry testimonies of diverse men; some suborned,
the other found out to be immediately produced and confirmed. For each man
seeing that Antipater was exposed to the accusations of those men, who had the
Government in their hands, and that the good fortune that had long accompanied
him, had openly delivered him into the hands of his enemies, they immediately
discovered the insatiable hatred which they had conceived against him, whereas
before the fear that they had of him enforced them to be silent: yet he
Antipater accused by all men.
yet there seemed nothing to be feigned, for that the accusers neither spoke in
favor of the King, neither concealed any thing for fear of danger, but
condemned all Antipater's wicked actions, and judged him worthy of death and
punishment, The year of the World, 3962. before Christ's Nativity 1.
not so much for his Fathers security, as

As soon as Nicholas had finished his discourse and accusations, Varus
commanded Antipater to answer to those crimes that were objected against him,
Varus gives Antipater license to justify himself.
if he had any thing to allege, that he was not guilty of those forfeits or
heinous crimes that were laid unto his charge. For of himself he desired
nothing more, and knew well that Herod his Father desired no less, Antipater
striveth by his protestations and invocation of God, to justify himself.
than that he should justify himself, and maintain his innocence. Antipater,
who, whereas before he disposed all his actions so, as if there had been no God
that had the oversway of humane affairs; at such time as Varus, when as by
often questionings he could wrest nothing from him, but that he only cried upon
God, seeing that otherwise there would be no end of these debates, he commanded
the poison to be brought forth before them all, that he might make experience
of what force it was: The poison is ministered to a condemned man, and it
kills him. Hedio and Ruffinus, c. 7.
which being presently brought unto him, and given to one that was condemned to
die, it presently killed the man. Which done, he arose and departed out of the
Council, and the next day went unto Antioch, where for the most part he was
wont to have his residence, for that it was the chief City of the Assyrians.
But Herod presently Varus upon his departure, Herod imprisoned his son, and
sent Ambassadors to Caesar to certify his abuses.
but all men's opinion was that the King did nothing in imprisoning him, but by
his counsel. When as therefore he had fast bound him, he sent unto Caesar, and
wrote his Letters unto him, as touching Antipater, sending certain appointed
Messengers, who by word of mouth might assure him of his cursed treasons.

At the very same time there was a Letter intercepted, Antiphilus's Letter to
Antipater.
sent by Antiphilus to Antipater, which Antiphilus remained in Egypt: which
Letter being opened by the King, was written to this effect: I have sent you
Acme 's Letter, hazarding thereby my own life: For you know that I am in danger
of the displeasure of two mighty Families, if I should be discovered. As for
your self, bethink you well of your affairs in this respect. Such were the
Contents of this Letter. The King made diligent search for others also, but he
could find none, for Antiphilus's servant, who had brought that which was read,
denied that he had any other. But while the King was in this doubt, one of his
servants and friends perceived that the inside of the Messengers under coat was
newly sewed: for he had two garments the one upon the other: and conjecturing
that the Letters might be hid in the foulds thereof, as indeed they were, he
ripped the same, Acme's Letters to Antipater.
and found them. The Tenor whereof was this: Acme to Antipater, Health: I have
written the Letters to your Father, according as you gave me instructions, and
I have counterfeited the copy of my Letter, as if it had been sent by Salome to
my Mistress. I assure my self, that when he has read the same, he will punish
Salome as one that has practiced Treason against him. But that Letter that was
supposed to have been written by Salome to Acme, was of Antipater's invention,
and in Acme's style. The Contents were these: Acme's Letter to Herod.
Acme to King Herod, Health: Whereas I have an especial care, that nothing be
concealed from thee that concerns thy security, having found a Letter of
Salomes written against thee unto my Lady, I have not without danger taken the
copy thereof, and sent it unto you in which she required that she might have
license to marry Syllaeus. Tear this copy, least through the knowledge of the
same, I come in danger of my life. Now in that which she had written to
Antipater, she discovered that she had written these words to Herod, according
to that order he had given her, as if Salome Salome, and sent them unto her
Mistress to work treason.

Acme was a Jew born, and Chambermaid to Julia, Caesar's Wife, and did that
which is above written, for the love which she bare unto Antipater, whom he had
hired by great sums of money, to the end, that she should assist him to execute
the mischief, which he practiced against his Father and against his Aunt. Herod
made almost desperate by the great mischiefs of Antipater, was stirred upon the
sudden to shorten his days, for that he was the only means that stirred up
these great Tempests of Sedition in his Kingdom; Herod enflamed with hatred
against his Son
and who not only practiced against his Father and his Aunt, but against his
Sister also; and had in like manner corupted Caesar's Family. Salome also
incensed him the more, beating her breasts, and offering her self to all
deaths, if any such like matter might be duly proved against her. For which
cause Herod sent for Antipater, commanding him to speak freely all that which
he had to say, without fear. But he having not one word to answer for his
defense, Herod said unto him: Since that on all sides thou art convicted and
surprised in thy wickedness, delay not, but discover those that are of thy
Confederacy. Antipater lays all the fault upon Antiphilus.
Whereupon he laid all the fault upon Antiphilus, and named none other. At that
time Herod being wounded with extreme grief, would have sent Antipater to Rome
unto Caesar, that he might receive his judgment from him; but afterward he
feared, lest, by the interest of his friends, he should escape the danger; for
which cause he kept him bound and fettered in Prison, as he had done before:
And in the mean while he sent certain Messengers with Letters to Caesar, to
accuse his Son, and to declare wherein Acme had been his Confederate, producing
the Copy of the Letters. These Ambassadors therefore repaired to Rome,
instructed in those things they were to answer to, those Interrogatories that
should be offered them; and with them he sent these Letters.

CHAP. VIII.
The Golden Eagle that Herod had consecrated, and fixed on the Portal of the
Temple, is pulled off: The severe Punishment that he inflicteth for it. The
King's terrible Sickness; and the cruel Orders that he gives to his Sister
Salome, and to her Husband.
Herod's Ambassadors were on their Journey to Rome with his Orders, Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 8.
he fell sick, and made his Will, appointed his youngest Son to succeed him in
the Kingdom; for through Antipater's instigations, Herod falling sick, makes
his Will, and leaves the Succession of his Kingdom, with his other Goods to
his Friends and Kinsfolks. Herod impatient in his old age and wondrous wayward.
he had conceived a hatred against Archelaus and Philip. He sent also a
thousand Talents unto Caesar, and five hundred to his Wife, and to his
Children, Friends and Freemen. He bestowed also Money, Rents and Lands upon
his own Children: He gave his Sister Salome an ample Possession, because she
had always persevered in loving him, and had never offended him. And having
lost all hope of recovery, for that he was about 70 years old, he became very
touchy and froward in whatsoever his affairs. The cause hereof was, that
opinion he had conceived, that he grew contemptible; and that the whole Nation
took pleasure in those mis-haps which befell him: which some of those who were
favored by the people, made him the rather believe, upon this occasion which
ensues: Amongst those that were most learned among the Jews, Judas the Son of
Sariphaeus, and Matthias the Son of Margalothus, the The year of the World,
3963. after Christ's Nativity, 1.
they incensed the younger sort, counselling them to overthrow all those works
that the King had caused to be made, contrary to the Law and Custom of the
Country; to the end, that they fighting for Piety, might obtain the reward
that attends the same. For in that the King had undertaken and done many
things contrary to the Law, diverse unaccustomed miseries had befallen him, and
namely that sickness wherewith he was detained. For Herod had done diverse
things contrary to the ancient Law; against which Judas and Matthias exclaimed
openly. A Golden Eagle upon the greatest Gate of the Temple
For he had erected over the Portal of the great Temple, an Eagle of Gold of
great value. Now the Law prohibiteth that they, who pretend to live according
to the same, should in any sort erect any Image, or represent any Figures of
living Creatures Contempt of death.
yet ought they to prefer an honest death before a pleasant life, if so be it
be employed for the defense of their Countrey-laws and Religion. For in so
doing, they should obtain immortal praise for the present, and a memorable and
eternal glory in time to come; neither that they should protract the execution
thereof for fear of danger, since death was a thing that could not be avoided;
so that since by the general course of Nature, they must needs die, it should
become them bravely to forsake their lives with praise and honor in embracing
Virtue. For to die in the execution of some noble exploit (which cannot be
achieved without hazard of danger) their Children should be richly rewarded
with the fruits thereof, and their other Parents that should outlive them (of
what Sex soever) should reap the fruits of that glory which was honorably
achieved by them. In these or such like words they encouraged the young men.

About that time there was a rumor spread, that the King was dead, which gave
very great furtherance were in the Temple. Now when the tidings hereof came
unto the ears of the King's Captain, he fearing The young men pulling down the
golden Eagle, hew it in pieces with their Axes.
Judas and Matthias, who scorned to submit themselves; and led them to the
King; who demanding of them how they durst deface the sacred Image? They
answered, that long before that time they had resolved it; and that now,
according as they had resolved, they had like valiant men performed the same.
For we (said they) maintain the honor of God, and the Doctrine of our Law,
whereof we are Disciples; neither ought you to admire, that with contempt of
your Ordinances, we have preferred the Laws of our Forefathers, which Moses
has left us in writing, according as he was suggested and taught them by God:
Judas and Matthias with forty other young men, being brought to the King's
presence justify their actions with joy, and the King sends them bound to
Jericho.
Neither do we refuse any death or punishment which thou shall inflict upon us,
being assured in our Consciences, that we suffer not for Impiety, but Piety's
sake. Thus spoke they all Jericho: Then calling before him those principal
Jews, who had the Government under him; and being brought into their Assembly
upon his Pallat, by reason of his weakness, he recited unto them the numberless
toils he had endured for their sakes; in like manner, how upon his great
charges, he had repaired and re-edified the Temple; whereas the Asmoneans, for
the space of 125 years, wherein they reigned, could not perform such a Building
to the honor of God. Moreover, he signified unto them, how he had adorned the
same with precious Gifts; for which he hoped that after his death his memory
and glory should survive. After this, he expostulated with them for what cause
they abstained not from offering him that injury during his life time? Herod
assembleth the Governors of the Jews, and expostulateth with them about this
commotion.
And why at Noon day, and in the sight of all the people, they had laid hands
Herod showed himself more favorable toward the rest, Matthias deprived of the
High Priesthood, and Jozarus assigned his place.
but he caused Matthias to be deprived of the Priesthood, as one who in part
had been the cause of that which had happened; and in his place substituted
Jozar, one of his Wives Brethren. During the Priesthood of this Matthias it
happened also, that another High Priest was elected that very day wherein the
Jews did usually celebrate their Fast. For Matthias, the night before the day
of the Fast, seemed in his Dream, to have the company of his Wife; and whereas
for this cause he was Joseph the Son of Ellemus appointed him to be his
Assistant, by reason of his alliance. Joseph Ellemi for one day High Priest.
Herod therefore deposed Matthias: And as for the other Matthias, who had moved
this trouble, both he and his companions were by his order consumed with fire.

This very night the Moon was eclipsed, and Herod's sickness grew more
vehement. For God punished those sins which he had committed. Matthias and
Judas burned
For he was inflamed with a slow fire, which to the outward sense seemed not so
vehement, but inwardly searched and afflicted all his Entrails: He had also a
ravenous and unnatural Appetite to his meat, The Eclipse.
which could no way be satisfied. Besides that, he had an Ulcer in his Bowels,
Hedio and Ruf^^^ chap. 9
with a strange and furious Colic. His Feet were swelled, and of venomous
color; (...) horrible sickness.
and his Stomach was no less affected also. His Members rotted, and were full
of crawling Worms, with a filthy, and no less troublesome Priapism, accompanied
with an intolerable Stench: Besides all this, he had a strong Convulsion of his
Nerves, and shortness of Breath. For which cause it was a general opinion
amongst holy men, and such as had the knowledge of Prophecy, The hot Baths of
Calliroes that flow into the Lake of Asphaltite.
and refused none of those remedies which they thought requisite for him. He
therefore past over Jordan, and went into the hot Baths of Calliroes; the
Waters whereof are potable, besides other virtues they have against all other
kind of sickness: this Water discharges it self into the Lake called
Asphaltites. Being there, it was thought good by his Physicians, that he should
refresh himself in those Waters: There being set by them into a Bathing-tub
filled with Oil, he grew so sick, that they held him for dead. Whereupon all
his Domestic servants wept and lamented, and all his familiar friends cried
out, bewailing him; and with their great noise caused him to come to himself:
And seeing himself wholly out of hope to escape, he gave order that there
should a Distribution be made, to every Soldier the sum of fifty Drachmes; and
he offered great Presents Jericho, where a melancholy humor possessed him,
Herod bestows a distribution among his Soldiers.
which made him unsociable, and displeased against all men; so that seeing that
he must needs die, he bethought him of this wicked action that follows. For
the Noblest men amongst the Nation of the Jews, resorting unto him from all
parts (by his command, under the express Penalty of loss of life, to whosoever
should neglect the same) the King showed himself to be displeased, as well
against those whom he thought guilty, Herod commands that the Noblest of the
Jews should be slain after his death
as against them who had given him no occasion of discontent. For he caused
them to be shut up in a place called the Hippodrome, which was the Tilt-yard to
run Horses in; and sent for his Sister Salome, and Alexas her Husband, telling
them that his end was at hand, for that his griefs did incessantly torment him;
which as he said, he ought to bear patiently, because it was an end that should
happen to all men. But that which most grieved him was, that he saw himself
deprived of those mournings and lamentations, which a King deserved. For he was
not ignorant of the Jews affections, neither how his death was desired and
longed for by them, since that in his life time they Hippodrome to be environed
by his Soldiers, as yet unadvertised of his death (which he would not have
published before this execution was ended) and to command them to shoot their
Arrows at those that were shut up therein. And that when they had killed them
all after this manner, they should


Augustus refers it to Herod, to dispose of Antipater as he pleases. Herod
falling into a relapse of his Torments, desires to kill himself; Achiabus one
of his Grandchildren hinders him: It is reported that he is dead; Antipater
endeavors in vain, to bribe his Keeper to set him at liberty; as soon as
Herod hears of it, he sends one to kill him.
WHilst he delivered these instructions to his Kindred, Letters are sent from
Rome, that Acme was executed by Caesar's Command, and that he had Authority to
use
he received Letters from those Ambassadors which he had sent to Rome unto
Caesar; the effect whereof Acme was put to death by Caesar's Command, who was
displeased with her, for that she had been of Antipater's Conspiracy, who was
remitted to Herod's pleasure, like a King and Father, to use him as best
pleased him; either to exile and banish him; or, if it please him, to put him
to death. Herod receiving these News, recovered his Spirits a little, through
the pleasure he received in the Contents of those Letters, Antipater as his
pleasure.
both of Acme's death, and of the power that was granted him to punish his Son.
But being assailed afresh by grievous Dolours, and urged with a desire to eat,
Herod calling for a Knife and an Apple intends to stab himself.
he called for an Apple and a Knife; for he was accustomed to pare his Apples
himself, and cut a little, and afterward to eat it: When as therefore he had
gotten hold of the Knife, he looked round about him, determining to give
Achiabus his Grandchild hastily stepped within him, Achiabus with holds his
hand.
and stayed his hand, and called for assistance. At that time the sorrow and
lamentation was renewed in all the Palace, as if the King had been already
dead: Antipater thinking his Father to be dead, deals with his Keeper for his
delivery, which Herod hearing of commands him to be slain.
And Antipater certainly believing that his Father was departed, began to hope
(and confirmed no less in his words) that being delivered out of Prison, he
should obtain the possession of the Kingdom without any difficulty; and treated
with the Jaylour concerning his deliverance, offering him great Presents both
in hand and hereafter, as if there had been no other question but of that. But
so far was the Jaylour from obeying that which Antipater demanded, that he went
and acquainted the King what his intent was, and what offers he made him. Herod
who had already conceived go kill him; and that done, he should be buried in
the Castle of Hircanion, without

CHAP. X.
Herod alters his Will, declares Archelaus his Successor; he dies five days
after Antipater. Herod's glorious Funeral ordained by Archelaus; the peoples
great acclamation in favor of Archelaus.
AFter this, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 10.
having changed his mind, he made a new Testament. For he appointed Antipas
Tetrarch of Galilee and of Peraea, Herod's Will is changed.
whereas before he had instituted him for his Successor in the Kingdom. He
created Archelaus King; he gave the Provinces of Gaulonites, Trachonites,
Batanea and Paneade to Philip his Son, and Archelaus's Brother by the Mother's
side, to be Tetrarch over those places. He gave his Sister Salome, Jamnia, Azot
and Phaselis, with fifty thousand Crowns of Gold. He provided also for his
other Kins-men, all whom he left rich in money, which he gave them, and
revenews which he assigned them. His Legacy to Caesar, and Julia his Wife.
He gave Caesar ten Millions of Drachmes in Silver, amounting to the sum of
eleven hundred thousand Francks; besides a great quantity Julia, Caesar's Wife,
and to certain others, he bequeathed five millions of Drachmes, amounting to
five hundred and fifty thousand Francks, Herod's death.
or thereabout. After he had in this manner disposed all things, some five days
after he had caused Antipater to be executed, he departed this life; having
reigned after Antigonus's death, for the space of thirty and four years, and
thirty and seven years after he was elected and approved King by the Romans: A
man without respect, cruel and severe toward all men, Slave to his wrath, Lord
of the Laws; yet so favored by fortune, as no man more; for from a private
man, he became a King; and being environed with many dangers, he always happily
escaped; and he lived also a very long time. Herod's mutable and strange
Fortune.
And as concerning his Family and Children, in his

Before the King's death was thoroughly known, Salome and Alexas after the King's
death, dismiss the Jews that were shut up in the Hippodrome.
Salome and Alexas discharged those that were locked up in the Hippodrome, and
sent every one of them home unto his own house; telling them, that the King
commanded them to depart, and follow their household Affairs, and till their
Land; wherein they performed a most noble action, and benefitted the whole
Nation with an especial good turn. After the King's death was bruted abroad,
Salome and Alexas caused all the Army to be assembled in the A^phitheatre in
Jericho; and first of all they caused Herod's Letters to be read, which were
addressed to the Soldiers, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 11.
in which he gave them thanks for the fidelity and Herod's thanksgiving to his
Army, and testament read, and Archelaus is applauded by the people.
praying them to continue the same to Archelaus his Son, whom he had appointed
to be their King after him. That done, Ptolomey, to whom the King had committed
the custody of his Seal, recited his Testament, which was to take no effect,
except that Caesar approved the same. Thereupon all of them began to applaud
and honor Archelaus for their King. The Soldiers flocked about him in Troops,
accompanied with their Captains; promising him to serve him with no less good
will and affection, Alias, cap. 12*
than they had done his Father; praying God to yield him his assistance.

At that time also the King's Hearse was prepared, Herod's Corpse is buried with
great pomp and solemnity in Herodion.
and Archelaus gave order that his Obsequies should be most royally performed;
and bestowed all the Furniture that was The Germans and French served under
Herod.
and lastly, marched the Germans and Galatians; all of them in their Warlike
Dress and Discipline. After them followed all the Army, marching in order, as
when they were drawn up in Batalia, each one under his Captain. Next these
followed five Herodion, distant some eight Furlongs off. For there he was
Herod. Archelaus continued his Mourning for seven days space in honor of his
Father. (For the Law of the Country ordains no less.) And after he had
feasted the people, and laid aside his mourning Apparel, he ascended up into
the Temple. All the way as he went, all the people with Shouts and
Acclamations, Archelaus banqueteth the people.
cried, God save the King; and with Prayers and Praises honored him to their
uttermost: And he being conducted up to a high Throne of Gold, which was made
on purpose, entertained the people very graciously, taking pleasure in their
Acclamations and Congratulations that they bestowed upon him. He gave them
thanks also, For that they had blotted out of their remembrance, the injuries
that his Father had done unto them; protesting in that Caesar should ratify
his Father's Testament. For this cause, although the Soldiers that were in
Jericho, were so kind to set the Diadem upon his head, yet he would not accept
of that uncertain honor; because it was not resolved whether Caesar, who was
the principal Party in the Gift, would grant him the Government or no.

He protested likewise, Archelaus promises that with Caesar's approbation, he
will carefully intend the desires and profits of the people.
that if his Affairs succeeded according to his desire, he would not, in
honor, forget their love, or leave their good affection unrequited. Archelaus
spoke kindly and courteously unto them, the more they applauded him; and
presented him with diverse Petitions, for Grants and Donations from him. Some of
them cried out unto him, that he should take off some part of their yearly
Taxes: Others cried to him, to deliver those Prisoners that were committed by
Herod, of whom diverse had pined a long time in Prison: Others instantly urged
him to cut off those Tributes which had been imposed by him upon Bargains and
Sales, Archelaus did not any ways contradict, striving to the uttermost of his
power to please the people; for he knew very well, that their good affection
would be no small advantage toward him, in the confirmation of his Kingdom.
That done, he sacrificed unto God; and afterward fell to banqueting and
entertainment of his Friends.

CHAP. XI.
Some Jews (who demanded satisfaction for Judas and Matthias and others deaths,
whom Herod caused to be burned, for having pulled down the Eagle off the Portal
of the Temple) make an Insurrection, which obliges Archelaus to cause three
thousand of them to be put to death: He goes afterward to Rome, to be
confirmed King by Augustus: His Brother Antipas, who pretends to have a right
to the Crown, repaireth thither also; the Cause is pleaded before Augustus.
MEan while, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 12. al. 13.
some amongst the Jews who were desirous of Revolutions, in their Matthias and
his Confederates, whom Herod had put to death and condemned, The seditious
people bewail Matthias, and those that were executed with them.
for defacing the Golden Eagle; because that after their decease, they had
neither been publicly honored, nor lamented, by reason of the fear that the
people had conceived of Herod. For which cause, at that time they required with
lamentations and outcries, that their Obsequies might be solemnized; and as if
the dead bodies had received some satisfaction by their tears and exclamations,
they uttered many odious and disgraceful expressions against Herod; and
assembling themselves together, they requested Archelaus to do them Justice
against those, that during Herod's life, They would be revenged on Herod's
friends, and would depose the High Priest.
were in Authority; and especially they demanded, that the High Priest who was
advanced by his Father, should be deposed, and that another more Archelaus was
sore displeased at these violent proceedings, yet notwithstanding, he conformed
himself to their humor, in that he was with all expedition, to repair unto
Rome, The year of the World, 3964. after Christ's Nativity, 2.
to understand and attend Caesar's pleasure. Therefore he called Caesar's
consent, he should return back again unto them, and that then he would consult
with them for the common profit, according to their demands; wishing them for
the present to contain themselves, and to take heed lest they stirred up
Sedition.

When he had thus instructed his General, he sent him unto them. But they cried
out with a loud voice, and would not suffer him to speak; but for fear of
danger and death, they put him to silence. And if any other were so forward as
to speak unto them, and persuade them to some moderation, and to alter their
sinister resolutions, he was also in danger: For that they had this persuasion,
that all things ought rather to be ordered according to their pleasures, than
by the Authority of their Superiors; supposing that although, during Herod's
life time, they had been deprived of their dearest friends, it would be now a
matter unworthy their courages, after his death to be cut off from their
privilege to demand their revenge. For they were transported with their own
opinions; and held all that for lawful and upright, which was in any sort
conformable Archelaus to advise them, and diverse came unto them not as
messengers from him, but as friends and lovers of peace, of their own motion,
with an intent to pacify them, they would not permit any of them to speak; and
through their rage there arose a great tumult, which had grown to a further
extremity, if a great number of people had joined with them.

At that time fell the Feast of Unleavened Bread, Sedition at the Feast of the
Passover.
which is called Pascha, which is a Memorial of their deliverance out of Egypt;
at which time all men do most willingly present their Sacrifices; and a greater
number of Beasts are killed at that Feast, than at Judas and Matthias, who were
the Expositors of the Law, and kept themselves within the Temple, whither they
had gathered good store of Victuals, which they were not ashamed impudently to
beg for. But Archelaus, fearing lest their rage should produce some more
grievous effect of mischief, sent out a Captain, with a Regiment of a thousand
men, to repress their fury, before the rest of the people were infected with
their follies; and to bring them likewise unto him, whom they found to be the
forwardest in that Commotion. Against those the Seditious cried out with great
clamours, and incensed the people against them, so that all of them rushed

Now Archelaus supposing that his whole Fortune was endangered, except he
repressed the rage of the multitude; he sent out all his Foot, with a certain
number of Horse, to prevent, lest they that were without should yield
assistance to those who had taken up their lodging in the Temple; and to put
those to the sword, who having escaped the violence of the Foot, Three thousand
Jews slain.
supposed themselves to be in security. These Horsemen slew about three
thousand men, the rest retired themselves into the Mountains that were near
adjoining. Hereupon Archelaus made Proclamation, that each one should repair

After this, Archelaus repairs to Rome, and many of his Faction follow him
Archelaus, accompanied with his Mother, took his Voyage to Rome, with
Nicholaus and Ptolomey, and with diverse other his Friends; committing the
Government of all his Household and Kingdom to his Brother Philip: Salome,
Herod's Sister went also, leading with her, her Children. There went also
diverse other of his Kindred, who said that they would all of them endeavor for
Archelaus, that he might obtain the Kingdom; but in effect, it was to hinder
him with all their Power: and especially, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 13. al. 14.
to accuse him unanimously, for what was done in the Temple. Sabinus, Caesar's
Syria, posting into Jewry to take charge of Herod's Money, met with Archelaus
in Caesarea. But Varus arriving in the mean while, detained him from finishing
Archelaus had sent for him to come thither by Ptolomey, and Sabinus willing to
do Varus a pleasure, would not seize the Fortress of Jewry; nether sealed up
Herod's Treasures, but left them in Archelaus's possession, until such time as
Caesar had given order for the Estate; and after he had made this promise, he
stayed in Caesarea.

After Archelaus had set sail toward Rome, Sabinus repaireth to Jerusalem,
with an intent to seize Herod's Treasures and Castles.
and Varus was departed for Antioch, Sabinus went to Jerusalem, where he seized
the King's Palace: and calling before him the King's Agents, and the Captains
of his Garrisons, he required them to deliver up their Castles into his hands.
But they according as Archelaus had commanded them, continued the possession in
their accustomed manner, according to the King's direction, pretending Caesar's
behalf. Antipas in hope to recover the Kingdom* saileth to Rome,
At the same time Antipas Herod's Son traveled to Rome likewise, in hopes to
be elected King, in regard of Salome's promises; and for that he better
deserved the same than Archelaus, considering that in the first Testament,
which should be of more force than the later, he had been appointed King. He
led his Mother also with him, and Ptolomey the Brother of Nicholaus, who had
been one of Herod's most esteemed friends, and was well affected to further his
Title. But especially he was stirred up to seek the Kingdom by Ireneus, a man
very eloquent, and to whose charge, in regard of his sufficiency, the Affairs
of the Kingdom had been committed. For which cause, although he was persuaded
to give over the Kingdom unto his elder Brother, who was confirmed in the
Kingdom by his Father's Testament, yet he would not Antipas no sooner arrived
in Rome, but all his Kinsfolk revolted from Archelaus unto him, not so much for
the love they bare to him, as for the hatred they conceived against Archelaus;
and above all, for the desire they had to recover their liberty, and to draw
themselves under a Roman Governor. For they thought that if there were any
contradiction, that Antipas, for whom they endeavored to procure the Royalty,
should be more profitable to them than Archelaus: Sabinus also, by his Letters,
accused Archelaus to Caesar; but Archelaus by Ptolomey, exhibited unto Caesar a
Supplication, containing his Right and Title unto the Kingdom, his Father's
Testaments, and the account of the Money which Herod his Father had sealed up,
together with his Ring, and expected the issue.

But when he had read these Letters, and those which Varus and Sabinus had sent
him, and understood what sums of money he had left, and what the yearly
Revenue was, and how Antipas challenged the Kingdom, and appropriated it to
himself, according as his Letters mention,; he assembled all his friends, to
have their advice thereupon. Amongst them was Caius the Son of Agrippa, and his
Daughter Julia, adopted by him, whom he caused to sit in the chiefest place;
which done, he commanded the Assistants to speak what they would concerning
this matter. At that Antipater, Salome 's Son, a man very eloquent, Antipater
Salome 's Son, accuses Archelaus before Augustus Caesar.
and a great Adversary to Archelaus, spoke first, saying, That it was a mockery
for him at that time to speak of the Kingdom, considering that before Caesar
had granted it him, he had already seized the Forces of the State, when as upon
a Festival day, Caesar's prejudice, whose Authority he had contemned; or by
being a private man, which was a great oversight. For which cause, he
undeservedly at this time hoped for his approbation, whom already, as much as
in him lay, he had deprived of the Title and Authority of his Allowance.
Moreover, he objected against him, that of his own Authority he had changed
certain Officers of the Army, and that he had seated himself in the Royal
Throne; and like a King, had determined certain causes, and had granted certain
demands of the people: That he had left nothing undone, which he might have
performed, had Caesar confirmed his Title. He alleged also, that they who were
enclosed in the Hippodrome, Caesar should grant him the Kingdom, he would
behave himself no less unkindly toward him, than he had done to his most kind
Father. That it was no less than an odious crime in him, to delight himself
with Songs and Dances at his Father's death, as if he had been his enemy: That
he Caesar's Presence, to the intent to obtain the Kingdom by his consent,
whereas already he had behaved himself no otherwise, than if he had already
been established King by his Authority. But most of all he exaggerated the
Slaughter he had committed in the Temple, and the Impiety perpetrated so near
to the Feast of Easter; at which time diverse, Antipater to be King. For he had
been allotted the Kingdom by his Father, not when his mind was dead before his
body, but when both his Judgment was sound, and his body in health. Yea,
although at that time Archelaus's Father had such a conceit of him, as in his
later Testament he pretends; yet, that he had already declared what kind of
King he was Caesar's Authority in confirming the Kingdom; and being as yet a
private man, doubted not to murder the Citizens in the Temple, This said,
Antipater (to give greater credit to his words, bringing diverse of his Kindred
as Witnesses of that he had said) ended his Oration.

Whereupon Nicholaus arose, Nicholaus excuses Archelaus.
and alleged in Archelau 's behalf as touching the slaughter, that it was to
be imputed to their impiety, who could not be restrained from their Tumults and
Uproars, before Archelaus was enforced to appease them by force; alleging,
That they were so much the more guilty, for that they had not only exercised
their malice, but also had enforced others to attempt so great a revenge
against them; for their insolency seemed in appearance to concern Archelaus,
yet in a sort their contumacy Caesar's ruin. For those that had been sent by
him to appease and redress their sedition, were, against all Law and right,
charged and killed by them, without respect of God, or regard of the solemn
Feast: Whose defense Antipater was not ashamed of, without respect of equity,
so that he might satisfy that hatred which he bare unto Archelaus. That
therefore it was their fault, who first of all abstained not from injury, but
whetted those Swords which were drawn in maintenance of the peace, against
their own bosoms. He enforced all other things also, whereof they had accused
Archelaus, against themselves, saying, that none of these things were done
without their consents; and that the offense was not so grievous, as they
intended it should be esteemed, to the end they might discredit Archelaus. So
great a desire was in them to hurt their Kinsman, a man both well Caesar, the
Sovereign of the World.

Further, that Caesar would not imitate them in that wrong they did unto Herod,
who (being, during his lifetime, bountifully graced by him, by many benefits)
do now after his death, go about to violate his last and truest Testament; but
that rather like a Friend and Confederate, he would confirm his Will; who, like
his faithful and sworn well-willer had committed all things to his trust. For
that there must needs be a great difference between Caesar's Virtue and Faith,
which was renowned thorough the whole world. For which cause he would not judge
his Decree to be inconsiderately past, who left his Succession to his well
deserving Son, and referred all things to his trust. For that it was unlikely
that he should err in the choice of his Successor, who had so discreetly
submitted all things to Caesar's judgment. After this manner Nicholaus also
finished his discourse. Hereupon Caesar courteously raised Archelaus, Caesar
pronounces Archelaus to be worthy of the Kingdom.
who lay prostrate and humbled before his feet, telling him that he was most
worthy to be King, by giving an apparent Testimony, that he was constant in his
resolutions; pretending that he would do nothing but that which should be
answerable to Herod 's Testament, and Archelaus 's profit; and seeing the young
man was confirmed in some good hope with this his promise, Hedio and Ruffinus,
chap. 14.
he determined nothing more for that time; but dismissing the Council, he
debated with himself, whether he should ratify the Kingdom to Archelaus only,
or divide it amongst Herod 's Kindred, especially since they all had need of
his assistance.


A great Rebellion in Judea, whilst Archelaus was at Rome; Varus Governor of
Syria stops it. Philip, Archealus's Brother, goes also to Rome, in hopes to
obtain one part of the Kingdom. The Jews send Ambassadors to Augustus, to free
them from their obedience to Kings, and to reunite them to Syria: They
complain to him against Archelaus, and abhor the memory of Herod.
Caesar had determined any thing certainly in this behalf, Marthalce
Archelaus's Mother dies.
Marthalce, Archelaus's Mother died of a Sickness; and Varus the President of
the Jews in Syria, had sent Letters, Varus pacifieth the Seditions at Jerusalem.
which assured the Emperor of the Rebellion of the Jews. For after Archelaus's
departure, all the Nation was in an Uproar. To pacify which, Varus resorted
thither, and punished the Authors of the same: and after he had appeased all
things, he returned to Antioch; leaving a Regiment of Soldiers in Jerusalem, to
restrain the factious Innovations amongst the Jews; yet, he prevailed nothing
by his policy. Alias, cap. 15
For as soon as Varus was gone, Sabinus, who was Overseer of Caesar's Affairs,
remaining in that place, Sabinus's Avarice raises a great Sedition in
Jerusalem, at the Feast of Pentecost.
grievously burdened the Jews, trusting to that power that was left him, and
supposing that he was already enabled to withstand the multitude. Jerusalem,
not only for Religion's sake, but also for despite and hatred they had
conceived against those Violencies and Injuries, which Sabinus had offered
them. And not only were those of Judaea grievously offended, but diverse also
resorted out of Galilee and Idumaea, from Jericho and the Cities situate on the
other side Jordan, desiring all of them to be revenged on Sabinus. And dividing
their Camp into three Bands after this manner; one part of Hippodrome; and of
the other two, the one seized the Southern Quarter of the Temple, and the other
the Eastern, and the third which were in the Hippodrome, were planted to the
Westward, where the King's Palace stood; and thus prepared they all things that
were necessary to set upon the Romans, whom they had besieged on all sides. At
that time Sabinus fearing their number and resolution, who were resolved either
to die or overcome; sent present Letters unto Varus, requiring him with all
expedition to send him a supply, because the Regiment that was left by him, was
in great danger; and must needs utterly perish, without his speedy rescue: As
for himself, he withdrew into the Tower and Dungeon of the Castle Phaselus,
which was a Fortress, so called in honor of Herod's Brother, who was killed by
the Parthians; A most blooddy Battle fought betwixt the Romans and Jews near
unto the Temple.
and their lives also. The Romans having made this Sally, there arose a
desperate skirmish, wherein the Romans diverse ways had the upper hand; yet the
Jews were no ways discomforted, notwithstanding they had lost many men; but
wheeled about so long, till at last they seized the outward Galleries, and
those that encompassed the Temple, and in that place there was a hot Assault;
for they flung down stones with their hands and slings, and there were certain
Archers mixed among them; who having recovered a place of advantage, grievously
gauled the Romans which Diverse Jews are slain and burned in the Roof of the
Porches.
and they that were resorted thither, were all of them consumed before they
were aware. For some of them fell with the Roof of the Galleries; others shot
at, and killed by those that stood round about; others them, all, because they
were disarmed, though furiously desperate: so that not one A great part of the
sacred treasure taken away by the Soldiers.
and Sabinus to all men's knowledge carried away four hundred Talents. But the
Jews being afflicted with a double calamity, first of all with the loss of
their Friends in that fight: and lastly, with the spoil of the treasury; yet
they assembled a Troop of the valiantest Soldiers, and besieged the Palace,
threatening to burn the same, with Sabinus and all other the Romans that were
therein, The Palace besieged by the Jews
except they speedily departed; and in so doing, they promised both them and
Sabinus all assurance and security: whereby it came to pass, that diverse of
them that Rufus and Gratus having three thousand of those valiant Soldiers
under their command, Rufus and Gratus, Captains of Herod's Army, join with the
Romans.
who had served Herod, joined themselves with the Romans. The like did those
Horsemen which followed Rufus, who in like manner submitted themselves to their
direction: yet for all this, the Jews continued and intended their Siege,
undermining their walls, and exhorting the Romans to depart, and not to deprive
them of their liberty, which they had long enjoyed under their Predecessors.
Sabinus was willing to depart from thence with his Soldiers; yet durst not
trust them in regard of their former attempt, and he suspected the too liberal
offer his enemies had made him: but neglected it, because he expected Varus.

At the same time infinite other troubles were raised in diverse other places of
Judaea, according as every one either was incensed with a desire of gain, Hedio
and Ruffinus, cap. 15.
or a will to revenge. For two thousand Soldiers (who had formerly served under
Herod, and being at that time cashiered, Diverse tumults in Jewry.
lived at home) assembling themselves together, assailed those of the Kings
faction, who made head against them, under the conduct of Herod's Nephew
Aciabus, Two thousand of Herod's Soldiers assail the Kings people.
who never daring to encounter them in a place of equal advantage, in that they
were old Soldiers, and well exercised in war, defended himself, in that he held
and kept himself as near as he could in the mountains and places of advantage.
Moreover, Judas the Son of Ezechias the Arch-thief, whom Herod overcame with so
much difficulty at Sephoris a City in Galilee, Judas, Ezechias's Son the
Arch-thief.
gathering unto him a band of desperate men,

Whilst these troubles ranged in every place, Simon also, who had been one of
Herod's servants; Simon, Herod 's Servant.
and both for his shape, stature and strength, was esteemed amongst all men,
undertook the Kingdom: and being attended by a mighty Army, and proclaimed
Jericho, and spoiled all that was therein. He burnt also diverse other Royal
Palaces, belonging to the King, which were in diverse places of the Country;
giving them free license who were his followers in the Action, to bear away the
Prey that remained: And far more licentious pranks had he played, had not his
practices been speedily and wisely prevented. For Gratus, who with the King's
Soldiers, had joined himself winh the Romans, Gratus conflict with Simon.
and gathered all the Forces that he had, went out against this Simon. And
after a fierce Battle, they on the other side of Jordan, were put to flight;
and fighting rather with courage than Military Discipline, they were overcome.
Simon, Simon beheaded.
in crossing a Valley, sought to save himself by flight, Gratus met with him,
and cut off his head.

About the same time also, The Jews almost enraged in rebellion.
the Royal Palace of Amatha, that was hard by Jordan, was burnt by men of as
bad disposition as Simon was. And thus through the whole Nation reigned this
raging Rebellion, for that the Country had no King, who by his Virtue, might
govern and moderate the people; for that the strangers who were sent to repress
these mutinies, Athronges strong in body and goodly in stature, attempteth the
Royal Dignity.
did rather incense them through their Violence and Avarice. For a certain
obscure and base man (neither esteemed for Virtue, nor worthy of regard for his
Riches, but being a Shepherd utterly unknown before, and only famous for his
huge stature and strength) called Athronges, was so audacious to aspire to
Royal The year of the World, 3965. before Christ's Nativity, 3.
who were esteemed for men of valor and execution, whereby they imagined they
had the means offered them to obtain the Kingdom. Each one of these had the
Command over a Company. For a great company of people resorted daily unto them;
the charge of whom was committed unto his Brethren, at such time as any
occasion of War was offered, and he in the mean while wearing the Diadem on his
head, ordered, counseled and commanded all things. The Power of this Gallant
endured a long time, who was not called King for nothing; for he disposed all
things according to his own pleasure; and both he and his Brethren were fleshed
with the slaughter of the Romans, and those of the King's side, whom he hated
alike; these, by reason of the insolence they Herod's lifetime; the other, in
regard of those injuries, which lately they supposed themselves to have
received by them. This hatred of theirs daily increased more and more, and
there was no man that could escape their hands, both in respect of the gain
sought, and for the custom they had to shed Blood. They therefore at that time
set upon the Romans, and surprised them on the sudden near to Emmaus, at such
time as they carried Victuals and Munition unto their Camp, and having enclosed
their Centurion Arius, with forty of their most valiant Footmen, they shot him
thorough with their Darts: The rest that expected nothing less than death, were
saved by Gratus, who came in upon them with the King's Soldiers; whereupon,
leaving the dead bodies, they retired. Continuing their War Gratus, the other
in fighting against Ptolomey. Athronges and his Brethren taken.
The eldest was taken by Archelaus; and the last being dis-heartened with the
Accidents, and seeing no means to escape (for besides his other mishaps, his
Soldiers were afflicted with sickness) he, with the rest, upon Archelaus's
Faith and Oath, submitted himself unto him. But this was done some little while
after.

At this time all Judaea was full of Robberies; Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 16.
and as many seditious Assemblies as drew together, so many Kings were there
elected, who were raised to the utter ruin of Varus understanding by Sabinus's
Letters, in what dangers they were; and fearing the utter overthrow of his
third Legion, he took with him the two other (for to the uttermost in Syria
there were but three) and with the assistance of the Kings and Tetrarchs, he
hasted into Jewry, to relieve those that were besieged; commanding those that
were sent out before he dislodged, to meet him at Ptolemais; and passing by the
City of the Berythians, he received a thousand and five hundred Soldiers at
their hands, to attend him in his War. Aretas also, who was Lord of Petra,
drawing himself into Confederacy with the Romans, in regard of that hatred he
bare Herod, sent him Ptolemais, he delivered a part thereof to his Son, and one
of his Friends; commanding them to make War against the Galileans, who bordered
uopn that City; who entering that Country, and putting all those to flight,
whosoever durst make head against him* he took Sephoris; and selling the
Inhabitants under the Spear, he consumed the City with fire. Varus himself
marching toward Samaria with his Army, violenced not the City, in that he knew
it was free from the Contagion of the Seditious; but he pitched his Camp in a
certain Village, Arus burned by the Arabians.
which was Ptolomey's Possession, called Arus. The same did the Arabians burn,
revenging themselves on Herod's Friend for his sake; and marching forward,
Sampho and Emmaus burned.
the Arabians spoiled also another Village called Sampho; and for that it was
Emmaus was burned by Varus's Command, and in revenge of his Soldiers that were
killed in that place, it was left desolate and void of Inhabitants. Varus
repaireth to Jerusalem, and delivers the Legion that was besieged.
From thence, drawing near to Jerusalem, those Jews that besieged the Legion of
that side, upon the sudden view and approach of the Army of the Romans,
fearfully fled, giving over that Siege which they intended. But those Jews of
Jerusalem, being sharply reproved by Varus, alleged in their excuse, that the
people, in regard of the Feast, were assembled in that place; and that the War
was not begun by their consent, but undertaken by their boldness who resorted
thither from diverse places; and that they were so far off from assailing the
Romans, that they rather Joseph, King Herod's Nephew, Gratus and Rufus, with
their Soldiers, were gone out to meet Varus, and those Romans that had
sustained the Siege, had done no less. But as for Sabinus, he would not appear
in Varus's presence; by stealing away privily out of the City, he fled toward
Varus sending a part of his Army thorough the whole Country, sought out those
Authors of this Sedition, and those that were noted men in the action; some of
which who were most guilty, were punished; the rest were delivered. Of those
that were punished for this occasion, The Punishment of the Conspirators.
there were about two thousand crucified, and that done, seeing that this Army
stood him in little stead, he dismissed them. For diverse disorders and
injuries, contrary to Varus's express Command, were acted by his Soldiers, who
sought after nothing more than to increase their means by other men's miseries.
And hearing that ten thousand Jews were assembled together, he hasted to
apprehend them; but they, not daring to hazard their fortune in a fight with
him, by Achiabus's advice submitted themselves. But Varus having pardoned the
people for Caesar, who pardoned diverse of them. Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 16.
al. 17.
But he chastised certain of Herod's Allies, and such as bare Arms with them;
for that neither in regard of Kindred, nor respect of Justice, they had
abstained from Insurrection. After that Varus had thus appeased all the
troubles in Jewry, and left the first Legion in Garrison in Jerusalem, he
returned to Antioch.

But Archelaus was crossed in Rome by another Occurrent, that arose upon this
occasion: The year of the World, 3966. after Christ's Nativity, 4.
Certain Ambassadors of the Jews resorted thither by Varus's permission,
requiring that it might be lawful for them to live according to their own Laws;
these presented themselves to the number of fifty, and were backed by eight
thousand Jews The Embassage of the Jews to Rome.
And when Caesar had assembled the Council of his Friends, and chief Citizens
in Apollo's Temple, which he had builded to his mighty charge, thither resorted
the Ambassadors, Archelaus and the Ambassadors of the Jews appear before
Caesar.
who were followed by a Troop of Jews; and Archelaus also, attended by his
Friends. But the King's Kindred neither stood by Archelaus, in regard of the
hate they bare him; and yet disdained to assist the Ambassadors, for that they
were ashamed in Caesar's presence to oppose themselves against their nearest
Friend and Kinsman. Philip Herod' s Son.
Philip also was present at that time, who by Varus's persuasion, resorted
thither out of Syria; especially to plead for his Brother, to whom Varus wished
all good fortune: Besides that, hoping not a little, that if the Jews should
obtain the liberty to live according to their Laws, it might come to pass,
Herod's Children, he might also light on some part thereof. Therefore, after
the Ambassadors of the Jews had obtained License to propose their demands,
pretending with themselves wholly to exstinguish the Royalty: The Ambassadors
of the Jews rip up Herod's and Archelaus's iniquity.
They began to rip up Herod's disgraces; alleging how only in name he had been
a King, whereas otherwise he had used all the Tyrannous practices, that the
wickedest person could have invented, toward the destruction of his Nation;
and that not content with these, he had of his own head practiced and invented
new. Neither that it needed to reckon up how many he had deprived of life, when
the estate of those that were alive was far more desperate; whom he not only
frighted with perpetual terror and severity, but also with injurious hands had
not abstained from their Herod had no other ways governed, than as if the
Government had been committed to a most wild Beast. For which cause, whereas in
times past that Nation had been afflicted with many Calamities and Murders,
yet that there is no example extant amongst their Monuments of Antiquity, that
may be compared with their present Calamity under Herod. For which cause, upon
just respects, they had with one consent, named Archelaus their King; supposing
that whatsoever King might befall them, he would always demean himself more
affably than Herod had done; and that to honor Archelaus, they had mourned
with him for his Father, to gratify him in Caesar's hands to grant it) and as
if he had been afraid, lest he should assuredly be acknowledged for his
Father's Son, he had showed an example of his Virtue, Moderation and good
Government, that he would use toward his Subjects, by the first Act which he
had committed, not only against God, but also against men. For in the Temple it
self he has caused three thousand of his Contrymen to be killed in stead of
Sacrifices. And how can he choose but be justly hated, who besides his other
cruelties, objecteth against us the Crime of Rebellion and Mutiny? The effect
of their request therefore was this, that they might not any more be governed
by a King, nor any such like Government; but that they might be united unto
Syria, and submit Nicholaus excuses Herod and Archelaus.
when they had favorable Governors. After the Jews had spoken to this effect,
Nicholaus discharged the Kings of those Accusations that were objected against
them, and namely Herod, who (as he said) had never been accused all his
lifetime; and that it was no reason that they who justly accusing him, might
have caused him to be punished during his lifetime, should now address their
Accusations against him after he was dead. And as touching those things which
were objected concerning Archelaus's actions, it ought to be imputed to their
insolence; for that engaging themselves in matters contrary to Law; and having
begun to murder those who Nicholaus.

CHAP. XIII.
Caesar confirms Herod's Testament, and appoints his Children to be his
Successors.
Caesar had heard these things, Caesar makes Archelaus an Ethnarch, and
bestows one half of the Kingdom on Philip and Antipas.
he dismissed the Assembly. But some few days after, desirous to make an end of
this matter, declared Archelaus not King, but Lord of half that Government that
appertained to Herod; promising him to bestow a Royal Dignity upon him, if so
be he behaved himself virtuously, according as it became him. As for the other
Moiety, he divided it between two of Herod's Sons, Philip and Antipas, who
debated with his Brother Archelaus for the whole Kingdom. The same Antipas
also, had the Country on the other side Jordan, and Galilee, with two hundred
Talents of yearly Revenue. As for Philip, he had Bathanea, Trachonitis and
Auranitis, and part of the Palace that was called by Zenodorus's name, with one
hundred Archelaus, he had Idumaea, Judaea and Samaria, which were discharged of
the fourth part of the Tributes by Caesar, for that they had joined themselves
with the rest of the people, during the time of the Sedition. Besides that,
Archelaus had the Tower of Straton, Sebaste, Joppe and Jerusalem. For Gaza,
Gadara and Hippon were Cities of Greece, which Caesar had separated, and
adjoined to Syria. Archelaus had five hundred Talents of yearly Rent out of his
Country. Thus was the Patrimony divided among Herod's Sons. Salome.
As for Salome, besides that which her Brother had given her in his Will, which
were the Cities of Jamnia, Azot, Phasaelis and half a Million of money, Caesar
granted her a Royal house in Ascalon; so as she received in the whole, sixty
Talents of yearly Revenue, and had her house allotted her within the Dominion
Archelaus. All Herod's Kindred received that which was bequeathed unto them by
his Testament. Two of his Daughters that were unmarried, were endowed by Caesar
with a quarter of a Millon of money which he gave them, besides their Father's
Portion, Herod's two Daughters that were Virgins married to Pheroras's Sons.
and they were married to Pheroras's Sons. Moreover, he gave Herod's Sons, all
which he had given him by the Testament, amounting to the sum of one thousand
and five hundred Talents; contenting himself only to receive some few movables,
not so much for the value, as in remembrance of the King, who had given them.

CHAP. XIV. The year of the World, 3966. after Christ's Nativity, 4.

An Impostor counterfeits himself to be Alexander, Herod's Son; Augustus finds
out his Cheat, and sends him to the Galleys.
AVgustus having thus ordained Herod's Succession, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 18.
a young man, and a Jew born, brought up in the City of Sidon, Alias, cap. 17*
by a certain Roman Free man; intruded himself into Herod's Kindred; The false
Alexander.
for all those that beheld him, reported that he resembled Alexander, Herod's
Son, who was killed by him; and by this means he began to aspire to the
Kingdom: Whereupon, calling to him a Companion, who was his own Alexander,
Herod's Son, who was delivered from death by the means of a certain friend, who
had the charge to see him executed; who executing others in their steads,
delivered both him and his Brother Aristobulus, and that they were both escaped
in this manner. Being puffed up by these Toys, he failed not to deceive other
men; and as soon as he came to Creet, as many Jews as he fell in conference
with, he persuaded them no less; and getting much money from them, he sailed
into the Isle of Melos; where he gathered a great Sum of Money, under pretext
that he was of the Kings Blood. And now hoping that he should recover his
Father's Kingdom, and that he should reward those that Rome, accompanied with
his Friends in great pomp. And being arrived at Puteol, he was entertained
there with no less favor by those Jews, whom he deceived by his colorable
Title; and diverse others, who had been Herod's Friends and Familiars, came unto
him, and entertained him as their King. The cause hereof was the natural
disposition of men, who take pleasure in false reports, together with the
report of his resemblance. For they that had frequented very familiarly with
Alexander, held it for a matter most assured, that he was the man, and none
other; and affirmed unto others upon their Oaths, that it was he, so that this
rumor at last came to Rome. And all the Jews that dwelt there came forth to
meet him, The false Alexander comes to Rome.
saying, That it was God's handiwork, that he was after that manner Mariamne's
behalf, from whom he was descended; he was carried in a Litter through the
Streets with all the Apparel of a King, the charge whereof was defrayed by
those who were his Friends. He was attended by a great multitude of men, and
honored with great applause, as it ordinarily falls out at such time as,
beyond all expectation, any one is found to have been miraculously preserved.
When this News was brought to Caesar's ears, he gave small credit thereunto,
persuading himself that it was a hard matter to deceive Herod, in a matter of
so great importance: Notwithstanding, conforming himself in some sort to the
opinions of men, he sent a certain Freeman of his called Celadus, who had very
familiarly conversed with Alexander Aristobulus during their Infancy; giving
him charge to bring Alexander unto him to the end he might see him; which he
did, and was never the wiser in discovering him. The false Alexander cannot
deceive Caesar.
Notwithstanding, Caesar was not fully deceived. For, although he resembled him
somewhat; yet he was not so exactly like him, that he could deceive those who
narrowly observed him. For this counterfeit Alexander had hard hands, in that
he had been accustomed to labor, which the true Alexander could not have, in
regard of his tender and delicate education; and likewise, this man was of a
rough skin, and hard flesh. Caesar therefore, discovering the treachery both of
the counterfeit Scholar, and lying Master, and how they agreed in their
confident Justifications, he enquired of them, what was become of Aristobulus,
who was secretly hidden with him; Cyprus, for fear of dangers, to which they
are exposed who sail by Sea, to the end, that if any misfortune should befall
him, all Mariamne's Race should not be extinguished, but that at least,
Aristobulus might be left alive. Whilst he owned these things, and the Author
of the Fable justified no less, Caesar drawing the young man aside, said unto
him: My friend, if thou will not deceive me, thou shall have this recompense,
that thou shall not be punished. Tell me therefore what thou art, and who has
emboldned thee to practice this fraud; for this malice is so great, that it
surpasses thine age. The false Alexander is condemned to ^ug at an Oar.
Whereupon, being unable to conceal the truth, he discovered the treachery
Caesar, how and by whom it was contrived. At that time Caesar being loath to
falsify his promise that he had past to this false Alexander, and seeing that
in times past he had Melos had lost their charges, which they had employed upon
this false Alexander, who had a shameful end, as it has been heretofore
declared.

CHAP. XV.

AFter that Archelaus had taken possession of that Sovereignty that was
allotted him, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 19. al. 18.
he came into Judea, where he deposed Joazar the Son of Boethus from the High
Priesthood; The Priesthood is taken from Joazar, and delivered to Eleazar* and
from him to Joshuah the Son of Sias.
accusing him to have favored the Seditious, and established Eleazar his
Brother in his place. After this, he re-edified the Palace in Jericho, and
sumptuously adorned it; drawing away the half of those Waters which served the
Borough of Neara, and conveying them thorough a field which he had planted with
Palm Trees; he Archelais; and contrary to the Laws of his Country, he married
Glaphyra, Archelaus's Daughter, who had been his Brother Alexander's Wife,
Archelau builded.
by whom he also had diverse Children; notwithstanding, the Law of the Jews
forbids a man to marry his Brother's Wife. Neither did Eleazar enjoy the
Priesthood any long time; but during his life time, Jesus the Son of Sias was
substituted in his place.

The tenth year of Archelaus's Government, the chiefest Governors among the
Jews and Samaritans, unable any longer to endure his cruelty and Tyranny,
accused him before Caesar; and especially after they had understood that he had
transgressed Caesar's Command, who had charged him to behave himself graciously
toward them. Which Caesar understood, he was sore displeased, and caused
Archelaus's Agent to be called before him, who was then at Rome, and sent for
Archelaus also; and esteeming it too base an indignity for him to write unto
him, Go (said he) unto him with all expedition, and bring him unto me without
delay. He posting forward with all diligence, at length arrived in Judaea,
where he found Archelaus banqueting with his friends; and having acquainted him
with Caesar's Commands, Archelaus banished and confined.
he hastened him away. As soon as he came to Rome, after that Caesar had heard
his Accusers and his justification, he banished him, and confined him in the
City of Vienna in France, and confiscated all his Goods.

But before Archelaus was sent for to Rome, he reported unto his friends this
Dream which ensues: He thought that he saw ten Ears full of Wheat, and very
ripe, which Simon, Simon the Essean interprets Archelaus's Vision.
an Essean, having first of all obtained security and license to speak, said,
that the Vision prognosticated, that a great alteration should befall in
Archelaus's Estate, to his prejudice. For the Oxen signified Afflictions, in
respect that those kind of creatures do ordinarily labor; and as for the
change of Estate, it was signified by this, in that the earth being labored by
the Oxen, altered its condition and shape; and as touching the ten Ears of
Corn, they signified the like number of years: Archelaus's Sovereignty should
be at an end. Thus interpreted he this Dream. And the fifth day after the
Vision thereof, Archelaus's Agent, by Caesar's Command, came into Jewry to
summon him to Rome. Some such like matter happened to Glaphyra, his Wife also,
the Daughter of King Archelaus: She (as we have said) married Alexander,
Herod's Son, when she was a Maid, and Brother to this Archelaus; who being put
to death by his Father, she was married the second time to Juba King of
Mauritania; and he also being dead, she living with her Father in Cappadocia,
was married to Archelaus; who put away Mariamne his Wife, for the love he bare
unto Glaphyra. She living with Archelaus, Glaphyra's Dream.
had such a Dream: She thought she saw Alexander by her, she cherishing and
Glaphyra, Thou verifiest that Proverb, which says, Women have no Loyalty. For
having given me thy faith, and married with me at such time as thou were a
Virgin, and born Children by me, thou have forgotten and neglected my love,
thorough the desire thou have had to be married the second time. Archelaus,
thou art content to admit my Brother for thy Husband. Notwithstanding this, I
will not forget the love that I have born thee, but will deliver thee from him,
who has done thee this reproach, by retaining thee for mine own, as heretofore
thou have been. After that she had told this Vision to some women that were her
Familiars, she died very shortly after. Which accident I have thought good to
register in this place, in that I was to treat of those things; and otherwise
the matter seems to be a notable example, containing a most certain argument
of the Immortality of Souls, and God's Providence. And if any one think these
things incredible, let Cyrenius Censor of Syria.
Now when the Government of Archelaus was united to Syria, Cyrenius who had
been Consul, was sent by Caesar to tax Syria, and to dispose of Archelaus's
house.


Written by FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Eighteenth Book.
1. Judas and Sadoc taking an opportunity by virtue of the Tax which was
imposed upon Judea, endeavor to establish a fourth Sectary, and kindled a
great Civil War. 2. Of the four sorts of Sectaries that were among the Jews. 3.
Salome's death, the Sister of Herod the Great. Augustus's death, whom Tyberius
succeeds. Herod the Tetrarch caused the Town of Tyberias to be built, in honor
of Tyberius. The Troubles among the Parthians, and in Armenia: Other
Disturbances in the Kingdom of the Comagenes. Germanicus is sent from Rome to
the East, to establish the Authority of the Empire: He is poisoned by Piso.
Pilat, Governor of Judea, had suffered the Imperial Standards to be brought
into Jerusalem, having the Emperor's Picture on them; that he was forced to
cause them to be carried out again. The Commendations and Praises of JESUS
CHRIST. A horrid injury done to a Roman Lady by the Goddess Isis's Priests: how
Tyberius punished them. 5. Tyberius causes all the Jews to be banished from
Rome. Pilat punishes the Samaritans, for having drawn themselves together in
Arms: They accuse him to Vitellius Governor of Syria, who sends him to Rome to
clear himself. 6. Vitellius restores the High Priest's Vestments to the Jews,
to keep as they did formerly: Tyberius's behalf, with Artobanus King of the
Parthians: The cause of his hatred against Herod the Tetrarch. Philip, Tetrarch
of Trachonitis, of Gaulanitis, and of Bathanaea, dies without Children; his
Dominions are reunited to Syria. 7. A War between Aretas King of Petra, and
Herod the Tetrarch; who having married his Daughter, would repudiate her, to
marry Herodias, Aristobulus's Daughter, and his Brother Herod's Wife. Herod's
Army is totally routed, and the Jews impute it to John the Baptist's
Imprisonment. Herod the Great's Posterity. 8. By what several Accidents of
Fortune, Agrippa, surnamed the Great, who was Aristobulus's Herod the Great's
Grandchild and Mariamne's, was made King of the Jews by the Emperor Caius
Caligula, as soon as he had succeeded Tyberius. 9. Herodias, Herod the
Tetrarch's Wife, and King Agrippa's Sister, being impatient to see her Brother
reign in so much Prosperity, compels her Husband to go to Rome, to obtain a
Crown also; but Agrippa having written to Caius against him, he banisheth him
and his Wife to Lions in France. 10. The Sedition of the Jews and Grecians, in
the City of Alexandria. 11. Caius commands Petronius Governor of Syria, to
compel the Jews by force of Arms, Petronius mollified by their Prayers, writes
to Caius in the Jews behalf. 12. Two Jews called Asinaeus and Anilaeus, both
Brother, and of a mean extraction, become so powerful near Babylon, that they
give enough to do to the Parthians: Sylesia, unite against the Jews, and kill
fity thousand of them unawares.


CHAP. I.
Judas and Sadoc taking an opportunity by virtue of the Tax which was imposed
upon all Judea, endeavor to establish a fourth Sectary, and kindled a great
Civil War.
CYrenius the Roman Senator having passed through all Degrees, The year of the
World, 3973. after Christ's Nativity. 11.
Offices and Dignities, until such time as he obtained the Consulship, (a man
of great account) was sent into Syria by Caesar's order, to do justice among
the people, and to sess and tax every man's goods: Coponius a Captain of Horse
was sent with him, who was appointed to be Governor of all Jewry. Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 1.
Cyrenius therefore came into Judea, which was already united to Syria, to tax
the Goods of the Inhabitants thereof, Cyrenius is sent by Caesar, into Syria,
to execute Justice in that place.
and to confiscate Archelaus's Substance. And although at the first the Jews
thought this Tax very unreasonable, yet notwithstanding Joazar the Son of
Boethus. But after this there arose a certain Jew called Judas the Gaulanite,
Coponius Prefect of Judaea.
born in the Town of Gamala; who having a certain man called Sadoc the
Pharisee, Confederate with him, labored to stir up the people to Rebellion:
The Taxation of the people of the Jews.
alleging that the Sess was no other thing, but a confession of their
servitude; exhorting all the Nation to maintain their liberty, and putting them
in hope that they thereby should happily establish their estates, Alias, chap.
3.
and enjoy their goods with security; and besides this, obtain both honor and
glory in prosecution of such an enterprise. Moreover, that God would not afford
them a more assured way to settle their Fortunes, than by this means; namely,
if they would employ themselves Slaughters Thefts, Seditions and Famine in
Judaea*
There was nothing but Robberies and Murders of the Nobility, under pretense
to establish the state of the Commonweal, but in effect for their private
profit The Temple of Jerusalem burnt.
that they consumed the Temple of God, and burned all the stately buildings. So
dangerous a thing it is to change the Customs and Manners of a Country. For
Judas and Sadoc having introduced and raised a fourth Sect, Judas and Sado^ the
Authors of the fourth Sect.
and tying the Sectaries to their command, filled the whole Commonweal with
many troubles; and planted the roots of those mischiefs, which afterward spread
abroad from this unaccustomed


Of the four sorts of Sectaries that were among the Jews.
THere were three Sects among the Jews of long continuance and Antiquity; Hedio
and Ruffinus, c. 11. al 5*
that of the Esseans, that of the Saducees, and that of those who were called
Pharisees. Of these we have spoken in our second Book, Three Sects of whom
mention is made in the second Book of the Wars of the Jews.
of the Wars of the Jews; and yet now I think it not amiss to speak somewhat of
them in this place also. The Pharisees use a very austere and strict kind of
life, and addict not themselves to any delicacy, but diligently The Pharisees
Doctrine.
and yet they take not an assent of will from man; supposing that God tempereth
all things in such sort, that by his Ordinance and man's will all things are
performed, good or evil. They believe also, that the Souls of men are immortal;
and that after death they receive their reward, according as they have addicted
themselves to virtue or vice in their life times; the one to lie in perpetual
Prison, the other to rise again very shortly. For which cause they are in great
esteem among the people; and all that which appertains to the service of God,
whether they be Prayers or Sacrifices, all things are done according as they
give direction. So ample a Testimony The Saducees opinion.
temperance and honest life. But the Saducees are of that opinion, that the
Souls of men perish with their Bodies. They observe no other thing but that
which is in the Law; and hold it a Virtue to dispute with their Masters,
concerning the Decrees of their Sect. Their opinion is entertained by very few;
yet such, who for the most part are men of the best account; there is hardly
any thing done without their advice: And when they are advanced to any honors,
they are enforced to allow of that which the Pharisees shall propose; otherwise
the common people will not endure them. The Esseans Opinion.
The Esseans attribute unto God the Government and disposition of all things.
They say that the Souls of men are immortal; and all the uttermost of their
endeavor and delight is, to maintain Justice and Equity. They send their
Offerings The Esseans life and manners.
and sacrifice apart. Otherwise, they are men of most reconciled behavior,
and such as are wholly addicted to cultivate their Land. They have one custom
which is worthy admiration, and such a one as is not to be found amongst any
other, either Greeks or Barbarians, that make account of virtue, which they
have practiced from all Antiquity; which is, that they possess their goods in
common; neither does the richest among them make more use of his possessions,
than he that has least of all. They are at least four thousand in number, who
have neither Wives nor Slaves; supposing that Women are the occasion of
injustice, and Slaves do cause insurrections; Plisti among the Danes.
In a word, they follow the same course of life that they do, Judas ^alilaeus
the Author of the fourth Sect.
who are called Plisti among the Danes. The fourth Sect was founded by Judas of
Galilee, which accords altogether and in all things with the Pharisees, but
they are extremely zealous of their liberty, acknowledging but one only God,
Lord and Master of all things; and had rather both themselves with their
dearest Children and Kindred, should endure the most grievous and bitter
torments that may be imagined than call any mortal man their Lord. Of which
constancy of theirs I forbear to discourse any further at this time, for it is
sufficiently known unto diverse, who have been Gessius Florus our Governor,
Gessius Florus 's injuries.
by which means at length it came to pass, that they revolted and rebelled
against the people of Rome. Thus much concerning the Sects among the Jews.

CHAP. III.
Salome's death, the Sister of Herod the Great. Augustus's death, whom Tyberius
succeeds. Herod the Tetrarch caused the Town of Tyberias to be built, in honor
of Tyberius. The Troubles among the Parthians, and in Armenia: Other
Disturbances in the Kingdom of the Comagenes. Germanicus is sent from Rome to
the East, to establish the Authority of the Empire: He is poisoned by Piso.
AFter that Cyrenius had confiscated Archelaus's Goods, Hedio and Ruffinus,
chap. 3.
and finished the valuation of Antonies overthrow by Caesar in the Actian
Battle) he deposed Joazar from the Priestly Dignity, Ananus the Son of Seth
made High Priest in Joazar's place.
by reason of that Sedition which the people stirred up against him, and
established Ananus the Son of Seth in his place. But Herod and Philip took each
of them the possession of their Tetrarchy, Alias, cap. 6.
and disposed of the Affairs thereof. Herod enclosed Sephoris with a strong
Wall, Sephoris chief City of Galilee.
and made it the chiefest City and Ornament of Galilee: He fortified also
another City called Bataramphtha, and named it Julias, in honor of Julia the
Emperor Caesar's Wife. Betaramphtha called Julias, Paneas, Bethsaida.
Philip repaired Paneada, situated near unto the head of Jordan, and called it
Caesar^a; he repaired also the Borough of Bethsaida, near unto the Lake of
Genezareth, and gave it the dignity of a City, both for the number of the
Inhabitants, as for Men's bones scattered in the Temple.
and called it Julia, by Caesar's Wives name. As for Coponius the Governor in
Judaea, who (as we have said) was sent with Cyrenius, in his time there happened
that which follows. At the Feast of Unlevened Bread, which we call Pascha,
the custom was that the Priests opened the Temple Gates about midnight, The
year of the World, 3974. after Christ's Nativity, 12.
at which time certain Samaritans, who secretly entered into Jerusalem, as soon
as the Gates were open, spread men's bones amidst the Porches, and over all the
Temple; whereby it came to pass, that the Priests began to keep a more diligent
watch, than they had done before.

Some little while after, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap 4.
Coponius returned to Rome, and Marcus Ambivius succeeded him in the
Government. In his time Salome, King Herod's Sister, departing out of this
life, bequeathed unto Julia the City of Jamnia, and all the Lands and Country
round The year of the World, 3975. after Christ's Nativity, 13.
she gave her also Phasaelis, situate on the Plain; and Archelais, where there
are diverse Date Trees, bearing most excellent fruit. After Ambivius, Annius
Rufus had the Command, in whose time died Augustus Caesar, the second Roman
Emperor, after he had reigned fifty seven years, six months and two days; and
had Antonius his Co-partner in the Monarchy for the space of fourteen years.
The year of the World, 3977. after Christ's Nativity, 15.
He lived in the whole seventy seven years.

After Caesar succeeded Tiberius Nero, the Son of Julia his Wife, who was the
third Roman Emperor. He it was that sent the fifth Governor into Judaea,
whose name was Valerius Gratus, who succeeded Annius Rufus. This Gratus deposed
Ananus, and appointed Ismael the Son of Fabius High Priest; The year of the
World, 3978. after Christ's Nativity, 16.
and after his decease (for he lived but a Eleazar the Son of Ananus was made
High Priest. A year after, this Eleazar was also deposed, and the Priesthood
was given to Simon the Son of Camithus; who continuing in this dignity for a
year's space and no longer, Joseph called Caiphas succeeded him. The year of
the World, 3979. after Christ's Nativity* 17.
After Gratus had behaved himself thus, he returned to Rome, after he had
remained in Judaea for the space of eleven years. After him came Pontius
Pilate, and succ^eded him in the Government. But Herod the Tetrarch being
entertained into Tiberius's Friendship, builded a City in honor of his name,
and called it Tiberias. He planted it in the fruitfullest part of Galilee, hard
by the Lake Genezareth, and near unto the natural Baths in the Borough called
Emmans. The year of the World, 3980. after Christ's Nativity, 18.
This City was peopled by strangers, who resorted thither from all parts, and
by diverse of the Countries Galilee; some of which were constrained to inhabit
the same. Some of those likewise, who were in authority repaired thither; and
from all Countries, many flocked thither, who were not all assuredly held to be
Freemen; all which he made free, and gave them great gifts, on that condition,
that they should not abandon the City. To some of them he gave houses already
builded, to others Lands very apt to be tilled, knowing that the inhabiting of
such a place was contrary to the Laws and Customs of his Country, Tyberias
builded.
and the Ordinances of the Jews; for that Tiberias was builded in a place full
of Sepulchers; Phraates King of the Parthians, slain by the Treason of
Phraataces his Son.
and our Law says, he that converseth in those places, is held unclean and
defiled for the space of seven days.

At that very time Phraates King of Parthia died, being treacherously killed by
his Son Phraataces, for this cause: After that Phraates had begotten many
lawful Children, he took an Italian woman to be his Concubine, called Thermusa;
whom with other Julius Caesar had sent unto him. The year of the World, 3990.
after Christ's Nativity, 28.
After he had begorten on her his Son Phraataces, he was so much besotted with
her beauty, that he took her to his Wife, and held her in high esteem. She that
might persuade him unto all that she pleased, enforced her self to the
uttermost, to make her Son King of Parthia; and seeing that she might not
attain thereunto, Thermusa, Phraataces 's Mother.
except she had first found out the means to deliver her self of Phraates's
lawful Children, she persuaded him to send them Hostages to Rome. In a word,
they were presently sent away, because Phraates had not the power to contradict
Thermusa's Will, and only Phraataces was brought up in State Affairs; who
thinking the time too tedious and long, if he should expect the Kingdom till
his Father was dead, conspired against him by the instigation and furtherance
of his Mother, with whom Phraataces slain.
In effect, being equally attainted of those two enormous Crimes, both for the
murder of his Father, and Incest committed with his Mother, he was generally
hated by his Subjects, who rebelled against him before he was settled in his
Kingdom. By this means his Fortune was overthrown, and he died. The Noble men
among the Parthians, perceiving that it was impossible for them to maintain
their State without a King, and that their King ought lineally to be descended
of the Race of the Arsacians (because by custom they might not choose any out of
another stock) and supposing that their Ordinances had too much already been
broken, and that it would redound to their great dishonor, if the Kingdom
should be continued in the hands of such a man, who was descended from an
Italian Concubine, they sent Herod to come and be their King; Herod sent for by
the Parthians, and slain in hunting.
who otherwise was hated of all the people, and accused of extreme cruelty: In
a word, he was an unsociable man, and extremely choleric, notwithstanding he
was of the Blood of the Arsacides; they therefore flocked about him, and killed
him at a Banquet made at a certain Sacrifice (for the custom of the Parthians
was, that every one bare his weapon) or as the common report was, that he was
killed when he was a hunting. For this cause they sent Ambassadors to Rome,
requiring that one of those that were Hostages there might be their King; and
one Vonones was sent unto them, who was preferred above all his Brethren. For
he seemed to be capable of that high Degree of honor, as to command two of the
greatest Sovereignties that were under the Sun; the one of his own Nation,
Artabanus King of Media, who was of the Race of the Arsacides. To this request
of theirs he willingly condescended, and came unto them with his Army, and
Vonones marched forward against him. At the first encounter, although the
common sort among the Parthians favored Artabanus, yet he was overcome,
Vonones King of the Parthians put to flight by Artabanus.
and fled to the Mountains of Media. But not long after, having assembled a
Vonones, and defeated him; at which time Vonones retired himself with some
Horsemen of his, into Seleucia. But Artabanus having made a great slaughter of
those that fled, and wholly abashed the minds of the Barbarians, he retired to
the City of Ctesiphon, with those people that accompanied him, and was
afterward made King of Parthia. Vonones arrived in Armenia, and at the first,
sought to make himself King over that Nation, sending to this effect certain
Ambassadors to Rome; but Tiberius repulsed his suit in respect of his
Cowardice; but the rather because Artabanus, by an express Embassage, had
threatened him with War. For those of the greatest power among the Armenians
(who are those that dwell about the Flood Niphates) maintained Artabanus's
Title; Vonones submits to Syllanus Governor of Syria.
and Vonones, destitute of all hope to obtain the Syllanus, who was Governor
of Syria; and in regard that he had been brought up at Rome, he was kept in
Syria; and Artabanus gave Armenia to Orodes, Orodes King of Armenia.
one of his Sons. Antiochus King of the Comagenes died also at that time,
Antiochus King of Comagena.
and there fell a debate betwixt the Commons and the Nobility; so that both
parties sent their Ambassadors to Rome. The Nobles demanded that the Kingdom
might be reduced into diverse Provinces; and the people requested that they
might be honored by a King, Germanicus poisoned by Piso's means.
as they had been accustomed. The Senate decreed that Germanicus should be sent
to settle the affairs of the East, Fortune thereby presenting him with the
occasion of his ruin. For, when he arrived in the East, and orderly disposed
all things he was poisoned by Piso, whereof he died; as is declared in another
place.

CHAP. IV.
The Jews are so highly offended that Pilat, Governor of Judea, had suffered
the Imperial Standards to be brought into Jerusalem, having the Emperor's
Picture on them; that he was forced to cause them to be carried out again. The
Commendations and Praises of JESUS CHRIST. A horrid injury done to a Roman Lady
by the Goddess Isis's Priests: how Tyberius punished them.
PIlate Governor of Judaea led his Army from Caesarea to Jerusalem, Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 6. alias, chap. 8.
where he wintered them with an intent to bring in Caesar's Standards into the
City, in contempt Pilate brings Caesar's Statues to Jerusalem, and upon the
peoples instant motion transferreth them to Caesarea.
which forbids us to make images. For which cause, those Governors that
were before him, were wont to make their entries into the City without such
Pictures or Paintings. Pilate was the first, who unawares, and by night entered
Jerusalem, bringing with him his Images. Which when the people understood, in
great multitudes they resorted to Caesarea, beseeching him for many days, that
he would transport those Images into some other place. But when Pilate denied
them to perform their request, because the matter would redound to Caesar's
dishonor, and the Jews also ceased not to solicit him; some six days after
commanding his Soldiers to lie in Ambush in a readiness, The year of the World,
3997. after Christ's Nativity* 35.
he sat him down in the Tribunal within the Hippodrome; making use of the
opportunity of the place, for that it was most fit for a Stratagem. Pilate
amazed at the constancy they showed in the conservation of their Laws, suddenly
caused Caesar's Images to be transported out of Jerusalem, Pilat seeking to
draw certain Springs of Water to Jerusalem, stireth up a Rebellion.
into Caesarea: And not long after he intended to take Money out of the Sacred
Treasury, to cause water to be brought into the City through Conduits, from a
Fountain more than two hundred Furlongs off; which the people took so ill, that
diverse thousands of men assembled themselves, exclaiming against Pilate;
endeavoring thereby to make him give over his Enterprise. Some of them also
uttered diverse injurious speeches against him, as it ordinarily falls out
amongst an unbridled multitude. The year of the World, 3998. after Christ's
Nativity, 36.
But he caused them to be encompassed by a great number of his Soldiers,
attired in popular habit, with cudgels, as soon as they began to exclaim
against him, he gave a sign to his Soldiers; they, as it was before commanded
them, made use of their cudgels; and without distinction of persons, fell on
all those whom they had encompassed; and so unmercifully laid on them, who were
naked and disarmed, that some of them were killed, others grievously hurt; and
after this manner was the Tumult and Sedition appeased.

At that time was JESUS, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 6. Alias, cap. 9.
a wise man, if it be lawful to call him a man. For he was Pilate, and
afterward condemned to the Cross by him; Jesus Christ crucified by Pilat.
yet did not those who followed him from the beginning, forbear to love him for
the Ignominy of his death. For he appeared alive to them the third day after,
according as the Divine Prophets had before testified the same, and diverse
other wonderful things of him: And from that time forward the Race of the
Christians, who have derived their name from him, has never ceased.

At that time also there fell out another accident, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap.
7. alias, chap. 10.
which very sorely troubled the Isis at Rome, there were many shameful acts
committed. But I will first of all relate the accident in the Temple of Isis;
and then will I declare that which befell the Jews. There was in Rome a Lady
called Paulina, renowned both for the Nobility of her house, as also through
her study and exercise of Virtue. Besides this, she was very rich, and with her
Riches beautiful, and in her flourishing years; and notwithstanding, a very
Mirror of chastity. She was married to a certain Noble man called Saturnine,
that equalled her in all those her excellent perfections. A certain young man
called Decius Mundus, one of the Knights of greatest account at that time, fell
in love with her. But she was of that disposition, that it was impossible for
him to corrupt her by Presents; and the more she refused those infinite
Mundus's heart enflamed with ardent affection; so that to enjoy her but one
only night, he offered her two hundred thousand Mundus's Father, whose name was
Ida, expert in all sorts of subtilties; who being sore grieved to behold the
young man's resolution, whom she saw wholly addicted to a desperate death; she
addressed her self unto him, and encouraged him with hope; promising him to
bring him to Paulina's speech, by the means of a certain Bribe which she
intended to offer. He rejoicing very much at her motion, demanded what sum
should serve her: who, requiring nothing more Paulina; he furnished her
presently. When by this means she had quickened the young man's spirit, and
received all that which she demanded, she steered not the same course which
others had kept, that had the solicitation of the matter before, seeing she saw
that money would not tempt her; but knowing that she was deeply devoted to the
service of Isis, she practiced this subtle and unexpected policy. She addressed
her self to certain Priests of the Temple; and upon great hopes, and offer of
great Presents, and paying them down at present twenty and five thousand
Drachmes, and promising them as much more upon the performance of the bargain;
she disclosed unto them the passionate love which the young man bare unto
Paulina, exhorting them to work so wisely that he might enjoy her. They
Paulina; and having free access unto her presence, he required that he might
have conference with her in secret; which when he had obtained, he told her
that he was sent unto her by God Anubis, in that the God was surprised with her
love, and desired that she would come unto him. Paulina took great pleasure in
this his discourse, and told her Familiars how she had been honored with the
amorous solicitation of a God, and certified her Husband, how God Anubis would
lie with her: Whereunto he consented, knowing how great his Wife's chastity
was. She therefore repaired to the Temple; and after she had supt, and the time
was come wherein she was usually accustomed to lay her down to Mundus, who lay
hid within, failed not to accost her: who, thinking that it was God Anubis,
satisfied his desires all the night long; and in the morning betimes before the
Priests, who were privy to this Treachery, were stirring, he retired himself:
Paulina also, early in the morning repaired to her Husband, and acquainted him
how Anubis appeared unto her; and boasting among her Familiars, what conference
he had used with her: But some of them believed her not, in regard of the
manner of their entertainment; the rest were altogether amazed, supposing those
things to be no ways incredible, when they bethought themselves of the Ladies
chastity. Some three days after this act was committed, Mundus meeting with
Paulina, said You have saved me two hundred thousand Drachmes, wherewith you
might have augmented your Treasure; and this notwithstanding, you have not
failed to satisfy my request: Neither am I grieved that you have contemned me
under the name of Mundus; since that undertaking Anubis 's name, I have
accomplished my desire; and this said, he departed. But she, presently amazed
with the man's audacious impudence, tore her Garments; and having told her
Husband of all this subtle circumvention, she requested earnestly his
assistance, and that he would not forsake her in the prosecution of her
revenge; who presently acquainted the Emperor with every particular thereof.
Now when Tiberius had diligently understood how all things had happened,
Tiberius causes Is^s's Priests, and Ida to be hanged, and banished Mundu^*
by the inquisition and examination of the Priests, he condemned them and Ida,
who had been the Paulina, to be hanged: He pulled down the Temple also, and
cast Anubis's Statue into Tyber, and banished Mundus; supposing that he ought
not to be more grievously punished, considering that the fault which was
committed by him, proceeded from extreme love: Behold here the insolence
committed in the Temple of Isis, by the Priests that appertained to that
Temple. Now I intend to declare that which happened to the Jews that were at
that time in Rome, according as I both purposed and promised.

CHAP. V.
Tiberius causes all the Jews to be banished from Rome. Pilate punishes the
Samaritans, for having drawn themselves together in Arms: They accuse him to
Vitellius Governor of Syria, who sends him to Rome to clear himself.
There was a certain Jew, Fulvia, Saturnine's Wife delivers Gold and Purple
to be sent to the Temple in Jerusalem, they convert it to their own uses;
which, when Tiberius knew, he commanded all the Jews to be thrust out of Rome.
that having been accused for the breach of the Laws of his Country, and
fearing to be punished for the same, fled from thence, being a man of a most
mischievous behavior. He dwelling at that time in Rome, professed himself to
be an expounder of Moses's Law; and drawing to him three other, no Fulvia, a
Lady of much honor, became their Scholar, and had embraced the Religion of the
Jews; whom they had persuaded to send certain Purple and Gold to the Temple of
Jerusalem; which after they had received, they converted it to their own use,
as before they had determined to do. Tiberius, who was informed hereof by
Saturnine his familiar Friend, and Fulvia's Husband, who had discovered the
same unto him; commanded all Jews whatsoever to depart out of Rome. Of these
the Consuls chose out and enrolled to the number of four thousand men, whom
they sent into Sardinia; and punished diverse of them that refused to bear Arms,
for fear they should transgress the Ordinances of their Country. So that by
reason of the loose behavior of four wicked Rome.

Neither was the Nation of the Samaritans exempt from this trouble: for a
certain subtle Companion, who sought by all the means he might, to encroach
upon the peoples favor, persuaded them to withdraw themselves with him to the
Mount Gerazim (which they supposed to be the holiest amongst all their
Mountains) in which place, he promised he would show them the Sacred Vessels
buried in a certain place, where Moses had laid them: The Samaritans assemble
at Tirathaba, to ascend the Mountain Garazim: Pilate charge, and overcomes
them, and puts them to flight.
And at that time they being gathered together in Arms, by his persuasion,
encamped themselves in a Borough called Tirathaba, where they entertained those
that repaired thither, to join themselves with them, to the end, they might
ascend the Mountain with the greater Company: But Pilate prevented them, Pilate
executed the chiefest Ringleaders amongst them. The tumult of these Jews being
published abroad, and their misfortune made known, the Senate of Samaria
addressed themselves to Vitellius, who had been Consul, and who at that time
governed Syria; before whom they accused Pilate, for the murder of those whom
he had killed, saying, that they assembled not in Tirathaba to rebel against
the Romans, but to secure themselves against Pilate's Tyranny. Whereupon
Vitellius sent Marcus his Friend to take charge of Judaea, Alias, chap. 1
commanding Pilate to return to Rome, and to satisfy the Emperor of Pilate
accused before Vitellius, is sent to Rome.
Hereupon Pilate, after he had remained ten years in Jewry, repaired to Rome,
having no means to contradict that Command that Vitellius had given him. But
before he arrived there, Tiberius was dead.

CHAP. VI. Hadio and Ruffinus, chap. 8. alias, chap. 12.

Vitellius restores the High Priest's Vestments to the Jews, Vitellius comes
to Jerusalem, forgiveth the Jews their Tribute, and commits the charge of
the High Priest's Garments to them.
to keep as they did formerly: He treats in Tiberius's behalf, with Artobanus
King of the Parthians: The cause of his hatred against Herod the Tetrarch.
Philip, Tetrarch of Trachonitis, of Gaulanitis, and of Bathanaea, dies without
Children; his Dominions are reunited to Syria.
AS soon as Vitellius came into Judaea, he went up to Jerusalem, and celebrated
there the Feast of the Passover; The High Priest's Vestments reserved in the
Castle of Antonia.
and after he had been magnificently entertained in that place, he forgave the
Citizens all the Tribute of those Fruits which were sold. He delivered them
also the Ornaments of the High Priests, with all the Antonia, for this cause
which follows: Hircanus the High Priest, the first of that name, having
builded a Tower near unto the Temple, did for the most part make his Residence
therein, and there kept his Vestments that were committed to his charge, the
rather for that he only had the Authority to put them on, and return them into
their place at such time as he came down into the City, and put on his
accustomed Raiment. His Successors did the same, till Herod being exalted to
the Kingdom; and seeing this Tower to be strongly situated, builded the same
most magnificently, and called it Antonia, in honor of Antony his great
friend. And having found these Vestments in the place, he retained them with
him, assuring himself, the people would attempt nothing against him. Archelaus
his Son, and Successor Herod had done. But after that the Romans had obtained
the Sovereignty thereof, they kept the High Priest's Ornaments in their hands,
and reserved them in a place builded for that purpose, under the Seal of the
Priests; and the Governor of those that kept the Sacred Treasure, lighted the
Lamp every day in that place: Every seventh day before the Feast, the Governor
delivered them into the High Priest's hands; and after they were purified, he
put them on to do Divine Service, and the next day after the Feast he returned
them again to the same place where they were kept before; which custom was
observed thrice every year, in the time of a Fast. Vitellius advanced Jonathan
the Son of Ananus to the Priesthood, and degradeth Joseph surnamed Caiaphas.
But Vitellius returned those Ornaments into the hands of the Priests,
according to the ancient Orders; leaving them to be used when need required;
commanding the Joseph, surnamed Caiaphas; and advanced Jonathan, the Son of
Ananus, to that Dignity, and afterward returned to Antioch.

At that time he received Letters from Tiberius, by which he commanded him to
capitulate and conclude a Friendship with Artabanus, the King of the Parthians
(whose hatred he suspected and feared, lest, seizing on Armenia, he should work
farther mischief against the State of Rome) desiring him to assure the League
by Hostages, and namely, with Artabanus's Son. After Tiberius had written these
Letters above mentioned unto Vitellius, he persuaded the Kings of Iberia and
Alania by great store of Artabanus: But the Iberians would not be drawn
thereunto; yet they suffered the Alanes to march thorough their Country, and
opened them their Gates of the Mount Caspius, to give them passage to invade
Artabanus. The Parthians lose Armenia.
Thus once more was Armenia conquered, and the Country of the Parthians was
invaded, whereby the chiefest among them were killed. The King's Son also was
killed in those Conflicts, with diverse Thousands of his Army. Such things as
happened between Vitellius and Artabanus.
Moreover, Vitellius having sent money to a Kinsman and Friend of Artabanus,
pretended to corrupt him, to make Artabanus away. But Artabanus perceiving the
Plot that was intended against him; and seeing that he could not escape,
because it was attempted by a great number of the best accounted Nobles within
his Artabanus rostored to his Kingdom by the Danes and Swedes.
rather than to put himself in hazard, and resort unto them who had already
betrayed and forsaken him. Arriving in that place he assembled a a great number
of Soldiers of the Countries of Danes and Swedes; and having fought against
them who had opposed themselves against him, he recovered his Kingdom. A League
betwixt Vitellius and Artabanus.
When Tiberius had tidings hereof, he endeavored to draw Artabanus into
Friendship with him; which when Artabanus had notice of, he willingly admitted;
so that Artabanus and Vitellius met together near Euphrates, and, by the means
of a Herod's Banquet in the midst of Euphrates.
they debated the matter together; being each of them attended by their Guards.
After that they had concluded the Peace, Herod the Tetrarch feasted them in a
very magnificent Pavilion, erected in the midst of the River, Artabanus sends
Tiberius his Son in Hostage, and a Jew seven cubits high.
with great cost. And not long after, Vitellius sent Darius, Artabanus's Son,
in Hostage to Rome, with diverse Presents, amongst which there was a man seven
Cubits high, a Jew born, who was named Eleazar, who was called a Giant, by
reason of his stature. That done, Vitellius returned to Antioch, and Artabanus
to Babylon. But Herod, desirous to be the first that should advertise Caesar of
the receipt of these Hostages, Herod advertiseth the Emperor of all things,
before Vitellius's Letters came to his hands.
sent an express with Letters, by which he fully satisfied him of all that
which had happened, omitting nothing for the Consul to acquaint him; so that
after Vitellius's Letters Caesar had already assured him of the true
information that Herod had given him, Vitellius was much troubled: and
suspecting, lest he had received a greater injury, than the matter made show
for; he conceived in his heart a secret spite which continued until Tiberius
was dead, and Caius obtained the

At that time also Philip, Herod's Brother died, in the twentieth year of
Tiberius's Reign, after he had reigned himself for the space of seven and
thirty years, in Trachonitis, Gaulonitis and Bathanaea. During all the time of
his Government, he behaved himself very peaceably; for he made his abode within
his own Dominion. He walked, being accompanied with a small number of his
chosen servants, and had that seat carried after him, wherein he was accustomed
to fit and do justice; to the end, that if any one presented himself, and
required his assistance, he might, without delay, do him right. Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 9. alias, chap. 13.
For upon the first motion, the seat was placed in that part wherein the
Plaintiff met him; and being seated therein, he examined the cause, punishing
those that Juliade, and was buried in the Sepulcher which he himself had caused
to be built; The year of the World, 4000. after Christ's Nativity, 38.
and his Obsequies were performed with great Solemnity and Majesty. And for
that he left no Heirs Males behind him, Tiberius seized on his Estate, which he
united to the Government of Syria; ordaining that the Tributes that were gained
in his Tetrarchy, should be kept within the bounds of the same Country.

CHAP. VII.
A War between Aretas King of Petra, and Herod the Tetrarch; who having married
his Daughter, would repudiate her, to marry Herodias, Aristobulus's Daughter,
and his Brother Herod's Wife. Herod's Army is totally routed, and the Jews
impute it to John the Baptist's Imprisonment. Herod the Great's Posterity.
MEan while Aretas, King of Arabia Petraea, and Herod, fell at strife, the one
with the other, Herod the Tetrarch puts away Aretas Daughter, and marries
Herodias his Brother Herod's Wife.
for this cause that ensues: Herod the Tetrarch married Aretas's Daughter,
with whom he had lived married a very long time. Afterward, taking his journey
toward Rome, he lodged with Herod his half Brother by the Herod was the Son of
Simon's Daughter, which Simon was the High Priest) and there being surprised
with the love of Herodias, his Brother's Wife, which was the Daughter of
Aristobulus their Brother, and Sister to the Great Agrippa; he was so bold as
to propose Marriage to her, which was to be performed as soon as he returned
back from Rome; and to repudiate Aretas's Daughter. After he had ratified those
Covenants, he continued his Voyage to Rome; from whence he no sooner returned,
and performed that for which he went, but his Wife (who had some privy notice
of the Conventions which were made betwixt him and Herodias) before he
suspected that she knew thereof, required him to send her to the Castle of
Macheron, Herod's Wife returned into her own Country.
which was the Frontier Town Herod's and Aretas's Countries; without
acquainting him any ways with her intent. Herod condescended unto her request,
thinking she was ignorant of his drift: But she, long before that time, had
taken order with the Governor of Macheron (which at that time was under her
Father's Government) to prepare all things for her journey; where being
arrived, she speedily posted into Arabia, under the Convoy of those Governors,
who received and conducted her, the one after the other. As soon as she arrived
in her Father's Court, she presently acquainted him with Herod's resolution;
whence arose the beginning of this discord between them. Therefore they both of
them assembled their Armies upon the Confines of the Country of Gamalite, and
fought under the Conduct of the two Generals, to whom they had committed
Herod's Army discomfited by the Arabians.
In this Battle Herod's Army was wholly defeated, through the Treason that was
plotted against him by certain banished men of Philip's Tetrarchy, which were
in pay with Herod. Tiberius got notice of all this, by those Letters which
Herod had written unto him; Tiberius commands Vitellius to make War against
Aretas.
and being very much displeased with Aretas, for his proud attempt, he
commanded Vitellius to make War against him; desiring him, that if he could
take him alive, he should send him bound unto him; but if dead, he should send
him his head.

Diverse Jews were of the opinion, that Herod's Army was overthrown by the just
vengeance of God, who punished him most justly, because of the Execution which
he caused to be done on John surnamed Baptist: Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 10.
alias, cap. 14.
For he had put this man to death, who Herod feared, lest his Subjects allured
by his Doctrine and Persuasions, should be drawn to revolt. For it seemed that
they would subscribe in all things to his advice; he therefore thought it
better to prevent a mischief by putting him to death, than to expect some
sudden Commotion, John Baptist slain by Herod.
which he might afterward repent. Upon this suspicion, Herod caused him to be
bound, and sent to the Castle of Macheron, whereof we have spoken heretofore;
and there he was put to death, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 16.
The Jews were of opinion, that in revenge of Herod's Army, against whom God
was displeased, had been subject to their utter ruin and overthrow. Vitellius
leads his Army against the King of Arabia.
But Vitellius being resolved to make War against Aretas, gathered together two
Legions, and all those Horse or Foot, that he could assemble amongst those
Kings, who were the Romans Allies; and marching toward Petra, he stayed at
Ptolemais, because he pretended to pass by Judaea. Which when the principal
Nobles amongst the Jews had notice of, The year of the World, 4001. after
Christ's Nativity, 39.
they went out to meet him; beseeching him that he would not pass thorough that
Country, because it was a custom amongst them not to see any Images born, such
as he had of diverse colors in his Army. Vitellius repaireth to Jerusalem, and
displaceth Jonathan, and prefers his Brother.
Whereunto he condescended; and having changed his purpose, he caused his Army
to march thorough the great Plain: As for himself, he came to Jerusalem Herod
the Tetrarch and his Friends, to offer Sacrifice to God upon the next Festival
day; where he was most magnificently received by all the people of the Jews. He
stayed for the space of three days, during which time, deposed Jonathan from
the High Priesthood, and gave it to Theophilus his Brother. The fourth day
Letters came to him, Caius Caligula succeeds after Tiberius.
that advertised him of Tiberius's death; for which cause he commanded the Oath
of Fidelity should be ministered to the people, in the new Emperor Caius's
behalf. He called back his Army also, and sent them to their Winter Quarters;
because it was not lawful for him to prosecute the War, by reason the Empire
was fallen unto Caius.

It is said, Aretas gathers by Auguries, that it was impossible for the Army
to come to Petra.
that Aretas hearing news of Vitellius's Expedition or Voyage, and after he
Petra; because he that had the command of the Expedition, or he that obeyed his
Ordinance in conducting the same, or he against whom the Army was conducted,
should die. Vitellius therefore, retired to Antioch. A year before the death of
Tiberius, Agrippa, Aristobulus's Son, came to Rome, to treat with the Emperor
about certain Affairs. But before I speak any thing hereof, I will relate
Herod's Progeny, both for that it is pertinent to this present Narration, and
also, that the greatness of God's Providence may appear; to the end that a man
may know, that neither the number of Children, nor any other humane force
whatsoever it be, can be available without the fear of God; considering that
within the space of one hundred years, or somewhat Herod's Line, which was very
populous and fruitful, was extinguished, a very few excepted. Whereby we are
given to understand what the misery of Mankind is, and learn to moderate our
selves. It is also expedient to speak something of Agrippa; who, amongst all
other, deserves admiration; that being a man wholly in Obscurity, and base in
Birth, he was exalted to such greatness, as no one of those that knew him,
would ever have thought his Fortune should have such success and power. And
although heretofore I have spoken somewhat of this matter, yet it is requisite
that I speak something more expressly thereof in this place. Herod the Great had
two Daughters born by by Mariamne, Hircanus's Daughter: The one of them which
was called Salampso, was married by Herod to Phasaelus, the Son of Phasaelus,
Herod's Brother: The other called Cypros, was married to Antipater her Cousin,
who was Salome's Son, who was Herod's Sister. Phasaelus had five Children by
Salampso; three Sons, Antipater, Herod, and Alexander; and two Daughters,
Alexandria and Cypros, whom Agrippa the Son of Aristobulus married; and
Alexandria was married to Timaeus of Cyprus, who was a man of great dignity,
and with whom she died without Issue. Cypros had by Agrippa her Husband, two
Sons, and three Daughters; Bernice, Mariamne and Drusilla; their two Sons were
called Agrippa and Drusus: Drusus died very young; but Agrippa was Brought up
by his Grandfather amongst his other Brethren, Herod, Aristobulus and Bernice.
These were Herod's Children, Son unto him who was surnamed the Great: Bernice
was Costobarus's Daughter, begotten Salome, Herod's Sister: Aristobulus died,
leaving his Children under age, under his Father's charge, with Alexander his
Brother, as we have already related. These attaining their full age, were thus
married; Herod, Brother to Agrippa, was matched with Mariamne, Olympias's
Daughter, who was Herod the Great his Daughter, and of Joseph, Herod's Brother;
by her he had his Son Aristobulus: Aristobulus, Agrippa's third Brother married
Jotape, the Daughter of Sampsigeram, King of the Emesenians: They had a
Daughter which likewise was called Jotape, which was deaf. These were the
Children begotten by Herod's three Sons. But Herodias their Sister married
Herod, the Son of Herod the Great, whom he begot on Mariamne, the Daughter of
Simon the High Priest, by whom Salome was begotten. After her birth, Herodias,
in contempt of the Laws of the Country, married her self with Herod, her
Husband's Brother, begotten of the same Father, being separated from him during
his life time, who was Tetrarch of Galilee. His Daughter Salome was married to
Philip, the Tetrarch of Trachonitis, Herod's Son: Who dying without Children,
Aristobulus married her, who was Herod's Son and Agrippa's Brother: They had
three Sons, Herod, Agrippa and Aristobulus. See here the Posterity of Phasaelus
and Salampson. Antipater, by Cypros, had a Daughter that likewise was called
Cypros, which was married to Alexas Selcius, the Son of Alexas; of whom he
begat a Daughter called likewise Cypros. As for Herod and Alexander, who (as I
said) were Antipater's Brothers, they died without Issue. Alexander, Herod's
Son, who was killed by his Father, begat Alexander and Tigranes on the Daughter
of Archelaus, King of Cappadocia: Tigranes being King of Armenia, died without
Issue, after he had been accused at Rome: Alexander had a Son called Tigranes,
after his Brother's name, who was sent by Nero, to reign in Armenia, who had a
Son called Alexander, who married Jotape, the Daughter of Antiochus, King of
Comagena: Alexander, by Vespasian, was elected King in Lesis, a City of
Cilicia. As soon as Alexander's Posterity began to multiply, they fell from
their Countrey-Religion; to ^^llow the customs of the Greeks. All the rest of
King Herod's Daughters died with^^^ issue. Having after this manner reckoned up
Herod's Posterity, which continued ^^^il such time that Agrippa the Great began
to reign: It remains at this time to declare what adventures befell this
Agrippa; and how he escaping his dangers, obtained at last so great Power ad
Dignity. (...) ^tained great Dignity and Power.


CHAP. VIII.
By what several Accidents of Fortune, Agrippa, surnamed the Great, who was
Aristobulus's Son, and Herod the Great's Grandchild and Mariamne's, was made
King of the Jews by the Emperor Caius Caligula, as soon as he had succeeded
Tyberius.
SOme little time before the death of King Herod, Agrippa living at Rome.
through his lavish Liberality grows into Necessity.
Agrippa was gone to Rome; where he came very well acquainted with Drusus,
Tyberius the Emperor's Son; and was beloved of Antonia, the Wife of Drusus the
Elder, by the means of his Mother Bernice, whom Antonia held in great esteem,
and to whom she had recommended Bernice was dead, and he became his own Master,
partly by his daily and bountiful entertainment and living, partly by his
immoderate Liberalities, but especially by his lavish Prodigality toward
Caesar's Free men, whose favor he hunted after, he was brought into extreme
Poverty, and could no more live at Rome; the rather for that Tiberius having
lost his Son, forbad his friends to come into his sight, lest their presence
should refresh and increase the sorrow he conceived for the loss of his Son.
For these causes he returned back into Judaea, having but badly ordered his
Affairs, Agrippa bethinketh himself how he might shorten his miserable life.
spent his money, and left himself no means to satisfy Malatha in Idumaea, to
pass away obscurely and miserably the rest of his time. Which purpose of his,
Cypros, Agrippa's Wife certifieth Herodias his Sister of his Poverty, and
requires her assistance.
when Cypros his Wife perceived, she endeavored by all means to prevent his
resolution: She wrote to Herodias his Sister, who was married to Herod the
Tetrarch, acquainted her both what Agrippa had decreed, as also by what
necessity he was enforced thereunto; and she exhorted her, that in regard of
affinity she would assist him, and imitate her in this, who, as much as in her
lay, relieved his misery, although her Fortunes were far weaker than hers.
Being therefore sent for by his Sister and Wife, Agrippa dwells at Tiberias.
he was commanded to dwell in Tiberias, and had a certain Sum of Money Herod
did not continue long time in that mind, although by the Tire in a certain
company, where he drank immoderately, Agrippa esteemed it for an extreme
injury, that Herod had upbraided him with his poverty, and hit him in the
teeth, that he maintained him at his charge. For which cause he withdrew
himself to Flaccus, Herod taunteth Agrippa with his Poverty.
who had been sometimes Consul at Rome, and for the present was President of
Syria, with whom he had been very familiar at Rome: Flaccus received him very
kindly, and had also done the like a good while before to Aristobulus,
Agrippa's Brother, who were both at variance between themselves; yet, Agrippa
retireth himself to Flaccus.
notwithstanding this Dissension between them, Flaccus entertained them both
with equal favor. But Aristobulus remitted nothing of his hatred he bare his
Brother, and never rested till he had Flaccus into dislike with his Brother,
Aristobulus draws Agrippa into Flaccus's disfavour.
upon this occasion: The Inhabitants of Damasco, contending with the Sidonians
about their limits, and being to debate their cause before Flaccus; knowing
what interest Agrippa had in him, they besought him that he would further their
Cause, promising him a great Sum of money: whereupon he addressed himself in
what he could, to further those of Damasco. But Aristobulus, who had an inkling
of this conclusion and promise, accused his Brother to Flaccus; and after
enquiry was made, and he found guilty of the Fact, Agrippa grew out of the
Presidents favor; and falling again into extreme poverty, he came to
Ptolemais; and having no way to subsist, he resolved to go into Italy. And
seeing he wanted Money, he commanded Marsyas his Freeman, that by all means
whatsoever, he should seek to Protus (who was Agrippa's Mother's Freeman, who,
by the Testament of his deceased Mistress, was left unto Antonius's protection)
that upon his Master's Bill and Promise, he would lend him some Money. But he
alleging that Agrippa before that time owed him money, Agrippa by Marsyas's
means, borrows money of Protus.
extorted from Marsyas a Bill of his hand for twenty thousand Attick Drachmes;
deducting out of that Sum two thousand and five hundred, which Marsyas took
for himself; which he might the more easily do, for that Agrippa could not
otherwise choose. Having therefore received this money, he went to Anthedon,
where getting Shipping, he prepared himself for the journey.

But when Herennius Capito, who was Treasurer of Jamnia, understood of his
being Agrippa, whilst Herennius Capito extorteth money at his hands, flies to
Alexandria by night,
he sent his Soldiers to him, to exact three hundred thousand silver Drachmes
at his hands, for which he stood indebted to Caesar's Treasurer, during his
being at Rome; by which means he was enforced to stay. Whereupon he made a show
that he would obey their demand; but as soon as it was night, he caused the
Cables of the Ship to be cut, and cast off, and sailed to Alexandria; there he
requested Alexander Alabarcha, to lend him two hundred thousand Drachmes in
Silver; he protested that he would trust him with nothing: Agrippa borrows
money at Alexandria.
But admiring Cypros, his Wife's constant love toward her Husband, and her many
other Virtues; he, upon her promise, condescended to do him a kindness:
Whereupon, in present money he paid him five Talents in Alexandria, and
promised to deliver him the rest of the money at Puteol, fearing Agrippa's
unthriftiness. Cypros having furnished her Husband for his Journey into Italy,
returned her self and her Children into Judaea by Land. Agrippa arriveth at
Puteol, and is admitted to Caesar's presence.
But Agrippa, as soon as he arrived at Puteol, wrote unto Tiberius Caesar, who
lived in Capreas, signifying unto him that he came to do his duty; beseeching
him that he would grant him free and favorable access. Tiberius, with all
expedition, returned him a very kind answer; assuring him, that he would be
very glad to see him safely arrived in Capreas. In a word, as soon as he was
arrived, Caesar expressed and made it known, that his affection was answerable
to his Letters; and both embraced him, and lodged him. The next day Caesar
received Letters from Herennius Capito, who advertised him that Agrippa owed
three hundred thousand Drachmes of Silver, which he borrowed, and paid not at
the time prefixed; Caesar had read these Letters, he was highly displeased, and
commanded those of his ^^mber that they should not admit Agrippa to his
presence, until such time as he had li^^^arged that debt. Agrippa borrows
three hundred thousand drachmes of Antonia, Germanicus's and Claudius's Mother.


But he, nothing daunted at Caesar's displeasure, required Antonia, Germanicus
and Claudius's Mother, who was afterward Emperor, to lend him the sum of
three hundred thousand Drachmes, to the end he might not lose Caesar's
friendship. Who remembering her Bernice, Agrippa's Mother, and with what
familiarity they had conversed together, and how Agrippa likewise had been
brought up with Claudius her Son, lent Caius commended to Agrippa's charge.
Whereupon, he paying the debt, without any contradiction, enjoyed the Princes
favor; and was so reconciled to Caesar, that he committed his Nephew to
Agrippa's charge; commanding him to attend him always, whithersoever he went.
Being by this benefit bound and tied to Antonia, he began to reverence her
Nephew Caius, who was gracious in all men's eyes, and honored in memory of his
Parents. At that time by chance there was one Allius a Samaritan, Caesar's
Freeman, of whom he borrowed ten hundred thousand Drachmes of Silver; and
paid Antonia her due, and kept the rest, Allius Caesar's Freeman lends
Agrippa money.
the more honorably to attend and wait on Caius. By whom being entertained
with most inward familiarity, it happened one day, that riding in the same
Coach with him, Agrippa wished (for they two were alone) that Tiberius might
shortly surrender the Kingdom and Empire unto Caius, who was each way more
worthy than he. These words of his were overheard by the Coachman called
Eutychus, who was Agrippa's Freeman, who for the time, spoke not a word
thereof. But being afterward accused for stealing Agrippa's garment (as he
indeed had done) and brought Piso (who was the Governor of the City) he asked
him why he fled; Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 13.
who answered, that he had certain secrets which he desired to reveal unto
Caesar, Eutychus, Agrippa's Freeman bethinks him to accuse Agrippa to the
Emperor.
that appertained to his profit and safety; for which cause he was sent by him
in Bonds to Capreas. Tiberius according to his dilatory manner, wherein no King
or Tyrant ever equalled him, held him Prisoner. For neither did he presently
admit any Ambassadors, neither sent he Successors to those, who were
Governors of his Provinces, when the former were dead; and was no less
negligent in yielding audience to his Prisoners. But when his friends at any
time questioned him, why he used these accustomed delays; he answered them,
that he deferred the Ambassadors after that manner, lest, if he should
suddenly dispatch them, they should instantly return

And as for his Offices, For what cause Tiberius changed not his Governors
he left them in their hands to whom he had committed them, in regard of his
Subjects welfare. For naturally all Magistracy is subject to Avarice; but
especially strangers induce those who exercise the same, to gather and ingross
the more eagerly, when as the time of their Authority is short, and of small
assurance; whereas, if they should continue in the same for a long time, in
regard of the gain they had made, and the much profit they had raised, they
would be afterward less greedy to extort further. Now, if he should send
others to succeed them on a sudden, it were impossible for him to content them,
notwithstanding their many Bribes: whereas, in for that being already full of
blood, they prick me not, (said he) neither suck me so earnestly, but give me
some ease, whereas if new should light on my wound which were hungry, and
should seize my flesh in that desperate estate that I am, they would procure my
death. For these causes he said; that seeing his Subjects already consumed by
so many exactions, he thought it a good policy in him, and a better provision
for them, not to send them new Governors continually, who might, after the
manner of flies, suck them to the quick; especially, if to their innate
covetousness, he should add the fear of their sudden displacing. Now, to prove
that to be true, which I have declared of Tiberius's disposition, this action
of his may suffice to justify me: For having been Emperor for the space of
twenty two years, all those Governors which he sent into Jewry were two,
namely Gratus, Why Caesar would not give Audience to his Prisoners.
and Pilat his Successor; neither carried he himself otherwise toward

And as for his Prisoners, the reason why he delayed so much to give them
Audience, was, to the end that they who had been condemned to death, (...) not
speedily be delivered from those torments, Agrippa solliciteth Antonia to bring
Eutichus to his Answer.
wherewith he threatened them, and which they had deserved by their wickedness.
For whilst he kept them in that pain, their misery increased the more. For this
cause Eutychus could not obtain Audience at his hands, but was a long time
detained Prisoner. Antonia very much honored by Tiberius.
Afterward, in process of time, Tiberius transported himself from Capreas, to
Tusculanum, which was distant from Rome some hundred Furlongs: There did
Agrippa solicit Antonia, to cause Eutychus to be called to his answer,
Antonia discovers Sejanus's Conspiracy to Caesar.
concerning the accusation which he pretended against him. Now, Antonia was in
great favor with Tiberius, both in regard of the affinity that was between
them (in that she was Drusus's Wife, who was Tiberius's as in respect of
Augustus importuned her to wed; but lived always in honor, without blame.
Besides that, she had done Tiberius a great pleasure; for at such time as
Sejanus his Friend, and a man of great account in those days (by reason he had
the Government of the Army) practiced a Conspiracy against him; whereunto
diverse of the Senate, and of his Freemen, and of his Soldiers likewise, were
accessory: yet, she brought all their intents to nothing. This Attempt had
taken a great head, and Sejanus had finished his purpose, had not Antonia used
more advised courage, than Sejanus did in executing his Treason. For having
discovered the danger that threatened Tiberius, she wrote, and sent her express
Letters by Pallas, one of Capreas, to assure him in particular of the whole
Contrivance of the Conspiracy. Caesar having true understanding thereof, caused
Sejanus and his Confederates to be executed. Therefore, though before that time
he honored Antonia greatly, yet he did afterward honor her far more, so that
he trusted her in all things. When therefore, she entreated him to give
Eutychus Audience; Tiberius answered, If, said he, Eutychus has falsely
objected any thing against Agrippa, it suffices that he endure that Punishment
that I have enjoined him: But if in the Torture he maintain that which he has
spoken to be true, it is to be feared lest Agrippa, intending to punish his
Freeman, do rather heap the Punishment upon his own head. When Antonia had
reported this answer of his to Agrippa, Agrippa urges Eutychus trial, and for
certain speeches (...) his is cast into Bonds.
he did the more instantly solicit her, requiring her Agrippa ceased not to
importune her, Antonia took the occasion, which was this: Tiberius being after
Dinner time carried in his Litter, and having Caius and Agrippa before him, she
walking by the Litter, besought him to call Eutychus to his Trial: Whereunto he
replied; The Gods (said he) know, that that which I do, I do it not of mine own
will, but for the necessity I am pressed with upon your request: And having
spoken thus, he commanded Macron, Sejanus's Successor, to bring Eutychus before
him; which was performed with all expedition. Whereupon Tiberius asked him what
he had to say against him, who had made a Freeman of him? My Sovereign (said
he) Caius that is here present, and Agrippa rode one day together in the same
Coach, and I sat at their feet; after diverse discourses held between them,
Agrippa began to speak after this manner unto Caius; O, said he, would God the
day were come, wherein the old man, departing out of this world, would make you
Governor thereof: For his Son Tiberius would be no hindrance unto you, for you
might dispatch him: Then should the World be happy, and I likewise have my
share in the Felicity. Tiberius esteeming this his Accusation to be true, and
having of long time conceived a grudge against Agrippa, for that
notwithstanding he had commanded him to honor Tiberius, who was his Nephew,
and Drusus's Son; Agrippa had given small regard to his Commandment, and had
not honored him, but was wholly addicted unto Caius. For which cause he said
to Macron, bind me this fellow. He scarcely understanding that which he spoke,
and no ways suspecting that he should give that Command Agrippa, deferred the
performance, until such time as he might more exactly understand his mind. When
therefore Caesar turned into the Hippodrome, and by chance, met with Agrippa in
the teeth: This is he (said he) Macron, whom I have commanded to be bound: And
demanding of him once more, of whom he spoke; It is Agrippa, said he. Then had
Agrippa recourse to submissive and humble Prayers, refreshing the memory of his
Son, with whom he had been brought up; alleging the education he had used
toward his Nephew Tiberius: but he prevailed nothing, but was led away bound
in those Purple Ornaments which he then wore.

At that time it was very hot weather, Thaumastus Caius's Servant gives
Agrippa drink, whom he promises to procure his Freedom.
and he was extremely thirsty: Whereupon, espying Thaumastus one of Caius 's
Servants, who carried Water in a Pitcher, he required him to give him drink;
which, when he had willingly bestowed on him, he drank, and afterward said
unto him, This service thou have done me in giving me drink, shall do thee good
one day: For as soon as I escape out of these Bonds, it shall not be long
before I obtain thy liberty at Caius's hands, for that thou have not neglected
to do me service in this my Imprisonment, more than whilst I was in my
Prosperity. Neither deceived he the man's expectation of his promise, but
rewarded and gratified him: For afterward, when he had obtained the Kingdom,
he begged Thaumastus 's liberty at Caius 's hands, and made him his Steward;
and after his decease, he gave order that he should serve in the same place,
with his Son Agrippa, and his Daughter Bernice; so that he died very old, and
much honored. But this happened afterward. But at that time Agrippa stood
before the place bound with other Companions, who likewise were in Bonds; and
through the grief he conceived, he leaned against a certain Tree, on which
there sat an Owl. One of those Prisoners, who was by Nation a German, beholding
that Bird, asked the Soldier that was fettered with him, who he was that was
apparelled in Purple; and understanding that his name was Agrippa, and that he
was a Jew, and one of the Nobility of that Nation, he desired the Soldier, who,
to the end to guard him, was chained with him, to suffer him to draw near unto
Agrippa, and to have a little conference with him, for that he had a great
desire to ask him certain things concerning the Customs of his Country. Which
when he had obtained, and having got near him, he told him by an Interpreter of
that which follows: Young man (said he) the sudden change that has befallen
thee at this present, afflicts and oppresses thee with great and grievous
Torment, neither will thou easily believe that thou shall escape from thy
misery; yet so does the Divine Providence dispose of all things, A certain
German foretells Agrippa of his happy Fortunes to come, and the manner of his
death.
that thou shall shortly be delivered. Know therefore, and I swear unto thee by
the Gods, both those of mine Ancestors, and those also, who

This Presage of the German's seemed as ridiculous to Agrippa, as admirable
afterward. But Antonia being sore grieved at the young man's Calamity, thought
it not only a difficult matter for her to entreat Tiberius for him, but
altogether unprofitable, in regard she should be repulsed; yet, she prevailed
so much with Macron that he was Silas also, was admitted to speak with him; and
amongst his Freemen, Marsyas and Stichus, who brought him in such meats as he
was delighted withal, and Coverings under color to sell them; which, by the
permission of the Soldiers, who had no less direction from Macron, they spread
by night for him to take his rest upon. Agrippa lived six months in Prison.
See here the estate wherein Agrippa lived in Prison for the space of six
Months. But Tiberius being returned to Capreas, began at first to be attainted
with a certain lingering disease; Tiberius falls sick, and sends for his
Sons.
and for that his Sickness increased more and Euodus, whom he most honored
amongst all his Freemen, to bring him his Sons, because he intended to talk
with them before he died. But the truth is, that he had not any Children of his
own, but had adopted them: For Drusus, who was his only Child, was already
dead, Tiberius Gemellus, the Son of Drusus.
and had left behind him a Son called Tiberius, surnamed Gemellus. He had Caius
also, his Brother Germanicus's Son; who was in the flower of his Age, and had
been very well bred. Caius the Gracious, Germanicus's Son.
To him also the people ascribed very much, in remembrance of the Virtue of his
deceased Father; and as for himself, he was of a sweet conversation, and so
modest, that he was familiar and affable to all men. Whereby it came to pass,
that not only the people, but the Senate also, held him in great estimation; as
also all the

After that Tiberius had charged Euodus, to bring him the two young men the
next morrow, by break of day; he besought the Gods of that place, to give him
an evident Euodus, that as soon as he could, in the morning, he should suffer
him, of the two young Princes, to enter in unto him, who should arrive the
first. He walking out, met with Caius before the Chamber door (for Tiberius was
not there; who being ignorant of that which his Grandfather thought, was busy
about his Breakfast) and said unto him, that the Emperor his Father Tiberius
beheld Caius; he suddenly began to consider the Power of God, who deprived him
of the means to dispose of the Empire, according as he had determined with
himself, for that it lay not in his power; and he lamented greatly, not so much
for that he saw his design could not be brought to effect, as that his Son
Tiberius was in danger of his life; seeing that in all appearance, Caius would
be Master; who being so near a Relation, would prove the more dangerous to
young Tiberius, because Sovereignty desires no sharer: And Caius would be
always jealous, and never think himself sure, so long as young Tiberius was
alive. Tiberius addicted to the Mathematics
In a word, Tiberius was very much addicted to Astrological Predictions; so
that the greater part of those things which he executed all his life time, was
ordered

He seeing Galba one day coming toward him, He foretells Galba's Succession
in the Empire.
spoke this of him to his Familiars, Behold the man that shall be one day
honored with the Roman Empire. And amongst all the Emperors, he gave greatest
credit to Divination, for that in certain things, he had found the Conjectures
correspondent to truth. But at that time he was grievously disquieted by reason
of the misfortune that had happened; yea, he was so grieved, as if his
Grandchild had been already lost; and he blamed himself, because he had sought
these Presages; for that he might have died, without falling into that
disaster, in being ignorant of that which was to come; whereas, now he should
die in the knowledge of their misfortunes, whom he loved most entirely. Being
thus troubled Caius after this manner which ensues: My Son, Tiberius
recommendeth the Roman Empire, and Tiberius his Grandchild to Caius.
although Tiberius be more nearly allied unto me, than you are; yet,
notwithstanding, both by mine own advice, as also by the will of the Immortal
Gods, I commit unto your hands the Empire of the Romans: I require you
therefore, that when you shall enjoy the same, you forget not the good will I
have born toward you, who have established you in so high and worthy a
dignity; and I charge you likewise, that you forget not your Cousin Tiberius;
but knowing that, by the will of the Gods, I am he, who after them, am the
Author of so much happiness which has befallen you, you return me the like
good will and affection: And that you likewise take care of Tiberius, by reason
of your mutual relation; for you ought to know, that Tiberius serves you for a
Bulwark to maintain your Empire, and your own life; and if he die, it will be
the beginning of your misfortune. For it is a dangerous matter for those who
are raised to high Dignities, to be sole, and without Allies. Moreover, the
Gods do never leave them unpunished, who attempt and act any thing against the
Laws of Consanguinity. These were the last words which Tiberius spoke to Caius;
who promised him to perform all that which he required, notwithstanding he
meant nothing less: Caius kills Tiberius.
For immediately after he was enstalled in the Empire, he caused Tiberius to be
killed, according to his Grand-father's Predictions; as also the same Caius
died soon after by a Conspiracy that was practiced against him. When that
Tiberius Caius his Successor in the Empire, he lived not many days after, and
died after he had governed twenty years, Caius Caligul^ the fourth Roman
Emperor.
five months, and three days. Thus Caius was the fourth Emperor.

The Romans having intelligence of Tiberius's death, greatly rejoiced at the
good news, yet they durst not assure themselves; and though they desired
nothing more, yet they feared, lest the news should be false; and lest, if they
showed themselves too diligent in expressing their signs of joy, they should
afterward be accused for it, and lose their lives thereby. For Tiberius had
done much mischief to the Noble Families in Rome, Tiberius a Tyrant.
being of himself a choleric man, implacable toward all men without any
occasion; having a natural inclination so cruel, that the easiest pain
whereunto he adjudged matter should fall out otherways. But Marsyas, Agrippa's
Freeman, having certain Tiberius's death, ran speedily to comfort his Master
Agrippa, with these good news; and meeting with him as he came out of the Bath,
he made a sign unto him, and told him in the Hebrew Tongue, the Lion was dead:
Agrippa conceiving that which he meant, Marsyas, Agrippa's Freeman, certifieth
him of Tiberius's death.
was ravished with joy, and said unto him; I will requite thee for all those
benefits I have received at thy hands, and especially for this good news,
provided that it prove true. The Centurion who had the keeping of Agrippa,
considering what expedition Marsyas had used in running, and the pleasure that
Agrippa had conceived in his report, he began to suspect some alteration, and
asked him what had happened; and whereas he delayed to give him an answer, he
importuned him the more. Whereupon Agrippa told him plainly what he had heard,
in that he had grown already intimately Agrippa, hoping to speed the better
thereby, and made Agrippa good cheer: But whilst they were in the midst of
their Banqueting, The rumor was spread in Rome, that Tiberius was alive.
and drunk freely, there came one unto them, who told them that Tiberius was
alive, and that within few days he would come to Rome. The Centurion troubled
with this news, for that he had committed a Capital crime in eating in the
company of a Prisoner, upon the news of Caesar's death, and by rejoicing with
him; he drove Agrippa out of the place where he sat, and reproachfully said
unto him; Think thou (said he) that I know not how falsely thou spreadest
the rumor of Caesar 's death? yes, be assured thou shall answer thy lie with
the loss of thy head. This said, he caused Agrippa to be bound, whom
before-time he had suffered to go at Agrippa was all that night long in this
extreme misery. The next day the rumor was spread thorough the whole City,
that confirmed Tiberius's death; and at that time, every one boldly protested
it: There were some also, who offered Sacrifices for this cause: Caius
certifieth the Senate and Piso of Tiberius's death, and his Succession; and
wills that Agrippa should be sent to his own Lodging.
And there came Letters also from Caius, which were addressed to the Senate, by
which he assured them that Tiberius was dead, and how the Empire was committed
to his hands. He writ another also to Piso, who had the Guard of the City,
containing the like report; and besides that, commanding him to transfer
Agrippa from the company of those Soldiers, by whom he was kept, to the same
place where he was lodged before; so that from that time forwards, he grew
confident. For although he was Caius arriving in Rome, brought with him
Tiberius's body, which he burned most magnificently, according to the custom of
the Country: Tiberius's Funeral.
And although he were very willing to set Agrippa at liberty the same day, yet
he was dissuaded from it by Antonia; not for any ill will she bare the
Prisoner, but in regard of Caius's honor; lest thereby he should show himself
to be glad of Tiberius's death, in setting him at liberty so speedily, whom he
had committed to Prison. When, therefore, some few days were over, he sent for
him to his house, and caused his hair to be cut, and his garments changed; and
that done, he set a Diadem upon his head, Caius creates Agrippa King, and
gives him two Tetrarchies.
and made him King of Philip's Tetrarchy; to which he added Lysanias's
Tetrarchy; and changed his Chain of Iron, into a Chain of Gold of the same
Marullus into Judaea, to govern there. The second year of Caius's Reign,
Agrippa asked leave to repair into Judaea, to dispose of his Kingdom, purposing
to return again when he had dispatched those Affairs. Agrippa departs into
his Kingdom.
Which when the Emperor had granted him, he came into Judaea, and was seen and
saluted for a King, beyond all men's expectation; serving thereby for a most
notable example unto men, to express unto them how great the power of Destiny
is in humane Affairs, The year of the World, 4002. after Christ's Nativity, 40.
considering the poor estate wherein he had been before, and the happiness
which he enjoyed at that time. Some termed him happy, in that he resolutely
followed his hopes; others could scarcely believe that he was thus advanced.

CHAP. IX.
Herodias, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 14. alias, chap. 16.
Herod the Tetrarch's Wife, and King Agrippa's Sister, being impatient to see
her Brother reign in so much Prosperity, compels her Husband to go to Rome, to
obtain a Crown also; Herodias, Agrippa's Sister envieth her Brothers happiness,
and inciteth her Husband to seek a Kingdom.
but Agrippa having written to Caius against him, he banished him and his Wife
to Lions in France.
HErodias, Agrippa's Sister, was married to Herod the Tetrarch of Galilee, and
Peraea: She envied her Brother to see him raised to so great Authority, and to
far greater Rome, and to purchase as much as he possessed. For, said she, I
cannot endure to live, if Agrippa, Aristobulus 's, Son, condemned to die by the
sentence of his own Father (so poor and indigent, that to redress his
necessities wherewith he was daily pressed by his Creditors, he was constrained
at last to flee to Rome) should return with such Titles of Honor; and that her
Husband, who was a King's Son, and was called to the Kingdom by his Father,
should live obscure, and pass his life like a private man: Husband (said she)
if herefore it has been no prejudice to thee, to live in less Dignity than thy
Father has done; now at, least, desire that due honor which belongs to thy
Family; neither think it sufferable to be inferior to him, who in times past
has been maintained by thy Bounty: Neither suffer it to be thought (through
thine own sloth) that he in his necessity, had more industry to obtain an ample
Fortune, than you amidst your abundance; as if it redounded not to thy shame,
to be thought inferior to him at this time, who not long since, except by thy
pity, had no means to live. Let us therefore hastily repair to Rome, and
neither spare Gold, Silver, or any other expense, for that it avails us not
so much to keep the same, as to employ it in the purchase of a Kingdom. But
Herod dissuaded her as much as he could, for he contented himself to live in
quiet, and suspected the Confusion that was at Rome; which he endeavored, as
much as in him lay, to lay open to Herodias: Herod with Herodias repair to Rome.
rather than obtained. Having therefore furnished himself after the most
magnificent manner, and spared no cost, he repaired to Rome, and led Herodias
his Wife with him. Agrippa sends Fortunatus with Letters and Presents after
him.
Agrippa smelling their intent, and the preparation they made, he bestirred
himself too: And having notice that they were put to Sea, he sent Fortunatus,
one of his Freemen, to Rome, with Presents to the Emperor, and Letters
against Herod; with Commission to acquaint Caius with every particular,
according as the occasion should serve. He embarking himself after Herod, had a
quick passage, and was only prevented by him, but for the space that Herod
presented himself to Caius; for he presently followed Puteol, and found Caius
at Baia, Baiae are certain Baths in Campania, not far from Puteol.
a Village of Campania, distant from Puteol some five Stades; adorned with most
Royal and sumptuous Palaces; for that every Emperor enforced himself to exceed
the honor of his Predecessor, by reason of the hot Baths that naturally issued
out of the earth, serving both for the health of the body, and recreation of
the spirits. Whilst Caius talked with Herod, Herod is accused for favoring
Artabanus the Parthian.
having visited him first, he received Agrippa's Letters, containing Herod's
Accusations; for they accused him of a Conspiracy plotted betwixt him and
Sejanus, since the beginning of Tiberius's Empire: And how for the present he
favored Artabanus, King of the Parthians, to the prejudice of the Emperor
Caius; of which the preparations Herod had stored up in his Arcenals, gave
evident testimony, which were Caius was much moved with these informations, and
asked Herod if that which was informed him, touching his warlike preparation,
was true: He unable to contradict the same in any thing, for fear he should be
convicted of falsehood: Herod is perpetually banished, and confined in Lions in
France; and Agrippa is made Lord of his Lands and Goods: and Herodias despising
Caesar's bounty, accompanies him in exile.
confessed no less. Whereupon Caius supposing the Accusation of his revolt to
be sufficiently proved, deprived him of his Tetrarchy, and annexed it to
Agrippa's Kingdom; bestowing Herod's Substance also upon him. He banished him
likewise for ever, and confined him in the City of Lions, in France; and
understanding that Herodias was Agrippa's Sister, he gave her all that which in
right appertained to her. And supposing that she would not willingly accompany
her Husband in his calamity, he told her that he pardoned her for her Brother's
sake: But she gave him this reply; Mighty Emperor, you speak magnificently,
and as it well becomes so great a Majesty; but there is a cause that hinders
me from partaking the benefit of that bounty which you intend toward me, which
is the affection that I bear unto my Husband; whom if I should forsake in his
misery, it would very ill beseem me, in that I have been a partner with him in
his felicity. Caius displeased with her resolute answer, banished her likewise
with her Husband, and gave her Estate also to Agrippa. God did after this
manner punish Herodias, in regard of that envy which she had conceived against
her Brother; Caius at the first governed the Commonweal very happily, but
afterward usurped divine honors.
and plagued Herod, in that he had so easily listened to the foolish persuasions
of a woman. But Caius governed the Empire the first and second year of his
Reign with great applause, behaving himself graciously toward all men, whereby
he obtained the good liking of the Romans, and the favor of

CHAP. X.
The Sedition of the Jews and Grecians, in the City of Alexandria.
WHereas there arose a Sedition betwixt the Jews and Grecians that inhabited
Alexandria, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 15. alias, cap. 17.
three chosen Ambassadors on either side were sent unto Caius: One of these
Ambassadors of Alexandria was Appion, Appion, Prince of the Alexandrians
Ambassador accuses the Jews, because they ascribed not Divinity to Caesar.
who accused the Jews of many failings; and amongst other things, he alleged,
that they made no account of honoring Caesar: And that, whereas all other
Subjects of the Roman Empire had erected Altars and Temples in honor of Caius,
and in all other things had received him as Appion had urged many things, and
inveighed grievously against the Jews; hoping that Caius would be provoked
against them, as in all likelihood and appearance it should have fallen out:
Philo Judaeus, for the Jews is shut out, and can get no audience, and
commits the cause to God.
Philo, the chiefest among the Ambassadors of the Jews, a man of great worth,
and Brother to Alexander Alabarcha; being experienced in Philosophy, addressed
himself to answer those Accusations which were urged against the Jews; but
Caius commanded him silence, and willed him instantly to withdraw himself; and
was so displeased, that it appeared very manifestly, that he intended some
cruel revenge against them. Whereupon Philo departed after he had been
grievously threatened, and spoke thus unto the Jews that flocked about him; We
must be of good courage, since Caius in words seems to be displeased with us;
for in effect, he will arm God in our behalf, against himself.

CHAP. XI.
Caius commands Petronius Governor of Syria, to compel the Jews by force of
Arms, to receive his Statue in the Temple; but Petronius mollified by their
Prayers, writes to Caius in the Jews behalf.
BUt Caius, alias, chap 17.
being sore displeased that the Jews only despised his Ordinances, sent
Petronius into Syria, Caesar sends Petronius into Syria, and commands him
in spite of the Jews, to plant his Statue in God's Temple.
to succeed Vitellius, charging him with a strong Army to invade Judaea; and if
they willingly admitted his Statue, that then he should place it in the Temple
of God; but if they denied it, then, that overcoming them by force, he should
compel them to condescend thereunto. As soon as Petronius came into Syria, he
endeavored to satisfy Caesar 's Command; and having assembled as great an
Army as he could possibly levy, and leading forth with him two Legions of Roman
Soldiers, he wintred at Ptolemais, intending at Spring to invade Judaea: All
which he signified to Caesar by his Letters; The Jews repair to Ptolemais,
beseeching him that he would not bring his Statue into the Holy City.
who commending him for his industry, advised him to use all expedition
therein, and to make War against those who should disobey his Commands. Mean
while diverse thousands of the Jews resorted to Petronius, who was quartered at
Ptolemais; beseeching him not to constrain them to do that thing which was
contrary, to their Laws, or to transgress the Ordinances of their Forefathers.
For if (said they) you have wholly decreed to bring and erect this Statue in
our Temple, first deprive us of our lives, and afterward do that which shall
seem good in your eyes: For it is impossible for us, so long as our Souls
remain within our Bodies, to permit that which is forbidden by our Laws; or to
suffer such Impiety, in regard of that honor which we owe unto our Lawmakers,
and our Predecessors, who have ratified our Laws, to the intent we should
increase in Virtue. Petronius answered thus, If I were Emperor, or if the
Emperor would be ruled by my advice, your reasons might prevail with me; but I
am enforced to obey him, otherwise Hereunto the Jews answered; My Lord (said
they) since you are resolved, not to transgress, by any means, the Commands and
Contents of Caesar's Letters, neither will we any ways violate or infringe the
Prescript of our Law, under hope of Divine Assistance, and in imitation of the
Virtue of our Ancestors: For we are not so faint-hearted, that for the hope of
a vain and untimely desire of life, we should break the Laws which Almighty God
has proposed unto us, under the reward of Eternal Felicity: For which cause,
we will endure all Fortunes whatsoever, so that our Country Law and Religion
may remain inviolate; and we are ready to encounter any misfortune, under hope
that God will assist us; for whose honor, we fear not to adventure on any
danger. This had we rather do, than by obeying thee through Cowardice, to
incurr perpetual Ignominy; and that Caius's Commission.

conjecturing by these their answers, how hard a matter it was to force them
from their opinion; and perceiving he could not do for Caius what he expected,
in the erection of his Statue, without great Bloodshed, whereby much murder
and inconvenience might follow; he took some of his nearest and dearest friends
with him, and posted to Tiberias, that he might more conveniently and
circumspectly look into the Jews Actions. They fearing some imminent danger
through the Wars they expected from the Romans, The Jews met Petronius at
Tiberias, beseeching him not to violate the Sacred City with his Images.
and greater mischief through the breach of their Laws; assembled once more
many thousands of them, and met with Petronius at Tiberias; beseeching him that
he would not enforce them to that necessity, nor defile their Sacred City with
forbidden Images. Whereunto Petronius answered: Therefore (says he) will you
fight with Caesar, without regard, either of his ability, or your own weakness?
We will not fight (said they) but we will rather die, than depart from our
Laws. Whereupon, prostrating themselves, and laying open their naked throats,
they said they were ready to die. In these terms they continued for the space
of forty days, neglecting their Husbandry, though that was the chiefest
Seed-time: For it was most resolutely concluded among them, rather to suffer
death, than to admit the Statue. Aristobulus, King Agrippa's Brother, and
^lcias, the High Priest, entreat Petronius in the Jews behalf.
Whilst the matter stood upon these terms, Aristobulus, Agrippa's Brother, and
Elcias, accompanied with diverse of their Train, and some of the chiefest among
the Jews came unto Petronius, beseeching him that he would consider the
obstinacy of the people, neither give them occasion to draw them into desperate
actions; but rather, that he would write unto Caius, with what obstinacy the
people refused Caesar would be moved to moderate his severity toward that
Nation, and not to give them cause of Rebellion: And that if he might not be
moved from the prosecution of the War, that then he might go forward with his
business. This was the effect of Aristobulus's request.

But Petronius, Petronius promises the Jews to write unto Caius in their
behalf, and exhorts them to follow their Husbandry.
partly in respect of their Prayers who instantly urged him, and the Caius's
foolish ambition; and touched with the fear of God, and remorse of his own
Conscience, he had rather to his own danger, inform the Emperor of the
absurdity of the matter by his Letters, being no ways ignorant of his choleric
spirit, and forwardness in revenge, except his furious passion and expectation
were answered. For this thought he, that although it altered not his
resolution, but happily enforced his displeasure against him, in that he speedily
executed not his Command; yet, that it was the duty of a good man, not to
refuse an assured death, if so be it might save so guiltless and huge a
multitude. When therefore, he had assembled the Jews together Tiberias (when
many thousands of them resorted thither) and disposed all those warlike Forces,
that at that time gave attendance on him, round about him; he told the Jews
first of all, not his own, but the Emperor's intent, who would shortly have
them taste his displeasure, and enforce them to bear the burden of his
indignation, who were so bold as to contradict him: For himself, it necessarily
concerned him, that since, by the Emperor's favor he had received so great
honor, he should not commit any thing contrary to his Command. I hold it (said
he) a matter most just to employ my life and honor for you, to the end, that
so huge a number of men should not be drawn into the danger of death: and I
will respect the excellency of the Laws of your Fathers, for which you think
you ought to undergo a War and danger: neither is it lawful to suffer the
Temple of God to be defiled by the Authority of Princes. I will therefore write
to Caesar, and acquaint him with your minds; and in all that I may, I will
assist you to obtain your Request. God (whose power surpasses all industry and
humane force) vouchsafe to conduct you, and make you constant in the
observation of your Laws; and grant, that he, through excessive desire of
humane glory, commit not any thing that may offend God. And if Caius be
displeased, and enforce his inevitable displeasure against me, I will undertake
all danger, and endure all torments, both in body and spirit, to the end, that
I may not behold so many virtuous men, as you are, perish in your good and juct
actions. Go therefore each of you, and ply your work, and till your Lands; I
will send to Rome, and will employ both my Friends, and my self for you.

After he had spoken this, he dismissed the Assembly, praying the chiefest
amongst Petronius, and assisted him in all his affairs: For as soon as he had
finished his discourse to the Jews, there suddenly fell a great rain beyond all
After a long and continual Drought, there fell a sudden shower
At that time therefore the water fell in great abundance, and besides the
expectation and opinion of men; the Jews conceived hope, that Petronius
soliciting their cause, should not be repulsed. But Petronius was more amazed
than all the rest, seeing evidently that God undertook the affairs of the Jews,
and gave them testimony of his manifest assurance; so that they that were their
professed Adversaries, Petronius writes to Caius.
had no power to contradict them, as he himself wrote to Caius at large, with
inductions and exhortations, to the end he should not draw so many thousand
Petronius's Letters.

On the other side, Agrippa honors Caius in Rome, and in reward thereof
Caius wills him to demand somewhat; who desires nothing else, than that
Petronius's Commission to erect the Statue, be revoked.
King Agrippa, who at that time was at Rome, grew more and more in favor with
Caius; having entertained him at a Banquet, wherein he was very desirous to
exceed all others as well in sumptuousness, as in all other sorts of delights
Caesar in all things. Caius was amazed at his courage and magnificence, seeing
Agrippa so willing to constrain himself, above his power and means, to abound
in Silver; and all this to the intent to please him. For which cause Caesar, in
requital of his kindness, intending to honor Agrippa to his uttermost power,
in granting him that which he most desired; being one day warm with Wine,
invited him to drink a Carouse: adding these words;

Agrippa, I have heretofore known the honor thou have showed toward me, and
thou Tiberius's life time; and have omitted nothing, no not in that which
exceeds thy power, to show thy affection toward me: For which cause, I think
it should be a great shame for me, if I should suffer my self to be overcome by
thee in kindness, without some answerable correspondence: I will therefore put
that in practice, which I have heretofore omitted; for all those things that
hitherto I have bestowed on thee, are of no reckoning. My will is, that thy
merits should at this time be requited, by such means as might for ever make
thee happy. Now he spoke after this manner, hoping that Agrippa would beg some
great Province at his hands, or the Revenues of some Cities.

But although he had already prepared his demand, yet he did not discover his
intent, but gave Caius this answer; that whereas he had served him to the
dislike of Tiberius, it was not for the gain he expected heretofore; and for
the present also, he did nothing under hope to be rich; contenting himself that
he was in the Emperor's good favor. That the benefits he had received of him
were great, yea, exceeding all that which he durst ever have hoped: For (said
he) although they be but small in comparison of your Greatness, yet in respect
of my self who have received them, and in my conceit, they are very great.
Caius admiring his generosity, insisted to press him to ask whatsoever he had a
mind to, being ready to grant it. Whereupon Agrippa said, Dread Prince, since
it is your good pleasure to think me worthy to be honored by your Presents, I
will not request any thing at your hands, that may tend to enrich me; for that
by those goods you have already given me, I am greatly honored: But I beseech
and request one thing at your hands, which will purchase you the reputation of
Piety, and will procure God to be propitious unto you in all your actions; and
which also, will breed me much glory among those who shall hear that I have not
been refused in my demand, which concerns me more than the necessities of
this life: I therefore beseech you, that it will please you to give order that
that Statue, which you have charged Petronius to erect in the Temple of the
Jews, may never be put there. This was Agrippa's request to the Emprour,
knowing very well how dangerous a matter it was, and as much as concerned his
life, to demand any such thing at Caius's hands, that was not answerable to his
humor. Caius, on the one side, moved Agrippa had done him; and on the other
side, seeing how great an indignity it should be for him, if before such an
Assembly of Witnesses, he should deny Agrippa to request, as if suddenly he had
repented himself; and admiring Agrippa's virtue (who having an opportunity in a
moment to augment his particular Estate, either by Revenues, or other
Commodities; had preferred the Common Cause, the Laws of his Country, and
Piety, before all these) he granted him his Supplication; and wrote to
Petronius, praising him for that he had used such diligence in assembling his
Army, as also for all that whereof he had given him notice: adding these words;
If (said he) you have already erected the Statue which I commanded you, let it
remain in the place; but if it be not done, be thou no more troublesome to the
Jews, but dismiss thine Army, and repair thou in person to that place whither I
have sent thee: For I urge no more the erection of the Statue, for the desire
that I have to gratify Agrippa, whom I entirely honor, and in such sort, as
it is impossible for me to contradict any thing whatsoever, that either he has
need of, or shall require. These were the Contents of those Letters which Caius
wrote to Petronius, before he understood that the Jews were like to revolt; for
they made it known, that rather than they would endure the Statue, they would
hazard a War against the Romans: Which, when Caius understood, he was extremely
troubled; and being a man addicted to all villainy, and averse to all honesty,
and who gave place to no good counsel, after he had conceived a displeasure
against any man; and who likewise thought it a great happiness for him to
accomplish all that whatsoever he pleased; he wrote again to Petronius, Caius
writes to Petronius, charging him to murder himself, for neglecting his
Command.
to this effect; Since the Presents which the Jews have given thee, have more
prevailed with thee than my Commands have done; so that to please them, thou
have despised that which I have enjoined thee; I make thy self the Judge, how
much thou have deserved to incurr my displeasure, to the end, that thou may
serve for an example to all those, who shall come after thee, that an
Emperor's Commands ought not in any sort to be neglected. Although this
Epistle was both written and sent, yet Petronius received it not during Caius's
life time, for they that carried it, were stayed with cross Winds; so that
Petronius received those Letters that assured him of Caius's death, before he
received the other: For God would not forget Petronius, who exposed himself to
great dangers for the love of the Jews, and the honor of God. And Caius being
taken out of the world by God's wrath, being kindled against him, by reason
that he affected Divine Petronius obtained favor both at Rome, and through all
the whole Government, and especially among the principal Senators, against whom
Caius was accustomed to vomit up his choleric Revenges. He died a little after
he had written the Letter to Petronius, by which he threatened and denounced him
death. Hereafter I will declare the cause why he was taken out of this world,
and the manner how Treason was plotted against him. Petronius receives Letters
of Caius death before those, whereby he was commanded to kill himself.
The Letter that brought the tidings of Caius's death, was delivered to
Petronius first; and presently after, he received that wherein he enjoined him
to kill himself: He highly rejoiced at this his good luck, and Caius's death;
and admired God's Providence, who speedily and happily had rewarded him, both
for the honor that he bare unto his Temple, and also for having Petronius
escaped from death, by an unexpected Providence.

CHAP. XII.
Two Jews called Asinaeus and Anilaeus, both Brothers, and of a mean
extraction, become so powerful near Babylon, that they give enough to do to the
Parthians: Their Actions; their Death. The Grecians and Syrians who lived in
Seleucia,
IN those days there happened a grievous Commotion amongst those Jews that
inhabited Mesopotamia and Babylon, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 16. alias, cap. 20.
and such Slaughters and Calamities as never the like has been declared in our
former Narrations; A grievous Commotion among the Jews in Mesopotamia and
Babylon.
which in regard I intend to report both particularly and seriously, I will rip
up the whole cause thereof from its first Original. There was a City called
Nearda, belonging to Babylon, stored with Inhabitants, and enriched with many
fruitful Possessions, sufficient to sustain so great a multitude: Moreover, it
was such as might be hardly invaded by the Enemy; both for that the River
Euphrates surrounded it, and also for that it was fortified with Nisibis; in
which the Jews, in respect of the strength of the place, kept their Dragma,
which they were accustomed to offer unto God, and the rest of their Votive
money. These two Cities therefore served them for two Storehouses; The year of
the world, 4003. after Christ's Nativity, 41.
and from thence, according Asinaeus and Anilaeus, two Brothers* born in
Nearda; whose Father being dead, Asinaeus and Anilaeus, born in N^arda, retire
into a certain place, and great Companies flock unto them.
their Mother bound them to the Weavers trade, for amongst those Nations it was
accounted no indignity to follow that trade: for both men and women exercise
themselves therein. It happened, that their Master with whom they learned their
occupation, beat them one day, for that they came somewhat late unto their
work. They taking this chastisement of his as if a great injury had been done
unto them, betook themselves to their weapons, whereof there were great store
in that

The Governor of Babylon likewise intending to cut off this mischief before it
grew to greater head, assembled as many men as he could possible, both
Parthians and Babylonians, Asinaeus and his Companions beset by the Governors
and Princes of Babylon.
and marched forth against them; with an intent to root them out, before
Asinaeus, who at that time sat idly with his fellows, having his Arms by him:
Ye men (said he) methinks I hear the neighing of Horses, not such as when they
are in their heat, but as when they are backed by men. Moreover, I hear the
noise of their Bridles, and I fear lest the Enemies secretly stealing upon us,
should circumvent us: let therefore some one of us go and discover what the
matter is, and Asinaeus and all his Company, forasmuch as they were not in a
readiness to defend themselves: and our Law forbids us to do any manner of
work on the Sabbath. Asinaeus resolved with himself not to do that which the
Spy had said, but thought that it was better for them to behave themselves
valiantly in their necessity wherein they were plunged, Asinaeus, after he had
encouraged his Soldiers, puts his Enemies to flight.
He therefore presently betook himself to his weapons, and encouraged all those
that were about him, to make it known in effect what their valor was.
Whereupon all of them at once marched forth against the Enemy, and slaughtered
a great many of them, for that they, despising Asinaeus and his followers,
marched as if they went to lay hold on men already vanquished; but in the end
they were constrained to betake them to flight.

When the news of this skirmish was brought to the King of Parthia, Asinaeus
and Anilaeus are sought unto by Artabanus for friendship.
he was wholly astonished at the boldness of these two Brethren, and had a
great desire to see them and to speak with them. He therefore sent one of the
trustiest of his Guard, to let them that although King Artabanus had been
injured by them, in that they had invaded his Country; notwithstanding, said
this Ambassador, he making less account of the displeasure he has conceived
against you, than of your Virtue, has sent me unto you, to give you my hand
and troth in his name, for a safe conduct and security in your Voyage,
requiring you to be his friends; he treats therefore with you without any
Deceit or Fraud, promising you Gifts and Honors, and resolves to increase
your Dignity by his Power. Asinaeus refused to enterprise this Voyage, but sent
his Brother Anilaeus with certain Presents, such as he could possibly find. He
therefore departed with the Messenger, and presented himself before Artabanus;
who seeing Anilaeus come alone, asked him how it happened that Asinaeus came
not with him: And understanding that he stayed in his Marish, through the fear
that he had of him; he swore by the Gods of his Ancestors, that he would do him
no wrong, wishing them to give credit to his promise, Artabanus sent back
Anilaeus, to persuade his Brother Asinaeus to come to Court, Artabanus did
this, supposing that this his Amity with the two Brothers, would be a bridle
for the Jews, who otherwise might encroach upon his Governments. For he feared,
lest if any Rebellion should happen, and he should be troubled in that War,
Asinaeus and they of Babylon should grow more strong, as well by the voluntary
submission of the Jews, as by force; and Anilaeus, who easily persuaded his
Brother, giving him to understand among other things, what good will the King
bare him, and the Oath that he had sworn; so that both of them resorted to
Artabanus, who received them very graciously, admiring Asinaeus's Virtue, who
had so great a courage in all his Enterprises; considering especially, that he
was a man of low stature, and who, to look on, seemed to be contemptible: and
he told his Friends, that without comparison, he had a greater heart, than his
body.

And when in banqueting he had named Asinaeus, Abdagasis would have slain
Asinaeus, but Artabanus will not permit him.
and showed him to Abdagasis the General of his Army, signifying unto him, with
what valor these Brethren were endowed Abdagasis required that it might be
lawful for him to kill Asinaeus, to the end he might punish the wrongs he had
done to the Estate of the Parthians. Never (said the King) will I give my
consent to betray a man, who has committed himself to my protection, and has
given me his hand, and who builds upon the Oath I have past unto him in the
name of the Gods: But if thou be a valiant man in feats of Arms, thou have no
need to make me forswear my self; but when his Brother and he shall depart from
hence, assail him, and overcome him by thy valor, provided that I be not privy
to thy attempt. And afterward, calling Asinaeus to him in the morning; It is
time (said he) that thou return homeward, for fear thou provoke diverse of the
Captains of my Court, which, Artabanus commits the Territories of Babylon to
Asinaeus's charge, and dismisseth him with Gifts
contrary to my will, will endeavor to kill thee. I commit the Country of
Babylon to thy protection and guard; which by thy care and vigilance, shall
remain exempt from all Robberies, and other such Calaemities. Reason it is,
that I procure thy good, because I have engaged mine Honor and Faith
irrevocably unto thee; not upon any light matter, but for things that importane
thee as nearly as thy life. This said, he gave him certain Presents, and
presently dismissed him. Now, as soon as he returned home to his own Fortress,
he fortified the places, both those which were already secured, and the other,
which as yet no man had attempted to fortify: And in short time he grew to
that greatness, that no man, of so obscure Fortune and beginning, attained
before him. Neither contented with the Honors of the Babylonians, he was also
held in great account by the Captains of the Parthians, who were sent to govern
in the neighboring Provinces; Mesopotamia was at his Command. In this Felicity
and increasing Glory of his, he continued for the space of fifteen years; which
never began to decay, until such time as neglecting the ancient Study of
Virtue, and contemning the Laws of his Forefathers, both he and his factious
followers being drowned in pleasure, yielded themselves Captive to Foreign
Lust. It fortuned that a certain Governor of those Parthians came into that
Country, accompanied with his Wife, not only endowed with other Perfections,
but also admired for her incomparable Comeliness and Beauty; whom, Anilaeus
kills a Noble man of the Parthians, and leads away his Wife.
without ever seeing her, only by report of her Beauty, Anilaeus, Asinaeus's
Brother, loved entirely; and when as by no one of his allurements he could
obtain which thing was the Original of many mighty Calamities, both to himself,
and to Anilaeus's Wife, then she adored them according to the custom, and with
the same service which she used during her first Husband's days, sacrificing to
her Gods.

Their chiefest friends seeing this, Anilaeus being reproved for his Wife's
Idolatry, kills one of his Friends.
first of all reproved them, for that Anilaeus committed Anilaeus likewise had
villanously killed one of his dearest Friends, who had somewhat too freely
reproved him (who, at such time as he lay a dying, being touched with the zeal
of the Laws of his Ancestors, and with grief against his Murderer, wished that
Asinaeus and Anilaeus, and all their Associates might die the like death; they,
for that they were transgressors of the Law; the other,

But when they understood that the Parthian Gods were adored by this woman,
they bethought them that it behoved them not any more to bear with Anilaeus in
contempt of their Laws; for which cause, addressing themselves to Asinaeus in
great Assemblies, they exclaimed against Anilaeus; saying, that he ought,
although at first he had no power to dispose of himself; yet now at last, to
correct this error before it should redound to their public Plague: For that
both the Marriage was dis-allowed Anilaeus is accused before his Brother
Asinaeus, but he winketh at his fault
But he, although he knew that his Brother's fault would breed some great
inconvenience, both to himself and his followers; yet, being overcome with
Brotherly affection, he easily pardoned his Brother, ascribing his error to
the violence of his unbridled passion. But whereas daily more and more he was
tired with exclamations and greater reproofs, at length he admonished his
Brother of the matter, chiding him for that which was past, and desiring him to
amend the error hereafter, by sending home the woman unto her Kindred. Yet
this admonition of his took no effect with him; Asinaeus poisoned by the
Parthian woman.
for the woman perceiving that the rumor that was Anilaeus should incurr some
danger, she poisoned Asinaeus, to the end that her love being in Authority, she
might more freely practice her impiety. Now when Anilaeus had gotten the
Government into his own hands, he drew out his Forces against certain Villages
belonging to Mithridates, one of the chiefest among the Parthians, and
Artabanus's Son in Law; which Villages he spoiled, and carried away men, sheep,
and other riches. When Mithridates, who at that time was resident in those
Quarters, understood of the spoil of his Villages, he was very much displeased,
and the rather, for that without any occasion or proffer of injury, Anilaeus
had assailed him in contempt of his Estate, who was a chief Peer of the
Country: For which cause Anilaeus and his Associates. Anilaeus draws his
Forces into Mithridates's Country, and spoileth his Villages, and takes him
Prisoner.
Leading his Forces therefore against one of the Villages, he kept himself in
covert, to the end he might fight the next day, which was the Sabbath day; on
which the Jews attempted not any thing. Whereof when Anilaeus was advertised by
a certain Syrian, who dwelt in another Village, who had exactly told him all
Mithridates's intent, and the place where he intended to banquet with his
Soldiers; after he had made his Soldiers take their refreshment, marched out
by night, to the end he might charge the Parthians before they might be
advertised of his coming. He therefore rushed in upon them about the fourth
Watch of the night, and slew those whom he found asleep; and the rest being
astonished thereat, Mithridates Prisoner, and caused him to be carried away
naked on an Ass, which is one of the greatest disgraces Anilaeus told them,
that they ought to deal with him far otherwise; for that it behoved them not to
kill a man, who was one of the chief among the Nobility of the Parthians, and
one that was most honored in regard of that affinity and alliance he had with
the King: that although all that which heretofore had been offered to
Mithridates; were insupportable; yet if they should be instrumental to save his
life, he would pardon the injuries, and reward them for their Mercy in saving
his life; whereas if they should deal severely with him, the King would seek
his revenge, and make a horrible slaughter of those Jews that inhabited
Babylon: whom they ought to have compassion Anilaeus dismisseth Mithridates.
whereas they might be assisted with the flower and select men of their nation.
Having thus discussed and debated the matter to his Soldiers, his opinion was
approved, and they were persuaded; and so Mithridates was sent back again.

But he no sooner returned home unto his house, but his wife hit him in the
teeth, that he lived but by the mercy of his enemies, notwithstanding he were
the Kings Son-in-law; that he had made no reckoning to punish those, who had so
much injured him; that he likewise contented himself to have his life saved,
after he had been prisoner to the Jews: For which cause (said she) recover thou
thy former virtue and honor, which thou have heretofore lost, or I swear by
the Gods of the King my Father, that the bond of Marriage which is betwixt me
and thee shall be dissolved.

Mithridates, unable to endure these usual reproaches, and on the other side
apprehending his wives haughty courage, from whom he feared to be separated, he
assembled the greatest power of men that he could possible, notwithstanding it
were against his will, and led them forth; supposing himself to be unworthy of
life, if he, who by Nation was a Parthian, should be put to the worst by the
Jews. When Anilaeus understood that Mithridates came forth against him with a
great force, he thought that it would redound greatly to his indignity, if he
should lie lurking amidst his Marshes, and hoping that he should have no worse
fortune against his enemies, than he had at first, and

But after they had marched about ninety stades, and passed through a County
that was scant of water, and were about the heat of the mid day burned up with
thirst; Mithridates Army came in sight, and charged them even at that time,
when they fainted for want of drink, and through the extremity of heat, so as
they could scarcely handle their weapons. At that time Anilaeus's Soldiers
encountering with Mithridates's fresh men, were shamefully put to flight:
whereby it came to pass that a great number Anilaeus himself, and all those of
his Company, retired themselves in great haste into a Forest, leaving
Mithridates Lord and Master of the Field, whereof he was very joyful. A great
number of dissolute persons flock to Anilaeus, with whom he spoileth certain
Buroughs of the Babylonians.
Notwithstanding this disaster, an infinite number of lawless men resorted to
Anilaeus, who set little by their lives, provided there might no limit be
proposed to their unbridled licentiousness; so that he gathered a greater
number of men than those he had lost; yet they were far different in valor
from the former: for they were wholly ignorant of warlike discipline.
Notwithstanding, he being accompanied with these men, went and set upon diverse
Buroughs of the Babylonians, which were totally destroyed by his rapine and
violence. For which cause the Babylonians and his other enemies, sent unto
Nearda to the Jews that were there, Anilaeus might be delivered into their
hands: The Babylonians require Anilaeus, that they may punish him: they assail
and slay him.
whereunto condescending not (for although they had a will to perform their
request, yet it lay not in their power to deliver him) they required that they
might live in peace. And to treat of the conditions of peace, the Babylonians
sent certain men to confer with Anilaeus. They having surveyed the place
wherein Anilaeus kept, assailed both himself and his followers by night, and
slew all those they encountered with, without resistance, and amongst the rest
Anilaeus. When the Babylonians saw that they were delivered from the oppression
of Anilaeus, who till that time had been as it were a bridle unto them, to
restrain and curb the hatred they conceived against the Jews, with whom they
had oftentimes been at odds, by reason of the contrariety of their Religions,

Now when Anilaeus's men were defeated, the Babylonians set upon the Jews on
all sides; who seeing themselves in danger by reason of the insolence of the
Babylonians, against Seleucia, a City famous in regard of Seleucus the Son of
Nicanor, who builded it. In that City dwelt diverse Macedonians, diverse Greeks,
and a great number of Syrians. The Jews afflicted by the Babylonians, repair to
Seleucia.
The Jews fled thither, and continued there about five years, without any
molestation: But in the sixth year, when the Plague increased in Babylon, the
Jews that remained there, were enforced to seek them some new habitation; and
that removing of theirs into the City of Seleucia, was the cause likewise, of
their further mischief, as I will make manifest. The Greeks who dwelt in
Seleucia, are ordinarily at debate with the Syrians, and have always the upper
hand; but after that the Jews came to inhabit that place, in a certain Sedition
that arose among them, the

The Greeks being repulsed in this Tumult, and having no other means left them
to maintain their former honor; but to break that League of Friendship, which
was between the Syrians and the Jews; devised in private, each one with those
Syrians with whom they were acquainted, promising to live in peace and amity
with them; whereunto they condescended willingly. For the chiefest of these two
Nations concluded the Peace, which presently after followed, to the end that on
both parts they should join in hatred against the Jews: Fifty thousand Jews
slain in Seleucia.
So that altogether charging them at unawares, they killed more than fifty
thousand of them; they were all put to the Sword, The Jews that were saved,
repair to Ctesiphon.
These retired themselves to Ctesiphon a City of Greece, that was not far from
Seleucia, where the King resideth every year, and keeps the greatest part of
his Movables; hoping in that place, through the reverence of the King, they
might remain in more safety and security. All the Nation of the Jews that were
in these Quarters, stood in great fear: For the Babylonians and the Seleucians,
with all the Assyrians of that Country, agreed amongst themselves to make a
general War against the Jews; The Jews retire into Nearda and Nisibis.
whereby it came to pass, that they assembled themselves at Nearda and Nisibis,
trusting themselves to the strength of these Fortresses, which were inhabited
also by men who were expert in Arms. See here what the condition of the Babylon.



The Contents of the Chapters of the Nineteenth Book.
1. The Cruelties and Follies of the Emperor Caius Caligula: Several
Conspiracies against him. Chaereas, being assisted by several others, kills
him: Some Germans of his Guard kill some of the Senators afterward. The Senate
condemns the thoughts of his memory. 2. The Soldiers resolve to promote
Claudius, Caius's Uncle, to the Imperial Dignity. Saturninus's Speech in the
Senate, for Liberty. Chaereas sends to kill the Empress Cesonia, Caius's Wife,
and her Daughter. Caius's good and evil Qualities. The Soldiers carry Claudius
into the Camp, to make him Emperor: The Senate sends to him, to pray him to
forbear. 3. King Agrippa encourages Claudius to accept of the Empire. The
Soldiers, who had been for the Senate, forsake it, whether Chaereas would or
not; and join with those that had sworn to Claudius. So Claudius becomes
Master, and condemns Chaereas to die: He suffers with a wonderful Constancy.
And Sabinus, who had been one of the chiefest of the Conspiracy, kills
himself. 4. Claudius the Emperor confirms Agrippa in the Kingdom, adding
Judaea and Samaria thereunto: He gives the Kingdom of Chalcis to Herod,
Agrippa's Brother; 5. King Agrippa goes to his Kingdom, and puts his Chain,
being a token of his Imprisonment, into the Sacred Treasury of the Temple of
Jerusalem. He provideth for the Dignity of the High Priesthood: He is highly
displeased at the Dorites insolence, who had caused Caesar's Statue to be
erected in the Jews Synagogue. 6. Petronius, Governor of Syria's Letters to
the Dorites, concerning the Emperor's Statue, which they caused to be erected
in the Jews Synagogue. King Agrippa bestows the High Priesthood on Matthias.
Marsius is made Governor of Syria. 7. Silas (General of Agrippa's Forces) his
great Imprudence, obliges this Prince to put him in Prison. Agrippa fortifieth
Jerusalem, but the Emperor Claudius commands Marsius, Governor of Syria: He
bestows the Great Priesthood on Aelioneus: dies after a terrible manner:
Leaves for his Successor his Son Agrippa, and three Daughters: The Inhabitants
of Caesarea and Sebastes prove extreme ungrateful to his Memory. Claudius the
Emperor sends Fadus to be Governor of Judaea, because of Agrippa's Minority.


CHAP. I. The year of the World, 4004. after Christ's Nativity, 42.

The Cruelties and Follies of the Emperor Caius Caligula: Several Conspiracies
against
Caius did not only express and manifest his fury toward those Jews that dwelt
in Jerusalem, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap 1.
and in other neighboring places; Caius's Tyranny toward the Jews.
but also thorough all the Countries both by Land and Sea, which were subject
to the Roman Empire, filling the whole World with an infinite number of
mischiefs; yea, such, and so odious, that the like hitherto have never been
heard of. Caius's Tyranny toward the Senators and Patricians.
But Rome especially, felt the were chosen, who were to supply the Senate, were
most persecuted. For with ignominies Rome is most religiously honored, he was
so bold as to salute Jupiter, Cajus calls himself Jupiters Brother.
and to call him Brother. Many such impieties were committed by him, which
shows that his unbridled and extravagant madness did never forsake him. Amongst
other his mad pranks that he played, this is worthy of memory: for on a time,
thinking it to be too much trouble for him to cross the Sea between Puteol a
City in Campania, and Misenum another Town seated by the Seashore in a Gally;
and otherwise esteeming it a thing correspondent to his greatness, who Greece
whatsoever, that he spoiled not of those excellent pictures that were in them;
Cajus spoiled all the Temples of Greece.
Giving a Commission that all Statues, and whatsoever ornaments or gifts, and
presents that were dedicated in any Temple, should be brought unto him; saying,
that such things as were admirable, should be reserved for a place of
admiration, such as was the City of Rome: with these spoils of the Temples he
adorned his Palace and Gardens, and generally Italy. Cajus commands Memmius
Regulus to tran^fer Jupiter Olympus to Rome.
He was so impudent also, as to give direction, that Jupiter Olympius Statue,
which the Greeks had in great estimation, and which Phidias the Athenian
Satuarian had made, should be transported to Rome. But Memmius Regulus, to whom
he directed this commission, executed it not, because the Masons informed him,
that without spoiling it they could not remove it from the place. It is
reported also, that he was hindered from this execution by such prodigies that
are almost incredible: which he assured Cajus of, giving him to understand,
what the occasion was, that had moved him to disobey him therein: and whilst he
was in danger of death for his delay, the sudden and successful death of Cajus
warranted him from the same. Yea, so far stretched his unbridled fury, that
having a daughter newly Jupiter; Cajus compares himself with Jupiter.
saying, that the child was common betwixt him and Jupiter, leaving the
judgment to all men, which of the two parents was the greatest. And
notwithstanding all these his misdemeanors, yet did men tolerate him.

He gave liberty to slaves also to accuse their Masters of whatsoever crimes
they would: which was so much the more hateful, because all things were done by
Caesar's authority, and to his good liking: so that Pollux, who was Claudius
bondsman, durst accuse him, Cajus gave slaves free liberty to accuse their
Masters, and countenanced Pollux to accuse his Master Claudius.
and Cajus the Emperor was contented among the Judges to hear his Uncle
brought in question for his life, hoping (although it fell out otherwise) to
pick out an occasion to put him to death. For having filled all the Countries
of his Empire Many conspiracie^ against Cajus.
and the safety of all men: and had he not been speedily cut off, our nation
had almost been utterly exterminated. For which cause I thought good to make an
exact and ample declaration of every occurrent; namely, for that the knowledge
thereof makes very much toward the manifestation of Gods power and will,
which brings consolation unto those who are in adversity, and keep them within
the bounds of modesty, who suppose that their prosperity should Aemilius
Regulus, Three conspiracies against Cajus.
who was born in Corduba in Spain, was fully resolved to kill him himself, or
to make him away by the means of his Confederates. Chaereas Cassius, Colonel
over a thousand men was the conductor of another Band; Aemilius Regulus.
Cassius Chaereas* Annius Minucius.
and Annius Minucianus was in no less readiness to do his uttermost herein. The
cause that moved them to combine thus altogether in hatred against Cajus, was,
that in respect of Regulus, he was by nature a detester of all iniquity: for he
was a very generous man, and so free; that he dissembled not any of his
designs, but communicated them with many, who were either Minucianus, he was
induced to seek his revenge, through the desire he had to do justice to
Lepidus, who had Caius had put to death through the fear he had conceived of
him) knowing well that all they, against whom Caius was incensed, could not
escape with less punishment than loss of life. As for the third man Chaereas,
he could not endure the shame and reproach of cowardice that Caius had objected
against him, but feared besides, that his friendship and inward familiarity
with Caius would draw him into manifest dangers: for which cause, and his own
security and honors sake, he resolved to dispach him. Generally all of them
were resolved to rid the world of Caius, and bring an end to his pride and
tyrannical power, for their hope was that their attempt having good success:
their Country and Commonweal should reap the Chaereas was egged on with a
desire he had to grow famous, and through the facility and convenient means he
had to do it, The Circensian Games.
because his Colonels room gave him most secure access unto him. About that
time the Circensian Games were solemnized, which is a kind of Pastime which the
Romans very willingly behold, Caius causes diverse to be murdered, who request
mitigation of their exactions.
and to this intent they resort to the place of these exercises, and the common
people is wont to demand somewhat from the Emperor, which they desire to
obtain; and after having examined their requests, do never refuse them. Now
they required with instant and importunate supplications, that Caius would
discharge them of their taxations, and moderate the excessive tributes Chaereas
the more to execute his enterprise, Chaereas for many causes is incited against
Caius.
to the end he might finish his furious and tyrannical life, whose pleasure was
all men's destruction. He had often resolved to kill him at Table, yet he
deferred to do it, not that he fainted in his resolution, but because he
expected some better opportunity. He had been Captain of Caius Guard a long

Caius having appointed him to gather in his Tributes, in the execution whereof
he followed his own nature, rather than Caesar's command, and spared those of
whom he ought to have compassion for their poverty sake. Caius was so
displeased herewith, that he objected against him, that the cause why he
delayed the bringing in of his money, was his cowardice and negligence: And
among other injuries that he offered him, as often as he gave him the Watchword,
as he usually went to fetch it once a day upon his watch-day, he gave him the
names of women, and others that were ignominious persons, notwithstanding that
he himself was no less remarkable, for his effeminate daintiness. In those
Ceremonies which he himself had established, he attired Chaereas. whom he vexed
constantly when he gave him the watchword, and so much the more because his
companions jeared him with it. For when it was his turn to receive the word
from Caesar's mouth, he ordinarily fitted him with such an one as might move
laughter, which made him the bolder to conspire with his Confederates, in that
he had just occasion to be displeased: among these was a Senator, called
Popedius, and one that had past through all honors and offices, otherwise an
Epicure and lover of delights. Timidius accused him (in that he was his enemy)
that he had uttered certain injurious speeches against Caius: Popedius is
accused of a crime by Timidius unto Caesar.
and for proof hereof, he alleged Quintilia for his witness, a Popedius, by
reason of her incomparable beauty: and for that she refused to bear witness in
a matter falsely objected against him, whom she entirely loved, Timidius
required, that she might be examined by torture. Caius importuned herewith,
commanded Chaereas with all expedition and diligence to see Quintilia tortured:
and the rather gave he Chaereas these Commissions to kill and torment those
whom he pleased, for that he had conceived this opinion, that be would acquit
himself with more cruelty, to the end he might exempt himself of that reproach
of faint-heartedness which was wrongfully objected against him. Caius
commands Quintilia to be tortured, who confesses nothing.


Whilst thus Quintilia was led forth to be tortured, she trod upon the foot of
one Chaereas tormented her cruelly which he rather performed by constraint,
than of his own free will. And seeing he Caius in so pitiful an estate, that
all they that beheld her, had compassion on her. Caius likewise himself was
moved, and bethinking him of those pains she had endured he desisted from the
inquest and accusation which was prosecuted against Popedius and Quintilia and
gave her a certain sum of money, Popedius is absolved.
to comfort her against the indisposition that might follow by reason of her
torments, which she had so courageously endured.

This displeased Chaereas very much, Chaeraas conferreth with Clement and
Papinius.
as if he had been the cause of all those evils that had happened to those two
persons, whom the cruelest of men did bemoan. He consulted therefore with
Clement, who was Captain of the foot, and Papinius who had the command of the
Guard, and spoke unto them to this effect. We have (said he) O Clement, Caius
himself had compassion on them. But what reward or honor receive we for all
these services? Clement hearing these words, held his peace, giving manifest
testimony by his looks, and the change of his color, that he was greatly
ashamed he had so long time obeyed the Emperors commands: and whilst he
thought with himself that it was no policy for him to open his mouth against
Caius cruelty, Chaereas emboldned himself to discover the calamities and
dangers wherein both the City and the whole Empire were plunged, telling him,
that the common report was, that Caius was the

But (said he) those that will narrowly examine the truth, will judge that I
and Papinius that stands by me, and you, Clement, more than we, have caused
the Romans torment, and the World's misery, for that of our own will we have
been Ministers of Caius's Commands; and although the means lies in us to make
an end of those Violences that are committed against the Citizens, and injuries
to the whole World; yet we serve him for his Guard and Hang-men, in stead of
Soldiers. And we bear Arms, not to maintain our Liberty, and the Roman Empire,
but to preserve him who keeps their bodies and minds in slavery: And every day
are we soiled in their blood who are killed and tortured, until such time as
some one serve us with the same sauce, to satisfy Caius's Cruelty. For it is
not for

Clement declared by apparent signs, that he thought well of Chaereas
resolution, but he counseled him to make no words of it, for fear the rumor
thereof should be spread among the people, and the secret should be discovered
before the execution: and lest that Caius getting an inkling thereof, they
should all of them be drawn into danger of death; and in the mean while, it
behoved them to hope that some good It may be (said he) that I may furnish you
with some advice more secure than yours is, Chaereas, for a more honester than
it is, who is he that can propose? This said, Clement returned to his house,
ruminating with himself upon those words* which he had both heard and spoken.
Cornelius Sabinus.
But Chaeras grew fearful, and conferred with the Colonel Cornelius Sabinus,
whom he knew to be a man of reputation, a lover of liberty, and greatly
discontented with the estate for the miseries of the Commonweal; and seeing it
was necessary to attempt that with all expedition which he had intended, he
thought good to impart the matter to him; fearing lest Clement should discover
all the Conspiracy, Minucianus, who was conformable unto them in virtue, good
affection, and great courage; and who besides that, was suspected by Caius by
reason of Lepidus death. For, Minucianus and Lepidus were very great friends,
and had been associates in the same dangers. For Caius was feared Annius
Minucianus.
sparing none of them in particular or general, but made them all groan under
the burden of his fury.

Caius, although their secret conceit engendered among them a certain Amity.
For, before that time, as often as they met together, they were accustomed to
esteem Minucianus for the most honorable man of the Company, as in truth,
among all the Citizens of Rome he was the most famous, valiant and best
esteemed among them: being therefore assembled at that time, he was first of
all requested to speak his opinion. For which cause he asked Chaereas what the
watchword was he had received that day (for all the City knew very well what
mockery Caius usually used in giving Chaereas the Watchword:) Chaereas,
notwithstanding Minucianus, and said unto him;

But give you me for the Watchword, Liberty; mean while I give you thanks for
that you have awakened me more speedily, than of my self I have accustomed to
be. You need not now any further enforce your self to incite me by your words,
since both you and I have undertaken the same resolution. Before we were
assembled in this place, our thoughts were united. Behold here my sword that is
girt unto my side; this shall suffice for us both. And if you please you shall
be my Captain, and I will march under your Command, and will follow you under
assurance of your assistance and wisdom. They, who have valiant hearts, never
want Arms: for it is a confident courage that makes the weapon do execution.
That Caius cruelty. It is I that deserve to be trusted in this execution, and I
make you my Judge, since you have the like intention that I have.

Minucianus, Chaereas with certain others intend to kill Caius.
perceiving with what affection Chaereas spoke, embraced him with all love; and
after he had praised him, he exhorted him to continue his constancy: then
departed they one from the other, with prayers and wishes; and at that time
there happened a presage that confirmed them the more. For as Chaereas entered
into Chaereas was somewhat afraid, lest some one of his Associates had betrayed
him. But at last, he thought it was some one of those, who, being privy to his
resolution, gave him a Watchword to animate him the more; or that it was God,
who, governing and observing humane affairs, pushed him forward. After he had
imparted this his deliberation to diverse; sundry Senators, Knights, and
Soldiers being advertised hereof were in Arms. For, there was not any one that
supposed not that Caius death was the greatest good hap the Commonwealth could
expect. For which cause, all of them enforced themselves as much as they could,
to assist the execution with courageous and virtuous Calisthus, Caius Freeman,
certifies Claudius that Caius commanded him to poison him.
desiring each of them to be partakers in the dispatch of a Tyrant. For
Calisthus also, who was Caius freeman, and raised by him to great Authority,
yea, such as almost equaled him, adjoined himself to them for the fear he
apprehended of all men, and for those great riches which he had gathered
together, for that he was a man of a corrupt conscience, and easily won by
bribes and presents, doing wrong to all men, and abusing the power he had,
against whomsoever he pleased, contrary to all right and reason. Besides, for
that he knew the unbridled nature of Caius, who having once conceived an ill
opinion of any man, could never afterward be dissuaded or reconciled. Amongst
diverse other dangers that he had to apprehend, the greatness of the danger
Claudius, and secretly to follow him, under hope, that after Caius death, he
should be his Successor in the Empire, and that at that time he should by him
be maintained in the same estate, which he enjoyed: and by this means he
thought to obtain his amity and good liking, by giving him to understand how
Caius had commanded him to poison him, and how he had invented infinite delays
to defer this execution. As for mine own part, I think that Calisthus forged
this matter. For if Caius had pretended to kill Claudius, he had not been
dissuaded by Calisthus allegations, who had presently received his reward, if
he had deferred to execute his Masters command, with all expedition in a matter
so acceptable to him. So it is, that the Providence of God Caius to execute
that rage against Claudius; and Calisthus was thereby thanked for a benefit
which he no ways deserved.

Those that were about Chaereas day by day, followed the action very slowly,
notwithstanding that he willingly delayed not, The year of the World, 4005.
after Christ's Nativity, 43.
but thought on all occasions fit to finish his Chaereas expects the occasion
to assail Caius.
that were introduced by him. For, no man suspected Chaereas, so discreetly had
he behaved himself in all things: and he persuaded himself that no man would
have thought that he should lay violent hands on Caius. And although he had
done nothing to any effect; yet so it is, that the power of the Gods was
sufficient to give him force, and to kill him without drawing weapon. Chaereas
was sore displeased against his companions, in respect that he Caius should be
so much the better provided against them, they should not know how to show
their virtue, when the time required that they should assault and set upon him.
They therefore thought it good that the opportunity to set forward this
business, should be the time in which the Games of the Palace were celebrated,
which were solemnized in honor of Caesar, who first of all disanulled the
Peoples Authority, and Caesar himself likewise. At that time they concluded
that it would be an easy matter for them, The final conclusion of the
Confederates as touching Caius death*
when so many thousands of people should be shut up in so narrow a place; so
that he, who would step foremost to give the stroke, might very easily be
succored, for that he could have no assistance, although his Guard should have
the courage and desire to defend him. Chaereas resolved upon this, and it was
concluded that the first day of those sports that were next at hand, the deed
should be done: but their adventure was greater than their conclusion. For the
delay was such, as the third day was almost past, and hardly could they be
drawn to attempt Chaereas assembled all the Confederates, and told them that
the opportunity of time had overslipt them, accused and reproached them of
slackness in that execution, which had been so virtuously resolved among them:
and that it was to be feared, lest if any should be discovered, the whole
matter should be frustrate: by which means Caius might grow more cruel than he
was before. See we not (said he) that by how much liberty we take from our
selves, by so much we augment Caius tyranny? whereas we ought first of all to
obtain security for our selves, and afterward purchase perpetual felicity to
others, the greatest glory whereof shall redound unto our selves. Now they
having nothing to reply against so honorable a resolution, and yet
notwithstanding no ways enforcing themselves toward the action, Chaereas spoke
thus:

Most noble and generous Gentlemen, what is the cause that we linger and delay
in this manner? See you not that this day is the last day of the Games, and
that Caius is ready to go to Sea? for he has determined to sail into
Alexandria, and to see Egypt: truly it will be a small honor for us, if we
suffer him to escape out of our hands, to the end that both by land and Sea, he
may triumph over the Romans negligence. How can we choose but condemn our selves
justly, and challenge nothing but dishonor, if some Egyptian supposing that
men of free condition could not any longer endure his insolence, should put the
matter in execution? For mine own part, I will dream no longer upon your
consultations, but this very day will I hazard my self; and betide me what can,
I will sustain all fortunes with pleasure and courage. For I am a man of that
mind, that no danger can be so great or grievous to daunt me, or draw me from
so worthy an enterprise which some other will put in execution if I delay,
depriving me of the greatest honor and glory that the world can afford for its
deliverance. This said he departed with an intent to attempt and end the
matter, and encouraged the rest to do the like; so that all of them were
desirous to set hand to the enterprise, without any further delay. The custom
was, that the Captains of the Guard entered the Palace with their swords by
their sides, and in such equipage they asked the Emperor the Watchword. At
that time it fortuned that it was Chaereas turn to fetch the Caius was Caius,
arriving there first, had offered sacrifice in honor of Caesar Augustus, in
whose honor likewise those sports were solemnized. It came to pass that
whilst those Beasts were embowelled, that were appointed for sacrifice,
Asprenas Gown, who at that time was Senator, Caius sacrifices to Augustus
Caesar. Asprenas.
was besprinkled with blood: whereat Caius began to laugh; yet notwithstanding,
this was a presage for Asprenas. For he was slain that very day that Caius was.
It is reported that Caius at that time, contrary to his own nature, behaved
himself most affably toward all men, so that all the assistance were
astonished to behold the courtesy that he used. After the sacrifice was done,
he sat him The Theater.
Now was there every year a Theater builded, according to this form and fashion
that ensues: It had two gates, the one toward the open yard; the other
opening upon the porch, by which the actors had their egress and regress,
without disturbance of those who sat to behold the pastime. There was within
the same a certain room, separated from the rest, where the Players and
Musicians kept. When the people were seated, and Chaereas, with the Captains
were near about Caesar, Batibius.
who sat on the right side of the Theater: Batibius one of the Senators, a man
very expert in feats of Arms* asked Cluvitus privily in his ear, Cluvitus.
who sat by him and had in like sort been Consul, whether he heard any news?
who answering On this day (said Batibius) shall the tragedy be played of a
Tyrants death. Cluvitus made him this reply in Homers words.

Whist: lest some Greek should listen to our talk. Now whilst some one darted
certain apples and rare and precious Birds at the people, Caius took great
pleasure to behold how they strove one with another round about him, buffeting
one another to see who should get the same: but at that present there chanced
two presages: for the sport that was represented, was of a Judge; who was
apprehended and crucified, and in the Dance they represented Cynera, who Myrrha
her Daughter: and there was a great quantity of blood gathered to counterfeit
both the murder of the Judge that was crucified, as also of Cynera. It is
affirmed likewise, that the day was the very same, whereon Philip the Son of
Amyntas King of Macedon, had been killed by Pausanias one of his familiars, at
such time as he entered the Theater. Whilst Caius was uncertain with himself
whether he should remain until the sports were finished, for that it was the
last day of them, or rather should resort to the Bath, and after he had
refreshed himself, return back again thither as he had done before; Minucianus
sitting next unto him, fearing lest the occasion should be overslipt, because
he had seen Chaereas go out of doors, with an intent to go and encourage him.
But Caius caught him by the Caesar, he sat him down again: but the fear that he
had, grew so forcible, that he arose again; so that Caius could not detain him,
supposing that he had gone thence to dispatch some important business. At that
time did Asprenas counsel Caesar to repair to the Bath, telling him that after
his refreshment he might return thither again; all which he did, being desirous
that the resolution might take effect. They that were with Chaereas were ready
disposed to take advantage of the time, and were agreed each of them to stand
prepared and in a readiness, in a place appointed, to the intent to act the
Tragedy: and the delay seemed very tedious to them, for it was already three a
clock afternoon. So that Chaereas seeing that Caius Caius was risen to come
forth; by means whereof there arose some noise. For which cause the
Confedesates turned back into the Theater, and appeased the people, telling
them that they displeased and annoyed the Emperor: but the effect was, to draw
him aside from all those, Caius marched Claudius his Uncle, and M. Minucianus
his Sisters Husband and Valerius who at that time was Proconsul, who might not
by any means be drawn from their place, although they had the will, by reason
of the Place and Dignity which they held. Caius Paulus Auruntius. Now when he
was entered into the Palace, he left the ready way where his Officers were, and
Claudius and his Associates held: and turned aside by an unfrequented way to
the Baths, on purpose to see certain young Boys, who were come out of Asia, and
were sent him out of that Country, partly to sing in those Ceremonies that
were instituted by him, and partly to dance in Arms about the Theater; and in
that place Chaereas came and encountered him, asking him the Watchword: which
Caius gave him very reproachfully according to his custom. For which cause
without any further delay, Chaereas assailing him both in word and act, drew
his sword and gave him a great wound, which notwithstanding was not mortal:
some say that Chaereas purposely wounded Caius slain.
because he would not kill him at once, but to his greater torment increase the
number of his wounds: but I cannot believe it, for that in such executions a
man has no leisure to determine how to strike. And if Chaereas had such an
intention, I account him the veriest fool that might be, for he rather took
pleasure to content his despite, than readily to deliver both himself and
others, who, by his delay, in being of his Confederacy might be drawn into
hazard. For, if Caius had not been suddenly killed, he could not have wanted
rescue, and it should seem that Chaereas had not pretended to do so much
mischief to Caius, as to himself and his Fellow-confederates. And being in this
uncertainty, whether his enterprise should have fallen out happily or no, he
had without reason both undone himself and lost the occasion, Caius feeling the
grief of the wound (for he was stricken between the shoulder and the neck, and
his sword could not pierce further, by reason that it hit upon the first bone
of the breast) he cried not at all, neither called for any of his friends,
whether it were that he distrusted them all, or that he had some other
thoughts; and in lamenting himself he passed forward. But he was met by
Cornelius Sabinus who was already prepared to encounter him, who thrust him
down upon his knees: whereupon all of them environed him round about, Aquila
gave Caius his deaths wound: but Chaereas was the author and chief actor of the
tragedy.
and with mutual exhortations encouraged one another to do their utmost in
murdering him. At length in all Aquila that gave him the deadly wound, that
severed his soul from his body. But this act ought to be attributed to
Chaereas: For though diverse set to their hands in the action, yet was he the
first who had bethought him of the action, having a long time before any of
them premeditated the same, after what sort it should be attempted: and he also
was the first that durst boldly impart it unto others, and who after they had
allowed of his resolution, assembled them: and when every one was to speak his
opinion, he concluded the same very discreetly, and had always done far more
than the rest; so that by his earnest and honorable persuasions, he encouraged
those that were fainthearted, since at such time as the opportunity presented
it self, to set hand to the execution, Caius calm enough, for he was almost
dead. For which cause, it is necessary that all which others have done, should
be ascribed to Chaereas advice, virtue and diligence.

Thus died Caius, being struck with many mortal wounds. Now when Chaereas and
his Companions had dispatched him, they perceived well that it would be
impossible for them to save themselves, if so be they should return by the way
that they came; so much were they ravished with that which they had done: For
they drew themselves into no small danger by murdering an Emperor, who was
cherished and beloved through the folly of the common people, and whose death
the Soldiers would not Chaereas with his Confederates retireth into Germanicus
house.
and retired themselves into Germanicus's lodging, who was Caius's Father, whom
they had lately killed. This house adjoined unto the Palace. For although the
Palace was but one, yet consisted it of diverse lodgings which were builded by
several Emperors; whose names, whether they had begun or finished the works,
were imposed upon the same Buildings. When therefore they had escaped from the
press, they were in safety as long as the inconvenience that had befallen the
Emperor was yet hidden. The Germans Caesar's Guard.
The first report of his death came to the Germans Caius murder, were
vehemently grieved thereat, for that it is their manner to censure all things
not according to right, but as they were answerable to their own profits: Caius
especially was dearly beloved by them, for he had obtained their favor by
bestowing much money upon them. Their Captain was one called Sabinus, who was
not advanced to that dignity, either for his virtue or for the Nobility of his
Ancestors (for he was but a Fencer) but for his mighty strength and huge body.
They therefore ran about with Caesar's murderers from house to house; Sabinus
with his German Soldiers seeks for those that slew (...).
and meeting with Asprenas at first, whose Gown (as we have said) was
bebloodied with the blood of the sacrifice, which was a presage that boded him
but little good fortune, they hewed him in pieces. The second was Norbanus (who
for his Nobility and Ancestors might derive his Titles from the noblest
Citizens, amongst whom were diverse Generals of Armies) who seeing they made no
reckoning of his Dignity, Asprenas cut in pieces.
and being of himself endowed with great force and strength, Norbanus.
he took a sword from one of them which first assailed him; with whom he
grapled, and made them know that he intended they should buy his blood very
dearly; and indeed so had he done, but that, being environed by diverse, who
assailed him at once, he was beaten Anteius.
and struck with many deadly wounds. The third was Anteius, one of the number
of the Senators, who with some others met not with these men by chance, as the
two other had done; but to show the hatred that he bare unto Caius, and the
pleasure that he took to see him lie dead, was come out of his house, being
egged on with envy to feed his eyes with that spectacle. For Caius had banished
Anteius Father, whose name likewise was Anteius, and not content therewith, he
had sent his Soldiers to kill him. He therefore with great pleasure beheld the
carcass of this Tyrant; but hearing the uproar that was raised in every part of
the house, he thought good to hide himself: yet could he not avoid the narrow
search of the Germans, who were so displeased, that they killed all they met,
whether they were

But after the rumor of Caius death was heard in the Theater, What sort of
people they were that lamented Caius death.
every one was amazed, and could scarcely believe it. For although diverse of
them were very glad that he was taken out of the world, persuading themselves
that it would highly profit them; yet did their fear hinder their belief. On
the other side, there were some, who desiring not that any such mishap should
befall Caesar, and conceiving in their thoughts, that it was impossible to be
done, for that there was no men so bold, as to attempt it; they supposed the
report to be altogether false. Of this mind were certain women and children,
slaves and soldiers. These by reason they received wages at his hand,
tyrannized with him, being his ministers in all those abuses that he Caius drew
unto him. As for the Women and Children, they were of that opinion, by reason
that such kind of people take delight in Plays, Jests, Donations of flesh, and
other such Pastimes, which Caius in word pretended to do to gratify the common
people, but in effect it was to have means to satisfy his rage and cruelty. He
was also gracious among the servants and slaves, for that by him they had
liberty to accuse and contemn their Masters, and were therein countenanced by
Caius. For when they falsely accused their Masters, they were easily believed;
and when they discovered their Masters treasures, in recompense of their
discovery they were not only made free by him, but also sent home with rich and
ample rewards. For the reward that Diverse rumors of Caesar's death.
They likewise who knew the enterprise and were Confederates with the Actors;
yet did they more closely conceal it the one from the other, fearing lest if
they should discover the matter to any one of Caius tyranny, they might bewray
them: whereby if Caius should be yet alive, they might incur the danger of
punishment. For the report was, that he had been wounded in certain places; yet
that he was not killed; but as yet alive, and among his Physicians hands, who
dressed his wounds. Caius, there was no certainty to be gathered of that which
they said. There arose also another report, which daunted and beat down the
hearts and hopes of the Nobility; namely, that Caius setting light by the
danger wherein he was, and as little also by the wounds he had received, was
come into the Marketplace all bloody as he was, and after this manner
declaimed before the people: See here, how they that spread these rumors,
preferred their conjectures, which were void of all reason: which distracted
those that heard it, according as they were affected. Notwithstanding

But after that the Germans had environed the Theater with their naked Swords,
The German Soldiers resort to the Theater.
all that were present expected nothing but death; and as soon as any man
entered, they were seized with such an amazement, as if they had already felt
the strokes; so that they knew not what to do, having no heart to depart from
thence; and otherwise persuading themselves, that if they stayed there any
longer, it would breed them further danger. At length, when the Soldiers were
entered into the Theater by force, all the Assembly cried out, protesting that
whatsoever was done, it was besides their Asprenas and others that were Caius,
durst not freely rejoice at his death, because they were upon the point to lose
their own lives, having as yet no appearance of any safety.

At length Auruntius, Auruntius enters the Theater, and signifies the
Emperor's death.
a man who was gracious among the people, and was one of the common Criers, who
had a strong voice; and by crying such goods as were to be sold, had gathered
so great substance, as that he was accounted one of the richest men in Rome,
and in great esteem amongst all men in that behalf, entered the Theater in a
mourning Habit, and after a lamentable manner: And although he inwardly hated
Caius, yet for the fear he conceived lest he should lose his goods, and in
consideration of the present danger, he dissembled his joy; wearing all those
Garments of mourning, and using no less lamentation, than if he had bemoaned
the death of his dearest friend. After this manner he came into the Theater,
publishing Caius's death, to the intent that the people might not be ignorant
of that which had happened: The Germans fury, awakened by the death of Caius, is
pacified.
After this, he began to repress the rage of the Germans, and commanded their
Captains and Tribunes to put up their Swords, assuring them of the Emperor's
death; which act of his did manifestly save the lives of all those who were
assembled in the Theater, and all them likewise, Caius had as yet been alive,
there was not any sort of cruelty which they had not committed: For they bare
him so great love and affection, that to secure him from that misfortune, they
would have redeemed him with the loss of their own lives. But as soon as they
understood he was dead, they repressed their furious rage, which egged them
forward to revenge; knowing that it availed them nothing, to discover their
affections toward him, in that he could yield them no requital. Besides, the
fear they had, lest, that in pursuit of their Tyrannous Murders, the Senate
should be incensed against them, if so be the Government of the Estate should
be returned into their hands, made them contain themselves. Thus was the fury
of those Germans appeased for the death Caius.

Meanwhile Chaereas (who feared very much, lest Minucianus should fall into
the Minucianus and Clement were brought unto him, who in his presence commended
Chaereas's exploit, and gave him thanks in the name of the whole Senate; who
witnessed that it was to the general benefit, Chaereas, Minucianus, and Clement
consult about Caesar's death.
and good of the Commonweal; and that the greatest persons were beholding to
him, for that he had neither wanted good advice in his deliberation, nor
courage to execute his resolution; alleging that the nature of Tyranny was
such, that being puffed up with a short pleasure of unjust and intolerable
rule, it finally (as being hated by all good men) determined and ended in
misery, as manifestly appeared in that which had befallen Caius; who, before
any thing was either

Hereupon all they arose who were in the Theater, Arcion a certain Physician
dismisseth some.
and raised great noise and trouble in seeking to save themselves. The occasion
was, that a certain Physician called Arcion, being called out to go and dress
certain men that were wounded; making a show as if he went to go and prepare
such things as were necessary for those that were wounded, made those issue out
with him who sat nearest unto him; but the truth was, he did it to the end to
draw them out of the present danger. The Senate and people enquire after those
that slew Caius. Valerius Asiaticus wishes he had been the Author.
Meanwhile the Senate assembled Caius: The people with an entire and simple
intent, the Senate only to use some formal proceeding. For Valerius Asiaticus,
who had formerly been Consul, came forth among the people, who were in an
uproar; and supposing it a strange matter that no man knew who had killed the
Emperor, whilst every one enquired who it was that had done the deed; O, said
he, would it had been I that had done it. But the Consuls published an Edict,
containing the Accusations that were presented against Caius; commanding the
people and Soldiers, who were as yet in the Theater, to retire themselves to
their Lodgings. And the people were put in great hope, that they should be
eased of those Taxations, wherewith they had been burdened: And the Caius's
murder; who seemed to gather courage, and to speak boldly, as if the
Government of the Estate had been fallen into their hands.


The Soldiers resolve to promote Claudius, Caius's Uncle, to the Imperial
Dignity. Saturninus's Speech in the Senate, for Liberty. Chaereas sends to kill
the Empress Cesonia, Caius's Wife, and her Daughter. Caius's good and evil
Qualities. The Soldiers carry Claudius into the Camp, to make him Emperor: The
Senate sends to him, to pray him to forbear.
WHilst the Estate of the Empire was thus distracted, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap
2.
Claudius was suddenly fetched out of his house: The Soldiers elect Claudius
Emperor.
for the Soldiers assembling themselves together, and conferring among
themselves what was requisite to be done, perceived that it was impossible
Claudius, who was Caius's Uncle, for their Emperor; who was a man of that
reputation, that none of those who were assembled in the Senate, was more
capable than he was, both in regard of his Birth, and also of his good
Education; who likewise being by them exalted to the Dignity of the Empire,
would honor them and with all answerable bounty acknowledge their good deserts.
Wherefore they resolved to Cnaeus Sentius Saturninus, hearing of it and
conceiving that there was no time to be lost, to witness both his worth and his
courage; he got up (as if he had been compelled, but in effect, of his own
accord) and spoke after this manner with a confidence suitable to those brave
men, who

You Lords of Rome, although it be incredible, that the Liberty which has so
long time been unexpected, should return and visit us; yet so it is, that we
see the excellency thereof, although it be uncertain how long time the Gods
will bestow it on us; which is such, Cnaius Sentius Saturninus declaimeth in
the Senate.
that it may rejoice us for the present, what issue soever it may have
hereafter. For to them that know what Virtue is, it is no small felicity to
live one hour in freedom of mind, and in a free Country, Liberty a precious
thing.
and governed by such Laws, which in times past have made our Commonweal to
flourish. For mine own part, I cannot remember our ancient Liberty, for that I
was born after the subversion thereof: But I infinitely desire to have the
happy fruition of that which we enjoy at this present. And I think them also
very happy, who are born and Liberty purchased by Virtue.
there is not any thing that we ought more earnestly to affect, than to live
virtuously; for only Virtue is the thing that confirms men in their Liberty.
Tyrannies breed many mischiefs in Commonweals.
I cannot speak of the time past, but only by hearsay; but for what I have
seen with mine eyes, and perceived by my observation, I know how great
mischiefs Tyrannies do ordinarily breed in a Politic Estate: For they utterly
exstinguish all Virtue, and deprive Free men of all that perfect magnanimity
that may be in them; and teach both to flatter, and to fear, for that the
Commonweal is abandoned, not to the wisdom of the Laws, but to the fury of
intemperate Governors. Julius Caesar.
For since Jullius Caesar bent his thoughts to overthrow the Popular Government
in Rome. and violated the happy course of Law, whereby our State flourished,
the Commonweal has been overthrown. For in subjecting the Law to his good
liking, and himself to his particular desires, there is not any kind of misery
and mischief, that has not overthrown our City; so that his Successors have
employed themselves to the

But amongst all the rest, Caius, who this day has lost the benefit of life,
has wrought greater mischiefs himself alone, than any other, by discharging
his brutish and beastly wrath, not only against the common Citizens, but also
against his own Parents and Friends; demeaning An Exhortation to maintain
Liberty.
to put them to death, if they may possibly do it. Since therefore at this time
you are delivered from so many mischiefs, and are no more subject, except to
one another (which is a Pledge of Concord for the present, and of security in
time to come, and Glory unto him that has redressed the Estate) you shall deal
very well and wisely in my opinion, to provide for the Commonweal; foreseeing
very diligently, all that which concerns the good and profit thereof. It is
free for any man to speak his opinion of that which displeases him, for that
there is no Superior to countermand their saying, or that is exempt from
reproof, if he offend against the Commonweal, or that may threaten with the
Authority of Chaereas to be honored for his Noble Attempt.
by dignifying them with as great honors as may be imagined, and especially
Chaereas. For he only has been the man, who by the power of the Gods, and
through his great wisdom and valor, has given you your Liberty. Neither ought
you to forget him, but to heap Honors on his head; yea, special favors, as to
the man who first of all consulted, and first of all hazarded himself against a
Tyrant, for your liberty. It is an honest, and well-beseeming action of men of
free hearts, to restore Brutus and Cassius, who murdered Caesar; for they were
the Originals of Seditions and Civil Wars in this City: And this man, by the
death of a Tyrant, has not only at once delivered you of him, but also has
cut off those mischiefs that arose by him.

Thus spoke Sentius, and his advice was entertained with great applause, not
only by the Senators, but the Knights also that were there present. Whereupon,
a Senator, called Trebellius Maximus, arose; and stepping to him, pulled off
the Ring which Sentius had on his finger, wherein was inchased a Stone with
Caius's Picture in it, which Sentius had forgot to pull off; so intent was he
about that which he both said and did; Chaereas demanded the Watchword from
the Consul; Chaereas requires a Watchword at the Consuls hands.
who gave him the word, Liberty. They were all astonished at this change, and
could scarcely believe that which happened. For since the Popular Government had
been abolished, the Consuls had never given the Watchword, until that present
time: For before the City was oppressed by Tyranny, the Consuls commanded the
Soldiers. After that Chaereas had received the Word, he gave it his Soldiers,
who subscribed to the Senate's Authority: Of these there were about four
Companies, which preferred the Lawful Government before a Tyranny; who also
retired themselves to their Officers. As for the people, they returned to their
respective homes, full of joy, hope and courage, for that they had regained
Chaereas was their only hope: He foreseeing that there would some mischief
follow, if Caius's Wife and Daughter should remain alive; and that if all his
Friends and Family should not be utterly extinguished, all those who should be
spared, would serve to no other end, but to the ruin of the Commonweal, and
the Laws: And on the other side, desiring to see an end of that which he had
begun, Chaereas sends Julius Lupus to kill Caius's Wife and Daughter.
and to satisfy that hatred he had conceived against Caius; he sent Julius
Lupus, one of the Captains of the Guard, to kill both his Wife and Daughter;
which he did. And the cause why he gave this charge chiefly to Lupus, was, for
that Lupus was Clement's Kinsman, who was a Confederate in the execution of
Caius; to the end, that Caius, had offended through the corruption of his own
Nature, and not by the counsel of his Wife; and that all those evils which he
committed in the Commonweal, by desolating the Flower thereof, was his own
offense, not hers.

There were others that accused her to be the cause of all that which Caius had
committed; alleging that she had given him an Amorous Drink, by which he was
tied and entangled in such sort unto her, and so led and transported by her
love, that Rome, and the World subject to Rome: But her Defenders prevailed
nothing. For at length it was resolved she should lose her life.

To finish this Tragedy Lupus was dispatched, who lost no time in the
accomplishment of their intent who had sent him, for fear he might have been
blamed, and accounted but coldly affectionate toward the good of the
Commonweal. Therefore, as soon as he came into the Palace, he found Caesonia,
Caius's Widow, lying by the body of her murdered Husband, destitute of all
that which the Law gratifieth those that are dead with; Caesonia accuses
Caius, for that he would not give credit to her Counsels.
altogether bloody, and greatly afflicted; having her Daughter lying by her:
being in this condition, she was heard to utter no other words, but that she
blamed Caius, for that he had not given credit to that counsel which she had
given him so often; which words of hers, were by some interpreted two ways; for
some thought that she meant, that she had counseled her Husband to give over
his Cruelty, and murders which he exercised against his Citizens; and that in
his Government, he Caius to set upon the Conspirators, and kill them without
any delay; yea, before they had committed any offense, and by that means
provide for his security. They therefore said, that Caesonia blamed Caius, for
that he had behaved himself too carelessly, in that wherein she had counseled
him. Such were the words which Caesonia spoke, and such was the exposition, as
diverse men interpreted them.

She seeing Lupus coming, showed him Caius's body, and prayed him with tears
and complaints to come nearer: But perceiving that he made no answer, then she
knew the cause of his arrival, and offered her naked throat unto him with a
great courage, using Lupus: and after her, was her Daughter killed, which was
very young. This did Lupus assure Chaereas of with all expedition. This was
Caius's end, Caius a wicked man.
after he had reigned four years wanting four months. Before such time as he
obtained the Empire, he was an intemperate and wicked man, and addicted to his
pleasure, a favourer of Tale-bearers, exceeding fearful; and for that cause,
when he got the upper hand of any man, he was ready to kill him. He esteemed
this the only fruit of his power, to abuse it against Innocents; and to gather
and heap up great spoils and Booties, by wicked and unjust Murders, Rapines
and Oppressions; lifting himself above Caius given over to Lust.
All that which was answerable to Virtue, was odious in his eyes. In all things
that pleased him, he had so violent Appetites, that it was impossible to
contradict him; so that he was not ashamed to use the unlawful company of his
own Sister: Whereby it came to pass, that the Citizens of Rome began to hate
him extremely, for that the like had not been seen or heard of; of a long time
men could not Caius builded a Haven.
worthy the mentioning, or profitable either to the present or future world;
except some Ports that he made near to Rhegium and Sicilia, for Harbor of such
Ships as came and went into Egypt for Corn; which doubtless, is a stately work,
and very profitable for such as travel by Sea. True it is, that it was not
brought to perfection, but only half finished, because the Workmen wrought
slowly. But the chief cause thereof was, that he spent his study in
unprofitable matters, and loved rather to consume his Substance, to feed his
own private Lusts, wherein he took great delight, than to erect and build any
goodly and famous Work, which might have redounded Caius an excellent Orator.
Otherwise, he was an eloquent man, and very expert in the Greek and Vulgar
Roman Tongues, apprehending presently that which others said; and although they
had been tedious in their expressions, yet he answered them in an instant; and
in Affairs of Consequence, he had such a moving persuasion and power, that no
man could exceed him, both in regard of his quick Wit, and easy apprehension,
because he had taken pains, and had exercised himself in Learning. For being
Tiberius's Brother's Son, whose Successor he also was, he was enforced to be
studious; seeing that Tiberius, who was of the same years, was in like manner
excellently learned. Caius therefore enforced himself to imitate the Emperor
Tiberius, whose near Kins-man he was; and surpassed all those that were in Rome
at that time:

Now, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 3.
as I have heretofore declared, Claudius understanding of that which had
befallen Caius his Nephew, and seeing all his house wholly troubled for this
occasion, Caius death, in that they supposed that upon just occasion, he was
put to death, for which cause they rather bethought themselves on that which
concerned their fortunes, and how they Caius; rather incited thereunto of their
own cruel natures, than of any good affection they had toward the welfare of
the Common weal. All which things troubled Claudius, and put him in fear of his
life, the rather for that he saw Asprenas head and the rest of the Nobility
that were massacred, carried about to be seen: for this cause he kept himself
in a certain place, which was only accessible by certain steps or stairs, and
hid himself therein, because it was obscure. In that place one of the Soldiers
of the Palace called Gratus, being unable to discern who he was, in regard of
the obscurity of the place, and supposing him to be some one that desired to be
concealed, he drew near unto him to the intent he might the Claudius besought
him, that he would depart and leave him, he passed the more onwards, and laying
hold of him and drawing him into the light, knew him; crying out to those that
followed him: This is Germanicus, let us take hold of him, and create him
Emperor. Claudius perceiving that he was ready to be attached, and fearing
lest they should put him to death as they had done Caius, besought them that
they would pardon him, protesting unto them his innocence, and how he had no
ways been either accessory or agent in that which had been done. Whereupon
Gratus beginning to smile, took him by the hand, saying, that he had no cause
to suspect his life: For (said he) it behooves thee to rouse up thy spirits,
and to bethink thee how to govern an Empire, of which the gods (who Caius, to
reward thy virtue with. Arise therefore, and take possession of the Throne of
thine Ancestors. This said, he lifted him on his shoulders, for that Claudius
could not walk on foot, through the fear and joy that he had conceived of that
which had been told him.

Upon these speeches diverse of the Soldiers of the Guard assembled about
Gratus and perceiving that it was Claudius, whom they supposed to be dragged to
his death, they had compassion of him as on an innocent, for that they knew him
to be a man of a mild nature, who all the time of his life intermedled with
nothing, and who in like sort had been often in great danger during Caius life.
There were others of them that said, Claudius against his will drawn unto the
Empire.
that the judgment of this matter belonged to the Consuls: whereupon, Claudius
go on his way; so weak and feeble felt he himself in his whole body. It
fortuned likewise, that they who carried his litter, perceiving his plight,
fled away for fear, and left him, so little hope had they that their Master
should escape with his life, whom they saw to be thus drawn by the Soldiers.
Now when Gratus and his Associates were arrived in the Court of the Palace,
which (as it is reported) is the place which was first of all inhabited in
Rome, they began to think upon that which was to be done: thither also there
flocked a great number of other Soldiers unto them, The cause that induces
the Army to make Claudius Emperor.
who took pleasure to behold Claudius, enforcing themselves to place him in the
Imperial Dignity, in regard of Germanicus his Brother, whose memory was much
honored among all those, who had conversed with him. Moreover, they ripped up
how many avaritious acts the Senate had committed, and how great errors the
chiefest Senators had been guilty of, before the Public Government was
changed. Moreover, they considered the danger and difficulty of their actions
then in hand, for that the Government being administered by one only man, would
be dangerous for them, if he should obtain the same by any other means; whereas
if Claudius should enjoy the same by their permission and good will, he would
have them in remembrance who had favored him, and would recompense them
according to their merits. This was the effect of their discourse, Claudius
carried on men's shoulder unto the Army.
which they held among themselves, or when they met Claudius, and lifting him
up upon their shoulders, they carried him into the Army, to the intent that no
man might hinder them to finish that which they intended. There fell a debate
also betwixt the Senators and Citizens: For, the Senate desirous Difference
betwixt the Citizens and Senators.
to restrain the avarice of the Senate, and the refuge of the people, they were
very glad to see that Claudius was advanced, making their account that if he
were created Emperor, they should avoid a Civil war, like unto that which
happened in Pompeius time.

The Senate knowing that Claudius was carried into the Army by the Soldiers,
The Senate persuade Claudius to resign the Dignity offer^ed him.
chose out some of their order, and sent them as Ambassadors in their behalfs,
to signify unto him that he ought to use no violence in obtaining the Empire,
but rather Caius their late Emperor. That it should ill become him, who had
detested the fury of others tyranny, now willingly to be drawn to oppose
himself against his Country. That if he would obey them, and continue to
express the virtue and constancy of his life, which in times past he led with
commendation, he should obtain those Honors which free Citizens could afford
him, and in suffering himself to be governed by Laws, to Caius, which was fresh
in memory, for their own parts they would hinder his proceedings as much as in
them lay. They also alleged, that they were provided with Soldiers, and store
of Armor, and a great number of domestic servants, all which they would
employ against him: But over and above these things, they had far greater
helps, namely their hope, and good fortune, and the gods, who are wont to fight
for those who maintain virtue and goodness. They solemnly protested also for
their own parts, that they were of that mind, that there was nothing more
honest and just, than to fight for their liberty and Country. Veranius and
Broccus, who both of them were Tribunes of the people. They prostrating
themselves on their knees before him, humbly besought him that he would not
engage the Commonweal in a Civil war. And seeing that Claudius was enclosed
with a great number of Soldiers, in respect of whom the Consuls were of no
force, they besought him that it would please him to demand the Government at
the Senates hands, and receive it from them if he were resolved to be Emperor;
for that it would be an act more holy, and just, if he should obtain the same
with their good will, and not in despite of those, who would vouchsafe it him
willingly.

CHAP. III.
King Agrippa encourages Claudius to accept of the Empire. The Soldiers, who
had been for the Senate, forsake it, whether Chaereas would or not; and join
with those that had sworn to Claudius. So Claudius becomes Master, and
condemns Chaereas to die: He suffers with a wonderful Constancy. And Sabinus,
who had been one of the chiefest of the Conspiracy, kills himself.
ALthough Claudius knew with what presumption the Senate had sent this Claudius
denies to give over the Dignity that was offered him.
yet he did modestly entertain the same for the present. But supposing that it
stood very little with his security to commit himself to their trust, and being
encouraged by the exhortation of the Soldiers, Hedio and Ruffinus. cap. 4. al*
3.
who promised him their utmost endeavor, and by the incitation of King
Agrippa, he determined by no means to let the Sovereignty slip out of his
hands, in that it was so willingly and freely bestowed on him when he thought
least on it. After that Agrippa had performed all those duties unto Caius which
were requisite for such an one as had been by him advanced to Honor, and
having taken his body and laid it in a litter, he brought him out before the
Soldiers of his Guard, and assured them that Caius was yet alive, and for that
he found himself sick of those wounds that he had received, he sent to seek for
Claudius was taken by the Soldiers, thrust so much, that he got himself
passage unto him, whom he found altogether daunted, Claudius confirmed in his
resolutions by Agrippa. 1.
He therefore asked the Senators, what was become of Claudius, who told him of
the truth; and besides that, required him to give them his opinion and counsel,
touching the present Affairs: His answer was, that he was ready to adventure
his life in the behalf of the Senate: Yet, by the way he told them, that they
ought to have an especial regard of the Commonweal, rather than all the
pleasure they could pretend; and that they who would be Lords of an Empire,
Agrippa tells the Senate his opinion.
But Agrippa replied, Would God, Grave Fathers, that you were able to perform
the matters you intend; yet will I not fear to discover that unto you, which
concerns you nearly. You know well, that the Army that is with Claudius,
consists of such men, who have been long time trained up in Feats of Arms;
and that those that are to fight on your side, are but men gathered together;
and such as you join them with, are the very scum of your Slaves, who are both
Claudius such men, as may persuade him to give over the Empire. And to perform
this Message, behold my self in a readiness to be commanded by you.

To this effect spoke Agrippa; Agrippa with some others, is sent to Claudius.
and hereunto the Senators agreed, and sent him to Claudius, appointing him
others to accompany him. As soon as he came to Claudius, he secretly discovered
unto him in what perplexity the Senate was, and gave him instructions to answer
and carry himself like an Emperor, Claudius's answer to the Ambassadors.
and to show his Dignity and Power. Whereupon Claudius gave the Ambassadors
this answer; That he wondered Those that were sent from the Senate hearing these
words, returned back again. The Soldier's Oath taken.
But Claudius instantly assembled his Army, and exacted an Oath of Fidelity
Jupiter the Victorious, before day, and some of them hid themselves through the
fear they had of that which should be spoken: Others departed out of the City,
and resorted to their Country Farms, foreseeing with themselves the issue of
all these things; and perceiving that their hope of Liberty was lost, they
thought it far better for them to be exempt from danger, and to pass their life
in quietness, though it were with Subjection, than to be The Soldiers require a
Monarch at the Senates hands.
they suddenly heard a shout of Soldiers that were assembled round about them,
requiring the Senate to choose them an Emperor, and not to suffer their State
to be lost through a multitude of Governors; and to this effect spoke they,
lest the Government should be given to diverse, and not to one. This course of
theirs gave little content to the Senators, both in regard of the loss of that
Liberty which they expected, as through the good liking they had of Claudius;
Some affect the Empire.
notwithstanding, there were some that pretended some hope to be advanced, both
in respect of the Nobility of their Race, as in regard of their Alliance
Caesar's. For, Marcus Minucianus, a man of himself of Noble descent, and who had
married Julia, Caius's Sister, stood up to demand the Sovereign Government; but
the Consuls restrained him, alleging excuse upon excuse. Another, Minutiananus
also, one of Caius's Tutors, withdrew Valerius Asiaticus from Claudius. For
amongst others, the Fencers, who were of no small number, they of the Watch,
and the Sailors, joined themselves together with the Army. They therefore, that
pretended to demand the Empire, gave over their Suit, partly in the Cities
behalf, partly for their own private security.

About break of day Chaereas and his Companions went forth to debate the matter
with the Soldiers; and made signs to them, that he would speak with them, but
they made a great noise to cut them off from proceeding any farther, for all of
them were earnestly bent to have an Emperor and Sovereign Lord; and required
with all Chaereas and his Confederates against Caius. At length, Chaereas being
unable to conceal his Passion, and hearing that they asked for a Monarch,
promised that he would give them one, if they would bring him a Token from
Eutychus, who was the Wagoner to the Green Band, whom Caius had loved
extremely; in so much as he employed his Soldiers in servile Labors, as to
build him Stables for his Horses, besides several other reproaches, threatening
them that he would bring them Claudius's head; and told them that it was a
shame, after having The Soldiers with displayed Ensigns repair to Claudius.
but all of them drew their Swords, and with displayed Colors, marched toward
Claudius, to unite themselves with those, who had already bound themselves by
an Oath, to serve him faithfully. So that the Senate was abandoned, and
destitute of all defense; and there was no difference betwixt private men and
Consuls. All of them were astonished and confused, not knowing what to do,
because they had thus provoked Claudius's displeasure against them. And now
fell they to reviling one another, in testimony of the repentance they
conceived for their proceedings. Whereupon Sabinus, one of those who had
murdered Caius, Sabinus rather chooses death than to allow of Claudius.
arose, and protested, that he would sooner cut his Claudius, or behold with
his eyes, the misery and thraldom of his Country: He likewise encouraged
Chaereas; telling him that he deserved very little by cutting off Caius, if he
thought to live without the Liberty of his Country. To which he answered, that
he made no account of his life; yet that he intended to sound Claudius's mind,
and with this resolution they concluded. Q* Pompeius the Consul, with others,
resort to Claudius.
Mean while some of the Senators thought on every side to break through the
midst and thickest of the Soldiers, to go and do reverence and homage to
Claudius: amongst whom was Q. Pompeius one of the Consuls, whom the Soldiers
accused to be one of the principal Actors to incite the Senate to recover their
Liberty; and they drew their Swords against him; and if Claudius had not
restrained them, Claudius: Apomus retired himself sore wounded, and the rest
were in great danger to lose their lives. Claudius is persuaded by Agrippa, to
use the Senators more mildly.
But King Agrippa drawing near unto Claudius, desired him to use as much lenity
as was possible in him toward the Senators; for that if any mischief should
betide them, he should have no other persons to command. To the which Counsel
of his Claudius gave place, and assembled the Senate in the Palace, causing
himself to be carried thorough the City in the company of his Soldiers, who
marched before him, keeping back the common people. Caius, Chaereas and Sabinus
were come out into the streets, notwithstanding, they were forbidden by Pollio,
whom not long before, Claudius had made Captain of his Guard. And as soon as
Claudius came into the Palace, whither he assembled his friends, he pronounced
sentence against Chaereas. For although his action was accounted both generous
and noble, yet he was condemned for this, because he was perfidious; whereupon
he was adjudged to die, to give example to others, to the end that Princes and
Emperors may hereafter live in safety. He was therefore led to his death with
Lupus, Those that murdered Caius are executed.
and diverse other Romans. It is said of Chaereas, that he endured this accident
with a great courage, which he expressed, not only in that he changed not his
countenance, but also by the reproaches which he gave Lupus, Lupus was putting
off his Clothes, and complained of the cold that he felt, he taunted him thus,
alluding to his name, which was Lupus; That never any cold Caius. His death was
happy, for he received but one stroke; whereas Lupus was faint-hearted and
received diverse, because he stretched not out his neck freely. Some few days
after, at such time as the Romans solemnized their Expiations, and that every
one honored the memory of his dear Friend, they gave Chaereas a part of that
honor, and cast his portion into the fire; saying, That was to deface and
purge their ingratitude whereof they were guilty toward him. Thus ended
Chaereas his Life. But for Sabinus, Claudius had not only absolved him, but
also suffered him to exercise his Office, as he had done before; Sabinus
Kills himself.
yet he thought that he should do amiss, and against Justice, if he falsified
his Faith to his Associates and Confederates; for which cause he shortened his
own days, thrusting his Sword through his own body, to the very hilts.

CHAP. IV.
Claudius the Emperor confirms Agrippa in his Kingdom, adding Judaea and
Samaria
ONe of the first things that Claudius did after his establishment in the
Empire, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap 5.
was to disband those Soldiers whom he suspected; and published an Edict, by
which he confirmed the Kingdom to Agrippa, Alias, 4.
that Caius had given him, accompanying his bounty with many Praises; Claudius
gives Agrippa, Judaea, Samaria, and Lysanias 's Country.
adding moreover unto his Government all that which his Grandfather had
possessed; towit, Judaea and Samaria, which in that they were as one Lawful
Inheritance, appertained unto him. He gave him also out of his own Dominions,
Abela, and all the Country about Libanus, that in times past appertained to
Lysanias. And Rome. Antiochus King of Comagena.
He took from Antiochus the Kingdom that he had, and gave him in exchange a
portion of Cilicia and Comagena. He set Alexander Lysimachus Alebarcha at
liberty, Alexander Lysimachus Alebarcha.
who had been his old Friend, and sometimes Governor in Arabia, and once his
Mother Antonia's Steward; who had been committed Prisoner through Caius's
displeasure, and espoused Bernice, Agrippa's Daughter, to his Son Marcus; which
after the death of Marcus, who died before he was married, was afterward
married with her Father Agrippa's allowance, Herod, Agrippa's Brother created
King of Chalcis.
to Herod his Brother, for whom Agrippa begged of Claudius the Kingdom of
Chalcis. At that very time, the Jews that were in the City of Alexandria,
mutined against the Greeks: For after Caius's death, Sedition in Alexandria,
betwixt the Greeks and Jews.
recovered their former courage. For which cause Claudius gave Commission to
the Governor of Egypt, to pacify and appease that Uproar. He sent also his
Letters Patents into Alexandria and Syria, at the request of the two Kings,
Agrippa and Herod, to this effect:

Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus, Claudius's Edict in favor of
the Jews in Alexandria.
Father of the people, signifies this that follows: Understanding that the
Jews Inhabitants in Alexandria, and for that cause called Alexandrines, have at
all times enjoyed the self same Privileges of the City, which the ancient and
first Alexandrines have had: Which Favors they have obtained by the Leave of
those Princes that were our Predecessors, as it has been plainly made known
Alexandria has been united to our Empire by Caesar Augustus, their Privileges
have continued in force during the several Successions of many of our
Governors; which Rights of theirs have never been called in question, no not
in that time when Aquila was Governor in Alexandria: Since in like sort Caesar
Augustus has not let them, but when the Governor of their Nation was dead,
they might establish other Substitutes and Governors in his place; commanding
that all of them should yield him obedience in observation of their Laws and
Customs, without constraint or impulsion to do any thing contrary to their
Religion. Yet notwithstanding, the Alexandrines have mutined against the Jews,
being in the City of Alexandria, in the time of the Emperor Caius, by reason
of the Caius, who disgraced and oppressed the Nation of the Jews, because they
would not violate their Religion, nor acknowledge the said Caius for a God. Our
Will and Pleasure is, that no one of the Privileges of the Nation of the Jews
be abolished by reason of Caius's frenzy; but my mind is to maintain those
which heretofore have been This was the Tenor of that Ordinance which was made
in favor of the Jews in Alexandria.

But that which was generally made in favor of those, Claudius's Edict in the
behalf of the Jews scattered thorough the whole Empire.
who were dispersed thorough the whole World, was to this effect: Tiberius
Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus, High Priest, Father of the people, elected
Consul the second time, signifies that which ensues. Our well-beloved
Friends, the Kings, Agrippa and Herod, have required us, that we will permit
all those Jews that live under the Roman Empire, to use the same Laws and
Privileges which they have used heretofore, as we have granted to the Jews that
dwell in Alexandria. Augustus, they have never been exempted from them. It
stands with reason therefore, that henceforth the Jews that live under our
Empire, of what place soever they be, may observe their ancient Customs without
any contradiction: Giving them to understand, that hereafter they use our
Clemency so much the more moderately, without neglecting the Religion of other
Nations, in retaining their own. And our will is, that this present Ordinance
Italy, and be sent unto Kings and Foreign Princes, by sit Ambassadors, within
thirty days at the least to the end that they should be in such sort set up,
that they may be seen and read by all those that pass by.

CHAP. V.
King Agrippa goes to his Kingdom, and puts his Chain, being a token of his
Imprisonment, into the Sacred Treasury of the Temple of Jerusalem. He provideth
for
BY these Edicts of Claudius Caesar, Claudius sends Agrippa into his Kingdom.
which he sent both to Alexandria, and other parts of the World, it plainly
appears how well affected he was toward the Nation of the Jews. And
presently after this, after he had dignified Agrippa with all kinds of Honor,
he sent him back into his Kingdom, to govern the same; commanding all his
Presidents and Lieutenants in his Provinces, thorough which he was to pass, to
give him a friendly and honorable Convoy. But he, having wisely and happily
dispatched his Affairs, returned in all haste. As soon as he came to Jerusalem,
he offered Agrippa hangs up his Golden Chain over the Treasury Chamber in the
Temple.
and offered in Gift that Chain of Gold that Caius had given him; which was of
the same weight the Iron Chain was of, wherewith his Royal hands were manacled,
in memory of the Adversity he had past, and the Testimony of the exchange
thereof into better Fortune; commanding that it should be hanged up in the
Temple, and over the Chamber of the Treasury, to testify unto those that
should behold it, that the highest Estates are subject to alterations; and that
God can raise men again, from Obscurity, to happy Fortune. For this Chain that
hanged in the Temple, being consecrated to God, manifestly expressed unto all
men, that King Agrippa was upon a very Agrippa had duly and devoutly
acknowledged God's mercies, Simon the Son of Boethus placed in Theophilus's
room.
he deposed the High Priest Theophilus the Son of Ananus; and bestowed that
Honor on Simon surnamed Canthara, the Son of Boethus. This Simon had two
Brothers, and Boethus was their Father, whose Daughter had been married to King
Herod, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap 6.
as heretofore it has been mentioned. Simon held the Priesthood with his
Brethren and his Father, as the three Sons of Simon, Onias had done, during the
Empire of the Macedonians, as we have declared in our former Books. After the
King had given order for the Priesthood, Jerusalem had born unto him; for which
cause, he acquitted them of those Tributes that every Family paid, knowing that
it became him to show kindness unto them, who had been faithful and well
affected toward him. He created Silas, who had been his Companion in many
dangers, Agrippa releaseth the Tributes to those of Jerusalem.
General of all his Army. Not long after, certain young men that were Dorites,
under the color of constancy in case of Religion; who also had daily expressed
the same in their actions and unbridled rashness, brought the Image of Caesar
into the Temple of the Jews, and erected it in that place; which insolence of
theirs highly offended Agrippa, Silas.
who construed it as an Act that tended to the abolition of the Religion of
their Country: The Dorites place Caesar's Statue in the Synagogue of the Jews,
and thereby vehemently offend both Agrippa and Petronius.
For which cause, with all expedition he repaired to Petronius, who was
Governor Syria; and complained against those Dorites, who was no less
displeased with the action, than he himself. For he supposed that such breach
of Religion, was the means to further Impiety, and for that cause he wrote to
those which had attempted this Innovation, somewhat sharply to this effect
following.

CHAP. VI.
Petronius, Governor of Syria's Letter to the Dorites, concerning the
Emperor's
PUblius Petronius, Alias, cap. 5.
Lieutenant to Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus, P. Petronius
writes to the Dorites to send them to him, who have broken Caesar's Edict.
to the Magistrates of the Country of Doria, health: Whereas Caesar has
published an Edict, by which he permits the Jews to live according to their
Laws and Customs, some one amongst you have been so presumptuous as to
contradict the same in effect (although in words you protest that you obey him)
and do all that which you can, to hinder the Jews from enjoying their
Synagogue, in so much as in the same you have set up Caesar's Image; not only
thereby opposing your selves against the Jews, but also against the Emperor
himself; whose Caesar's Judgment: For it should be very ridiculous in me to
allege mine own judgment after that of Caesar's, who has granted the Jews the
liberty to live according to their own Laws and Customs, and has commanded
that they should converse in equal freedom among the Greeks. For these causes I
command you, that they who have been so bold as to contemn Augustus's Decree
(against whom their own Magistrates have been displeased; excusing themselves
that this accident happened not by their motion, but by the fury of the common
people) be brought before me by the Captain Proculus Vitellius, to yield a
reason of that which they have done; exhorting the Magistrates, that if they
Proculus, and give order that no Sedition or Violence be offered thereupon.
Which notwithstanding it seems that they effect, although we and the most
honored King Agrippa, whom I take for my good and special Friend, endeavor
nothing more, than that the Nation of the Jews should not assemble, and take
Arms, under color of their defense. And to the end, that whatsoever Augustus
has ordained concerning this matter, may be the better known unto all men, I
have added his Edict which he published in Alexandria: And although they are
sufficiently known unto all men, yet has the most honored King Agrippa read
them unto me, when I sat in my Tribunal Seat; concluding, according to right,
that the Jews ought not to be excluded nor hindered from enjoying those
benefits, Caesar: I therefore charge all men, that henceforward they take heed
lest they seek any occasion of Mutiny or Sedition, and that every one live
according to his Religion. See here how Petronius proceeded in this matter,
both to amend that which was past, and also to prevent that which was to come,
that none should be so bold to attempt the like. Jonathan the Son of Ananus is
restored to the Priesthood, and refuses it, and prays that his Brother
Matthias may minister therein.
After this, Agrippa took the Priesthood from Simon Canthara, and gave it again
to Jonathan the Son of Ananus, whom he esteemed to be more worthy than the
other. But Jonathan declared that he was not desirous of this Dignity, for in
effect he refused it; saying, O King, I most willingly acknowledge the honor
which it pleases you to bestow upon me; and know well that it is a Dignity,
which of your own free will you bestow upon me; notwithstanding that, God
judges me unworthy. It I will inform you of one. My Liege, I have a Brother,
who toward God and you, is The King took great pleasure in these his words,
and leaving Jonathan, he bestowed the Priesthood on Matthias his Brother,
according as Jonathan advised him: And not long after this, Marsus Prefect of
Syria.
Marsus succeeded in Petronius 's room, and took upon him the Government of
Syria.

CHAP. VII.
Silas (General of Agrippa's Forces) his great Imprudence, obliges this Prince
to put
SIlas being made General over the King's Army, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 7.
and for that he had always been faithful unto him, Silas, by too much reviving
the King's miseries and misfortunes, and ripping up his own deserts, grows
into the Kings hatred, and is sent Prisoner into his Country.
and had never forsaken him in any danger that was offered, Silas grievously
provoked the King's displeasure against himself, that rather subscribing to his
wrath, than his wit, he not only dispossessed Silas of his General's place, but
also sent him bound into his Country, there to be held Prisoner. Yet
notwithstanding, time assuaged this displeasure; and the King taking it into
better consideration, and remembering what Silas had endured in his behalf,
Agrippa sends for Silas out of Prison* who, dissembling not his displeasure,
is left still in Prison.
he revoked the Sentence that he pronounced. And as he was ready to celebrate
the Festival day of his Birth, and all his Subjects were to take their
pleasure; he speedily sent for Silas, to the end he might be partaker thereof,
Silas, who was of a free nature, supposing that he had just cause to be
displeased, concealed it not from those who were sent unto him, but spoke unto
them after this manner: To what honor does the King invite me at this present,
purposely to deprive me of it again? For he has not only deprived me of those
Honors which he bestowed upon me, in acknowledgment of the affection I have
always showed unto him: but he has altogether abused me, if he thinks that he
can restrain me from speaking freely, he deceives himself. For my Conscience
knows how many hazards I have delivered him from, and as long as I breath, I
will ring in all men's ears, how much I have endured for his Conservation and
Honor, in recompense whereof I am this day in Bond^, and shut up in an obscure
Prison, These words spoke he with a loud voice, desiring them to relate the
same unto King Agrippa; who seeing that he was grounded in an incurable folly,
left him in Prison.

After this, Agrippa fortifieth the Walls of Jerusalem.
the King began to fortify the Walls of Jerusalem, on the side of the new
Town, upon the common charge; increasing them both in length and breadth: which
if he might have thoroughly finished, it had been an invincible Fort. But
Marsus the Governor of Syria, Claudius commands. Agrippa to desist from
building the Walls
acquainted Caesar what the work was; and Claudius suspecting some Commotion,
wrote expressly to Agrippa, commanding him thence-forward to desist from Agrippa
was of nature so ready to exercise Liberality, Herod his Predecessor. For Herod
was naturally malicious, Agrippa favored the Jews more than Herod
extreme in punishing, and irreconcilable to those with whom he was
displeased, manifestly expressing that he loved the Grecians better than the
Jews. For he beautified those Cities that belonged to strangers, and gave them
money, and erected them Baths, and sumptuous Theaters, and Temples, and in some
of them Galleries: but as for the Cities of the Jews, he bestowed not this
bounty on any of them, no not the least reparation or gift that was worthy the
speaking Agripga was very courteous and affable, and equally imparted his
bounty unto all men. He was courteous unto strangers, any testified no less by
the bounty he bestowed on them. To his Contrymen he behaved himself affably,
and especially he was merciful to all those that were in misery. For which
cause his ordinary Court, and the place he took most pleasure in, was
Jerusalem. He was a diligent observer of the Laws of his Country, and lived
religiously, and with as great piety as was possible: Simon the Lawyer
backbiteth the King; who craving pardon, is reconciled unto him
Neither passed there one day, wherein he offered not Sacrifice. It happened at
one time, that a certain cunning Lawyer, who was called Simon, and dwelt in
Jerusalem; had assembled the people by reason of the King's absence, who for
the present was in Caesarea: In which Assembly he alleged many things against
Simon's, thus wrongfully spoke against him, were signified to the King by
Letters sent by the Governor of the City: When therefore, he sat him down in
the Theater, he commanded that very Simon to sit next him; and in peaceable and
kind manner, he spoke thus unto him: Tell me, I pray thee, what see thou
worthy of reprehension, or done contrary to Law, in that which is done here?
Simon having not any thing to reply, besought him to pardon him. The King grew
friends with him far sooner than it could be imagined; resolving with himself,
that mercy does far better become a King than wrath; and that moderation is
more requisite, Simon, he dismissed him. alias, cap. 20.
Now, although he had many reparations in diverse places, yet he honored those
of Berith above all the rest, Agrippa honors Berith with good Ornaments.
and builded them a Theater surpassing all other in sumptuousness and beauty:
And besides that, he made them a sumptuous Amphitheatre, and Baths, and Porches
no ways inferior. The Dedication also, of these things were celebrated with
great pomp and magnificence; he also made great Shows and Plays in the Theater,
in which there were all sorts of Music and Recreations; expressing in all
things the greatness of his Magnificence; and being desirous to delight the
people with a Combat, he gathered all the Malefactors that he could get, and
made two several Companies of seven hundred a piece, and brought them together
to fight, to the end

After that he had finished these abovenamed Buildings in Berith, Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 8.
he resorted to Tiberian, a City of Galilee, and was admired of all the other
Kings, so that Antiochus King of Comagena came to visit him: The like did
Samsigeran, King of the Emesenians, Cotys King of Armenia the less, and Polemon
Lord of Pontus: And besides all these, Herod Prince of Chalcis, and his
Brother: All whom he received and entertained most magnificently and amiably,
to show his greatness; to the end, that all men might perceive Marsus the
Governor of Syria visited him likewise, whom, to the end he might express the
reverence he bare to the Romans, he met with, seven furlongs off from the City.
Agrippa is displeased with Marsus, for sending away the Kings
This interview of so many Kings, was the original of that discontent that grew
betwixt him and Marsus; who seeing all those Kings that came* to see Agrippa,
sitting in the same Chariot with him, suspected such Concord and so great
Amity; supposing that this agreement of so many Kings, would be no ways
profitable or beneficial to the Romans. For which cause he presently sent unto
them, charging them with all expedition, alias, chap. 7.
to return each of them into their own Countries: Which strict Commission,
Aelionaeus the Son of Cithaeus made High Priest.
Agrippa took so ill, that he never had any kindness for Marsus afterward.
Matthias, and gave it to Aelionaeus the Son of Cithaeus. After he had reigned
three whole years over Judaea, he came to Caesarea, which in times past, was
called the Tower of Straton; and there he made Sports in honor of Caesar,
where all the Nobility of the Country was present. On the second day Agrippa
is saluted in the Theater for a God, and spieth the Owl which the German
foretold him of that five days after he should die.
Whereupon, a company of base Sycophants (whose flatteries do usually poison
the hearts of Princes) cried out thus: Be merciful unto us; hitherto we have
feared thee as a man, but hence-forward we will confess and acknowledge thee to
be of a Nature more excellent than Mortal Frailty can attain unto. Agrippa
reproved them not for using these words; neither rejected he their palpable and
detestable Flattery, as he ought to have done. But not long after, he looking
upwards, perceived an Owl over his head, pearched upon a cord, and knew
presently, that he was but Behold him (said he) whom you esteem for a God,
condemned to die; and destiny shall apparently convince you of those flattering
and false speeches, which you have lately used in my behalf: For I, who by you
have been adored as one immortal, am under the hands of death. But I must
willingly entertain that which God pleases to send me: For I have (...) lived
in obscurity, but in so great and wonderful felicity, that each one of you have
held me happy.

Whilst he spoke thus, his griefs augmented in such sort, that he was brought
almost to his last; for which cause, he was with all expedition conveyed into
his Royal Palace, and the rumor was spread in every place, that very shortly
he would be dead. For which cause the people, with their Wives and Children,
put on Sackcloth, according to the custom of the Country, to the end they
might solicit God's Mercy on the King's behalf; and all the City was filled
with tears and lamentations. The King that lay in an upper Chamber, and looking
down into the Court, saw them lying thus on the earth, could not refrain from
tears. And after he had, for the space of five days without ceasing, been
tormented with griping in his belly, he gave up the Ghost, in the fifty fourth
year of his Age, and the seventh year of his Reign: for he had reigned four
years under the Empire of Caius Caesar (having first of all governed Philip's
Tetrarchy Herod in the fourth year) and three years under the Empire of
Claudius Caesar; during which time he governed over the abovenamed Countries;
and moreover, over Judaea, Samaria and Caesarea. His Revenue amounted to twelve
hundred Myriades; The year of the World, 4009. after Christ's Nativity, 47.
besides which, he made many Loans. For in regard he was very liberal in
giving, he spent far more than his Revenue; and spared not any thing to show
himself magnificent. Before the people knew of his death, Herod his Brother
Prince of Chalcis, and Chelcias the King's Lieutenant and Friend, agreed
between themselves to send Aristo, 1200 Myriades amount to 15 Tuns of Gold.
one of their trustiest Servants, to kill Silas, who was their enemy, as if
they had been commanded by the King.

Thus died King Agrippa, leaving behind him a Son called Agrippa, seventeen
years old; Herod the Prince of Chalcis, and Chelcias kill Silas.
and three Daughters, one of which, that was called Bernice, was married to
Herod, his Father's Brother, when she was sixteen years old: The two other were
Mariamne and Drusilla; this Mariamne being of the age of ten years, was
promised in marriage by her Father, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 8. alias, chap. 9.
to Julius Archelaus, Chelcias's Son; and Drusilla, which was six years old,
was promised also to Epiphanes, Son to the King of Comagena.

After Agrippa's death, Agrippa's Children alive.
they of Caesarea and Sebaste forgot those benefits they had received from him;
and used him no less despightfully, than as if he had been their utter enemy:
The Caesareans and Sebastians revile Agrippa being dead.
For they reproachfully abused him after his death, and reviled him in such
sort, that it is unseemly to report the same. Moreover, all the Soldiers, who
were at Charon, drinking to one another for joy that the King was dead. Thus
they expressed their ingratitude, not only toward their King Agrippa, who had
bestowed so many Liberalities on them; but also toward Herod, his
Grandfather, who had builded their Cities, and to his extreme charge, Agrippa,
Agrippa 's Son
erected their Ports and Temples. At that time Agrippa, the deceased Agrippa's
Son, was at Rome, and was brought up under the Emperor Claudius. Caesar
understood how those of Caesarea and Sebaste had injuriously dealt with
Agrippa, he was highly displeased, and moved with their ingratitude: And his
purpose was, to send the younger Agrippa with all expedition, to take
Possession of the Kingdom of his Father, and therewithal to discharge him of
his Oath; but diverse of his Freemen and Friends, who were in great credit with
him, dissuaded him from it; alleging that it would be a dangerous thing to
commit the greatness of such a Kingdom to a young man, Claudius intends to
send young Agrippa into his Father's Kingdom, but is dissuaded; and sends
Caspius Fadus for President, into Judaea and those parts.
who scarcely had as yet attained to the age of eighteen years; and for whom it
was impossible to support the care of so great a Kingdom, considering that if
he were at man's estate, he should find himself over-burthened with the charge
of a Kingdom. This advice of theirs was approved by Caesar, and for this cause
he sent Cuspius Fadus to govern Judaea, and the whole Realm; honoring his dead
Friend in Marsus, who had been his Enemy, to enter into his Kingdom. He gave
especial Commission also, that Fadus should sharply punish those of Caesarea
and Sebaste, for the injuries they offered to his deceased Friend, and the
excess that was committed against his Daughters who were yet living; commanding
him to transport the Companies of the Caesarians and Sebastens, and the five
Roman Legions into the Country of Pontus to serve in that place, and to take
those Roman Soldiers that bare Arms in Syria, to serve there: Yet,
notwithstanding this Command, they were not displaced; for they sent
Ambassadors to Claudius to appease him, and by this means they obtained the
favor to remain in Judaea. The Jews themselves* were the cause of those Wars
which began under Florus.
After this, they gave beginning to those most grievous mischiefs and
calamities that befell the Jews; for they Florus's Government. And for that
cause, after that Vespasian had obtained the Victory, as it shall be hereafter
declared, he caused them to depart out of that Province, and made them seek
their Habitation elsewhere.

THE TWENTIETH BOOK Of the ANTIQUITIES of the JEWS:
Written by FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Twentieth Book.
1. The Emperor Claudius takes the Government of Syria from Marsus, and
gives it to Longinus. Fadus, Governor of Judaea, punishes some seditious
People, and Robbers who disturbed the Province: He commands the Jews to carry
back the High Priest's Vestment, to the Fort Antonia; but the Emperor gives
them leave to keep them at young Agrippa's request: He was King Agrippa the
Great's Son, and was then at Rome. 2. Izates, King of Andiabena, and Queen
Helena his Mother, embrace the Religion of the Jews: Their singular Piety; and
the great Actions of this Prince, whom God Fadus, Governor of Judaea,
punishes a man and his followers, who deceived the Jews. 3. Tiberius Alexander
succeeds Fadus in the Government of Judaea; and Cumanus succeeds Alexander.
Herod King of Chalcis's death, his Children: Claudius the Emperor gives his
Dominions to Agrippa. 4. The horrid Insolence of a Roman Soldier, causes the
death of twenty thousand Jews: Another Soldier's Insolence. 5. A great Quarrel
between the Jews of Galilee, and the Samaritans, who bribe Cumanus, Governor
of Judaea: Quadratus, Governor of Syria, sends him to Rome Ananias the High
Priest, and several others, to clear themselves before the Emperor; who put
some of them to death. The Emperor condemns the Samaritans, and banisheth
Cumanus; makes Foelix Governor of Judaea; gives Agrippa the Tetrarchy that
Philip had, viz. Bathanaea, Trachonit and Abila; and takes Chalcis from him.
The Marriage of Agrippa's Sisters. The death of the Emperor Claudius. Nero
succeeds after him: He gives the Lesser Armenia to Aristobulus, Herod's Son,
King of Chalcis; and to Agrippa, some part of Galilee, viz. Tiberiades,
Tarichee and Juliad. 6. Foelix, Governor of Judaea, causes Eleazar the High
Priest to be murdered; and his Murderers commit other Murders, even in the
Temple. Robbers and False Caesarea. King Agrippa establishes Ishmael High
Priest. Violences committed by the High Priests. 7. Foestus succeeds Foelix in
the Government of Judaea. The Inhabitants of Caesarea obtain of Nero to have
the Jews Freedom recalled. King Agrippa causes an Apartment to be built, from
whence all that was done about the Temple might be seen; the people of
Jerusalem cause a high Wall to be built to hinder it, by the Emperor's
Authority. 8. Albinus succeeds Foestus in the Government of Judaea; and King
Agrippa gives Ananus the High Priest causes Saint James to be put to death.
Agrippa enlarges the City of Caesarea, and calls it Neronias. Florus,
Albinus's Successor, offered many injuries to the Jews, which constrained them
to take Arms against the Romans.


CHAP. I.
The Emperor Claudius takes the Government of Syria from Marsus, and gives
it
AFter King Agrippa's decease (as we have heretofore declared in our former
Book) the Emperor Claudius sent Cassius Longinus to succeed Marsus in the
Government of Syria, whom he deprived of that Honor in memory of Agrippa; who,
during his Hedio and Ruffinus cap 1.
had oftentimes required by Letters, that he should not suffer Marsus to govern
the State of Syria. As soon as Cuspius Fadus came into Jewry, Cassius Longinus
Prefect of Syria.
to take charge of that Country, which he was to govern under Caesar; he found
the Jews that dwelt on the other side of Jordan in an uproar, who had taken
Arms against the Philadelphians, about the limits of a certain Village, called
Mia, which was stored with valiant men. Those who inhabit beyond Jordan, had
armed themselves in this manner, without the consent of their Governors; and
had killed a great numper of the Philadelphians: Fadus punishes the Jews for
their Insurrection against the Philadelphians.
Which when Fadus understood, he was much displeased, for that they had not
reserved the cause to his hearing, and complained to him of the Annibas;
Annibas executed, Amaramus and Eleazar banished.
and banished the other two, whose names were Amram and Eleazar.

Not long after this, Tholomaeus the Captain of the Thieves was also taken, and
brought unto him, who commanded him to be executed, for having committed many
Robberies in Idumaea and Arabia; Tholomaeus the Arch-thief.
and by this means all the Country of Judaea was cleared of all Thieves, by
the care and providence of Fadus. After this, he sent for the High Priests,
Fadus requires that the High Priest's Garment should be delivered into the
power of the Romans, and kept in the Castle of Antonia. alias chap 2.
and the Governors of Jerusalem, commanding them, according to the Emperor's
direction, to deliver up into the Castle of Antonia the Sacred Robe, Fadus and
Longinus (who at that time was come to Jerusalem with a great power, for fear
the Jews, by reason of this Injunction, should raise a Rebellion) first, that
it may be lawful for them to send their Ambassadors unto Caesar, to beseech
him that the Sacred Robe might remain in their custody. Secondly, that it might
please them to expect the answer which Caesar would return to their request.
The Jews deliver Pledges, to the intent they might be permitted to send Letters
to Caesar.
Fadus gave them this answer, that he permitted them to send their Ambassadors
to Rome, provided, that beforehand they delivered him their Children for
Hostages; which when they had readily performed, the Ambassadors were sent
away. Rome, the younger Agrippa (who was his Son that lately died) knowing the
cause of their coming, and being ordinarily accustomed to attend upon Caesar
(according as we have heretofore declared) besought Caesar that he would grant
the Jews their request, concerning the Sacred Robe; and that it might please
him to signify no less unto Fadus. On this his Petition Claudius gave the
Ambassadors Audience, and told them that he favored their suit; desiring them
to be thankful to Agrippa, upon whose suit he respected them, and granted their
Demands: And besides this Answer, he delivered them a Letter to this effect.

Claudius Caesar Germanicus, Conserver of the people, Consul created the fifth
time, Jerusalem, the Senate, People, and all the Nation of the Jews.

Being required by our well beloved Agrippa, whom I both have, and at this
present do bring up with me;I have heard your Ambassadors, who were admitted to
my Presence by his Claudius upon the younger Agrippa's motion, grants the
Jews liberty to have the custody of the High Priest's Vestments.
in such manner, as our most dear and right honored Friend Vitellius
heretofore ordained: To which demand of yours, I vouchsafe my allowance; first
in regard of mine own Piety, and that I desire that every one should serve God
according to his own Religion. Moreover, in so doing, I shall gratify King
Herod and young Aristobulus, whose affection toward me I am privy to, and
whose good inclination toward you I can witness; for whom I have a particular
kindness, by reason of their singular Virtue. I have also written to this
effect to Cuspius Fadus mine Agent: the names of those who have received my
Cornelius the Son of Ceron, Tryphon the Son of Theudeon, Dorotheus the Son of
Nathanael, alias, chap. 3.
and John the Son of John. Given the eight and twentieth of June, in the year
wherein Rufus and Pompeius Silvanus were Consuls. Claudius's Epistle to the
Jews.
At the same time Herod, who was Agrippa 's Brother that had lately deceased,
to whose hands in times past the Government of Chalcis had been committed;
Alias, cap. 9.
required the Emperor Claudius to grant him the power over the Temple, Herod
Prince of Chalcis has Authority granted him to create the High Priest.
and the Sacred Vestments, and the Authority of choosing the High Priest; all
which he obtained: And from that time forward, until the end of the War of the
Jews, this power remained in all his Successors. According to this Authority,
Herod deposed Canthara from the Priesthood, and gave the Succession thereof to
Joseph the Son of Caneus.

CHAP. II.
Izates, King of Adiabena, and Queen Helena his Mother, embrace the Religion of
the Jews: Their singular Piety; and the great Actions of this Prince, whom God
protects visibly* Fadus, Governor of Judaea, punishes a man and his
followers, who deceived the Jews.
AT that time Helena Queen of Adiabena, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 2.
and her Son Izates conformed themselves to the Religion of the Jews, Alias, 5.
upon this occasion that ensues: Monobazus King of Adiabena, Monobazus the
King of Adiabena begets two Sons on Helena his Sister, Monobazus and Izates.
who was also called Bazeos, having fallen deeply in love with his Sister
Helena, married her, and got her with Child. Upon a time it happened, that
sleeping with her, he laid his hand on her belly, whilst she lay asleep; and he
thought that he heard a voice that commanded him to take away his hand from off
her belly, lest he should crush the Fruit that was therein, which by God's
Providence should have a happy beginning, and no less fortunate ending.
Monobazus was much troubled at this voice, and as soon as he awoke, he told it
to his Wife; and afterward, when the Child was born, he called him Izates.
Besides, he had another elder Son Monobazus, according to his own name. And he
had also other Sons by his other Wives; yet notwithstanding, Izates was most
manifestly his best beloved, and so cherished by him, as if he had been his
only begotten Son; for which cause, his other Brothers envied him. The Father
manifestly perceived all this, yet he pardoned them; knowing that they did it
not for malice, but for the desire that every one of them had to be best
esteemed by his Father. Notwithstanding, being afraid lest some mis-hap should
betide Izates, by reason of the hatred his Brethren bare unto him, Izates sent
to Abemerigus, marries his Daughter Samacha.
he gave him many great Gifts, and sent him to Abemerigus, who reigned at that
time in a Fort called Spasinus; committing his Son's life into his hands.
Abemerigus also, entertained him very kindly; and loved him so, Samacha his
Daughter to Wife; and for her Dowry, he gave him a Country of great Revenue.

Monobazus being old, Caron very fruitful in (...), in which the Relikes of
Noah's Ark are to be seen.
and seeing he had not long time to live, desired before his death, that his
Son might come and visit him; he therefore sent for him, and received him very
lovingly, giving him a Country which he called Caeron, which brings forth
great abundance of Odoriferous Plants. In this place was the remainder of the
Ark, in which Noah was saved, during the Deluge; which remnants are to be seen
at this day, if any man have a desire to behold the same. Izates remained in
that place, until his Father's decease. But on the very day of his death,
Helena sent for all the Lords and Governors of the Kingdom, and Captains of
all the Army, and upon their

I suppose (said she) that you are not ignorant of my Husband's mind, who has
desired that Izates might be King in his stead, and has esteemed him most
worthy of such an honor: yet I expect your judgment in this point. For he that
receives the Sovereignty, not from one man's hand, but from many, and has the
same confirmed unto him by their consent, is happy. She used this discourse
unto them to try what their intent was, who were there assembled. Izates was
made King by his Mother Helena and the Nobility, and Monobazus governs the
Kingdom till his coming.
They understanding her mind, prostrated themselves first of all upon the earth
before the Queen, according to the custom of their Country, and afterward
answered her, that they approved the Kings election, and took pleasure to obey
Izates, whom his Father deservedly, and to all their contents and the desire of
the common people had preferred above the rest of his Brethren: alleging
moreover, that they would put his Brethren and Kinsmen to death before his
coming, to the end that he might enjoy the Kingdom Izates: notwithstanding she
required them to suspend their judgments touching the death of his Brethren,
until such time as Izates himself should give his consent thereunto.

They seeing they might not obtain the liberty to put them to death, were of
opinion that they should be kept prisoners until his coming, to the end that
they might do him no harm in his absence; and that moreover, until his coming
there might one be appointed to govern the State, whom she should esteem most
trusty and faithful unto him. Whereunto Helena condescended, and made his elder
Brother Monobazus Sampsera; exhorting him to govern the Kingdom until his
Brothers arrival. Izates having certain notice of his Fathers death, resorted
thither speedily, and receiving his Brother Monobazus willing surrender, took
upon him the Government of the Kingdom.

Whilst Izates was in the Fortress of Spasinus, Izates and his mother Helena
learn the true service of God according to the manner of the Jews.
a certain Merchant who was a Jew, called Ananias, having access to the Kings
wives, taught them the manner how to serve God according to the Religion of the
Jews: and Ananias by their means growing acquainted with Izates, taught him the
like, and accompanied him into Adiabena; being drawn thereunto by his earnest
entreaties, when Izates resorted thither upon his Helena was in like manner
instructed by another Jew, and retained the Rites and Religion of the Jews.

After that Izates came into his Kingdom, and knew that his Brethren and
Kinsfolk were imprisoned; he was much grieved, Conceiving therefore with
himself that it would be a great impiety in him to suffer them to be put to
death, or kept in prison; and that on the other side, it were a dangerous
matter for him, if being at liberty they should remember the evil they had
endured: Izates sends his Brothers to Claudius Caesar and Artabanus.
for this cause he sent some of them to Rome for Hostages with their Children
unto the Emperor Claudius, and the rest unto Artabanus King of Parthia.
Afterward when he was thoroughly assured that his Mother was wholly addicted
to the Religion of the Jews, Izates is dissuaded by Helena his Mother and
Ananias from circumcision.
he endeavored the more to Ananias, who, according with Helena in the course
of her dislike, threatened Izates, that if he would not obey his Mother, he
would forsake him, and depart from him, for that he feared, Eleazar, Eleazar
persuades (...) to be circumcised.
coming from Galilee, and accounted a Learned man in the Doctrine of our
Religion, persuaded him to be circumcised. For coming Moses, and said unto him;
O King, contrary to your knowledge you offend the Law, and God likewise; for it
suffices you not, that you understand the same, but the chiefest matter you
are tied unto, is to do that which the Law commands; how long therefore will
you remain uncircumcised? And if as yet you have not perused the Law as
touching this point, read it now, to the end you may know what great impiety it
is to omit it.

After the King had heard this, he would no longer defer his Circumcision: for
which cause withdrawing himself into another chamber, he called a Surgeon unto
him, who acted that which he required, and afterward calling his Mother and
Master Ananias unto him, he told them what had past: whereupon they grew
strangely amazed, fearing the King should be in danger to lose his Kingdom, if
this action of his should come to light; for that his Subjects would not
endure, that such a man that followed a contrary Religion should be their King:
They feared also, lest they themselves should be in danger, They that rely on
God, and put their confidence in him* do always reap the reward of their Piety.
forasmuch as the cause of all this matter would be imputed Izates himself and
his Children likewise out of many dangers, yielding them his assistance in
their doubtful and desperate conditions, declaring in effect that those that
only put their trust in him, and depend upon his Providence, are never deprived
of the fruit of their Piety. But of these things we will speak hereafter.

When Helena the Kings Mother perceived that the state of the Kingdom was in
peace, Helena the Queen of Adiabena resorteth to Jerusalem.
and that by all men's opinion, both homebred and strangers, her Son was
reputed happy by the good will of God, she was seized with a desire to go and
visit the City of Jerusalem, and adore God in the Temple, which was so much
renowned Alias cap. 6.
and offer Sacrifice of Thanksgiving therein; for which cause she besought her
Son that he would suffer her to perform her Vows; who willingly condescended to
her desire, and furnished her royally with all things that were necessary for
such a Voyage; giving her a great Sum of Money with her, and bringing her on
her way many days journey: so that at length she arrived in Jerusalem, to the
great advantage of the Inhabitants of that City. For at that time the City was
oppressed with a grievous famine, so that many died for want of food; for which
cause Queen Helena sent her servants, some into Alexandria to buy a great
quantity of Corn, the rest into Cyprus to buy dried Figs, who returned with all
expedition they might; whereupon Helena distributed the Victuals amongst the
Izates also understanding of this Famine, sent a great sum of Money to the
Governor of Jerusalem. But hereafter I will declare what other benefits the
King and Queen have bestowed upon our Nation.

Now Artabanus King of Parthia, perceiving that the Princes of the Kingdom had
conspired against him, Artabanus retireth himself to Izates and requires his
assistance.
resolved with himself to go unto Izates, for the security of his person,
hoping by that means, if it were possible to recover his Kingdom. He therefore
retired thither, and brought with him about one thousand men of his Kinsfolk
and domestic servants. And by the way he met with Izates, whom he knew very
well by his Royal Train, notwithstanding he was unknown unto him by
countenance.

Dread King, forsake me not who am thy servant, neither reject thou my prayers.
For being dejected by means of my misfortunes, and of a King become a private
man, I have need of thy succor. Consider therefore the inconstancy of fortune,
and think with thy self, that by providing for me, thou shall provide for thy
self. For if thou make no reckoning of the wrong that is done unto me, diverse
men will grow audacious to enterprise upon other Kings.

These words he pronounced with tears, and with looks fixed upon the ground.
When Izates had heard Artabanus's name, and saw his humble and submissive
condition, Izates comfort Artabanus, and promises him his assistance.
he leapt immediately from his Horse, and said unto him, King, be of good
courage, and let not thy present and perplexed condition dishearten thee, as if
thy misfortunes were irrecoverable. For this sorrow of thine shall be suddenly
changed, and thou shall find a better friend and ally, than thou hopest for at
this time: For either I will repossess thee of thy Kingdom of Parthia, or I
will lose mine own. This said, he caused Artabanus to get on Horsback, and
walked by him on foot, yielding him this honor, as to a greater King than
himself. Which when Artabanus saw, he was discontented, and swear by his Honor
and Fortune to come, that he would set foot on ground, if he would not get up
on horsback and ride before him: whereunto he obeyed, and mounting upon his
Horse again, he conducted him to his Palace; yielding him all the Artabanus,
assuring them on his Faith and Oath, that he would obtain a free pardon for all
that which was past, and to that intent he offered himself to be an Arbitrator
between them. The Parthians gave him this answer, Izates writes to the
Parthians and persuades them to receive their King.
that they would not refuse to entertain him, but that they could not: for that
one who was called Cinnamus was advanced in his place and Dignity, and that
they feared lest a Sedition should happen amongst them. Ginnamus who was a
noble and honorable minded man, knowing that their intent was such, wrote
himself unto Artabanus, who had nourished and brought him up, exhorting him to
return upon his Faith, Cinnamus restores the Kingdom to Artabanus.
and to receive again his own Kingdom. Artabanus Cinnamus came forth and met
him, and prostrating himself before his feet, called him King; and afterward
taking the Diadem from off his own head, he set it upon Artabanus head; who by
this means was restored to his former estate by Izates mediation, after he had
been driven out of his Kingdom by his chiefest Nobility. And he did not forget
the favors which he had received at Izates hands, but did him all the honor
that possibly he could imagine: Izates receives great honors and gifts at
Artabanus hands.
for he permitted him to wear the straight Tiara, and to sleep upon a gilded
Bed, which is a Privilege which belongs only to the Kings of Parthia. He gave
him also a plentiful and great Country which he had taken from the King of
Armenia. This Country was called Nisibis, where in times past Antioch,
Antiochia and Mygdonia builded by the Macedonians.
by them called Mygdonia.

Presently after Izates was thus honored, Artabanus died, leaving his Kingdom
to his Son Vardanes; Vardanes, after his fathers death, labors to persuade
Izates to make War against the Romans, but he prevails not.
who repaired to Izates, praying him to join with him in that War which he
intended to make against the Romans; but he prevailed not with him. For Izates
knowing the Romans force and good fortune, imagined that he undertook a matter
beyond his power. Besides, he had sent five of his young Sons to Jerusalem to
learn our tongue and discipline, and his Mother likewise to adore in the
Temple, for which cause he the rather held back and dissuaded Vardanes from
going against the Romans, whose power and conquests he ordinarily reckoned up
unto him, to the end he might discourage him, and by these assertions cause him
to give over his purposed Izates. But his enterprise had but a fruitless issue;
for God cut off all his hopes. For the Parthians understanding what Vardanes
intent was, After Vardanes was slain, the Kingdom is committed to Gotarza.
and how he was resolved to make a War against the Romans killed him, and gave
the Kingdom to his Brother Gotarza, whom not long after this, his Brother
Vologesus killed by treason, restoring to his two Brothers by the Mothers side
these Provinces, that is to say, the Kingdom of Media to Pacorus who was the
eldest, Vologesus King of Parthia.
and Armenia to Tiridates who was the younger.

When Monobazus King Izates's Brother and the rest of his Kinsfolk saw how
happily all things succeeded to Izates, Monobazus and his Kindred think to
receive the Jews Religion.
and how in respect of his Piety toward God, he was Abias King of Arabia, and
promised him great sums of money, if he would take Arms against their King, The
Adiabenians conspire with the King of Arabia against Izates.
promising him upon the first charge, they would forsake him, for that they
desired to be revenged on him, for having forsaken their Religion. Having
therefore confirmed their promise with an Oath, they incited him to make haste.
The King of Arabia performed that which they required, and marched forth
against Izates with a Izates Soldiers forsook him; and turning their backs to
their enemies, fled in great disorder, as if they had been surprised with a
Panick fear; yet was Izates no ways daunted; but having discovered that it was
treason and conspiracy of his greatest Peers, he retired also into his Camp,
where he enquired of the Cause that they pretended. After he knew that they had
plotted with the Arabian, he caused the Conspirators to be put to death: and
the next day after went out to fight, and killed a great number of his enemies,
and constrained the rest to betake them to flight. He pursued their King also
into a Fort called Arsam, which he battered and assaulted with such vigor and
diligence, that he took the same with Adiabena with great triumph: but he took
not Abias alive, for he himself had prevented his captivity with his death. The
Lords of Adiabena seeing themselves frustrated of their former hopes, in that
by God's hand they were delivered into the hands of their King, could not
contain Vologesus King of Parthia, desiring him to kill Izates, and to bestow
another King upon them who was a Parthian, for that they hated their King who
had abolished their Religion, The Lords of Adiabena persuade Vologesus to kill
Izates.
and had embraced a strange Law. The Parthian understanding hereof, prepared
himself for War; and having no just color or pretext to authorize it, he sent
a messenger unto him to redemand those honors which his father had given him,
which if he refused, he denounced War against him. Izates was not a little
troubled in his mind, when he understood this message: For he thought that if
he should restore the gifts, he should do himself great prejudice, for that it
would be imagined that he did it for fear; knowing on the other side that if
the Parthian should recover Adiabena from Media. Izates likewise encamped not
far from thence, having with him about six thousand Horse. To whom the Parthian
sent a messenger to give him to understand how great his power Euphrates as far
as Bactria, showing him what Kings he had under his subjection, threatening him
to punish him very severely, in that he behaved himself so ungratefully toward
his Benefactors; yea, that the God whom he adored, could not deliver him out of
the Kings hands. Hereunto Izates answered, that he knew well that the Parthian
far exceeded him in power, but that he was far better assured that God's power
extended beyond all men's contradiction. Izates calls upon God, who sends
the Dahans and Sacans into Parthia, upon whose arrival Vologesus returns.
And having returned them this answer, he betook himself to his prayers, and
prostrating himself upon the earth, and casting ashes on his head, and fasting
himself his wives and children, he called upon God and prayed after this
manner: O Lord Almighty, if I have not vainly submitted my self to thy
protection, but have entirely chosen thee Vologesus received Letters by which
he was certified that a great number of Dahans and Sacans, taking opportunity
by his absence, were entered into the Kingdom of Parthia, and spoiled the whole
Country. For which cause he returned back into his Country without any further
trouble. And thus Izates by Gods Providence was delivered from the Parthian
threats.

Not long after this, Izates delivers up the Kingdom to his Brother Monobazus
and dies.
after he had lived fifty five years and reigned four and twenty, Monobazus to
succeed him in the Kingdom, requiting hereby his faith and Loyalty, in that
during the time of his absence, and after the death of his Father, he had
faithfully ruled and governed the Kingdom to his use. His Mother Helena hearing
news of his death, lamented very grievously that she being his Mother was
deprived of a Son that so zealously honored and feared God, yet
notwithstanding she was comforted, when she understood that her eldest Son was
to succeed him in the Kingdom, and hasted with all diligence to go and meet
him. As soon as she arrived in Adiabena, she lived not long time after her Son
Izates. Whereupon Monobazus took both her body and his Brothers bones, and sent
them to Jerusalem, commanding that they should be buried Helena had builded,
Hedio and Ruffinus cap. 5. alias 8.
some three stades or furlongs from Jerusalem. But hereafter we will recite the
acts and gests of Monobazus during his reign.

But during Fadus Government in Judaea, Theudas persuades the people, that
with a word he will cause Jordan to divide it self, and yield them passage: he
with his followers are slain.
a certain Magician called Theudas persuaded a great number of the people to
take all their goods and substance, and to follow him to the River of Jordan;
for he said he was a Prophet, and told them that the River should divide it
self into two parts upon his commandment, and yield them free passage. By these
words of his, he deceived diverse of them. But Fadus sent some troops of Horse,
who charged them on the sudden, and killed a great number of them, and took
diverse of them Prisoners alive; amongst whom was Theudas, Jerusalem. This is
that which befell the Jews under Fadus's Government.

The year of the World, 4010. after Christ's Nativity, 48.

Tiberius Alexander succeeds Fadus in the Government of Judaea; and Cumanus
succeeds Alexander. Herod King of Chalcis's death, his Children: Claudius the
Emperor gives his Dominions to Agrippa.
AFter Fadus, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 5. alias, chap. 8.
succeeded Tiberius Alexander, the Son of that Alexander who had been Governor
of Alexandria; a man of as great Riches as any one of his time and place,
Tiberius Alexander Governor of Judaea.
who surpassed likewise his Son Alexander in piety, who forsook the Religion
Jewry, during which, Queen Helena sent huge sums of money into Egypt, and
bought Corn, and distributed the same to those that were in want, James and
Simon, the Sons of Judas of Galilee crucified.
according as I have said before. At the same time James and Simon, the Sons of
Judas of Galilee, who had busied themselves to incite the people to resist the
Government of the Romans, were put to death at such time as Cyrenius valued
each man's Goods, as we have heretofore declared. These did Alexander command
to be crucified. The year of the World, 4011. after Christ's Nativity, 49.
Herod, King of Chalcis, took away the Sovereign Priesthood from Joseph the Son
of Camydas, and transferred it to Ananias the Son of Nebedaeus. After Tiberius
Alexander, succeeded Cumanus. The died Herod, who was Brother to King Agrippa
the Great, in the eighth year of Claudius Caesar. He left behind Aristobulus,
whom he had by his first Wife, Bernicianus and Hircanus by Bernice, his
Brother's Daughter. Claudius Caesar gave this Kingdom to Agrippa the younger.
During the time that Cumanus governed, there happened a Sedition in Judaea,
whereby diverse Jews miscarried. The cause of all which accidents I will rip up
from the Original.

CHAP. IV.
The horrid Insolence of a Roman Soldier, causes the death of twenty thousand
Jews:
AT the time of the Feast of Pascha (during which time the Jews are accustomed
to feed on unleavened bread) a great number of people assembled themselves from
all parts, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 9.
to the City of Jerusalem. Alias, 10.
Whereupon Cumanus fearing lest, by this occasion, there should arise some
Commotion, he gave order that a Company of his Soldiers should be armed, and
should keep their Guard in the Porches of the Temple, to the end, if any
trouble should happen, they might repress it. Those Governors, who had been
his Predecessors, had done the like in such manner of Assemblies. It came to
pass, In the Feast of Pascha, a certain Soldier showing his Privy Members,
moves a Sedition among the people, whereby twenty thousand Jews lost their
lives.
on the fourth day of the Feast, that a certain Soldier discovering those
Privities Cumanus, saying, that the Soldier was set on by him; which when
Cumanus understood, he was in like manner grievously offended, in regard of
those injuries; yet exhorted those, whom he saw too forward, to keep the Peace,
for fear lest a Sedition should arise during the time of the Feast: And seeing
they would no ways obey him, but contrariwise, they ceased not to injure and
revile him, he commanded that all the Forces he had should be in Arms, and
retire themselves into the Fort of Antonia that was near unto the Temple, as we
have heretofore declared. Stephen, Caesar's Servant robbed in his Journey; for
which cause, Cumanus spoileth the Villages near to the place where the Robbery
was done.
In this mutiny there died twenty thousand men: and after this, instead of a
Feast, there was nothing but mourning; and without bethinking themselves of
their Prayers and Sacrifices, all of them began to weep and lament. So great a
mischief sprung from the insolence of one Soldier. This first lamentation was
scarcely finished, before a second succeeded the same. For some of those who
had a part in this Mutiny, being about a hundred stades from the City, robbed
one Stephen, that was Caesar's Servant, in the High way, and took from him all
that Cumanus understood, he presently sent some of his Soldiers to spoil those
Villages, which were nearest to the place where the Fact was committed, and to
bring the chiefest Inhabitants thereof in Bonds unto him. In this pillage a
certain Soldier found a Book of the Law of Moses in one of those Villages,
which he Caesarea, where Cumanus kept for that present, A certain Soldier
teareth the Books of Moses's Law, and therefore is beheaded by Cumanus's
commandment
requiring him that he would revenge, not their cause, but God's, whose Law was
on that sort dishonored; signifying unto him, that it was impossible for them
to live, so long as their Law was thus contemned. Cumanus fearing lest a second
mutiny and uproar should be raised among the people, by counsel of his Friends,
cut off the Soldier's head, who had committed that Crime against the Law; and
by this means appeased the Sedition that was ready to take head.

CHAP. V.
A great Quarrel between the Jews of Galilee, and the Samaritans, who bribe
Cumanus Governor of Judaea: Quadratus, Governor of Syria, sends him to Rome
with Ananias the High Priest, and several others, to clear themselves before
the Emperor; who put some of them to death. The Emperor condemns the
Samaritans, and banisheth Cumanus; makes Foelix Governor of Judaea; gives
Agrippa the Tetrarchy that Philip had, viz. Bathanaea, Trachonit and Abila; and
THere happened also a quarrel betwixt the Samaritans and the Jews, Hedio and
Ruffinus cap. 10.
upon this occasion: Alias. 12.
They of Galilee, who resorted to the City of Jerusalem at the times of our
solemn Feasts, Certain Samaritans kill diverse Galileans in their way to
Jerusalem.
were accustomed to pass thorough the Country of the Samaritans And at that
time it happened, that their way lay thorough a Borough called Nais, situate
in a great Champain Field: where a Quarrel arising betwixt diverse Inhabitants
Galilee understood, they resorted to Cumanus, requiring him to execute Justice
on those that had murdered their Contrymen; but he being corrupted with
money by the Samaritans, The year of the World, 4014. after Christ's Nativity,
52.
made no account of their complaint. The Galileans being provoked by this
Contempt of his, persuaded the common people of the Jews to betake them to
their Weapons, and maintain their Liberty; telling them, that slavery is of it
self very harsh; but that when it is accompanied with injuries, it is
intolerable. But their Magistrates endeavored to pacify them, promising them
to deal so effectually with Cumanus, that he should punish the Murderers; but
they gave them no Audience, but fell to Arms, requiring Eleazar the Son of
Dinaeus Eleazar was a Thief, who for many years made his abode in the
Mountains; The Galile^^^^ in revenge (...) of the Samaritans and spoil the same.
they therefore spoiled and burnt certain Villages of the Samaritans. After
that the report of all that which had passed, came to Cumanus's ears, he took
some Troops out of Sebaste, with four Companies of Foot, and armed the
Samaritans likewise, to go and fight against the Jews; whereof they killed
many, and led more of them away Prisoners. When the chiefest Magistrates of
Jerusalem saw into what a number of miseries they were fallen, they clothed
themselves in Sackcloth, and cast ashes on their heads, exhorting those that
were mutinous, to consider, that if they did not lay down Arms, and return
peaceably to their own homes, they would be the cause of their Countrey's utter
ruin; that they should see the Temple burnt Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 8.
all Judaea was full of Robberies. The Governors of Samaria resorted to
Numidius Quadratus, Alias. 12.
Governor of Syria, who dwelt at that time in Tire; to accuse the Jews, The
Samaritans accuse the Jews before Numidius Quadratus:
for that they had fired their Villages, and plundered them; telling him, that
their loss did not so much trouble them, as for that they saw the Romans were
contemned by the Jews; who notwithstanding, ought to appear before them as
their competent Judges; yet, nevertheless, that they assembled themselves, as
if the Romans were not their Superiors. For which cause they addressed
themselves to him, Cumanus being wholly corrupted by their money had smothered
the matter, and done no justice on the Murderers. When Quadratus heard this,
he reserved the judgment till another time, telling them that he would give
sentence in the matter when he came into Judea, The Jews say the burden of the
Wars on the Samaritans and Cumanus.
and had examined the truth on both sides; so that they returned without doing
any thing.

Shortly after, Quadratus came into Samaria, where he heard that the Samaritans
had been the Authors of the trouble, and on the other side knowing that some
Jews likewise intended some insurrection, he caused them to be crucified, whom
Cumaenus had left in prison. From thence he transported himself to Lydda, which
is a Borough of Dortus one of the chiefest among the Jews, Dortus with four
other are crucified*
and four other his Confederates induced the people to rebel against the
Romans. Quadratus caused them to be executed. As for Ananias, Ananias, Ananus,
Cumanus, Celer, and some other are sent to Rome.
who was the High Priest, and the Captain Ananus, he sent them bound to Rome,
to render an account to the Emperor Claudius of that which they had done.
Moreover, he commanded the chief Governors both of the Samaritans and Jews,
that they should speedily repair to Rome; whither Cumanus and Captain Celer
should conduct them, to the end they might be judged by Caesar himself, upon
the information taken on both sides. And fearing lest the common people of the
Jews Jerusalem, to give order that the Jews should attempt to raise no new
stirs; but when he came thither, he found all in peace, and busied in the
celebration of the Feast, and offering Sacrifices to God, according to their
accustomed Ceremonies. Being therefore assured that no man would rebel in that
place, he left them to their solemnites, and repaired to Antioch.

But the Jews that were sent to Rome with Cumanus and the principal Samaritans
had a day assigned them by the Emperor to decide the differences that were
between them. Alias cap. 13.
Cumanus and the Samaritans endeavored all that they might by the mediation of
Caesar's friends and freemen, to have the upper hand of the Jews; and indeed
Agrippa had not been at Rome. Agrippa moves Agrippina to entreat Caesar to
hear the cause of the Jews.
For he seeing that the matter was handled to the disadvantage of the Jews,
besought Agrippina the Emperors Wife, that she would prevail so with her
Husband, that he would be pleased to take full knowledge of that which was
done; and that afterward he should execute due justice on those whom he found
guilty of that sedition. Claudius favorably gave ear to this request: and
hearing the whole matter, he found that the Samaritans were the first Authors
of all those mischiefs, and caused them to be put to death who came before him
to plead, and banished Cumanus: he gave order also that Captain Celer should be
sent back to Jerusalem, and that there in sight of all the people he should be
dragged about the City, until he died. He sent Claudius Foelix, Pallas Brother,
to govern Judaea.

In the twelfth year of his Reign, Hedio and Ruffinus cap. 2. alias 13.
he gave Agrippa, Philip's Tetrarchy, with Batanea; and besides that, added
thereunto Trachonitis and Abila, which in time past appertained to Lysanias
Tetrarchy, Claudius Felix Governor of Judea.
taking from this the Province of Chalcis, which he had governed for the space
of four years. After that Agrippa had obtained this gift at Caesar's hands, he
married his sister Drusilla to Azizus King of the Emessenians, who consented to
be circumcised, Drusilla.
because Epiphanes, King Antiochus Son would not give ear unto the marriage,
for that he refused to entertain the Religion of the Jews, although in times
past he had promised his Father no less. Mariamne.
He gave Mariamne to Archelaus, Chelcias Son, who by her Fathers consent was
formerly promised him, on whom he begat a Bernice. A little after this, the
Marriage of Azizus and Drusilla was broken off on this occasion following:
Felix gets Drusilla from her husband.
When Felix governed Jewry, he saw Drusilla and fell in love with her, she
surpassing all other women in Beauty. He therefore sent a certain Magician
called Simon, who was born in Cyprus, and one of his greatest friends among the
Jews, who persuaded her to forsake her first Husband, and to marry Felix,
giving her to understand that she should be happy, if she refused not this
match. She unadvised, and resolved to rid her self from the hatred which her
Sister Bernice bare toward her (who hated her in regard of her beauty, and for
this cause ceased not to injure her) condescended to forsake the Religion of
the Jews, and to marry Felix, by whom she had a Son called Agrippa; whose death
hereafter I will Titus's his time he died, and was burned in the fire of the
Mountain Vesuvius with his Wife. Bernice remained a Widow, very long after
Herod's death, who was both her Uncle and her Husband, and the report was that
she had the company of her Brother. At length she wrought so much, that Polemon
King of Cilicia caused himself to be circumcised, to the end he might marry
her, purposing by that means to make it known how falsely she had been accused.
Whereunto Polemon gave ear because she was rich. But this Marriage continued
not any long time: Polemon King of Cilicia marries Bernice.
For Bernice through her impudency, as it is reported, abandoned Polemon, who
giving over that Marriage forsook also the Religion of the Jews. At the same
time Mariamne having forsaken Archelaus her Husband, married Demetrius, one of
the chiefest Jews that were in Alexandria, Mariamne scorning Archelaus marries
Demetrius,
both in regard of his descent, as also his riches; who at that time also
exercised the office of Alubarcha, that is to say, the Governor of Arabia. She
caused the Son she had by him to be called Agrippinus. But of all this I will
speak more exactly hereafter.

The Emperor Claudius died after he had reigned thirteen years, Hedio and
Ruffinus, cap. 10. alias 15.
eight months, and twenty days. Some say that he was poisoned by Agrippina his
wife the daughter of Germanicus, Claudius's Brother. She was first married to
Domitius Aenobarbus, one of the greatest men of Rome; after whose death and
long Widowhood, she was at length married to Claudius, Agrippina, Messalina,
and Paetina Claudius 's Wives.
into whose house she brought her Son called Domitius, by his own Fathers name.
Claudius had put Messalina his wife to death, for the jealousy he had of her;
although he had had children by her, namely Britannicus and Octavia: And for
his daughter Antonia, who was eldest of all his children and begotten on
Paetina one of his former Wives, she was married to Nero, whom Claudius so
named, and adopted for his Son. Agrippina, fearing lest Britanicus, growing to
man's Burrus. who was General of the Army, with some other Captains, Nero
Emperor.
and those of the greatest power among his freemen, to bring Nero into the
field, and to proclaim him Emperor. He being thus established in the Empire,
caused Britannicus to be secretly poisoned; and not long after this, he openly
caused his Mother to be put to death, yielding her this recompense, not only
for that she had born him in her womb, but also because by her means he had
obtained the Empire. The year of the World, 4019. after Christ's Nativity, 57.
He likewise murdered Octavia his wife, the Emperor Claudius's daughter, and
diverse other Noble men, under color of some Conspiracy intended against Nero's
History; Nero a tyrant.
of whom some have no regard of the truth, but have spoken at their pleasure,
Nero's tyranny.
for that he had been their Benefactor: others transported with hatred and
despite against him, having not been ashamed to punish such impudent lies
against his renown, that they deserve to be condemned. Neither do I wonder that
they have invented so many lies against Nero, considering that in those
Histories which they wrote of the former Emperors, they have not studied to
speak truth, although they had not any occasion to hate them, considering that
they lived a long time after their death. For my own part I am resolved never
to deviate from the truth, contenting my self to touch only by the way those
things that concern my Azizus King of Emesene being dead the first year of the
Emperor Nero's reign, his Brother obtained the Kingdom: Aristobulus the son of
Herod King of Chalcis, had the Government of the lesser Armenia from Nero, who
gave Agrippa a certain portion of Galilee, commanding those of Tiberias and
Tarichaea to live under him. Besides this, he gave him Julias situate beyond
Jordan, with fourteen Buroughs near adjoining thereunto.

CHAP. VI.
Foelix, Governor of Judaea, causes Eleazar the High Priest to be murdered;
and his Murderers commit other Murders, even in the Temple. Robbers and False
Prophets are punished. Alias cap. 16.
A great debate betwixt the Jews, and the other Inhabitants of Caesarea. Felix
punishes the thieves and Magicians, and other seducers of the people.
King Agrippa establishes Ishmael High Priest. Violences committed by the High
Priests.
BUt the affairs of Judea grew daily worse and worse: For the Country was
stored again with Thieves and inchanters, who deceived the common People. Felix
apprehended Eleazar the son of Dinaeus sent to Rome.
and caused them to be executed. He took Eleazar also the Son of Dinaeus, who
was Captain of those Outlaws and Thieves that ranged Foelix had given him his
word, that he should no ways be endangered; whereupon he came and submitted
himself, and was presently fettered and sent to Rome. Whereas the Governor
hated extremely Jonathan the High Priest, because he used to find fault with
him for his mis-behaviours, lest he should be blamed for him, because it was
through his means, that the Emperor had made him Governnour; Foelix conspireth
against Jonathan.
he resolved to make an end of him; there being nothing more unsufferable to
the wicked, than to be rebuked. To compass his design, he bribed a man called
Dora, who was born in Jerusalem, and was one of those in whom Jonathan reposed
his greatest trust; to bring in certain Thieves to murder Jonathan; who
willingly listened to his demands: and desirous to gratify the Governor, by
this means that ensues, Jerusalem, under color of Devotion; who carrying
their Swords close hidden under their Garments, accosted Jonathan, and killed
him. Now, for that this Murder was let slip, and not punished; from that day
forward, the Thieves resorted boldly to solemn Feasts, having their weapons
hidden under their garments, and thronging in among the people, killed some of
those who were their Adversaries and others, to pleasure those who had hired
them with ready money to rid them of those they mis-liked. And they did so, not
only up and down the City, but in the Temple likewise; where they killed some
who little suspected that any impiety should be committed in that place. For my
own part, I think that God has destroyed our City, in The deceitful Magician.
they persuaded the common people to follow them into the Desert, promising
them to show them signs and miracles done by the Power of God; whereunto diverse
gave ear, and at last suffered the penalty of their folly: For Foelix recalling
them back again, punished them.

At the same time there came a certain man from Egypt, Hedio and Ruffinus,
chap. 12.
to Jerusalem, who termed himself a Prophet; who incited the common people to
follow him to the Mount called Olivet, alias, cap. 17.
situate not far off from Jerusalem, A false Prophet draws the Jews to the
Mount Olivet.
and only distant some five furlongs from thence; telling them, that from
thence he would make them see the Walls of the City fall unto the ground, by
which way he promised to give them entry: Which being reported to Foelix, he
caused the Soldiers to arm themselves; and departing out of Jerusalem with
great store of Horse and Foot, he set upon them, and killed four hundred of
them, and took too hundred alive; as for the Egyptian, he escaped out of the
skirmish, and no man knew what became of him. The Thieves also, incited the
people anew to make War against the Romans, telling them that they ought not to
yield them obedience; and they burned and spoiled diverse of those Buroughs,
which opposed themselves against them. It chanced also, that the Jews that
inhabited Caesarea, Hedio and Ruffinus, cap. 13.
mutined against the Syrians that were in the same City, in that they strove to
have an equal Authority in the Government of the State as well as they. Alias,
18.
The Jews pretended the Title of Superiority, A broil in Caesarea between the
Syrians and the Jews.
because that Herod, who was a Jew, had builded the City of Caesarea; on the
other side, the Syrians owned the Jews sayings to be true; but they replied
also, that Caesarea was formerly called the Tower of Straton, and that at that
time there was not one Jew that inhabited the same. Which when the Governors
of that Country heard, The year of the world, 4020. after Christ's Nativity, 58.
they laid hands on the Authors of this Sedition, as well of the one, as of the
other party, and gave them the Bastindo; pacifying by this means, the trouble
for a little space. For the Jews once more being puffed up with their Riches,
and contemning the Syrians, injuriously reviled and provoked them: On Foelix
perceiving that this debate might breed a War, came in between them, requiring
the Jews to desist from further violence, and commanding his Soldiers to beat
down those who would refuse to obey him; by which means a great number were
killed, and diverse taken Prisoners. Moreover, he gave his Soldiers liberty to
spoil, and rob diverse very rich houses. The other Jews, who, besides their
Authority, were renowned Foelix to sound a retreat, and to call in his
Soldiers, and to spare that which as yet remained, being sore grieved at that
which had happened; to which Foelix condescended, At the same time King Agrippa
gave the Priesthood to Ishmael, the Son of Phabeus. There arose also a
dissension betwixt the High Priests, and the other Priests and Governors of
Jerusalem; and each Faction walked forth, accompanied with a Troop of proud and
mutinous persons, who decided their debates with bitter words, and flinging of
stones, Ismael the son of Phabeus High Priest.
so that no man might pacify them: For all things were so out of order, as if
there had been no Magistrates in the City; and the impudency and audaciousness
of the High Priests permitted so much, that they sent their Servants to the
Barns, The strife between the High Priests and the Priests.
to seize the Tenths that were due unto the Priests; whereby it came to pass,
that some poor Priests died for want; so much did the violence of the Seditious
at that time prevail ahove all right.

CHAP. VII.
Festus succeeds Foelix in the Government of Judaea. The Inhabitants of
Caesarea obtain of Nero to have the Jews Freedom recalled. King Agrippa causes
an Apartment to be built, from whence all that was done about the Temple might
be seen; the people of Jerusalem cause a high Wall to be built to hinder it, by
the Emperor's Authority.
AFter that Portius Festus had been sent by Nero to succeed Foelix in the
Government Judaea, Alias, 19.
the chiefest of those Jews that inhabited Caesarea, Foelix accused
repaired to Rome to accuse Foelix; and without all doubt he had been punished
for the injuries he had committed against the Jews, if Nero had not pardoned
him upon his Brother Palas's submission and entreaty, who importuned him, and
was at that time in great reputation with him. Hedio and Rufffinus, cap. 14.
Furthermore, two of the chiefest amongst the Syrians wrought Berillus, who had
sometimes been Nero's Master, and at that time was Secretary of Estate in the
Greek Tongue, by mighty Bribes, to beg of Nero the revocation of the Right and
Title which the Jews enjoyed in the Government and Administration of the
Commonweal. For which cause Berillus solicited the Emperor, and obtained a
Letter from him, which was the cause of those mischiefs that afterward
happened in our Nation; for the Jews of Caesarea, understanding what Commission
the Syrians had gotten,

Therefore, The Cutthroats among the Jews.
as soon as Festus was arrived in Judaea, he found the Country grievously
afflicted with Robberies, and the whole Country was ruined with Fire and
Sword. The Thieves likewise at that time increased mightily; they used short
Swords, after the manner of a Persian Cymetre, and crooked like the Roman
Faulchion; with which they killed diverse: For, thrusting themselves into the
press of the people that came in great multitudes on the Festival days, to
celebrate God's service, they killed those very easily whom they pleased; and
oftentimes repairing to their enemies Villages, Festus discomfiteth a great
deceiver, with all his followers.
they spoiled and burnt them. But Festus sent diverse Forces, Agrippa erected a
stately Building within the Palace at Jerusalem, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 15.
near unto the Porch. alias, chap. 10.
This Palace in times past appertained to the Asmoneans, and was situate in a
high place, with a fine Prospect, from whence they might with pleasure behold
the City of Jerusalem, wherein the King took great delight, and beheld from
thence that which was done in the Temple. The chiefest men of Jerusalem stop up
the Prospect of Agrippa's house.
The chiefest men of Jerusalem, seeing this Building, were very much
displeased; for neither does our Custom or Law permit that any one should look
on that which is done in the Temple, and especially Agrippa highly displeased,
and the Governor Festus far more than he, who commanded them to pull down the
Wall: But they besought him that he would give them License to send their
Ambassadors to Nero, to this intent; alleging that it was impossible for them
to live, if any part of their Temple should be beaten down. Which being granted
them, they sent ten of their chiefest Nobility, and with them Ismael the High
Chelcias, the Treasurer of the Temple unto Nero; who no sooner heard their
suit, but he pardoned them, not only for that they had done, but he commanded
Poppea, who was entreated by the Jews, she being a devout Princess, to sue for
them. She therefore commanded the ten Ambassadors to return, and kept Chelcias
and Ismael for Pledges with her. The King understanding how all things had
past, gave the High Priesthood to Joseph, Joseph Cabi the Son of Simon made
High Priest.
surnamed Cabi, which was the Son of Simon, who in times past, had been High
Priest.

CHAP. VIII.

CAesar being advertised of Festus's death, Albinus Governor of Judaea.
sent Albinus to govern Judaea. But King Agrippa commanded Joseph to lead a
private life, and advanced in his stead a certain man called Ananus, Ananus,
the Son of Ananus High Priest.
the Son of Ananus, who was reported to have been most happy; for he had five
Sons, all which supplied the place of the High Priest, after himself Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap 16.
The younger Ananus, who, as we said, was advanced to this place, was a rash
and headstrong man, that followed the Sect of the Saducees, who (as we have
already declared) were amongst all other the Jews, Alias, 21.
the most severe in executing Justice: Ananus had five Sons that succeeded him
in the Priesthood.
Whereas therefore, Ananus was of this disposition, he thought that he had a
fit occasion offered him to do what he pleased after Festus's death, and whilst
Albinus was as yet upon his way. He therefore ascended and sat down in the
Tribunal, assisted by the Judges; and caused James, the Brother of JESUS, who
was called CHRIST, The year of the World, 4025. after Christ's Nativity, 63.
to appear before him, with certain others, and accused them for transgressing
the Law, and Blasphemy against God, and caused him to be stoned to death. They
Ananus, James the Brother of our Lord stoned.
that hereafter he should commit no such like offense: For that his first
action was not allowable. Some of them also went to meet Albinus, being on his
way to Alexandria, Ananus accused before Albinus.
to inform him that it was unlawful for Ananus to assemble the Council without
his License. Albinus persuaded by these words, wrote a choleric Letter to
Ananus, Jesus the Son of Damnaeus possesses Ananus's place.
wherein he threatened to punish him. And for the same cause, King Agrippa
dispossessed him of the Priesthood, after he had held the same for the space of
three months; and in his stead he established Jesus the Son of Damnaeus. After
that Albinus was arrived in Jerusalem, he employed all his care and study to
pacify the

But the High Priest Ananias daily increased in honor and credit, and
purchased the good will of the Citizens, Some forcibly gather the Tenths of the
Priests.
by his liberality and great gifts. But he had some mischievous Servants about
him, who conversed with those that were most intemperate and aud^cious; who
repaired from Barn to Barn, and took up many Tithes that belonged to the
Priests, and beat those that refused to render them. The Priests used no less
violence than their servants, having no man that might restrain them; whereby
it came to pass, that the Priests; who were formerly maintained by the tenth,
died at that time for want of Victuals. And the Thieves renewing their entrance
into the City by night, during the Feast that was celebrated at that time, The
Thieves apprehend Ananias's Kindred and Servants.
took, the Secretary of Captain Eleazar Ananias's Son, who was the High Priest:
And having bound him, led him out of the City; sending Ananias word, that they
would deliver his Secretary, if he would prevail so much with Albinus, as to
deliver them their ten Companions then Prisoners, who were taken by him. To the
performance whereof, Ananias persuaded Albinus by manifest reasons: Caesarea
Philippi new builded by Agrippa, and called Neronias.
And by obtaining his demand, increased and begat a number of miseries. For the
Thieves used all the cunning means they could devise, in apprehending some one
of Ananias's house; and when they had taken any one of them alive, they would
not deliver him, except before, they might have one of their own delivered. So
that increasing both in courage and number, they became more and more insolent
to afflict the Country.

Agrippa enlarged the City of Caesarea, The Berithians receive much kindness at
Agrippa's hands.
surnamed Philippi; and in honor of Nero, called it Neronias. He builded also
to his great charge, a Theater in favor of the Berytians: He distributed Oil
and Corn for every one of the people, and adorned all the City with most antic
and fine Portraitures upon the Porches. The year of the world, 4026. after
Christ's Nativity, 64.
In Jesus the Son of Gamaliel succeeded in the Priesthood, which the King had
given him, and taken away from Jesus the Son of Damnaeus; who resigned him his
place against his will. Whereupon, there arose a discord between them; Ananias,
Costobarus, and Saul prepared to spoil the weaker.
for having assembled their resolutest followers, they came from bitter words,
to blows and stones. But amongst all the rest, Ananias was the richest in
wealth, and by his bounty reconciled the more unto him. Costobarus also, and
Saul, gathered each of them a Band of Rascals, and desperate men. These two
were of the Blood Royal; and by reason of their affinity and alliance with
Agrippa, they were well beloved:

When Albinus understood that Gessius Florus came to succeed him, Hedio and
Ruffinus, chap. 17. alias, cap. 22.
desiring that they of Jerusalem should acknowledge some of his good deeds, he
called before him all those Prisoners that were notoriously guilty of Murder,
Albinus executes the heinous Malefactors.
and caused them to be executed. As for those that were imprisoned upon any
small or slight cause, upon payment of their Fines, he delivered them; and in
so doing, the Prison was cleansed of Malefactors; and from that time, the
Country remained full of Thieves and Robbers.

The Levites, Agrippa gives them of the Tribe of Levi leave to wear the Linen
Garments.
who were ordained to sing Hymns to God, solicited the King to assemble Agrippa
permits the Ministers of the Temple to sing the Sacred Hymns.
This Suit of theirs was easily granted; for the King, after he had consulted
with those who were his Assistants, suffered the Levites that sung the Hymns,
to lay aside their ordinary Robe, and to apparel themselves in Linen, as best
liked them. He permitted also, that another part of the Levites, who intended
the service of the Temple, should learn to sing the Hymns and Psalms, as they
had required: All which he did, contrary to the Ordinances of the Country;
which being broken, there was nothing else to be expected but Punishment.

At that time the building of the Temple was finished. The people of the Jews
beseech the King that it may be lawful for them to repair the Porch.
And the people perceiving that more than eighteen thousand Workmen should be
idle, and deprived of Wages, whereupon they were accustomed to live by the
building of the Temple: on the other side, being loath to reserve their money
through the fear they had of the Romans; to provide for those Workmen (in the
entertainment of whom they resolved to employ their Treasure, for if any one of
them wrought but one hour of the day, he was suddenly paid his wages) they
requested the King, that it would please him to repair the Eastern Gate, on the
outward part of the Temple, situate in a Descent, the Walls whereof were in
height four hundred Cubits; made of square Stones of white Marble, from the top
to the bottom; and every stone twenty foot long, and six

This Work was first builded by King Solomon, who was the first that builded
our Temple. But Agrippa, to whom Claudius Caesar had given the Commission of
building of the Temple; thinking with himself, that it was very easy to break
it down, but very hard to build it up; and that to re-edifie the Porch, it
would cost much time and expense, he denied their request; permitting them
nevertheless, to pave their City with broad Stone. Matthias, the Son of
Theophilus, High Priest.
He took the Priesthood from Jesus the Son of Gamaliel, and gave it to
Matthias, the Son of Theophilus; in whose time, the Wars betwixt the Romans and
the Jews began.

But I think it not amiss, Hedio and Ruffinus, chap. 18.
but very answerable to the course of this present History, The Succession and
number of the High Priests among the Jews.
and to show how they had their beginning, and to whom this honor may be
lawfully communicated, and how many they were in number until the end of the
War. The first of them was Aaron, Moses's Brother, after whose death, his
Children succeeded him; and from that time forward, the honor has continued
with their Successors. For it is a Law observed by our Ancestors, that no man
should be admitted to the Priesthood, There were eighty three High Priests in
all.
except he be of Aaron's Posterity: for albeit he were a King, if so be that he
were of another Line, it was impossible for him to obtain the Priesthood. All
the Priests after Aaron, who (as we have said) was the first, until Phanasus,
whom the Seditious created Priest in the time of the War, have been in number
eighty three, whereof thirteen have executed the Office, from the time that
Moses erected God's Tabernacle in the Desert, until such time as arriving in
Judaea, King Solomon builded a Temple to God. For in the beginning, the High
Priesthood continued Aaron's Posterity, and obtained this degree in succession,
the one after the other. Their first Government was Aristocracy, which is the
Government of the Nobility; afterward a Monarchy; and at last a Royal
Government. The number of years wherein these thirteen flourished, were six
hundred and twelve years, from the day that our Fathers departed out of Egypt,
under the conduct of Moses, until the building of the Temple in Jerusalem by
King Solomon.

After these thirteen High Priests, there were eighteen others; who after
Solomon's time succeeded one after another, until the time that Nabuchodonozor
King of Babylon, Babylon, and led away the High Priest Josedech Prisoner. The
time of the Priesthood and continuance of these eighteen, was four hundred
sixty years, six months and ten days; so long as the Jews have had the Royal
Government. After the surprizal of Jerusalem by the Babylonians, until such
time as Cyrus, King of Persia, dismissed the Jews, and gave them leave to
return from Babylon, into their own Country, with permission to re-edifie
their Temple, there are seventy two years; and at that time the Captives being
returned, Jesus, the Son of Josedech, took upon him the High Priesthood; who,
with those of his Posterity, to the number of fifteen, have governed in a
Democracy, or Popular Government, until the time of Antiochus, surnamed
Eupator, for the space of four hundred and fourteen years. This Antiochus was
the first, who, with his General Lysias, displaced Onias, surnamed Menelaus, of
his Priesthood, commanding him to be killed at Berith; and after he had driven
his Son out of the Succession, he established Jacim High Priest; who
notwithstanding, was of Aaron's Race, but not of his Family. For this cause
Onias, the Son of Onias, and Nephew to the deceased Onias, retired himself into
Egypt: Where growing familiar with Ptolomey, Philometor and Cleopatra his Wife,
he persuaded them to build a Temple in the Confines of Heliopolis, not unlike
to that of Jerusalem, and to create a High Priest in the same; of which Temple
in Egypt, we have made very oftentimes mention. After that Jacim had held the
Priestood for the space of three years, he died without Jonathan High Priest,
who exercised the Office seven years; but afterward he was killed in an
Ambush, and Treason conspired against him by Tryphon, as we have declared
elsewhere. After him, Simon his Brother undertook the Priesthood, who was, not
long after, killed treacherously by his Son-in-Law at a Banquet. After him
succeeded his Son Hircanus; who enjoying this Dignity for the space of thirty
one years, died when he was very old, leaving behind him Judas, surnamed
Aristobulus; who dying, left his Brother Alexander his Heir, both of the
Kingdom and High Priesthood. After that Aristobulus had obtained the Judas
surnamed Aristobulus, was the first that set the Diadem on his head, causing
himself to be called a King; the which Alexander did continue; for he also
joined the Kingdom with the High Priesthood, and reigned twenty seven years:
And feeling himself draw near to his death, he left in Alexandras his Wife's
hands, to dispose of the Priesthood as she pleased: She therefore bestowed it
on Hircanus; and as for the Kingdom, she kept it in her own hands nine years,
and afterward died. Her Son Hircanus was High Priest for so long time: For
after Alexandra's death, his Brother Aristobulus made War against him; and
having overcome him, he took the Kingdom from him; and not only seized on the
Crown, but the Priesthood. After he had reigned three Pompey repaired to
Jerusalem, and took it perforce; and laying hold of Aristobulus, sent him bound
unto Rome with his Children. After which, he restored the Priesthood once more
to Hircanus; committing the Government of the Nation unto his hands, forbidding
him in the mean space to wear the Diadem. Besides the first nine years,
Hircanus governed twenty and four: But Barzapharnes and Pacorus, Princes of the
Parthians, passed Euphrates, and made war against Hircanus, and took him alive
Prisoner, and made Antigonus, Aristobulus's Son, King. But after he had
governed three years and three months, Sosius and Herod took him alive
perforce, and Antonius sent him to Antioch, where he was beheaded. After that
Herod was created King by the Romans, there was never any High Priest created
of Aristobulus only excepted. This Aristobulus was Hircanus's Nephew, who was a
Prisoner among the Parthians; and having given him the Priesthood, he married
Mariamne his Sister, to the intent Hircanus: But afterward fearing, lest all
of them should turn to Aristobulus's side, he caused him to be killed, by
finding out a means to cause him to be stifled, at such time as he bathed
himself in a Fish Pond near to Jericho, Aristobulus slain by Herod.
as we have declared before this. After him, he bestowed the Priesthood no more
on any of the Line of the Asmoneans. Archelaus his Son, supra l 15. c. 3.
followed his Father's steps in respect of the Priesthood; and from that time
forward, the Romans have enjoyed the Sovereignty over Jewry. All they then,
that have exercised the Priesthood from Herod's time, until the day that Titus
took the City and the Temple, have been in all, twenty and eight: All the
continuance of their Government was one hundred and seven years. Some of these
governed during Herod's Archelaus his Son: But after these two were dead, the
Government was Aristocratical, or of the Nobility, wherein the Priests had the
Government over the whole Nation. Thus much have we thought fit to speak at
this time concerning the High Priests.

CHAP. IX.
How Florus, Albinus's Successor, offered many injuries to the Jews, which
constrained them to take Arms against the Romans.
GEssius Florus being sent by Nero, to succeed Albinus, filled all Judaea with
many mischiefs and miseries. The year of the World, 4028. after Christ's
Nativity. 66.
He was a Clazomenian born, and was married to a certain Woman called
Cleopatra, no less mischievous than himself; who, being beloved by Poppea,
Nero's Wife, obtained this Dignity for him. He behaved himself so insolently
and violently in all his Government, Gessius Florus Governor of Judaea.
that through the great injustice he committed, the Jews praised Albinus, as if
he had been their Benefactor. For he concealed his mischief, taking care lest
it should be discovered: But Gessius Florus behaved himself so, Gessius Florus
worse than Albinus.
as if he had been sent to make open show and sale of his Villainies, published
his injustice in the ears of our Nation, without omitting any injustice in
executing The year of the World, 4030. after Christ's Nativity. 68.
And, in a word, there was no moderation in him; so that the poor Jews being
unable to endure such insolence, were constrained to abandon their own houses,
and to fly their Country, and remain in some more commodious place of
security; yea, though it were among strangers. What need I speak any more? he
that constrained us to draw our Swords against the Romans, Florus the original
cause of the Wars of the Jews.
was Florus; we made this account, that it was better for us to die all at
once, than to perish by little and little. Florus's Government in that
Province, which was the twelfth year of Nero's Empire. The beginning of the
Wars.
but they that desire to know exactly all that which we have been constrained
both to do and suffer, may pursue may Books of the Wars of the Jews. For which
cause, in this place I will end this ancient History.

This ancient History contains all that which has been reported to be done
since the first Creation of man, The Epilogue of the Antiquities of the Jews.
until the twelfth year of Nero's Empire, omitting nothing that has befallen
the Jews, as well in Egypt, as in Syria and Palestine: All that likewise, which
we have been enforced to suffer under the Assyrians and Babylonians; as also
our Estate under the Persians and Macedonians, and finally under the Romans.
Joseph expert in the Greek and Hebrew Tongue.
I have such knowledge in that which concerns our This Volume was written.
And in this place I will make an end of The year of the World, 4057. after
Christ's Nativity* 95.
And if God grant me life, I will shortly treat of our Wars, and the events of
the same that have happened hitherto, which is the thirteenth year of
Domitianus Caesar's Empire, and the fifty sixth year of my Age. Moreover, I am
resolved to discover in four Books, the diverse Opinions of the Sects of the
Jews, as touching God and his Essence, and our Laws; according to which certain
things are permitted us, and others are forbidden.

The End of the Antiquities of the Jews.
THE Lamentable and Tragical HISTORY OF THE WARS AND UTTER RUIN OF THE JEWS.

Comprised in Seven BOOKS BY FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS, The Son of MATTHIAS.

Formerly Translated into English, By Tho. Lodge, D. M. P. And now Revised, the
Translation refined, according to the late French Copy of it, Published by
Monsieur Arnauld, D' Andilly.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, Nathanael Ranew, Jonathan Robinson, and
Obadiah Tomlins. 1675.


THe War of the Jews against the Romans, The duty of an Historiographer, and
how things that are past should be written.
was of all other the greatest that ever was attempted in our Age, or heard of
in Joseph himself had a hand in the Wars of the Jews.
For this cause, I Joseph the Son of Matthias, by Birth an Hebrew, a Citizen
and Priest of Jerusalem; who, in the beginning of those Wars, bore Arms against
the Romans, and afterward (being thereunto forced by necessity) was present at
all those things, which were attempted and prosecuted in those Wars; have
thought good to write in the Greek Tongue (in favor of all those who
acknowledge the Sovereignty of the Roman Empire) all that which heretofore in
my own Language I have written, to inform other Nations. When these great Wars
began, the Romans were at Civil Wars among themselves: And the younger and more
turbulent sort of Jews, trusting to their Riches and Courage, excited so great
troubles in the East, to make use of this opportunity, that whole Nations were
in apprehension to be brought into subjection to them, because Euphrates, to
revolt all together. Moreover, at that time the Gauls, who bordered upon the
Romans, suffered them not to live in peace: And the Germans also began to take
Arms. After Nero's time all things full of trouble*
In a word, after the death of Nero, Seditions reigned every where: so that by
reason of the opportunity of these times, many went about to make themselves
Kings: And the Soldiers, lead with the hope of gain, desired nothing more than
trouble and alteration. Now, because these matters were important, the trouble
I had to see the truth disguised, made me take care to inform exactly the
Parthians, Babylonians, Joseph had written this History in the Hebrew Tongue
before.
and the farthest distant Arabians, and those of our Nation, inhabiting beyond
Euphrates, together with the Adiabenites, of the true cause of this War, of all
that who (besides their false informations) stick not to write Histories, not
only void of all The Glory of the Romans is diminished, if you derogate from
their labors at the Siege of Jerusalem.
and debase the Jews; I cannot understand how they can be held great, who
triumph in the Conquest of men so obscure and abject. Nay, whilst they thus
extol the Romans valor in conquering the Jews, they consider not the
continuance of the War, nor the multitude of the Roman Forces, nor the honor
of their Captains; whose Glory is much impaired, if they lessen that of the
ressistance, by which the valor of the Jews rendered the execution of the
Enterprise so difficult. For my own part, I am not resolved to contradict
those, who shall enhance the Glory and Noble Actions of the Romans, nor to
extol and cry up the Deserts of my own Nation; but my resolution is, in all
truth and sincerity to set down each Occurrent, without Titus his Piety toward
the Jews.
The truth whereof Titus Caesar himself can justify, who destroyed the same;
who, during all those Wars, still pitied the people, for that they (as he well
perceived) were kept in awe by the Seditious: And oftentimes, of his own
accord, he deferred the taking of the City, and purposely protracted the Siege,
to the intent, that in the mean time the Authors of the Seditions, All
Calamities that happened since the beginning of the World, being compared with
those the Jews suffered are of no moment.
Captivity and Desolation. Nay, if all the Misfortunes and Calamities which the
World from the beginning has seen, be compared with the infelicity and fall of
the Jews, they are slight and inconsiderable.

And to increase our sorrow, it is not to Foreigners, but to our own
Contrymen, The Grecian Historiographers overpass the Wars of the Jews with
silence.
who am the Historiographer. I confess I have often blamed, and perhaps with
reason, the most eloquent Grecians; that (although these our most miserable and
memorable Wars happened in their days, in respect whereof, all other former
troubles are obscure and of no reckoning) they have restrained their Tongues
and Pens, to the end they might carp at those with greater liberty, who
undertake the publishing thereof; whom, though in Learning and Eloquence, they
exceed, yet they have the advantage Who may rightly be called a Historiographer.
wherein they should both tell truth, and with great labor enquire of those
things that are past; here the travel is too tedious, the bit is in their
teeth, so that they leave the matter to their performance, who are incapable
and unapt both in style and study to register the Actions of Princes and great

Egypt; to show what Countries they conquered, and what Colonies they planted;
were in my judgment, both impertinent, and to little purpose; considering that
diverse of mine own Nation have before my time written an exact History of the
actions of our Ancestors: yea, many Greeks also have translated these men's
Writings into their own Tongue, without much deviating from the truth. I will
therefore begin my History in that time where these Writers, and our own
Prophets have ended theirs, and set down at large all those Wars that happened
in my time. As for those things that precede Antiochus, Antiochus Epiphanes,
the first Author and Fountain of the Wars of the Jews.
surnamed Epiphanes, took the City of Jerusalem, and possessed the same for the
space of three years and six months; and how he was driven out of that Country
at last, by the Asmoneans. After this I will set down the Dissentions that
happened amongst Antiochus's Successors for the Kingdom; and how by this means
they drew Pompey and the Romans into their Affairs. The Epitome of the Wars of
the Jews.
How Herod likewise, the Son of Antipater, being assisted by Sosius, put an end
to the Rule of the Asmonean Princes: And how, in Augustus Caesar's time, after
the death of Herod, and during the Government of Quintilius Varus, a Sedition
was raised among the people: And how in the twelfth year of Nero's Reign, the
War began. What Cestius's time; and what Warlike Exploits the Jews performed in
their first Attempts and Revolts; how they strengthened the Cities and Forts
about them; and how Nero (hearing of the great Overthrow, which his Army
received under Cestius their General, and fearing lest he should lose all) made
Titus Vespasian General of his Army; who being attended by his eldest Son, came
into Judaea, accompanied with as great a number of Romans as he could possibly
gather; how a great number of his Allies were defeated in Galilee; what Cities
they took in that Province, either by Assault, or by Composition. Besides all
these things, I will express what Order and Discipline the Romans observe in
their Wars, and how they are accustomed to exercise their Soldiers. I will
describe also the places and nature Galilee and Judaea, together with the
Mountains, Lakes and Fountains thereof, with all the Properties of the same;
not forgetting those miseries which the Captive Cities suffered; and how they
were surprised. All which (together with all those evils and miseries which
during those troubles befell my self) I will discourse with all truth and
diligence, the rather because I publish them to many who are no ways ignorant
of them.

After this, The signs and changes after Nero's death.
I will set down how (upon the declining and downfall of the Jews) Nero died;
and how at such time as Vespasian had undertaken the Expedition to Jerusalem,
he was recalled from it, to receive the Imperial Dignity; and how when Egypt to
establish that Province, the Jews began to mutiny among themselves; how many
Tyrants arose among them, who hatched much civil discord and debate in their
Government. Moreover, how Titus departing out of Egypt, came the second time
into Judaea, and ranged over the Country; and how and where he levied and
encamped his Armies. How, and how often, the City was vexed by Seditions,
especially at such time as he himself was present. What Onsets he gave, Titus
besieges Jerusalem.
and how many Mounts he raised, in begirting the City with a triple Wall: The
strength and Provision of the City: The manners and Sacrifices of the Jews.
The Situation and Platform of the Temple, and the Altars therein: The Rites
and Ceremonies used on Festival days: The seven Purifications, and the Offices
of the Priests: The Garments also, of the High The Humanity of the Romans
toward the Jews.
what Humanity the Romans showed to strangers, and how often Titus (who desired
to save both the City and Temple) exhorted the Seditious to mutual Amity.
Furthermore, I will report how the people of the Jews (after the many and
grievous Calamities which they suffered in the Siege, by War, Sedition, and
Hunger) were at length reduced into servitude after the taking of that great
and potent City. Neither will I omit the slaughter of such as deserted their
Nation, neither the punishment inflicted on those that were Captive: The
burning of the Temple, and the overthrow of the City.
I will set down how the Temple was burnt against Caesar's Will, and and the
number of those that were led away into Captivity, and what miseries they The
Romans triumph over the Jews.
Finally, how Titus traveling thorough the whole Country, established a Form
of Government; and afterward returning into Italy, triumphed with much honor.
All these things I have comprehended in seven Books, endeavoring as much as in
me lies, The cause why he wrote this History.
to avoid all occasion of reproof, from those men who know these Affairs, and
were Actors in the War. Which I have done for their sakes, who love truth. And
according to that Order and Form I promised, I will begin my History.


Written by FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the First Book.
1. The Destruction of Jerusalem by Antiochus King of Syria. The overthrow of
the Syrians by Matthias Maccabaeus and his Sons. Jonathan, to Aristobulus. 3.
Of Aristobulus, Antigonus, Judas, Essaeus, Alexander, Theodore, and Demetrius.
4. Of the War of Alexander, King of the Jews, with Antiochus and Aretas; and of
Aristobulus and Hircanus. 5. Of the War between Hircanus and the Arabians; and
of the taking of Jerusalem. 6. Of the War of Alexander with Hircanus, and also
of Aristobulus. 7. Of the death of Aristobulus, and the War undertaken by
Antipater and Mithridates. 8. How Antipater was accused before Caesar; of the
Priesthood of Hircanus, and how Herod made War. 9. Caesar's death. Cassius
comes into Syria; Herod ingratiates with him. Malichus poisons Antipater, who
had saved his life: For which Herod causes him to be slain. 10. How Herod was
accused, and set free. 11. Of the War of the Parthians against the Jews; and of
Herod's Flight and Fortune. 12. Of Herod's War for the recovering of Jerusalem,
after his return from Rome; and how he warred against the Thieves. 13. Of the
death of Joseph. How Herod besieged Jerusalem; and how Antigonus was slain. 14.
Of the treacherous practices of Cleopatra against Herod. Herod's War against
the Arabians, and of a very great Earthquake. 15. How Herod was confirmed in
the peaceable Possession of the Kingdom of Judaea, by Augustus Caesar. 16. Of
the Cities and Monuments repaired and builded by Herod, and of his felicity and
liberality toward strangers. 17. Of the disagreement between Herod and his
Sons, Alexander and Aristobulus. 18. Of Antipater's Conspiracy against his
Father Herod. 19. How Herod should have been poisoned, and how the Treason was
discovered. 20. How Antipater's malicious practices against Herod were
discovered and punished. 21. Of the Golden Eagle, and of Antipater's and
Herod's death.



The Destruction of Jerusalem by Antiochus King of Syria. The Overthrow of the
Syrians by Matthias Maccabaeus and his Sons.
AT such time as Antiochus, surnamed Epiphanes, made War against Ptolomey the
Sixth King of Egypt, The year of the World, 3800. before Christ's Nativity, 162.
for the whole Dominion of Syria, those of the chiefest Authority and Nobility
among the Jews, were divided into two Parties: And that of Onias the High
Priest being become the Tobias out of the City; who fleeing to Antiochus for
refuge, besought him in all humility, that he would lead his Forces into
Judaea; offering themselves to be his Guides in the Expedition. Antiochus (who
had long desired such an occasion) easily condescended to their request;
Jerusalem, and slew most part of them who favored Ptolomey. He gave his
Soldiers liberty to sack the City, spoiled the Temple of the great Riches which
were in it; and for the space of three years and six months forbad the
Sacrifices, Ant. l. 12. c. 6.
which before time were accustomed to be offered every day to God in that
place. Antiochus being stirred up by Tubias's Sons, invadeth Judaea, and
surpriseth Jerusalem.
Whereupon Onias the High Priest fled to Ptolomey; of whom having obtained the
grant of a piece of Land, within the Liberties and Precincts of Heliopolis; he
built a Town and Temple there, resembling the City and Sanctuary of Jerusalem;
of which we shall speak in due place.

But Antiochus not satisfied with the unexpected surprise of the City, nor with
the pillage and slaughter of the Citizens, Ant. l. 15. c. 4.
was so far transported by his passions, and incenssed The High Priest Onias
flies to Ptolomey.
that he compelled the Jews to renounce their Religion, to forbear the
Circumcision of their Children, and to immolate Swine upon the Altar. The
abhorrence, which the chiefest and honestest amongst them, Ant. l. 12. c. 7.
could not refrain to declare against these Abominations, Antiochus alters
the Customs of the Jews.
cost them their lives. For Bacchides, who was Governor of all the Garrisons of
Judaea, by the appointment of Antiochus, being naturally very cruel, omitted no
occasion to execute his wicked Orders; insomuch that he particularly tormented
such as were of Noble Birth and Quality; Bacchides's cruelty toward the Jews.
and every day represented to them the fresh face and memory of the desolation
of their City. But, at length, a Tyranny so insupportable animated those that
suffered it, to attempt the means of freeing themselves Ant. l. 1. c. 8.
and of executing revenge upon the Authors. Matthias (or Mathathias Maccabaeus)
the Son of Asmoneus, Matthias confederated with others, makes War against
Antiochus*
one of the Priests, who dwelt in a Village called Modin; accompanied with his
five Sons and his own household, armed with Swords, slew Bacchides; and fearing
the power and multitude of the enemy's Garrisons, presently retired himself
into the Mountains. Thither resorted diverse of the people unto him; by which
conflux, growing more confident and courageous, he descended from the
Mountains; and overcoming the Captains of Antiochus, drove them out of the
Borders of Judaea. By many instances of such happy success, he became so
renowned, that he was by common consent of the people (whom he had delivered
from the subjection of strangers) made their Ruler: And when he died, he left
his eldest Son who was called Judas, to succeed him in the Government. This
brave Son of so brave a Father, could not doubt of the endeavors which
Antiochus would use, to revenge the losses he had received; and therefore he
gathered together an Army of his own Contrymen, and was the first among the
Jews that made a League with the Romans. Antiochus failed not (as he had
foreseen) to enter into Judaea with a powerful Army; and this great Captain
repelled him with a great Overthrow. And whilst the remembrance of this Victory
was yet fresh in men's minds, he assaulted the Garrison of Jerusalem, which as
yet was entire; in which Conflict he forced them to forsake the high Town,
which is called Holy, and betake themselves to the lower part: And having
recovered the Temple, he purified it, and compassed it with a Wall, and made
new Vessels for the

Scarce was the City brought to its former Estate, Antiochus dies, and leaves
the Kingdom to his Son Antiochus; who gathers a huge power and invadeth Jewry.
but Antiochus died; leaving behind him Antiochus Eupator, his Son and Heir;
not only of his Kingdom, but also of his hatred against the Jews: Who having
gathered together fifty thousand Foot, and almost five thousand Horse, and
fourscore Elephants, entered by the Mountains, into Judaea, and took a Town
called Bethsara; near which Judas met him, in a place called Bethzacary, where
the passage was something strait: And before they joined Battle, Eleazar,
Judas's Brother, seeing one Elephant higher than the rest, bearing a Ant. lib.
12. c. 14, 15.
and adorned with Golden Furniture, thought Antiochus had been there; ^leazar
dies being slain by an Elephant.
and ran from his Company, breaking the Ranks of the Enemies, till he came to
the Elephant: but he could not reach him whom he deemed to be the King, he was
so highly mounted; all he could do, was to wound the Elephant in the belly with
his Sword, till the Beast fell upon him, and pressed him to death; which act of
his had no other success but this, that by attempting so great a matter, he
gave testimony that he preferred Glory before his life. Eleazar prefers
honor before life.
For he that rid on this Elephant, was but a private person; and although
Antiochus had been there, Eleazar had achieved nothing more in this valiant
attempt; but yet he adventured his life, in hope to perform some great exploit.
This act of his was a presage unto his Brother Judas, of the event Antiochus's
Army (being both more in number, and more fortunate) obtained the Victory; and
Judas after the loss of many of his company, fled to the Gophonites, with those
of his side who escaped. Antiochus advanced afterward to Jerusalem, from
whence after some stay he departed for want of Provisions, leaving a sufficient
Garrison there; as for the rest of his Army, he led them for their
Winter Quarters into Syria. But notwithstanding the King's departure, Antiochus
departing from Jerusalem, leaves a sufficient Garrison there.
Judas rested not; but encouraged by many of his Nation, who daily came to him,
and gathering also together those who escaped out of the former Battle, he
fought with the Forces of Antiochus at a village named Adasa, where after many
proofs of his valor in assaulting and slaughtering a great number of his
enemies, he himself at length was slain; and within a few days after, his
Brother John also was betrayed, Ant. l. 12. c* 18*
and slain by their treacheries who favored Antiochus. Judas sighteth with
Antiochus Captains, and is slain.
Ant. l* 13* c. 1.


CHAP. II.
The Succession of Princes, from Jonathan to Aristobulus.
AFter Judas succeeded his Brother Jonathan in the dignity of Prince of the
Jews. The year of the World, 3805. before Christ's Nativity, 157.
He carefully studied the peace and security of his people, and fortified
himself by the friendship of the Romans, and was reconciled to Antiochus his
Son; yet did Tryphon (who was tutor to the young Antiochus) laying wait for
him, Jonathan taken by Tryphon's subtilty is slain.
and seeking to spoil him of his friends, took Jonathan at such a time as he
came with a small company to Antiochus who was at Ptolemais, and binding him,
led an Army against Judaea: from whence being repulsed by Simon Jonathan's,
Ant. l. 15. c. ^.
Brother, in displeasure and revenge thereof, he slew Jonathan.

But Simon valiantly bestirring himself in the Conduct of the affairs of the
Commonwealth, The year of the World, 3813. before Christ's Nativity, 149.
took Zara, Joppe and Jamnia (which were bordering Towns;) and overcoming the
Garrison of Accaron, he destroyed the City, and assisted Antiochus against
Tryphon, who besieged Dora, before that expedition which he made against the
Medes. Simon encountreth with Cendebeus, and overcomes him.
Yet would not the greedy mind of the King be satisfied, notwithstanding Simon
had thus faithfully served and assisted him to the ruin and death of Tryphon:
but in a short time after, he sent Cendebeus (the General of the Army) to
harass and spoil Judea, and to take Simon Prisoner. But Simon though very aged,
acted both youthfully and valiantly, Ant. l* 13* c. 14.
and sent his Sons before with the most resolute men he had against Antiochus,
Simon by the t^eachery of his Son-in-law Ptol^maeus, is taken and slain.
and himself with the residue of his Army, assaulted another quarter of the
enemies Camp; and having laid many ambushes in the mountains, he obtained a
great victory. After which he was made High Priest, and delivered the Jews from
the subjection of the Macedonians, under which they had been two hundred and
seventy years. John otherwise called Hircanus, the Son of Simon.
Finally, by the treachery of Ptolemy his Son-in-law, he was murdered at a
Banquet; who imprisoning his Wife and two Sons, sent certain men John,
otherwise called Hircanus. But the young man understanding the design, fled to
Jerusalem, accompanied with a great multitude; for he greatly hoped that the
people would remember his Father's prowess, especially because Ptolemy's
iniquity was hated of all men. Ptolemy also hasted to enter the City at another
gate: but he was speedily repulsed by the people, who had already received
Hircanus. For which cause he presently retired himself into a Castle named
Dagon, situate beyond Jericho.

After that Hircanus had obtained the office of High Priest, The year of the
World, 3831. before Christ's Nativity, 131.
which was left him by his Father, and had offered Sacrifices to God, he led
forth his forces with all speed to besiege Ptolemy, hoping to deliver his
mother and brethren that were detained Hircanus obtains the honor of the
High-Priest^ood which his father had (...) cruelty ag^^^t Hircanus's Mother.
For when Ptolemy perceived himself to be in danger, he brought Hircanus's
Mother and Brethren upon the walls, and beat them where he might behold them in
their torments, threatening to cast them down from the wall, except Hircanus
would presently depart. How great soever the indignation of Hircanus was, it
was forced to give place to the affection he had for persons so dear to him,
and to his compassion of seeing them suffer. But his Mother being no way
dismayed with the stripes which she endured, nor with the death wherewith she
was threatened, lifted up her hands to her Son, beseeching him that he would not
in regard of her miseries be moved to spare so impious a person; for she should
esteem her death Ptolemy might receive just punishment for the villainy which he
had impiously committed against their house. Hircanus seeing the resolute mind
of his Mother and hearing her entreaty, was moved to assault the Castle; but
straightway seeing her beaten and torn, he relented with compassion, and his
mind agitated with Ptolomey was no sooner delivered from the Siege by this
occasion, but he put Hircanus's Mother and his Brethren to death, Ptol^maeus
murthereth Hircanus's Mother and Brethren.
and afterward fled to Zeno, the Tyrant of Philadelphia, who was also surnamed
Cotylas.

In the mean while, Antiochus, to be revenged for the Victory which Simon had
got over his Generals, entered with an Army into Judaea, and besieged Hircanus
in Jerusalem; who opening the Sepulcher of David (who had been one of the
richest of all the Kings of Judaea) took more than three thousand Talents from
thence; The year of the world, 3839. before Christ's Nativity, 123.
of which he gave three hundred to Antiochus, and so obliged him to depart the
Country. This Hircanus was the first Prince that entertained Foreign
Soldiers. But so soon as Antiochus had bent his Power and Forces against the
Medes, he took that opportunity to revenge himself, Antiochus, upon the payment
of three hundred Talents, raises his Siege.
and presently assaulted the Towers of Syria; assuring himself he should find
them (as indeed they were) void of Soldiers to defend them. He made himself
Master of Medaba, Samea, Sichem and Garizim, and subdued the Cuthaeans, who
inhabit the places adjoining to the Temple, that was built in imitation of that
which is at Jerusalem. Ant. lib. 13. cap. 15.
Moreover he took many Cities of Idumaea, and amongst the rest, Doteon and
Marisa; and coming into Samaria (which Herod afterward rebuilt, and called
Sebaste) he besieged it on every side, Ari^^obulus and Antigonus besiege
S^bas^^.
and left his two Sons, Aristobulus and Antigonus, to continue the Siege: They
omitted nothing to the purpose; and there came such a Famine Antiochus,
surnamed Spondius, who speedily came to relieve them; but he was overcome by
Aristobulus and Antigonus, and was pursued by them to Scythopolis, whither he
retired himself. But they, returning again to Samaria, Sebas^ overthrown and
spoiled.
straightened the City; and at last, taking it by force, destroyed the same, and
led away their Inhabitants Captives. Whilst thus Fortune favored them, they
ceased not to pursue their good success, but led their Army beyond Scythopolis;
and shared between them all the Land of Mount Carmel.

CHAP. III.
Of Aristobulus, Antigonus, Judas, Essaeus, Alexander, Theodorus and Demetrius.
THis Felicity and good hap of Hircanus and his Sons, was accompanied with the
envy of many of his Contrymen; and their discontent was the cause of an open
Rebellion: The Seditious overcome in War.
For diverse of the Jews rising up in Arms against them, were so much overruled
by their ambitious passion, that they could not contain themselves from the
prosecution of an open and bloody War; Hircanus, after he had happily governed
the Country for thirty three years space dies*
wherein, notwithstanding, they were put to the worst. From that day forward,
Hircanus passed the remainder of his life in all The year of the world, 3861.
before Christ's Nativity, 101.
to whom God spoke, and gave him the knowledge of future accidents. He foresaw,
and foretold, that his two eldest Sons should not continue long in the
Government, (whose ends are worth rehearsal, being very different from their
Father's felicity;) for the eldest Son Aristobulus, after his Father's death,
changed the Principality into a Kingdom; and was the first that put a Crown on
his head; four hundred twenty one years, Ant. lib. 13. cap. 19.
and three months, after the deliverance of the people from the Captivity of
Babylon. Antigonus (who was his second Brother, and whom in appearance he
seemed to love most entirely) he made him partaker of his Dignity, and
committed the rest of them to Prison: He imprisoned his Mother also, for that
she had contended with him for the Government of which Hircanus had made her
Regent. Aristobulus famisheth his Mother.
And he was so given over to all kind of cruelty, that he not only kept her
Prisoner in Bonds, but also put her to death by Famine: Aristobulus loved
Antigonus very dearly.
To which Impiety he added that of killing his own Brother Antigonus, whom he
had entirely loved, and made Partner with him in the Kingdom. For by reason of
certain scandalous slanders, which his envious and malignant Courtiers
contrived and invented against him, he commanded him to be put to death. Upon
their first information, Aristobulus (swayed by Brotherly affection) gave them
no Antigonus returned from the War, at that Festival time, wherein, Aristobulus
fell sick; Antigonus therefore, about the end of those Festival days, attended
with a great Equipage and Train of armed men, ascended up into the Temple, to
offer Sacrifice, and to pray God for the health of the King his Brother.
Hereupon, certain cursed and wicked detractors repaired to the King, and told
him, that this great Guard of Soldiers which accompanied Antigonus, Antigonus
in honor of his Brother, ascended up into the Temple.
and his magnificent Pomp, showed that he was not contented with the honor he
had done him, in associating him in the Royalty, but was minded to possess it
wholly to himself; in which resolution they said he was come accompanied with
so many Soldiers, Antigonus falsely accused to his Brother.
that it could not be doubted, but that it was to murder him. Aristobulus,
though unwillingly, yet at Aristobulus commands his Guard, that if Antigonus
came armed, they should kill him.
(himself then lodging in a certain Castle, which in times past was called
Bari, and afterward Antonia, by Herod, in honor of Antonius) with this
Commission, that if Antigonus came unarmed, they should let him pass; if
otherwise, they should kill him. He sent certain Messengers also, to Antigonus,
requiring him to repair unto him dis-armed: But the wicked Queen prevented this
good intent of his by a subtle stratagem complotted by those, that with her
conspired against him; The Queen's cunning Stratagem against Antigonus.
for she persuaded those that were to carry this message, to discover nothing
of what the King had commanded them; but to tell Antigonus, that his Brother
having intelligence that he had brought very goodly Armor, with other Galilee,
desired him to come to him, armed as he was, that he might have the pleasure to
see him in his Warlike Ornaments. Antigonus suspecteth not his Brother.
Which when Antigonus understood (who, by reason of his Brother's affection,
suspected no mischief) he armed himself, and resorted to him, intending to
content him with his appearance. But no sooner arrived he in the strait, which
is called the Tower of Straton, but the Guard of Aristobulus set upon him, and
slaughtered him; yielding by this means a demonstrative testimony, that
Detraction is able to destroy all good nature and friendship; and that there is
no union of affection so great, as it can always resist the attempts of envy,
to ruin it.

In this Occurrence there happened a thing which cannot be too much admired:
Judas the Prophet foretells Antigonus's death.
Judas, who was of the Sect of the Esseans, had so certain a knowledge of the
Future, that his Predictions were never found false. This man beholding
Antigonus pass thorough the Temple, cried out to his familiars, who attended
him in no small number (as ordinarily, diverse of his Disciples did:) Ah, how
happy were it for me at this present, if I were dead, since truth is dead
before me, and one of my Predictions is found faulty! For behold Antigonus yet
lives, who should this day have died in the Tower of Straton, which is distant
from this place six hundred furlongs, and it is now the fourth hour of the day;
now therefore is the time, wherein my Divination shall be falsified. Having
spoken to this effect, the old man sat down, being altogether disconsolate and
pensive; within a while after, it was told him that Antigonus was slain in a
place under Straton, being of the same name with that at Caesarea, which is
situate upon the Seacoast; which conformity of names, was the cause that
Judas staggered in his Divination.

The sorrow which incontinently seized Aristobulus, Aristobulus through the
grief he conceived at his Brother's death, falls sick.
for committing this heinous Murder, augmented his sickness in such sort, that
his Soul was continually troubled with the thought of his sin; and his body,
through extreme heat of passion, became dried up; and the grief that he felt
was so vehement, that his Entrails became exulcerated, so that he voided blood
in great abundance. And it so fell out, by God's Providence, that one of his
Servants, who was deputed to that Office, bearing out that blood which came
from him, A Servant spilleth blood in the same place where Antigonus was slain.
missed his way, and came to that place where Antigonus had Antigonus; on which
he poured out the blood of the Murderer, Aristobulus: Which, when they
perceived who stood hard by, imagining that the Servant had purposely spilled
the blood in that place, as it were in Sacrifice to the Ghost of that Prince;
they cried out so loud, that Aristobulus hearing their cry, demanded the cause
thereof; and the more that each man feared to discover the same to him, the
more instantly he desired to understand the truth; so that at length, after he
had used threats, he was certified of what had passed. Whereupon, his eyes were
suddenly filled with tears; and in vehement agony of mind, The eye of God
discovers every sin.
he cried out, and said; How could I hope, but that the great eye of the Divine
Majesty should see my wicked acts, and the sudden vengeance of my Brother's
blood pursue and overtake me? Aristobulus dies miserably.
How long, O thou miserable Body, will thou detain my Soul from being
sacrificed to the vengeance of my Mother and Brother's death? Why do I thus
lingeringly languish, in offering a part of my blood unto them? Let them take
it all at once; and let not the Divine Vengeance laugh any longer to see the
effusion of mine Entrails. The year of the World, 3862. before Christ's
Nativity. 100


His Wife after his death delivered his Brother Alexander from Prison, and
established him King, who was both the eldest, and seemed to be the most
moderate among the rest of his Brethren. Ant. l. 13. c. 9
But growing by this means both proud and potent, he put one of his Brethren to
death, Alexander advanced to the Kingdom, uses much cruelty.
for aspiring after the Kingdom; but spared the other alive, for that he
contented himself with a private and contemplative life. He made War also
against Ptolomey, that was called Lathyrus, who had surprised the City of
Asoth, and put a great number of his enemies to the Sword; nevertheless,
Ptolomey's side obtained the Victory: But retiring himself into the Country of
Egypt, by reason that his Mother Cleopatra pursued him with open War; Alexander
forcibly entered the City Gadara, Alexander is overthrown by Theodore.
and the Fort of Amath (one of the greatest of all those that were beyond
Jordan) in which place Theodore, Zeno's Son, had hoarded up his chiefest and
most precious movables, which he took, but enjoyed not long; for Theodore,
suddenly setting upon him, recovered all that which was his; and furthermore,
laid hands on the King's Carriage; in seizing which, he slaughtered many Jews,
to the number of ten thousand. But Alexander, after he had recovered this loss,
invaded the Frontire Towns upon the Seacoast, and won Rapha, Gaza and
Anthedon, which afterward by King Herod was called Agrippias. The Sedition of
the Jews against Alexander upon a Festival day.
But after he had conquered these places, the common sort of the Jews raised a
mutiny against him, during a certain solemn and holy Feast; (as Mutinies and
Seditions are commonly raised at Banquets) and it is Alexander assaileth the
Castle of Amath, and razeth it.
he warred upon Arabia; and overcoming the Galaadites and Moabites (and
imposing upon them a Tribute) he returned to besiege Amath. But Theodorus,
daunted with his prosperous success, and finding the Castle without any to
defend it, razed it to the ground. After this, he assaulted Obodas King of the
Arabians; who having laid Ambushments in the Country of Galaad, in a place fit
for such a purpose, discomfitted him and his whole Army, being driven into a
deep Valley, where they were pestered with a multitude of Camels.

But Alexander escaped to Jerusalem, where the people who had conceived a
hatred against him, being encouraged by his great loss and slaughter of men,
began again to rebel; but then also he overcame them: and in six years space,
in sundry Battles, slew above fifty thousand Jews: Notwithstanding, he never
rejoiced in his Victory, because the strength of his Country was consumed
thereby. For which cause, giving over his Wars, he began to seek the people's
favor by sweet and mild courses; but they so much hated his inconstant and
variable manners, that when he demanded of them what he should do to win their
favors, they answered, that he should die, and that scarcely they could pardon
him if so be he were dead, who had done them so much mischief. The Jews sent to
Demetrius, surnamed Eucerus, for help; who, in Demetrius comes to help the
Jews.
came and joined his Forces with the Jews about Sichem, being three thousand
Horse, and forty thousand Foot: Alexander met them both with a thousand Horse,
Ant. lib. 13. cap. 20.
and six thousand Foot, that were strangers, besides ten thousand Jews that
remained faithful to him. Before the fight began, the two Kings sent Messengers
to one another's Army, The War betwixt Demetrius and Alexander, wherein
Demetrius is Conqueror.
persuading one another's men to forsake their Colors and Captains: For
Demetrius hoped that Alexander's hired men would have forsaken his service, and
come unto him; and Alexander hoped that the Jews that followed Demetrius, would
have left Demetrius, and come to him. But when both parts perceived that the
Jews continued obstinate in their purpose, and the Greeks kept their fidelity,
the two Armies encountered; in which Encounter, Demetrius had the upper hand
Alexander's Hirelings evidently showed their strength and courage.) But the end
of this Victory was such, The Jews revolt from Demetrius.
as neither party expected; for they who sent for Demetrius, after his Victory,
forsook him; and Fortune changing her Colors, six thousand Jews fled to
Alexander, into the Mountains, whither for safety he had betaken himself. This
revolt much displeased and discouraged Demetrius; so that he now thought, that
Alexander uniting his Forces, was able to give him Battle; and he feared that
all the Jews would at that present follow Alexander; for which cause, he
returned home. Yet the rest of the Jews, Alexander's immoderate wrath, who
crucified eight hundred Captives.
having thus lost the help of Demetrius would not desist from their Rebellion;
but they so long warred with Alexander, till at last (the most of them being
slain) he drove the rest into the City of Bemezeli; and when he had surprised
and Jerusalem. But immoderate anger turned his cruelty into impiety; for having
crucified eight hundred Captives in the midst of the Judaea, and stayed in
Banishment, Alexander cease from War.
during the life of Alexander. Thus, after he had by such actions sought the
tranquillity of his Kingdom, which he obtained not, but with long time and great
difficulty, he ceased to make War against his Country.

CHAP. IV.

AFter this, Alexander fears Antiochus, Demetrius 's Brother.
Antiochus (who likewise was called Dyonisius, Brother to Demetrius, and the
last of all the race of Seleucus) raised up new broils against Alexander; who
fearing him because he had overcome the Arabians, drew a deep Trench along that
ground which lies between Antipatris, and the Seacoast of Joppa: and before
the Trench he built a very high Wall, and raised Towers of wood to hinder his
enemies passage. But all this could not keep out Antiochus; who burning the
Towers, The King of the Arabians invadeth Antiochus's Soldiers unawares.
Aretas, King of Arabia, retiring himself into certain places of his Country
which were fittest for defense, and returning suddenly to Battle with his Horse
(who were in number ten thousand) rushed suddenly upon Antiochus's Soldiers,
and found them unprovided; so that a hot Skirmish began betwixt them; The King
of Arabia puts Antiochus's Forces to flight, and kills a great number of them.
in which the Soldiers of Antiochus, whilst he lived, showed themselves valiant
(though they were on every side massacred by the Arabians) but so soon as he
was slain (who was always ready to assist those that were in danger) all of
them fled; and the greatest part of them were slain in the Battle, and in
flight: As for Cana, where all (except very few) died for hunger. After this,
the people of Damascus being incited with the hatred they bare to Ptolomey the
Son of Menneus, They of Damascus and Aretas against Alexander.
sent for Aretas, and established him King over Coelosyria; who warring against
Judaea, and overcoming Alexander in Battle, retired upon Composition. Alexander
having taken Pella, resorted once more to the Town of Gerasa, in that he was
desirous to get Theodorus's Riches; and took the place, notwithstanding that it
was fortified with three Walls, and that upon every Wall there was planted a
Garrison. He took Gaulan and Seleucia, and that Town which is called the Valley
of Antiochus. Moreover, having taken Gamala, which was a very strong Castle,
and imprisoned the Governor thereof, who was called Demetrius, because he was
a wicked Judaea after he had spent three years in War; where, for his
prosperous success, he was joyfully received of his Nation. But no sooner
ceased he from War, Alexander sick of a Quartane Fever.
but he fell sick of a Quartane Ague; and he thought that he should drive away
his sickness, if he employed himself in some business; for which cause,
laboring under his disease, Ant. lib. 13. cap. 22.
he applied himself to War, and toiling above his strength, amidst those
tumults, he yielded up the Ghost in the thirty seventh year of his Reign;
leaving the Kingdom to Alexandra his Wife, Alexandra, Alexander's Wife, through
the opinion of Virtue, obtains the Kingdom.
fully accounting that the Jews would in all things obey her, because that she,
always misliking and seeking to hinder his cruelty and iniquity, had won the
hearts of the people: Neither was he deceived; for she being admired for her
piety amongst them, they easily submitted to her; the rather Hircanus first
made High Priest, and afterward King
She had by Alexander two Sons, the eldest was called Hircanus, whom by reason
of his years, she made High Priest; and because of his dull nature, she thought
that though he were in Princely Authority, yet he would molest no man: As for
the youngest Son Aristobulus, because he was of a hot spirit, she was willing
that he should lead a private life.

Now there was a certain Sect among the Jews, The Pharisees getting in favor
with the Queen, are made her chief Governors, and enjoy all honors.
which were called Pharisees, who joined themselves with the Queen: These
people were thought to be of the godliest sort, and to be more skilful than
others, in interpreting the Scriptures; and Alexandra favored them the more,
because she was much given to Religion. These having by the Kingdom; leaving to
Alexandra, nothing but the Expenses and care of the Government. Alexandra
willingly obeys the Pharisees.
She ruled others, but her self was ruled by the Pharisees, who at last killed
Diogenes, a gallant man, and highly in favor with King Alexander; affirming,
that through his counsel, the King commanded those eight hundred
beforementioned to be crucified: The Pharisees by their envy and Accusations,
are the death of many good men.
And further, they persuaded the Queen Alexandra, that she should put to death
all others, through whose counsel Alexander her Husband had been incited
against those eight hundred. The Queen being blinded with Superstition, thought
it unlawful to deny any thing which they requested; so that they put to death
whom they Aristobulus, Aristobulus expostulateth with his Mother.
who persuaded his Mother to spare some, and to banish others, who she thought
had deserved punishment; which Exiles dispersed themselves through the whole
Country. Now Alexandra sent an Army to Damascus, and because Ptolomey daily
vexed the City, she took it without doing any thing worthy of memory. She also
solicited Tigranes, King of Armenia, with Gifts and Promises (who with an Army
had besieged Ptolemais, wherein Cleopatra was) but he, for fear of troubles in
his own Country, in that Lucullus had entered into Armenia, withdrew himself
from thence.

Shortly after Alexandra falling sick, Aristobulus proclaims himself King.
her youngest Son Aristobulus, with his Servants Alexandra imprisoneth
Aristobulus's Wife and Children.
and hiring Soldiers with the money he found in those Castles, he proclaimed
himself King. But Alexandra (pitying the complaints of Hircanus) imprisoned the
Wife and Children of Aristobulus, in a Castle near the North part of the
Temple, which in old time was called Baris (as we said before) afterward
Antonia, from Antonius, The year of the World, 3863. before Christ's Nativity*
^^.
as in like manner Sebaste and Agrippias, other Cities were named of Augustus
and Agrippa. But Alexandra died before she could revenge Hircanus of the wrongs
which Aristobulus had done him. This Queen reigned nine years, and left
Hircanus in possession of all, whom during her life time she had advanced to
the Kingdom. But Aristobulus being both stronger in power, Alexandra dies, and
Hircanus succeeds her in the Kingdom.
and greater in authority, encountered with his Jericho; where many of
Hircanus's Soldiers forsaking their King, fled to Aristobulus; so that he, and
the remnant that followed him, were forced to fly into the Castle called
Antonia, where he found Hostages to redeem them, for (as we have already said)
Aristobulus his Wife and Children were imprisoned in that place: Ant. l. 14 c.
1.
And lest any worse mis-hap should betide him, The Brethren contending for the
Kingdom, are accorded upon certain conditions.
he concluded a Peace, upon condition that Aristobulus should be King, and that
he, as Brother to the King, should enjoy some other Dignities. Upon these
conditions they were made friends in the Temple, where in the presence of all
the people, they friendly embraced each other; which when they had done, Ant.
lib. 14. cap. 2, 3, 4.
they changed houses, and Aristobulus went to the King's Palace, and Hircanus
to Aristobulus's house.

CHAP. V.
Of the War between Hircanus and the Arabians, Antipater persuades Hircanus to
fly to Aretas, King of Arabia, and to crave his assistance to recover his
Kingdom
and of the taking of Jerusalem.
NOw a sudden fear invaded all the enemies of Aristobulus, when they saw him
(contrary to all expectation) made King; and especially Antipater, above all
others, whom Aristobulus had long hated. This Antipater was an Idumaean born;
and for Nobility and Riches, the chief, and best reputed of his Nation. This
man persuaded Hircanus to fly to Aretas King of Arabia, and crave his help to
set him in his Kingdom: He exhorted Aretas likewise to receive Hircanus, and to
help him to recover his Kingdom; Antipater with Hircanus fly from Jerusalem by
night, to Aretas King of Arabia.
speaking much against the manners of Aristobulus, and praising Hircanus:
adding, that he being King of so famous a Nation, ought to assist those who
were unjustly oppressed; and that Hircanus had manifest injury offered him,
being forced to forsake his Kingdom, which by the right of Succession, was due
unto him. After he had thus made his way, he took in the night time Hircanus,
and fled with him out of the City; and making all haste possible, they arrived
safe at a Town called Petra (a Town where the King's of Arabia are accustomed
to keep their Court) there he delivered Hircanus into the King's hands, Aretas
furnishes Hircanus with fifty thousand Soldiers.
and by many gifts and entreaties, obtained of him that he Aretas gave him an
Army of fifty thousand Horse and Foot; which power, Aristobulus not The year of
the World, 3073. before Christ's Nativity, 89.
was overcome at the first onset, and forced to fly to Jerusalem. Aretas
besieged him there, and he had been surely taken, if Scaurus, a Captain of the
Romans, taking opportunity at those troubles, had not raised the Siege: For
Pompey the Great (who warred against Tigranes) sent him out of Armenia, into
Syria: And he coming to Damascus, Scaurus Captain of the Romans.
found it newly taken by Metellus and Lollius; wherefore, understanding how
matters stood in Judaea, he hasted thither in hope of a booty. As soon as he
entered into the Confines of the Country, both the Brethren sent their
Ambassadors to him, The year of the World, 3890. before Christ's Nativity, 63.
desiring him to take their parts: But Aristobulus having sent him four hundred
Talents, these made him neglect Justice; for Scaurus upon receipt of that Sum,
sent messengers to the Arabians and Hircanus, threatening the displeasure of the
Romans and Pompey, except they would presently raise their Siege: Whereupon
Aretas being much terrified, Scaurus receives four hundred Talents from
Aristobulus, and commands the Arabians and Hircanus to depart out of the
Country.
returned out of Judaea, to Philadelphia, and Scaurus to Damascus. Yet it
sufficed not Aristobulus, that he had escaped from being taken; but gathering
all his Forces together, he pursued his enemies; and joining Battle with them
about Papyron, he slew six thousand of them; in which number was Cephalon,
Antipater's Brother. But Hircanus and Antipater being destitute of the Arabians
help, thought fit to seek for succor from the Romans, who had hindered them
from receiving that of the Arabians. For which cause, as soon as Pompey had
entered Syria, and was come to Damascus, they in humble manner addressed him
with many gifts, and made the same remonstrances to him, that they had made
before to Aretas; earnestly requesting him, Aristobulus, Antipater and Hircanus
seek for Pompey's help.
and restore Hircanus to the Kingdom, to whom both by birthright, and for his
virtue, it was due.

Aristobulus, who became confident in that he had gained Scaurus by Presents,
failed not to repair to Pompey also, Ant. lib. 14. cap. 6, 7.
and he went with the Equipage and Pomp of a King; but not abiding to debase
himself, and thinking it disparagement longer to pay him respects in more
abject manner than beseemed a King, Pompey furnished with the Syrians and Roman
Army, sets forth against Aristobulus.
he returned to Diospolis: Whereat Pompey being angry, at the request of
Hircanus and his followers, he went against Aristobulus, accompanied both with
the Roman Army, and the Syrians, their Auxiliaries. When they had passed Pella
and Diospolis, and came to Corea (where the Confines of Judaea begin) as they
passed thorough the midst of the Country, they understood that Aristobulus was
fled to Alexandrium (a Castle strongly built, and situate upon a very high
hill.) Pompey commands Aristobulus. to descend.
Pompey arriving there, sent messengers to him, commanding him to descend:
Which imperious manner of so proceeding, appearing insupportable to
Aristobulus, he determined rather to hazard himself, than obey. But when he saw
that the people began to fear, Aristobulus resorteth to Pompey.
and that his friends advised him to consider the power of the Romans, whose
strength he was no ways able to resist; he followed their counsel, and came to
Pompey; where having alleged many reasons to show that he had just Title to
the Crown, he returned again into the Castle. And afterward, being urged by
his Brother to come and plead his Title, he came, and returned thither again,
without contradiction from Pompey: As he fluctuated thus betwixt hope and fear,
and doubted Pompey, and tell him that he would do all that he should desire of
him; but as he was in the midst of his way, fearing lest he should seem to
derogate any thing from the Majesty of a King, he returned back again. Pompey
willed him to write to the Governors of his Towns and Castles, Aristobulus
intends to fight with Pompey.
to surrender (because he had commanded them not to do it, except they received
Letters written by his own hand:) In this he fulfilled Pompey's mind; yet being
angry and discontented, Hedio.
he departed to Jerusalem, and now fully determined to fight with Pompey:
Idumaea.
But Pompey not thinking it best to give him time to prepare himself, followed
him with all speed; Pompey besieges Jerusalem.
and so much the more willingly, because that near Jericho, he had news of
Mithridates his death. This is the fruitfullest place of Judaea, Aristobulus
humbly presents himself to Pompey.
This Balsom is a Shrub, whose Stem being cut with sharp stones, droppeth Balm
out of the wounds thereof, which men gather as it droppeth from them. After he
had rested there that night, in the morning he hasted to Jerusalem. Ant. lib.
14. cap. 7, 8.
At his sudden arrival, Aristobulus being dismayed, in humble manner came to
him, Pompey vieweth the City which way it might most easily be battered.
and by promising him money, and to yield himself and the City into his hands,
he appeased his anger. But he performed no part of his promise; for his
Associates would not suffer Gabinius (who was sent for the money) to enter into
the City: For which cause Pompey being moved to displeasure, retained
Aristobulus in Prison; and coming near the City, he took a view at what place
it might be easiliest entered, Sedition within the City betwixt Hircanus and
Aristobulus's friends.
for he did not lightly perceive how he could batter the Walls, they were so
within the City; The year of the world, 3903. before Christ's Nativity, 59.
wherein Aristobulus's Confederates thought it best to fight, and deliver
Hircanus, would that the Gates should be opened to Pompey. At last,
Aristobulus's Friends not prevailing, fled into the Temple; and to the end that
they might fight it out to the last, they cut down the Bridge which leads out
of the City into the Temple. Pompey and his enter the City, and search the
King's house.
When the rest had received the Romans into the City, and delivered to them the
King's Palace, Pompey sent a Captain called Piso, with Soldiers to seize the
same; who leaving a Garrison in the Town (seeing he could persuade none of them
that were in the Temple to peace) prepared all things necessary to batter it.
Aristobulus his friends fly to the Temple
All which time Hircanus and his friends showed themselves ready to help them
to their power, and to do whatsoever they were commanded. Pompey at the North
side filled the Ditch and Valley with earth, which Pompey (observing the
seventh day, wherein the Jews Religion obliged them to abstain from all labor)
caused it to be filled up those days; forbidding the Soldiers to fight at that
time, to the intent he might fill the Ditch more conveniently (for it was
lawful for the Jews only to do what was necessary to sustain and defend their
lives upon the Sabbath.) At last, when the Ditch was filled, and the Towers
were built upon the Rampire, he battered the Walls with those Engines that he
brought from Tire; but they were beaten back by those who resisted from the top
of the Walls, who rouled stones at them: Against the violent power whereof, the
Towers that were built in Pompey admired the valor of the Jews; that being
amongst the thickest of their enemies Darts, they omitted no Ceremony of their
Religion; but (as though they had had firm Peace) they every day observed their
Ceremonies, offered Sacrifices, and most diligently performed the Divine
Service; yea, though every day they were killed at the Altar, they ceased not
from the Lawful Rites of their Religion. At last, in the third Month of the
Siege, during which, scarcely one Tower was beaten down, they brake into the
Temple; and the first that attempted to climb over the Wall, was Cornelius
Faustus, Sylla's Son; and after him two Centurions, Furius and Fabius, with
their Regiments; who compassing the Temple Twelve thousand Jews slain in the
Temple.
but very few Romans, though many hurt: And amongst all that Massacre, there
was nothing so grievous to the Jews, as that the Holy Pompey, Pompey and his
followers enter the Sanctuary.
with his followers, came into the Temple, where it is lawful for none but the
High Priest to come, and saw the Candlesticks, Lamps, Table, Censers, and all
the Golden Vessels, and whatsoever was within the Temple. Moreover, he beheld
the great quantity of Odoriferous Drugs, Pompey's Continency.
which were kept in store in that place, and two thousand Talents of Holy
Money; yet did he not take away these things, nor any thing else belonging to
the Temple. But the day after it was taken, he commanded the Sacristans to
purge and make clean the Temple, and to offer the usual Sacrifice. He likewise
confirmed Hircanus High Priest (who had in all things showed himself very
forward, Hircanus made High Priest.
and especially at the time of the Siege; and also hindered a multitude of
people, Aristobulus) and thus, like a good Captain, he got the good will of the
people more by love, than by fear.

Amongst others that were Captives, there was Aristobulus's Father-in-law, who
was also his Uncle: Pompey causes the chiefest Conspirators to be beheaded.
as for those that had been the chief cause of these Wars, Pompey caused them
to be beheaded. He rewarded Faustus likewise, and those who had fought
valiantly with him, with very rich Gifts, and imposed a Tribute upon Jerusalem,
and took from that Nation the Cities which they had gotten in Coelosyria, and
appointed them to be governed by him who then was President for the Romans;
Pompey delivers many goodly Cities from the subjection of the Jews.
making them keep within the bounds of their own Country. And in favor of
Demetrius of Gadara (a freed-man of his) he re-edified Gadara, which the Jews
had destroyed: He Hippion, Scythopolis, Pella, The year of the World, 3903.
before Christ's Nativity, 59.
Samaria, Marissa, Azotus, Jamnia, and Arethusa. The Towns also upon the
Seacoasts, Gaza, Joppa and Dora, which was called Straton's Tower, and
afterward by Herod built sumptuously, and called Caesarea. All these Cities he
restored to the Inhabitants, and joined them to Syria. Of which, and of Judaea,
and of all places from the Borders of Egypt to Euphrates, he made Scaurus
Governor, leaving him two Legions of Soldiers. Aristobulus and his Family
carried to Rome.
Which done, he took his journey to Rome by Cilicia, leading Aristobulus and
his Family Captives, with his two Daughters, and two Sons; the elder whereof,
called Alexander, escaped in the way; the younger, whose name was Antigonus,
was with his Father and Sisters carried to Rome.

CHAP. VI.
Of the War of Alexander with Hircanus, and also of Aristobulus.
SCaurus advanced with his Army into Arabia; Ant. lib. 14. cap. 9.
but being by the difficulty of the place hindered, The Arabian is reconciled to
Scaurus.
that he could not come to Petra, he wasted all the Country adjoining to
Pella; although, whilst he stayed to do this, he endured much evil; for there
arose a great Famine in his Army, notwithstanding that Hircanus, by Antipater's
Ant. lib. 14. cap. 10.
sent them Victuals. Scaurus also sent the same Antipater, as his familiar
Friend, to Aretas, to persuade him that by disbursing some money, he should
work his Peace. To which motion Aretas condescended, and gave him three hundred
Talents, and so Scaurus with his Army departed out of Arabia.

In the mean time Alexander the Son of Aristobulus (who, Alexander,
Aristobulus's Son, gathers a great power against Hircanus.
in the way to Rome, escaped from Pompey) gathered together a great Army, and
straightly beset Hircanus; wasting all Judaea; and hoped quickly to take
Jerusalem, because the Wall which was destroyed by Pompey, had not been built
up again. But Gabinius, a great Captain, who was sent into Syria to succeed
Scaurus; marched with an Army against him. Whereupon, The year of the World,
3904. before Christ's Nativity, 58.
fearing the worst, he assembled all the Forces he could, to make resistance;
Al^^candrium, Hircania and Machaeron, which are near the Mountains of Arabia.
Gabinius sent Marcus Antonius before him with part of the Army, Alexander
gathers ten thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse.
and followed after with the rest; and certain chosen men out of Antipater's
Company, and other Companies of the Jews, whereof Malichus and Pitholaus were
made chief, joined themselves with Marcus Antonius; and presently after them
followed Gabinius with all his Company, to meet Alexander.

Alexander perceiving himself unable to encounter all those united Forces,
Antipater with his Forces goes out to meet Alexander.
fled; but drawing near Jerusalem, he was constrained to hazard the fight;
where losing to the Alexander fights with his Enemies, and loses six
thousand men.
Gabi^ius pursued him, and as soon as he came to the Castle called Alexandrium,
understanding that many Jews had forsaken their Colors, he, by promising them
Pardon, sought to unite them to his Party again; but when he perceived that
they hammered on no abject resolution, he slew the most of them; Marcus
Antonius a Captain.
and for the rest, he drove them into the Castle. In this Battle Marcus
Antonius did many things worthy of renown; and although he had always showed
himself valiant, yet there especially his courage appeared. Gabinius leaving
some to besiege the Castle, went to the Cities of the Province, and strengthened
those that were not yet assaulted, and re-edified those that were destroyed;
and by his Commandment Scythopolis, What Cities the Jews received to inhabit:
Samaria, Anthedon, Apollonia, Jamnia, Raphia, Marissa, Dora, Gadara and
Azotus, and many more began to be inhabited, so that their Inhabitants joyfully
returned and dwelt therein. Which when he had done, he returned to Alexandrium,
Ant. lib. 14. cap. 11.
and began a more close Siege; whereat Alexander being terrified and made
desperate, Alexander's Mother striveth to pacify Gabinius with rewards.
sent Ambassadors to him, beseeching him to pardon him; promising to render
unto him the Castles of Machaeron and Hircania, which were in his power,
besides Alexandrium: All which, Gabinius, by counsel of Alexander's Mother,
destroyed, lest they might be occasion of new Wars: For the apprehension which
this Princess had for her Husband, The change of the Government of the Jews.
and for her other Children, Prisoners at Rome, made her omit nothing to
endeavor to gain the affection of Gabinius. After this, Gabinius carried
Hircanus to Jerusalem; and committing the Temple to his charge, he committed to
others of the Nobility the care of the Commonwealth, Ant. lib. 14. cap. 1^.
and divided the whole Nation of the Jews into five parts and Governments,
whereof one was established at Jerusalem, another at Doris, the third at
Amathon, the fourth at Jericho, and the fifth at Sephoris, Galilee: And the
Jews being delivered from the Government of one man only, willingly suffered
themselves to be ruled by an Aristocratical Government. But shortly after,
Aristobulus escaping from Rome, raised new troubles; and gathering a great
Army, Aristobulus escaping from Rome, raises new troubles.
partly of those that desired a change, and partly of such as loved him before,
took Alexandrium, and began to compass it again with a Wall: But hearing that
Gabinius had sent Sisenna, Antonius and Servilius against him with an Army, he
went to Machaeron; Aristobulus fights with the Romans.
and dismissing those that were not fit for War, he took with him only eight
thousand armed men, amongst whom was Pitholaus, Governor of them that were
revolted, who with one thousand men, fled out of Jerusalem: But the Romans
pursued them; and joining Battle with them, Aristobulus with his men fought
Aristobulus, retreated to Machaeron; where the King hiding himself the first
night amongst the Ruins, hoped that having respit, he might gather another
Army, The Romans obtain the Victory, and carry away Aristobulus and his Son to
Rome.
and fortify the Castle: But having for two days sustained the Forces of the
Romans with extraordinary courage, at last he was taken; and with his Son
Antigonus, who had been imprisoned with him at Rome, he was carried to
Gabinius, and from thence to Rome, where the Senate put him in Prison; but his
Sons they sent into Judaea, because Gabinius writ that he had so promised
Aristobulus's Wife, upon condition the Castles might be yielded.

Whilst Gabinius prepared to war against the Parthians, Ptolomey hindered him,
being returned from Euphrates, into Egypt: Antipater and Hircanus assisted him
with all things belonging to the War; as Money, Weapons, Corn, and Men; and
Antipater persuaded the Jews who kept the ways that lead to Pelusium, to suffer
Gabinius to pass. Now, Alexander, Aristobulus's Son, once more provokes the
Jews to Rebellion.
in the other part of Syria, at the departure of Gabinius there began a
Commotion; and Alexander, Aristobulus's Son, once more incited the Jews to
Rebellion; and having gathered a mighty power, purposed to destroy all the
Romans that were in that Country: Which Gabinius fearing (who was returned out
of Egypt at the beginning of these tumults) he sent Antipater before, who
persuaded some of the Rebels to be quiet; yet thirty thousand remained with
Alexander: For which cause he was The Jews overcome by the Romans.
and went out to Battle; near Itabyrium they fought, the Romans prevailed, and
ten thousand were slain, and the rest were put to flight, and Gabinius returned
to Jerusalem by the counsel of Antipater; Gabinius overcomes the Nabathaeans
in Battle.
where having established all things, he marched thence, and overcame the
Nabathaeans in Battle; he likewise permitted Mithridates and Orsanes, two
Parthian Noblemen, who were fled to him from the Parthians, Ant. lib. 14. cap.
13.
secretly to depart, saying, that they had escaped from the Soldiers. In the
mean time Crassus, who was appointed to be his Successor, had Syria delivered
him; Marcus Crassus takes away the rest of the Gold of the Temple.
and toward the maintenance of the Parthian Wars, he took all the Gold that
was in the Temple of Jerusalem, besides the two thousand Talents which Pompey
had forborne to touch: But passing over Euphrates, he was both himself and his
whole Army Crassus, the Parthians endeavored to enter Syria; but Cassius, who
succeeded him in the Government, repulsed them; and having gotten the upper
hand, he speedily passed into Judaea; and taking Tarichea, carried away about
three thousand men Captive; and put Pitholaus to death, for gathering a company
of seditious people to Aristobulus his part. Antipater's Wife a Noble woman of
Arabia.
He that counseled his death was Antipater, who was married to a Noble Woman
of Arbia called Cypris, by whom he had four Sons, Phasaelus, Herod, afterward
King, Joseph and Pheroras; and one daughter called Salome. His wise Conduct and
Liberality got him the Friendship of many Princes, and especially that of the
King of Arabia, to whose fidelity he committed his Sons, when he undertook
Aristobulus. But Cassius made a Truce with Alexander, and in the mean time went
to Euphrates, to hinder the passage of the Parthians; as we shall show in
another place.

The year of the World, 3917. before Christ's Nativity. 45.

Of the death of Aristobulus, and the War undertaken by Antipater and
Mithridates.
AFter that Caesar had forced the Senate and Pompey to flee beyond the Ionian
Sea, Ant lib. 14. cap. 14.
and by that means made himself sole master of Rome, Caesar delivers
Aristobulus from his bonds.
he set Aristobulus at liberty, and with two Legions of men sent him in have
into Syria, hoping through his means speedily to reduce both it, and also all
places adjoining to Judaea: But both the hope of Caesar, Aristobulus and his
Son slain by Pompey's friends.
and the forwardness of Aristobulus were frustrated by ill Aristobulus was
poisoned by Pompey's favorers, and even in his own Country his body lay
unburied, which notwithstanding was preserved from putrefaction with honey,
till such time as Antonius sent it to the Jews, commanding them to bury it in
the Sepulcher of the Kings. His Son Alexander also was beheaded at Antioch by
Scipio, being first according to the tenor of Pompey's Letters accused before
the Tribunal-seat, Ant. l. 14. c. 5.
of such things as he had committed against the Romans. Ptolemy Prince of
Chalcis which is upon Mount Libanus, Ptolomaeus Son marries Antigonus younger
Daughter, and for that cause is slain by his Father.
sent his Son Philippio to Ascalon, to the widow of Aristobulus, to counsel her
to send her Son Antigonus and her daughters to him. Philippio falling in love
with the youngest named Alexandra took her to wife. But sometime after he was
put to death by his Father, who himself married Alexandra; and for that
affinity sake, was more careful of her Brethren. After the death of Pompey,
Antipater sought all means to get into Caesar's favor: and when Mithridates of
Pergamena was hindered by the Garrison at Pelusium to pass further with an Army
into Egypt, Ant. lib. 14. cap. 16.
and was by that means stayed at Ascalon, Antipater not only persuaded the
Arabians to assist him, but he himself seconded him with almost three thousand
armed Jews. Moreover, he incited the Potentates of Syria, and Ptolemy who
inhabited Libanus, Mithridates goes to Pelusium, and thereby obtains
Antigonus's help.
and Jamblicus, and his Son Ptolemy to assist him; for whose sakes the Cities
of that Country did willingly undertake the War. And now Mithridates
strengthened by Antipater's means came to Pelusium; and because they would not
suffer him to pass, he besieged the City. In which siege Antipater showed
Pelusium was taken. After which the Inhabitants of the Province bearing the
name of Onias resolved not to suffer him to pass any further: But Antipater
handled the matter so discreetly with them, Mithridates victory against the
Egyptians.
that they did not only suffer him to pass, but also supplied victuals for his
Army. Whereupon the City of Memphis would not fight, but yielded of their own
accord to Mithridates: so that passing thorough Delta, he fought with the other
Egyptians, in a place called* The Camp of the Jews; and being with all his
company in danger, he was rescued by Antipater, who marching along the River
side, set upon and discomfited the left wing of the Enemies battle, and rushing
upon them that Mithridates, Antipater performs many noble exploits, and
exposes himself to all dangers for Caesar's sake.
he slew many, and pursued the rest that fled, till he got their Camp, and all
this with the loss of fourscore men. But Mithridates lost eight hundred men;
and being thus against all hope preserved from being cut in pieces, he was
without all envy a true witness before Caesar of all that Antipater had done
and deserved. Whereupon Caesar rewarded his courage with praise and promises,
and so made him forward to hazard himself for him. In a word, he proved and
showed himself a stout Warrior, Caesar makes Antipater a free Citizen of Rome.
and the many wounds he had in every part of his body, were badges and
testimonies of his valor and virtue. Afterward when the estate of Egypt was
quiet, Caesar returned into Syria, where he made him a Citizen of Rome, and
granted him the immunities thereof; adding so many other Hircanus in the
High Priesthood.

CHAP. VIII.
How Antipater was accused before Caesar. Of the Priesthood of Hircanus, and
how Herod made war. Antigonus Aristobulus's Son comes to Caesar to accuse
Pompey's friends for his fathers death.

AT the same time Antigonus the Son of Aristobulus repairing to Caesar, was
against Antipater's greater felicity: for coming to complain of his Fathers
death (who was, as it was thought, poisoned by Pompey's partisans;) with as
great hatred as sorrow he accused Hircanus and Antipater of having been the
cause that he and his brethren had been so unjustly driven out of their native
soil, and Egypt to Caesar's forces, not for good will, but for fear, and that
hereby they might blot out the memory of the good will they had born to Pompey.
Antigonus falsely accuses Hircanus and Antipater.
At these words Antipater (drawing aside his vesture) showed the number of his
wounds, saying, it was not needful to use words to prove what affection he had
born to Caesar; for his very body showed it, although he himself held his
peace: Antipater casting of his garment, shows his many wounds.
adding that he admired the impudent boldness of Antigonus, who being Son to an
enemy of the Romans, and a fugitive from Rome, and as inclinable as his Father
to Rebellion, dared to accuse before the Roman Emperor others that had been
always faithful to him; and that in stead of accounting himself happy in having
his

Which when Caesar heard, Caesar creates Hircanus High^ Priest, and to
Antipater he gives the Government of Judea.
he said that Hircanus was most worthy to be High Priest, and bad Antipater
name what Charge he would have: who leaving that to the pleasure of the giver,
he was made Governor of all Judaea. And moreover he obtained lieve to
re-edifie the razed walls of his Country; and Caesar commanded that this Decree
should be engraven in Tables of Brass and in the Capitol, that it might be a
memorial in time to come of Antipaters's justice and virtue. Ant. lib. 14. cap.
16.
Antipater having attended Caesar out of Syria, first of all repaired the
ruined walls of his Country, which Pompey Antipater repaireth the walls of his
Country.
and going throughout all the Country, he threatened the obstinate, and
persuaded the seditious to obedience, admonishing them, that if they obeyed
Hircanus, they might live in wealth and peace, and enjoy happiness; but if they
suffered themselves to be led away with the vain hopes of those, Antipater
charge his Subjects to obey Hircanus.
who for their private commodity sought alteration, then they should find him
in stead of a Governor, a severe Master, and Hircanus instead of a King, a
Tyrant; and the Romans and Caesar, instead of friends, deadly enemies: for that
they would not suffer his power to be overthrown, whom they themselves had
established King. Antipater in speaking thus considered himself and the need of
providing for the safety of the State, Phasaelus and Herod, Antipater 's Sons.
because he well knew the sloth an stupidity of Hircanus. He made Phasaelus
Jerusalem, and of the whole Province; Herod's fortitude.
and sent Herod his youngest Son to govern Galilee (although he was very young)
who being by nature valiant and ambitious, sought out occasion to show his
brave mind. Herod banisheth the thieves out of Syria.
He took Ezechias Captain of a troop of Thieves, who, as he understood, were
wont to prey upon the confines of Syria with a great multitude, and put him to
death with many other Thieves: which thing was so grateful to the Syrians, that
in all Towns and Villages they made songs of Herod, as though he had restored
them to peace and to their Possessions. This action also made his merit known
to Sextus Caesar, who was Caesar the Emperor's Kinsman and Governor of Syria.
Phasaelus obtained the favor of the people of J^rusalem.
Phasaelus also striving to exceed the virtue and gallantry of his Brother,
used Jerusalem: so that during the time he governed the City, he did nothing
insolently or by force. For which cause the people honored Antipater no less
than if he had been their King, yet was his fidelity and affection never the
less toward Hircanus. But it is impossible that any man that lives in
prosperity, should not be envied. For Hircanus, although before-time he were
moved something at the glory of the Father and the young men, Hircanus animated
by envious men against Antipater and his Sons.
and especially with the prosperous success of Herod; yet in particular he was
stirred up by many envious person (who use to haunt the Courts of Princes) who
were grieved that Antipater and his Sons ruled without offense. These men told
Hircanus that he only enjoyed the bare name of a King, and that Antipater and
his Sons ruled Herod who had put to death a great multitude of Jews against the
Law, whereas neither by word of mouth, nor by writing, the King had given him
any such authority: and that Herod, if he were not a King but a private person,
was to be brought into judgment, there to answer the matter, and show the King
a reason, and satisfy the laws of his Country; which permit no man to be put
to death, before by Law he be convicted. By these persuasions Hircanus grew
angry: Herod called to his answer before the Council.
so that not concealing his wrath, he caused Herod Galilee, The year of the
World, 3922. before Christ's Nativity, 4^.
he repaired to the King, accompanied with a sufficient Guard, not so great as
to give jealousy to Hircanus, nor so small as to expose him to the attempts of
his Adversaries. Sextus Caesar, who loved the young man much, and feared lest
any evil should betide him amongst his enemies, sent to Hircanus, warning him
to absolve Herod from the crimes of which he was accused. Hircanus absolveth
Herod Hircanus once more incited by the wicked
Which Hircanus, who also loved Herod, made no difficulty to do. But Herod,
supposing he had done it unwillingly, went to Damascus to Sextus, purposing not
to appear, if hereafter he were sent for. Hereupon Hircanus was once again
incited against Herod by his enemies, who certified him that he was gone away
in a rage, with design to enterprise something against him: which Hircanus
believing, knew not what to do, seeing his enemy

Shortly after Sextus Caesar proclaimed him General of the Army, both in Syria
and Samaria; Herod gathering a great Army comes to Jerusalem to depose
Hircanus.
so that now he was greatly to be feared by Hircanus, not only for that he was
highly in favor with the Commonalty, but also for the forces which he
commanded. Hereupon Hircanus fell into extreme fear, verily persuading himself
that Herod with his whole Army would presently come against him. Neither was
his suspicion vain: Herod dissuaded by Antipater from attempting against
Hircanus.
for Herod angry at the pretended crime whereof he was accused, came with a
great Army to Jerusalem, intending to depose Hircanus; which he had effected,
had not his Father and Brother gone forth to meet him, and pacified him,
entreating him that he would account that terror (wherein he had put his
enemies) Hircanus side might do more for him than a whole Army; and that he
ought not to hope for victory, being to fight against his own King, who had
always been gracious unto him, and never had thought of doing him hurt, but
only being as it were urged thereunto by some of his Council, who through mere
envy, and to satisfy their own passions, had framed a shadow of an Herod was
satisfied herewith, and supposed it to be sufficient in order to his great
designs, to have showed his forces and his power unto his Nation.

At this time began Civil war among the Romans near Apamia, Bassus murthereth
Sextus Caesar by treason.
in which Caecilius Bassus, for the love he bare to Sextus Pompey, slew Sextus
Caesar at unawares, and made himself Governor of his Army; and other Captains
of Caesar's to revenge his death, made after Bassus with all their forces; unto
whom Antipater by his two Sons sent aid, both for the sake of Caesar that was
slain and of him that was yet alive (for he was an entire friend and
well-willer unto them both) and these wars continuing long, Marcus came out of
Italy to succeed Sextus.

CHAP. IX.
Caesar's death. Cassius comes into Syria: Herod ingratiates with him. Malichus
poisons Antipater, who had saved his life. For which Herod causes him to be
slain.
AT this time arose great and bloody Civil Wars amongst the Romans, after
Caesar was slain by the treason of Cassius and Brutus, Marcus, Sextus Successor.
having ruled the Empire Ant. l. 14. c. 2.
By reason of which murder their troubles daily increased, Julius Caesar slain
by Brutus and Cassius,
and the Nobility being at variance amongst themselves, every one followed that
couse, that they thought most expedient for themselves. Whereupon Cassius
presently marched into Syria, Cassius levieth money in the cities.
to take possession of the Government of the Army which was about Apamia; where
he made Marcus and Bassus friends, took the conduct of the Legions which they
commanded, and raised the siege from Apamia, and leading the Army in his own
person, Herod, Cassius friend.
he forced every City to be tributary, and exacted without measure. He
commanded the Jews to contribute seven hundred Talents: Cassius severe in his
exactions.
Antipater fearing his displeasure, appointed his Sons and others of his
friends presently to gather the money; and especially amongst the Malichus a
friend of his. But Herod first of all got Cassius his favor, having brought
him an hunndred Talents which he had collected out of Galilee, which was his
part or Province. As for the rest, he accused them of negligence, and was angry
at the other Cities: So that having pillaged Gophna and Ammauntes, The year of
the world, 3922. before Christ's Nativity. 40.
and other two small Cities, he marched onwards with intent to kill Malichus,
for that he had been so careless and negligent in gathering the tribute-money.
But Antipater (presently disbursing unto Cassius an hundred Talents) saved both
him and all the rest of the Cities. Malichus forgetful of Antipater's kindness.
Yet Malichus after Cassius was departed, did no more remember how beneficial
Antipater had been unto him, but oftentimes treacherously laid wait to murder
him because he hindered and withstood his villainous pretensions;
notwithstanding that himself had often confessed that Antipater had saved his
life. Antipater, Antipater gathers an Army against Malichus.
fearing both his power and subtilty, passed over the River Jordan to gather an
Army, that he might prevent those treacheries. But Malichus being discovered,
saw nothing left for him to do but to dissemble; and accordingly by many
Phasaelus chief of the Garrison in Jerusalem, and Herod who was master of the
Army, that they should be a means to reconcile him unto Antipater. Whereupon
Antipater entreating Marcus (who was General of the Army in Syria, and had
determined to kill him) he was saved. The reason that Marus would have put him
to death, was, because Malichus was of a turbulent and factious spirit.

The young Caesar, Octavius Augustus succeeds after Caesar.
surnamed afterward Augustus, and Antonius warring against Cassius and Brutus:
Brutus and Cassius, gathered an Army in Syria; and in consideration of the
great capacity of Herod, they made him Procurator of all Syria, giving him a
band of horse and foot. Cassius promises Herod after the War to make him King
of Judaea.
Moreover Cassius promised him, that if the war had an Judea. But it so came to
pass, that the merit of Herod, which raisd this hope so high, was the cause of
Antipater his Fathers death. For Malichus being hereby put in fear, hired one
of the Kings officers for a certain sum of money to poison Antipater; by which
means he died, being thus unjustly rewarded for his good will toward wretched
Malichus. Antipater poisoned by Malichus.
He was a worthy man and fit to govern, and recovered the Kingdom being lost
for Hircanus: Malichus (perceiving the people incensed against him, because
they suspected that he had poisoned Antipater) pacified and moderated their
displeasure by denying the fact; yet for his better security, he gathered about
him a Guard of armed men: for he thought that Herod would not let the matter
slip so, Herod intends to revenge his Father's death.
but would presently come with an Army to Phasaelus (who sent him word not
openly to encounter Malichus, lest a sedition might arise among the people) he
patiently permitted it so to be, and suffered Malichus to justify himself, and
celebrated a solemn funeral for his Father: which done, he went to Samaria, and
appeased the sedition wherewith that City was disquieted. After this he
returned to Jerusalem, intending to celebrate the Festival, and having sent
certain of his armed men before him, he appointed the rest to accompany him.
But Malichus, who feared this approach of his, solicited Hircanus to give
order, that no strangers should intermingle themselves among the people,
Malichus joyneth with Hircanus.
to disturb their devotion. But Herod contemning this Prohibition entered the
City by night: whereupon Malichus once more came to him, Antipater. Herod,
although he could very hardly bridle his displeasure, yet dissembled the same:
Cassius charge Herod by letters to revenge his fathers death.
and sent letters to Cassius, wherein he complained of his fathers death.
Cassius already hated Malichus sufficiently, and so he writ again to Herod,
willing him to revenge his father's death; which that he might the better
effect, he secretly commanded the Captains of his Regiment to assist him. Now
for that after the surprizal of Laodicea, all the best of the City came to
Herod, bringing presents and crowns, he appointed this for a fit time of his
intended revenge: which Malichus suspecting as he was near Tire, he purposed
secretly to get away his son, who was there a pledge, and to flee into Judaea.
But despair of his own safety urged him to greater matters; for he hoped to
incite the Jews to take Arms against the Romans, Cassius was now busy in the
War against Antonius; so that he thought he might easily depose Hircanus, and
make himself King. But God prevented these vain hopes: For Herod, suspecting he
had some great design, invited him and Hircanus to supper, in order to which he
made a show as though he had sent one of his servants to cause a banquet to be
prepared, but indeed he sent him to the Roman Captains to tell them to lie in
wait for Malichus: who remembering what charge Cassius gave them, The decree of
fate laugheth at humane hope.
came forth of the City to the shore next adjoining to the Town, all armed with
swords; where compassing Malichus round about, they killed him with many
wounds. Hircanus hereat astonished, fell in a swoon, and being scarcely come to
himself, Herod's Tribunes kill Malichus.
he demanded who killed Malichus; one of the Captains answered, that Cassius
Cassius has preserved me and my Country, in killing him who was a Traitor to
us both: but whether herein The year of the World, 3923. before Christ's
Nativity, 39.
or that for fear he approved the fact, it is uncertain. Thus was Herod
revenged upon Malichus.

CHAP. X. Ant. lib. 14. cap. 20.

How Herod was accused, and set free* Felix comes with an army against
Phasaelus.

AFter Cassius was departed from Syria, Phasaelus overcomes Felix, and
reproacheth Hircanus with ingratitude.
there arose another sedition in Jerusalem: Felix came with an Army against
Phasaelus, to be revenged upon Herod for killing Malichus. It chanced that
Herod was at that time at Damascus with Fabius a Roman Captain, and would have
come to assist Phasaelus, but by the way he fell sick, so that he could not
succor him: but it so fell out, that Phasaelus without any help, did of
himself overcome Felix, and afterward reproached Hircanus as ungrateful, in
that he had both favored Felix, and suffered Malichus's brother to seize upon
diverse place (as already he had done, and especially one of greatest strength
called Massada:) Yet all these did not protect him from Herod, who was no
sooner recovered of his sickness, but presently he retook them all, and at
Hircanus's request permitted him to depart. He also chased Marion, whom Cassius
had made Prince of the Tyrians Galilee, who had got three Castles in that
Country. As for the Tyrians that he took, he spared their lives, and sent some
away with rewards; whereby he got the good will of the City, and the hatred of
the Tyrant. Which Marion had gotten into his hands all Syria; and for the
hatred he bore to Herod, took with him Antigonus, Aristobulus's Son, and
marched against him: and by Fabius's means, whom Antigonus had gained to
himself by money: Antigonus Aristobulus's Son put to flight by Herod.
he also got Ptolemy to assist him in this expedition; which Ptolemy was
father-in-law to Antigonus, and furnished him with all necessaries. Herod
likewise, having prepared himself against them, gave them battle in the
entrance into Judea, and got the victory: and having put Antigonus to flight,
he returned to Jerusalem, where he was honored by all men for his courage in
that victory; so that even they Hircanus, sought his friendship and
familiarity. This Herod long before this time had a wife which was a noble
woman of his own Country, Doris, Herod's first wife, of good birth, by whom he
had Antipater.
named Doris, and had by her a Son named Antipater: but he then married
Mariamne, daughter of Alexander (who was Aristobulus his son) and of Alexandra
Hircanus his daughter, by reason whereof he came to be in favor with the King.
But when Cassius was slain near Philippi, Caesar departed into Italy, The
chiefest Jews repair to Caesar to accuse Phasaelus and Herod.
and Antonius into Asia; at which time the chief of the Jews came and accused
Phasaelus and Herod, alleging that they by force got unto themselves the rule
of the Country, and left Hircanus only the bare name of King. But Herod being
then present, so wrought himself into Antonius's favor by a great sum of
money, Ant. lib. 14. cap. 21.
who thereupon returned home. Afterward an hundred men of the most honorable
amongst the Jews, repaired to Daphne near Antioch to Antonius (now doting on
the love of Cleopatra) and offered an accusation against the two brethren,
having chosen some of the greatest Quality and Eloquence to speak for them,
Messala undertook their defense being assisted by Hircanus. Antonius having
heard both parties demanded of Hircanus, whom he thought the fittest to govern
the Commonwealth? who answered, Herod and his brethren. Whereat Antonius was
exceeding glad (for he had been most courteously entertained by Antipater, when
he came with Gabinius into Judea;) and thereupon he made them Tetrarchs,
Antonius makes the two brothers Tetrarchs.
committing to them the rule of all Judaea: The Jews once more complain against
the two brothers.
Whereupon there arose greater tumults in Jerusalem, and the Jews sent another
Embassage of a thousand men to Tire, where Antonius resided with an intent to
come against Jerusalem. Antonius displeased with their murmurs and complaints,
commanded the Magistrates of Tire to kill all they could catch of the Jews, and
to maintain their Authority, Antonius commands in Zyre.
whom he himself had constituted Tetrarchs. But Herod and Hircanus went to
these Deputies, who walked on the Seashore, admonishing them earnestly to be
contented, lest by their indiscreet proceeding, they should become not only the
cause of their own deaths, but also of War against their own Country; Antonius
sent out certain armed men, who killed many of them, and wounded the rest.
Hircanus after this disaster caused the dead to be buried, and the wounded to
be cured, notwithstanding all this, they that escaped would not contain
themselves in Peace, but so troubled the Antonius in displeasure, slew those
that he had in hold.

CHAP. XI.
Of the War of the Parthians against the Jews. Of the flight of Herod, and his
being made King of Judaea.
TWo years after this, Ant. lib. 14. cap. 21.
and when Barzapharnes, a great Noble man of the Parthians, governed Syria with
Pacorus the King's Son, Lysanias persuades Barzapharnes to depose Hircanus,
and enstate Antigonus.
Lysanias who had succeeded his Father Ptolomaeus, Son of Minaeus, promised
them a thousand Talents, and five hundred Women, to put Antigonus in possession
of the Kingdom of Judaea, and depose Hircanus. Being induced by these promises,
Pacorus marched along the Seacoast, and Barzapharnes past through the midst of
the Country. But amongst the rest of the places bordering on the Sea, the
Tyrians would not receive Pacorus (notwithstanding the Citizens of Ptolemais
and Sidon had given him entertainment) wherefore he gave part of his Horse unto
one who was the King's Butler, called Pacorus (as himself was;) commanding him
to pass into Judaea, and learn what their enemies meant to do, and to help
Antigonus where need required. As they wasted the Country about Carmel, many
Jews came of their own accord, and joined with Antigonus, showing themselves
Drymos; where having fought with his enemies, and put them to flight, he
pursued them with all speed as far as Jerusalem: And his number being
augmented, he came to the King's Palace. A sore fight in the Marketplace,
betwixt Antigonus and Hircanus.
But Hircanus and Phasaelus met them with a strong Company, and fought with
them in the Marketplace, where the enemies were forced to fly, and part of
them were by Herod shut up in the Temple; and he appointed to keep them sixty
men, which he placed in the houses next adjoining* But the people bearing a
grudge to the two Brethren, Daily slaughters in Jerusalem.
set the houses on fire: Whereat Herod being angry (for that his men were
consumed with fire) set upon the people, and killed a great many of them, and
every hour one laid wait for another, so that every day some were murdered.
Pentecost drawing nigh, all places about the Temple, and the whole City, was
filled with people of the Country, whereof the most part was armed; and
Phasaelus kept the Walls, and Herod with a small Company, kept the King's
Palace; and assaulting their enemies upon the sudden, as they were in the
Suburbs, they killed a great many of them, and put all the rest to flight; part
of them he couped up in the City, others he shut in the Temple, and the rest
between that and the uttermost Rampire. Whereupon Antigonus requested that
Pacorus might come and treat a Peace betwixt them. Phasaelus entertaineth the
Parthian, and with him five hundred Horse Pacorus's Treason and subtilty.
Phasaelus moved by these prayers received the Parthian into the City, and
entertained him into his house, accompanied with five hundred Horse, who came
under a pretense to make Peace; but in effect he resorted Antigonus; for
craftily conspiring against Phasaelus, he persuaded him to repair to
Barzapharnes as an Ambassador to treat a Peace, notwithstanding that Herod
altogether dissuaded him, willing him to kill the Traitor, and not to trust his
subtilty; adding that the Parthians were naturally unfaithful.

Pacorus departing out of the City, The year of the World, 3924. before
Christ's Nativity, 38.
took Hircanus with him that he might be the less suspected; and leaving some
Horse with Herod, named Or free.
Eleutheri, he followed Phasaelus with the rest. When they came near Galilee,
they found the Inhabitants at variance, and up in Arms, and met with
Barzapharnes (who craftily, with pretense of courtesy and friendship, hid his
Treachery) who after he had bestowed Presents upon them, and that they were
retired, laid an Ambush for them; whereof they had intelligence Edippon. Here
they were informed of the thousand Talents that were promised, Herod in
Jerusalem, and Phasaelus in the Camp, are in danger of their lives.
and how that Antigonus had given the Parthians more than five hundred women of
those that were amongst them; and that oftentimes they had been laid wait for,
and had been lately taken, but that delay was made till such time as Herod was
surprised in Jerusalem, lest he hearing what was become of them, might provide
for himself. Now they perceived that these were not only words, for they beheld
some Guards not far off: Yet would not Phasaelus forsake Hircanus,
notwithstanding that Oselius (to whom Saramalla, the richest among the Syrians
had declared all the Treason) exhorted him to fly; but he chose rather to to go
to Barzapharnes, and to upbraid him to his face, that he had treacherously laid
Antigonus had done for the Kingdom. Pacorus. But presently the Parthians, who
stayed behind, and had charge so to do, laid hands on Phasaelus and Hircanus,
who openly exclaimed against their falsehood and perjury.

In the mean time Pacorus was sent out to surprise Herod, and by some stratagem
to ^oul him out of the City: Herod is laid for to be betrayed.
He wrought by all the means he could, according as he was instructed; but
Herod who was always wont to mistrust the perfideous practices of the Parthian,
and believed that the Letters which Phasaelus had writ to him to discover the
Treason, were fallen into the enemies hands, would not go forth, though Pacorus
incited him to ride out and meet them that brought the Letters, for he had
already learnt Phasaelus; and Mariamne a very wise woman, Hircanus's Daughter,
with many entreaties persuaded Herod not to go forth, but to beware how he
trusted himself to the mercy of that Barbarous people, whose ill designs he
could not be ignorant of. Herod in the night time flies into Idumaea.
Whilst Pacorus was consulting with his Accomplices, how he might privily effect
his Treasons (seeing it was not possible openly to circumvent a man of so great
Wisdom) Herod in the night time, whilst his enemies neither knew nor suspected
his intent, took his nearest kindred, and fled into Idumaea; which being once
known, the Parthians followed him. For which cause* he made his Mother, his
Brethren and Mariamne, whom he had espoused, and her Mother and youngest
Brother to keep on their journey, Herod more hotly pursued by the Jews than the
Parthians.
and he with his Servants warily assaulted the Parthians; and having in diverse
assaults Massada; and in his retreat sustained more harm by the Jews, than by
the Parthians; who, as they had been always troublesome, so now within three
score furlongs from the Town, they set upon him: Herod's Victory.
The Battle was long, but Herod obtained the Victory, killed a great many of
them; and in remembrance of the action, built on that place a most stately
Palace, Herodion.
and a strong Castle, which from his own name he called Herodion. In this
retreat many joined with him: But when he came to Thersa, a Town of Idumaea,
his Brother Joseph met him, and persuaded him to lessen the number of his
followers, because Massada could not receive such a multitude (for the number
amounted to above nine thousand.) Massada.
Herod, according to his counsel, dismissed those that were unfit for Idumaea,
giving them necessaries for their journey. As for those that were chosen men,
and fit for his purpose, he retained them with him, and so he was received into
the Castle; where leaving eight hundred Soldiers to defend the women, Petra a
City of Arabia.
and Provision sufficient for those that were within, he himself went to Petra,
a City of Arabia.

In the mean time the Parthians at Jerusalem began to sack the houses of them
that were fled, The year of the World, 3925. before Christ's Nativity, 37.
and the King's Palace; they only abstained from Hircanus's money, which
amounted to more than three hundred Talents. As for other men's Goods, they
found not so much as they expected; for Herod long before, suspecting the
infidelity of the Parthians, had sent all his Riches and Jewels into Idumaea,
as his followers also had Marsa, and bound Phasaelus and Hircanus, and
delivered them in Chains to Antigonus, who presently cut off Hircanus's ears,
Antigonus cutteth off Hircanus's ears.
to the end, that if by some alteration, he chanced hereafter to get loose, he
might be no more High Priest; for by our Law, none may offer Sacrifice, that
wants any member of his body. But Phasaelus his fortitude prevented the cruelty
of Antigonus; for having neither Weapon, nor his hands at liberty, he beat out
his own brains against a stone, and died; demonstrating himself by that act, to
be the true Brother of Herod and not a Poltron like Hircanus: Yet some report
that Antigonus sent a Surgeon under pretense to cure the wound, who filled
the same with venomous Phasaelus's words before he died.
and so killed him. It is reported likewise, that understanding before his
death by means of a certain woman, that Herod was escaped, he spoke these
words; Now I shall die without regret, since I leave behind me one that will
take vengeance of my enemies; The Parthians established Antigonus King.
and so he died. Although the Parthians had not yet received the five hundred
women promised them (which was the chief thing they looked for) yet they
established Antigonus in Jerusalem, and led Hircanus Prisoner into Parthia. But
Herod with all speed hasted into Arabia, as if his Brother had been yet alive,
to the intent to borrow money of the King of Arabia, with which alone he hoped
that the cruelty of those barbarous Parthians might be mitigated toward
Phasaelus: For his opinion was, that although the Arabian had now forgot his
Father's Friendship, and Herod took with him a Son of his Brother's into
Arabia, that was seven years old; and purposed to give 300 Talents for his
Ransom, and had made the Tyrians intercessors for him to the Parthians:
Malichus their King sent to him as he was yet in the way, charging him with all
speed to depart out of his Dominions; pretending that the Parthians had sent
Ambassadors to him, to request him to drive him out of his Country; but
indeed the cause was, that his ingratitude suffered him not to pay that which
Antipater had deserved, or requite his Sons, now comfortless, for those good
turns that he had received at their Father's hands: And those who counseled
him to this, were such as offered to forswear those Sums which Antipater had
put them in trust with, who were the chiefest men about him. Herod perceives
the Arabians to be his enemies
Herod perceiving the Arabians to be his foes for that which Egypt; and the
first night he lodged in a Country Temple, to the intent that those of his
company that were behind him might overtake him. The next day coming to
Rhinoslura, his Brother's death was told him; after he had paid what he could
not refuse to the first sentiments of so violent a sorrow, he went forward.

In the mean time the King of Arabia (though too late) repented himself of that
which he had done to Herod, and sent Messengers after him to desire him to
return, but they could not overtake him, he had marched so fast. When Herod was
come to Pelusium, the Mariners of the City would not receive him into their
Vessels; for which Alexandria; whither he no sooner came, but Cleopatra
received him very honorably, intending to make him General of her Army which
she was preparing at that time. Herod in great dangers repaireth to Rome.
But he neither regarding the offers of the Queen, nor yet discouraged by the
hard Winter Season, nor the dangers of the Seas, took his journey toward Rome;
and being in great danger of Shipwreck near Pamphilia, both he and the rest of
the Passengers, were forced to cast away the most part of their lading: with
much ado he arrived safe at Rhodes, which had been much ruined in the War
against Cassius; there he was entertained by two of his friends, Ptolomey and
Sapinas; and although his money grew scant, yet there he built a great Galley
with three Ranks of Brundusium, and from thence went straight to Rome. Herod
repairing to Rome, has conference with Antonius.
Where first of all (in regard of the familiarity between his Father and him)
he went to Antonius, declaring unto him both his own calamity, and the
miserable desolation of the whole Country; and how, leaving his dearest
friends besieged in a Castle, himself through the stormy Winter Seas was come
to him, to implore his assistance. Antonius compassionating his calamity, and
remembering his familiarity with Antipater, and esteeming the merit of Herod
which stood before him, determined to make him King of the Jews, whom before,
he himself had made Tetrarch: For he loved not Herod so well, but he hated
Antigonus as much; holding him both a seditious person, Ant. lib. 14. cap. 13.
and an enemy to the Romans. Now, to the accomplishment Herod finds both
Caesar and Antonius favorable unto him.
he found Caesar far more ready than himself, when he called to mind the
service that Antipater did in Egypt under his Father, and his entertainment and
friendship in all things: And besides all these, he was much satisfied with
Herod's courage and ability. Wherefore he caused the Senate to be assembled,
wherein Messala and himself, Herod praised before the Senate
in the presence of Herod, recounted his Father's deserts and fidelity toward
the Romans; declaring Antigonus to be an enemy, not only because he had
formerly revolted, but for that now lately, in despite of the Romans, he had
by the assistance of the Parthians, Herod made King by the Roman Senate
usurped the Kingdom. With which considerations the Senate being moved, and
Antonius affirming it to be expedient for the Roman Wars aagainst the
Parthians, that Herod should be created King, the whole Senate consented:
Antonius and Caesar came forth with Herod between them, and the Consuls marched
before him accompanied with other Magistrates to offer Sacrifice, and to
Register the Decree of the Senate in the Capitol. After which Antonius feasted
Herod the first day of his Reign.


Of Herod's War for the recovering of Jerusalem after his return from Rome; and
how he warred against the Thieves.
AT this time Antigonus besieged those that were left in the Castle of Massada,
Ant. lib. 14. cap. 23.
who had great store of Victuals, Antigonus gets Massada.
and wanted nothing but Water. Joseph, Herod's Brother, who defended it,
purposed to go to the Arabians with two hundred of his dearest friends, for
that he had intelligence that Malichus repented that he had given Herod no
better entertainment. And accordingly he had forsaken the Castle, had not great
store of rain fallen that very night, wherein he intended to flee; but the
Wells and Cisterns being now filled with Water, The Wars between Antigonus's
Soldiers and Joseph, Herod's Brother.
there was no cause to flee; so that issuing out of the Castle, he assaulted
Antigonus's Soldiers, and killed very many of them; sometimes in open fight,
and sometimes by policy: Yet, he fought not always with fortunate success, but
returned sometimes with loss. In the mean time, Ventidius (who was General of
the Roman Army which was sent to expel the Parthians out of Syria) after he had
repulsed them, Ventidius the Roman General takes money from Antigonus.
came into Judaea, under pretense to succor Joseph and the rest that were
besieged; out in effect, to get money from Antigonus. When therefore he drew
near Jerusalem, and had received the money he looked for, he departed with Ant.
lib. 14. cap. 24.
leaving Silo behind him with a few to color his pretense: And Antigonus
hoping for a second Supply from the Parthians, corrupted Silo not to molest him
for the present. Herod against Antigonus.
By this time Herod having sailed from Italy to Ptolemais, and gathered a great
Army of strangers and his own Countrymen together, came into Galilee against
Antigonus, being assisted with the Forces of Ventidius and Silo, whom Gellius,
who was sent from Antonius, persuaded to establish Herod in his Kingdom. Herod
intends after he has taken Massada and Joppa, to besiege Jerusalem.
But Ventidius was busy in appeasing the Broils that the Parthians had made in
the Cities, and Silo was corrupted by Antigonus: Yet did not Herod want aid;
for every day, the further he marched into the Country, the more his Army
increased, all Galilee (very little excepted) yielding unto him. Whereupon he
Massada, to deliver his friends that were there besieged; but Joppa hindered his
purpose; which being an enemy Town, he thought best to take it before he went
any further, lest whilst he was going to Jerusalem, his enemies should have a
place behind him to flee to. Now Silo joined Armies with Herod, rejoicing that
he had found occasion to retire; but he was pursued by the Jews of Antigonus's
Party, who Herod with a loose Wing of his Army, and a small Company of men,
encountered, and presently put to flight, and saved Silo, who had much ado to
make resistance against them. This done, and Joppa taken, he hasted to Massada;
and the people of the Country (some for his Father's sake, others for his own,
and many for both) joined themselves to him: Many also, came to him for hope,
because he was Antigonus hindered his journey, by planting certain Ambushes in
places convenient, where Herod was to pass; though by all this they little
harmed him.

Herod having raised the Siege of Massada, Herod begirteth Jerusalem with a
Siege, and proclaims the cause of his coming.
and rescued his friends, from thence went to Jerusalem; where both Silo's
Soldiers, and many of the City came and joined with him. Being now terrified
with the greatness of his Forces, there pitching their Tents at the west side
of the Town, they that guarded that part, assaulted them with Darts and Arrows;
and others issuing by Troops forth of the City, assaulted the Front of the
Army: Whereupon Herod caused one to go about the Walls of the City, and to
proclaim, how that he was come for the good of the whole City; and that he
would Antigonus his followers with loud exclamations hindered the Crier's voice
from being heard, lest any man should alter his mind; Herod presently commanded
his men to beat the enemies off from the Wall; upon which order, they shot such
a flight of Arrows and Darts from the top of the Towers, that they forced them
to retire. At this time Silo was detected to have been corrupted with money;
Silo's subtilty being corrupted by the Jews.
for he solicited many Soldiers to cry out that they wanted Provisions, and to
ask money and Victuals, and to crave to be dismissed and sent into some fit
place of Quarter during the Winter, because Antigonus had laid waste all the
Country; and even Silo himself offered to be gone, and exhorted others to do
the like. But Herod seeing Silo; and calling many of the Soldiers together,
requested them not to forsake him at that exigent, whom Caesar, Antonius, and
the whole Senate (as they knew) had sent thither; promising them, that within
one day he would relieve all their necessities. When he had thus Silo's
excuses; and forecasting lest hereafter there should be any want, he sent
Letters to Samaria (which City about this time had put it self under his
protection) willing them to bring Victuals, Herod g^^hereth great store of
provision.
and Wine, and Oil, and Cattle to Jericho. Antigonus hearing this, presently
sent certain of his men to lie in Ambush in the Fields, and suddenly to set
upon those that came for Provision, and kill them, and so hinder them from
carrying any Victuals to the Camp: according to his Commandment, there went a
great number of Soldiers to Jericho, and placed themselves upon the Mountains,
with an intent to espy if any body carried Provision to the Army. In the mean
time Herod rested not; Herod accompanied with ten Troops, comes to Jericho.
for taking with him ten Companies (five of the Romans, and Jericho, where he
found the City without Inhabitants, and five hundred with their Wives and
Families had placed themselves upon the tops of the Mountains; whom when he had
surprised, The Romans got a great Prey.
he permitted to depart. But the Romans brake into the City, and sacked it
(where they found the houses stored with all manner of Riches;) and the King
leaving a Garrison at Jericho returned. He sent likewise the Roman Soldiers to
the Provinces which were on his side; to wit, Idumaea, Galilee and Samaria,
that they might abide there till Winter was past. Antigonus also, through
Silo's means (whom by money he had made his friend) obtained that a part of his
Army might (during the Winter time) abide at Lidda, that he might by this means
obtain the favor of Antonius:

All this time Herod was not idle, but accompanied with two thousand Foot, and
five hundred Horse, he went about Idumaea, and sent also his Brother Joseph,
lest by Antigonus's means the people should rebel. And having carried his
Mother, and the rest of his Kindred, whom he took from Massada, into Samaria,
and placed them where no danger might betide them; himself went into Galilee,
to subdue that part of the Country which as yet was not in his hands, and to
expel from thence the Garrisons left by Antigonus. Ant. lib. 14. cap. 24.
And when he was come to Sephoris, notwithstanding there was a very great Snow,
Herod takes the City of ^^phoris.
he easily took it, for the Garrison fled before he assaulted it; and finding
Herod sets forth against the Thieves.
And sending before three Companies of Foot, and one Troop of Horse into a
Village called Arbela, himself forty days after came thither with the whole
Army. For all this the Thieves feared him not, but arming themselves, came to
meet him, trusting to their experience in Warlike affairs, and their own
desperate courage. The Battle being joined, the Right Wing of their Party put
the Left Wing of Herod's to flight; but he with his Right Wing presently
succored them, Herod pursued them even unto Jordan, and killed many of them;
those that escaped fled over the River. And thus he freed Galilee from that
fear, save that yet there were left some lurking in the Caves, by whom he was
constrained to make a longer stay. Wherefore, first of all he gave the Soldiers
some fruit of their labors, distributing to every one of them an hundred and
fifty Drachmes of Silver, and unto the Captains more, and so he sent them where
they should pass the Winter. Also he writ unto his youngest Brother Pheroras,
to provide necessaries for them, and to build a Wall about the Castle of
Alexandrium; which he performed.

In the mean while Antonius passed the time about Athens, The year of the
World, 3926. before Christ's Nativity, 36.
and Ventidius sent for Silo and Herod, to assist him in the War against the
Parthians; after they had settled the affairs of Judaea, so as no longer to
need their presence. Herod willingly sent Silo unto Ventidius; and in the mean
time he with his Army went against the Thieves in the Caves. Ant. lib. 14. cap.
25.
These Caves were in very steep Mountains, so that there was no way to come to
them, save only by crooked and very narrow passages: And these Mountains were
all Rocks of Stone, The description of the Caves where the Thieves kept*
hanging over the Valleys; so that the King a great while was doubtful what to
do, seeing the place so inaccessible. At last, Herod devised a way scarcely
heard of before; for he put the valiantest of his men into Chests, and so let
them down to the mouths of the Caves, where they killed the Thieves and their
Families, and put Herod seeking to save some of them, caused a Trumpet to
publish to them, that they might come to him with safety; but there was not one
Herod being in a place where he might behold this spectacle, being moved with
compassion, stretched forth his hand and requested him to spare his Children:
But he being nothing moved to compassion by Herod's words, upbraided Herod's
meanness of mind; and having butchered his Sons, he also killed his Wife; and
casting the dead bodies down into the Valleys, at last he cast himself likewise
down headlong.

Herod having thus taken the Caves, and slain those that were in them, left
such a part of his Army, as he thought might suffice to repress any that should
attempt a Rebellion, under the Command of Ptolomey, and returned to Samaria,
carrying with him three thousand Foot, Ptolomey Captain of Herod's Soldiers
slain.
and six hundred Horse against Antigonus. After his departure, those that were
accustomed to trouble Galilee, having now (as they thought) opportunity,
assaulted Ptolomey at unawares, and killed him; and having wasted the Country,
retired into Marish Grounds, and Strong Holds. Which when Herod understood, he
presently came to succor the Country, and killed most part of the enemies;
and having taken all the Castles by force, he exacted an hundred Talents for a
punishment of that revolt, to be paid by the Cities. In the mean time the
Parthians being put to Pacorus slain, Ventidius, in obedience to Letters from
Antonius, sent Machaera to Herod with a thousand Horse, and two Legions of
Foot, to assist him against Antigonus. Antigonus writ Letters to Machaera,
desiring him to help him; and complaining that Herod had injured him, promised
him a great sum of money: But he thinking it not best to forsake him he was
sent to succor, especially seeing that Herod would give more, would not be
subborned by him; yet counterfeiting himself to be Antigonus his friend, under
that pretense to discover what Forces he had, contrary to Herod's counsel, he
went to him. But Antigonus distrusting his intent, kept him out of the City,
Machaera's iniquity.
and like an enemy drove him away from the Walls: Machaera ashamed of what he
had done, returned to Emmaus unto Herod; and being in a rage that things fell
out against Herod or Antigonus. The year of the World, 3927. before Christ's
Nativity. 35.
Herod hereat was moved, and purposed to be revenged upon Machaera, as an
enemy; yet he bridled himself, and hasted to Antonius, to let him understand
Machaera's cruelty: Machaera remembering how he had offended, followed the King,
and with many entreaties besought him to be reconciled, and obtained it. Yet
Herod kept on his journey to Antonius; and hearing that he was now with a great
Army besieging Samosata (a very strong City near Euphrates) he made the more
haste; thinking it now a fit time to show his affection and his courage, and
that thereby he might win Antonius's favor the more. His arrival hastened the
taking of the place, which Antiochus was constrained to deliver; for he killed
a great number of the Antonius admireth Herod's valor.
and had for his reward a great part of the Spoil; and Antonius, though before
he admired his virtue, yet now his opinion of him increased, so that he had a
greater addition of his honor, and reason to hope his establishment in the
Kingdom.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the death of Joseph. Ant. lib. 14. cap. 25.
How Herod besieged Jerusalem; and how Antigonus was slain.
Herod's Affairs in Judaea went backward. He had left his Brother Joseph
Governor of all, and commanded him to attempt nothing against Antigonus till
his return; for he little trusted to Machaera's help, because of the part he
had played before. But Joseph seeing his Brother to be far off, regarded not
what charge was left him, but went to Jericho with his own Troops, and five
Companies of Horse which Machaera sent with him, thinking now in Harvest time
to have taken away their Corn; but being assaulted by the enemies upon the
Mountains, and in difficult places, himself was there slain, after he had
showed himself in the fight a worthy and valiant man; and there was not one
left alive of all the Roman Horse, for they had been newly levied in Syria, and
they had no old Soldiers amongst them to assist their want of experience.
Antigonus not contented with the Victory, Antigonus's cruelty against Joseph's
Carcass.
became such a Tyrant, that having the dead (...) in his power, he cut off
Joseph's head, and caused his body to be scourged, although Pheroras his
Brother offered fifty Talents to redeem the same entire.

After Antigonus had obtained this Victory, there was such a change in Galilee,
that Herod's Favorites, and drowned them in a Lake. Also there arose great
Commotions in Idumaea, where Machaera was repairing the Walls of a certain
Castle called Githa. All this while Herod heard nothing of the news; Herod
certified of his Brother's death in a Dream.
for after Samosata was taken, Antonius made Sosius Governor of Syria, leaving
order with him to help Herod against Antigonus, and so he departed into Egypt.
Sosius sent two Legions with Herod into Judaea to help him, and he himself with
the rest of the Army followed. When Herod was at Antiochia, near Daphne, his
Brother's death was showed him in a Dream; and being troubled at it, he leaped
out of his bed, even at the same instant that the Messengers who brought
tidings of his death, entered into the house. He could not forbear some
expressions of grief; but he checked his Libanus, he took eight hundred
Inhabitants of that Mountain to help him, and joined unto them one of the Roman
Legions; and not expecting the day, with them he entered into Galilee; where
meeting with some enemies, he forced them to flee to the place from whence they
came, and besieged their Castle; but before he could take it, he was
constrained by hard weather, to lead his Army into the next Village. Within a
few days his number being increased with another Legion which Antonius sent, he
put his enemies in such fear, that in the night time they forsook the Castle.
Then he hasted to Jericho to be revenged on those that had killed his Brother;
Herod's Dining Room fell after he had forsaken it, and gone to bed.
where there befell him a most strange accident, from which being against all
hope delivered, he persuaded Herod took this as a Presage, both of the dangers,
and prosperous success he was to have in his Wars. And the next morning early
he removed from thence, and about six thousand of the enemies descending from
the Mountains, charged his Vanguard; yet they durst not join Battle with the
Romans, but molested them with stones and darts, with which they wounded many;
so that Herod himself passing along, was wounded in the side with a Dart.
Antigonus desirous to show himself the stronger, as well in multitude of men,
as in courage, sent Pappus a friend of his, with some Forces to Samaria, with a
design to fight Machaera. Herod, on the other side, went about the enemies
Country, and took five Towns, and destroyed two thousand of the Inhabitants;
and firing the houses, returned to his Army near a Village called Cana.

Every day there came flocking to him a very great number of Jews, both from
Jericho and other parts of the Country; some out of hatred to Antigonus, and
others out of love of change, and an esteem of Herod. Whilst thus he hasted to
fight, Pappus, with his men, neither fearing the multitude nor strength of
their enemies, came fiercely upon them, and offered Battle: Which being begun,
those that were not engaged against Herod, resisted a while; but Herod
remembering his Brother's death, ventured more than the rest, to the end, to be
revenged upon them that were the Authors thereof, The number of the Carcases
hinder the Soldiers passage.
that they who had the Victory, could not pass thorough the streets for them.
Those of the Country were so dismayed with this overthrow, that the whole
multitude of them fled away; and Herod by the benefit of Jerusalem, had not a
great storm hindered him, which was the only cause that at that time he got not
a full Conquest, and Antigonus was not utterly overthrown; who, through fear
and desperation, was preparing to leave the City. But Herod, toward night
having given his friends leave to depart to refresh themselves, being himself
heated with his Armor, after the manner of Soldiers, entered into a Bath,
accompanied only with one Page: And as he was there, three of his enemies that
had escaped out of the Battle, and came to the Bath to hide themselves; seeing
the King there, were so terrified with the King's Presence, although at that
time he was naked and weaponless, that they thought of nothing but flight; and
being no body was present there to surprise them, they escaped; and Herod was
very Herod beheadeth Pappus, Antigonus 's Captain.
The next day he beheaded Pappus, who was the General of Antigonus his Army,
and sent his head to his Brother Pheroras, to comfort him for their common
loss; for Pappus was he that slew Joseph.

The year of the World, 3928. before Christ's Nativity, 34.
he with his Army came to Jerusalem, and besieged it, pitching his Tents before
the Temple, where it was easiest to take the City, and where formerly Pompey
had entered it. It was now the third year after Herod had been declared King at
Rome. Now, when he had quartered his Army as he thought best for his purpose,
A^t. lib. 14. cap. 12.
and divided the Suburbs, he caused three Rampires to be raised for Towers to
be built upon them; and leaving there his trusty friends that would not slack
their business, Jerusalem besieged.
he went to Samaria to visit Mariamne (the Daughter of Alexander, who was Son
to Aristobulus) formerly (as we before made mention) espoused to him: And he
wedded her even in the time of the Siege, to show how he contemned his enemies.
After his Marriage-rites were performed, he returned to Jerusalem with a far
greater Sosius also seconded him with a great Army of Foot and Horse, whom he
sent before him through the midst of the Country, and he himself came after by
Phoenicia. Now when all his whole Army was joined together, The year of the
world, 3929. before Christ's Nativity, 33.
to the number of about eleven Legions of Foot, and six thousand Horse, besides
the Syrians that came to help him, which were no small number; he laid his
Assault and Battery to the Northermost Wall. He grounded his Right upon the
Decree of the Senate, whereby he was declared to be King: The Jews valiantly
defend themselves.
Sosius also was warranted by Antonius's Letters, whereby he commanded him to
help Herod with all the Forces under his Command. Meanwhile the Jews that were
within the City were diversely troubled; for the weaker sort, gathering
themselves together about the Temple, deplored their unhappiness, and envied
Herod's Soldiers after five months Siege, enter the City.
But at last, certain of Herod's bravest men, by a breach, entered the City,
and the Romans the like on another side. Those places nearest the Temple were
the first that they seized upon: afterward, the whole Army entering the City,
it was lamentable to see how in every corner the people were massacred;
Slaughter in Jerusalem.
for the Romans being displeased that the Siege continued so long time, became
more cruel; and Herod's Army endeavored to let none of the adverse part
escape. Sosius takes Antigonus.
Antigonus, not considering his former condition, came and prostrated himself
at Sosius's feet, beseeching him to be merciful unto him; but Sosius nothing
compassionating his calamity, insulted over him, and called him Antigona; yet
did he not permit him to depart free as a woman, but put him in Prison.

Now when Herod had conquered his enemies, he endeavored to the utmost to
repress the insolence of his Auxiliary Strangers, who thronged to see the
Temple, and Sosius, that if the Romans would desolate the City both of men and
money, they would leave him King of a Desert: Adding further, that he esteemed
not the Empire of the whole World, to be a recompense for such a Massacre of
his Subjects. Hereunto Sosius answering, that the Soldiers ought to have the
sacking of the Town, in recompense of that labor they had spent in the Siege:
Herod liberally bestows money upon the Soldiers.
Herod replied, that he had rather recompense them out of his Sosius Presents
worthy of a King. This done, Sosius dedicated a Golden Crown unto God, and
Antigonus Captive with him, to the end, to present him to Antonius. This man
desirous to continue his life, and entertaining himself with this col^ hope
even until the last, received in the end that reward which his faint heart
desired, and was beheaded.

Herod being now King, Antigonus beheaded.
he made a distinction between the Citizens; and those who had favored him he
used very honorably, Ant. lib. 11. cap. 1.
and put those to death who had followed Antigonus: And when money sailed, he
distributed all his Kingly Ornaments, and sent them to Antonius and his
Company. Yet did he not quie redeem himself from all troubles; for Antonius
being passionately enamoured on Cleopatra, in all things yielded to her desire:
Cleopatra's cruelty against her Kindred.
And Cleopatra having raged so against her own Kindred, that she had Syria to
Antonius, she persuaded him to put them to death, that she might thereby the
easier obtain their Possession. Afterward her covetous mind thought to effect
the same against the Arabians, and the Jews also; insomuch that she secretly
went about to cause the Kings of those places, Malichus and Herod, to be put to
death: Antonius made a show as though he would have granted her request; yet he
thought it great impiety to kill good men, and so great Kings* Notwithstanding,
he no more accounted them his friends; but took a great quantity of ground from
the limits of both their Countries, and a Vineyard in Jericho where Balm grew;
and gave her all the Cities on this side the River Ele^therus (Tire and Sidon
only excepted.) Cleopatra's covetousness.
Now, when Antonius to Euphrates, when he set forward to make War against the
Parthians; and afterward, by Apamia and Damascus, she came into Judaea; where
Herod having something pacified her angry mind with great gifts, obtained to
pay her yearly two hundred Talents for that part of his Country which Antonius
had given her; and seeking by all means possible to get himself an interest in
her favor, he conducted her to Pelusium. Not long after, Antonius returned out
of Parthia, and brought Artibazes the Son of Tigranes Captive, and gave him to
Cleopatra, with all the money and Prisoners that he had taken.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the treacherous practices of Cleopatra against Herod. Herod's War against
the Arabians, and of a very great Earthquake.
WHen War was declared between Augustus and Antonius, The year of the World,
3934. before Christ's Nativity, 28.
Herod prepared himself to attend Antonius; seeing for the present all troubles
were pacified in Judaea, and he had already gotten the Castle of Hircanion,
which Antigonus's Sister had in her possession. But Cleopatra craftily
prevented him in this his journey, so that he could Antonius: Ant. lib. 15.
cap. 5.
For she desiring the ruins of both the Kings (as was before mentioned)
persuaded Antonius to cause Herod to make War against the Arabians; whom if he
overcame, Cleopatra's subtle Treason against Herod.
then she should be made Queen of Arabia; and if himself were overcome, then
she should be Queen of Judaea: Intending hereby, that one of these Potentates
should ruin the other. But this practice of hers succeeded greatly to Herod's
advantage; for first of all, making head against those of Syria that were his
enemies, with all the power of Cavalry he could, which was very considerable;
and meeting them near Diospolis, Ant. lib. 15. cap. 6.
he overcame them, though they valiantly resisted. After which overthrow, a
mighty Army of the Arabians came to help them; so that an infinite company was
gathered together about Coelosyria, expecting the Jews near the City called
Canatha: Where King Herod meeting them, purposed not to fight unadvisedly, but
to compass his Camp round about with a Wall; but his Army, puffed up with their
former Victory, would not be counseled, but violently assaulted the Arabians,
and at the first onset put them to flight. Herod pursuing his enemies, was
greatly endangered by the Treason of the Inhabitants of Canatha (who were set
on by Athenio, one of Cleopatra's Captains, who had always born him ill will)
for the Arabians encouraged by their help, The Arabians defeat Herod's Army.
returned again to Battle; and they two joined their Forces together, and set
upon Herod in stony and difficult places, and put his Army to flight, and slew
many of them; those that escaped fled into a little Village hard by, called
Ormiza; where the Arabians compassing them about, took both the men and their
Tents, Herod's Soldiers, he came and brought help, but too late, and to little
purpose. The cause of this defeat was, Athenio had not had opportunity to work
him that injury; (...) navity, 28. yet was he revenged upon the Arabians, and
daily made incursions upon their Borders, and ceased not to invade and spoil
them, till by many defeats, he had cried quittance with them for their one
Victory.

While thus he pursued his enemies, Another calamity of Herod's.
a great calamity befell him in the seventh year of his Reign, and in the midst
of the War between Augustus and Antonius; for about the beginning of the
Spring, there chanced a great Earthquake, which killed an infinite multitude of
beasts, and thirty thousand people; yet the Army had no harm, for it lay in an
open place. With the report hereof, the Arabians were highly encouraged: For as
report always increases a mischief, the Arabians, making account that all
Judaea was destroyed, and that there was no man left alive to resist them,
entered into the Country, assuring themselves to conquer it; having first slain
the Ambassadors of the Jews that were sent to them. Herod seeing his people
terrified at the sudden approach of their enemies, and disheartened with the
continuance of their calamities, rowzed up their drooping spirits by speaking
to them on this wise: Herod's Oration to his dismayed Soldiers.
I see no such great reason of your present fear; for though there be cause for
you to be troubled at the evils which God's indignation makes us suffer, yet
none but cowardly minds are daunted by the coming of their enemies, who are but
men, whose violence, if your selves please, ye may repress. For mine own part,
I am so far from being discouraged by the approach of mine enemies, Fear gives
Confidence.
providently seek to prevent their dangers: so that I am encouraged to hope for
Victory, even by your fear. For when you were too confident, and against my
will and direction ye encountered your enemies, Athenio found opportunity to
surprise you: But now, your prudent caution, and discreet moderation, is an
evident token to me of assured Victory. It behooves you therefore, before the
Conflict, to keep this mind; but in the Conflict, ye cannot show too much
ardour and courage, to make our impious enemies see, that no calamities, whence
soever they come, whether from Heaven or from Earth, can daunt the courage of
the Jews, whilst their breath is in their bodies: and that never a one of you
will suffer the Arabians to domineer over your Goods and Possessions, whom many
times you have almost made your slaves. Be not therefore terrified with this
Herod's Peroration.
On the contrary, what fear ought not our enemies to be possessed with for the
crime, whereby, contrary to the Law of all Nations, they have butchered our
Ambassadors, and offered to God such a Sacrifice for the good success of their
War? Think you they can hide themselves from the sight of God, and from his
mighty arm? or that they shall

After he had by these persuasions animated his Soldiers, Herod sacrifices to
God before the Battle.
and found them in some sort encouraged thereby, he offered Sacrifice to God.
And presently after, with all his Jordan; and pitching his Tents at
Philadelphia, not far from the enemies, he made a show to assault a Castle that
was between them and him, and so skirmished with them afar off, desirous to
draw them to the Battle. The Arabians had sent some Troops to seize upon it;
but Herod's Forces gave the repulse, and in despite Elthemus their General
more than any) he assaulted them in their Trenches, and cast down their
Rampire, so that they were constrained to come forth to Battle without any
order; and their Horse and Foot were confusedly mixed together: And although the
Jews were in number inferior to them, yet they were inferior to the Jews in
courage; nevertheless, they became now more hardy, because they despaired of
the Victory; and so long as they stood to it, they had no great loss; but when
they turned their backs, then many were slain by the Jews, and many perished,
being trodden on by their fellows. Those that escaped, were forced to retire
into Herod besieged them; and there was such penury of water, that for drink
they were all like to perish. For which cause, they sent Ambassadors to the
King, offering him fifty Talents to let them go; but he contemned them, and
would not hear them. The Arabians through extreme thirst, are enforced to ^ield
to the Jews.
At length, their want of water was so great, that coming out by companies of
their own accord, they offered themselves to the Jews; so that in this sort
there came forth four thousand in five days, whom the Jews put in chains; and
the sixth day the whole multitude (despairing of their lives) came forth to
fight, with whom Herod conflicting slew about seven thousand. So great a Defeat
satisfied Herod's revenge, and so abated the pride of the Arabians, that they
took him for their Protector.

CHAP. XV.
How Herod was confirmed in the peaceable Possession of the Kingdom of Judaea,
by Augustus Caesar.
THe joy of this prosperous success, (...)
was soon abated by the news of the Victory of Augustus over Antonius at
Actium; and his love for the latter made him apprehend the worst that could be
imagined from the former: Yet was he more afraid than hurt by this his
suspicion; for Caesar counted not Antonius fully conquered, so long as Herod
kept to his Party. Wherefore, the King timely foreseeing those dangers that
might ensue, went to Rhodes, where at that time Caesar resided; and in the
habit of a private man, without a Crown, but with a Kingly Majesty, he
presented himself before him, Herod 's Oration to Augustus Caesar.
and with great constancy spoke to him in this manner: I was, O Caesar, made
King of Judaea by Antonius his means; and I cannot deny, but that (had not the
Arabians hindered me) I had, with all the Power I could have made, seconded and
assisted Antonius against thee: Yea, although personally I could not go, yet
did I what I could to help him, Herod speaks freely before Caesar.
and sent him many thousand Measures of Corn. Nay, though he had the Overthrow
at Actium, yet did not I forsake him, who had deserved well at my hands: and
although I Cleopatra to death; which if he would do, I promised him to assist
him with money, Strong holds, and an Army, yea, and with mine own person,
against thee: But the love of Cleopatra, and God, who had already designed the
Empire of the World to thee, stopped his ears. By this means, O Caesar, I find
my self conquered with Antonius, and have forsaken my Crown and Dignity with
his Fortunes; and I am come unto thee, without grounding the hope of my safety
upon any thing but my own Virtue, and the experience which thou may make of
my fidelity to my Friends. Caesar's Answer to Herod*
Herod having spoken in this manner, Caesar answered: Live in safety, and reign
now with greater security than before; for thou deservest to rule others,
Antonius; for, for my part, I have conceived a great hope and expectation of
thy Valor and Prowess. I cannot blame Antonius, in that he rather hearkened to
Cleopatra than to thee, since, by his imprudence, I have obtained thy
friendship. That thou have begun to do well, it hereby appears, because
Ventidius has signified unto me, that thou have sent him succors against his
enemies. For which cause, by this my present Decree, be thou established in thy
Kingdom; and I will shortly give thee such proofs of my Amity, that thou shall
have no cause to bewail the loss of Antonius. After this speech, Augustus put
the Crown upon Herod 's head; and made a Decree and sealed it, testifying how
he had remitted all things done by Herod, and confirmed him in his Kingdom, and
rehearsing many things greatly tending to Herod 's praise. After that Herod had
made great Presents to Caesar, he requested him to pardon Alexander, one of
Antonius his friends; who earnestly, and in humble manner desired the same: But
Caesar being much incensed against him, answered, that he for whom he
entreated, had greatly and many times offended; and so he repelled Herod with
this answer.

When Caesar traveled into Egypt through Syria, Herod's gratulation toward
Caesar.
he was entertained by Herod with all Royal Pomp possible: And that was the
first time that he showed himself to take part with Caesar, when near Ptolemais
he took a view of the Soldiers with Caesar, and made a Banquet for him and all
his friends, and feasted the whole Army. And in as much as he traveled to
Pelusium thorough a dry Country, when they returned again, he provided water
for them, and furnished the Army with all necessaries; so that both Caesar
Caesar increases Herod's Dominion.
For which cause, after he came into Egypt, and that Antonius and Cleopatra
were now dead, he did not only increase his honor, but also restored to him
that portion of his Country which was taken away by Antonius, and given to
Cleopatra: And besides that, Gadara, and Hippon, and Samaria, and other Cities
about the Seacoast; to wit, Gaza, and Anthedon, and Joppa, and Straton's
Tower; and moreover, gave him four hundred Galatians, which before were
Cleopatra's Guard. Nor did Caesar's Liberality stop here, but to show how far
his esteem of this Prince's merit proceeded, he added to his Dominion,
Trachonitis, and Batanaea, and Auranitis, upon this occasion: Zenodorus (who
for money had hired the Lands of Lysanias) continually sent people out of
Trachonitis, to Damascus; who in humble manner went to Varus (who was at that
time Governor of Syria) entreating him to inform Caesar of their calamity:
Caesar understanding the same, writ back again, commanding him to exterminate
those Thieves. Whereupon Varus with an Army, Herod made Governor of Syria.
went to those places which were most infested, and rid the Country of the
Thieves, and confiscated the Territory from Zenodorus: which Caesar (lest it
should again be a refuge for Thieves to spoil Damascus) gave to Herod, and made
him Ruler over all Syria. Ten years after, Caesar returning to this Country,
commanded the Governors to do nothing without Herod's counsel: And after
Zenodorus's death, he gave him all the Country between Trachonitis and
Galilee. But that which Herod esteemed above all the rest was, that Caesar
loved him best of all next to Agrippa; and that Agrippa loved him most of all
men next to Caesar. When he was arrived to this pitch of Felicity, he showed
the greatness of his Soul, by the greatest and most holy enterprise that can be
imagined.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Cities and Monuments repaired and builded by Herod, and of his felicity
and liberality toward strangers.
The year of the world, 3947. before Christ's Nativity, 15.
and enclosed twice as much ground as was before about the Temple with a strong
Wall, whereon he bestowed great costs and charges to beautify it; as the great
Porches will testify, which he built about the Temple, and the Castle on the
North part thereunto adjoining, which he built even from the foundation. The
Castle was so rich and sumptuous, that it was equal to the King's Palace; Ant.
lib. 15. c. 10. 12, 13, 14.
and in honor of Antonius, he named it Antonia. He built himself also a Palace
in the upper part of the City, Herod's Buildings.
and in it two very great Apartments, so rich and admirable, that no Temple was
to be compared to them: He termed one of them Caesarea, and the other
Agrippias, in honor of Augustus and Agrippa. But it was not only by Palaces
that he would preserve his Name to Posterity, and immortalize Samaria he built
a fair City with a Wall, which was about twenty stades in circuit, and called
it Sebaste; and he sent thither six thousand Inhabitants, giving them a most
fertile Soil and sundry Privileges. There also amongst other Buildings, he
erected a very fair Temple, and dedicated it to Caesar. About this Temple there
was a piece of ground containing three stades and an half. For this Testimony
of Herod's affection, Caesar added to his Dominion another Country: In
gratitude for which, Herod erected another Temple of White Marble to him, near
the head of Jordan, in a place called Panium, where there is a Mountain rising
very high into the air; at the side whereof is an obscure Valley, where there
are high Rocks, that (by spouts of water falling on them) are made hollow; so
that the water, standing in The Fountain head of Jordan
falls down with a stream of such a depth as is admirable. At the foot of
this Valley, on the outside, spring certain Fountains, which many think to be
the head of the River Jordan; which, whether it be true or no, we will declare
hereafter.

At Jericho also (between the Castle of Cyprus, and the other ancient Palaces)
he erected Augustus and Agrippa. Finally, there was no convenient place in the
whole Kingdom, wherein he erected not something in honor of Caesar: and having
in every place of his own Kingdom devised and dedicated Temples unto him, in
Syria also where he ruled he did the like; founding in many Cites, Temples,
which he called by the name of Caesar. And perceiving, that amongst the Cities
of the Seacoast, there was one called Straton's Tower; which being very old
and ruinated, and for the situation thereof deserving reparation and cost, he
repaired it with White Stone, and built a very Royal Palace therein; in which
work, more than in any other, he showed how great and high his mind was. For
this stands in the midst between Dora Joppa, in a Coast where there was no Port
or Haven; so that they who sail from Phaenicia into Egypt, are in great danger,
by reason of the violent Winds that blow from Africa; whose blasts enforce the
water with such violence against the Rocks on the shore, that the waves,
rebounding back again a good way within the Sea, make the whole Sea
tempestuous. Herod makes a greater Port than that of P^rarum..
But the King, by his liberality and cost, overcoming nature, built Stations
for Ships. And although the nature of the place was altogether contrary to his
intent, yet he so overcame all difficulty, that the Sea could do that Building
no harm: And it was so goodly and beautiful to behold, that one would have
thought there had been no difficulty in this admirable work. An apt description
of a Haven.
For having measured out a sit place for the Port, he laid a Foundation twenty
else deep of Stone, Drusius, after the name of Drusus, the Son of the Empress
Livia, Wife of Augustus. Within the Port there were very many Vaults also, to
store such Merchandise as was brought into the Haven; and diverse other Vaults
for Sea men to lodge in. A very pleasant Descent, which might serve for a Walk,
encompassed the whole Port: The entrance hereunto

On either side of the entrance were three great Colosses set on Pilasters;
those on the left hand are propped up by a Tower, being a solid Rock of Stone.
But at the entrance on the right hand were two huge stones joined together,
which make a greater Tower than the other. There is also a house adjoining to
the Haven built of white Stone. The Streets of the City leading to this place,
are of one bigness and proportion. Upon a Hill opposite to the mouth of the
Haven, he built a Temple very beautiful, and exceeding great, which he
dedicated to Caesar, wherein was placed Caesar's Statue, full as great as that
of Jupiter at Olympus (for it was made after that Model) and Rome, like that of
Juno at Argos. The City he built for the benefit of the Inhabitants of the
Province, Caesarea in times past called the Tower of Straton.
and the Port or Haven for Commerce. All this he did in honor of Caesar; after
whose name he called it Caesarea. And that nothing might be wanting to render
it worthy so glorious a name, he added to so many great works, the fairest
Marketplace in the World; Ant. lib 15. cap. 10. 12.
besides a Theater, and an Amphitheatre, not inferior to the rest. Ant. lib.
17. cap. 5.
He also appointed Games and Spectacles to be celebrated every fifth year, in
honor of Augustus: And himself first began them in the 192 Olympiade; and he
proposed great rewards, not only to the Victors, but also to the second and
third after them. Agrippium.
Moreover, he repaired Anthedon, which was destroyed by the Wars, and called it
Agrippina, in honor of Agrippa; whose name he caused to be engraven Antipatris.
Nether was he unmindful of his Parents; for in the richest Soil of the whole
Kingdom he built a City in memory of his Father, and by his name called it
Antipatris, being in a very rich Soil, both for Woods and Rivers. Cyprus*
At Jericho also, he built a very goodly and strong Castle, and called it
Cyprus, Phasaelus's Tower.
in honor of his Mother. He likewise built a Tower in memory of his Brother
Phasaelus, at Jerusalem, and called it Phasaelus his Tower; of the strength and
beauty of which, we shall speak hereafter. He also called another City
Phasaelus, which is situate in a Valley beyond Jericho, toward the North.

Having thus eternized the memory of his Friends and Kindred, he did not forget
to do the like for himself; for he built a Castle on a Mountain near Arabia,
having on one Herodium.
and this Castle he called Herodium, after his own name. By the same name also
he called a Mount, sixty stades from Jerusalem, artificially made Herodium a
Castle resembling a City.
so that this Castle, for the abundance of all necessary Lodgings, seemed a
City; and yet was all the King's Palace. Having erected thus many Buildings, he
showed his great mind in strange Cities likewise; for at Tripolis, and
Damascus, and Ptolemais, Herod's bounty to all men.
he built public Colleges for instructing Youth. He built the Wall of Byblis;
Berytus and Tire: At Sidon and Damascus he built a Theater; and a Water-conduit
at Laodicea, a Sea-town. At Ascalon he built Fountains or Lakes very sumptuous;
and Baths with Pillars, that for greatness and good work, were miraculous. To
other places he gave Forests and Ports; and to many Cities added Fields, as
though they had been Fellow-cities of his Kingdom. And to others, as to Coos,
he gave Annual Revenues for ever; to the end, they might never lose the
remembrance of the obligation they had to him. Moreover, he gave all poor
people Corn; and he often, and in sundry places, lent the Rhodians money to
build a Navy of Ships. Herod famous through the World.
At his own proper cost he repaired the Temple of Apollo Pythius, which had
been burnt. What shall I say of his liberality toward them Lycia and Samos, or
his magnificent Gifts toward all the people of Jonia? Nay, and the Athenians,
The year of the World, 3954. before Christ's Nativity. 8.
Lacedaemonians, Nicopolites, and the Citizens of Pergamus and Mysia, received
very many benefits at his hands. He paved also a large Street in Antioch, of
Syria, which was in length twenty stades, and that with fair Marble. This
Street before that time was so full of dirt, that no man could go thorough it:
And all along it he built Galleries, that people might go dry thorough it in
rainy weather.

Some may say, that these benefits thus bestowed, were for the proper use of
those people on whom he bestowed them; but no man can deny, but that which he
did for the Citizens of Elis, was not only common to those of Achaia, but to
all the World, where the Games, called Olympica Certamina, were solemnized. For
Herod seeing Greece; he, not only in his person at that time became one of the
proposers of rewards in that Olympiade, in which he went to Rome; but also,
gave a yearly stipend to maintain the same, lest, for want, they should be left
off. It is not to be told what Debts and Tributes he remitted; for he delivered
the Phasaelites and Balaneotes, and other Towns of Cilicia, from the payment of
a yearly Tribute: yet was he not so liberal to them as he would have been,
fearing lest the envy of some might accuse him of some further meaning, if he
should be more bountiful to the Cities than those that were the owners thereof.
Herod a great hunter.
He exercised his body likewise in exercises fit for so valiant a mind; for he
was a very skilful hunter, wherein he had always his Herod besides the virtue
of mind and body, had the blessings of Fortune.
Besides the Virtue, both of his mind and body, he had also good Fortune; for
very seldom the event of War was otherwise than he expected; if it sometimes
fell out contrary, it was not through his fault, but through the rashness of
his Soldiers, or else through Treason.


Of the disagreement between Herod and his Sons, Alexander and Aristobulus.
BUt his private and domestical sorrows troubled his public felicity; Ant.
lib. 1^. cap. 3, 8. and lib. 16. cap. 13.
and most adverse fortune befell him through the means of a woman, whom he loved
as himself. For being now made King, he put away his Wife which he first
married (a Lady born in Jerusalem, Herod expels Antipater out of the City,
and kills Hircanus, his Wife's Uncle.
whose name was Doris) and married Mariamne, the Daughter of Alexander, the Son
of Aristobulus; which caused troubles in his house, both before, but especially
after his return from Rome. For he banished his eldest Son Antipater, Doris,
out of the City, only for his Children's sake that he had by Mariamne;
licencing him only at Festival times to come to the City, in regard of some
suspicion of Treason intended against him. And afterward he slew Hircanus, his
wifes Uncle, (notwithstanding that he returned out of Parthia unto him) because
he Barzapharnes, after he had taken all Syria had carried him away prisoner
with him. But his own Countrymen that dwelt beyond Euphrates, in commiseration
redeemed him from thraldom; and had he been counseled by them, and not come to
Herod, he had not been killed: but the marriage of his Niece caused his death:
for, for that cause, and especially for the love of his native soil, he came
thither. That which moved Herod to kill him was, not for that he sought the
Kingdom, but because he had right to the Kingdom. Herod's children by Mariamne.
Herod had five Children by Mariamne, two Daughters and three Sons. The
youngest was sent to Rome to study, where he died. The other two he brought up
like Princes, both for their Mothers Nobility, and for that they were born
after he Mariamne: which from day to day tormented him more violently, in such
sort, that he seemed insensible of those griefs which this his best beloved
caused to him. For Mariamne hated him as much as he loved her: and having a
just cause and color of discontent, and moreover being emboldened by the love
which he bare her, Mariamne hatefully upbraideth Herod with Hircanus's death.
she every day upbraided him, with that which he had done to Hircanus her
Uncle, and to her Brother Aristobulus. For Herod spared him not, although he
was a Child; but after he had made him High Priest in the seventeenth year of
his age, he presently put him to death, after he had so honored him: who, when
he came to the Altar clothed in sacred attire upon a Festival day, all the
people Herod, that the same night he sent him to Jericho, to be drowned in a
Lake by the Galatians, who had received commission to perform the murder.
These things did Mariamne daily cast in Herod's teeth, and upbraided both his
Mother and Sister, with very sharp and reproachful words: Herod's Mother and
Sister do falsely accuse Mariamne to him.
yet he so loved her, that notwithstanding all this, he held his peace. But the
women were set on fire: and that they might the rather move Herod against her,
they accused her of adultery, and of many other things which bare a show of
truth: objecting against her, that she had sent her picture into Egypt to
Antonius; and that through immoderate lust she did what she could to make her
self known unto him, who doted upon women's love, and was of sufficient power to
do what wrong

Hereat Herod was much moved, Herod secretly charge Joseph to kill his wife.
especially for that he was jealous of her whom he loved, bethinking himself
upon the cruelty of Cleopatra, for whose sake King Lysanias, and Malichus King
of Arabia were put to death; and now he measured not the danger by the loss of
his wife, but by his own death which he feared: For which cause being drawn by
his affairs into the Country, he gave secret commandment to Joseph, his Sister
Salomes husband (whom he knew to be trusty, and one who for affinity was his
well-willer) to kill his wife Mariamne, if so be Antonius should have killed
him. But Joseph not maliciously, but simply to show how greatly the King loved
her, disclosed that secret unto her: and she when Herod was returned, and
amongst other talk Joseph, whom you charged to kill me. Herod's suspicion
betwixt Joseph and his wife.
Herod hearing this which he thought to be secret, was like a mad man, and
presently persuaded himself, that Joseph would never have disclosed that
commandment of his, except he had abused her; so that hereupon he became
furious, and leaping out of his bed, he walked up and down the Palace:
whereupon his Sister Salome having fit opportunity, confirmed his suspicion of
Joseph. For which cause Herod growing now raging mad with jealousy, commanded
both of them to be killed. Which being done, his wrath was seconded by
Repentance; and after his anger ceased, Herod commands both Joseph and
Mariamne to be slain.
the passion of love was presently renewed: yea, so great was Mariamnes Sons
inheritors of her displeasure.
Mariamnes Sons succeeded their Mother in her hatred, and recogitating what an
impious act it was, they accounted their Father as a mortal enemy, both before
and after they went to study at Rome, and especially after they returned again
into Judea. The year of the World, 3956. before Christ's Nativity, 6.
For as they grew in years, so did the violence of their revenge increase. And
being now marriageable, one of them married the Daughter of their Aunt Salome,
who accused their Mother; the other married the Daughter of Archelaus King of
Cappadocia. And now to their hatred was joined a liberty to speak Archelaus)
purposed to flee and accuse Herod before Caesar. Herod giving ear to those
calumniations, sent for Antipater whom he had by Doris, Herod's debate with
those Sons he had by Mariamne.
to the end he might defend him against his two Sons, and sought to advance him
above them. But they thought this alteration intolerable; seeing one, whose
Mother was but a private woman, so preferred: and they, exalted with their own
Nobleness of Birth, could not contain their indignation, but upon every
occasion showed themselves offended; Ant. lib. 16. cap. 4.
by reason of which imprudence they were every day less accounted of. As for
Antipater, he wrought himself into favor: for he Antipater by disgracing his
Brothers, is declared his Fathers heir.
and raised many slanders on his two Brethren, partly invented by himself,
partly divulged by some of his Favorites, whom he set awork about the matter,
till at last he put his Brethren out of all hope of having the Kingdom. For he
was now by the Kings Will and testament declared King, so that he was sent as a
King to Caesar, in a Kingly habit and pomp, only he wore no Crown: and in time
he so prevailed, that he wrought his Mother into Mariamnes stead; Herod
accuses Alexander before Caesar.
and with flatteries and calumniations so moved the King, that he began to
deliberate about putting his Sons to death. For which cause, he conducted his
Son Alexander with him to Rome, and accused him before Caesar, that he had
given him poison. But he with much ado, having obtained lieve to plead his own
cause, and that before Herod or Antipater, he modestly held his peace in all
things his Father had offended in: and first of all he cleared his Brother
Aristobulus from that crime in which he was involved with himself. And
afterward he inveighed against Antipater's subtilty, and complained of those
injuries which had been offered him, having, beside the equity of his cause,
sufficient eloquence to acquit himself, for he was a vehement Orator, and knew
well how to persuade. Last of all he objected, that his Father having a desire
to put both him and his Brother to death, A reconciliation between Herod and
his Sons.
had laid an accusation upon him; whereat the whole Audience wept, and Caesar
was so moved, that not regarding the accusations that were laid upon them, he
presently made Herod and them friends, upon these conditions, that they in all

Hereupon Herod returned from Rome, and though he seemed to have forgiven his
Sons; yet he laid not his jealousy and suspicion aside. For Antipater still
persisted to make Herod hate his other two Sons, though for fear of him that
reconciled them, he durst not openly show himself an enemy to them, Afterward
Herod sailed by Cilicia, Archelaus kindly entertaineth Herod and his Sons.
and arrived at Eleusa, where Archelaus received him very courteously, thanking
him for the safety of his Son-in-law, and declaring himself very joyful that
they were made friends: for he had writ to his friends at Rome with all speed
possible, that they should be favorable to Alexander, when he came to plead
his cause. And after this entertainment, he conducted Herod to Zephyria, and
made him a present of thirty talents, and so took his leave of him. Herod as
soon as he came to Jerusalem, assembled the people together, and in the
presence of his three sons, he showed them the cause of his going to Rome, and
blessed God and thanked Caesar, who had appeased the discord of his family, and
made his Sons friends; which he esteemed more than his Kingdom: Herod's worthy
Oration to the people, wherein he distributeth honors to his three Sons.
And I (says he) will make their friendship firm. For Caesar has not only
given me an absolute power in my State, but lieve also to choose whom I please
of my Sons for my Successor. And now I declare my intention to divide my
Kingdom amongst my three Sons: which purpose of mine, first I beseech Almighty
God, and secondly you to favor: for one of them for his years, the other for
their Nobility of Birth, Caesar has conjoined, and I their father ordained my
successors: Give them the respects and duty according to their age which they
have reason to expect from their Charge not the order established by nature. For
a man cannot do a greater pleasure to the younger when he honors him above
his years, than he shall give discontent to the elder. For which cause, I will
constitute to every one of them such friends and well-willers, as with whom
they may be most conversant; and of them I will require pledges of concord and
unity amongst them. For I know that discords and contentions arise by malice of
those who are conversant with Princes; Herod (...) not the Kingdom to his Sons,
but the honors of the Kingdom
and that if they be well disposed, they will increase friendship. And I
require not only these, but also all every one of you consider my age, my
course of life, and piety: for I am not so old that any Herod converteth his
Speech to his
and that I am friends with my Sons. And you my Sons, I exhort you to acquit
Caesar who has reconciled us: And last of all obey me, who request and entreat
that at your hands, which I might command, namely, that you remain Brethren. I
shall take order that you want nothing suitable to your royal Dignity, if you
continue and remain friends. I pray God with all my heart, that what I have
ordained may tend to your advantage and to his glory.

After he had thus spoken he embraced them very lovingly and dismissed the
people, Herod by his words did not utterly extinguish the hatred between his
Sons.
some praying that it might be as he had said: others (who desired alteration)
making as though they heard nothing. Yet for all this, the dissension amongst
the Alexander and Aristobulus could not endure that Antipater should succeed to
part of the Kingdom, and Antipater was grieved that his Brethren should have a
share with him; yet he so craftily carried himself, that no man could perceive
his hatred toward them. And they derived of a noble race spoke all they
thought, and many endeavored to set them on; and others, friends to Antipater,
insinuated themselves into their company, to learn intelligence: so that
Alexander could not speak a word, but presently it was carried to Antipater,
and from him to Herod with an addition; so that when Alexander spoke any thing
simply, meaning no harm, it was presently interpreted in the worst sense
possible: and if he chanced at any time to speak freely Antipater's treason
against his Brother Alexander.
presently it was made a great thing. Antipater suborned men to urge him to
speak, that so their false reports might be shadowed with a color of truth;
and that if he could prove any one thing true, all lies and tales else divulged
might thereby be justified. All Antipater's familiars were either naturally
secret, or else he stopped their mouths with bribes, lest they should disclose
his intents: so that one might justly have termed his life a mystery of
iniquity. By what means Antipater corrupted his Brother Alexander's friends.
All Alexander's friends were either corrupted by money, or flattering
speeches, wherewith Antipater overcame all, and made them thieves and proditors
of such things as were either done or spoken against him. But of all the means
he employed to ruin his Brothers with the King, Antipater whetteth Herod and
his Courtiers against Alexander.
the most crafty and powerful was, that instead of declaring himself Herod to
credit the accusation, which were, that Alexander was so desirous of his death,
as to frame plots against his life: and nothing made so much credit be given to
these calumniations, as that Antipater colourably excused his brother. Herod
incensed hereat, every day withdrew his affection more and more from the two
brethren, and daily increased his love toward Antipater. The Nobility also
were inclined after the same manner; some of their own inclination, and others
out of compliance: so did Ptolemaeus the chiefest of all the Nobility, and the
Kings Brethren and all his kindred; for all men's expectation was upon
Antipater. And that which Alexander the more, was, that all these conspiracies
designed for his overthrow were made by the counsel of Antipater's Mother: for
she being Stepmother to him and his Brother, was the more cruel against them,
because she could not endure their having the advantage above her Son of being
born of so great a Queen. And although many followed Antipater, for the hope
they had of him, yet were they also compelled thereunto by the King's command,
who gave special charge to his dearest friends, not to follow Alexander or his
Brother. And this Prince was a terror not only to those of his own Kingdom,
but also to foreign Nations, because Caesar had given him so great authority*
for he gave him license to take any one that was a fugitive from him, out of
any City, although it were not under his Dominions. Now the young men being
Antipater by little and little animated Pheroras their Uncle, and Salome their
Aunt, against them; to whom he spoke with the same liberty as if she had been
his Wife.

Moreover, Glaphyra, Glaphyra, Alexander's wife, increased his conceived
suspicion by her words.
Alexander's Wife, contributed to the increasing of these enmities, by bearing
her self above all women that were in the whole Kingdom; (for she derived her
Pedigree by the Father's side from Ti^enus, by the Mother's side from Darius,
Son of Histaspes:) and by inveying very much against the baseness of Herod's
Wives; who, she said, were chosen for their Beauty, and not for their Nobility
of Birth. For Herod (as we have said) had many Wives, as it was lawful for him
by the Aristobulus objecteth to his Wife her base Birth.
and all of them hated Alexander, for Glaphyra's Pride, and contumelious
speeches. Aristobulus also, made Salome his enemy, although she were his Wife's
Mother; because he often upbraided his Wife with her base Birth, still teling
her that he had married a private woman, and his Brother Alexander a King's
Daughter Ant. lib. 16. cap. 7.
Which his Wife often with tears told to her Mother; adding moreover, that
Alexander and Aristobulus threatened, that if they got the Kingdom, they would
make their Father's other Wives weave with their Maids; and his other Sons
Notaries of Villages, because they applied themselves to Learning. Salome moved
hereat, could not contain her self, but told all to Herod; who easily believed
her, because she spoke against her Son-in-law. Alexander and Aristobulus
oftentimes bewail their Mother, and by that means provoke their Father.
Moreover, another accusation was laid to their Alexander and Aristobulus did
often bewail their Mother, and lament her hard fate, and cursed him: and that
often, when he bestowed some of Mariamne's Clothes upon his latter Wives, they
threatened that in a short time, they would make them change them for Mourning.
Whereupon, though Herod feared the fierce spirits of the young men, yet because
he would not take away all hope of amendment, he called them to him as he was
to go to Rome; and as a King, threatened them in few words; and like a Father,
gave them many admonitions, and requested them to love their Brethren,
promising them forgiveness of their former offenses, The two Brothers excuse
themselves before their Father Herod.
so that hereafter they mended all. But they beseeching him not to believe
Accusations forged against them upon malice, and answering, Salome was their
enemy, and Pheroras their Uncle; and both of them much to be feared, especially
Pheroras; who was fellow with his Brother of all, saving the Crown, and had his
own Revenues amounting to an hundred Talents a year, and received all the
Profits of the whole Country beyond Jordan, which were given him by his
Brother. Herod also, had obtained of Caesar to make him Tetrarch, and had
bestowed upon him for his Wife, his own Wife's Sister; after whose decease he
offered Pheroras falling in love with a mean person, refused so honorable a
Match; whereat Herod being angry, married his Daughter to his Brother's Son,
who was afterward slain by the Parthians: Yet, after some time, he pardoned
Pheroras's offense. Diverse formerly were of opinion that in the life time of
the Queen, he would have poisoned Herod; and Herod, although he loved his
Brother very well, yet because many who had access unto him, told him so, he
began to misdoubt: And therefore, examining by Torture many that were
suspected, at last he came to some of Pheroras's Friends; but none of them
confessed the Poison, but only, that he was determined to flee to the Parthians
with her whom he was so in love with, and that Costabarus, Salome's Husband*
Salome her self was not free from Accusation; for Pheroras accused her, that
she had purposed Matrimony with Syllaeus, who was Procutator to Obodas, King of
Arabia, a great enemy of the King's: And she being convicted both of this, and
all things else, whereof her Brother Pheroras accused her, yet obtained pardon,
as likewise Pheroras did; so that the whole Tempest of all the Family was
turned against Alexander, and fell upon his head.

The King had three Eunuchs whom he loved extremely, Alexander corrupts his
Father's Eunuchs, and tells them he is to succeed in the Kingdom.
and every one known by their Offices; for one of them was his Butler, the
other was his Cook, and the third waited upon him in his Bedchamber: These
three Alexander with great gifts corrupted. Alexander induced; and how he had
deceived them by affirming that there was no trusting to Herod, who was a
morose old man; The year of the World, 3956. before Christ's Nativity. 6.
and that he died his hair, to make himself seem young; and that in despite of
Herod fears his Son Alexander.
Hereat Herod was so terrified, that he durst not presently divulge their
confessions, but night and day he sent out spies to learn what was said or
done; and whom he suspected, them he presently killed; so that his whole
Kingdom was full of Bloodshed. For every one, as his malice moved him, feigned
Calumniations; and many desirous of Bloodshed, abused the King's passion as
they pleased against their enemies: Credit was given to every lie; and no man
was so soon accused, but presently he was punished; and he who presently before
accused others, was now accused himself, and Ant. lib. 17. cap. 8.
For the King's jealousy shortened the time of Trial for their lives; and he
became so tyrannous, that he afforded not a good look, Herod's cruelty.
even to them that were not accused, but showed himself most fierce and violent
to his dearest friends: So that he banished many out of his Kingdom, and railed
against such as he had no power over. Antipater increased this mischief more
and more, by employing all his friends, to accomplish the ruin of Alexander.
By whose rumors and tales the King was so possessed, that he fancied always
that he saw Alexander before him with a drawn Sword. Herod casts Alexander
into Prison, and tortured his friends.
For which cause he suddenly cast him in Prison, and tortured his friends; many
of which died in torments, because they would not confess more than in
conscience was true: Others, not able to endure the torments, Alexander and his
Brother Aristobulus designed Treason against their Father, and that they
expected their time till he went a hunting; resolving with themselves, that
having killed him, they would presently flee to Rome. Although these and such
like Calumniations were no ways probable, yet extremity of pain forced men to
invent them; and the King willingly believed them, as it were comforting
himself thereby, that he might not be thought to have imprisoned his Son
unjustly. Alexander perceiving that it was impossible for him to remove his
Father's suspicion, Alexander during his imprisonment, wrote four Books against
his enemies.
thought it best to yield himself guilty: and so he made four Writings, wherein
he confessed the Treason, and nominated his partakers therein, namely, Pheroras
and Salome, who were the chief; which later he said had been so impudently
Herod's hands when Archelaus, fearing his Son-in-law and Daughter to be in
great danger, speedily came into Judaea, and by his prudence appeased the
King's wrath: For so soon as he came to Herod, he cried, Where is that wicked
Son-in-law of mine, or where may I see the face of that wretch that goes about
to murder his Father, that I may tear him in pieces with mine own hands, and
marry my Daughter to a better Husband? For although she be not privy to his
counsel, yet it is enough to make her infamous, that she is Wife to such a man.
Nay, I admire your patience, who are in such danger, Archelaus, King of
Cappadocia.
and suffer Alexander yet to live: For I came thus hastily out of Cappadocia,
thinking he had been put to death, to talk with you concerning my Daughter,
whom I married to him for your sake. Wherefore now let us take counsel what to
do with them both; and seeing you are too Father-like, and not able to punish
your Son, your treacherous Son; let (...) change rooms, and let me be in your
place to revenge you. How great soever Herod's choler was, this discourse of
Archelaus disarmed it: And Herod showed him the Books that Alexander had writ:
Archelaus and Herod consult upon Alexander's Book.
and upon reading every Chapter with deliberation, Archelaus took occasion fit
for his purpose; and by little and little laid all the fault on Pheroras, and
those that were accused in the Book. And perceiving the King to give ear unto
him: Let us (said he) consider whether the young man has not been circumvented
by the treachery of so many malicious persons, and not of himself, formed a
design against you: For there appears no cause why he should fall into such
wickedness, who already enjoyed the honors of the Kingdom, and hoped to
succeed you therein, had he not been persuaded thereto by other men; who seeing
him a young man, enticed him to such an attempt. For we see, that by such
persons, not only young men, but also old men, and most Noble Families; Herod
is incensed against his Brother Pheroras.
yea, and whole Kingdoms are ruinated. Herod, upon these speeches, began
somewhat to relent, and abate his animosity against Alexander, but increased it
toward Pheroras; for he was the Subject of the whole Book. Pheroras perceiving
the King so to trust to Archelaus's friendship, that he was led by him to do
what he pleased; he in humble manner came to Archelans, seeking humbly for
succor at his hands, of whom he had not deserved any favor. Archelaus
answered him, that he knew Pheroras attired in a mourning garment, with tears
falls before Herod's feet, and craveth pardon.
Hereupon, Pheroras obeyed Archelaus's counsel; and putting on a black Attire,
in a pitiful manner, and with tears, he prostrated himself at Herod's feet; and
craving pardon, obtained it; confessing himself to be a most wicked and vile
person, and to be guilty of all that which was objected against him; and that
the cause which moved him to do all these things, was the frantic and mad fits
he fell into, for the love of that woman. After Pheroras had thus become his
own Accuser, and a Witness Pheroras, by Archelaus's means, pacifieth Herod.
Archelaus endeavored to mitigate Herod's wrath toward him, and excuse his
fault; by alleging for example, that his Brother had attempted greater matters
against him whom notwithstanding, for Relation's sake, he had pardoned: Adding
that in every Kingdom, as in mighty bodies, frequently some part begins to
inflame, which notwithstanding, is not presently to be cut off, but to be cured
by easy means.

Archelaus using many speeches to Herod to this purpose, at last quite appeased
his wrath toward Pheroras, Archelaus compels Herod of his own accord to be
entreated for Alexander.
but still counterfeited himself angry with Alexander, affirming that he would
take his Daughter away with him; till, at last, he brought Herod of his own
accord to intercede for the young man, not to break the Marriage. Archelaus
Alexander, for he greatly esteemed his affinity. Herod replied, that if he
would not divorce his Daughter from Alexander, he should think that he had
bestowed his Son upon him again: For they had no Children, and his Daughter was
dearly loved by the young man; so that if he would permit her to stay still
there, for her sake he would pardon all Alexander's offenses. Hereto Archelaus
with much ado agreed, and so was reconciled to his Son-in-law, and he to his
Father. Yet Herod affirmed that he must needs be sent to Rome, to speak with
Caesar, for he had written the whole matter to Caesar. Thus Archelaus craftily
delivered his Son-in law from danger; and after this reconciliation was made,
they spent the time Herod dismisseth Archelaus and his friends with great
Presents.
Upon Archelaus's departure, Herod gave him seventy Talents, and a Throne of
pure Gold, adorned with Precious Stones; and Eunuchs, and a Concubine named
Panichis; and rewarded every one of his Friends according to their deserts. And
all the King's Kindred, by his appointment, bestowed rich Gifts upon Archelaus;
Ant. lib. 16. cap. 11.
and both he, and all his Nobility accompanied him to Antioch.

Not long after, Eurycles the Lacedemonian secretly accuses Alexander to his
Father, and is the cause of his death.
there came one into Judaea far more subtle than Archelaus; who both
disannulled the reconciliation made for Alexander, and caused his death also.
This man, named Eurycles, was a Lacedemonian born; and brought to Herod rich
Gifts, as it were for a bait of that he intended. He had so behaved himself in
Greece, that it could no longer tolerate his excess: And Herod again rewarded
him with far greater Herod's House, and the hatred between the Brethren, and
how the King was affected toward each of them, Eurycles by feigned friendship
deceives Alexander*
he first of all lodged at Antipater's house; making a show, in the mean while,
of good will toward Alexander; pretending, that in times Archelaus, his
Father-in-law: And by this means he quickly insinuated into favor with him,
and was considered as a friend, and a faithful friend. Alexander presently
likewise, brought him into friendship with Aristobulus; and he having gained
their affections, accommodated himself to their humors, in order to compass
his design of adhering to Antipater, and betraying Alexander. And he often used
incensing words to Antipater, as it were chiding him, that being eldest of the
Brethren, he so slenderly looked after them, who pretended to put him besides
the Crown which was his right. Many times likewise, he used the like words to
Alexander; admiring that he who was born of a Queen, and Husband to a Queen,
would permit one descended of a private woman, to succeed in the Kingdom;
Archelaus's help in any thing. Alexander supposed he spoke as he thought,
because he counterfeited friendship with Archelans; so that misdoubting
nothing, he disclosed to him all his mind concerning Antipater, saying, Herod
dis-inherited them of the Kingdom, since he had slain their Mother formerly.

Eurycles, counterfeiting pity for them, and sorrow for their misfortune;
enticed Aristobulus to speak to the like effect: And having animated them both
to complain in this sort against their Father, he presently went to Antipater,
and disclosed to him all their secrets, falsely adding also, a story of some
Treachery which those two Brethren intended against him; which was to dispatch
him with their Swords. Antipater rewarded him with a great Sum of Money for
this advice, and commended him to his Father. And thus he, being hired to
effect the death of Alexander and Aristobulus, became himself their accuser:
Whereupon, he came to Herod, and told him, that Alexander and Aristobulus had
long since resolved together to kill him, and that he only was the cause that
they performed it not, by promising them to assist them in the matter: That
Alexander used these speeches, that Herod was not contented to enjoy a Kingdom
which was another's right, nor yet to have put Queen Mariamne to death, but he
would also leave the Kingdom belonging to their Ancestors, to a pernicious
Bastard, Antipater. But for this cause, he would revenge Hircanus and
Mariamne's death: And that it was not fit that such a man as Antipater should
receive the Kingdom without blood: And every day, he had occasion given him to
persist in this resolution, Alexander, whose Father's base Birth is a shame and
discredit unto him. And that going a hunting, if he held his peace, his Father
was offended; if he praised him then it was said, he mocked: So that in every
thing, he found his Father's affection, turned from him, and that he was only
favorable to Antipater; so that he would die with all his heart, if he failed
of his purpose: If he killed him, his Father-in-law Archelaus would afford him
safety, to whom he might easily flee. And after, he would go to Caesar (who, as
yet, knew not Herod's manners) and he would not stand before him then, as he
did Herod's wickedness; which being once made manifest to the World, no man
would account him a Murderer of his Father. Eurycles having falsely reported
this of Alexander, to Herod, fell presently to praise and extol Antipater;
affirming that he only loved his Father, and hindered such practices.

The King, Another false Accusation of Alexander and his Brother, moves Herod
to indignation.
yet not thoroughly appeased for that which was past, grew into exceeding fury;
and Antipater again suborned other false Witnesses against him, who affirmed
that they were wont to have secret talk with Jucundus and Tyrannus, who
sometimes were Officers of the King's Cavalry, and now displaced for some
offense they had committed. Whereupon, Herod being very angry, presently
tortured them: and they affirmed, Diophantus, the King's Notary, writes
feigned Letters in Alexander's name*
that they were ignorant of all that which was laid to their charge. But there
was found, and brought to the King a Letter, pretended to be written by
Alexander, to the Governor of the Castle of Alexandrium; requesting him, that
he would receive him and his Brother Aristobulus into the Castle, when he had
killed his Father; and to assist them both with Arms, and other Necessaries.
Alexander affirmed Diophantus, the King's Secretary; who was both malicious,
and could counterfeit any one's hand; and who afterward having counterfeited
many, was at last for the same put to death.

Herod caused the Governor of the Castle to be tortured, but he confessed
nothing that was laid against him: and although he had no good proof of any
thing, yet he commanded his two Sons to be kept in hold. He likewise termed
Eurycles (who was the Incendiary of his house, and the breeder of all the
mischief) Author of his safety, and one who had well deserved at his hands, and
gave him fifty Talents: Who, departing from Judaea before matters were well
known, went to Archelaus, and feigning that he had reconciled Alexander and
Herod, he received there a piece of money. Achaia, and spent that which he had
evilly got, in as bad manner as he had got it. Lastly, he was accused to
Caesar, that he had caused dissension Achaia, and spoiled the Cities; for which
cause he was banished. And this was the punishment that was inflicted upon him
for his treachery to Alexander and Aristobulus.

It is not amiss here in this place, to compare Avaratus of Cous, unto this
Eurycles: who being a dear friend to Alexander, Cous Evaratus.
and arriving about the same time that Eurycles did; being put to his Oath,
swear that he heard the young men say nothing; though indeed his Oath nothing
prevailed nor profited them, for Herod would only hear and give ear to
Accusations, and he highly esteemed them that would believe them with him, and
show themselves moved thereat.

Moreover, Ant. lib. 16. cap. 12.
Salome increased his rage against his Sons; for Aristobulus minding to
Syllaeus the Arabian, to whom she privily revealed the King's Secrets: This was
the utter ruin of the young men, Herod, by Salome's counsel imprisoneth his
Sons.
wherewith they were overthrown, as it were with a violent Tempest. For
presently Salome went to the King, and told him of what Aristobulus had
admonished her: And he becoming outrageous, caused both his Sons to be bound,
and imprisoned in several places. Then he he sent Voluminous, General of his
Army, and Olympus, one of his familiar Friends, The year of the World, 3961.
before Christ's Nativity, 1.
to Caesar, to carry the Informations against his Sons in writing; who sailing
to Rome, after their arrival, delivered the King's Letters. And Caesar was very
sorry

Hereupon Herod, Ant. lib. 16. cap. 13.
according to Caesar's direction, went to to Berytum, and there gathered an
Assembly to sit in Judgment; Herod gathers a Council against Alexander and
Aristobulus.
the chief in that Judgment were the Governnours that Caesar in his Letters
appointed. Saturninus and Pedanius presided, and with them Voluminous, Intendant
of the Province; next the King's Kindred, and Salome and Phe^oras; and then the
Nobility of Syria, Archelaus only excepted; who, Herod suspected him to be
partial. But he suffered not his Sons to come into Judgment, for he knew that
the very sight of them would have moved all men to compassion: And moreover, if
they were permitted to speak for themselves, that Alexander would easily have
acquitted them both: For which cause they were kept in Platan, Herod accuses
his Sons in open Judgment.
a Village of Sidonia. The King beginning his Oration, was as vehement, as
though they had been present against whom he spoke: But he was half afraid to
object any Treason against them, because he had no proof thereof; and therefore
he aggravated their opprobrious words, injuries and offenses, which they had
committed against him, which he affirmed to be more unsufferable than death.

Herod's sentence against his Sons.
which seemed to condemn him; and thereupon, requested every one to give their
verdict. And first of all, Saturninus condemned his Sons, but not to die;
saying, that he had three Sons present, and he could not be so severe, as to
judge other men's Sons to death. The two other Delegates also affirmed the
same, and some others followed their advice: But Voluminous was the first that
pronounced the sorrowful Sentence; after whom all the rest followed; some to
flatter Herod, some for hatred they bare him, but none for any indignation
against the young men. Then all Judaea and Syria expected an end of this
Tragedy; yet no man thought Herod such a Tyrant, as to put his two Sons to
death. Herod caused his Sons to be brought to Tire, and from Caesarea,
bethinking himself what death he should put them to. Tyro, an old Soldier,
exclaimeth against Herod's cruelty.
In the mean time, there was an old Soldier of the King's named Tyro, who had a
Son belonging to Alexander, and highly in his favor, and he himself greatly
loved the two young men: who being very much grieved in mind at that which had
past, went about, crying, that Justice was trodden under foot, Truth oppressed,
the Sentiments of Nature extinguished, and the Actions of Men full of iniquity;
and whatsoever else, grief could put into the mind of a man, who nothing
esteemed his own life. At last, this Tyro came boldly to the King, and said
unto him. O King, thou seem to me most unhappy, who give credit to wicked
and vile persons, against thy dearest Sons; for Pheroras and Salome thou
believe before thine own Children, whom, notwithstanding, thou have often
sound to have deserved death; and thou perceivest not that they do this, to the
intent to make thee want lawful Successors, and leave thee none but Antipater,
whom in their hearts they would have King, because they can rule him as they
list. But bethink thy self (O King) how all thy Soldiers will hate him for the
death of his two Brethren; for there is no man that does not pity the two young
men, and many of the Nobility are displeased hereat. After he had spoken this,
he named them who were displeased: Whereupon, the King commanded them, and him,
and his Son to be laid hold on: Tyro with his Son, are by the King's Command
laid hands on.
And presently one of the King's Barbers, named Tryphon, showing himself to be
in I know not what fury, came forth, and said to Herod: Tyro persuaded me to
kill thee with my Razor; promising me, that if I would so do, Alexander would
give me a great reward. Herod hearing this, caused Tyro, and his Son, and the
Barber, to be tortured; Ant. lib. 16. cap. 13.
the two former denied all, and the Barber affirmed nothing more than he had
already said. Then he commanded Tyro to be more tormented; whereupon, Another
false Accusation against Tyro.
his Son, moved with compassion toward his Father, promised to disclose all
Alexander's means and procurement, was purposed to have killed him. Many that
were present thought it was a device of the young man, to free his Father from
torments; but others were persuaded that it was true. Upon this, Herod made a
speech unto the people, wherein he inveighed against the Officers of his Army,
and Tyro, and made the people arm themselves, Herod commands his Sons to be
strangled, and to be buried with Alexander, their Mother's Uncle.
and kill them with staves and stones. After which, he sent his Sons to
Sebaste, which was not far from Caesarea, and there he caused them to be
strangled; and having quickly dispatched the matter, he ordered them to be
brought to the Castle Alexandrium, there to be buried with their Mother's
Uncle. And this was the Alexander and Aristobulus.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Antipater's Conspiracy against his Father Herod.
ANtipater now hoped without all controversy to succeed in the Kingdom, Ant.
lib. 17. cap. 21.
but he became generally hated of the whole Nation; for it was openly known,
that he, by false calumniations, had caused his Brethren's death. And on the
other side, Alexander had by Glaphyra two Sons, Tygranes and Alexander: and
Aristobulus had by Bernice, Daughter to Salome, five Children; to wit, three
Sons, Herod, Agrippa and Aristobulus; and two Daughters, Herodias and Mariamne.
Herod, after he had put Alexander to death, sent away Glaphyra with her Dowry
into Cappadocia; and married Bernice, Aristobulus's Wife, to Antipater's Uncle;
for Antipater had devised this Match to become friends with Salome, whom before
he hated and envied. Antipater striveth by Gifts and Bribes, to creep into
men's favors.
He also, by his great Gifts, sought to get Pheroras's favor, and the
Friendship of such as were Friends to Caesar, sending to that end great sums
of money to Rome. He gave Saturninus, and all the rest, great Riches in Syria.
But the more he Herod made much of these Orphans, whose Parents he had slain.
Intending to show how much he repented their deaths, by the pity and compassion
he took of their Children. For assembling together his friends, he caused the
Children to be placed by him; and the tears standing in his eyes, he said,
Since my ill Fortune has taken away from me the Fathers of these Children,
Herod grievously bemoneth his Sons, expressing the same by his commisseration
toward their Children.
there is no care so great, which Nature, and my compassion of their present
condition, obliges me not to take of them. Wherefore I will endeavor, that
seeing I have been a most unfortunate Father, I may be a most affectionate
Grandfather; and leave them who are most dear unto me, to reign after me. In
order whereunto Brother Pheroras (said he) I betroth your Daughter to Alexander
's eldest Son, to the end, that this Alliance may oblige you to serve in stead
of a Father to him: and to your Son, Antipater, (said he) I assure the Daughter
of Aristobulus, Herod betrotheth his Nephews.
that so you may be the same to her; and my Son Herod, Grandson by his Mother
to Simon the High Priest, shall marry her Sisster. This is my will and
pleasure, touching this matter, and let no man who loves me seek to alter it.
And I beseech Almighty God to prosper these Marriages to the good of my
Country, and of these my Nephews; and to look upon these Children with a more
favorable eye than he did upon their Fathers.

Antipater was so amazed, that all the Orphans well perceived it. For now he
thought himself dishonored by his Father, and that he stood in great danger,
seeing that Alexander's Son was like to have both Archelaus and Pheroras the
Tetrach to protect him. Moreover, he considered how he was hated, and how the
people compassionated the children that were fatherless; and looked upon him as
the murderer of their fathers. Wherefore he resolved by all means possible to
break these Marriages. Yet he feared to insinuate any thing to his father
cunningly, who was now very suspicious and mistrustful; and therefore went
openly unto him to make his humble suit and request to him, that he would not
leave him without honor, nor deprive him of that Succession, which before he
had judged him worthy Alexander's Son were (besides Archelaus his favor) made
Son-in-law to Pheroras. Herod's children by his seven wives.
Wherefore he earnestly prayed him, that seeing he had many daughters, he would
change these Marriages: for the King had nine Wives, and by seven of them he had
children; Antipater by Doris, Herod by Mariamne daughter of Simon the High
Priest, Archelaus by Malthace the Samaritan, and a Daughter called Olympias,
whom his brother Joseph married: and by Cleopatra of Jerusalem, Herod and
Philip, and by Pallas, Phaselus; he had two other Daughters also, Roxane and
Salome; one of them by Phaedra, and the other by Elpis. He had likewise two
wives, by whom Mariamne, Sisters to Alexander and Aristobulus. Wherefore
Antipater seeing his Father had such choice of Daughters, requested the
marriages to be altered.

The King, Herod is persuaded by Antipater's flatteries to break off the
marriages.
well perceiving his mind and purpose toward the Orphans, and calling to
remembrance the misfortune of his Sons, whom he had put to death, he judged
that if ever he found occasion, he would be as industrious to destroy the
children by calumnies, as he had done their fathers; and so falling into great
anger with sharp words he drove him out of his presence; yet afterward, he so
flattered Herod, that he got the marriages to be altered. And first of all he
joined Aristobulus's Daughter with Antipater himself, and his Son to Pheroras's
Daughter. Here one may see what Antipater could do by flattering speeches: for
Salome in the like matter could not speed, although she was his Sister, and
procured many times the Emperors Wife to speak for her, that she might marry
with Syllaeus the Arabian, yet was she not permitted so to do. But Herod swore
that he would account her as an utter enemy, except she would desist from that
purpose; and afterward, against her will, he married her to Alexas, a friend of
his; and one of her Daughters to Alexander's son, and the other to Antipater's
maternal Uncle.

As for Mariamnes Daughters, Ant. l. ^7. c. 3.
one of them was married to Antipater, his Sisters Son, the other to Phasaelus,
Antipater builds upon the Kingdom.
his Brother's Son. When Antipater had quite overthrown the hope of the
Orphans, and joined affinity as he thought good, he now held himself on
Pheroras now assisted him, as one that was confirmed and established for King.
A debate betwixt the Ladies in the Court.
Also the women in the Court fell at variance, and raised a new broil: for
Pheroras's Wife with her Mother and her Sister, and the mother of Antipater did
behave themselves very insolently in many things, toward two of the Kings
daughters; of which Antipater, who hated them, was very glad, none of the other
women except Salome daring to oppose this Cabal. But Salome went to the King,
and told him that their meetings were not for his service.

Antipater also made the same show, so that he stuck not openly to affront
Pheroras: notwithstanding they had meetings and banquets in the night; and the
unity was the more confirmed, the more they perceived themselves to be noted;
for Salome knew all this and told it to the King. The King was very angry, and
especially against Pheroras's wife, whom chiefly Salome blamed: and having
called together all his kindred and friends, Ant. lib. 17. cap. 4.
he accused her before them amongst other things, that she had behaved her self
contumeliously toward his daughters, and that she assisted the Pharisees
Pheroras, he asked him whether he had rather renounce the friendship of him his
King and Brother, or abandon his Wife. And he answering, that he had rather die
than lose his Wife; Herod doubtful what to do, turned him to Antipater, and
commanded him to have no commerce with Pheroras, or his wife, or any one
belonging to them after that time. He obeyed this command openly in show, but
secretly went to their house: and fearing that Salome might perceive it, he by
his friends in Italy procured himself to be sent for to Rome, Herod forbids
Antipater of his Brothers company, or to have conference with his wife.
by Letters brought to Herod, wherein it was commanded, that shortly after the
receipt thereof, Antipater should be sent to Caesar. Wherefore Herod using no
delay, sent him presently, furnishing him with all things necessary, and a
great sum of money; giving him likewise his last Will and Testament to carry
with him to Caesar; wherein was written that Antipater should be King, and
after him Herod, the Son of Mariamne, Daughter of the High Priest. But Syllaeus
the Arabian, neglecting Caesar's commandment, at Rome, there to contend with
Antipater, about matters which were before in controversy between him and
Nicholaus. He had also a great contention with Aretas his King, whose friends
he had slain, and amongst others, Sohemus, the most wealthy man in all the
Country of Petra; and Fabatus, Caesar's Procurator, whom he had corrupted,
assisted him against Herod. But Herod afterward giving Fabatus a greater sum
of money, alienated him from Syllaeus, and by this means dispatched that which
Caesar commanded: and because Fabatus restored nothing, he accused him that he
was Procurator, Fabatus Caesar's Governor, discovers Syllaeus secrets.
not for Caesar but for Herod: wherewith Fabatus was moved; and being as yet in
great estimation with Herod, he disclosed Syllaeus's his secrets, and signified
to the King, how that Syllaeus had corrupted Corinthus Corinthus, though always
brought up in the Kings Court, yet was born in Arabia. Wherefore he presently
took him, and two other Arabians that were found with him; one of them was
Syllaeus's friend, and the other Phylarchus. Upon their examination they
confessed, that Corinthus for a great sum of money was hired to kill the King.
After this they were sent to Saturnius, Governor of Syria, and by him to Rome.

CHAP. XIX.
How Herod should have been poisoned, and how the treason was discovered.
HErod still urged Pheroras to forsake his Wife: Herod banisheth his Brother
Pheroras and his wife.
for he knew not how else to punish her, having many matters against her: which
because he would not yield to, at last he was so moved, that he banished them
both. Pheroras taking this injury patiently, departed to his Tetrarchy, taking
an Oath that his banishment should endure as long as Herod lived; and that
whilst he lived, he would never come any more to him: And accordingly he would
not come to visit him when he was sick, notwithstanding he was often sent for,
when (as he thought) he lay on his deathbed, Pheroras fell sick. At which time
Herod showed his patient and humble mind; for he went to him, and very kindly
sought help for him; but he was too far spent, Pheroras died and was buried in
Jerusa*
and a few days after died: and although Herod loved him until his dying day,
yet was it bruted abroad, that he poisoned him. Herod caused his body to be
brought to Jerusalem, and commanded all the Nation to mourn and buried him with
a sumptuous funeral. Thus one of the Murderers of Alexander and Aristobulus
came to this end: but shortly after, the revenge of that wicked fact fell upon
Antipater, Ant. l. 17. c. 7.
who was the chief Author thereof. For certain freed men that belonged to
Pheroras came in mournful manner to Herod, and complained to him, that Pheroras
was poisoned, and that his own Wife had given him a drink, which as soon as he
had drunk, he presently fell sick; that two days before his sickness, A Witch
of Arabia.
there came a Witch out of Arabia, sent for by his Mother and Sister, to give
him a Love-potion; and that she in stead thereof, through Syllaeus's
inducements, had given him poison; for she was of Syllaeus's acquaintance.

The King moved with this discourse caused diverse of Pheroras freed men and
freed women to be put to torture; The confession of the women in their tortures.
and one of them impatient of the pain, exclaimed in this wise: O God, ruler of
heaven and earth, revenge us upon Antipater's Mother, who is the cause of these
our evils. When the King understood thus much, he became more eager to search
out the truth; and the woman disclosed Antipater's Pheroras and the other
women, and their secret meetings; and that when Pheroras and Antipater came
from the Palace, they used to Antipater had complotted to go to Rome, and
Pheroras beyond the River Jordan. For they were often wont to say, that Herod
having killed Alexander and Aristobulus, would next come to us and our wives:
and that it was unlike that he would spare any one, who spared not Mariamne and
her Sons; and therefore it was best to flee as far as possible from such a wild
beast. They also deposed that Antipater was often wont to complain to his
Mother, that now he grew gray-haired, his Father became young and lusty; that
himself might die perhaps Hydra, that is to say, Alexander and Aristobulus's
Sons, began to spring up again: and that he could not reasonably hope to leave
the Kingdom to his Sons, since Herod had declared that he would have it go
after him to Herod the Son of Mariamne: wherein he was persuaded that he
doated, if so be he thought his Will should be of force; for he would take such
an order, that he would have none of all his Progeny alive; and that Herod was
the greatest hater of his Sons of any Father in the World: and was not
therewithal contented, but he also hated his own Brethren. A proof whereof was,
that he not long ago gave him a hundred talents, that he should have no more
Pheroras: and that when Pheroras asked wherein he had hurt him, Antipater
answered, I would to God that he would take away all from us to our shirts, and
leave us only our lives; but said he, it is impossible to escape this dangerous
Beast, who will not not suffer men openly to show friendship to one another.
Thus we are reduced to that pass that we cannot meet but in secret: yet if we
bear the hearts and hands of men, the time will be when we may talk and meet
openly. The women in torments disclosed these speeches, and that Pheroras was
determined to flee with the rest to Petra. Herod believed all these sayings,
and the rather because of that which was said concerning the hundred talents:
For he said nothing of the same to any one, but to Antipater.

Doris, Doris, Antipaters Mother is spoiled of her Jewels, and thrust out of
the Palace.
Antipater's Mother: and taking from her all the Jewels which he had bestowed
upon her, of the value of many talents, he banished her. When his wrath was
somewhat appeased, he released Pheroras's women from torments; yet he became so
prone to suspicion, that he tortured many that were innocent, lest he should
let any escape that were guilty. Amongst others Antipater the Samaritan, who
was Steward to his Son Antipater, through torments confessed, that his Son
Antipater had procured poison out of Egypt to kill him, by means of a friend of
Antiphilus; which poison Theudion, Antipater's Uncle took of him, and delivered
to Pheroras, whom Antipater charged to dispatch Herod whilst he was at Rome,
far from suspicion; and that Pheroras gave his Wife the poison to Antipater.
And being brought to the King, as soon as she was come to her self (for she was
amazed with the fall) the King demanded of her, wherefore she had done so, and
swore unto her, if that she would truly disclose all, he would pardon her; but
if she told an untruth, her body should be torn in pieces with torment, and not
be buried. She a while held her Pheroras wife freely confesses what was become
of the Poison.
and at last said, Wherefore should I keep any thing secret, seeing Pheroras is
dead, to save Antipater, who has caused all this mischief? Hear O King, and
God, who cannot be deceived, be witness of the truth of what I shall say: When
I sat weeping by Pheroras as he lay a dying, he called me to him, and said,
See, wife, how much I was deceived concerning my Brothers love toward me; for
I hated and sought to kill him, who thus loves me, and sorroweth so much for
me, though I am not yet dead: but truly I am justly rewarded for my iniquity.
And now (wife) bring me hither the poison which was left by Antipater in your
keeping for my Brother, and make it away before my face, that I carry not with
me to Hell a guilty Conscience for that crime. So I brought it as he desired
me, and the most part of of Antiphilus; and they also confessed that Antiphilus
had brought a box out of Egypt, Alexandria. Thus it seemed that the Ghosts of
Alexander and Aristobulus went about the whole Kingdom, to discover the most
hidden things, and to draw testimonies and proofs from the mouths of those that
were furthest from all suspicion. For the Brothers of Mariamne, daughter of
Simon the High Priest, being put to the rack, confessed that she was acquainted
with this conspiracy. Gods justice leaves nothing unpunished.
Wherefore the King punished the mothers fault upon her child: for having writ
in his Will, that Herod her son should succeed Antipater in the Kingdom, now
for her fault, he razed him out.

CHAP. XX.
How Antipaters malicious practices against Herod, were discovered and punished.
THe arrival of Bathyllus was the last proof of Antipater's Crime, and
confirmed all the rest. This Bathyllus was one of his freed men, and brought
from Rome another sort of poison, composed of that of Asps and other Serpents;
to the end that if the first proved too weak, and took not effect, then
Pheroras and his wife might make an end of the King with this. And for the
height of Antipater's wickedness, he also had given this man Letters, which he
had written to Herod against Archelaus and Philip his Brethren, Antipater's
treasons against Archelaus and Philip his brothers.
who were at that time brought up at Rome to study, being very hopeful young
men: and for that Antipater feared they might be some hindrance to him in that
which he expected, he devised all means possible to make them away. And the
better to effect this purpose, he counterfeited Letters in his friends name
that were at Rome, and for money got others to write, that these two young men
used in taunting wise to rail against their Father, and openly to complain of
the death of Alexander and Aristobulus: and that they took it ill that they
were sent for home (for their Father had sent word that they should come away)
at which also Antipater was much troubled. For before his departure from Judaea
to Rome, he procured such like Letters to be forged against them at Rome;
Antipater gives a great sum of money to those that counterfeit letters against
his Brothers.
At the same time he gave great sums of money to them in whose name he had
written the Letters against his Brethren: hereby as it were hiring them to be
secret. For the concealment of which subornation from Herod's knowledge, he
bought much rich Housholdstuff and Tapistry of curious work, and Plate, and
many things more, amounting by his account to the sum of two hundred Talents,
which he pretended was to be employed in presents in prosecuting the business
against Syllaeus. But the mischief which he provided against was inconsiderable
in comparison of those which he had more reason to fear; Judea to Rome, bare
him so much good will as to give him intelligence what troubles were in the
Court at home, although it was seven months before he returned to Judaea from
Rome. Peradventure they who were minded to tell him all, were forced to hold
their peace, by consideration of the blood of Alexander and Aristobulus which
cried for vengeance against him.

At last he sent Letters from Rome to his Father, that now he would shortly
return home, Ant. lib. 18. cap. 8.
and that Caesar had treated him very honorably. The King desired greatly
Antipater is solicited by Herod with many kind words to hasten his return
and fearing that if he had inkling of matters he would look to himself,
feigned great kindness toward him, and sent back again unto him very loving
Letters, willing him to hasten his return: which if he did, possibly he might
obtain pardon for his Mothers offense: for Antipater had understood that she
was banished.

Antipater received a Letter at Tarentum, whereby he understood the death of
Pheroras, and greatly lamented it; which diverse that knew nothing thought well
of. Yet as far as one may conjecture, the cause of his grief was, that his
treason had not gone forward as he wished, and that he feared lest that which
had passed might come to light, and lest the poison should be found. Yet when
he came to Cilicia, Celenderis, he began to reflect more upon his Mothers
Antipater, pressed him to make haste, lest his long delay should breed any
suspicion in his Father, and lest thereby he should give occasion to malignant
people to raise slanders: For, said they, if any thing had passed against you,
it was in your absence; and were you in presence no man durst do or speak
against you; and it were a very unwise part, for uncertain suspicions,
Antipater followed, and so arrived in the in the Haven of Caesarea, Antipater
hated in Caesarea.
having passed Sebaste; where contrary to his expectation, he was much
surpised that all men eschewed his company, and no man came near him. For
although he was always hated, yet before they durst not show their hatred. But
now they abstained from coming to him for fear of the King; because the rumor
of those things which Antipater had done was known in every City, and to every
man, only Antipater himself was ignorant thereof. For there was never any man
brought thither with greater pomp than he, when he was to sail to Rome; Varus
the Ruler of Syria was there; and then boldly going into his Father's presence,
he advanced boldly near him, Antipater's entertainment at his Fathers hands.
to salute him. But Herod putting him back with his hands, and shaking his
head, cried out, What thou that have attempted to murder thy Father, dare
thou yet presume to offer to embrace me, being guilty of so many treasons!
May thou perish, wretch, as thy crimes deserve. Come not near me till thou
have cleared thy self of all that is laid to thy charge; for thou shall have
justice, and Varus shall be thy Judge, who is by good fortune now here. Go and
premeditate how to acquit thee against to morrow, which is all the time I will
give thee to do it.

Hereat Antipater was so astonished with fear, that he was not able to reply
any thing, but silently went away. Presently his Mother and his Wife came to
him and told him all the proofs of treasons against him; then he considered
with himself how to answer every point. The next day the King called an
assembly of his friends and kindred, Antipater is judged before Varus.
and to them admitted Antipater 's friends: and he and Varus sitting in
judgment, commanded all proofs to brought, and the witnesses to appear: amongst
whom were certain of Antipater 's Mothers servants lately apprehended, who had
Letters from her to carry to him, to this effect: Forasmuch as all things are
known to thy Father, beware that thou return not unto him, before thou have
obtained some warrant of thy safety from Caesar. These and others being brought
in, Antipater also came in after them, and prostrating himself before his
Fathers feet, he said, I beseech you, commanding him to hold his tongue, spoke
thus unto Varus: I know well, Varus, that you, or any other just and
indifferent Judge, Herod's accusation against Antipater.
will find Antipater to have deserved death: But I fear lest you conceive an
aversion against me, and think me worthy so great afflictions for having been
so unfortunate as to have brought such children into the world. And yet this
should move you to pity me, Herod's kindness toward his children.
who have been so merciful to, and careful for such wicked caitifs. For I had
already appointed those young men that are dead to be Kings, and brought them
up at Rome, and gotten them Caesar's favor: but they whom I had so much
honored, and exalted to the Crown, became traitors against my life. Their
death Antipater, whose security I sought thereby, because he was a young man
and the next that should succeed me: but this cruel beast has discharged his
rage upon my self, and thinks my life too long, and is grieved that I live to
be old, and has attempted to make himself King, The year of the World, 3961.
before Christ's Nativity. 1.
no other way but by murdering his Father. For Antipater's sake deprived them
of their right. Herod loved Antipater above the rest, and bestowed many
benefits on him.
For wherein had I so well deserved of them, as of Antipater? unto whom, during
my lifetime, I committed the sway and rule of my Kingdom, and openly in my
Will and Testament declared him my successor: Besides other gratifications, I
bestowed upon him the yearly revenue of fifty Talents. And lately when he was
to sail to Rome, I gave him three hundred Talents, and commended him to Caesar,
as the only Son of all my house, who had regard to his Fathers life. And what
was the offense of the others compared with Antipaters? what proofs were
produced Varus, that he deceive you not: for I know this beast, and I even now
see by his feigned tears, how probable a tale he will tell. This fellow once
warned me, that whilst Alexander lived, I should beware of him, and not put
every one in trust with my person: This is he who was wont to go before me into
my bedchamber, and look about in every corner, lest any should have lien in
wait to have attempted any treason against me: This is he who watched by me in
my sleep, and in whom I thought my self secure; who comforted me when I mourned
for them that were put to death. This is he Varus, when I remember his crafts
and subtilties, and all his counterfeitings, I wonder that I am yet alive, and
how I escaped the hand of such a traitor. And seeing that fortune stirs up
those of mine own house against me, and that those that I most esteem are my
greatest enemies, I will bewail my hard fortune alone; and not one that has
thirsted after my blood shall escape, although proof be brought against every
one of my children. ^ Thus, his heart being surcharged with sorrow, he was
forced to break off his speech: and presently he commanded Nicolas, one of his
friends, to report all the proofs and evidences.

All this while Antipater lay prostrate at his Fathers feet; Antipater's
answer, and excuse.
but now lifting up his head, he addressed to him and said: You Sir your self
made my Apology: For how can he pass for a Parricide, who as your self confess,
always watched to preserve you from all dangers? Which if you say I did
feignedly, is it probable that I would be so circumspect in other affairs and
at other times, and now in so weighty a matter play the part of a senseless man?
How could I think that such a design, though kept secret from men, could be
hidden from God, who sees all things? Was I ignorant what befell my Brethren,
whom God so punished for their wicked conspiracy against you? Or what should
cause me to aim at their life? The hope of the Kingdom? I possessed it already:
Or a suspicion of your hatred toward me? I knew you loved me passionately: Or
any fear which I had of you? On the contrary, I rendered you formidable to
others by the care I took of your preservation. Rome, to the end that Syllaeus
might not triumph over your old age. Antipater calls Rome and Caesar to
witness.
Rome can witness my piety, and Caesar the Prince of the whole world, who often
called me a lover of my Father. Receive here, O Father, his Letters, far more
Rome, knowing I had here in this Country many secret enemies. Thus you unwarily
have been the cause of my ruin, by forcing me to that voyage which has
afforded envy time to frame accusations against me: but now I will come to the
proof of these matters. Behold here I am, who, notwithstanding a Parricide, yet
never suffered any misfortune by sea or land: is not this a sufficient argument
of my innocence? But I will not insist upon this proof of my innocence, since I
know that God has permitted you to condem me already in your heart. Only I
conjure you, give not credit to depositions extorted by torments: let me be
burned, inflict all torments upon me, spare not my body: For if I am a
Parricide I ought not to die without accompanied these words with so many
tears, that he moved all that were present, and Varus also, to compassion; but
Herod only abstained from weeping, for his anger against his unnatural Son
fixed his mind upon the proof of his Crime. And presently Nicolaus at the
King's commandment made a long speech concerning Antipater' s malice and
artifices, which he laid so open, that he extinguished all pity in the minds of
the hearers. He ascribed all the mischief which had befallen that Kingdom unto
him, Nicolaus at the King's command begins a most heinous an bitter
accusation against Antipater.
and especially the death of his two Brethren, who through his calumniations
were made away; affirming also that he used treacherous practices against those
yet alive, fearing lest they should succeed in the Kingdom: for he who had
prepared poison for his Father would much less spare his Brethren. And then
coming to the proof of his intent to poison his Father, he declared in order
all the evidences thereof, aggravating his offense by the corrupting of
Pheroras, who by Antipater was drawn in to purpose the murder of his Brother
and King, Nicolaus's peroration.
and how he had also corrupted the King's dearest friends: and so filled the
whole Court with wickedness. When he had accused him of many other things, and
brought proof thereof he ended his speech.

Then Varus commanded Antipater to make answer to these things, The poison:
tried upon a condemned man.
and seeing that he continued lying on the ground, and said nothing more, but
God was witness of his innocence; he called for the poison, and gave it one who
was condemned to die, who having drunk thereof, presently died. Then Varus
talked apart with Herod; and what was done there in that Council he writ unto
Caesar, and the next day he departed. And when Herod had put Antipater in
prison, he sent messengers Caesar, to inform him of his hard fortune and
calamity. After this it was discoverd that Antipater designed the death of
Salome. For one of Antiphilus servants came from Rome, and brought Letters from
Acme, who was one of Julia's maids, which she writ to the King, telling him
that she found a Letter of Salomes among Julia's; which for good will she had
sent him. These Letters which she affirmed to be Salomes, Another proof against
Antipater.
contained many invectives against Herod, and many accusations. But these
Letters were feigned by Antipater, who for money had persuaded Acme to write
them in her own name; as the Letter that she writ to Antipater evidently
showed; for she writ as follows.

I have writ to your Father as you requested me, and sent also other Letters;
and I assure my self he will not spare his sister, if he do but read the
Letters. You may do well, seeing I have performed all your requests, to be
mindful of your promise. This Letter against Salome and others, being found to
be counterfeited, the King began to doubt that Alexander was made away by such
counterfeited Letters; and he remembered that he had almost put his Sister to
death, through Antipater's device. Wherefore he resolved no longer to delay to
punish him for all, yet was he hindered by a great sickness from accomplishing
his purpose. Herod intends Antipater's punishment, and therefore blotteth his
name out of his Testament.
He only sent Letters to Caesar concerning Acme's treachery and false
accusation of Salome; and changed his Testament, and blotted out the name of
Antipater, and in his room writ Antipas, leaving out Archelaus and Philippus,
who were the elder Brethren, because Antipater had rendered them odious to him.
Augustus a thousand Talents, beside many other rich gifts: and to his Wife the
Empress, and Children, and Kindred, and Freed men, about five hundred; he also
gave great gifts to others, either in land or money, and left to his Sister
Salome great riches.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Golden Eagle, and of Antipater's and Herod's death.
HErod's disease increased, partly through age, and especially by his grief and
sorrow; Ant. lib. 17. cap. 8.
for he was now threescore and ten years old; and his mind was so troubled for
the death of his Children, that though he were in health, yet he took no
pleasure in any thing; and his sickness was so much the more grievous to him,
because that Antipater was yet alive; but he purposed to put him to death as
soon as he was recovered of his sickness. To increase his calamity there arose
a tumult among the people. There were in the City two Doctors reputed very
skilful in our Country-laws: One of them was named Judas, the Son of
Sariphaeus; the other was called Matthias, the Son of Margalote. These two were
followed by a great number of young men; so that when they expounded the Law,
they had an assemby like a great Army. against his express Commandment; The
year of the World, 3963. after Christ's Nativity, 1.
which forbids to place the Images, or likeness of Judas and Matthias persuade
the people to pull down the Golden Eagle.
even to die for their Countrey-laws. For they that died for such a cause,
should enjoy everlasting life and glory: And that many unwise men, ignorant of
that Doctrine, so loved their lives, that they chose rather to die by sickness,
than to spend their lives in so glorious an enterprise. Whilst they spoke thus,
there was a rumor spread, that the King was now at the last gasp; whereby the
young men being encouraged, about Noon, when many were walking in the Temple,
they let themselves down from the top of the Temple with great ropes, and so
with hatchets cut down the Eagle. The young men that pulled down the Eagle, are
brought before Herod, and are examined.
he went with a great many Soldiers speedily to the Temple, and took almost
forty of the young men, and carried them to the King: Who asked them if that
were true, that they were so bold as to cut down the Golden Eagle: They
confessed they had done it. Then he demanded by whose Commandment? They
answered, by the Commandment of the Law. After this, it was asked them, why
they, who were presently to die, were so joyful? They answered, Because after
death, they hoped to enjoy Eternal Bliss. The King hereat was so greatly moved
with anger, that for all his disease, he went forth and made a Speech to the
people wherein he inveighed against these persons, as Sacrilegious; who, under
pretense and color of their Countrey-laws and Religion, attempted some great
matter; The young men with the Ring leaders, condemned to die.
The King, with much ado entreated, caused the young men that let themselves
down with Cords, and the two Doctors, to be burned; and the rest which were
taken in the act, to be beheaded. After this, the King's sickness spread over
his whole body, and he was afflicted with most grievous pains: The King
troubled with many diseases.
For he had a great Fever, and an Itch over all his body, which was
intolerable, and a daily Colic; and his feet were swelled, as though he had
the Dropsy: Ant. l. 17. c. 9.
His belly also, was swelled, and his privy members putrified, so that the
worms Herod seeks remedy in his sickness at the hot Baths.
for the death of the two Doctors. Herod, notwithstanding he was afflicted with
so many and grievous sicknesses, yet he was desirous to live, and sought
remedy, in hope of health. At last, he passed over Jordan, where he used the
warm Waters of Calliroe, which run into the Lake of Asphaltites; and are so
sweet, that men use to drink of them. There the Physicians caused his body to
be bathed in hot Oil, and he was therewith so weakened, that his sense failed,
and he was as though he were dead; whereat those that were about him being
troubled, with their cries they caused him to look up; and now despairing of
life, he caused fifty Drachmes

As he returned, Herod full of melancholy
When he came to Jericho, he was in a very great likelihood to die; and his
melancholy put into his head a wicked resolution: For he caused the chief men
of every Town and Village in all Judaea to be assembled together, and then he
shut them up in a place called the Hippodrome: And calling unto him his Sister
Salome, and Alexas her Husband; I know (said he) that the Jews will make Feasts
for joy of my death; yet if you will do what I desire, it shall be mourned for,
and I shall have a remarkable Funeral. As soon as I have given up the Ghost,
cause my Soldiers to encompass these men whom I have here in hold, and kill
them all: By this means all Judaea, and every Hous-hold thereof shall have
cause to lament. The Ambassadors signify (...) death, and bring Letters that
authorize Herod to punish Antipater.
After he had commanded this to be done, those whom he had sent to Rome,
brought him Letters, wherein was showed how Acme, Julia's Servant, was by
Caesar's Command put to death, and Antipater adjudged worthy to die: yet Caesar
writ, that if his Father had rather banish him, he permitted it. Herod with
this news was something pleased, yet presently his pains and a vehement Cough
seized him with that violence, so that he thought to hasten his own death;
Herod overcome with pain, would have (...) himself.
and taking an Apple in his hand, he called for a Knife (for he was accustomed
to cut the meat which he did eat) and then looking about him, lest any standing
by should hinder him, he lift up his arm to strike himself. But Achab his
Nephew run hastily to him, and stayed his hand; and presently there was made
great lamentation Ant. lib. 1^. cap. 16.
as though the King had been dead. Antipater having speedy news hereof, took
courage, and promised the Keepers a piece of money to Antipater requested.
Herod hearing this, lifted up his voice with more strength than was meet for a
sick man, and commanded his Guard to go and kill Antipater, and bury him in the
Castle called Hircanion. And now again he altered his Testament, Antipater's
death.
and appointed Archelaus his eldest Son King, and Antipas his younger Brother
Tetrarch. Five days after the death of his Son Antipater, Herod died; Ant. lib.
17. cap. 12.
having reigned thirty and four years after he slew Antigonus, and thirty seven
years after the Romans had declared him King. In many things he was as
fortunate as any man; for being born but a private person, he got the Crown,
and kept it, and left it to his Posterity: But in his Domestic Affairs, he was
most unfortunate. Salome, before it was known to the Soldiers that the King was
dead, went forth with her Husband, and released all those that were in Hold,
whom the King had commanded to be slain; saying, that the King's mind was
altered, and therefore he gave them all License to depart: Herod's death
signified to the Soldiers.
And after their departure, the King's death was published to the King's
Soldiers, who, together with the other multitude, were assembled in the
Amphitheatre at Jericho, by Ptolomey, Keeper of the King's Seal; who made a
Speech to them, and told them that Herod was now happy; and he comforted the
multitude, and read unto them a Letter which the King left, wherein he
earnestly requested the Soldiers to favor and love his Successor. After the
Epistle read, he recited the King's Testament, wherein Philip was appointed
Heir of Trachonitis, and the places thereunto Antipas Tetrarch, and Archelaus
King. He commanded his Ring to be carried to Caesar, to whom he referred the
cognizance and disposal of all with full Authority; requiring, that as to any
thing else, his said Testament should be performed.

This was no sooner read, Archelaus proclaimed King after his Father's decease.
but presently the Skies were filled with the voices and cries of the people,
who congratulated Archelaus; and the Soldiers and the People promised to serve
him faithfully, and wished him a happy Reign. This done, the next care was
about the King's Funeral, on which Archelaus spared no cost, but buried the
King with all Royal Pomp possible. Herod's pompous Funeral.
The Hearse whereon he was carried, was adorned with Gold and Precious Stones;
upon it lay a Bed wrought with Purple, whereupon was Jericho, to the Castle of
Herodion; where, as himself had appointed, it was interred.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE WARS of the JEWS,
Written by FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Second Book.
1. Of Herod's Successor Archelaus, how he entered into the Temple, and the
Mutiny that arose for the revenge of those that were executed for taking away
the Golden Eagle. 2. Of the Fight and Massacre in Jerusalem, between the Jews
and the Sabinians. 3. Varus, Governor of Syria for the Romans, represseth the
Insurrections in Judea. 4. How the Jews had an Ethnarch constituted over them.
5. Of the Impostor Alexander, Herod's pretended Son; and how he was taken. 6.
Of the Banishment and Death of Archelaus. 7. Of Judas the Galilean, who
established a fourth Sect; and of the three Sects amongst the Jews, 8. Of the
Cities which Philip and Herod built: and of Pilat's Government. 9. The Emperor
Caius orders Petronius, Governor of Syria, to constrain the Jews by Arms, to
receive his Statue into the Temple: Petronius forbears to do it. The death of
Caius saves him from Punishment. 10. The Roman Army declares Claudius Emperor.
Of the Reign and Death of Agrippa. 11. Of diverse Tumults in Judea and Samaria.
12. Of the Tumults in Judea under Foelix. 13. Of Albinus and Florus, Presidents
of Judea. 14. Of Florus his cruelty against the Jews of Caesarea and Jerusalem.
15. Of another Oppression of the Citizens of Jerusalem by Florus. 16. Of
Politianus the Tribune. King Agrippa's Speech to the Jews, exhorting them to
obey the Romans. 17. Of the Rebellion which the Jews begun against the Romans.
18. Of the death of Ananias the High Priest, Manahem and the Roman Soldiers.
19. Of the great Massacre of the Jews at Caesarea, and in all Syria. 20.
Cruelties exercised against the Jews in diverse other Cities, and particularly
by Varus. 21. Fifty thousand Jews slain at Alexandria. 22. Of the Massacre of
the Jews by Cestius Gallus. 23. Of Cestius his Battle against Jerusalem. 24. Of
the Siege of Jerusalem by Cestius, and of the Massacre. 25. Of the cruelty of
those of Damascus against the Jews, and of Joseph's Affairs in Galilee. 26. Of
Joseph's danger and escape; and of the malice of John of Giscala. Tiberias and
Sephoris are recovered by Joseph. 28. How the people of Jerusalem prepared
themselves for War; and of the Robberies of Simon, Son of Gioras.


CHAP. I.
Of Herod's Successor Archelaus, and how he entered into the Temple; and the
Mutiny that arose for the revenge of those that were executed, for taking down
the Golden
ARchelaus being acknowledged Successor in the Kingdom to Herod, The year of
the World, 3964. after Christ's Nativity, ^2.
lately dead, necessity constrained him to go to Rome, to the end he might be
confirmed by Augustus; which Journey gave occasion of new broils. For after
that for seven days he had celebrated his Father's Funeral, and largely feasted
the people (for this is a custom amongst the Jews, Ant. lib. 17. cap. 11.
which brings many of them to poverty; and yet he that does not so, is
reputed impious) he went to the Temple, The Lamentations and Banquets Archelaus
made.
attired in a white Garment, Caesar, who by his Father's Testament* was Lord
and Master of all; and for that cause, he had refused the Diadem offered him by
the Soldiers at Jericho, when they would have Crowned him. But he promised,
Archelaus promises ^his Subjects all favor.
that if he were confirmed King by the hands of the Emperor, he would largely
recompense both the Soldiers and the people for their good will; Archelaus, in
favor of the people, granted all these requests; and then offering Sacrifices,
A Sedition about the pulling down of the Eagle, and the Agents thereof.
he banquetted with his Friends. But suddenly, a little after Noon, a great
multitude desirous of alteration (the common lamentation for the King's death
being ceased) began a private mourning, bewailing their misfortune, whom Herod
had put to death for pulling down the Golden Eagle from the Porch of the
Temple. Ant. lib. 17. cap. 12.
This sorrow was not secret; but the whole City resounded with lamentations
Herod for that fact, had rewarded with money. And that first of all, he who by
Herod was constituted High Priest, was to be rejected, and another more honest
and devout was to be put in his place. Archelaus's bounty toward the Seditious.
Archelaus, although he was herewith offended, yet, because he was presently to
take such a journey, he abstained from violence, fearing lest he should render
the multitude his enemies. Wherefore he sought rather by admonition, than by
force, to reclaim those that were seditious; and he sent the Governor of the
Soldiers to request them to be pacified. But the Authors of the Sedition, so
soon as he came to the Temple, and before he spoke one word, threw stones
Archelaus dispatched many messengers unto them, whom they contumeliously
treated; so that if they had been more in number, their fury would have
proceeded further. The Feast of Easter solemnly kept, and much Sacrifice
offered.
Wherefore, when the Feast of Unleavened Bread drew nigh, which the Jews call
Easter, wherein an infinite number of Sacrifices were appointed; an innumerable
multitude of people came out of all Villages thereabout, for devotion sake, to
the Solemnity: And they who so lamented the death of the Doctors, remained in
the Temple, seeking by all means to promote the Sedition. Which Archelaus
fearing, sent a Band of Soldiers, and a Tribune with them, to take the chief of
the Seditous, before such time as they had drawn unto them the multitude of the
people; against whom the Archelaus persuaded himself, that the multitude would
not be appeased without Three thousand of the Jews slain at the Feast of ^as^er.
There were also some who followed Archelaus, and proclaimed by virtue of his
Command, that every one should depart home to his house; as accordingly,
notwithstanding the holiness of the day, they did. But he, accompanied with his
Mother, Poplas, Ptolomey and Nicholaus his Friends, went to the Seacoast,
leaving Philip Governor of the Kingdom, and of his Household: With them
departed Salome and her Children, and the Kings Brethren and Kindred, under
pretense to assist Archelaus to the Crown; but indeed, it was to inform Caesar
of the Murder committed

When they came to Caesarea, Sabinus comes into Judaea to seize the Fortresses
and keep the Treasure.
they met with Sabinus Governor of Syria, who was coming toward Judea, to
take into his custody Herod's Treasure. Varus, to whom Archelaus had sent
Ptolomey about this matter, forbad him to proceed further. And so Sabinus, in
obedience to Varus, neither entered the Castles, not took Herod's Treasure from
Archelaus; Ant. lib. 17. cap 13.
but promised, that he would let all alone, till Caesar's pleasure were
understood. But so soon as one of them that hindered him was gone to Antioch,
and the other, to wit, Archelaus, to Rome; he still remaining at Caesarea, now
hasted to Jerusalem, and took the King's Palace: Where, calling for the chief
of the Guard, and the Purveyors, he exacted of them an account, and sought to
take into his custody Archelaus had given them, refused him entrance; affirming
that they kept them more for Caesar than Archelaus. Antipas elected King by
Herod's former Testament, striveth with Archelaus for the Kingdom.
At this time also, Antipas, one of Herod's Sons, went to Rome with a design to
obtain the Crown; alleging that Herod's first Testament was of more force than
the last, and that he in the first was declared King; and both Salome, and
diverse others of his Kindred, who sailed with Archelaus, promised him their
aid. He took with him his Mother and Ptolomey, Brother to Nicholaus; in whom he
had great confidence, because he had been always faithful to Herod, and was
held by him in great credit. But none had so much encouraged him, as Irenaeus
the Orator, who had an excellent faculty of speaking. Trusting to these, he
refused Archelaus, both as the elder, and appointed by the last Testament of
his Father. Now, when they were all arrived at Rome, those of the Kindred that
hated Archelaus; and especially those that looked upon it as a sort of Liberty
to be governed by the Romans, favored Antipas; in hope, that if their design
of being freed from the Rule of Kings did not succeed, they should, at least,
have the comfort to be commanded by him, and not by Archelaus. Antipas accuses
Archelaus by Letters to Caesar.
And to further him the more, he obtained Sabinus's Letters to Caesar; wherein
Archelaus was accused, and Antipas commended. Salome, and the rest of the
Accomplices, presented Accusations against Archelaus, to Caesar; who, after them,
delivered also his Justification in writing; and withal, his Father's Ring, and
an Inventory Caesar calls a Council of Roman Nobility.
by Ptolomey. Caesar pondering with himself what both Parties alleged, and the
greatness, and large Revenues of the Kingdom, and the number of Herod's
Children; and having also read the Letters of Varus and Sabinus, he called the
chief of the Romans to Council; where Caius, the Son of Agrippa, and his
Daughter Julia, whom he had adopted by his assignment, sat in the first place,
and so he licenced the Parties to plead their Rights. Antipaters's vehement
Accusation against Archelaus.
Antipater, Salome's Son, being the greatest of all Archelaus's Adversaries,
spoke first, and said, that Archelaus now only for form disputed for the
Kingdom, of which he had already possessed himself without waiting to know
Caesar's Pleasure; and that he did now strive in vain, to render Caesar
favorable to him, whom he would not attend to judge of his Lawful Succession.
That after Herod's Caesar, to crave the shadow of the Kingdom, the substance
and body whereof he already possessed; so that herein he left nothing to Caesar
to dispose of, but the bare Title. Moreover, he alleged that Archelaus did but
counterfeit sorrow for his Father's death, feigning himself to mourn in the day
time, Antipater (...) to vehemence in accusing Archelaus*
and in the night he would be drunk and Riotous. By which carriage, he said,
that he had caused the Sedition of the people, and incurred Herod, foreseeing
his cruelty, never judged him worthy of the Kingdom, till such time as his
Understanding failed him; The Will changed during Herod's Sickness.
when being more sick in mind than body, he knew not whom he named his
Successor in his last Will; whereas, he had nothing whereof he could blame him,
whom in his former Will, he had appointed his Successor, when he was in health,
Antipater against Archelaus.
both of mind and body. Yet (said he) put the case, Herod in his extremity,
knew what he did, yet Archelaus has rendered himself unworthy of the Kingdom,
by having committed many things against the Laws. For (said Caesar, who before
he received any, has murdered so many? Antipater having spoken more to this
effect, and at every Accusation taking Witness of his Kindred that stood by,
ended his Speech.

Then Nicolaus stood up, Nicolaus defends Archelaus.
and first of all showed, that the slaughter of them in the Temple was
necessary and unavoidable; for they, for whose death Archelaus was now accused,
were not only enemies of the Kingdom, but also of Caesar: And for other Crimes
objected, he showed how that they were done, even by the counsel and persuasion
of the Accusers. He also urged, that the second Testament might be of force,
for that therein Herod had referred it to Caesar, to confirm his Successor. And
Archelaus humbles himself at Caesar's feet.
seeing he knew by whom he should be established. When Nicolaus had ended his
Speech, and declared all that he thought might make for Archelaus, Archelaus
coming into the midst of the Council, prostrated himself at Caesar's feet.
Caesar's Bounty and Humanity toward him.
Augustus courteously raised him from the ground, and declared him worthy to
succeed his Father. Yet did he not pronounce a definitive Sentence; but the
same day, the Council being dismissed, that he might deliberate with himself at
more leisure, whether any one single person of those nominated in the two
Wills, should succeed their Father in the Kingdom, or that the Kingdom should
be divided amongst the

CHAP. II.
Of the Fight and Massacre at Jerusalem, between the Jews and the Sabinians.
BEfore Caesar determined any thing concerning this matter, Ant. lib. 17. cap.
14.
Malthace, the Mother of Archelaus, Sedition in Jerusalem.
fell sick and died; and many Letters came out of Syria, signifying Varus
foreseeing after the departure of Archelaus from thence, had gone to Jerusalem
to repress the Authors of that Sedition: And because the multitude would not be
quiet, he left one Legion of the three which he brought out of Syria, Sabinus
seizes the King's Treasure, and labors to get possession of his Fortresses.
in the City, and so returned to Antioch. But Sabinus coming afterward to
Jerusalem, was the cause that the Jews began a new Broil: For he forced the
Garrisons to render to him the Castles, and rigorously made search for the
King's Treasure: And he was not only assisted by those that Varus left there,
but also he had a great multitude of his own Servants all armed, to further his
Avarice. And in the Feast of Pentecost (so called, because it happens at the
end of seven times seven days) the People gathered themselves together, not for
Religion's sake, but for anger Galilee, Three Camps of the Jews.
and Idumaea, and Jericho, and the Countries beyond Jordan. Yet the Jews which
were Inhabitants of the City, surpassed the rest both in number and courage:
and they therefore parted themselves into three Bands, and made three Camps;
one on the North side of the Temple, another on the South toward the
Hippodrome, the third on the West, near the Palace; and so they besieged the
Romans on every side. Sabinus greatly fearing them, both for their multitude,
and for their courage, sent many Letters to Varus, earnestly requesting him
with all speed to bring succor; for if he did not, Sabinus gets into the
highest Tower of the strongest Castle.
the whole Legion would be destroyed. He himself got into the highest Tower of
the Castle of Phasaelus, so called from the name of Herod's Brother, whom
Command, attacked the Temple, and there fought a fierce Battle with the Jews;
who A Skirmish between the Jews and Romans.
who fought against them from so high a place; neither could they sustain the
force of them who joined Battle with them; till at last the Romans fired the
Porches, which for greatness, and curious work, were admirable. The Romans fire
the Porches.
By this means many Jews were either destroyed with the sudden fire, or else,
leaping down amidst their enemies, were by them slain; others going backward,
were cast headlong from the Wall; others despairing of life, killed themselves
with their own Swords; and they who privily came down the Walls, being
assaulted by the Romans, Sabinus got.

But this loss of men and money stirred up many more Jews, and those more brave
than the first, against the Romans; whom they besieged in the King's Place, and
threatened all their destructions, unless they would presently depart from
thence: Yet promising Sabinus and the Legion lieve to depart, if he so liked.
Part of the King's Soldiers, who of their own accord fled to them, assisted
them. But the most Warlike and valiant amongst them, were three thousand men of
Herod's Army, whose Leaders Ru^us and Gratus; one of the Foot, and the other of
the Horse; both which, although they had had no Soldiers with them, might yet
for their Valor and Counsel, have been considerable to the Party of the
Romans. The Jews earnestly continued the Siege, and assaulted the Castle-Walls,
crying upon Sabinus to depart, and not to hinder them now, after so long time,
to recover their Countrey's Liberty. Sabinus, though with all his heart he
wished himself away, yet he durst not trust them; but he suspected, that their
courtesy was but a plot to entrap him. And on the other side, hoping that
Varus would come and help him, he still endured the danger of the Siege. At the
same time there were tumults in many place of Judaea; Ant lib. 17. cap. 15.
and many, through opportunity of the time, aspired to the Kingdom. For in
Idumaea two thousand old Soldiers, Herod, gathering together, and having armed
themselves, went to attack the King's Forces commanded by Achiab, Herod's
Nephew; who, because they were old Soldiers, and very well armed, durst not
meet them in the Field, but withdrew into some Fortresses. At Sephoris also, a
Town of Galilee, Judas the Son of Ezechias, Captain of the Thieves which
formerly were defeated by King Herod, and had wasted the Country; gathered
together a great multitude, and brake into the King's Armory, and armed all his
Company, and fought against them who affected the Royal Dignity. Simon, one of
the King's Servants takes the Kingdom upon him.
Also, beyond the River, one Simon, who had been Herod's Servant; being a
goodly man, and of a huge stature, put a Crown upon his own head; and gathering
together a company of Vagrants, went about with them to Jericho, and burnt the
King's Palace, and many fair and sumptuous houses there, and so got a great
Booty there; and he had surely fired all other Buildings of Note, had not
Gratus, Captain of the King's Footmen, made haste to fight him with the Bow-men
of Trachon, and the most Warlike men of Sebaste. Simon lost many men in this
Encounter; and when he fled into a strait Valley, Gratus overtook him, and cut
him overthwart the neck, so that he fell to the ground. In like manner, other
of the King's Palaces near Jordan, by Bethara, were burnt by a multitude of
other Rebels, gathered together in Bands from beyond the River. Athrongaeus a
Shepherd, usurpeth the Kingdom.
At this time a Shepherd, named Athrongaeus, pretended to make himself King:
His Birth was so low, that formerly he had been but a simple Shepherd; and he
had no other merit, but that he was very large, Emmaus, who carried Corn and
Armor unto the Legion; he fought with them, and killed one Arius a Centurion,
and forty of the most valiant amongst them upon the place; the rest being in
like danger, through the help of Gratus with the Soldiers of Sebaste, escaped.
The End and (...) of the War.
After they had done many things in this manner against their own Contrymen
Archelaus, and the two other, who were eldest after him, fell into the hands of
Gratus and Ptolomey; and the fourth yielded himself to Archelaus upon
Composition. Such was the success of the bold Enterprise of these five men. But
at that time a War of Thieves filled all Judaea with Troubles and Robberies.

CHAP. ^.
Varus, Governor of Syria for the Romans, represses the Insurrections in Judea.
WHen Varus had, Ant. lib. 17. cap. 16.
by the Letters of Sabinus, understood the danger wherein the Varus assisteth
the Romans against the Jews.
being besieged in Jerusalem; he hasted to succor them: But first he went to
Ptolemais with two other Legions, and four Cornets of Horse; where he had
appointed the King's Forces, and the other Auxiliary Troops to meet him. As he
passed by Beritus, the Inhabitants gave him fifteen hundred men. Also Aretas
the King of Arabia, for the hatred he bare to Herod, sent him a great number,
both of Horse and Foot. As soon as the Host was assembled, Varus incontinently
directed part of his Army into Galilee, adjoining to Ptolemais; and appointed a
friend of his, the Son of Caius their Governor, who presently put all to
flight against whom he was sent; and having taken the Castle of Sephoris, he
fired it, and made all the Inhabitants thereof Slaves. Varus takes diverse
Cities and Castles of Judaea.
Varus, with the rest of the Army, went to Samaria, and Arus, which belonged to
Ptolomey, the Arabians sacked it, for they hated those that loved Herod. From
thence they went to Sampho, another strong Borough; which they in like manner
sacked and destroyed, without sparing any thing. All was filled with the
slaughter and fires which the Arabians made, Emmaus burnt.
there was no end nor hindrance of their Avarice. Also Varus commanded Emmaus
to be burnt, being angry for the death of Arius, and the rest that were slain
there; and the Inhabitants thereof abandoned it, every one by flight seeking to
save himself. Varus comes to Jerusalem with his Army, and with his only*
Presence dismayeth the Jews.
From thence he went to Jerusalem; and at his approach, the Jews that besieged
the Roman Legion fled and scattered themselves, Josephus, The year of the
World, 3966. after Christ's Nativity, 4.
Archelaus's Cousin, with Gratus and Rufus, went to meet him; leading the
King's Army, and the Sibastians, and the Roman Soldiers, adorned in their
accustomed Apparel. Sabinus durst not be seen by Varus, and therefore got him
out of the Town before, and went to the Seacoast. Varus divided his Army, and
sent some Parties into the Country, Varus crucified two thousand of the
Seditious.
to seek the Authors of the Tumult: And those that

And understanding that in Idumaea there yet remained ten thousand men in Arms,
he presently sent the Arabians home, because he perceived that they did not
serve as they that came to help him, but as they themselves pleased, wasting
the Country against his Orders; and so, accompanied with his own Army, he
hastened against the Enemies: But they without any fight, through Achiab's
Counsel, yielded themselves to Varus. And he pardoned the Common Soldiers, and
sent the Captains to Caesar to answer the matter: Varus's mercy and bounty to
the Idumeans.
Who, pardoning most of them, yet punished some that were of Herod's Kindred,
because they had rebelled against their own King. Varus having Judea and
Jerusalem, left in the Fortress of Jerusalem, the same Legion that was there
before, and departed to Antioch.

CHAP. IV.
How the Jews had an Ethnarch constituted over them. The year of the world,
3966. after Christ's Nativity, 4.

NOw Archelaus met a new obs^acle at Rome; Ant. lib. 17. cap. 17.
for the Jews, who before the Sedition, with the lieve of Varus, were gone to
Rome, to crave the liberty of their Country. Ethnarcha, Ruler, or Governor.
Those who went as Ambassadors in their Countrey's behalf, were fifty in
number; and they were assisted by more than eight thousand Jews, that lived at
Rome. The Jews call Archelaus in question.
Whereupon, Caesar called a Council of the Nobility of Rome in the stately
Temple of Apollo, which he had built on Mount Palatine. The whole Body of the
Archelaus and his friends. Archelaus's Kindred neither came with him, nor with
the rest of the Jews: with him they would not join, for envy; and with the Jews
they durst not, for shame. Amongst them also was Philip, the Brother of
Archelaus, whom Varus sent in courteous manner to assist his Brother; or to the
end, that if it should please Caesar to divide Herod's Kingdom among his
Children, he might have a part. The Ambassadors spoke first, and began to
declaim against Herod's Memory: First of all they said, that they found him not
a King, but the most cruel Tyrant that ever was; and that he had murdered
many; and those whom he left alive, endured such misery, as they thought
themselves far more unhappy than those that were so butchered. A bitter
Accusation of the Jews against Herod and his Sons.
For (said they) he was not only contented to tear his Subject's bodies with
torments, but also defaced and ruined the Cities of his own Country, to adorn
and beautify the Cities of Strangers: And he permitted Foreigners to massacre
the Jews without revenge. And instead of their ancient and wonted happiness
which Judea enjoyed by a Religious observation of the Laws, the Country was by
him made so poor, and so wasted with Injustice, that within these few years
that Herod reigned, they have suffered more Murders and Massacres, than all
their Ancestors had, from the time of their departure out of Babylon, in the
Reign of Xerxes, to the days of Herod. That being, by enduring such misery, now
accustomed to the Yoke, they had willingly subjected themselves to his Son
Archelaus after that Herod his Father was dead, Herod's Tyranny and cruelty.
notwithstanding he was the Son of such a Tyrant; and had publicly mourned for
the death of Herod, and offered Sacrifice for the prosperity of his Successor.
But he, to show himself Herod 's true Son, began his Reign with the slaughter
of three thousand Citizens; and because he had so well deserved the Kingdom, he
offered so many men to God for Sacrifice; and on a Festival Day, The Jews
beseech the Romans to have compassion on the remainder of the Jews.
filled the Temple with so many dead bodies. Wherefore, it is not strange that
they who escaped that Massacre, consider their own calamity; and as in Battle,
turn their faces against those who wounded them, and beseech the Romans, that
they would think the remnant of the Jews worthy of compassion; and not abandon
and expose the residue of their Nation as a Prey to them, by whom they are like
to be most cruelly butchered; but that it may please them to adjoyn their
Country to Syria, and to let them be ruled by the Romans; that so they may
find that the Jews, though now counted seditious and rebellious, are under
peaceable and quiet Governors, a peaceable Nation. With this Petition the Jews
ended their Accusation. Nicolaus defends Archelaus before Caesar, and the rest.
After this, Nicolaus stood up against them; and first of all acquitted the
King's of the Crimes laid to their charge, and then reproved his Contrymen,
as people not to be easily Governed, and of their own nature averse, except
forced, to obey their King: And by the way he also blamed the Kindred of
Archelaus, who joined with his Accusers. Caesar having heard what both parts
could say, dismissed the Assembly. Caesar makes Archelaus Ethnarch of Jewry.
And within few days after he gave Archelaus half the Kingdom, with the Title
of Ethnarch; promising moreover, to make him King, if he behaved himself well:
the other half he divided into two Tetrarchies, and gave the same to the rest
of Herod's Sons; The distribution of the Kingdom to Herod's Children.
one to Philip, the other to Antipas, who contended with Archelaus Antipas his
Part lay from Galilee, beyond the River Jordan; the Revenues whereof amounted
to two hundred Talents a year. Philip had Batanaea, and Trachonitis, and
Auranitis, and part of what belonged to Zenodorus near Jamnia; the Revenues
whereof amounted to one hundred Talents a year. Archelaus had in his Ethnarchy
Idumaea, and all Judaea and Samaria, which was freed from the fourth part of
the Tribute, Those Cities that were under Archelaus's subjection.
because they had not rebelled with the rest. These Cities also, were given
him, Straton's Tower, Sebaste, Joppa and Jerusalem. But Gaza, and Gadara, and
Hippon, Caesar took from the Kingdom, and joined them to Syria. Archelaus's
yearly Revenues amounted to four hundred Talents a year. Caesar also, besides
that which Herod had left Salome, Salome Princess of Jamnia, Azotus and
Phasaelis
as Jamnia, Azotus and Phasaelis, gave her the Palace Ascalon; all which
amounted to threescore Talents a year. But Caesar obliged her to live in the
Country subject to Archelaus. And having confirmed the rest Herod's Kindred
the Legacies which in his Testament he had left them, he gave his two Daughters
that were Virgins, over and above, a hundred and fifty thousand Drachmes of
Silver, and married them to Pheroras's two Sons. Lastly, he divided that which
Herod had bequeathed unto himself, amounting unto a thousand Talents, amongst
his Sons; leaving himself only some Jewels of small value, which he reserved in
honor and remembrance of the dead.

CHAP. V.

AT the same time, Ant. lib. 17. cap. 18.
a certain young man, a Jew born, brought up by a Freed-man of Rome in the Town
of Sidon, A certain young man feigning himself to be that Alexander, whom Herod
slew, deceives many.
being very like Alexander whom Herod had put to death, went to Rome, having
one of his Contrymen for his companion, who knew very well the Estate of the
Kingdom; and by whose instructions he affirmed, that they who should have put
him and Aristobulus to death, being moved to compassion, let them go, and put
two others in their room like them. With this tale he deceived many Jews living
in Creet, where he was honorably received: From thence he sailed to Melos,
where he was entertained with greater pomp; and enriching Rome. At his landing
at Puteoli, he received great Presents from the Jews who dwelt there,
especially those that were well affected to his Father, honored him as a King.
For he was so like Alexander, that they that had seen Alexander, and knew him
well, would have sworn he had been the same. Wherefore, when he arrived at
Rome, all the Jews desired to see him, and an infinite multitude followed him
whithersoever he went in the streets; and they so doted upon him, that they
carried him in a Horse-litter, and at their own proper cost and charges,
prepared for him a Royal Train.

But Augustus well remembered Alexander's visage (for Herod had accused him
before Caesar desires to see the young man.
before he saw him, he judged that he was some Impostor, yet he made as though
he believed all; and sent one Celadus, who knew Alexander well, to bring this
young man to him. Celadus no sooner beheld him, but forthwith he perceived the
difference betwixt them; and especially, when he took notice of his hard flesh
and servile shape, he presently understood the whole matter. But he could not
but be greatly surprised at his bold speeches; for when they demanded of him
what was become of Aristobulus, he answered, that he was alive; but on purpose
tarried behind, and lived in Cyprus, because, being asunder, they could not
both so easily be entrapped. Celadus taking him apart from the rest of the
Company, told him, that Caesar would save his life, if he would truly confess,
by whose counsel he Alexander. He, accepting this proffer, followed him to
Caesar, and declared to him the Jew, who, for lucre sake, had made use of his
likeness to Alexander; confessing that he had received as great Gifts of the
Cities by which he passed, Caesar makes the counterfeit Alexander a
Galley-slave, and executes his Counselor
as they would have given Alexander, if he had been alive. Caesar laughed at the
Cheat, and condemned this false Alexander to the Galleys, but put the other Jew
to death, who had induced him to this Imposture. And as for the Jews at Milo,
he thought that they had punishment sufficient, in losing all that which they
had laid out, and bestowed upon him.


Of the Banishment and Death of Archelaus.
ARchelaus being now made Prince, Ant. lib. 17. cap. 19.
remembered the contests past; and in revenge thereof, Archelaus banished for
his Tyranny, and his goods confiscated.
he ill treated, not only the Jews, but also the Samaritans. But in the ninth
year of his Reign, the Jews and Samaritans sent Ambassadors against him, to
Caesar; by whom he was banished to Vienna, a City of Gallia, and all his Goods
confiscated. It Is reported, that before he was summoned to appear before
Caesar, he had a strange Dream, Archelaus's Dream of the Oxen and ears of Corn.
in which he saw nine great Ears of Corn devoured by Oxen; and Simon an Essean
told him, that the nine Ears of Corn betokened the number of years he had
reigned, and the Oxen signified the change of his Fortune; for as much as these
creatures in laboring Archelaus was sent for to Rome, to answer before
Augustus the things whereof he was accused. I have also thought it worth
rehearsing, to set down the Dream of his Wife Glaphyra, Daughter to Archelaus
King of Cappadocia, who was first married to Alexander, Brother to this man,
and Son to King Herod, by whom he was put to death, as we have said before:
After whose death, she was married to Juba, King of Lybia; and he being dead,
she returned home to her Father; where living in her Widowhood, Archelaus
refusing Mariamne, marries Glaphyra.
Archelaus the Ethnarch beholding her, was so inflamed with her love, that
presently he divorced his Wife Mariamne, and married her. Soon Judaea, she
dreamed that she saw Alexander her first Husband, standing before her, and
saying unto her; Glaphyra saw Alexander in her sleep.
It had been enough for thee to have married the King of Lybia; but thou, not
contented therewith, come again to my house, greedy of a third Husband; and
which is worst of all, art now married to mine own Brother. I will not conceal
nor dissemble this injury which thou do me, but I will recover thee against
thy will. And she scarcely lived two days after she had related this Dream to
her friends.

CHAP. VII.
Of Judas the Galilean, who established a fourth Sect; and of the three Sects
amongst the Jews.
AFter that Archelaus's Dominions were reduced into a Province, Ant. lib. 18.
cap. 12.
a certain Roman Knight called Coponius, was made Governor thereof. During his
Administration, The year of the World, 3973. after Christ's Nativity, 11.
a certain Galilean named Judas, incited his Contrymen to revolt;
reproaching them for paying Tribute to the Romans, and for being subject to any
but to God. This Judas was Author of a new Sect of his own devising, nothing
like other Sects. For there are three Sects of Philosophers amongst the Jews;
one is that of the Pharisees, Three Sects among the Jews, of which the Esseans
were the best.
another of the Sadducees, and the third of the Esseans, which is the most
famous of all the three. The Esseans are Jews born, but live in the greatest
union together imaginable: They consider all Pleasures, as Vices that are to be
avoided; and esteem Continence and Victory over the Passions, as the greatest
Virtues. They reject Marriage, and account other men's Children, put to them to
be taught whilst young, The Esseans Doctrine of Marriage.
as their own Kins-men, whom they diligently instruct in their Manners and
Opinions; not for that they condemn Marriage and Propagation of Mankind, but to
avoid women's incontinence; for they think that none of them keep themselves
true to one man. Among the Esseans goods are common.
Also, they contemn Riches, and all things with them are common, and no man
amongst them is richer than other. And they have a Law amongst themselves, The
Esseans Hospitality
They have not one certain City, but are dispersed in many Cities; and if any
of their Sect, though a stranger, come to them from another place, they give
The Esseans App^^el.
All Children under Government, brought up by them, go apparelled alike; and
they never change their Apparel nor Shoes, except they have worn out their
first Apparel. Among themselves they neither buy nor sell; but every man that
has any thing which another wants, gives him it, and takes that of Their
Religion and labor.
they all meet together again, and being covered with linen clothes, they wash
their bodies with cold water: and having thus purged themselves, they go to
their Cells, into which no man that is not of their Sect is admitted: And then
they come to the Refectory, as into a holy Temple; where all sitting down with
silence, there is set before every man in order, a loaf, and a little mess of
pottage, all of one sort. Before they eat a Priest gives thanks, and no man
may eat The Esseans in compassion and helping others have free choice in other
things they are ruled by their Governor.
And although, that in all other matters they are ruled by their Superior, yet
in these two, to wit, compassionating and helping, they may do as they think
good: for every one may when he pleases, help those whom he thinks deserve
The Esseans swear not.
as if they had bound it with an oath: and they shun oaths worse than perjury;
for they esteem him a liar, who is not to be believed, without he call God to
witness. They study diligently ancient Writers, chiefly gathering out of their
Writings, what is most convenient for the soul and the body. Out of them they
learn Remedies for Diseases, and the Virtues of Herbs, Stones and Metals.
Those who are desirous to be of their Order, do not straight way converse with
them; but for a year before, live out of the College, and The Esseans Vows and
Covenants.
till for two years more, they have observed his life and manners: And at last,
when he is thought worthy, he is admitted to their common company. But before
he is received to the common Table, first he is to protest solemnly to honor
and serve God with all his heart, to observe Justice and Fidelity toward all
men; never willingly to hurt any man, nor injure any for another man's command;
but always to hate the wicked, and assist the good; to keep his faith to all,
but especially to his Superiors; The Esseans circumspect in Justice.
because they hold their power from God. To which they add, that if he be put
in Authority over others, he never will abuse it to the prejudice of those that
are under him; and neither exceed the rest in apparel, nor any other ambitious
pomp: that he will always love the truth, and severely reprove liars: and that
he will keep his hands and soul pure from all theft and unjust gain: and that
he will not conceal any mysteries, or secrets of their Religion from his
companions, nor reveal them to any strangers, although he should be thereto
threatened by death. Adding moreover, that he will never deliver any Doctrine,
save that which he has received; and diligently preserve the Books, as well as
the Names, of those from whom they received it. These Protestations they oblige
those to take solemnly, who enter into their Order, to They account it a great
incivility to be in the midst of the Assembly, or on The Esseans reverence the
Sabbaths.
Upon other days they dig a pit a foot deep in the ground with the hatchet,
which (as we before said) every one, at his entrance into their Order, has
given him; and then covering themselves diligently with their garment, as if
they feared to be irreverent to the light of Heaven, in that pit they ease
themselves; and then cover their ordure with the earth they took out of the
pit: And this they do in most secret places. And although this purging of their
bodies be natural, yet do they by washing purify themselves after it, as after
great uncleanness. Furthermore, The Esseans live a long time.
as though they had touched a stranger. They are long-lived, so that most of
them live an hundred years, which I judge is by reason of their well ordered
diet, and their temperance. They contemn adversity, and by constancy and
fortitude triumph over torments. The Esseans constancy in the War with the
Romans.
They prefer an honorable death before life. The Wars which the Jews made
against the Romans, showed what invincible courage and hardiness they have in
all things; for they suffered the breaking of the members of their bodies, fire
and Sword, and all kind of Tortures, rather than be brought to speak the least
word against The year of the World, 3979. after Christ's Nativity. 17.
or to eat meats forbidden: They could not be forced to any of these, neither
would they entreat the Torturers, nor show any sorrow amidst their torments:
Yea, in the midst of their pains they scoffed at their Tormentors; and joyfully
yielded up their souls, as though they hoped to pass to a better life. For it
is an Opinion amongst them, The Esseans esteem the soul immortal, but they
believe not the Resurrection of the dead.
that the body is mortal and corruptible, but the souls remain ever immortal;
and being of a most Pure and Etherial Substance, wrap themselves in bodies as
in prisons, being drawn thereunto by some natural inclination: But when they
are delivered out of these Carnal Bonds, then presently, as freed from a long
Bondage, they joyfully mount into the Air. And of the good souls they say, as
did the Grecians, The Grecians opinion of the soul of man.
that they live beyond the Ocean in a place of Pleasure, where they are
Sysiphus, Tantalus, Ixion and Titius. These Esseans also believe that they are
created immortal, that they may be induced to Virtue, and averted from Vice;
that the good are rendered better in this life, by the hope of being happy after
death; and that the wicked, who imagine they can hide their evil actions in
this world, are punished for them in the other with The Esseans prophecy.
who have once embraced it. There are also some among them, who promise to
foretell things to come; which faculty is obtained as well by the studying of
Holy Books and Ancient Prophecies, as by the care they take of sanctifying
themselves: And their predictions seldom fail.

There is another sort of Esseans, There is a College of the Esseans, that
differs from the former in the point of Marriage.
agreeing with the former, both in apparel, diet and kind of life, and
observance of the same Laws and Ordinances; only they differ in the matter of
Marriage: Affirming, that to abstain from Marriage, tends to abolish mankind.
For (say they) if all men should follow this opinion, presently all mankind
would perish. Notwithstanding, these people use such moderation, that for three
The second Sect of the Pharisees.
the Pharisees are said to be most skilful in Interpreting the Laws. The chief
Article of their belief is, that all things are to be attributed to God, and
Fate; yet so, that every man may in many things, of his own power, do good or
ill; though destiny may help much therein: And that the souls of men are all
incorruptible; but only the souls of good men go into other bodies, and the
souls of wicked men are sent The third of the Sadducees
But the Sadduces deny Fate, and affirm, that as God is the Author of no evil,
so he takes no heed to what men do; that a man has power to do

CHAP. VIII.

ARchelaus his Ethnarchy being now made a Province, Ant. l. 18. c. 7.
the rest of his Brethren, to wit, The year of the World, 3997. after Christ's
Nativity, 35.
Philip and Herod, who was surnamed Antipas, continued to govern their
Tetrarchies. And Salome dying, left Julia by her Testament the Toparchy which
she ruled, as also Jamnia, and a ground set with Palm Trees in Phasaelis. When
Tiberius the Son of Livia, upon the death of Augustus, (after he had reigned
seven and fifty years, six months, and two days) was made Emperor of Rome,
Philip built a City near the head of Jordan in the Country of Paneade, and
called it Caesarea; and another he built in the lower part of Gaulanitis, and
named it Tiberias, and another in Paerea on this side Jordan, which he named
Julias. Pilate being sent by Tiberius to be Governor over the Jews, caused in
the night some Ensign on which was the Image of Caesar to be brought into
Jerusalem; which thing, within three days after, caused a great tumult among
the Jews: for they who beheld this action were astonished, and considered it as
a violation of the Law of their Country, which forbids expressly, any Picture or
Image of men or other creatures to be brought into the City. At their
lamentation who were in the City, The people would not condescend to Pilate to
alter their Country-laws.
there was gathered together a great multitude out of the villages adjoining,
and they went presently to Pilate then at Caesarea, beseeching him earnestly
that the Images might be taken away out of Jerusalem, and that the Laws of
their Country might remain inviolated. When Pilate denied their suit, Pilate
sitting in his Tribunal-seat, called all the Jews together before him, as
though there he would have given them an answer: but on the sudden a company of
armed Soldiers (for so it was provided) compassed the Jews about on all sides:
The Jews were hereat amazed, Pilate admiring the constancy of the Jews in their
Religion, sent the Statues from Jerusalem.
seeing that which they expected not. Then Pilate told them, that except they
would receive the Images of Caesar he would kill them all; and to that end made
a sign unto the Soldiers to draw their swords. The Jews, as if they had agreed
together, fell all down at once, and offered their naked necks to the stroke of
the sword, crying out that they would rather lose their lives, than suffer
their Religion to be profaned. Pilate admiring the constancy of the people in
their Religion, presently commanded the said Ensigns to be taken out of the
City of Jerusalem.

After this, he caused another tumult among them; for they have a sacred
Treasure called Corban, The year of the World, 3998. after Christ's Nativity,
39.
which Pilate resolved to make use of to bring water into the City, four
hundred furlongs off: for this cause the people murmured; so that when Pilate
came to Jerusalem, they flocked about his Tribunal to make their complaint.
Pilate foreseeing a tumult, caused Soldiers secretly armed to mingle themselves
among the people in private apparel, Pilate beats the seditious with clubs.
and commanded them not to use their swords, but to beat those with clubs whom
they saw make such clamours. And when he had thus plotted The year of the
World, 4001. after Christ's Nativity, 36.
died miserably. The multitude amazed at the calamity of those that were slain,
held their tongues. For this cause Agrippa Son of Aristobulus, whom Herod the
King his Father put to death, Agrippa Aristobulus's Son hates Tiberius, and
insinuates himself into Caius Caligula's friendship.
went to Rome, and accused him to Caesar. Tiberius not admitting his
accusation, he remained still at Rome, and sought the favor of other great men
there, and especially he courted Caius the Son of Germanicus, he being yet a
private person: and upon a certain day, having invited him to a banquet, he
stretched forth his hands, and openly prayed Almighty God in stead of Tiberius
Caesar he might see him Lord of all the world. Tiberius having notice hereof by
one of his familiar friends, caused Agrippa to be imprisoned; where Tiberius,
which was six months after. Tiberius reigned 22 years six months, and 3 days.
After he was dead (having reigned two and twenty years, six months, and three
days) Caius Caesar, who succeeded him in the Empire, freed him from prison, The
year of the World, 4001. after Christ's Nativity, 39.
and gave him the Tetrarchy of Philip, who was newly deceased, and the title
Agrippa came into his Kingdom, Herod the Tetrarch began to envy his estate; and
Herodias his wife still urged him forward, in hope that he should be made a
King also: for (said she) thou want that dignity only through slothfulness,
because thou would not go to Caesar: Caius Caesar gives the Tetrarchy to
Agrippa, (...)'s Son, and makes him a King.
for if Agrippa be made a King, being before but a private man, how can thou
doubt to be made a King, who art already a Tetrarch? Herod herewith persuaded,
went to Caius Caesar, who greatly reproached his ambition, insomuch as he fled
into Spain: for Agrippa had followed him to Rome to accuse him before Caesar;
and Caius gave him Herod's Tetrarchy. And so Herod remained in Spain with his
wife till his death. Ant. l. 18. (...).
Herod and his wife remain in Spain.


CHAP. IX.
The Emperor Caius orders Petronius Governor of Syria to constrain the Jews
by arms to receive his Statue into the Temple. The year of the World, 4002.
after Christ's Nativity, 40.
Petronius forbears to do it. The death of Caius saves him from punishment.
Caius Caesar so abused his Authority, Ant. lib. 18. c* 15.
that he would be thought to be a god, and so called. Caius Caesar calls and
reputeth himself a God.
Also he put many Noble men of his Country to death by his cruelty; which he
likewise extended even to Judaea: for he sent Petronius with an Jerusalem,
commanding him to set his Statues in the Temple; and if the Jews refused to
receive them, The fear the Jews had of Petronius's Army.
that those who withstood him should be put to the sword, and the rest led away
captive. Almighty God did otherwise dispose this proud commandment. But
Petronius accompanied with three Legions, and many assistants out of Syria,
came with all speed from Antioch to Judaea: many of the Jews would not believe
any war toward, notwithstanding that they heard a general report thereof: and
they that believed it, could not bethink themselves of any means to resist.
Suddenly all were in a great fear; for the Army was now come to Ptolemais, The
description of Ptolemais.
which City is situate by the Sea-shoar in Galilee, in a fair Field; and on the
East Side it is compassed with Mountains, distant from it threescore furlongs,
Galilee; on the South Side it is invested with Mount Carmel, which is distant
an hundred and twenty furlongs: on the North-side it is environed with an
exceeding high Mountain, which the Inhabitants call the Tyrians Ladder: this
Mountain is an hundred paces distant from the City. Two miles from this City,
there is a River running by, called Pelus, a very little one, near which is the
admirable Sepulcher of Memnon, Sand like Glass near Memnon's Sepulcher.
which is a hundred cubits high and of a concave form. In this place is seen a
sort of Sand as transparent as Glass, which many ships carry away for Balast;
but though they empty the place of it, yet that place is presently after
covered with the like sand again. For there are winds which as it were on
purpose, carry this sand from the higher places round about it thither; and
this

Now the Jews with their wives and children gathered themselves together in the
field where the City Ptolemais is situate, and humbly besought Petronius not to
violate their Country-laws, but to have compassion on them. Petronius seeing
the multitude that humbly sued to him, and how earnestly they sought his
favor, left Caesar's statues at Ptolemais, and himself went from thence to
Galilee, and at Tiberias called all the Jews and Nobility together, Petronius
certifieth the Jews of the Romans power and Caesar's threats.
he represents to them the power of the Caesar's threatenings ought to be to
them; adding moreover, that the Jews supplication was indeed a contumely,
seeing all Nations under the dominion of the Romans (the Jews only excepted)
had already placed Caesar's Statues in their Temples among those of their gods:
and herein they did as it were revolt from the Emperor, and affront him their
Governor who represented his person. They answered, it was against the Laws
and Customs of their Country: for it was not lawful for them to have the Image
of God, much less of a man; and that they were not only forbidden by the Law to
have an Image in the Temple, but also to have it in any profane place.
Petronius replied, if you observe your Laws so religiously, I must also observe
my Lord's command; for if I do not, but spare you, Petronius said; Are ye then
prepared and minded to fight against Caesar? The Jews answered, No, we every
day offer sacrifices for Caesar and the Romans. But if Caesar must needs place
his Image in the Temple, he must first kill us all with our wives and children.
The constancy of the Jews.
Hereat Petronius greatly marvelled, and was moved to compassion when he beheld
the constancy of the Jews in their Religion, and so great a multitude prepared
to die for it. And for that time they departed, nothing being done. The next
day following he assembled only the Nobility of the Jews, Petronius once more
assembleth the Jews, and threatens them.
and spoke to them both generally and one by one, exhorting them to obey
Caesar's command, and sometime admonishing them, otherwhile threatening them,
and putting them in mind of the power of the Romans, and Caesar's indignation,
and that he must of necessity do as he was commanded. But they were moved by
none of these. Whereupon Petronius, fearing the ground would be left untilled,
(for it was now seed-time, and all the people had remained idle in the City for
fifty days space) calling them together, he said, that he would go about a
thing which might greatly endanger him self. Petronius sends to Caesar and
signifies the Jews supplication.
For (said he) I will either (God assisting me) appease Caesar's wrath, or else
I will lose mine own life to save such a multitude as you are. And dismissing
the people, who made daily prayers to God for him, he led his Army from
Ptolemais to Antioch, from whence he presently sent to Caesar in all haste,
recounting Judea, and that all the whole Nation made supplication to him; whose
request and humble suit if he denied, he must utterly destroy the men and their
Country; for they remained resolute in their Countrey-religion, and vehemently
resisted any new Law. Caius writ an answer of these Letters to Petronius,
threatening him, that it should cost him his life, because he made no more haste
to execute his command. The messengers that brought these Letters, were tossed
in a tempest upon the Sea three whole months together; Petronius receives
letters of Caesar's death.
but others coming after them to bring news of Caius's death, had a prosperous
wind: so Petronius received the Letters of Caius Caesar's death twenty seven
days before the other threatening Letters came.

CHAP. V.
The Roman Army declares Claudius Emperor. Of the Reign and Death of Agrippa.
Caius Caesar being assassinated, The year of the World, 4005. after Christ's
Nativity, 43.
after he had reigned three years and six months, Claudius was made Emperor by
the Army which was at Rome. The Senate by the instigation of the Consuls
Sentius Saturninus, and Pomponius Secundus, commanded three Legions of Soldiers
to keep the City, during the Council holden in the Ant. lib. 19. cap. 3.
and abhorring Caius Caesar's cruelty they determined to fight against
Claudius, and to reduce the Empire to the ancient Government; that as
before-time, so for ever after, Caius reigned three years and six months.
those should rule that the Senate judged worthy. It chanced that at this time
Agrippa came to Rome, and the Senate sent to him, requesting him to come and
take place in their Council. Claudius also desired him to take part with the
Army, intending to use his help where need required. Agrippa is chosen both
betwixt the Senate and Claudius for an arbiter.
Agrippa perceiving that Claudius was in a manner already Emperor for his
power, he took part with him; who presently sent him as Ambassador to the
Senate, to tell them his purpose; how that first of all, the Soldiers, whether
he would or no, set him in that dignity; and it had been in him an undiscreet
part, to have forsaken such an offer from the Soldiers, who Caius Caesar's
death. The Senates answer to Agrippa.
Agrippa carried this message to the Senate, who answered, (as though they
trusted to their Soldiers and the Justice of their Cause) that they would not
thrust themselves into voluntary bondage, Claudius receiving this answer, sent
Agrippa again to tell them, that nothing could cause him to abandon them by
whom he was made Emperor: and Massacres, for the obstinacy of some few.
Agrippa did this message also to the Senate; Fellow Soldiers, what should move
us to massacre our Friends, and Kindred, and Parents, who follow Claudius?
especially, seeing we have an Emperor with whom we can find no fault; unto
whom we should rather go forth with Congratulations, than with Arms. When he
had said this, he passed thorough the midst of the Court, and all the Soldiers
followed him.

The Senate, The Senate follow the Soldiers to Claudius.
being thus left desolate, and abandoned by their Forces, began to be in great
fear; and seeing it was no standing out for them, they followed the Soldiers,
and went to Claudius. Before the City Walls, there met them some that
endeavour-to show themselves dutiful to Claudius for his Fortunes sake; who,
having their Swords Caesar understood any thing of their coming, had not
Agrippa hastened to advertise him of the matter. He told him, that if he did
not presently appease the Soldiers fury, now raging against the Citizens, all
the Nobility would presently be destroyed, and he should be left Emperor of a
desolate place. When Claudius heard this, Claudius honorably entertains the
Senate.
he repressed the Soldier's fury, and very honorably received the Senate into
his Camp; and went forth presently with them, and offered Sacrifice to God (as
the manner is) for the good Estate of the Empire, and to give him thanks for
that Sovereignty which he held of him. Agrippa's Kingdom.
Also, he presently made Agrippa King of all his Father's Dominions; giving him
likewise, all that Augustus had given Herod, The year of the World, 4008. after
Christ's Nativity, 46.
to wit, Trachonitis and Auranitis, and besides them, another Country, called
Lysania; and published this his Gift by Edict to the people, and commanded the
Senate to engrave that Donation in Brazen Tables, and to place it in the
Capitol. Moreover, he gave the Kingdom of Chalcis to his Brother Herod, who was
become also his Son-in-law by the marriage of Bernice, his Daughter. Agrippa
now received greater Revenues of his Kingdom than he could desire; which he
spent not vainly, but in building such a Wall about Jerusalem, as, had he
finished it, the Romans could never have taken it: Ant. lib. 19. cap. 5.
But before he could end that work, he died in Caesarea; having reigned three
years with the Title of King, Agrippa after he had reigned three years in
Caesarea dies.
and other three years before with that of Tetrarch. He left behind him three
Daughters, which he had by Cypris; Bernice, Mariamne and Drusilla; and one Son
by the same Wife named Agrippa; who, Claudius reduced the Kingdom into a
Province, and made Cuspius Fadus Governor thereof. After whom succeeded
Tiberius Alexander; who nothing violating the Laws of the Nation, Herod after
he had reigned in Chalcis, dies.
ruled them in Peace. After this, Herod, King of Chalcis, died; leaving behind
him two Sons, which he had by his Brother's Daughter Bernice; to wit,
Bernicianus and Hircanus; and by his first Wife Mariamne, Ant. lib. 19. cap. 7,
8.
Aristobulus. His other Brother also, Aristobulus, died a private person,
leaving one Daughter, Jotapa. And these were the Posterity of Aristobulus, Son
of King Herod by Mariamne, Alexander and Aristobulus,'s Genealogy.
whom he put to death: But his elder Brother Alexander's Posterity reigned in
the greater Armenia.

CHAP. XI.
Of diverse Tumults in Judaea and Samaria.
AFter the death of Herod, who reigned in Chalcis, Claudius created Agrippa,
the Son of the former Agrippa, The year of the World, 4011. after Christ's
Nativity, 49.
King of Chalcis, his Unkle's Kingdom: And Cumanus was made Ruler of the other
Province after Tiberius Alexander; under whom many new tumults and calamities
befell the Jews. For when they were assembled together at the Feast of
Unleavened bread in Jerusalem, the Roman Soldiers standing in the Porch of A
filthy fact and speech of a Soldier against the Jews on a Festival day.
lest the people gathered together should make any tumult) one of the Soldiers
taking up his coat, turned his bare buttocks against the Jews faces, speaking
words as unseemly as was his gesture. At which insolence the whole multitude
began to murmur; and they flocked about Cumanus, requesting him to punish the
Soldier for his misdemeanour: And some of them, rash young men, and prone to
Sedition, began to revile the Soldiers, and threw stones at them. Cumanus
fears the people's (...).
Cumanus, fearing that the whole multitude of the Jews would violently move
against him, called to him many armed Soldiers, and sent them to seize the
Gates of the Temple. Some ten thousand men thronged to death.
The Jews being in great fear, fled, and left the Temple; and there was such a
throng, that as they hasted to flee, above ten thousand people The year of the
World, 4014. after Christ's Nativity, 52.
for near Bethoron, one Stephanus, Servant to Caesar, carrying some rich
household stuff, was robbed of it in the Highway. But Cumanus sending for those
in the Villages next adjoining, in order to discover the Thieves, commanded
them to be bound and brought to him, because they had not taken the Thieves: In
one of which Villages a certain Soldier finding the Book of the Holy Scripture,
A Soldier cuts the Book of the Holy Scripture in pieces and burns it
cut it in pieces, and burnt it. Hereupon all the Jews of this Country
gathered themselves together from all places, being no less incensed, than if
they had seen their Country set on fire; and carried by zeal for their
Religion, they forthwith went to Caesarea, to Cumanus, there beseeching him,
that the Soldier, who had affronted God and their Law, might not escape
unpunished. The Soldier executed, that burned the Bible.
Cumanus perceiving that the Jews would not be appeased without

At the same time there arose a great difference between the Galileans and
Samaritans; A Galilean slain in Samaria.
for at a Village called Geman, situate in the great Plain of Samaria, a
certain Galilean, of the number of the Jews that came to the Feast, was slain:
For which fact many Galileans joined together, to be revenged of the
Samaritans: And the Principal of the Country went to Cumanus, requesting him,
before any more harm were done, to go into Galilee, and punish the Authors of
this Murder. But Cumanus being busied in greater Affairs, sent them away
without granting their request. When this murder was known in Jerusalem, all
the multitude left the solemnity of the Festival, Samaria, Eleazar and
Alexander, two Princes of the Jews, exercise much cruelty.
refusing to be restrained by the Magistrates. Of this their Tumult and
Sedition, the Son of Dinaeus, called Eleazar, and one Alexander, were Captains;
who, with violence entering the Borders of the Country of Lacrabatana, killed
man, woman and child, and burnt the Towns. When Cumanus heard this, he took the
Cavalry of Sebaste, and went to help them that were thus oppressed; and he
killed and made Prisoners many of them who took part with Eleazar. Now the
Magistrates of Jerusalem went out to the rest of the Jews which so wasted
Samaria, clothed in sackcloth, and ashes upon their heads, and beseeched them
not to seek revenge upon the Samaritans, lest thereby they moved the Romans to
destroy Jerusalem; but to be merciful to their Country, the Temple, their
Wives and Children, and not at once hazard Conspiracy in Robbery.
and overthrow their whole Country and Nation in revenging the death of one
Galilean. The Jews hereby were pacified, and departed. At the same time there
were many that made it their Trade to rob and steal (as most commonly people by
long peace grow insolent) so that they robbed in every part of the Country,
and the strongest and most audacious oppressed those that were weaker. Hereupon
the Samaritans went to Tire, to pray Numidius Quadratus, Governor of Syria, to
revenge them of those that so robbed and spoiled their Country. The chief men
of the Jews went thither also; and Jonathas, the Son of Ananus, who was High
Priest, defended the Jews against the Samaritans Accusation; affirming, the
Samaritans to have been cause of that tumult by killing the Galilean; and that
Cumanus was cause of the rest of their Quadratus for that time sent away both
Parties, promising them that when he came into their Country, he would
diligently enquire of the matter: And coming from thence to Caesarea, he
crucified all those whom Cumanus had made Prisoners. Quadratus Governor of
Syria, hears the Samaritans and Jews.
And departing from thence to Lydda, he heard the Samaritans complaints, and
sent for eighteen men, whom he understood for certain to have been in that
broil, and beheaded them, and sent the two Highpriests, Jonathas and Ananias,
Quadratus gives Sentence betwixt the Jews and Samaritans.
and his Son Ananus, with some of the most considerable Jews, to Caesar; and
also, the chief of the Samaritans. He likewise commanded Cumanus and Celer the
Tribune, to go to Rome, and justify themselves to Claudius, for that which
they had done in that Country.

Lydda to Jerusalem; and finding there the multitude celebrating the Feast of
Unleavened Bread, without any tumult or disorder, he returned to Antioch.
Claudius's Sentence against some Samaritans, Cumanus and Celer.
Caesar at Rome hearing the Allegations of Cumanus, and the Samaritans (Agrippa
was also there, earnestly defending the Cause of the Jews; as also Cumanus was
assisted by many Potentates) he pronounced sentence against the Samaritans, and
commanded three of their chief Nobility to be put to death, and banished
Cumanus, and sent Celer the Tribune bound to Jerusalem, that the Jews might
draw him about the City, and then cut off his head. This done, he sent Faelix,
Brother to Pallas, to govern Judaea, Samaria and Galilee. And he preferred
Agrippa from Chalcis, to a greater Kingdom; making him King of that Province,
whereof Philip had been Tetrarch; to Claudius dies, and Nero succeeds him.
Trachonitis, Batanaea and Gaulanitis; adding thereunto the Kingdom of Lysania,
and the Tetrarchy whereof Varus had been Governor. Claudius having reigned
thirteen years, eight months, and thirty days, departed this life, leaving Nero
to succeed him, The year of the world, 4014. after Christ's Nativity* 52.
whom by the persuasions of his Wife Agrippina he adopted to the Empire, though
Britannicus, by his former Wife Messalina; and a Daughter called Octavia, whom
he married to Nero: He had also another Daughter by Agrippina, named Antonia.
How Nero abused his Wealth and Felicity; and how he slew his Brother, Nero
kills his Brother, his Mother and Wife.
Mother and his Wife, and afterward raged against all his Kinddred; and how in
a mad vein he became a Player on a Stage; because it requires a long
Narration, I will speak nothing thereof.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Tumult in Judaea under Felix.
BUt I think my self to relate particularly the Actions of this Emperor
toward the Jews. The year of the World, 4018. after Christ's Nativity, 56.
He made Aristobulus, Herod's Son, King of the lesser Armenia; and added to
Agrippa's Kingdom, four Cities, and the Territories belonging unto them: Two of
them, Abila and Julias, were in the Country of Peraea; the other, Tarichaea
and Tiberias, Ant lib. 20. cap. 11.
were in Galilee: And he made Felix Governor over the rest of Judaea. This
Felix took Eleazar, Captain of the Thieves, after he had robbed and spoiled the
Country twenty years, Foelix surpriseth Eleazar the Captain of the Thieves,
and many others, and sends them bound to Rome.
and many more with him, and sent them bound to Caesar; and he crucified a
great number of them, who either were Thieves and his Confederates, or
Jerusalem, called Sicarii, from their short Swords, who at high Noon in the
midst of the City* killed many in every place; and especially at the
celebrating of Holy Feasts, they mixed themselves with the multitude, having
short Swords under their coats, and therewith killed those to whom they bare
any grudge; Another sort of Thieves, who at noon days went about the City to
murder men.
and when men fell down dead, they amongst the rest, cried out of the murder.
By this deceitful means they were a long time unsuspected and unknown. And
first of all, they killed Jonathan the High Priest, and after him, every day
some were slain; and the City was put in no less fear, than if it had been in a
time of War, for each man every moment expected death, and cast a diligent eye
upon those that came Jonathan the High Priest with many others slain.
and no man trusted his familiar friends; and yet were they murdered, whilst
they were looking about them to escape danger. So cunningly did these Thieves
cover and conceal their actions. Moreover, there arose another sort of
mischievous people, Ant. lib. 20. cap. 12.
who did not so much harm with their hands as the first, but with their impious
counsel more; and did no less trouble the quiet Estate of the City, than did
the Thieves. These people being Vagabonds and Juglers, desiring alteration
under pretense of Religion, made the people frantic; for they led them into
the Wilderness, affirming, that there God would show them tokens of his purpose
to set them at liberty. Foelix, perceiving that these Assemblies tended to
Rebellion, sent an Army of Horse and Foot against these people, and killed many
of them.

But a certain Egyptian, An Egyptian Prophet gathers well nigh thirty
thousand men.
a false Prophet, occasioned a far greater Massacre among the Jews than this:
for being a Magician, he came into the Country; and calling himself a Prophet,
he gathered unto him almost thirty thousand Jews, who were by his Magic Arts
seduced: and leading them from the Wilderness to Mount Olivet, he determined
from thence to go to Jerusalem, and to drive thence the Forces of the Romans,
and there to fix the seat of his Dominion over the people. He chose for his
Guard a good number of his followers. Foelix overthrows the Egyptian.
Foelix foreseeing his intent, met him with his Legions of Romans, and a great
number of other Jews; and fighting against him, the Egyptian being defeated,
fled, and many that were with him were taken and committed to Prison, and the
rest of the multitude dispersed themselves into their Country. These The
Thieves and Magicians work much mischief to many men.
another part (as it happens in a sick body) began to rise: For some
Magicians and Thieves being gathered together, exhorted the people to shake off
the Roman Yoke, and threatened present death to those that continued to suffer
so shameful a Servitude; so that they forced them who were contented with their
subjection to the Romans, The year of the World, 4020. after Christ's Nativity,
58.
to disobey them. These people being dispersed all over the Country robbed and
sacked rich men's houses; killed them, and fired the Villages; so that all
Judaea was in extreme fear of them, and every day their cruelty increased.

At this time arose another tumult at Caesarea, Ant lib. 10. cap. 13.
between the Jews that dwelt there, and the Syrians. The Jews challenged the
City to be theirs, because it was founded by Herod, who was a Jew. But the
Syrians denying not that the builder of the City was a Jew; yet affirmed, that
it ought to pass for a Greek City; for (said they) the A Fight between the Jews
and Syrians about Caesarea.
and the Greeks scorned to give place to the Jews. The Jews surpassed them in
Riches and strength of body, and the Grecians trusted to the help of the Roman
Soldiers; for a great many of the Roman Army being levied in Syria, were ready
to assist the Syrians, because of Kindred and Consanguinity. Sedition and
Slaughter among the Jews.
The Officers that commanded them endeavored to appease the Tumult, and took
those that were most seditious, and beat them, and cast them into Prison.
Foelix finding them at blows as he passed into the great Marketplace,
commanded the Jews, who had the advantage, to retire; and because they obeyed
not, he sent for Soldiers, who slew them, and plundered their Goods. The
Sedition being still on foot, he sent some of the Nobility on either Part, The
year of the World, 4024. after Christ's Nativity, 62.
to Nero, to plead their Cause before him. Festus succeeded Foelix, who
vigorously persecuted them that troubled the Country, and destroyed many
Thieves.


Of Albinus and Florus, Presidents of Judaea.
ALbinus, Ant. lib. 20. cap 15.
who succeeded Festus, followed not his steps; for there was no mischief so
great, Albinus President of Judaea, full of all wickedness.
which he was not guilty of: For, he, not only took away by force men's Goods
from them under color of Justice, and at his own pleasure exacted a greater
Tribute; but also freed and let loose any one, whom, either the Magistrates of
the City took, or his Predecessors had left in Prison, so that their Friends
would give a piece of money; and they only, who were not able to give money,
were imprisoned The Seditious bribe Albinus to wink at their Robberies.
At this time, they in Jerusalem that desired alteration, began to take
courage; and those that were rich among them feed Albinus with money, to have
his Protection: and the common people that loved not to be in quiet, were much
pleased with Albinus's Government; and each of the most wicked, had a Troop of
Thieves after him: But Albinus himself was over them all, as chief of the
Thieves; whom he used as his Guard to rob the meaner sort. They, whose houses
were sacked and spoiled, were glad to hold their peace; and they, who yet had
esscaped, were glad to be very officious toward those who deserved death, for
fear they should suffer it. In general, no men could trust one another. Every
one trembled under the Rule of so many Tyrants: And all these mischiefs were
the Seeds of the Servitude,

Notwithstanding that Albinus was of such behavior, The year of the World,
4028. after Christ's Nativity, 66.
yet Gessius Florus, who succeeded him, so behaved himself, that in comparison
of him, Albinus might have been thought a good Governor. For Albinus did all
things secretly and craftily, but Gessius committed any iniquity, how great
soever, so openly, as though he gloried in mischief; Ant. lib 20. cap. 16.
and behaved himself, not as a Ruler of the Country, but as a hangman sent to
execute Malefactors; omitting no manner of Theft, nor any means whereby he
might afflict the people. Gessius Florus succeeded Albinus, and proved worse
than Albinus.
Where he ought to have showed pity, there he was a Tyrant; and where he ought
to have been ashamed, there he showed himself shameless. No man ever could
invent more means to betray the truth, and devise more subtle ways to do The
Covetousness of Florus spoileth whole Cities.
but he wasted and spoiled whole Cities at once, and destroyed the people in
great multitudes. He was not ashamed, by the public voice of a Crier, to
proclaim it thorough the whole Country, lawful for any one that would, to rob
and steal, so that they would bring him a part of their Booty. In brief, his
Avarice was such, that the Country was almost left desolate; people forsaking
their own native home, and fleeing into strange Lands. And all the time that
Cestius Gallus was Governor of Syria, no man durst go to him, to make any
complaint against Florus. But when, at the Feast of Unleavened Bread, Gallus
came to Jerusalem, there met him a multitude of the Jews above three hundred
thousand; all beseeching him to help and succor their Florus, who was the very
Pest of their Nation. Yet Florus was so impudent, that being with Gallus, and
hearing these Outcries against him, he was no whit moved, but laughed at it.
Cestius for that time appeased the people, promising that hereafter he would
make Florus more gentle unto them, and Antioch. Florus conducted him to
Caesarea, and justified himself to him with lies, devising with himself how to
make the Jews rebel, which he thought was the safest means to cloak his
villainies: for if they continued in peace and obedience, Cestius Gallus
appeaseth the people, and promises a mitigation of Florus's severity.
he feared that some of them would accuse him before Caesar; but if he could
make them revolt, then he hoped that their great fault would shadow his
injustices. Wherefore to bring about his purpose, he every day oppressed them
with new calamities, in order to force them to rebel against the Romans. At
this time the Gentiles of Caesarea got their Cause against the Jews, before
Nero, and brought Letters to testify the Decree in their favor. The beginning
of the war of the Jews, the 12. year of Nero's Reign.
Which was the beginning of the War of the Jews, in the twelfth year of Nero
his Empire, and the seventeenth of Agrippa's reign, May.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Florus his cruelty against the Jews of Caesarea and Jerusalem.
HOw great soever the Evils were which Florus perpetrated tyrannically, Ant.
lib. 20. cap. 15.
our Nation suffered them without revolting. The causes of the War of the Jews.
But that which happened at Caesarea was as a spark that kindled the fire of War.
The Jews dwelling at Caesarea, had a Synagogue near unto a piece of ground that
belonged unto a Gentile dwelling there. The Jews often The year of the World,
4030. after Christ's Nativity, 68.
offering him far more than it was worth: but the man not only contemned their
request, but also, to their great grief, he resolved in that place to build
Taverns; and so to leave them a very strait and narrow passage to go to their
Synagogue. Some young men among the Jews, led with zeal, resisted the workmen,
Florus's perjury and deceit toward the Jews.
and would not suffer them to build. Florus hearing this, commanded the Jews to
let the workmen go forward in their work. The Jews not knowing what to do, one
John, a Publican, offered Florus eight talents to hinder the building; whom he
promised for that money to fulfill their request: and now having it, he
presently departed from Caesarea, and went to Sebaste without performing any
thing, giving as it were occasion of sedition, as though he had received money
Caesarea, a seditious person, took a great earthen vessel, and set it at the
entrance into the Synagogue, and upon it offered Birds. This fact so moved the
Jews, that they would not be pacified, because it was done in contempt of their
Religion and thereby the place was profaned. One part of the Jews that was more
modest and wise, counseled the Jews to complain to them that were in
Authority: but those who by heat of youth were prone to sedition, began
contumeliously to revile their adversaries. On the other side, the authors of
this action and the more seditious of the people of Caesarea were also prepared
to fight with them, having The conflict of the Jews with the Caesareans.
only to pick a quarrel; and so they fought together. Jucundus, General of the
Horse, that was left to keep all in quiet, presently came with Soldiers, and
commanded the Vessel to be taken away, and so endeavored to appease the
tumult: but not being able to do it through the violence of them of Caesarea;
the Jews took the Books of their Law, and retired themselves to a place called
Narbata, belonging to them, which was distant from Caesarea threescore
furlongs: from whence twelve of the chief of them, together with John the
Publican, went to Florus being at Sebaste, to complain of the injury done to
them, and to request him to assist them, and modestly put him in mind of the
eight Talents they gave him. But he presently commanded them to be bound and
imprisoned, Florus imprisoneth twelve of the chiefest Jews in Caesarea.
because they had presumed to take and carry their Law from Caesarea. Hereat
those of Jerusalem were greatly moved; but they showed it not. Whereupon
Florus, as upon set purpose to give occasion of rebellion, sent for seventeen
Talents out of the Sacred Treasury, pretending that it was to be employed in
Caesar's affairs. At this time the people were much troubled, and ran to the
Temple calling upon the name of Caesar, that he would deliver them from Florus
his tyranny. Some of them being seditious, began to curse Florus bitterly, and
took a Box, and carried it about and begged an alms for Florus; Another cause
of war raised by Florus.
which they did in derision, as who should say, he was as miserable as beggars
that have nothing. Florus for all this abated not his avarice, but was more
eager to rob the inhabitants of their goods. Caesarea, to have quieted the
sedition and removed the cause of tumults, as also he had received money to
that end; taking an Jerusalem, that with the help of the Roman Soldiers he
might effect his pleasure, and terrify the whole City.

The people to pacify him, went out in courteous sort to meet the Army,
showing themselves ready to give them the best entertainment they could, and to
receive Florus with all honor and reverence. Another occasion of the War.
But he sent before him one Capito a Centurion, with fifty horsemen; commanding
them to depart, and not to mock him with a pretense of honor, whom they had so
heynously affronted. That if they had any courage, Florus scorneth the
gratulation of the Jews.
they should flout and reproach him to his face; and not only in words, but in
deeds show, that they desired liberty. Herewithal the multitude was terrified;
and the horsemen that came with Capito assaulting them with violence, every
Florus, or did any honor to his troops: and going every one unto his house,
they past the watchful night in fear and sorrow. Florus for that night lodged
in the King's Palace. The next day he caused a Tribunal openly to be placed,
and the high Priest and all the chief of the Jews resorted thither and stood
before the Tribunal. Florus in his tribunal requires them to be yielded unto
him, who had spoken ill of him.
Then Florus sitting in the Tribunal-seat, commanded them to bring forth
presently all those, that had used any opprobrious words against him, and
threatened to be revenged on them except they did it. The Jews made answer, that
the people intended nothing but peace and quietness, and requested that they
that had offended in words, might obtain pardon. For it was no marvel in so
great a multitude, if there were some rash and foolish young men: and that it
was (...) of (...) Soldiers.
Hereat Florus's Choler was increased, and presently he commanded the Soldiers
to plunder the Marketplace (which was the higher part of the City) where
things were sold, and put all they met or found to the sword. The Soldiers who
were desirous of gain, having now authority from their Ruler, did not only sack
the place they were sent to, but also all the houses, and murdered the
Inhabitants. Florus: and he causing them to be whipped, Florus's Soldiers kill
630 Jews in one day.
afterward hanged them. There were slain on that day, of men, women and
Children (for they spared not the infants) six hundred and thirty. So horried
an action appeared so much the more insupportable to the Jews, in regard it was
a new sort of cruelty which the Romans had never exercised. Florus then doing
that which none before durst ever presume to do: for he caused Knights before
the Tribunal-seat to be whipped, and after hanged; who though they were Jews
born, yet had received that dignity from the Romans.

CHAP. XV.
Of another oppression of the Citizens of Jerusalem by Florus.
AT this time King Agrippa was gone to Alexandria, Bernice requires Florus to
pacify his displeasure against the Jews.
to see Alexander, whom Nero had sent to be ruler over Egypt. His Sister
Bernice in the mean while remained in Jerusalem; and seeing the cruelty of the
Soldiers, she was much grieved and often Florus, requesting him to abstain from
the slaughter of the Citizens. But he, neither regarding the multitude of them
that were slain, nor the dignity of her that entreated, but only his private
gain, and what he could gather by oppression and rapine, denied her request: so
that the rage of the Soldiers extended it self also against the Queen. The fury
of (...) Soldiers against Bernice.
For they did not only before her face beat and kill all that came in their
way, but they had also killed her, had she not fled into the Palace, where she
watched all night, keeping a guard about her, in fear that the Soldiers would
break in upon her. She came to Jerusalem to fulfill her vow to God: for it is
the custom, that if any be afflicted with grievous sickness, or be in any other
distress, they must abide in prayer thirty days before they offer sacrifice,
and abstain from wine, and shave their hair; which Bernice then observing, went
also barefoot to Florus his Tribunal-seat, to entreat him: but he not only
contemned, but also put her in danger of her life. This was done the sixteenth
day of May. The day after, the multitude gathered together in the upper part of
the City in the Marketplace, and with great cries complain Florus: which the
Nobility and high Priests (fearing death) apprehending, beseeched them to
abstain from such words as had already caused that calamity in the City, and
not to provoke Florus to greater indignation. The people exclaim against Florus.
And so the multitude was pacified for their sakes who entreated, and hoped
that hereafter Florus would desist from such cruelty. Florus, when he saw the
multitude quieted, was sorry: and that he might again provoke them, he
assembled together the Nobility and high Priests, telling them that it would be
an argument that the people did not seek alteration any more, Florus renews
the discontents of the people.
if they would go in courteous manner and meet the Soldiers which were coming
from Caesarea, Florus's subtilty and treason.
whereof there were two Legions. Having thus assembled the Jews together to

Then all the Priests and Levites brought forth the holy vessels and ornaments
of the Temple, The exhortation of the Priests and Princes to the people.
and with Harps, songs, and musical instruments came before the multitude, and
on their knees conjured them by the care, that they ought to have of Florus all
occasion of violence, and save your Country from ruin, and your selves from
further calamities.

With these persuasions they mollified the obstinacy of the Jews, and also
persuaded many of the seditious people, some with threats, and some with
reverence of themselves to be pacified. And so they going before, all the
people followed, and went out to meet the Roman Soldiers. At their coming near
them they saluted them; who answering nothing again, those of the Jews that
were seditious, began to rail against Florus, The event shows Florus's intent
and counsel.
by whose order this was done: whom presently the Soldiers apprehending, beat
them with clubs; and the rest flying, the Roman horsemen pursued The slaughter
of the Jews.
one tumbling upon another. There was a great throng in the gates of the City;
for every one hasting and striving to get in, hindered themselves and others.
Many died most miserably in the throng, and some were stifled, and some pressed
to death and trodden upon; so that their neighbors coming to bury them, could
not know them. The Soldiers also cruelly assaulted them, killing all that they
could come to, and hindered the people from going in by the gate called Bezetha,
The seditious for fear lest Florus should seize their spoils, flee to the Temple
because they desired first to recover the Temple and the Castle called Antonia.

At the same time Florus coming with a party of Soldiers out of the Palace
pursued Florus takes the spoils, and enters the Temple.
who being pestered with stones and darts cast from aloft, could not resist the
people, who on every side came against them, but retired themselves to the rest
of the army at the King's Palace. Those that were seditious, fearing that
Florus would again assault them, Florus seeing the Jews in expugn^ble in the
Temple, (...) his violence, and (...) a band behind him, goes to Caesarea.
and by the Castle Antonia get entrance into the Temple got upon the Galleries
that reached from the Porch of the Temple to Antonia, and beat them down,
hereby to defeat the covetousness of Florus, who greedily gaped after the
sacred Treasure, and strived to enter by Antonia into the Temple to take it:
but seeing the Porches beaten down, he offered no more violence. And calling
Florus, as he was requested, changing the garrison, with the rest of the army
went to Caesarea.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Politianus the Tribune: King Agrippa's speech to the Jews, exhorting them
to
FLorus yet devised another way to stir the Jews to rebellion: for he sent word
to Cestius that the Jews were revolted, impudently belying them to have
committed that which indeed they endured at his hands. The Nobles of Jerusalem
and Bernice certified Cestius of all that Florus had done. Cestius (...),
President of (...) consulteth with the Princes what were ^est to be done.
He receiving Letters from both parties, deliberated with his Officers what to
do. Some counseled Cestius to go into Judea with an army, and punish the Jews,
if they were revolted; and if they were not, then to confirm them in their
obedience. Yet it pleased him better to send some about him thither before, to
bring him true news of their estate, and what had Politianus is sent to
Jerusalem and meets with Agrippa
So he sent Politianus the Tribune, who in his way met with Agrippa in Jamnia
as he was returning from Alexandria, and told him all, for what, and from whom
he was sent. Here also were present the Priests and the chief of the Jews, to
welcome Agrippa; and having saluted him as courteously as they could, they
presently bewailed the misery which had befaln their Nation, and the cruelty of
Florus. Which although Agrippa compassionated, yet he made as if he were angry
with the Jews whom he greatly pitied; purposing hereby to allay their passions
in stead of further irritating them by testifying the same sentiments to
revenge. All the better sort, who for the sake of their lands and estates
desired quietness, well perceived that the Kings reprehension was not of
malice, but for their good.

Also the people of Jerusalem went out to meet the King threescore furlongs
off, The multitude of the people go out to meet Agrippa and Politianus.
and received him and Politianus very courteously; yet the women lamented the
death of their husbands slain, and with tears moved the whole multiude to
sorrow, who besought Agrippa to have compassion on their Nation, and entreated
also Politianus to go into the City, and behold what Florus had done. There
they showed him the Marketplace desert, and the houses destroyed; and by means
of Agrippa they persuaded him to go round about the City as far as Siloa, only
with one man, and behold with his eyes what Florus had done, and that they were
obedient to the Romans in all things, Politianus assembleth the people, and
inciteth them to peace, and after returns to Cestius.
and only were enemies to Florus who had used them so cruelly. Politianus
having gone about the whole City, ascended into the Temple The Jews require the
King, that (...) be some Ambassadors sent to Rome to complain of Florus to
Nero.
and so he returned to Cestius. After his departure, the multitude of the Jews
came to Agrippa and the high Priests, requesting them to send Ambassadors
against Florus to Nero, because otherwise they should give occasion to think it
a voluntary rebellion, by not complaining of such murders: For Florus would
make him believe that they had rebelled, except they went to him to show that
Florus gave first occasion; and it was certain that the multitude would not be
quieted, if any one hindered that Embassage. Agrippa thought it would be an
hateful matter to send Ambassadors to Rome to accuse Florus; and on the other
side he perceived, that it was to no purpose to contradict the Jews, who were
ready now to rebel: wherefore calling the people together he made a speech to
them, having seated his sister Bernice in an eminent place in the house of the
Asmoneans. The porch wherein he called them together, was in such a place that
it overlooked all the higher part of the City, for there was only a bridge
between it and the Temple, which joined this and that together; and there he
spoke to the Jews in manner following: Agrippa's (...) to the Jews.
If I saw that you were resolved to make war against the Romans, and that the
better part of the the people were not inclined to peace, I would not have come
unto you, nor have presumed to have counseled you in any thing. For it is in
vain to give others are moved with a rash and unadvised desire of liberty, and
others are drawn by Agrippa striveth to make the common sort flexible and
attentive.
if he hear that which displeases him, and I will tell you nothing but that
which seems expedient for you. For they that are so bent to rebellion, that
they will not be recalled, may for all my words continue in the same mind
still. And I will speak nothing at all, except you will all keep silence. I
know many seek to aggravate the injuries that are done by the Rulers of this
Country, and highly commend and extol liberty: yet before I begin to declare
unto you the difference between you and those against whom ye purpose to make
war, I must first divide and separate two things which you think inseparable.
It behooves to honor the Magistrate, and not to provoke him by injury.
for you ought to show your selves humble and dutiful to those that are in
authority, and not exasperate and provoke them to wrath by reproachful
speeches. For in reviling them for small offenses, you incite against you those
whom you so revile: and whereas before they only did you a little injury, and
with some shame, now being moved by your resistance, they will openly set upon
you and destroy you. There is nothing that so restrains Agrippa excuses
Caesar and the Romans.
are grievous to you: yet all the Romans do not oppress you, nor Caesar,
against whom you must take arms. For they command no cruel Governors to come
to you; nor can they who are in the furthest part of the West, easily know what
is done in the East, or indeed be exactly informed thereof. And truly it is a
thing most against reason to take arms for so small a cause; especially, when
they against whom you take arms know nothing of the matter. But there is reason
to hope, Depulsion of the Jews liberty, which they so vehemently seek
that these matters you now complain of will not be always so: For there will
not be always the same Governor; and it is credible, that they who succeed
this, will Pompey entered this Land: but then our ancestors and their Kings far
exceeding you in riches, strength of body and courage, were not able to
withstand a small part of the Roman forces; and do you who are their
successors, and far weaker than they, having succeeded them in subjection,
think that you are able to resist all the whole power of the

The Athenians, The example of the Athenians, and others who obey the Roman
Empire.
who sometime to preserve the liberty of Greece, feared not to set their own
City on fire, and with a small fleet defeated that proud Xerxes, whom they
forced to flee with one ship (though he had such a navy that the seas had
scarce room for one ship to sail by another, and all Europe was not able to
receive his army) and got that famous victory over Asia, The Lacedaemonians.
near the little Isle of Salamina, yet now are subject to the Romans, and that
City, the Queen of all Greece, is now ruled by the commands it receives from
Italy. The Macedonians.
The Lacedaemonians also, after they had gotten such a victory at the
Thermopyles, and under their General Agesilaus sacked Asia, acknowledge now the
Romans for their Lords. The Macedonians also, who had before their eyes the
valor of Philip, Alexander, The comparison of the Romans force with the Jews
weakness.
and promised themselves the Empire of the whole world, now patiently bear this
change, and obey them whom fortune has made their masters. Many other Nations,
who for their power and strength have far more cause than you to seek their
liberty, yet patiently endure to serve the Romans: But you only think it a
disgrace to obey them, The Romans have brought the whole world under their
government and have sought another world beyond the Ocean sea.
who are Lords of the whole World. And where are the armies that you trust in
or your navy to make you masters of the Romans Seas? Where are your treasures
to effect what you intend? Think you that you are to war against the Egyptians
or Arabians? and do you not consider the bounds of the Romans Empire? Do you
not consider your own inability? Know you not that your neighbour-nations have
often by force taken your City? and that the forces of the Romans have passed
through the whole world unconquered, and Euphrates, and toward the North beyond
Ister, and toward Euphrates and toward the North beyond Ister, and toward
the South beyond the Wilderness of Libya, and toward the West beyond Gades;
they have found another World beyond the Ocean, and with an army entered
Britain, where never any came before. Are you richer than the Gauls, stronger
than the Germans, wiser than the Greeks; are you more in number than the whole
world beside? What hope can you have to encourage you against the Romans? But
some of you will say, that bondage is a grievous thing. But how much more
should the Greeks think so, that were thought to be the noblest Nation under
heaven, and had such large dominions; yet now obey the Roman Governors? as
also the Macedonians do, who have greater cause than you to seek their liberty?
500 Cities of Asia obey the Romans.
What shall I say of the five hundred Cities of Asia? do they Taurus, the
inhabitants of Hellespont, and Pontus, and about Maeotis, who in times past had
no masters, no, not of their own Nation, yet now three thousand Soldiers keep
them in awe; and forty long Galleys keep peaceably those seas that were never
sailed on before? What think you, the Bythinians, Cappadocians, and those of
Pamphilia, Lydia and Cilicia, could say for their liberty, who notwithstanding
peaceably pay tribute to the Romans? What of the Thracians, whose country is
five days journey in breadth, and seven in length, far more inaccessible and
stronger than yours, by reason of the mountains of Snow and Ice? yet do they
obey two thousand Romans, who are in garrison? Beside them the Illyrians, whose
country Dalmatia and Ister, are kept in obedience only by two Legions, with
help of whom they also resist the Dacians. The Dalmatians themselves, who have
so often attempted their own liberty, and still as their wealth increased
rebelled, are now in peace under one Legion of the Romans. The defense of
France.
Nay, if any have reason to rebel, it is the Gauls, whose country is by nature
strong, being on the East Side compassed with the Alps, on the North with the
River of Rhene, on the South with the Pyrenaean mountains, on the West with the
Ocean. Notwithstanding, having amongst them three hundred and five Nations, and
as it were the very fountain of plenty of all sort of goods and commodities
wherewith they enrich the whole World; yet do they pay tribute to the Romans,
and account that their happiness depends upon that of the Romans; and that
neither for want of

Neither could the Spaniards, The Spaniards subject to the Romans.
though Gold grew in their Country, keep themselves from being subject to the
Romans. Nor the Portugals and the Warlike Cantabrians, for all the distance of
Sea and Land between them and Rome. The Ocean, whose waves beating against the
shore, terrify the Inhabitants adjoining, could not stay them, but they passed
it; and carried an Army beyond the Pillars of Hercules, and passed the tops of
the Pyrenaean Rome, the Romans have left only one Legion for Garrison amongst
them. The Germans multitude, virtue and huge stature.
Which of you has not heard of the multitude of the Germans; whose Virtue, and
mighty bodies, I think you have often seen, for in every Country the Romans
have them for Captives: Yet they, whose Country is so large, having hearts far
bigger than their bodies, and souls that contemn death, and are more cruel than
brute beasts; yet are they now limited by the River Rhine, and kept in
subjection by eight Legions of Romans; and those that were taken were made
slaves, and the rest chose rather to save themselves by flight than fight.
Moreover, you who have such confidence in the Walls of Jerusalem consider the
Walls of Britain; The Britains subject to the Romans.
which Country, though compassed The Parthians.
and four Legions keep that so populous an Island. What shall I say more, when
the Parthians, a most Warlike people; who lately reigned over so many Nations,
and abound in so much Wealth, are now compelled to send Hostages to Rome; Nay,
you may see all the Nobility of the East at Rome; where, with the Pretext of
Peace, they shadow their Captivity. The Carthaginians made subject by Scipio's
hands.
Almost all the Nations under the Sun tremble and dread the Roman Puissance;
and will you only War against them? Do you not consider what befell the
Carthaginians, who boasted themselves of that great Hannibal, and were sprung
from the Noble Race of the Phenicians; yet, at last, were destroyed by Scipio?
Neither the Syrenaeans, who descended from the Lacedaemonians, The Romans,
govern the Moors.
nor all the Race of the Marmaridans, extending as far as (the Nations whereof
can hardly be numbered) which from the Sea Atlantic, and Hercules's Ethiopia,
and innumerable Cities: Who, besides that, they pay so much Fruits and Corn to
the Romans, as for eight months in every year, will keep and sustain all the
people of Rome, do also pay Tribute; and moreover, assist them any way they
can, and never murmur at it, as you do: And there is only one Legion left to
keep them in obedience. But what should I need to tell you of Foreign
Examples, to convince you of the Power of the Romans, seeing you may well
understand it by what they have done in Egypt, your neighbor Country; which
reaching to Aethiopia and Arabia the Happy, and bordering upon India, and
having in it an infinite number of people, besides the Inhabitants of
Alexandria (which is easy to be counted, Alexandria acknowledges the power of
the Romans
by the Tribute paid of every person by the Poll) yet they disdain not to live
under the Dominion of the Romans. Alexandria is both populous and very rich, in
length thirty Furlongs, in breadth ten, and pays more Tribute in a month, than
you do in a whole year; and, besides their money, finds all Rome with Corn four
months in the year: And is on every side compassed about, either with a vast
Wilderness, by which none can pass; or the fierce Sea, which is boundless; or
with great and strong Rivers; or muddy and durty Quagmires, and Marish-grounds:
Yet all this little avails them to withstand the force of the Romans. For two
Legions only placed in the City, keep all the great Country of Egypt, and the
Nobility of Macedon in awe. Now, since all the inhabited World is subject to
the Romans, what Associates will you have from some Country not inhabited, to
aid you against the Romans? Except peradventure some of you hope for help from
beyond Euphrates, and that your Contrymen of Adiabena God's favor toward
the Romans.
if any under their Dominions should war against them. It remains then, that
you must only trust that God will help you; but you see God does assist the
Romans: For it is impossible that such an Empire should have been without the
help of God. Besides, consider that although you were to war against far weaker
than yrur selves, yet you could not promise to your selves favorable success;
and it may so come to pass, that if you Religiously observe the custom of
Sabbaths, and in them do nothing, it will not be hard to conquer you. For so
your Ancestors found by experience with Pompey; who designed all his
Enterprises The last Argument that proves the Jews destitute of God's and
man's help, and unapt to make War.
how will you request help at God's hands, if wilfully you break his Laws? All
that begin War, either trust in Humane Riches, or Divine Succor: and they that
war, having no probability to hope for any of those, wilfully lead themselves
into open destruction. But if you cannot resist the passion which transports
you, let every man with his own hands butcher his Wife and Children, and
consume this goodly Country with fire; for so you shall gain this, not to
abide the shame of a Conquest. It is good, O Friends, it is good, whilst yet
the Ship is in the Haven, to foresee and provide for future Tempests; and not
Whilst the Ship is yet in the Port, it is good to prevent the future Tempest.
when you are amidst the Waves and Surges of the Sea. They who fall into misery
not foreseen, are worthy to receive compassion; but they that run into wilful
calamity, deserve no pity, but reproach. Unless perhaps ye think that the
Romans will fight with you, on certain conditions; and that if they overcome
you, they will not use you hardly, nor fire and destroy this Sacred City, and
all the whole Nation, as they have done others. If ye be overcome, whosoever
escapes unkilled, can have no place of refuge; for all Nations either are
already subject to the Romans, Agrippa's Prophecy of the Jews future misery.
or fear that they shall be shortly. So that not only you shall be in danger,
but also all Cities wherein any Jews remain. For there is no Nation nor people
in the whole World, among whom some of your Contrymen are not, who all shall
be most cruelly put to death, if you rebel: And for the wicked counsel of a
Agrippa protests that he had omitted no counsel that he thought expedient for
the Jews.
they will not spare these things, seeing you were no more grateful unto them,
for preserving them before. I protest before God, your Holy Temple, and all the
Angels of Heaven, and our whole Country, that I have kept back no counsel
which I think profitable for you. Now, if you consider those things which are
profitable for you, ye shall live with me King Agrippa thus ended his
discourse, which his Sister Bernice, standing by him, accompanied with her
tears: And these reasons and testimonies of affection touched the hearts of the
people; so that their fury being somewhat allayed, they cried out, that they
meant not to take Arms against the Romans and Caesar; but against Florus, for
the injuries he had done them. To this, Agrippa answered; But your deeds show
that you mean War against the Romans; for you have not paid your Tribute to
Caesar, and you have beat down the Gallery which joins the Temple to the Castle
of Antonia: But if you would stop your Rebellion, repair with speed the
Gallery, and pay your Tribute; for this Fort belongs not to Florus, nor the
Money. Herewith the people were content; and ascending into the Temple with
Agrippa and Bernice, they began to re-edifie the Gallery; and the Officers went
about and gathered Agrippae stifled the beginning of the War. After this, he
began to persuade the people to obey Florus, Agrippa the King is by the people
driven out of the City with stones.
till such time as another were sent to supply his place. Herewith the
multitude was so moved, that they contumeliously reviled the King, and threw
stones at him, and drove him out of the City. The King seeing that their
Sedition would not be quieted, complaining of the injury done to him, he sent
some persons of the best rank to Florus, who was at Caesarea; that he might
choose whom he would amongst them, to gather the Tribute thorough the whole
Country. And so he departed into his own Kingdom.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Rebellion which the Jews begun against the Romans.
AT this time, some of the chief Incendiaries, assembled together, suddenly
assaulted a Castle called Massada, The Jews refuse Caesar's Sacrifices for the
prosperity of the Romans
which they took by surprise, and killed all the Romans and in their places put
a Guard of their own Company. In the Temple also, Eleazar, Son of the High
Priest Ananias, a bold and desperate young man, Captain of the Soldiers;
persuaded them who offered Sacrifices, not to offer any, but those that were
Eleazar, who at that time was General, as is before said. Wherefore all the
chief men, High Priests, and Principal of the Pharisees, assembled themselves;
and perceiving into how great danger those Rebels brought the City, they
determined to make trial of the courage of the seditious people: Wherefore,
they assembled them together before the Brazen Gate, which was in the inner
part of And first of all, they greatly complained of their rash and unadvised
Rebellion, and that they sought to stir up so great a War against their
Country; inveighing against the cause that moved them thereto, as being
without reason: Telling them, that their Ancestors, for the most part, adorned
the Temple with the Gifts of Gentiles, never refusing the Offerings of
Strangers; and not only not refused their Offerings (for that were an impious
fact,) but also placed in the Temple the Gifts that they sent, which were yet
to be seen. And that it was strange, that now only they thought to provoke the
Romans to War, by making new Laws: And besides other danger also, to make the
City guilty of a great Crime in matter of Religion, as though it were such,
wherein none might offer Sacrifice but Against those who refuse Foreign
Sacrifices.
nor any but they adore God. If we should make such a Law against any private
person, he had just cause to accuse us of Inhumanity. But now the Romans are
despised, and Caesar himself accounted profane; and it was to be feared, that
if the Jews disdained to accept of Caesar's Offerings, Caesar would hinder them
from offering any: And the City of Jerusalem would presently be accounted as an
enemy to the Empire, None of the Seditious gave ear to those that were in
Authority.
unless they presently accepted Caesar's Sacrifice; and before such time as
they heard these news, against whom this outrage was attempted. Having thus
spoken, they brought forth the most learned amongst the Priests, to recount
from time to time how their Ancestors had always accepted of the Sacrifices of
Strangers.

But none of the Mutineers gave ear to any thing that was said, Ambassadors
sent to Florus and Agrippa, against the Seditious.
and the Levites came Florus; the chief whereof was Simon, the Son of Ananias;
others also, were sent to Agrippa, of which the chief were Saul, Antipas and
Costobarus (who were all a kinn to the King) requesting them both to come with
an Army to the City, and suppress the Sedition which was raised, before it went
further. Florus was glad of these tidings; and desiring nothing more than War,
War in Jerusalem between the Seditious and those that favored Peace.
gave no answer to the Deputies. But Agrippa, willing to spare both parts, as
well the Good as the Rebels; and to preserve Judaea to the Romans, and the
Temple to the Jews; thought it not meet for him to busy himself in such
affairs, but sent three thousand Horse to aid the people against the Rebels;
Which Horse were of Auranitis, Batanaea and Trachonitis; and he made Darius
their Captain, and Philip, Son of Joakim, General of all the Army. These coming
into the City, the Nobility, with the High Priests, and the rest of the people
that desired Peace, Eleazar, endeavored, besides that which they had already,
to get also into their hands the higher part of the City. Wherefore, during the
space of seven days, there continued a great Conflict betwixt them, and either
part kept what they had. When the Celebration of the Feast called Xylophoria
was come, Xylophoria a Feast.
wherein every one carries Wood to the Temple, to keep a

Now many of the Sicarii or Thieves, who carried short Poyniards under their
Coats, went amongst the weaker multitude, and boldly followed their old
practice. By which, The King's Soldiers are overcome.
those of the King's side were forced to leave the higher part of the City;
which the Rebels presently entering, set the Palaces of Ananias, Agrippa and
Bernice, on fire; and forthwith went to the place where all Charters were kept,
purposing there to burn all Bounds and Obligations of Debtors, thereby to
defraud the Creditors; and so to join all the Debtors to their Faction, and
stir up all the poor people against the rich. The Keepers of these public
Writings fleeing, the seditious persons set all on Ananias the High Priest, and
Ezechias his Brother, and they who (as is before spoken) were sent Deputies to
Agrippa: And so the Seditious were satisfied that day with the Victory, and
firing of the houses aforesaid.

The next day, The Jews take Antonia, and burn it.
which was the fifteenth of August, they assaulted the Castle Antonia; having
besieged it two days, they took all that guarded it and killed them, and placed
in it a Garrison of their own company. This done, they went to the King's
Palace, whither Agrippa's Soldiers were fled; and dividing their Company into
four parts, they began to pull down the Walls; none of them that were within
durst come out for fear of the multitude, but went up to the Turrets of the
Palace, and killed all those that offered to come up, and many of the Thieves
under the Walls, with things that they cast down. This Conflict continued day
and night, for the Rebels thought that those within could not hold out long for
want of Victuals; and they within thought that the Seditious being wearied,
would soon give over. In the mean season, one Manahem, the Son of Judas of
Galilee (that most crafty subtle Sophister, who reproached the Jews in
Cyrenius's time for paying Tribute, and for being subject to any but to God)
taking with him certain Nobles, went to Massada, where King Herod's Armory was;
Jerusalem as King: And being thus made Head of the Rebellion, he prepared the
Battery against the King's Palace. But they wanted Engines, and could not
openly undermine the Walls, by reason of the enemies, who continually cast down
Darts upon them. Wherefore they began a Mine a great way off, till it came
under one of the Towers, which then they supported with Posts of wood; and they
set fire on the Wood supporting it, and went their way; so the Supporters being
consumed with fire, the Tower presently fell down. But those within, foreseeing
their Adversaries intent, perhaps by the shaking of the Tower; had built a Wall
behind it, to keep out the Rebels, between them and it. The Seditious Manahem
and others, that were Manahem only granted to the King's Soldiers, and to the
Jews; who, presently accepting thereof, departed, and so left the Romans in
great fear; for they were not able to resist so great a multitude, and they
thought it a shame to entreat that they might depart; besides, Manahem the
chief of the Rebels gives the King's Faction and Friends license to depart.
that it was dangerous for them, although it were granted. Wherefore, leaving
the lower place which was called Stratopedon, because it might easily be taken,
they retired into the King's Towers, whereof one was called Hippicos, the other
Phasaelus, the third Mariamne. The Rebels that were with Manahem brake
presently in to the lower part that the Romans had forsaken, and killed all
that they found there; and when they had sacked it, they set it on fire: And
this was done the sixth day of September. The Romans forsaking the Stratopedon,
flee into the King's ^orts.


CHAP. XVIII.
Of the death of Ananias the High Priest, Manahem and the Roman Soldiers.
THe next day following, Ananias the High Priest was taken in one of the
Waterconduits of the King's Palace, The death of Ananias the high Priest, of
Ezechias his Brother.
where he had hid himself, and was there killed with his Brother Ezechias, by
the Seditious: And the Rebels besieged all the Towers round about, and kept
diligent watch, lest any of the Romans should escape. But Manahem, both
Ananias, the High Priest, became so proud and insolent, that he thought none so
capable as himself for Government; and became an intolerable Tyrant. Now
Eleazar and some of his Companions assembled together, said, that it would be
shameful for them that had revolted from the Romans, only to recover their
liberty, to receive for master one of their own Nation, who, although he were
not so violent as Manahem, yet was so inferior to them. And if it were so,
that it were expedient to have one Ruler over all the rest, Manahem ought to be
the last that should be chosen to command them. Being thus agreed, they set
upon him in the Temple, where he was praying with great pomp, apparrelled like
a King, and having about him a guard of his friends in armor, Eleazar his
followers set upon Manahem, the people all took up stones to stone him, Eleazar
his followers assault Manahem in the Temple.
hoping that by his death the sedition would be extinguished. The guard of
Manahem at first made some resistance; but when they perceived the whole
multitude against them, every one shifted for himself as he could; and those
that were taken were put to death, and they that esscaped were afterward
sought for: only a few of them fled to Massada, amongst whom was Eleazar, the
son of Jairus, Manahem's kinsman, who afterward became a Tyrant there. But
Manahem fled into a place called Ophias, where he hid himself: and being taken,
he was drawn out from thence, Manahem with the Princes slain.
and after many torments put to death, and with him all the chief ministers of
his Tyranny, and particularly Absalomon, who was his chief Officer. Manahem, to
the end to extinguish sedition, but to the intent to rob and plunder more
freely.

The people indeed with many entreaties besought them to let the Romans alone,
The Romans unable any longer to resist, yield themselves.
whom they besieged; but they were so much the more earnest against them: till
being no longer able to make resistance, with the consent of Metilius their
Captain, and some other of more Authority, they sent to Eleazar, requesting him
to give them license to depart with their lives, and leave their baggage to the
Jews. He accepting their offer, sent to them Gorion, the son of Nicodemus, and
Ananias the Sadducee, and Judas the Son of Jonathas, to confirm the promise of
Metilius led away the Soldiers: and whilst the Romans had their weapons, none
of the Rebels durst attempt any of their treachery against them: but so soon
as, according to covenant, they had laid down their shields and Swords, and so
departed mistrusting nothing, Eleazar's Guard set upon them, and killed them;
they neither made resistance, nor any entreaty for their lives; only put them
in mind of their Promise and Oath. The Romans, against all Covenant and Law,
are all slain, save Metilius.
So they were all slain, save only Metilius; who, greatly entreating for his
life, and promising that he would become a Jew in Religion, and be circumcised,
they spared him. Though this was a small loss to the Romans, because there were
but a very few slain of their great, and almost infinite Army; yet it was easy
to judge, that it would cause the Ruin and Captivity of the Jews.

and was sorrowful and desolate, lamenting as though they themselves should
answer for

CHAP. XIX.
Of the great Massacre of the Jews at Caesarea, and in all Syria.
AT the same hour, on the self-same day, it happened, as it were, by God's
Providence, that the Inhabitants of Caesarea massacred the Jews that dwelt
among Caesarea: For those that escaped, Florus took, and brought them forth
bound to the people. The Jews spoil the Villages, and burn the Cities of Syria.
After this Massacre done at Caesarea, the whole Nation of the Jews was
enraged: And dividing themselves into Companies, they wasted and destroyed in
short time all the borders of Syria, and the Cities thereabout; to wit,
Philadelphia and Gebonitis, Gerasa, Pella and Scythopolis: Also, they took by
force Gadara, Hippon and Gaulanitis; pulling down some places, and firing
others. From thence they marched toward Cedasa, a City of the Tyrians, and
Ptolemais, Gaza and Caesarea; and neither Sebaste nor Ascalon could resist
them, but they also were consumed with fire. Likewise they destroyed Anthedon,
with Gaza: And most places belonging to Syria was in a most deplorable
condition, and every City was exposed to the disorders and violences of two
several Armies, each of which placed their safety in making a great Effusion of
Blood: The days were spent in bloodshed, and the nights in fear, worse than
death it self. For though they only pretended to destroy the Jews, yet were
they drawn to suspect other Nations, that followed the Jews Religion; and
because they were, as it were, All Syria full of miserable calamities.
and carried them to other places, as Conquerors. He was most renowned that had
stolen most, or killed most. There might you see in several Cities, the dead
bodies of all Ages unburied; old men, and children, and women, lying in most
shameful manner, their secret parts being uncovered. Briefly, all the Country
was filled with exceeding great calamity; and the fear of yet greater misery to
come, was unspeakable.

These were the Conflicts between the Jews and Strangers. Jews against Jews.
But afterward, making incursions upon the Borders of Scythopolis, the Jews
there dwelling, became their enemies. For they conspiring with the Citizens of
Sythopolis, and preferring their own Commodity and Security before Kindred and
Consanguinity, joined with the Gentiles against the Jews; and yet, for all
that, they were suspected for their forwardness. For the Scythopolitans fearing
that they would assault the City by night, and excuse their revolting by their
great misery, commanded all the Jews, that if they would show themselves trusty
to the Gentiles, they, with all their Children, should go into a Wood hard by.
The Jews forthwith did as they were required, suspecting nothing; and the
Scythopolitans were quiet for two days after, and did nothing: But the third
The Scythopolitans kill thirteen thousand Jews.
who finding most of them asleep, they surprised them in a moment, and killed
them all, who were in number thirteen thousand; and afterward, took their
Goods. Here I think it not amiss to speak of the death of Simon, who was the
Son of Saul, whose Race was very Noble: He was a man of great courage, and
strength of body, both which he used to the great hurt of his own Nation; Simon
daily kills many of his Contrymen in Scythopolis.
for he daily killed many Jews who dwelt near Scythopolis, and often scattered
diverse Companies, and put whole Armies to flight; but at length he had an end
worthy of his deeds, and the murder of his Contrymen. For when the
Scythopolitans had compassed the Wood about, so that none could escape their
hands, they killed the Jews in every part thereof. Simon not drawing his Sword,
made I receive, O Scythopolitans, a worthy reward for that which I have done;
who, to show my fidelity toward you, have killed so many of mine own
Contrymen: And it is a just Plague, that a strange Nation should be false to
us, who impiously forsook our own Brethren. I am not worthy to receive death
from the hands of my enemies, and therefore I will kill my self with my own;
and this death will be a sufficient Punishment for my Offenses, and a full
Argument of my magnanimity, that none of my enemies may boast of my death, nor
insult over me. When he had thus said, he beheld all his Family with compassion
and rage mixed together, as his Wife and Children, and aged Parents. Simon kills
his Parents, his Wife and Children, and at last himself.
And first, taking his Father by the hair of the head, he stood upon him, and
thrust him thorough; after him he killed his Mother, who was willing to die;
after them his Wife and Children, every one of them as it were offering their
bodies to the

CHAP. XX.
Cruelties exercised against the Jews in diverse other Cities, and particularly
by Varus.
AFter this so great A Massacre of the Jews at Scythopolis, Another Slaughter
of the Jews.
other Cities also, where they inhabited, rose against them; and two thousand
five hundred were slain at Ascalon, The Cities in Arms against the Jews.
and two thousand at Ptolemais; and the Tyrians killed diverse, and put more in
Prison: Likewise, they of Gadara and Hippon slew the most valiant, and those of
least courage they cast into Prison. Also all other Cities, who either feared
or hated the Jews, rose up against them. Only they of Antioch, Sidon and
Apamea, spared those that dwelt with them, and neither killed nor imprisoned
any of them; perhaps they stood in no fear of them if they should have risen,
because their City was so populous; yet I think they spared them only for pity
sake, because they saw they were Gerasa did no harm to the Jews amongst them;
but when they desired to depart, they conducted them safely to the end of their
Borders. In the Kingdom, also, of Agrippa much cruelty was showed against the
Jews; for he being gone to Cestius Gallus at Antioch, left the Rule of his
Country to one of his Friends named Varus, Kinsman to King Sohemus; to whom
there came seventy of the chief Nobility of the Country of Batanaea,
requesting a Garrison to repress those that should attempt Rebellion amongst
them. Varus kills seventy Jews in their journey.
Varus, instead of receiving them well, sent certain of the King's Soldiers by
night, and killed them all as they were coming to him. He committed this
Murder without Agrippa his consent, only for Avarice. But being emboldened by
this Fact, he ruined the whole Realm; Agrippa understood thereof; who, for
Sohemus's sake, durst not put him to death; but dispossessed him of his place.
In the mean while the Revolters took the Castle of Cypros, which is situate
above Jericho; The Romans yield up their Castle in Macheron to the Jews.
and after they had killed the Garrison, they destroyed the Fortress. At the
same time a multitude of Jews laid Siege before the Castle of Macheron, and
persuaded the Soldiers left in Garrison, to yield the Castle; who, fearing that
if they denied, they should be compelled thereto, delivered it to them, upon
condition, that they might quietly depart: Which done, the Jews place a strong
Garrison in it.

CHAP. XXI.
Fifty thousand Jews slain at Alexandria.
THe Citizens of Alexandria had always a quarrel against the Jews that lived
with them, since the time that Alexander the Great, for their help against the
Egyptians, permitted them to inhabit Alexandria, and to have the same
Privileges with the Grecians. This Honor and Privilege was also continued to
them by the Successors of Alexander; who also gave them a certain place in the
City to dwell in, that they Egypt was brought under the rule of the Romans,
neither Caesar, nor the following Emperors, diminished the Jews Privileges
which Alexander had given them. But there were daily contests Sedition in
Alexandria between the Greeks and Jews.
to determine of an Embassage to Nero, certain Jews mingled themselves amongst
the Greeks, and so went into the Amphitheatre: Who being espied by their
Adversaries, the Greeks cried out, that the Jews were enemies, and came as
Spies; and so they laid violent hands upon them. Some of them fled, only three
of them were taken by the Greeks, whom they drew to a place to burn them alive.
All the Jews of the City came to succor them; and Tiberius Alexander exhorts
the seditious Jews to keep peace.
if Tiberius Alexander, Governor of the City, had not appeased their fury; who
did not at first use Force of Arms against them, but sent some of their chief
men to persuade them to cease, and not to incite the Roman Army against them.
But the seditious Jews refused this advice, and mocked Tiberius: Who seeing
that they would not otherwise be appeased, sent two Legions of Romans, and five
thousand other Soldiers, who by chance came out of Lybia; and gave them charge,
not only to kill them, but also to fire their houses, and take their Goods. The
Soldiers presently went into the place called Delta (where the Jews were
gathered together) and did as they were commanded, though not without a bloody
Victory. For the Jews gathering themselves A cruel victory, wherein fifty
thousand Jews were slain.
So that all that place flowed with blood, for there were slain fifty thousand
Jews; and all the rest had been extinguished, had not Alexander (moved to
compassion by their entreaties) commanded the Soldiers to leave off; who being
obedient to him, presently departed: But the people of Alexandria were hardly
withdrawn from the Massacre, because of the hatred which they had conceived
against the Jews; and with much ado, they were withheld from tyrannizing over
the Alexandria.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Massacre of the Jews by Cestius Gallus.
CEstius Gallus now thought it time to bestir himself, Huge companies of the
Romans.
for as much as the Jews were now hated every where; and taking with him the
twelfth Legion out of Antioch, two thousand chosen Foot, and four Companies of
Horse, out of the other Legions, Antioch, three thousand Foot all Bow-men, and
three thousand Foot, sent by Agrippa, a thousand Horse, and four thousand which
Sohemus brought, whereof the third part were Horse, the rest Foot, and for the
most part Bow-men; he went toward Ptolemais. Many joined themselves to them
out of every City, who, though they were not so skilful in War as the Romans,
yet their hatred was more than theirs. Agrippa himself was there with Cestius,
Zabulon, a strong City of Galilee spoiled and burnt.
commanding those he brought. There Cestius taking a part of the Army, went to
Zabulon (which is the strongest City of Galilee, called also Andron, and parts
the Borders of the Jews from Ptolemais) and when he found it desolate of
Inhabitants (who were fled into the Mountains) but full of Riches; Tire, or
Sidon, or Beritum) and after spoiled all the Territories about it. When he had
burnt all the Villages thereabout, he returned to Ptolemais. The Syrians, and
especially those of Berith, stayed still behind to get Booties: The Jews kill
two thousand Syrians.
Which when the Jews understood, and that Cestius was departed, they took
courage, and came and set upon them, and killed of them two thousand. Cestius
departing from Ptolemais, went to Caesarea, and sent part of his Army before to
Joppa; The Romans take Joppa, and burn it, and kill eight thousand four hundred
Jews.
commanding them to keep the Town, if they could get it; and if the Townsmen
made any resistance, that then they should stay till he came with the rest of
the Army. Some of them attacked it by Sea, some by Land; by which Narbatena in
the Toparchy near Samaria, who spoiled the Country, killed a great number of
the inhabitants, robbed and burnt the villages, and carried away much booty with
them.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Cestius his Battle against Jerusalem.
Cesennius Gallus, Sephoris and other Cities of Galilee do friendly entertain
the Romans.
General of the twelfth Legion, into Galilee, and gave him as many other Troops
as he thought sufficient to conquer that nation. The strongest City of Galilee
called Sephoris opened the gates to them, and other Cities followed their
example. They that were seditious and gave themselves to robbing, retired to
the Mountain of Azamon which is situate in the midst of Galilee over against
Sephoris: These Gallus went to attacque with his Army; and so long as they kept
the higher part of the Mountain, they easily repelled the Romans, and killed
above 200 of them: but when they saw the Romans had gained a higher place than
that wherein they kept, they resisted no longer: for not being armed, they
could not stand out, and if they should have fled, they could not have escaped
the Horsemen; so that Two thousand seditious slain in Galilee by the Romans.
and above 2000 of them were slain. Gallus finding he had no more to do in
Galilee, returned with his troops to Caesarea, and Cestius with his whole Army
went to Antipatris: were understanding that a great company of Jews were
gathered together in the Tower called Aphec, Antipatris spoiled and burned.
he sent some before to attacque them: but the Jews would not abide battle, and
the Romans burnt their Tents and the Villages adjoining. Cestius going from
thence to Lydda found the City desolate; Lydda burnt.
for all the people were gone to Jerusalem, because of the Feast of
Tabernacles: C^stius planteth his Army fifty furlongs from Jerusalem.
and when he had killed fifty persons whom he found there, he fired the Town,
and went by Bethoron to Gabaon, which is but fifty furlongs distant from
Jerusalem. When the Jews saw the War draw near their The assault and victory of
the Jews against the Romans.
they went to fight with the Romans, observing no order, nor regarding the
Sabbath, which formerly they held in so great estimation: and the same fury
that made them leave their devotion, made them also victorious in the battle;
for they assaulted the Romans with such courage, that they brake their body,
and killing all that resisted, pressed into the midst thereof: and if a fresh
supply both of Horse and Foot had not come in in time, all Cestius's Army had
been in danger. There were slain five hundred and fifteen Romans, whereof four
hundred were Foot, and the rest Horse; but of the Jews only two and twenty. The
most valiant in this combat were Monobazus and Cenelaeus, Kinsmen to Monobazus
King Adiabena; and next to them Paraides Niger, and Silas a Babylonian, who had
fled to the Jews from King Agrippa, whom he had lately served. But at length
the Jews being repulsed, The courage of the Jews against the Romans.
returned to Jerusalem; and Simon the Son of Gioras attacqued the Romans, as
they were returning toward Bethoron, and slew many of the Rereward, and took
many Carts and much Baggage, which he brought into the City. Cestius stayed
three days in the Field, and the Jews kept the high places, observing which way
he would go, with a purpose to set upon the Romans if they stirred.


Of the Siege of Jerusalem by Cestius, and of the Massacre.
AGrippa perceiving the Romans to be in great danger, because all the Mountains
were covered with infinite numbers of Jews, he purposed to try, if with gentle
words he could persuade them to desist from war; or if some refused, to receive
those that were willing. Wherefore he sent unto them Borcaeus and Phoebus, two
of his Captains, whom they well knew, with charge to promise them pardon in the
name of Cestius, The Rebels kill one of the Kings Ambassadors* another of them
escaped being wounded
and of the Romans, for all that they had already done, if they would lay down
their Arms and return to their duty. But the Revolters fearing that all
Agrippa, determined to kill these Deputies; and they slew Phoebus before he
spoke a word; Borcaeus, being wounded, escaped. But the people were angry
hereat, and with stones and clubs drove them into the Town that were the
authors of this fact. Cestius perceiving them divided Jerusalem. And when he
had pitched his Tents in the place called Scopus, Cestius draws forth his
whole Army against the Jews.
seven furlongs from the City, he did nothing against it for three days space;
perhaps hoping that they within would relent; and in the mean time he sent a
great many Soldiers into the Vilages adjoining to fetch Corn. The fourth day,
which was the thirteenth of October, he came against the City with his Army in
battle array. The Jews were so surpised and terrified to behold the Roman
Discipline, that they forsook the outmost parts of the City, and retired into
the Temple. Cestius passing Betheza, burnt Scenopolis, and the place called the
new Market; and coming Tyrannus Priscus General of the Foot, and many other
Rulers and Captains of the Horse, being corrupted with money by Florus, hindered
that his purpose; whereby the War was prolonged, and a thousand Calamities
befell the Jews. In the mean time many of the chiefest among the Jews, Diverse
Jews call for Cestius as if they (...) to open (...)
and Ananus the Son of Jonathas made an offer to Cestius to open the Gates to
him: but either through anger or diffidence, he contemned the offer. The Rebels
understanding this Treason, with stones constrained Ananus and his complies to
throw themselves over the wall for their safety. Which done, they retired
thmselves to the Towers, from whence Cestius with many chosen Sol^^^ and Bowmen
assaulted the Temple on the North-side. (...) burn the Temple-gates
The Jews valiantly made re^^ance out of the Porches, and often repulsed the
Romans, as they approached the Walls: yet at last by the multitude of their
adversaries darts, they were forced to give back. Then the foremost of the
Romans holding their shields over their heads, and leaning against the wall,
they in the second rank also held their Shields against those in the first, and
so in order until the last, thereby making a Tortoise, as the Romans call it,
or defense, that all their shot and darts could do them no harm; so that the
Soldiers safely undermined the walls, and attempted to fire the Gates of the
Temple.

The seditious were hereat greatly amazed, and many fled out of the City as if
it would presently be taken. But the people were as glad of it as the Rebels
were dismayed, and came to the Gates to open them to Cestius, as one who had
well deserved at their hands. And truly if he had but a little longer continued
the siege, he had taken the City. But I think that God being angry with these
wicked persons, would not suffer the War to be ended at that time. For Cestius
neither regarding the good will of the people, nor the desperation of the
Rebels, removed his Army from thence; and having received no loss, very
unadvisedly departed from the City: Cestius's sudden departure makes the
Thieves more confident.
at whose unlooked for flight, the Rebels took heart; and making after him,
they killed some Horse and foot of his Rear. Cestius quartered that day in the
Camp Scopion. The next day he went further into the Country, whereby he more
encouraged the Rebels; who following, killed many of his Rere, because the
place thorough which the Romans marched was narrow, the Jews assaulted them on
the flank, and the last durst not cast any darts against them who wounded them
on their backs, thinking that an infinite multitude had followed them; and they
were not able to resist them that assaulted them on each side, being heavy
armed and not daring to break their order; whilst on the contrary the Jews were
active and light: so that the Romans endured much harm at the hands of their
Enemies, and did them none. And thus were they beaten all the way long, and
many of them killed; amongst whom was Priscus Captain of the sixth Legion, and
Longinus the Tribune, and Aemilius Jucundus Campmaster of a Regiment of Horse.
And so with much ado, they came to Gabio; where they first pitched their Tents,
casting away much of their baggage, which might any way hinder them. Cestius
stayed there two days, doubtful what to do. The third day he perceived his
enemies increased, and all places about filled with Jews: whereby he saw that
his slowness was to his disadvantage, and the number of his enemies would still
increase, if he made any longer abode there. Wherefore that he might flee
speedily, he caused the Soldiers to cast away all those things that might be a
hindrance to them, and to kill their Mules Asses, and Cattle, saving only those
that carried munition; fearing that if he should not destroy them, the Jews
might make use of them against Bethoron. The Jews in large passages little
molested his Army: but when they were to pass a strait, then they set upon
those of The Jews pursue their Enemies, and bring them into a desperate Estate
neither could they get up to their enemies, the ascent to the top of the
Mountains was so steep: and they were compassed on each side with Rocks and
deep Valleys, so that if any went out of the way he fell down and was killed;
and thus there was no way either to flee or to resist. In this desperation they
fell to lamentations and outcries, which the Jews answered with shouts of joy,
encouraging one another to play the men, being glad of their enemies adversity:
The mourning and lamentation of the Romans, and the Jews exhortation.
and all the Army of Cestius Bethoron. In the mean while, the Jews kept all the
places thereabouts besieged, and guarded the passages. Cestius seeing it not
possible to march openly, Cestius's stratagem.
thought best to flee, and chose almost 400 of his strongest Soldiers, and set
them in very eminent places, commanding them that when they were aloft, they
should cry as they did before, that the Jews might think that the whole Army
was there, and so he with the rest of his Army marched quietly 30 Furlongs. In
the morning, the Jews perceiving the Romans to be fled, assaulted the 400, by
whom they were deceived, and presently killing them with Darts, they Cestius:
who having fled away in the night, made more haste the next day; so that the
Soldiers for fear, left their Arms and Instruments to beat down Walls, and
Slings, and much other munition; which the Jews taking, after used against
them. Thus they followed the Romans to Antipatris: and seeing they could not
overtake them they returned, bringing with them the warlike Instruments, and
rifling those that were slain, and taking whatsoever the Romans had left
behind; and so singing Songs of Victory, they returned to Jerusalem, having
lost very few of their company, and slain 5380 of the Roman Foot and their
Auxiliaries; and 980 Horse. And this was done upon the eighth day of October,
and in the twelfth year of the Reign of Nero.


Of the Cruelty of those of Damascus against the Jews, and of Joseph's affairs
in Galilee.
AFter this ill success of Cestius, The year of the World, 4031. after Christ's
Nativity, 69.
many of the chiefest among the Jews daily fled and forsook the City, as a ship
presently ready to sink. Costobarus and Saul two Brethren, and Philip the Son
of Joachim General of Agrippa's Army, retired themselves to Cestius. As for
Antipas, who was also besieged by them in the Kings Palace, he would not flee
with the rest, and so was killed by the Rebels. Diverse of the noblest Jews
forsake the City, as if they had been in a ship ready to sink.
But Cestius sent Saul and the rest of his Company into Achaia unto Nero, to
inform him of the cause of Florus had caused all these wars: for so he hoped
that Nero would turn his anger against Florus, and free him from danger. Then
the people of Damascus understanding the defeat of the Romans, devised how to
destroy the Jews which inhabited amongst them: and they thought it was easy to
be accomplished, for that the Jews were already assembled in the common places
of exercise, for fear of some such matter: yet they mistrusted their own Wives,
who all, except a few, The Damascenes kill 10000 Jews in one hour.
were Jews in Religion. Wherefore they took great heed to conceal their intent
from them; and so assaulting the Jews in a narrow place and unarmed, they put
them all to the sword, to the number of ten thousand. After the Rebels that had
pursued Cestius were returned to Jerusalem, Joseph the Son of Corion, and
Ananus the high Priest, appointed to Govern the City.
they labored to join all to them that Joseph the Son of Corion, and Ananus
the high Priest, were appointed Rulers of the City, and especially to see the
Walls thereof repaired. Eleazar the Son of Simon was put into no authority,
notwithstanding that he had in his custody great prey and spoil taken from the
Romans, and Cestius his money, and a great part of the public treasure;
because they perceived he aspired to a Tyranny, and had his greatest Confidents
about him as his Guards: yet in time Eleazar by money and craft persuaded the
people to obey him in all things. They also chose other Captains, to be sent
into Idumea, who were Jesus the Son of Sapphas, and Eleazar the Son of the new
Niger who was born beyond Jordan to obey these Captains, who was therefore
called Peraites, and was then Governor of Idumea. they neglected not to do the
like by other Regions: for Joseph the Son of Simon was sent to Jericho, and
Manasses beyond the River, and John the Essean to Tamna, every Lydda, Joppe and
Amaus were annexed to John the Essean, and John the Son of Ananias was
appointed Governor of Gophnitis and Acrabatena. Joseph the Son of Matthias was
made Ruler over both Galilees, Joseph the Historiographer Governor of both
Galilees.
unto which was joined Gamala the strongest City in all that Country.

Each of these Governors discharged his place according to his wisdom and
dexterity. When Joseph came to Galilee, which was committed to his protection,
his first care was to get the good will of the Inhabitants; knowing that it
might much profit him, although in other matters he should offend: considering
that he should have Joseph makes 70 Elders Rulers in Galilee, and appoints
seven in every City to determine the causes of less weight.
and made them Rulers over all Galilee, and elected seven Judges over the
lesser Towns to judge inferior matters: but he reserved all great affairs and
Criminal Causes to his own hearing. Moreover, having ordained a form of Justice
that those seventy should follow, he took counsel how to provide for his
security abroad. And being assured that the Romans would come into Galilee, he
compassed those places with strong Walls that were fit for his purpose, to wit,
Jotapata, Bersabea, Selamis, Perecho, Japha and Sigoph, Tarichea and Tiberias:
Joseph fortifieth the convenient Cities with Walls.
Moreover he fortified the Hill Itaburin, and the Caves near the Lake of
Genesareth, which is in lower Galilee; and in high Galilee Petra, which is also
called Acheberon, and Seph, Jamnith, and Mero; in Gaulanitis also, Seleucia,
and Soganes, Gamala; he only permitted them of Sephoris to build their own
Walls, because he perceived them to be rich and prone to War of themselves.
Likewise John the Son of Levias, at Joseph's command, built the Walls of
Giscala himself alone; but in all other places that were fortified. Joseph put
to his helping hand, and directed how they should be done. He listed an hundred
thousand men, who were all young persons and fit for the War, and he armed them
with old Armor, which he had gathered from all parts of the Country. And
considering that that which made the Roman Army invincible, was that they were
all obedient to their Officers and well disciplined, and that he could not
exercise them in martial discipline, by reason of his other occasions, he
thought good at least to teach them to be obedient. And Joseph instructs the
Galileans in War.
and how to sound the trumpet, both to call to combat, and to retire; how to
march in length, and cast in a ring, and how to succor those that were most in
danger: and in short, he taught them whatsoever might either encourage them, or
make them active: Joseph teaches the Galileans how they should obey in the
Wars.
but especially he exercised them in good Discipline, imitating in particular
the order of the Romans, and often telling them that they were to fight with
men, who for strength of body and courage surpassed all nations of the World.
Also Every one of the Cities of Galilee send the half of their multitude to
warfare, the rest they keep to provide them Victuals.
but God also for their enemy. After this manner he daily exhorted them: and
now he had got together as many men as he desired; for their number was 60000
Foot, and 250 Horse, besides 4500 strangers whom he hired, and to whom he
chiefly trusted, and 600 chosen men to guard his own person. And the hirelings
only excepted, the rest of the Soldiers were provided for by the Cities: for
every


Of Joseph's danger and escape; and of the malice of John of Giscala.
WHilst Joseph thus ordered the Estate of Galilee, John a notable dissembler,
and a thirsty murderer under hope of gain.
there arose a Traitor born in Giscala, John the Son of Levias, a most subtle
and deceitful man, who by vile means was now become the richest person in that
Country, having before been very poor, and unable to put his Villainies in
practice. He could lie at his pleasure, and thought deceit a Virtue, which he
used even toward his dearest friends; he was also attire, and the Villages
thereabout; and with them he wasted all Galilee, and killed many of those whom
the fear of War had driven thither. This man, long time before, had desired to
be General of a formed Army, and aspired to greater matters, only the want
Joseph considered him as a serviceable man, he persuaded him to suffer him to
build the Walls of that place where he was born, and which was now desolate;
and to accomplish this, he gathered great sums of money of the richer sort.
After which, having persuaded Joseph to give order to all the Jews that were
dispersed over all Syria, that they should send no Oil to the neighboring
places, save only that which was made by their own Nation, he caused great
quantities of Oil to be brought to the Confines of Galilee, and buying four
Barrels for a piece of Tyrian money (which amounted to four Attick Groats) he
sold them again to the Syrian Jews; the half of one Barrel for as much as all
four cost him. And for that Galilee abounded with Oils, and especially at that
time, he conveyed it to John employeth the money he got, against him by whose
means he gained it.
and none was brought but by himself. By this means he gathered an infinite
mass of Money, which presently he turned to the prejudice of him who had given
him license to get it. And thinking that if he could depose Joseph, he might
come to be Ruler over Galilee, he commanded his followers to rob and spoil more
than they did before; and so to trouble the Country, that he might either kill
the Governor treacherously, if he sought to redress it; or if he neglected it,
to accuse him of slothfulness, and so make him odious to the people. Moreover,
he had already given out speeches, that Joseph went about to betray Galilee to
the Romans; and he devised many things to this effect, to work Joseph's
Overthrow. It happened that at that time, Agrippa's President robbed.
some of the Village of Dabarita, who watched in the Ptolomey, who was Steward
to King Agrippa, and his Sister Bernice, and plundered all his Carriages,
wherein was much costly Apparel, and many Silver Vessels, and six hundred
pieces of Gold. And for that they could not carry this secretly, they brought
all the whole Booty to Joseph, at Tarichea: who, reproving them for offering
violence to the King's Servants, commanded the things to be kept at the house
of Aeneas, who was one of the richest men in the Town, and should restore them
to the owner when time served; wherein, thinking to do himself great good, he
brought himself into much danger. For the Thieves being offended that they
received no part thereof, and seeing that Joseph would restore to Agrippa and
his Sister Bernice that which they had labored for, they went round about the
Villages in the Ten thousand Armed men come out against Joseph.
and spread this false report in every place, that Joseph was a Traitor to his
Country; and with the same rumor also, they filled the Cities thereabout. So
that early in the next morning, ten thousand men armed assembled themselves
together in the Theater at Tarichea; the greatest part of them cried out in
their fury, that the Traitor Joseph ought to be stoned, others that he ought to
be burned? and John himself, with one Jesus the Son of Sapphias, All Joseph's
Friends and Guard, save four, flee from him.
who at that time was a Magistrate in Tiberias, omitted nothing to animate the
people yet more against him. All the Friends of Joseph, and his Guards, being
terrified with such a multitude, fled, four only excepted. Joseph in the mean
while was asleep; and had he slept a little longer, they had set his house on
fire. The Tumult awakened him, and the four that remained with him, neck. At
this sight they that bare him good will, especially the people of Tarichea,
Joseph's Oration in the Seditious.
And having obtained license to speak, he said: I was never minded to send back
that money to Agrippa, nor to keep it to my private use. For (God forbid) that
I should ever hold him for my friend, who is your open Enemy; or that I should
so seek my own profit, as thereby to damnifie you all. But (O ye men of
Tarichea) for as much as I perceived that your City especially had great need
to be fortified, and that you were not able to build the Walls, and for that I
feared the people of Tiberias, and others adjoining, who still gaped after this
Prey and Wealth that was taken from Agrippa; I determined to get those Spoils
for you, to re-edifie your Walls. If ye mislike this, I will bring out the
Treasure, and give it to be divided amongst you: But if you like thereof, then
you are obliged to defend me.

This Speech of his well pleased the people of Tarichea, who gave him great
Praises, and displeased them of Tiberias, so that they breathed out threatenings
against him. Thus they both left Joseph, and contested one against another.
Joseph now having many Tarichea were almost forty thousand) spoke more boldly
to the multitude, and rebuked their temerity; telling them, that it was
necessary to strengthen Tarichea with that present money, and that he would
also provide to strengthen other Cities; and that they should not want money,
if they would agree and conspire together against those from whom they might
get it, and not offer violence to him, who could procure it for them. The
multitude being thus deceived, though they were angry, yet departed: Yet two
thousand of those that were animated against him, offered to set upon him: but
he being already retired into his house, they there besieged him. Another
stratagem of Joseph against the Jews.
Wherefore Joseph used another device likewise to repress these: and getting to
the top of the house, he beckned unto them with his hand, to Joseph opening the
doors, put them forth amongst the people all bloody as they were; whereat they
were so daunted, that leaving their Weapons behind them, John's Envy and
Treason against Joseph.
Hereat John took occasion to increase his hatred and jealousy against Joseph;
and having ill success in this policy, he still attempted other plots to bring
Joseph in danger. First he counterfeited himself sick, and requested Joseph to
permit him to go to Tiberias, and use the hot Baths, in order to recover his
health. Joseph, not having yet perceived his Treason, writ Letters in his
behalf to the Governor of the Town, to provide John with good accommodation,
and to let him want nothing that he needed. John persuades the Tiberians to
revolt from Joseph.
Two days after his arrival there, he went about the business which he
designed; and enticed some with money, others with flatteries, to revolt from
Joseph. Silas, whom Joseph had made Governor of the City, understanding this,
presently by Letters gave notice thereof to Joseph; who receiving the same in
the night, went to Tiberias very early in the morning. All the people, except
those that John had corrupted, went out to meet him: but John, notwithstanding
he judged that he came against him, still counterfeited himself sick in bed,
and sent a man of his acquaintance to excuse his absence for not coming to meet
Joseph. John sends certain Armed men to kill Joseph.
Then Joseph assembled the Tiberians together in a place to speak to them,
concerning that which was written to him: And John sent armed men thither with
Commandment to kill Joseph. The people perceiving them to draw their Swords,
cried out; and Joseph at their cry looking about him, and perceiving their
Swords even almost at his throat, he leaped down a little Hill upon the Shore,
which was six cubits high, upon which he stood to speak to the people: Joseph
flees in a little Boat by the Lake.
And going into a boat with two of his Guard which he found there, he went
Joseph fearing that a great conflict would ensue, and so the whole City,

But those that inhabited about the City, and heard of the Treason, and by whom
it was attempted, John flees in to his Country Giscala.
armed themselves and came against John; but he, before their coming, fled to
Giscala, where he was born. In the mean while, all Galilee came and joined with
Joseph; The Galileans flock to Joseph against John.
and there were many thousands of Armed men gathered together, affirming that
they came against John, and to fire that City which had received him. Joseph
thanked them for their good will, saying, that he had rather conquer his
enemies by moderation, than by fire and Sword; and therefore requested them to
John, and did not forsake him within five days next following, should lose all
their Estates, and their houses should be sacked and set on fire. Hereupon,
three thousand presently forsook John, and came and laid down their weapons at
Joseph's feet, John's Treason against Joseph.
prostrating themselves before him; so that there remained with John but two
thousand fugitive Syrians. By whom being assisted, he again went secretly to
work, having had so ill success by open dealing; and so he privily sent
messengers to Jerusalem, to accuse Joseph that he had gathered a great Army,
and that except he were quickly prevented, he would come and usurp Dominion
over the Mother-city. But the people understanding before of John's hatred, did
not regard it; yet diverse Joseph, secretly sent money to John, to hire Foreign
Soldiers, that he might make War against Joseph; whom they determined amongst
themselves to displace: And thinking that their order was not sufficient to
effect it, they sent moreover two thousand five hundred men, and four of their
Principal Nobility with them, to wit, Joazar the Lawyer, and Ananias the
Saducee, and Simon and Judas, the Sons of Jonathas; all very eloquent men, and
learned in our Laws, to withdraw the people's minds from Joseph; giving them
charge, that if he of his own accord came to them, then they should permit him
to speak for himself; but if he refused so to do, then they should hold him as
an enemy. Joseph's Friends at Jerusalem gave him intelligence that an Army was
coming against him, but for what cause Four Cities of Galilee submit themselves
to Joseph's Enemies.
to wit, Sephoris, Gamala, Giscala and Tiberias, which nevertheless he soon
after easily recovered, without Force of Arms: And having taken the four
Captains and Counselors of his enemies, he sent them to Jerusalem; against
whom the people being incensed, would have killed them, and those that sent
them, had they not fled in good time.

CHAP. XXVII.

NOw John, Tiberias is recovered by Joseph, and saved by a Stratagem.
for fear of Joseph, kept himself within the Walls of Giscala; and a few days
after Tiberias revolting again from Joseph, the Inhabitants called in Agrippa,
who came not at the day appointed, only a few Roman Horse showed themselves.
Joseph understanding this at Tarichea; and having sent his Soldiers to fetch
Corn, he thought not good to go alone against the Rebels; nor yet did he think
it best to delay the time any longer, fearing that whilst he delayed, King
Agrippa would come and possess the Town; besides that, the next day being the
Sabbath, he could do nothing. Tarichea to be kept shut, that his intent might
not be revealed to them, of Tiberias. Then taking all the Boats that were in
the Lake, in number two hundred and thirty, and in every one of them four
Sailers, he speedily sailed to Tiberias: And when he came near the City, yet so
far off, that the Inhabitants thereof could not easily descry him, he commanded
all the Boats to stop, and the rowers to beat the water still as if they were
rowing; Joseph with seven Soldiers comes to Tiberias, and terrifieth his
Enemies.
and taking only seven of his Guard with him, unarmed, he went near enough the
City, that they might see him. When the Rebels perceived him, and thought that
the Boats were full of Armed men, they threw down their Weapons, and held up
their hands to him, beseeching him to spare the City. Joseph, with many
threatening and bitter Speeches, reproached them first, that having undertaken
built the Walls; yet if any would come and talk with him, and give him
assurance of Joseph by a subtle policy touleth out the chiefest of Tiberias,
and carries them away in Boats to Tarichea.
and then for another, as he thought good, till he had loaded all the Boats:
which done, he commnded all the Boatmen with all speed possible to go to
Tarichea, and put them in Prison; so he carried away all the Council, which
were in number six hundred, and 2000 more, all whom he brought to Tarichea. But
they which remained in the City, cried with one voice that one Clitus was cause
of the revolt, and therefore besought Joseph to punish him for all. Clitus the
Author of the sedition, drawing his Sword with his right hand, cut of his left.
Joseph told them that he would put none of them to death, but commanded
Levias, to come and cut off Clitus his hands: but he fearing to trust himself
amongst so many enemies, refused to do execution. Clitus perceiving that Joseph
was angry, and ready to come out of his Boat to do it himself, besought him to
grant him one of his hands; which Joseph did upon condition that he should cut
off the other himself. So Clitus drawing out his Sword with his right hand, cut
off his left. After this manner Joseph brought Tiberias again under his
subjection. And within a few days after, he took Giscala and Sephoris, which
had revolted, having given the spoils thereof to his Soldiers; yet afterward he
restored most that was taken away to the people; and the like he did to the
inhabitants of Tiberias: by which means he got the good will of them all.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How the people of Jerusalem prepared themselves for War, and of the Robberies
of Simon Son of Gioras.
AFter that these broils, The troubled Estate of Jerusalem.
which hitherto happened only in Galilee, were ceased, they prepared themselves
against the Romans. And the chief men of Jerusalem, and Ananus the high Priest,
with all speed renewed and repaired the Walls, and made all sorts of
Instruments for war, Arrows and other weapons; so that all the City was busied
herein, and trained their men in warlike discipline. All places were filled
with agitation and tumult; but the graver sort were very pensive, and many as
it were foreseeing the calamity that after ensued, could not refrain from
tears: they that desired peace, received no comfort in any thing: all things
were done at their beck who were cause of all this War. And the Estate of the
City, even then before the Romans came, was like a City to be destroyed, But
Ananus neglected that which was necessary for War, and labored to reconcile
the seditious faction of those that were called Zealous: Simon the Son of Gioras
commits great rapines, and murders in Acrabatena and Idumea.
but how he was overcome, and what his end was, we Simon the Son of Gioras in
the Toparchy of Acrabatena, having gathered together a multitude of seditious
people, robbed and spoled every where; and he not only broke into rich men's
houses, but also beat them grievously, openly exercising his Tyranny. But when
Ananus and the rest sent an army against him, he fled to his fellow-thieves of
Massada, and there staid till Ananus and the rest of his Enemies were slain:
and then he wasted Idumea with the rest; so that the Governors of that place
were fain to put a Garrison in every Village: so great was the number of them
that were slain by these Thieves. And thus stood the affairs of the Jews.


Written by Flavius Josephus.

1. OF the coming of Vespasian General of the Romans into Judea; and of two
Massacres of the Jews; and how the Sephorites yielded themselves to Vespasian.
2. The Description of Galilee, Samaria, and Judea. 3. Of the Aid sent to them
of Sephoris, and of the military discipline amongst the Romans. 4. How Placidus
Assaulted Jotapata. 5. How Vespasian invaded Galilee; and how at his presence
the Galileans fled. 6. How Gabara was taken. 7. How Jotapata was besieged; and
of the situation and battery thereof. 8. Of the Siege of Jotapata by Vespasian;
and of Joseph's diligence, and of the excursions of the Jews against the
Romans. 9. How Vespasian battered the Walls of Jotapata with a Ram, and other
warlike Engines. 10. How Jotapata was again assaulted. 11. How Trajan and Titus
took Japha. 12. How Cerealis overcame the Samaritans. 13. How Jotapata was
taken. 14. How Joseph being taken, saved his own life. 15. How Joppe was taken
again. 16. How Tiberias was yielded. 17. How Tarichea was besieged. 18. Of the
Lake called Genesareth, and the Fountains of Jordan. 19. How Tarichea was
delivered.


CHAP. I.

When the Emperor Nero understood the ill success of his Armies against the
Jews, Nero is amazed and afraid at the valiant acts of the Jews.
he was seized with fear and astonishment; yet he dissembled it as much as
necessity would permit him. In the meanwhile he set a good face on the matter,
and made as though he were of more courage, saying, That that which happened, was
rather by the fault of his General Cestius, than the valor of their
Adversaries: thinking that it behoved him, who was Emperor, not to show himself
moved with a little bad news; and that the greatness of his Empire ought to
secure his mind from the apprehension of considerable misfortunes. Yet it
appeared by the vexation of his Nero sends Vespasian to govern in Syria, and
direct his War.
At last, he pitched upon Vespasian, whom he thought only meet for that purpose;
a man who from his Infancy had been trained up in War, even until he was
gray headed; who had appeased the people of the West, and helped them being
troubled by the Germans, and recovered it for the Romans: as also he did
Britain, which was unknown before; and for that cause made his Father Claudius
triumph, without taking any pains for it. Nero considered all these things, and
his prudence grounded on old Age and Experience; and that also he had Sons in
the flower of their Age, to be pledges for his fidelity, who might assist their
Nero sent him to govern the Armies in Syria, greatly encouraging him with fair
speeches and promises, as at that time need

Accordingly Vespasian departed out of Achaia, where he was with Nero: and he
commanded Titus his Son to lead the fifth and tenth Legions from Alexandria;
and he himself crossing over the Hellespont, Vespasian and Titus gather great
Forces against the Jews.
followed after by land into Syria, where he assembled all the Roman forces,
and all Auxiliaries of the Kings adjoining that were confederates. The Jews
after Cestius unfortunate success, became proud of their Victory, and could not
contain themselves; but like men incapable of moderation, they still gave more
occasion of War: and gathering all their Forces together, they went to Ascalon,
which is an old City seven hundred and twenty furlongs distant from Jerusalem,
which the Jews had always hated, for which cause they also first assaulted it.
The Commanders The Jews besiege Ascalon.
Niger of Paerea, Silas the Babylonian, and John the Essean. Now the City of
Ascalon had very strong Walls, but few men to defend it; for it had only one
Company of Foot, and one Band of Horse, whom Antonius commanded. The Jews made
such haste, as though they had dwelt hard by. Anthony fights with the ^words.
Antonius persuading himself that they would assault him, caused his Horse to
issue forth of the City: and neither fearing the multitude, nor the malice of
his adversaries, he valiantly received the first assault of the Enemies, and
beat them back that attempted to assault the Wall. So the Jews who were
unskilful, having to do with them that were expert; and fighting on foot
against Horsemen; without order, against those that were in good order; lightly
armed, against The Romans overcome the Jews, and make a great slaughter of them.
This greatly helped the Romans to kill so many Jews: for they that fled were
easily overtaken by the Romans, and killed; and others compassing diverse of the
Jews about, slew them with Darts; so that the Jews were in a great (...).
and two of their Leaders, John and Silas. The rest, whereof many were wounded,
followed their General Niger, who fled into a little Town of Idumaea, named
Salis: Of the Romans only some were wounded in that fight. Yet the Jews were
not daunted with this misfortune; but the grief thereof much increased their
Courage: neither were they dismayed with the former loss of so many men within
so short time; but rather calling to mind the great Victory they had got
before, they Aschalon in great number and fury, but with the same success and
disadvantages in warlike affairs which they had before. For Antonius having
notice which way they meant to come, placed an ambush in the way; Eight
thousand Jews slain at (...).
and the Horse setting upon them at unawares, killed above eight thousand of
them, before they could prepare themselves to fight: whereupon all the rest
fled, and Niger with them, after he had given all the proofs that could be
expected from a valiant man: and for that the Enemies pursued them, they fled
into the Tower of a Town called Bezedel. Antonius knowing it to be in vain to
stay about the Tower that was invincible, and yet loath to let the General of
the Enemies escape, set fire on the Niger had been burnt. But he leapt into a
deep Vault in the Castle, and so escaped, and three days after he showed
himself unto his Soldiers, who sought for him weeping, that they might have
his body, for they thought him dead: whom against all expectation seeing alive,
they were very glad, as though by Gods providence he had escaped to be still
their Leader.

Vespasian being arrived with his Army at Antioch, (...).
which is the mother-City of Syria, for greatness and other advantages,
doubtless the third in the whole World; and finding that King Agrippa there
expected his coming, he hasted with all his Forces from thence to Ptolemais.
(...) the Romans.
At this place there came to him the Citizens of Sephoris a City of Galilee,
who had no thought at all of Rebellion: these both provident for their own
Vespasian came, submitted Cestius Gallus, and received from him a Garrison of
Soldiers; and now also courteously entertaining Vespasian, offered their help
against their Countrymen. Vespasian at their request gave them a Guard of
Horse and Foot, so great as he thought was able to resist the force of their
Enemies, if the Jews should attempt any thing against them. For he thought it
would be a great help to him in the future War to have Sephoris on his side,
the greatest City of Galilee, situate in a strong place, and which otherwise
might be a safeguard to the whole Country.

CHAP. II.

THere are two places named Galilee, The Description and Situation of the
higher Galilee.
one called high Galilaea, and the other low Galilee: and they are both
compassed with Phoenicia and Syria. On the West Ptolemais, with the limits of
its Territory borders them, as also does Mount Carmel, which in time past
belonged to Galilee, but now to the Tyrians. Unto which adjoyneth Gabaa, which
signifies the Horsmens City: so called, because King Herod's Horsemen were sent
thither to inhabit. The length and breadth of the lower Galilee.
On the South part it joyneth to the Samaritanes and Scythopolitanes, as far as
Jordan. On the East part it bordereth upon Hippene, Gadaris, and Gaulanitis,
which are the Borders of King Agrippa's Country. On the North it Tyria. The
length of lower Galilee reaches from Tiberias to Zabulon; near which is
Ptolemais by the Seacoast. In breadth it reaches from the Village Xaloth,
situate in a great Plain, to Bersabe, where also begins the breadth of high
Galilee, and reaches to the Village called Baca, bordering upon the Tyrians;
and the length thereof is from a Village near Jordan named Thella, to Meroth.
And though of such bigness, and environed with so many Nations, yet they
always resisted Foreign Forces. For the Galileans are from their Childhood
Warlike, and never daunted by fear or penury; For their Country is most
fruitful, and abounding with all manner of Trees, notwithstanding the
Inhabitants take small pains in tilling the ground; and there is no waste
ground.

Galilee be less in compass than the Region beyond the River, The Description
of the Country beyond the Flood.
yet it is more populous, fertile and rich than that: For it is all tilled, and
all bears fruit. But that beyond the water, though it be bigger, yet it is
not all inhabited; for there are many Deserts, and barren Places, unfit to bear
fruits for the nourishment of Men. Peraea has a good soil and large plain
beset with diverse trees, especially Olives, Vines, and Palm Trees: and it is
abundantly watered with Brooks running from the Mountains and Springs that
continually stream forth during the greatest heats of Summer.

The Length of this place is from Macheran to Pella; The Description of the
Region of Samaria.
the Breadth from Philadelphia Jordan. This Town Pella lies on the North part,
and Jordan on the West, and the Country of the Moabites bordereth on the
South; and on the East Arabia, Silbonitis, Philadelphia and Gerasis. Samaria is
seated between Judaea and Galilee, beginning at a Town called Ginea, and ends
in the Toparchy of Acrabatena, nothing differing in nature from Judea. For both
of them are full of Mountains and have rich plains and good for Tillage; The
Description of Jury, whose middle part is Jerusalem.
full of Trees abounding with wild Apples and others: Though they are of their
nature dry yet they have rain enough, and have many sweet waters, and abundance
of goods grass, and great store of milch-Beasts; and which is a great argument
of wealth, both places are very populous. On the confines of these Countries
stand Anauth, a Village otherwise called Borceos, which lies on the North part
of Judaea. The South part of Judaea, if you measure the length, extends to the
Village of the Arabians, called Jordan: the breadth reaches from Jordan to
Joppe: in the midst thereof is situate Jerusalem; so that some call that City
the navel of the Country. Judaea also bordereth on the Seacoast, The division
of Judaea.
even unto Ptolemais. It is divided into eleven portions: the first is
Jerusalem, Head and chief of all, and above all the rest, as the Head is above
the Body: and the rest are Toparchies. Gophua is the second, after that
Acrabatena, then Thamna, afterward Lydda; also Emmaus, Pella, Idumea, Engadda,
Herodium and Jericho; besides these, Jamnia and Joppa command the places
adjoining. Moreover, there is Gamala, Gaulanitis, Batanea and Trachonitis,
which are portions belonging to King Agrippa's Kingdom. This Country begins
at Mount Libanus, Jordan, and reaches in breadth to the Lake near Tiberias.
And in length it reaches from Julias to Arphas; and the Inhabitants are partly
Jews, and partly Syrians.


How Aid was sent to the people of Sephoris; and of the military Discipline of
the Romans.
I Have spoken of Judaea as briefly as might be, Vespasian sends help to the
Sephorites, but fills Galilee with sword and fire
and with what Countries it is environed. Now Vespasian sent help to the
Inhabitants of Sephoris, to wit, one thousand Horse, and six thousand foot,
Placidus the Tribune being their Leader. The Horsemen divided themselves into
two Companies, and lodged in a great Plain; and the Footmen were in Garrison in
the City to defend it, as the Horsemen did without. These Joseph although he
committed no act of hostility; and also spoiled all that was without the
Cities, and always repulsed the Inhabitants, if at any time they took courage
to revenge themselves. Joseph seeing things in this posture assaulted the City
Sephoris, in hope to take it; but before such time as it revolted unto the
Romans, he had compassed it with so strong Walls, that the Romans themselves
could not have taken it, and so his hope was frustrate: for neither by force
nor fair means would the Sephorites yield to him. Hereat the Romans being
angry, troubled the Country more than before: they now neither night nor day
ceased from destroying it, but robbed and spoiled all they found; and all men
able to bear Arms they slew, and made the rest their slaves. Thus all Galilee
Joseph had walled.

In the mean time Titus came to Alexandria during Winter, sooner than he was
expected; Titus brings a mighty Army into Judaea.
and so received there the Soldiers that he was sent for: and having a
prosperous journey, he quickly came to Ptolemais; and finding his Father there,
to two of the chiefest Legions, to wit, the fifth and tenth, he also adjoined
that fifteenth Legion that he brought with him, and there followed them
eighteen Companies; five out of Caesarea, one Troop of Horse, and five
Companies of Horse out of Syria: ten of these Companies of Foot had in every
one of them a thousand Men, the rest only six hundred and thirteen, and in
every Troop of Horse, were an hundred and twenty. Antiochus, Agrippa, and
Sohemus, brought each of them two thousand Bowmen, and a thousand Horse: and
Malchus King of Arabia, brought five thousand Foot, and one thousand Horse; the
most of his Foot were Archers, so that the whole Army, together with the Kings
Aid, amounted to the number of threescore thousand, Horse and Foot together;
besides them that followed the camp, who were a great multitude, and inferior
to none but their Masters in warlike discipline: for one cannot too much admire
the Romans, who so train up their servants in time of Peace, that they are very
fit for War. So that whosoever well beholds their Military Discipline, he
shall perceive that they gained not this their goodly Empire by chance and
fortune, but by their valor: for they do The diligence and labor of the
Romans, in providing things necessary for the Wars.
even as though they were fighting against the enemy; so that hereby they
easily endure the burden and travel of War. For no disorder makes them forget
what to do; neither does fear dismay them, nor continuance of Fight and War
weary and tire them. So that whosoever they fight against, who are not so well
expert in these affairs as they, they always overcome them: and one may well
call their exercises amongst themselves, conflicts without bloodshed; and
their wars, conflicts with bloodshed. They are not easily overcome The
industry of the Romans.
which they do not rashly, nor pitch their Tents in marish or high places after
a disordered manner; for if the place be unequal, they make it plain. And they
proportion their Camp apiece: for they have many Smiths, The order of the
Romans in their Camp.
and all kind of Workmen needful, which still follow the Army, to perform such
business. And in the innermost part of the Camp they make Quarters, whose
outside resembles a Wall, with Towers equally distant one from another, and
between them Engines of War to cast Stones, and suchlike, that all kind of
shot may be in readiness. They also build four Gates large and wide, both for
their Horse easily to come in at, and also for themselves if need require, to
enter in or issue out speedily. Pretorium, or Generals Tent, is like a Temple;
so that it seems a City, and a Market full of shops made in an instant. There
are also seats built for the Chief Officers to judge of controversies, if any
arise between the Soldiers and others. All this place, and all things
belonging thereto, are made in an instant, partly by reason of the multitude,
partly by the industry of such as work: and if need require, they compass it
with a Trench four Cubits deep, and as many broad. Thus the Soldiers enclosed
with their Arms, live quietly in their Tents, without disorder; and all things
are done with good advice and prudence, whether they need Water, or Corn, or
Wood, they all go to dinner at the time appointed, and all sleep at once; and a
Trumpet gives notice when to watch and guard, The reverence and obedience of
the Roman Soldiers to their Cap-Captains.
and nothing is done that is not commanded. How the Romans forsake their Camp.
When they go forth of the Camp, a Trumpet sounds and no man is idle, but at
the first notice takes away his Tent, and makes all ready for departure. Then
the Trumpet sounds again, warning them to be ready; and having laden their
Beasts with their baggage, they expect the sound again, as though they were to
run a race; and at their departure they burn their Camp, because it is easy to
build the like again; and also least afterward it should advantage their
Enemies. When the The Armor of the Roman Footmen.
as though they were ready to give Battle. The Footmen have a Headpiece, a
Breast Plate, and a Sword on the left side, and on the right side a Dagger. The
Footmen guarding the General, have a Javelin and a Shield: the rest are armed
with Bucklers and Pikes. Moreover, they carry a Saw, a Basket, a Fardle, a
Hatchet, a Cord, a Sithe, a Chain, and Victuals for three days: so that the
Footmen are as much laden as the Cattle. The furniture of the Romans Horsemen.
The Horsemen carry at their The Romans attempt nothing unadvisedly or rashly.
They never do any thing unadvisedly in Battle, but manage all things according
to counsel; so that they either do not err, or if they do, their fault is
easily amended. For they think that bad success after deliberation, is better
then good fortune without it; and they think that therein fortune did but
flatter them, to work them some despite, by reason they did not deliberate:
but that which is premeditated, The Romans grow more diligent by fear.
but their minds also more courageous: and their diligence is the greater by
their fear of punishment. For their Laws are capital, not only for them that
forsake their order, but also for them that commit the least negligences; and
their Generals are more severe then their Laws. Yet their Rewards of merit are
so great, that they seem not cruel in punishing the faulty. Moreover, they are
so obedient to their Rulers, The obedience of the Roman Soldier is no small
occasion of his victory.
that in Peace they honor them, and in War the whole Army seems one body
united together: they keep such good order, and are so ready Romans, if they
triumph not over her too. Therefore seeing their deeds are ruled by Advice and
Counsel, and their Commandments so well executed by the Army, what marvel is it
if their Empire in the East reach to Euphrates, How far the Roman Government
extends.
in the West to the Ocean, in the South to Africa, in the North to Rhine and
Danubius? seeing that one may justly affirm the possession less than the
possessors. This I have spoken, Romans, but to comfort the conquered, and to
terrify those that desire alteration: and perhaps it may instruct them who
want good Discipline, and are ignorant of the Manners and Customs of the Romans
in their Military

CHAP. IV.
How Placidus assaulted Jotapata, and was repelled by the Jews.
IN the mean time Vespatian being at Ptolemais with his Son Titus, prepared all
things necessary for his Army. Placidus draws his forces against Jotapata,
and being repulsed, flies.
But Placidus was already entered into Galilee and run through it, where he slew
almost all he had found, who were of the weaker sort of people incapable of
resisting. And seeing that those of courage always fled into the Cities Joseph
had fortified, he turned his forces against Jotapata, which was the strongest
of them, thinking it might easily be taken by a sudden assault, and that he
thereby should get great glory and advantage; because the people seeing the
strongest Cities surprised, would not fly to any again. But it fell not out as
he expected; for the people of Jotapata understanding his coming, met him near
the Town, and suddenly encountering the Romans, being a great multitude and
well disposed to fight, as those that bare Arms for the general safety of the
Country, and the lives of their Wives and Children, they put the Romans to
flight, and wounded many, though only seven were slain; because the Romans in
flying kept their ranks, and were well armed: but the Jews being unarmed,
rather trusted to their Darts and Arrows, than come to handy Jews slain, and a
few wounded. And so Placidus when he saw himself repulsed from the Town,
abandoned the Enterprise.

CHAP. V.
How Vespatian invaded Galilee, and how at the very sight of him the Seditious
fled.
VEspasian desirous to master Galilee himself, departed from Ptolemais, making
such journies as the Romans are wont to. And he commanded his Auxiliary
Vespatian directs the Romans march
because they were lighter armed, to go before and repress the enemies
incursions, and search the Woods and Forests fit for Ambushes, whereby they
were to pass. After them followed part of the Romans Foot and Horse: and ten
commanded out of every Company, with their Arms and all things necessary to
make a Camp. After them followed the Pioneers, whose office it was to mend the
Ways, where they were bad, and to cut down the Woods that were in the way, lest
by bad way the Army should be retarded. After them he sent his baggage, and the
baggage of the Officers under him, with Horsemen to guard it. And after them he
himself followed, leading an Army of choice Foot and Horse: And accompanied
with his own Guard of Horse. For he had out of every Legion six score men for
his guard. Next followed those Romans have chosen for their Standard, because
it is the King of all Birds, The Eagle by the Romans is held the Ensign of the
Empire, and a sign of Victory.
and is most valiant and strong; wherefore they think it a sign of Dominion and
Victory over all them against whom they bear it. After these sacred Ensigns
followed the Trumpets sounding in warlike manner; and after them the Body of
the Army, marching six in a rank; and, as the custom is, with Centurions, by
them to keep order. The Servants of each Legion accompanied the baggage. The
last Company were Victuallers, Handicrafts-men, and other mercenary people,
guarded by Foot and Horse in great number. Thus Vespatian with his whole Army
Galilee, and there pitched his Camp. He might have passed on, but he thought
fit by the sight of his Army to terrify his enemies, and give them time to
repent, if any one would alter his mind before the War began. Yet in the mean
time, he prepared all things necessary for a siege. The only Rumor of his
coming made many Rebels faint-hearted. For Joseph's Soldiers, who had pitched
his Tents a little from Sephoris, when they knew that the enemy approch'd, and
that they were presently to fight with the Romans, they fled not only before
they fought, but also before they saw them. Joseph being left with a very few,
and knowing that he was not able to abide his enemies, and that the Jews were
dismayed, and that if he put any trust in them, (...)
they would for the most part revolt to the enemies; for that time abstained
Tiberias.

CHAP. VI.
How Gadara was besieged and taken.
VEspatian went first to Gadara, and took it easily at the first assault: for
all the able men and fit for War were fled out of the City. The Romans entering
the place put all to death without mercy, partly for the hatred they had
conceived against the Jews, and partly in revenge of that which had befaln
Cestius. And they burnt the Joseph's presence in the City, which he had made
choice of for his safeguard, filled it with fear. For the People of Tiberias
thought he would never have fled if there had been any hope of withstanding the
Romans: wherein they judged not amiss: for he foresaw what event the War would
have, and that their safety consisted only in changing their rebellious minds.
He himself, though he hoped to obtain pardon of the Romans, yet had much rather
have died, then lived pleasantly with them against whom he was sent, and so
become a Traitor to the Country committed to his charge. Wherefore he determined
faithfully to write a true state of the Country to the Nobility at Jerusalem,
Joseph is afraid of the Romans and writes to Jerusalem.
and not to extol the enemies forces too much, lest they should say he was a
Coward; nor yet put them in any comfort, lest Romans; or, if they would make
War, then they should send a sufficient Army against them: And having written
to this effect, he presently sent men away to Jerusalem to carry the Letters.

CHAP. VII.

VEspatian was very desirous to take Jotapata, because he knew many of his
enemies were fled thither, and this was the strongest Refuge they had. So he
sent before some Foot and Horse, with Pioneers to plain the ways, which were
full of ragged stones, so that it was hard for Footmen to pass, and altogether
unpossible for Horsemen. Within four days they effected that which they were
commanded, and made a large way for the Army to pass. On the fifth day, which
was the one and twentieth of March, Joseph comes to Jotapata from Tiberias
Joseph before they came, entered into the City, coming thither from Tiberias to
encourage the Jews who were dismayed. A certain runaway told Vespatian Joseph
was come thither, and advised him to hasten thither; for if he could take
Joseph, he might easily take all Judea. Hereat Vespatian was very glad, and
took it as a good fortune that the most prudent and potent of his enemies,
should (God so disposing) put himself as it were in hold. And so presently he
sent Placidus before with a thousand Horsemen, and with him Ebutius, a man both
valiant and prudent; and commanded them to invest the City on all sides, lest
Joseph should privily escape from thence. The day after he himself followed
with the whole Army, and about noon came to Jotapata; Jotapata besieged.
and leading his Army to the North side of the Town, he pitched his Tents upon
a Hill seven stades distant from the City: purposely placing himself within the
view of his Enemies, that the very sight of his Army might terrify them:
Nothing is more effectual in War, or more desperate than necessity.
The next day began the Battery, and the Jews kept themselves in order, and
resisted the Romans before their Walls. But when Vespasian sent all the Bowmen,
and Slingers, and other Engineers to beat them off from the Walls, and he
himself with Foot assaulted the Wall in another place where it might easily be
entered: then Joseph, accompanied with all his Forces, issued out the Town, and
assaulted the Romans fiercely, and drove them from the Walls with great
courage: though they themselves suffered as much harm as they did to their
Enemies. For as the Jews were animated by desperation, so were the Romans with
shame; these latter had Military A fight between the Romans and the Jews
continued a whole day and broken off by night.
The next day also they encountered the Romans, and resisted them more stoutly
than before, taking courage that they the day before had resisted them contrary
to their expectation. The Romans also fought more valiantly, ashamed as it were
of themselves, in suffering the Jews to resist them; thinking withal that they
themselves were overcome, if they did not quickly suppress their Enemies.
Wherefore the Romans for five days together ceased not to assult the Town, and
the Jews strongly repelled them; and neither the Jews feared their Enemies, nor
the Romans were dismayed The situation of Jotapata.
Jotapata is almost all situate upon a Rock, and compassed about with deep
Valleys, which descend strait down like a Wall, so that one can scarcely see
the bottom without dazzling. There is only one access to it on the North, where
it is seated upon a declining Mountain; which Joseph enclosed with a Wall, to
the end it might be no passage for the Enemies: all the rest of the City is
environed with high Mountains, so that it cannot be discerned by any before
they be hard by it, such was the strength of Jotapata.

Vespatian determined both to combat the nature of the place, Vespatian
intends to begin a sharp Siege.
and the hardiness of the Jews; and therefore called all his Captains together,
and consulted with them to begin a hot siege: at last they resolved to rear a
Mount in that place where the City was Jews cast continually great stones, and
all kind of Darts upon that which defended them; which though they pierced not
through, yet they made a great noise and terrified the Workmen. Which Vespatian
seeing, caused all Engines that cast stones and darts, which were in number an
hundred and threescore, to be placed against the Walls to beat the Jews from
thence. And so they cast Stones, Darts, Fire and Arrows in great Jews from off
the Walls, but also out of the reach of their shot; for the Arabian Archers,
and those that used Slings and Darts, The Jews break out and beat down the
Bulwark.
and all the Engines continually played upon them. For all this the Jews rested
not, but running out in Companies, they pulled down the Sheds which defended
the Workmen, and then assaulted them having no defense: and when they had
beaten them away, destroyed and fired all that the Romans had wrought for their
own defense and safeguard. At last Vespatian perceived that these damages
happened, for that there was some space left between all these works, whereby the
Enemies had access to do them such harms: Wherefore he united them together,
and so hindered the excursions of the Jews. Joseph (...) stakes in the ground,
and fasteneth unto them raw Ox Hides, to raise the Wall, and beat off the Shot.
When the Mount was almost made, and the Towers upon it finished, Joseph shunned
to do nothing for the safeguard of the Town, called all workmen necessary
together, and commanded them to build a Wall there higher than the Romans Work;
but they said, it was impossible for them to work, for the number of Darts in
that place. Then Joseph made this device to defend them: he fixed stakes in the
ground, and fastened to them hides of Kine and Oxen new slain, by which they
were defended from shot and fire; so that laboring night and day they raised
the Wall twenty cubits high, erecting also upon it many Towers: and by this
means they made it a strong defense. The Romans, who before thought themselves
sure of the Town, were now greatly dismayed, both by this device of Joseph, and
also by the hardiness of the Jews.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Siege of Jotapata by Vespatian, and the diligence that Joseph used; and
how the Jews made Sallies against the Romans.
THis Stratagem, and the Courage of the Jews, greatly moved Vespatian: for now
they receiving courage from that defense, made assaults upon the Romans of
their own accord, and every day skirmished, running out in Companies, and like
Thieves Vespasian would not permit his Soldiers to fight any longer, but
determined to take it by Famine, and either to make them come and yield
themselves for lack of Food, or if they held out, to famish them: conceiving
that it would be more easy to take it by force, if ceasing a while from
assaulting it, he afterward set upon it when their Case was more desperate.
Vespasian restrains his Soldiers from fight, and besieges the City.
Wherefore he commanded all passages to be kept, that none could go out of the
City; but they had great store of Corn, and of all other things else, except
Salt and Water, whereof they stood in great want: for there is never a Fountain
in the City, and they have little rain in Summer, so that the Inhabitants were
in great distress; Joseph delivers his Soldiers water by measure.
for there was hardly any Water left in the City. Joseph perceiving there was
abundance of all things else, and that the Citizens were valiant, Vespasian
hoped that within short time their Water would be spent, and they constrained
to yield. Joseph's Stratagem.
But Joseph to frustrate this hope, commanded a great many Garments to be laid
in water and hanged upon the Walls, so that the Water might run down on every
side. When the Romans saw this they were much surprised, imagining that they
would not waste so much Water in mockery, if they wanted Water to Vespasian no
longer hoping to win the City by Famine, purposed to assault it again by force.
The Jews were very glad of this; and being in manifest danger, Another Policy
of Joseph.
rather wished to be slain, than perish through hunger or thirst. Joseph
devised also another way to get Water out of the Country. There was a little
Valley out of the way, and therefore not regarded by the Romans; by this way
Joseph sent men into the Country to his Friends, for such things as the City
wanted, commanding them when they came near the Watchmen, to hide and cover
themselves with hairy Skins, that the Watchmen might think them to be Dogs: and
this he used a good while, till at last the Watchmen perceived it, and so set a
guard there to stop the passage. When Joseph perceived the City could not hold
out long, and fearing his own Life if The people beseech Joseph that he would
not forsake them.
he consulted with the chief of his Officers, how he might fly. But the People
discovering his intent, flocked about him, and besought him to take pity upon
them, and not forsake them, who had no hope but in him; affirming, that for his
sake they were all courageous and bold to fight; and if they were taken, yet he
would be a comfort to them, and that it did not become him to fly from his
Enemies, nor forsake his Friends, nor, as it were, leap out of a Ship shaken
with a Tempest, into which he came when the Seas were calm; for so by this
means the City would soon be lost, and he once gone, no man afterward could or
durst resist their Enemies, for in him was all their hope.

Joseph kept it to himself, Joseph's Prudence.
that his purpose was to work his own safety: and told Galilee, and come
against the Romans, and so raise the Siege: whereas now staying with them, he
saw not wherein he did them any good, but rather incited the Romans against
them, making them more earnest to take the Town than they would be, only
because he was there, that they might take him; but if they knew once that he
were fled, they would not then be so earnest in the Siege. Joseph herewith
could not persuade the people, but they flocked faster about him, and both
young and old of all sorts came and prostrated

Joseph considering with himself that if he stayed with them voluntarily,
Joseph stays in Jotapata.
he granted their request, Where there is no hope of help there war is the last
remedy.
and if he denied, he feared they would force him; therefore being partly moved
with compassion, he determined to stay: and being now, as all the City was,
desperate, he told them that now it was time to fight; seeing there was no hope
of safety; and that it was a glorious thing to spend their lives honorably,
and by some noble act to leave a remembrance unto their posterity of their
Valor. The great courage of the Jews in their extreme de^paration.
And so issuing out of the City, with the most valiant among them, when he had
killed the Watchmen, and third day, The year of the World, 4031. after the
Nativity of Christ, 69.
and for certain days and nights afterward never ceased. When Vespasian The
audacious courage of the Jews in their extreme desperation.
and not to fight against men who desired to die, because no men were more
courageous than the desperate; and that if they found none to assail, their
courage would soon be laid, like a flame of fire, when the matter that
nourishes it is consumed. That the Romans must seek victory more warily, for
that they fought not for necessity, The Jews with their slings are repulsed by
the Arabian Archers.
but only to increase their Dominions. After this, oftentimes they beat the
Jews by the Arabian Archers, and with Slings and Darts, and others shot which
never ceased. But so soon as they were without the danger of shot,

CHAP. IX.
How Vespasian battered the Walls of Jotapata with a Ram, and other Warlike
Engines.
VEspasian thinking himself as it were besieged, both in regard of the long
time A Ram.
whose end is armed with strong massy Iron, and made in the form of a
Rams-head; whence it takes its name, because it butteth Walls as a Ram butteth
with his head. It hangs on another Beam with Ropes, like the Beam of a pair
of Balances: the Beam it hangs on lying across, is held up with two props,
which being drawn back by force o^ many men, and then jointly with all their
Forces should forward, it strikes the Wall with the head of Iron: And there is
no Wall nor Tower so strong, but though it abide the first stroke of the
Engine, yet can it not hold out long. The Joseph seeing them still beat one
place, and that presently the Wall would fall, Joseph's device how to break the
Force of the Ram.
devised a way to resist the force of the Ram, he filled sacks with chaff, and
let them down off the Wall just against that place Joseph and his Soldiers
sought to help themselves by fire, and so they fired all that was made of dry
wood in three several places; and withal the Engines, and Mounts of the Romans,
who now had enough to defend themselves, because they were astonished Joseph
burnt the Engines, and turns off the Romans
every one having work enough to secure himself against the fire, which seizing
upon dry matter with Brimstone and Pitch wonderfully increased, so that in one
hours space, it consumed all the works that the Romans had made with so great
labor. There was an action of a Jew one Samson of Eleazar, which deserves
eternal memory: the man was born at Saab in Galilee. He took up a great stone,
and cast it down with such force upon the Ram, Eleazar's strength and courage.
that he brake off the head thereof; and nothing fearing leapt down amongst the
midst of his Enemies, and brought the head away to the foot of the Wall, where
being unarmed, and as it were a mark for his enemies to shoot at, he received
in his body five Arrows; and as though he had not felt them, he got up the Wall
again, where, that all might see him, he boldly stood still, till through grief
of his Ramath in Galilee showed themselves valiant, named Netiras; and Philip,
who assaulted the tenth Legion of the Romans with such violence, that they
broke their ranks, and put all to flight that endeavored to withstand them. At
the same time Joseph and a good number with him, took fire and burnt the
Engines, Works and Huts of the fifth and tenth Legions, Netiras and Philips
valor against the Romans.
and those that followed him destroyed all Engines, and other matter that was
left. In the evening the Romans again erected the Ram against that part of the
City which before they had beaten: and one of the Jews shot an Arrow from the
Wall, and wounded Vespasian in the sole of the foot; yet the wound was not
great, for that the force of the Arrow was spent before it came to him, having
come a great way off.

Vespasian wounded in the sole of the Foot by an Arrow.
who seeing Vespasian bleed, presently spread the news through the whole Army,
and almost all of them came running to see their General, and especially Titus,
who feared his fathers danger. But Vespasian presently freed the Army from all
perturbation, and his Son Titus from fear. For the dissembling grief of the
wound, he showed himself to all that were sorrowful for him, and incited them
to fight against the Jews more earnestly than before. Whereupon every one as it
were to revenge their General, despised all danger, and assaulted the Walls,
exhorting one another. The War renewed against the Jews.
Joseph and his associates, notwithstanding many of them were killed with Shot,
Darts and Arrows; yet forsook not the Walls, but with Fire and Sword, and
Stones fiercely assaulted them, that being defended with Hurdles battered
Joseph upon the Wall, was struck with a Stone, and his head carried from his
body by violence of the blow three furlongs off, as though it had been The
force of the Roman Darts.
and likewise the noise of Darts, Arrows and other shot. Many were slain on
every side, and the bodies of those that were killed, being dashed against the
Wall made a great noise: and within the City was heard a pitiful lamentation
and weeping amongst the Women; and without a heavy mourning and cry of them
that were wounded to death; and all that part of the Wall where the fight was,
flowed with Blood: so that now the multitude of dead bodies had so filled the
ditch before the Wall, that the Romans might easily pass over into the City;
and Jotapata died most valiantly; many also were sore wounded: and
notwithstanding the Wall was continually battered, yet it was almost Morning
before it fell, being all night long beaten with the Ram. And then they of
Jotapata repaired the breach with in defatigable labor, before the Romans
could set up a Bridge to enter it.


How Jotapata was again assaulted.
THe next day in the Morning Vespasian brought his Army to enter the breach,
Vespasian leads on his Army to enter the City.
having given them but little rest after their whole nights labor: and
desirous to make the Jews that defended the breach, forsake their Station,
before such time as he entered, he took the most valiant of his Horsemen, and
unhorsed them, being armed from Head to Foot, and placed them in three ranks;
that they being so armed, might besiege round that part of the Wall that was
battered, having long Pikes in their hands, upon the Mountain, to the end that
none might escape. After the Footmen he commanded Joseph, perceiving his
intent, Joseph's subtle Policy.
placed the old Men and Children, and those that were already wearied, upon
those parts of the Walls that were not battered: and himself with the stoutest
of the City went to defend the breach; and he placed six men before them whom
he chose out, himself being one of them to sustain the first brunt of the
enemies assault: commanding them likewise to stop their Ears to the end that
they might not The cries of Women and Children in the Battle.
whose cruelty would doubtless after the taking of the place shed the blood of
their Fathers, Children, and Wives: such were the orders which Joseph gave. In
the mean time, the weaker multitude, Women and Children, seeing the City
compassed about with three ranks of Horsemen, and the Romans with their Swords
drawn pressing against the breach, and all the Mountains about shining Arabians
ready to let fly a Shower of Arrows: they cried out as though the City were
already taken; so that a man would have judged them already under their Enemies
Swords, and not only in danger to fall into their hands. Wherefore Joseph
commanded the Women to their houses, lest their cries should dismay his
Soldiers; willing them likewise to keep silence, and threatened them if they
did not: and so he marched to the breach, which place fell to his lot: He gave
not much heed to them that sought to scale the Walls, but only minded what
effect the terrible Storm of the Enemies Arrows would produce.

As soon as the Trumpets began to sound, the Air became obscured with the
multitude of Arrows. Joseph's Companions remembering the charge given them,
stopped their The War of the Romans with the Jews upon the Bridge.
and covered their bodies against the shot of arrows. And as soon as the
bridges were set against the Wall, presently they fell on; and before the
Romans could enter upon them, they repelled them back with great prowess and
courage which the greatness of the danger did not abate but increase, so that
they did not give one foot back, till either they killed or were killed. But
the Jews had not any fresh men to second those that were tired; and the Romans,
still as they were wearied sent fresh supplies and joining together their long
shields, exhorting one another, they became as it were a wall of defense
invincible; and the whole Army like one body, beat back the Jews, The Jews pour
sc^lding Oil upon the Romans.
and so set foot on the Walls. Joseph, in this desperate case devised a new way
to repel this present danger: he commanded the Jews to fetch scalding Oil,
which The Romans retire (...) hout obtaining their purpose
so that now they were not forced to handy blows, they had leisure to shoot
Arrows and Darts against them. When Vespasian saw that his men in the fight
endured much misery, toward evening he caused them to retire, many being
slain, and more wounded, only six men of Jotapata were slain, but above 300
wounded: this fight June. But after Vespasian had comforted his Soldiers for
Vespasian erecteth higher Platforms and Towers.
and in them Archers, and men that cast Darts and such like: who not being
perceived of them that were upon the Walls by reason of the highness of the
Towers, and the covering thereof, easily wounded them who stood thereon. So the
Jews when they could not avoid the Arrows, nor be revenged upon them whom they
could not see, The Citizens of Jotapata valiantly sustain the siege.
nor yet fire the Towers being covered with plates of Iron, forsook the Walls;
yet they always encountered with them who sought to enter. Thus the Jotapata
resisted, notwithstanding that many every day were slain, and that they did
their Enemies no harm without great danger to themselves.

CHAP. XI.
How Japha was taken by Trajan and Titus.
AT this time Vespasian understood that Japha a City near Jotapata, minded to
rebel, Jotapata had held out contrary to all expectation: The taking in of
Japha by Trajan.
wherefore he sent thither Trajan, Governor of the tenth Legion, and with him
two thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse: who finding the Town able to resist,
and the Inhabitants prepared for fight, and marched out to meet him, (for the
Town being by situation strong enough, was also compassed with a double Wall)
he fought with them, and after a while put them to flight, and in the pursuit
entered with them at the first Gate: which the Citizens perceiving, shut the
second Gate, not suffering their own Citizens to enter in, lest the Enemies
also should rush in with them, as they had done into the first Gate. Truly, God
gave this Victory unto the Romans; and his will it was, that most of the
Valiant men of the City should The Jews shut up by the Romans, between two
Walls are slain.
Many of them came to the gates, and called those that kept them by their
names, pitifully entreating that they might come in: which whilst they were
kept out, were butchered like Sheep, being enclosed between two Walls; their
own Citizens having shut one Gate upon them, and the Romans the other: and many
thus enclosed perished by their fellows Swords; and an infinite number by the
rage of the Romans, 12000 Jews slain.
having no courage to resist and revenge themselves. For the Inhumanity of
their own Citizens, and terror of their Enemies together, utterly discouraged
them; and so they died all, in number 12000; cursing not the Romans, but the
Jews their own Countrymen. Trajan, thinking that the City was now destitute
Titus with his Forces co^mes to Japha.
reserved the taking of the City for the General, and sent Messengers to him,
requesting him to send his Son Titus to accomplish the Victory. Vespasian
fearing that yet there would be some resistance, sent Titus with 500 Horse and
1000 Foot, who hastening thither, placed Trajan on the left side of the Town,
and himself on the right: so the Romans on every side scaled the Walls; and the
Galileans, having a while resisted, A sharp Skirmish within the Town, between
the Galileans and the Romans.
at length left them. Then Titus and his followers leaping down, got into the
City, and began a vehement fight with them that were assembled therein, some
valiantly issuing out of the Narrow streets, and assaulting them, and the Women
casting such things as they could get, upon the Romans, from the tops of their
June.


How Cerealis Conquered the Samaritans.
THe Samaritans also were partakers of the sad Effects of this bloody War. The
Assembly of the Samaritans on the Mountain Garizin.
They assembled themselves together upon Mount Garizin, which they accounted a
sacred place. But this Assembly gave cause to believe, that not warned by their
neighbors harms, not with any advice or judgment, considering their own
infirmity, and the Romans power, they began to be tumultuous. Vespasian
foreseeing this, thought Samaria had Roman Garrisons in it, yet the great
multitude assembled, made it reasonable to fear them. Wherefore he sent thither
Cerealis, the Tribune of the fifth Legion, with six hundred Horse, and three
thousand Foot. Cerealis thought it not the best way to go unto the Mountain,
and attaque the whole multitude there, who were so numerous, but he commanded
his Soldiers to beleagure the Mountain about, at the Foot thereof, and to keep
there all the day. There happened at that time a vehement heat, and the
Samaritans wanted Water. Want of water in the Mountain Garizin.
It was then Summer, and the People had not provided themselves with Victuals,
so that many, in one day only, for want of drink died of thirst: others
preferring death before the misery they endured, fled to the Romans: of whom
Cerealis learned 11600 Samaritans slain.
and killed them all, in number 11600. This was done the 27th, day of June.
These were the miseries that befell the Samaritans.

CHAP. XIII.
How Jotapata was Taken.
THe Citizens of Jotapata having endured this hard Siege, beyond all
expectation, seven and forty days; the Romans Mounts were now raised higher
than their Walls. A fugitive certifieth the weak estate of the Citizens of
Jotapata, and how few they were.
On the same day one of the City fled to Vespasian, and told him in what case
the City stood, and how few Citizens were left, and that with daily watchings
and fighting they were far spent, so that they were not able to resist any
more, and that they might be taken by policy if they were followed: for in the
last part of the night, being weary, they ceased from their labor, and slept
till the Morning: wherefore he persuaded Vespasian to assanlt them at that
time. But Vespasian knowing how faithful the Jews were one unto another, and
how they contemned all punishment, gave little credit to this Runaway: For a
little before, one of Jotapata being taken, could not by any torments be
compelled to confess or disclose the Estate of the City; the fire nothing moved
him, and so at last he was crucified, laughing and scorning death. Yet a
probable conjecture which he had, persuaded him to give some credit to this
Traitors words: and for that he knew no great harm could befall him, if he so
assaulted the City as the Traitor advised, he commanded the man to be kept, and
put all his army in readiness to assault the Town. At the hour appointed, he
made toward the Wall with silence: Titus marched first, accompanied with one
Domitius Sabinus, a Tribune, Sextus Cerealis and Placidus, with their
Companies; so the Castle was taken, The Romans (...) the City whilst the Jews
sleep.
and the Enemies were in the midst of the Town; and it was fair daylight, and
yet the Townsmen knew nothing, being now fast asleep after their great labors
and watchings: and they that watched could see nothing, there was so thick a
mist by chance that Morning, and the rest never wakened till Death was at their
door, and that they perceived their Calamity and Destruction. The Romans
mindful of all that had befallen them in the time of the siege, The Romans have
(...) compassion.
neither spared nor pitied any one: but driving the people out of the higher
part of the City into the lower, they massacred them all. They that would have
fought could not for the narrowness of the Joseph's Guard seeing that they could
not fight, gathered themselves together in a corner of the City, and slew
themselves that the Romans might not kill them. But some of the Watchmen, who
first perceived the City to be taken, fled into a Tower, and resisted a while
(this Tower was situate in the North-side of the City) and at last being
environed with their Enemies toward Evening yielded, The fight of the Jews
with the Romans in the Tower.
and offered themselves to be slain. The Romans might have boasted that this
Victory had been without bloodshed on their part, had not Antonius a Centurion
been slain treacherously. Antonius slain by a Jew treacherously
For one of them who fled into the Caves (as many did) requested Antonius to
give him his hand, in token that he might come out safe and without danger:
which he doing unadvisedly, the Jew with 40000 Jews perish during the Siege,
and in the former battle.
so that they took away a thousand and two hundred Captives; and the number of
them who were slain during the siege, and at such time as the City was taken,
amounted to forty thousand. Vespasian commanded the City to be destroyed, and
the Castles to be burnt. Thus Jotapata was taken the thirteenth year of Nero's
Reign, on the first of July.

CHAP. XIV.
How Joseph was taken, and how he redeemed his Life with Deeds and Words.
BUT especially, above all others, the Romans made diligent search for Joseph,
both for the animosity they had against him, and also because Vespasian greatly
desired to get him into his hands, conceiving he being taken, the greatest part
of the War would then be ended; so they sought him among the dead, and amongst
those that were Joseph leaps into a deep trench, and lies hidden in a Cave.
but he (fortune favoring him) when the City was taken, escaped from the midst
of his Enemies, and leapt into a deep Well, which had a large Cave on the one
side, which they above could not perceive) where he found forty of the bravest
of his men, who had provision there for many days. There in the daytime he lay
hid, and in the night he went forth to see if he could escape; but perceiving
that all places about were diligently watched for to take him, he returned again
into the Cave, and lay there two days; Vespasian by Tribunes send Joseph
assurance.
the third day, a certain woman that had been with them in the Cave, discovered
him. Then Vespasian sent two Tribunes to him, to promise him safety, and bring
him before him; the Tribunes names were Paulinus and Gallicanethus. But Joseph
would not accept the offer, fearing that because he had been the Author of all
Nicanor the Tribune known to Joseph.
they sought him out to punish him; till Vespasian sent Joseph Nicanor, the
third Tribune, one of Joseph's acquaintance. Nicanor recounted to him how mild
the Romans were toward them whom they had conquered, and that the Roman
Generals rather admired him for his Virtue, than hated him. Moreover, that his
General intended not to punish him, which if he pleased he might do, (whether
he yielded himself or no) but to save him, being so valiant a man: adding also,
that if Vespasian meant ill, he would never have employed his Friend in such a
message, to use friendship (so noble a Virtue) to so evil a purpose as to work
Treason; and that he, though Vespasian had been so minded, would never have
consented to have betrayed his friend Joseph. For all Nicanors words, he still
hesitated, as unresolved Vespasian hindered them, being desirous to take Joseph
alive. Nicanor ceased not to entreat him; and he perceiving how his Enemies
began to be enraged, and calling to mind the dreams he had had, Joseph's dream
of the slaughter of the Jews.
wherein God had fore-shew'd him all the Jews calamities, and what happy
success should befall the Romans (for he could interpret dreams, and whatsoever
God obscurely showed, being instructed in the Holy Books of the Prophets, and
himself a Priest, as his Parents were) being as it were now filled with the
Spirit of God, and the Dreams and Visions coming into his mind, he prayed
secretly to God after this manner: Joseph filled with the Spirit of God,
secretly prays.
O great Creator of the Universe, Seeing it pleases thee to ruin the Nation of
the Jews, and to send all good Fortune to the Romans, and that thou have chosen
me to foretell future events, I submit to thy will, and render my self to the
Romans to save my life, protesting, that I mean not to go them to play the
Traitor to my Country, but as thy Minister. And having thus spoken, he yielded
himself to Nicanor. Joseph, perceiving that he yielded himself to the Romans,
flocked about him, and cried out, What is become of all our love for our Laws?
Where are those generous Souls and true Jews, to whom God when he created them,
inspired so great a contempt of Death? Joseph consents to Nicanor.
Art thou, O Joseph, so desirous to live, as to become a vile Bond-slave? How
soon have thou forgotten thy self? How many have thou persuaded to embrace
death for the sake of their liberty? The Jews violence and expostulation
against Joseph.
Truly, thou have but a shadow of valor and prudence in thee, if thou do
hope that they will save thy life, against whom thou have so behaved thy self;
or if they would save thee, to desire life at their hands. But seeing the
Romans offer has made thee forget thy self; yet we, to preserve the honor and
credit of our Country, will lend thee our Arms and Swords, and so if thou be
willing to die, die like the General of the Jews: which if thou refuse to do,
thou shall whether thou will or no, die like a Traitor to thy Country. When
they had thus said, they all threatened to kill him with their Swords, if he
yielded to the Romans.

Joseph fearing their violence, and being persuaded that if he died before he
had revealed to his Nation the things which God had declared to him, (...)
should fail in his duty to God, he had recourse to the reasons which he thought
most likely to prevail, and spoke to this effect.

Wherefore, Joseph's Oration to his Countrymen.
O my Friends (said he) are you become murderers of your selves? Wherefore are
ye so eager to divide things so united as the Soul and the Body are? If any man
imagine that my mind is changed, the Romans know whether that be true or no. I
confess It is a goodly matter to die for liberty, but yet to die fighting.
He is not only to be judged a Coward, who refuses to die when need requires,
but he also who will die when no need urges. Moreover, what withholds us
from offering our selves to the Romans? Truly, fear of death. Shall we
therefore make that certain our selves, which we fear at the Romans hands? But
some will say, if

If it be said, that it is a pa^^ of courage to kill ones self; I maintain on
the contrary, it is the part of a very Coward. The similitude of a Sailer.
For I think him to be a very timorous Seaman who perceiving a Tempest coming,
It is against the common course of Nature for a man to kill himself, yea, and a
heinous sin against God.
sinketh the Ship wherein he is before it comes. Moreover, it is against the
Law of Nature, and the Sentiments of all Creatures to kill our selves, and
thereby we also commit a heinous crime against God. There is no living creature
that of his own seeking would willingly dye: For every one feels in himself
the strong and forceable Law of Nature, whereby they desire to live: and for
this cause we judge them our Enemies, that seek to take life from us, and
punish them that take it indeed: And do you not think it a great contempt for a
man to despise life which is Gods gift? For we of him receive our first being,
and from The soul is immortal, and a portion of God placed in our bodie^.
and in some sort partake of the Nature of God: If any one abuse that which
another puts him in trust with, we think him a perfidious and wicked man:
and shall we think that if we remove out of our Bodies that which God has
placed in the same, that he shall not know of it whom we have so abused? We
hold those slaves worthy to be punished that run away from bad Masters: and
shall not we then be held for impious, who flee from so good a Master as God
is? Do ye not know that they, who according to the Law of Nature depart out of
this Life, and render that to God which they received of him when he who gave
it requires it, shall leave behind them a perpetual Name to their Posterity and
Family? And that unto those souls who are obedient to their Creator when he
calls them, he gives a holy God revengeth him on the author of injuries
And that on the contrary, they who cause their own death, go into dark hell?
and that God punishes this their offense upon all their posterity? The custom
of the ancient Jews, and how they dealt with those that slew themselves.
Hence it is that our wise Lawmakers forbids it, who knew how God abhors
this crime. For if any amongst us kill themselves, it is decreed that till the
Sun go down they shall be unburied, though we hold it lawful to bury before
those that have been killed in War.

Other Nations cause their right hand to be cut off, who have killed
themselves: judging, that as the soul thereby was separated from the body, so
the hand deserves to be separated from it. Joseph, Per^^ation.
Wherefore, O Companions, think on that which is reasonable, and add not to
your misery,

Joseph spoke more to this effect, Joseph is in great danger to be slain.
to dissuade his Companions from killing themselves: But they stopping their
ears with desperation, wherewith they had armed themselves to die, came
furiously toward him with their swords drawn, upbraiding him that Joseph
calling one by his Name, and looking upon another with a countenance like a
Governor, holding another hand, and entreating the rest distracted in such
danger, by this means diverted the blows they intended him, for still as one
came near to strike him, he turned his face upon him, like some wild beast
encompassed with the hunters. Some of them who remembered he had been their
Captain in their extremity, with reverence of his personage trembled, so that
their swords fell out of their hands: and many lifting up their arms to strike
him, of their own accord let their weapons fall. Joseph, notwithstanding his
desperate estate, Another policy of Joseph.
yet was not void of judgment, but trusting in Gods assistance, he hazarded
his life, and spoke unto them as follows: Seeing ye are all determined to
die, let us cast lots who shall kill one another; and he to whom the lot
falls, shall be killed by him who shall next follow, and so the lot shall be
cast upon every one of us, and none of us shall be forced to kill our selves.
For it were injustice, that when some of us are slain; the rest should repent
themselves, Joseph fellows dye by lots, and Joseph and another are reserved.
and so escape. They all liked well of this, and always he upon whom the lot
fell, was slain by him that followed, for death was more acceptabe, because
they thought Joseph should die with them. Now it happened, by the providence of
God, that Joseph remained alive only with one other; and he persuaded him who
was left alive to live, and not to seek death, lest either the lot should fall
upon himself, and so he be slain, or upon the other, and so he should be
polluted with the murder and slaughter of one of his Friends. Joseph being thus
delivered from extreme danger both from the Joseph resorteth to Vespasian with
Nicanor.
and from those of his own Nation, went with Nicanor to Vespasian.

All the Romans came about him to see him; and pressing about their General,
they made a great noise, some rejoicing that he was taken, others crying out to
punish him, others striving to come near to behold him better: and they who
were afar off cried out to kill that Enemy of the Romans Fame. But those who
were near and beheld him, remembering his great Actions, An example of Titus
grace and mercy toward Joseph.
were astonished at his change of Fortune: No Captain or Ruler, but although
before they were all moved against him, yet now beholding him, they begin to
pity him: especially Titus, who being of a gentle disposition, admired Joseph's
valor, his constancy in adversity, and considered his Age, and thereby was
moved to take compassion upon him, remembering what a manner of man he had been
during Titus was the chief author of Joseph's life: Yet Vespasian caused him to
be carefully kept, as though he meant to send him to Caesar. Which Joseph
hearing, requested that he might speak a word or two with him alone. Whereupon,
all but his Son Titus departing, Joseph has private conference with Vespasian.
and two of his Friends, Joseph spoke to him in these terms.

You think only, that you have Joseph for your Captive, but I am a Messenger to
you of greater matters from God. Joseph foretells Vespasian of his future
honors.
Otherwise, I knew my Country Laws, and how it behoved the Generals of our
Nation to die, and not to be taken alive by their Enemies. You will send me to
Nero; Wherefore? since Nero and those that are to succeed him before you, have
so little time to live, you, O Vespasian, shall be Caesar, and Emperor of Rome,
and Titus your Son after you: keep me therefore in bonds with you, for you are
not only my Lord, but Lord of all the World, Sea and Land, and all Mankind.
And if I now fain these things in this state of mine own mind against God, let
me be reserved to greater punishment. After he had thus spoken, Vespasian gave
small credit to his words, thinking that Joseph fained these things of himself
to save his Life: yet by little and little he began to give credit to him,
because God put it in his mind to hope for the Empire, and foretold him of his
Reign by many signs and tokens, and he also found Joseph to tell the truth in
other matters. For one of Vespasians friends saying, that it was strange that
he knowing this, Jotapata, Joseph's truth in all things.
and what was like to befall himself, that so he might avoid those evils. Joseph
answered, that he had foretold the Citizens of Jotapata, that after seven and
forty days they should be destroyed, and that the Romans should keep him
alive in hold. Vespasian secretly enquired of these Joseph had told him
concerning himself. So he commanded Joseph to be kept Prisoner, yet he gave him
apparel and diverse other things in most courteous manner: Joseph is kept bound,
yet rewarded by Vespasian.
and Titus greatly honored him. The fourth day of July, Vespasian returned to
Ptolemais, and from thence he came to the Seacoast to Caesarea, which is the
greatest City of Judaea, whose Inhabitants are for the most part Greeks. The
Inhabitants received the Army and the General with all friendship possible,
Ca^sarea a great City by the Seaside, inhabited for the most part by Greeks.
both for that they loved the Romans, and especially also for that they hated
the Jews; so that many entreated Vespasian to put Joseph to death. But
Vespasian, judging this a rash Petition, would make no answer to it: and he
left two Legions to Winter at Caesarea; Scythopolis, because he would not
over-charge Cesarea with the whole Army. Scythopolis.
This place is warm in Winter, and exceeding hot in Summer, by reason it is
situate on a Plain by the Seacoast.

CHAP. XV.
How Joppa was taken by the Romans.
IN the mean time a great multitude being gathered together, Joppa the retreat
of the Seditious and Thieves.
who either were seditious persons, or thieves, or such as had escaped out of
the taken-Cities, re-edified Joppa for their refuge, which Cestius formerly had
destroyed: and seeing they could not find provision in the Country, which was
already wasted and left desolate by the War, they purposed to become Pirates;
and so building Ships for that purpose, they robbed the Phoenicians, Syrians,
and Egyptians, not suffering any to pass those Seas without danger. Vespasian
understanding their practices, sent Horse and Foot against Joppa, who finding
the City not guarded, got into it in the night: which the Inhabitants
perceiving, were so terrified that they durst not make any resistance to expel
Joppa is naturally no road for Ships (for it is situated upon a turbulent
Shore) and on every side has very high and eminent Rocks, which trouble the
Seas, and make huge Waves. In this place (if we may believe the fable) one may
see the signs of Andromeda's Chains. Of Andromeda, read lib. 4. Ovid Metamorph.
When the North Wind blows, it strikes the Waves against the Rocks, and so
causes a dangerous Sea, that it were far more safe to be in the midst of the
Seas than at that Shore when the said Wind blows. The Inhabitants of Joppa
rode there all night, A huge tempest drowneth those of Joppa in the Sea.
and by break of day the North Wind began to blow fiercely, and drove some of
the Ships one against another, and others against the Rocks: and many striving
against Wind and Weather, and seeking to get into the midst of the Sea for fear
of the Rocky Shore, and their Enemies there, were drowned. Joppa were swallowed
up by the Waves, others suffered shipwreck; some killed themselves rather than
to be drowned: many with the Waves were stricken against the Rocks, so that the
Sea was bloody, and all the shore covered with dead Bodies: and whosoever
escaped the Sea, and got to shore, the Roman Soldiers there standing ready,
killed them. Four thousand and two hundred bodies cast out.
Four thousand and two hundred dead Bodies were cast upon the shore. So the
Joppa taken, and twice destroyed by the Romans in a short time. Vespasian built
there a Castle, Vespasian takes Joppa, and encampeth in the Castle.
and placed in it some few Horsemen and Footmen, to the end that none of the
Jews might come thither again to play the Pirates; and that the Footmen might
keep the Castle, and in the mean time the Horsemen might go forth, and spoil
all the Towns and Villages, and Territories belonging to Joppa: which also they
did. When the news of the destruction of Jotapata was brought to Jerusalem,
many gave small credit to it; partly for the greatness of the Calamity, partly
for that no man could say, he had seen the destruction of the City: for none
escaped the Massacre to carry the news, ^ame it self declares the destruction
of Jotapata.
but only report thereof was spread abroad. But at the last it was confirmed to
Joseph was slain Jerusalem was so afflicted his for death, that whereas others
were lamented only by their Kindred, all the City bewailed his supposed Death.
They mourned for him thirty days, and hired Musicians to sing Funeral Songs for
him. At last, truth discovered it self, and the true news of the destruction of
Jotapata with the accidents there: Joseph is said to be slain in Jerusalem.
also how Joseph was not slain, but was living in the hands of the Romans, and
that the Romans honored him more than a Captive could expect. The hatred,
malice and wrath in Jerusalem against Joseph.
Then the Jews began as much to hate him now living, as before they had mourned
for him when they supposed him dead. Some said he was a Coward, others that he
was a Traitor to his Country, and the whole City vented reproachful speeches
against him. These heavy tidings increased their rage and their adversity
(which to wise Joseph. And this was the Estate of the Citizens of Jerusalem.

CHAP. XVI.

VEspasian was desirous to see the Kingdom of Agrippa (for the King had
entreated him to go thither, Vespasian comes unto Agrippas Kingdom, and
recreateth himself there, and feasteth twenty days.
partly to the intent to feast him and his whole Army, partly that he might
repress some troubles arising in his Kingdom in the time of his absence) And so
he departed from Cesarea upon the Seacoast, and went to Caesarea Philippi,
where he stayed and refreshed his Soldiers twenty days; and himself also
feasted, giving God thanks for his prosperous success in the War. This done, he
had Intelligence that Tiberias and Tarichea were revolted (both which Cities
belonged to Agrippa's Kingdom) whereupon determining utterly to destroy the
Jews which inhabited thereabouts, Agrippa for his good entertainment, by
surrendering these Cities to him. In order whereunto he sent his Son Titus to
Caesarea to bring the Soldiers there to Scythopolis, which was the greatest
City of all Decapolis, and was near Tiberias; whither himself being come, he
expected his Son's coming: and departing from thence with three Legions, he
pitched his tent in a place called Enabris, where the seditious people of
Tiberias might behold his Army; this place was thirty Furlongs from Tiberias.
From thence he sent Valerianus a Captain to exhort them to peace, Valerianus
peaceably speaks to the Townsmen.
and he sent fifty Horsemen to accompany him: for he understood that the people
desired peace, and against their will were forced to War, by some of the
Seditious amongst Valerianus coming near the City Walls, lighted from his
Horse, and commanded all his Company to do the like, that they of Tiberias
might not think that they came to fight, The seditious sally out, and put the
Romans to flight.
but in peaceable manner: before he spoke a word, the boldest of the seditious
persons issued out against him, having one Jesus the Son of Tobias, who had
been a Captain of Thieves, for their Leader. Valerianus not presuming to fight
without Authority from his General, although he had been certain of the
Victory; and considering that it was great danger for so few to fight against a
whole multitude, and withal terrified with the boldness of the Jews, contrary
to his expectation, he fled away on Foot, accompanied only with five other,
leaving his Horse and the rest behind him, whom Jesus and his followers took,
and brought into the City, rejoicing The Citizens of Tiberias prostratet
themselves before Vespasian, and obtain pardon.
fearing what might ensue upon this fact, went to King Agrippa, who presented
them to Vespasian; they prostrated themselves at his feet, beseeching him to
have compassion on them, and not to think the whole City partakers with those
few wicked persons, that so had merited his displeasure; but to spare the
people who always had honored the Romans, and only punish the Authors of that
revolt and misdemeanour, who also had withheld the whole City till now from
yielding it self to the Romans. Vespasian moved by their entreaties, pardoned
the City, (though he was exasperated against them all for taking of Valerianus
Horse) and because he perceived Agrippa was Solicitous for fear that the City
should be destroyed; and Vespasian promised the Citizens pardon. Then Jesus and
his associates thinking it not safe for them to abide there, fled to Tarichea.
The next day Vespasian sent bebefore before him Trajanus with certain Horsemen
into the Castle, to see if all the people desired The Tiberians entertain
Vespasian with acclamations.
The Gates of the City were narrow, so that the Army could not quickly enter
in: wherefore Vespasian commanded a part of the Wall on the Southside to be
pulled down, and so entered; forbidding to spoil the Citizens, or ruin the
Walls, for Agrippa's sake, who promised that from thenceforth the Citizens
should be quiet: And indeed this King spared no pains to repair the mischiefs
which Division had caused amongst them.

CHAP. XVII.
How Tarichea was besieged.
VEspasian departed from Tiberias, Vespasian besieged Tarichea.
and encamped near Tarichea, and fortified his Camp: foreseeing that the Siege
of this place would cost much time: for all Rebels that had desired War were
got thither, trusting both to the strength of the City, and the Lake adjoining
to it, called Genesareth. For this City was built like Tiberias, upon a
Mountain: and Joseph had enclosed it with a Wall where it was not compassed by
the Lake. But the Wall, though strong, yet was not so strong as that of
Tiberias: for Joseph built that in the beginning of the Revolt, having men and
money at will; but that of Tarichea was built only by the remainder of his
liberality. The Taricheans had great store of Ships in the Lake adjoining, to
the end that if they were overcome by Land, they might fly by Water: to which
end they had prepared their Ships for Battle by Water, if need should be.
Whilst the Romans entrenched themselves, Jesus and his followers not dismayed
either with the multitude or Military Discipline of his Enemies, issued out of
the City, and slew the Workmen, and destroyed part of the Work; The Romans
drive the Jews to their Ships.
till perceiving the Romans assembled together against him, he fled again to
his Company without any loss or harm received. But the Romans pursued them so
fast, that they forced them to take their Ships: and so being gone so far from
the shore, as that yet they might easily reach them with the shot of an Arrow,
they cast Anchor and disposed their Ships in Warlike manner, and fought against
the Romans who were on Shore. Vespasian understanding at the same time that a
great multitude of them were gathered together in a place near the City, sent
his Son Titus against them with 600 Horse; who finding the number of his
Enemies too great to encounter, he certified his Father that he needed more
Forces: Yet perceiving many of those Horsemen of good courage, before any more
aid came, (though some of them were afraid of the Jews) he got upon a high
place where all might hear him, Titus Oration to his terrified Soldiers.
and said, O ye Romans, I will first put you in mind who you are, and of what
Nation, that so considering what your selves are, you may also consider who
they are with whom we are to fight. As for you, was there ever any Jews are not
to be feared.
And as for he Jews though they endure and manfully bear out their misery, yet
they look upon themselves as vanquished. If therefore they constantly endure
misery, and fight valiantly being in adversity; what should we do who are in
prosperity? I rejoice to see you show good Countenance; yet I fear lest so
great a multitude of our Enemies may discourage some of you. Let every one
therefore once again consider, who himself is, and with whom he is to fight:
and that although the Jews be bold and valiant enough, yet they observe no
warlike order, and are unarmed, and so are rather to be termed a multitude than
an Army. I need not speak of your knowledge and skill in War: since for this
only cause we are trained up in Warlike discipline in time of Peace, to the end
that our courage should answer the number of our enemies when we are to join
Battle: for what (...).
for as they are few, so are they easi^y kept in order, and may easily come to
help one another, not being pestered; whereas great multitudes do more hinder
one another than do good, and oftentimes do themselves more ^arm than their
Enemies. The Jews indeed are led with Desperation, Rage and Fury, which when
good fortune seconds them are of some force, but the It becomes Soldiers to
obey their Captain.
and will undergo the greatest perils? my self will bear the brunt of the
Enemies, and first encounter with them, and let none of you depart from me:
persuade your selves that God will assist me in this fight, and boldly presume
that we can do much more being in the midst of our Enemies, then if we should
only fight with them at distance.

Titus having thus spoken, as it were by Gods providence, all his Soldiers
took heart and courage, so that now they were sorry to see Trajan come with 400
Horsemen more before the fight began, as though their Victory would be less
renowned, because he came to help them. Vespasian also sent Antonius and Silo
with 2000 Archers, to take the Mountain that was just opposite to the Town,
Vespasian sends new supplies to Titus.
and to beat them that defended the City off from the Walls: and they did as
they were commanded. Then Titus with all force possible The Jews fly into the
City.
and trampled on by the Horsemen, every one fled as fast as he could into the
City. The Romans killed some as they fled, others as they overtook them, many
for haste tumbling one upon another; A bitter dissension and sedition in the
City.
and they prevented all that fled to the Walls and drove them back again into
the field, so that of this great multitude a very few were saved who got into
the City. Now at their return into the City, there fell a great dissension: for
the Inhabitants considering their own Estate, and the event of all former Wars,
and especially Titus being not far from the Wall, heard these tumults within
the City, Titus Oration to the Roman Soldiers.
and cried out to the Romans; This is the hour (follow Soldiers) wherein God
has given the Jews into our hands: why do we defer the time any longer, why do
we not take the Victory offered? do you not hear the cries within? they who
escaped our hands, are at variance amongst themselves: the City is ours, if we
make haste, and take courage. Nothing worthy renown can be achieved without
danger. Let us not only prevent our enemies concord, which necessity will soon
effect, but also our own Forces before any fresh aid come to us; that besides
the Victory, being so few over so huge a multitude, we may also divide the
spoil of the City among us. Jesus with his followers flies into the fields.
No sooner had he thus spoken, but presently he mounted upon his Horse, and
rode into the Lake, and so passed into the City, and all the Soldiers followed
him. They that defended the Walls, were so amazed at his boldness, that none
made resistance against him as he came: but Jesus with his followers leaving
the quarter which was his to defend, fled into the fields: others flying
toward the Lake, fell into their Enemies hands, who came that way against
them, and so were slaughtered as they were getting into their Ships; others
were slain as they were swimming to overtake the Ships that were new lanch'd
from the Shore: and there was a great slaughter of men all over the City. For
the strangers that fled not, made some resistance, but the Townsmen did Titus
having slain the factious, took compassion upon the Citizens and saved their
lives, Titus certifies his Father of his exploits and Victory.
and caused the Slaughter to cease. They who escaped to the Lake, seeing the
City taken, removed as far as they could from their Enemies. Titus sent
Horsemen to let his Father understand what he had done. Vespasian was very glad
of his Sons glorious success, whereby a great part of the War was ended. He
commanded the City to be Guarded round about, to the intent that none might
escape away alive. And the next day he came down to the Lake, and commanded
Ships to be built to pursue those that had escaped by it: and having many
workmen, and great store of matter to build them withal, his command soon
effected.


The Description of the Lake of Genezareth, and the Fountain of Jordan.
THE Lake of Genezareth takes its name from the Country adjoining to it; the
breadth thereof is forty furlongs, the length a hundred. The Water of this
Lake is sweet and good to drink, and more subtle than ordinarily the Waters of
other places are; and it is very clear near the shore, and more cool to drink,
than either that of the River or Fountain; yea it is always more cold than one
would judge such a Lake The Fountain of Jordan.
There are in it many sorts of Fishes, nothing like the Fishes of other places,
either in shape or taste. The River Jordan passes through the midst of it. It
is thought that Panium is the head and Fountain of it, but in truth it has its
Original from Phiala, from whence it passes under ground a hundred and thirty
Furlongs from Caesarea, toward that way which leads unto Trachonitis on the
right hand. This Source is called Phiala, by reason of its roundness, for it is
as round as a Wheel, and the Water still keeps within the brink of Phiala,
never increasing nor diminishing. No man knew that this was the head of Jordan,
till Philip the Tetrarch of Traconitis found Phiala, found them afterward
carried to Panium, which before that time was thought to be the Fountain of
Jordan. Panium, though it be naturally beautified, yet by Agrippa's cost and
charges it was much more adorned. Jordan begins with a deep River out of
this Den, The Description of Genezareth.
and passes along the Marish places, and dirty Lake of Semechonitis, and from
thence 120 Furlongs to the City Julias, and in the way divides the Lake
Genezareth, The fertility of Genezareth
and passing a great way further into the Wilderness, at last it falls into
the Lake called Asphaltites. Upon the Lake Genezareth there bordereth a Country
of the same Name, naturally beautiful and admirable; for there is no kind of
Plant which will not grow there, and the Inhabitants have replenished it with
Plants and Trees of all sorts, and the temperature of the Air well agrees The
length and breadth of Genezareth.
Besides the temperature of the Air, it is also watered by a plentiful Fountain
called Capernaum: Many think it to be an Arm of Nilus, because it has Fishes
like the Corbe bred only in a Lake near Alexandria. The length of this

CHAP. XIX.
A Sea Fight; in which Vespasian defeats in the Lake of ^^nezareth all those
that had saved themselves at Tarichea.
VEspasian having built his Ships, A Sea Fight against the Taricheans.
and furnished them with as many men as he Taricheans could not possibly make
any escape by Land, although they would; and they were not able to fight hand
to hand with the Romans, for their small Pyrate Boats could not withstand their
Enemies great Vessels; and besides they were not sufficiently manned, so that
they feared to encounter the Romans, who pressed altogether upon them: yet
notwithstanding sometime they came about the Roman Ships, and cast Stones at
the Romans afar off, and sometimes also they came near, and skirmished with
them: yet they themselves always had more harm than the Romans; for their
Stones which they cast did only rattle Vespasian's Victory in the Lake of
Genezareth against the Taricheans
They that were in the water and lift up their heads to swim, were killed with
Arrows, or over-taken with Roman Boats: and if in desperation they came
swimming toward their Enemies, their Hands or Heads were presently cut off.
Thus some perished one way, The end of the Battle by Sea, wherein died 6500 men.
some another, till at last they fled, and arrived upon the shore, where their
Ships were compassed round about. So the Romans killed many upon the Lake, and
many upon the Land, and one might then have seen all the Lake stained Vespasian
consults with his Chieftains about the Jews.
and full of dead Bodies, for not one escaped alive. A few days after, these
dead Bodies corrupted the Air by their stench, in such sort, that the whole
Country was annoyed with it: and this spectacle was so hideous that it caused
horror not only in the Jews, but even in the Romans themselves, who had been
the cause of it. And the Shores were all full of Boats that had suffered
Shipwreck, and dead Bodies swollen in the water: And this was the end of that
War by water. The number of them that perished here and in the City, was 6500.
The Fight being ended, Vespasian sat in a Tribunal Seat, and separated the
Strangers from the Inhabitants, for that the former seemed to be the Authors of
that War: Yet he deliberated with the Captains and Governors, whether he
should likewise pardon them: but they told him that their lives Vespasian for
this cause judged them unworthy to live, presuming that if they were let go,
they would fight against them who pardoned their Lives; it remained to consider
what death to put them to. But he thought with himself, the Inhabitants would
not patiently abide so many to be massacred, who had fled to them for succor;
wherefore he sought to use no violence to them, because he had promised them
security. But at last he was overcome by the persuasion of his Friends, who
told him that all things against the Jews were lawful, and that profit was to
be preferred before honesty, seeing both could not be had: so License being
Tiberias. They willingly obeyed as they were commanded, not misdoubting the
safety of their goods or money: But the Romans had placed themselves on every
side the way even to Tiberias, to the intent that none might escape, and so
shut them all in the City. Presently after came Vespasian and enclosed them all
in an Amphitheater, and so killed 1200 persons, who were all old men, or young
and unable for service. The Destruction and sale of the Jews.
Of the rest, that were all strong young men, he sent 6000 to Nero to work at
Istmos, near Corinth. The rest of the multitude he sold, in number 30400,
besides others that he gave to Agrippa, whom also he permitted to do what he
would with those that were of his Kingdom: But Agrippa sold all those that were
given him. Trachonitis, Gaulanitis, and Hippenis, and many of Gadara, whose
contempt of Peace procured the War. They were taken the sixth of the Ides of
September.

The FOURTH BOOK
Written by Flavius Josephus.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Fourth Book.
1 HOw Gamala was besieged. 2 How Placidus took Itaburium. 3 How Gamala was
destroyed. 4 How Titus took Gischala. 5 Of the beginning of the Destruction of
Jerusalem. 6 Of the coming of the Idumaeans to Jerusalem, and of their deeds. 7
Of the Massacre of the Jews by the Idumeans.


CHAP. I.
How Gamala was Besieged.
AFter that Tarichea was taken, The Victory of the Romans against the Jews.
all those Cities that from the time that Jotapata was surprised till this
instant had revolted from the Romans, did now again unite themselves unto them:
so that the Romans Galilee, Giscala only excepted, and Itaburium, a Mountain so
called. With these two rebelled Gamala, a Town over against Tarichea, and
situate upon the Lake, belonging to the Kingdom of Agrippa; and also Sagane,
and Seleucia* which two last belonged to Gaulantis, Sagane to the higher part,
called Gaulana, Semeachonitis a Lake.
and Gamala to the lower; Selucia unto the Lake Semechonitis, which is thirty
furlongs in breadth, The Fountain of Jordan.
and threescore large, whose Marshes reach even to Daphne, which Country is
very pleasant of it self, The situation of Gamala.
and famous for that it entertaineth the stream called little Jordan, and at
the foot of the Golden Mountain, drives it into the great Jordan. Agrippa in
the beginning of the Revolt had made a Treaty with Sagane and Seleucia: but
Gamala, trusting to its situation, would not enter into the Treaty. It is far
stronger than Jotapata. It stands on a hill which rises up in the midst of an
exceeding high Mountain, so that it represents the figure of a Camel, which
the Hebrews call Damel, and thereof it took the name, which the Inhabitants
have corrupted into Damal. Before it, and on either side are deep Valleys, into
which a man can hardly descend; only it may be assaulted on that side where it
joyneth to the Mountain, which also the Inhabitants have made inaccessible, by
cutting there a deep Ditch. In that place the City was very well inhabited on
the descent of the Hill, The City of Gamala inexpugnable and strong.
and toward the South part it stood on so steep a Hill, that it seemed as if
it would have fallen every hour, Joseph compassing it with a Wall, and with
Ditches and Mines made it stronger. Wherefore the Inhabitants of this place put
far more confidence in their Walls, than they of Jotapata did; yet they were
fewer in number, and not so Warlike people; but on account of the scitutation
of the City, they esteemed themselves above their Enemies: for the City was
full of men that fled thither by reason of the strength of the place: so that
for seven Months they resisted the forces that were sent by Agrippa to besiege
them. Vespasian besieg^^h Gamal^.
Vespasian having decamped from Ammaus, pitched his Tiberians, and so went to
Gamala, (Ammaus signifies Hot-Water, for there is a Fountain of Hot-Water
there, which cures many Diseases.) The City was so The year of the World,
4031. after the Nativity of Christ 69.
that he could not besiege it round about: wherefore he placed men to keep
watch in such places as were passable, and possessed the highest Mountain,
where his Soldiers pitching their Tents, entrenched themselves. On the East
part of the City in the most eminent place there was a Castle, where the
fifteenth and fifth Legions lay against the Town, and the tenth Legion filled
up the Ditches and Valleys. King Agrippa went to the Walls, One with a sling
wounds Agrippa.
and spoke to those that defended them, willing them to yield to the Romans;
but one of them with a Sling struck him on the right Arm, and hurt him; which
much troubled his familiar Fr^ends. And the Romans for anger that the King was
hurt, and for fear of such mischances to themselves, now became earnest to
assault the Town, persuading themselves that they would use strangers and their
Enemies hardly

The Romans having quickly entrenched themselves by reason of the multitude
that labored in business, who were accustomed to such work, began to place
their Engines against the Town-Walls. Chares and Joseph who were two of the
most potent men in the Town, animated and armed their Citizens, and led them to
the Walls to defend them; but they had not much courage to the business. And
although they well perceived that the City could not long hold out, seeing they
wanted Water, and many other things necessary to stand a Siege; yet
notwithstanding they exhorted the Townsmen to be valiant, The Romans besiege
Gamala and assault it.
where a while they resisted, notwithstanding the shot: but at last, The Romans
fall down with the ruins of the Jews houses*
they fell down upon other houses beneath them, and beat them down also, and
they likewise others situated beneath them. Many of the Romans this way
perished; for being amazed, and not knowing what to do, they got into their
houses, notwithstanding they saw them shake and totter: and many seeking to
escape, were maimed by some part of the Ruins that fell upon their Bodies, and
many were choked in the dust. Many Romans slain and spoiled.
The Citizens of Gamala rejoiced thereat, thinking that this aid was sent from
God: and not regarding their private losses, they ceased not to force the
Romans into their houses; and if any were in the narrow streets, them they slew
with Darts from the high places. The ruins afforded them Stones enough, and
their slain Enemies Swords and Armor, which they took from them, being half
dead, and used

Vespasian, Vespa^sian's fortitude and warlike valor.
who was always in the midst of these encounters, was greatly moved to see the
Buildings fall so upon his Soldiers, and forgetting his own safety, he retired
himself with only a few to the higher part of the City, where he was left in
great danger, having very few about him (for Titus his Son was not there, being
before this time sent to M^tianus in Syria) and now he could not fly safely,
nor yet had it been for his honor, if he could. Vespasian's fight with the
Jews.
Wherefore remembering all his great Actions from his Childhood, and his

Many Romans perished in this Fight, and among the rest Ebutius a Centurion,
who not only in this fight showed himself valiant, but also in many battles
before, and had done the Jews much harm. Gallus with ten Soldiers (...) hid in
a certain house.
Also in that fight a certain Captain named Gallus, accompanied with ten Syrian
Soldiers, hid himself in a house, and at supper-time he heard the people of
that house talk, what the Citizens of Gamala were purposed to do against the
Romans, and in the night time he slew them all, and escaped safe unto the
Romans. Vespasian perceiving his Army dejected at this disadvantage, and so
much the more, for that they never yet had so bad success, and especially, for
that they had forsaken their General, and left him in danger, thought good to
comfort them, speaking nothing concerning himself, Vespasian comfort his
Soldiers.
lest he should seem to find fault with some. In the beginning of his speech, he
told them, That it behoved them patiently to bear that which was common to all
men, because there was no Victory without bloodshed, and that Fortune was
mutable; that he had already slain many thousand Jews, and now had paid a small
Tribute for his happy success to adverse Fortune. That as it did not become any
but vainglorious people to boast in their Prosperity, The inconstancy and
mutability of fortune.
so none but Cowards feared and trembled in Adversity. For; said he, Fortune is
very mutable both to the good and bad; and he is a valiant Man that is (said
he) this has not befaln us through want of Courage, or by the Valor and
Prowess of the Jews; but the difficulty of the place has been the only obstacle
of our Victory. If you are to be blamed, it is only for venturing too far; for
when you saw your Enemies fly to the higher places, you should then have held
your hands, and not have pursued them with so manifest danger to your selves,
as every one might foresee in this pursuit: so having gained the lower part of
the City, you might in a little time have drawn them to a more equal conflict:
but you, being eager of the Victory, did not respect your own safety. The Roman
Soldiers do all things with discretion.
It is not the manner of the Romans rashly and unadvisedly to fight; they are
wont to do all things orderly and advisedly. Timerity is fit only for barbarous
People; With these and such like speeches he comforted his Soldiers.

The People of Gamala were at first very joyful for their prosperous success;
which notwithstanding did not happen through their Valor: but soon after
considering, that now all hope of pardon was taken away, and that there was no
way to escape, they became very sorrowful, and their hearts relented (for now
Victuals failed them) yet The Romans once more attempt the assault of G^mala.
The Romans again built Mounts, and attempted to assault the City, and many of
the Citizens fled by the Valleys where no guard was, and by secret Vaults
underneath the ground; and they who for fear of being taken, remained in the
City, perished for hunger: for all the Victuals were reserved for them that
fought, who, by the extremity whereinto they were reduced, had not lost their
Courage.


How Placidus took the Mountain Itaburium.
DUring this Siege, The height of the Mountain Itaburium.
Vespasian made another attempt against those that kept the Mountain Itaburium,
situate between the great field and Scythopolis, being thirty Furlongs high,
and inaccessable on the North side. In the very top of this Mountain there is a
Plain twenty Furlongs over, enclosed with a Wall: which Wall though of Joseph
had built in forty days. They received all necessary provision from beneath,
but they had only rainwater. Unto this place a huge multitude were gathered,
and Vespasian sent Placidus against them with six hundred Horse, who could no
ways get up the Mountain: wherefore he exhorted many of them to peace, putting
them in hope of pardon: Many Jews came down toward him, but with intention to
entrap him, and surprise him unawares. Placidus purposely gave them fair
speeches, hoping to get them down into the Plain: and they, as though they
would have obeyed him, Fraud paid with fraud.
followed him thither, meaning when they came there, suddenly to assault him:
yet Placidus his device took place. For when the Jews assaulted him, he fained
flight, and the Jews having pursued him a great way from the Mountain, he
turned again upon them, Placidus Victory.
and wounded many on the backs as they fled, killed some, and Itaburium, and
Jerusalem; and the Inhabitants (now Water failing them) yielded to Placidus,
and delivered the Mountain unto him.

CHAP. III.
How Gamala was Destroyed.
IN the mean time many of the Gamalians, The Romans undermine a certain Tower
and it falls with a great noise.
that had appeared the most hardy, fled October. Upon which day, three
Soldiers of the fifteenth Legion, toward the break of day, undermined the
highest Tower in their quarter, and entered into it, those that kept it, neither
perceiving them when they came in, nor when they went out (for it was in the
nightime.) These Soldiers being wary lest any noise should be made, removed
five of the greatest stones of the Foundation, and presently leapt away; and
incontinently the Tower fell with a hideous noise, and with the fall killed
those that kept it; whereupon many that kept watch in those quarters fled
through fear; and they who sought to escape the Romans, were killed; amongst
whom Joseph was stricken with a Dart from a part of the Wall that was fallen
down, and there dyed. They who were within the City were terrified with the
noise hereof, and ran up and down as though all the Enemies were already entered
into it. And Chares Joseph's Companion, being sick, yielded up the Ghost, fear
increasing his Disease, and helping to shorten his life. The Romans remembering
the bad success at the last assault, did not enter the City till the
twenty-third of the Month aforesaid.

Then Titus animated by resentment of the misfortune of the Romans in his
absence, Titus with two hundred Horse besides chosen Footmen, enters Gamala.
accompanied with 200 Horsemen, and some chosen Footmen, entered the City, no
man resisting him: the Watchmen then first perceiving it, cried, To Arms.
Those within the City fearing that Titus was entered, some took their Children,
some their Wives, Titus, and were all put to the Sword; and they that could not
get into the Castle, not knowing what to do, fell among the Roman Guards. Then
the skies were filled with the cries of men dying, and the lower places of the
City flowed with blood. Vespasian led his whole Army against those that fled
into the Castle, The top of the Castle of Gamala stony and hard to be climbed.
which was of a great height, and scarcely accessible, standing in a stony
place full of Ditches and deep Dens, and compassed with steep Rocks. The Jews
drove down the Romans that offered to come up to them, partly with Darts,
partly with Stones, which they rolled down upon them; and they were so high,
that the Romans Arrows could not reach them. But at last, as it were by Gods
providence, The Romans Victory by Gods Providence.
who would have it so, a Whirlwind arose which carried 9000 Jews slain in
Gamala, and only two Women escape.
So that the Cruelty the Romans showed against the people of Gamala, was not so
great as that which they used against themselves; for there were only four
thousand that perished by the Romans Sword, and the number of them Philip Son of
Joachim, a worthy Man, and General of Agrippa's Army; and these two were saved
only, because at such time as the City was taken, they hid themselves: for they
spared not Infants, but many took them and cast them down from the Castle. And
thus was Gamala destroyed the 23 day of October, having begun to Revolt the 21
day of September.

CHAP. IV. The year of the World, 4032. after the Nativity of Christ, 70.

How Titus took Giscala.
NOw all the Cities and strong Places of Galilee were taken, Giscala only
excepted. Part of the Inhabitants whereof desired Peace, for that they were
Husbandmen, and their riches consisted in the Fruits of the Earth; John a
Poysoner and a deceitful man, inforceth the Citizens of Giscala to Rebel.
but there were many factious Freebooters in the City, and amongst them many of
the natural Inhabitants. These people were incited to Revolt by one John, a
very wicked and deceitful person, Son to one Levias; he was of ill manners,
bold to attempt any thing, and making no conscience of any thing he took in
hand; and he was known to all men for one that desired War, to make himself
mighty. This man was a Ringleader of the Seditious persons in Giscala: and for
fear of him, the People, who perhaps otherwise would have sent Legates to the
Romans to request peace, were hindered and forced to stay till the Romans came
to fight against them. Against these People Vespasian sent Titus, and with him
a thousand Horsemen; and the tenth Legion toward Scythopolis: Himself with the
rest went to Caesarea, to refresh them after their great labor, at the charge
of the Towns adjoining; judging it necessary to fit them to sustain manfully
the toyls that were to ensue: for he foresaw that he should have much ado to
win Jerusalem, both for that it was very Vespasian foreseeth his no small
trouble in the Siege of Jerusalem.
and was the Chief City of all the Nation. And his care in this point was so
much the more, for that he perceived many out of all parts fled thither; and
that it was compassed with almost invincible Walls: and besides this, the
boldness and desperate courage of the Inhabitants, who although that they had
had no Walls at all, yet had been scarcely to be Conquered: and therefore he
thought it necessary to refresh his Soldiers before this Enterprise, as
Champions are prepared for the Combat.

Titus having taken a view of Giscala, Titus his compassion toward those of
Giscala.
judged that it might easily be taken: yet knowing that if it were taken by
force, all the People would be destroyed by the Romans, he being weary of
bloodshed, and commiserating the innocent People, which were otherwise like to
perish together with the culpable, attempted to take it by surrender. Titus his
merciful Oration to those of Giscala.
among whom were many of the Seditious, he told them that he marvelled what
help they expected, or by whose advice, all other Cities being now taken, they
alone would resist the Roman Forces, especially whenas they had already seen
many Towns, far stronger than theirs, overthrown at the first assault: and that
contrariwise those who had yielded themselves to the Romans, lived in peace,
and enjoyed all that was theirs. Which offer (said he) I now also make to you,
and am not yet incensed against you, because that which you do is in hope of
your liberty: but if you still persevere in your rebellious course, and refuse
this kind offer, you shall presently perceive the Roman Sword drawn out for
your destruction, and incontinently find your Walls but a mockery, and no ways
able to resist the Roman Galilee. None of the Townsmen were admitted to make
answer, nor to come to the Walls; for the Seditious were Masters of them: John's
answer to Titus's Exhortation.
and a Guard was placed at every Gate, lest any should go out to submit
themselves, or any Horsemen should be received into the City. John made answer
for all, That he liked well of the conditions offered, and that he would either
persuade or compel the Inhabitants to accept them: but he requested that that
day might be granted to the Jews, being the Seventh day, wherein it was not
lawful for them to treat of Peace, or make War. For (as the Romans knew) the
Jews every seventh day cease from all work: and if they profaned it, they who
caused them to do Titus might prevent by placing a strong Guard and Watch in
every place about it.) That Titus might make advantage of it, since it being
his design to offer them Peace and Safety, it was an action no less worthy of
him, to have regard to the observation of their Law, than a duty indispensable
in them not to violate it.

With these and such like speeches John sought to delude Titus, being not so
religious about the keeping of the Sabbath, as careful for his own safety: for
he feared that the City would presently be taken, and himself left alone; and
so he determined in the John should then escape to be the overthrow of
Jerusalem, and that Titus should not only grant him the time he requested to
deliberate, but also that night remove his Camp near Cydessa, a great Village,
and the strongest of all that Country, belonging to the Tyrians, which the
Galileans always hated.

In the night time John perceiving no Romans to keep watch about the Town, John
reserved, by Gods providence, to be at the Siege of Jerusalem.
and having now opportunity, fled not only with the armed men about him, but
also with many of the Chief of the City, and whole Families, whom he promised
to conduct to Jerusalem. But John fearing either Death or Slavery, and careful
for his own safety, carried them twenty Furlongs out of the City, where being
so desolate, they began grievously to lament. For every one thought himself as
near his Enemies, as he was The fear of those Jews that fled with John
and were killed in the way with the press of them that followed: so that the
Women and Infants perished miserably: and if they spoke any thing, it was only
to entreat their Parents or their Kindred to stay for them.

But John's exhortation took effect, who cried to them to save themselves, and
hasten to such a place where they might be safe, and revenge themselves of the
Romans, for the outrages which they that remained behind were like to endure:
and so the multitude

Titus early in the morning came to the Walls to know whether they accepted of
his Offer. Then the people set open the Gates, and with their Wives and
Children came to meet him, The Citizens of Giscala entertain Titus with all
obedience.
all crying that he was their Benefactor and Deliverer: Also they told him that
John was fled, and besought him to pardon them, and execute Justice upon those
Malefactors that remained in the City. Titus, at their request, sent certain
Horsemen to pursue John, but they could not take him, for before they came, he
had gotten to Jerusalem; yet they slew almost two thousand of them that fled
with him, and brought back again 3000 Women and Children. Titus was angry that
John by deceit had escaped unpunished: yet his anger was something appeased,
when he perceived John's Titus mercy to his Enemies.
in that so many of his Company were slain, and so many brought back Captives.
It is better to leave an Enemy in suspense through fear, than with the guilty
to confound the innocent.
Thus he peaceably entered the City, commanding the Soldiers to break down a
little piece of the Wall, as it were to take possession of it, and so punished
the Seditious rather with Threats than Torments. For he thought that many were
accused only for private hatred, and so were in danger to suffer being
innocent: and he thought it better to let the wicked live in fear, than with
them to destroy the guiltless: and that perhaps hereafter they would be more
quiet, either for fear of punishment, or for shame of falling again into their
former offense, for which they were pardoned: whereas if any man suffered
undeservedly, he could not afterward help it. He placed there a Garrison both
to repress the Seditious, and also to confirm them that desired Galilee
Conquered after it had cost the Romans much toil.

CHAP. V.
Of the beginning of the Destruction of Jerusalem.
AS soon as John was entered into Jerusalem, all the People flocked about him,
and those that came with him, enquiring what new Calamities had befallen their
Giscala, and other places that were not able to resist; and that it behoved
them all to reserve their Vigor and strength to defend their Metropolitan
City. The courage of John and those that fled with him, stirs up the Jews to
make War against the Romans.
They also told them how Giscala was taken by the Romans, and that they
departed in good sort away, though some reported that they fled. The People of
Jerusalem hearing what these men reported, and how many were Prisoners to the
Romans, fell into a great fear, as though that John, nothing ashamed he had so
shamefully forsaken them of Giscala who fled with him, went first to one, and
then to another, inciting them all to War, with vain hopes, alleging the
weakness of the Romans, Jerusalem, having had so much ado, and endured such
difficulties in entering the little Bourgs and Villages of Galilee, against
whose Walls they had broken all their Engines. These discourses of his incited
many young men to Sedition; but all the wiser sort foresaw what was like to
ensue, and already mourned for the loss of the City. In this case were they of
Jerusalem: Intestine discord in Jewry.
yet before this Sedition in the City, the Country People began to be at
discord among themselves. For Titus departed from Giscala to Casarea, and
Vespasian went from Caesarea to Jamnia and Azotus, and took them both: and
leaving there Garrisons, he returned to Caesarea, bringing with him a great
multitude The Jews t^rn their weapons against themselves.
All the Cities had Civil discords among themselves, so that when the Romans
did not set upon them, one part of the Jews in every City fought against
another, and there was a great dissension between those that desired peace, and
the Seditious People. At fiirst, this Discord began only in private houses; but
in the end, those of one mind united, and began in Companies to Rebel openly.
Thus every place was troubled with civil discord: and every where rash young
men, who desired War, prevailed against grave and wise old men, who foreseeing
the calamity like to ensue, desired Peace. At first, the Inhabitants one by one
robbed and spoiled what they could; The Thieves trooping together in Jerusalem
spoil the Country.
but at last in whole Troops they joined together and robbed openly, and wasted
all the Country about: and in their Robberies they Jerusalem. This City had no
Governor, and according to the ancient Custom of their Ancestors, was open to
all that came thither that were their Countrymen; and so much more willingly
at that time, because they thought they that came thither, came of good will to
help them: which Rapins and spoils committed by day.
for not content to rob and spoil, they also attempted to commit Murders, not
only privily, or in the night upon mean men, but even in the day time they
publicly set upon those of the chiefest quality. For first of all they took
Antipas, who was of the blood Royal, The Nobility of the City are taken and
slain by the Thieves.
a man so eminent amongst them, that the public Treasure was committed to his
charge, and put him in Prison: and after him they took Sepha a Raguel, and
Levias, both of them of the Kings Household; and after them all that seemed to
bear any sway or Authority amongst the People. Great fear fell upon the
Inhabitants, and every one provided to save himself, as though the City were
already surprised by the Enemies. But these people were not content thus to
have imprisoned these great men, they thought it not safe for themselves any
longer to keep them alive: for many went daily to visit them, who were able to
revenge their injuries; and moreover they feared that the People would make
head against them, being moved with their Insolences. Wherefore they
determined to kill them: and to effect their purpose they sent one John a cruel
Murderer, who was the Son of Dor^as: he accompanied with ten more, all having
swords went to the Prison, and slew as many The Thieves at their pleasure make
a high Priest.
and that therefore they had deserved well by it. The People were brought to
such slavery and terror, that the choosing the High Priest was in their hands,
to elect whom they pleased; so much was their Insolence increased. Thus they
not respecting the Families, A high Priest chosen by them contrary to the
ancient Custom.
out of which it was only lawful to choose the high Priest, they elected
Strangers and base persons to that sacred Dignity, and such as would be
partakers of their Villainies and Impieties, for they, who not deserving it,
attained to such dignity, Ananus, who was one of the Priests, and the most
ancient and wisest of them all, who perhaps had saved the City, had he escaped
the hands of these Miscreants. But they used the Temple as a Castle and defense
for themselves against the People, and made the Sanctuary a place for them to
exercise Tyranny in. And that which increased the sorrow of the Citizens, was,
that amidst these Calamities, their Religion was also contumeliously abused:
for these

Then calling one of the holy Tribes, Phanes a Country Clown made a high Priest.
named Eniachin, they cast Lots, and the Lot fell upon one, whereby their
iniquity was discovered. This man whose Lot it was to Phanias, who was the Son
of Samuel; a man not only unworthy of that Dignity, but who had been so ill
brought up, that he never knew what the high Priest meant. This Phanias was
born in a Village called Apthasis. Him, against his will, they fetched out of
the field, and as it had been in a Stage Play, they graced him with the
Sacerdotal habit, and gave him instructions how he should behave himself, as
though so great impiety had been but a sport. The rest of the Priests,
beholding a far off the holy Laws thus scorned, scarcely contained themselves
from tears, and groaned for sorrow, that their sacred Dignities were so abused.
The People could no longer endure this their Tyranny, but every one bethought
himself how to suppress these Tyrants. The best Citizens exhort the people to
revenge.
And those that were most earnest herein, were Gorion, Joseph's Son, Simeon the
Son of Gamaliel; who first went about the City in private, and afterward in a
public Assembly exhorted the People to be revenged upon those Tyrants, who
took from them their Liberty; and to address themselves to purge the holy
Temple from such vile and unclean Persons. Likewise the best disposed among the
Priests, to wit, Jesus the Son of Gamala, and Ananus, the Son of Ananus, often
in public Sermons reprehended and upbraided the People with their sloth, that
they made no more haste to destroy those Zealous; for so those wretches termed
themselves, as though they had been devout promoters of God's Glory, and not
impious malefactors.

The people being all assembled together, grieved to see the holy place so made
a Den of Thieves, and such Robberies and Murders committed openly; yet did
they not go about revenge, thinking themselves too weak to deal with these
Zealots, as indeed they were. Whereupon the high Priest Ananus stood up among
them: and having often turned his Eyes to the Temple, The Zealous the most
wretched occasion of these violences.
and beheld it with tears in his Eyes; Oh, said he, How far better were it for
me to die, than live to see the House of God thus filled with Impiety, and the
Sanctuary wherein none should come but the high Priest, profaned with the
wicked feet of impious persons, clothed in Priests apparel, and bearing the
greatest Authority? Why do I yet live, Ananus sharp invective against the
Zealous.
and to be gray headed, abstain from dying a glorious death? Nay, rather I
alone will go against these Murderers, and as though I were in a Wilderness
where there were no man besides my self, I alone will go and offer my soul in
the presence of God. For what does it avail me to live amongst a People that
have no feeling of their own calamity, and which Ananus twitteth the Jews with
their fear.
O tyrannous Government! But why should I exclaim against the Tyrants? Do not
you your selves make them great, and nourish their power and authority by your
patience? Do not you, by despising those who were before in authority, being
but a few, make all these, who are many in number, Tyrants over your selves?
Have not you by keeping your selves quiet whilst they are armed, drawn their
swords upon your own heads? and whereas it behoved you to resist their
enterprises, when first they injured your Kindred; The cruelty of the Thieves.
you by suffering, have made them Thieves, because at first you made no
account, when they destroyed Houses and whole Families. And this was the cause,
that at last say, they being neither accused nor condemned, nor having any man
to hear them, they were The Temple the strongest Fortress of that City.
called indeed a Temple, but now a Fortress or Castle of defense. What do you
now think, such a Tyranny being established over you, and your Enemies being
even upon you; what do you deliberate to do? Do you expect the Romans to come
and help you to save the Temple and sacred places, as if our City were at that
pass that our very Enemies could not but pity us? Will you not rise, and as the
very brute Beasts do, Wars are intended for liberty.
to our disadvantage) if not to obtain our Liberty? And we, who cannot endure
to be subject to the Lords of the whole World, suffer those of our own Nation
to tyrannize over us. It may be The comparison of the Romans and Jews and their
properties.
The Romans never durst pass beyond the limits of profane places, nor ever
violated our sacred Laws and Customs, but always reverenced the Sanctuary,
beholding An answer to their contrary opinion, who object the number and
boldness of the Enemy.
What punishment is there that those that have thus tyrannized over us deserve
not? yea, what punishment can be devised great enough for their offense? I know
that all of you were so persuaded before I spoke, and you were incited against
them by that which you have endured at their hands: but yet some fear their
multitude and their courage, The Epilogue of Ananus Oration to the people.
and consume them therewith. Let us but only show our selves, and we shall
dismay them. Yet it is an

Ananus thus exhorted the people against the Zealots; yet he knew well that it
was great difficulty to overcome them, being lusty young men, many in number,
of great courage, and the more desperate by the remorse of Conscience for the
horrible crimes and execrable deeds which they had committed; for they
despaired of all hope of pardon for their misdeeds. Yet Ananus thought it
altogether intolerable that the Commonwealth should be so overruled. After
this exhortation the people cried out, that they were ready to go against the
Thieves, and to do as they were exhorted. Ananus selected out the most able men
for War, and set them in order, Ananus quickly gathered together the people,
who were more in number than the Thieves, Ananus disposes hi^ Soldiers
against Zealots.
but not so armed as they; but what they wanted in arms, their courage
supplied. For the Citizens were armed with fury, stronger then Arms; and they
which were gone out of the Temple, with a more desperate boldness than all the
multitude how great soever. For the Citizens thought it no abiding for them in
the City, except they could drive away the Zealots: and the Zealots thought
they could not escape torments and death it self, except they were Victors. The
fight of the Citizens and Zealots in the Temple.
At last, the Thieves not able to make any longer resistance, by little and
little retired themselves into the Temple, and Ananus with his Company entered
the Temple by force with them, and brake the body of his Enemies. Then they in
the outer Temple were in great fear, and fled into the inner Temple, and shut
the Gates with all speed. Ananus would not offer violence to the sacred Gates;
and besides the Enemies cast Darts from above: for he thought it a great
offense against God, although he might have got the victory, to introduce the
people not being purified. Wherefore he elected six thousand of the chief of
all his men well armed, and appointed them to keep the Porches, and others to
succeed in their places while they took rest. And many of the better sort of
the Citizens being placed to keep watch there, hired John full of deceit, and a
betrayer of the Citizens*
But John, who as before we declared, fled from Giscala, wrought the ruin of
them all. This man being full of deceit, and above all measure desirous of
rule, long ago intended to overthrow the Commonwealth. To which end, from that
time he counterfeited himself to be against the Thieves, and so day and night
accompanied Ananus and the rest, both in their Consultations, and when they
went to visit the Watch; and he disclosed all their Counsels to the Zealots:
and there was nothing decreed by the people, but he gave the Thieves
intelligence thereof before it was put in practice; yet he seemed to be very
respectful to Ananus, and the rest of the Nobility, hereby hoping to conceal
his Treachery. But it fell out contrary to his expectation; for this his too
much reverence caused him Ananus perceived that the Enemies knew all their
designs; and though John's deeds carried suspicion of Treason, yet could they
not easily remove him, his craft was such: besides this, he was upheld by many
noblemen who were employed in these affairs. John swears to be faithful to
the people.
Wherefore they thought good to request of him an oath of friendship; which he
denied not, but added moreover that he would be true to the people, and neither
disclose any deed or secret Counsel of theirs to the Enemies, but with heart
and hand would truly endeavor to suppress the Rebels. So Ananus did no more
mistrust him because of his oath, and admitted him afterward to all their
Counsels, John contrary to his Oath reveals their secrets to the Zealots.
by suffering none of the Townsmens secrets to be concealed from them, but
declared unto them all that ever Ananus and his Confederates determined against
them; and that even now he was like together with them to fall into extreme
Danger, except it pleased God as it were miraculously to assist them. For, said
he, now Ananus without delay will Vespasian, who will come with his Army in all
haste and take the City: and that he had appointed the day following for
Purification, to purify the people, that so under pretense of piety he might
let them into the City, or else they might enter in by Ananus purposed so soon
as they were unarmed to set upon them. John stirs up the Zealots against the
Citizens.
Wherefore if they had any care of themselves, they should either entreat the
Watchmen that besieged them to be favorable to them, or else get some succor
from some place without the Temple. For (said he) he that amongst you hops
for pardon if you be overcome, does not remember what has past, and what he
has done; but let them persuade themselves as they please, they that have been
injured, will not forget and forgive so soon, as he that injured them is sorry
for his fact. Nay, many times the repentance of malefactors makes them John
terrified the Zealots; yet durst he not openly tell them what he meant by
foreign help, notwithstanding he meant the Idumeans. And that he might more
inflame the Thieves, he went to the chiefest of them, and secretly told them
that Ananus was cruelly bent against them, and breathed out many threatenings
against some in particular.

CHAP. VI.
How the Idumeans came to Jerusalem, and what they did there.
AMongst the Zealots there were two principal, Eleazer one of the Zealots
causes the Idumeans to be sent for
Eleazer the Son of Simon, who above all the rest was thought most fit both to
give counsel, and to execute that which was consulted upon* and Zacharias the
Son of Amphicalus; who both Ananus, to get him into Authority, had sent to call
the Romans (for this John had fained) deliberated with themselves what to do,
having so short time to provide. For they supposed that presently the people
would assault them; and they bethought themselves that now it was too late to
seek foreign help: for they might endure all calamity, before they could give
notice hereof unto any that would help them. Yet at last they determined to
call the Idumaeans to aid them, The Zealots require help from the Idumeans.
and so they write a short Epistle to them, letting them understand how Ananus,
having seduced the people, meant to betray the Mother-City of their Nation to
the Romans: and that they fighting for Ananus and their enemies hands, and the
City to be brought in subjection to the Romans: they also ordered many things
to be spoken by word of mouth to the Rulers of Idumea. For which purpose were
chosen two principal men, eloquent, and apt to persuade; The nature and manners
of the Idumeans.
and that, which was in this case required, swift of foot. It was certain that
the Idumeans would presently aid them, being a brutish rude Nation, and prone
to sedition and alteration, much rejoicing therein, and by flattery easily
entreated to War, and would make as much haste to them, as if they went to some
festival solemnity: so that there only was requisite two speedy messengers.
Which two were Ananias. These presently went to the Governors of Idumea, who
reading the Epistle, and hearing that which the messengers were to say to them,
like Madmen assembled all the people together in great haste, and proclaimed
War: so the people in an instant gathered themselves together, and were all
armed to fight for the liberty of their Mother-City; and twenty thousand being
assembled together under the Government of four Captains, Twenty thousand
Idumeans come to Jerusalem.
came with all speed to Jerusalem: the names of them were John and James, the
Sons of Sosa, and Simon the Son of Cathlas, and Phineas the Son of Closoth.
Ananus and his Watch knew not of the going of those two Messengers, nor of the
Watches in the City, but they understood of the Idumeans coming, and so shut
Jesus the eldest of the Priests next after Ananus* stood in a Tower opposite
against them, and spoke in this manner.

Though many and diverse tumults and troubles have molested this City, yet I
never so much wondered at any of them, Jesus Oration and exhortation to the
Idumeans.
as that you are come with such fury and readiness to help these wicked people,
against all expectation: for (said he) you are come against us to help most
vile persons: and so rashly, as it behoved not you to have done, if your
Metropolitan City had requested your help against barbarous people. If I judged
your manners like theirs that have requested your help, I should then think you
had some reason to come: for nothing causes firmer friendship than agreement
or sympathy in manners. But they, if their actions be considered, Romans
coming, and of the betraying of the City? For even now I heard some of you
mutter, that you came to deliver your Mother-City. The disproof of the Zealots
faction, who intended the overthrow of the City and betraying-thereof.
Is it not a wonder to see this device and invention of these malefactors? But
they could devise no other way to incite others against us (who even naturally
desire liberty, and are ready for the same to spend our dearest blood in
conflict with the enemy) but to fain us to be enemies of Liberty. But it
behooves you to consider who are these Calumniators, and against whom these
Calumnies are devised; and then to gather the verity of the matter, not from
forged tales, fained at men's pleasures, but from the thing it self. What should
move us now to yield to the Romans, having endured us yet nothing to constrain
us thereunto? when if we had liked to live under their obedience, we needed not
at Galilee, which they have already conquered, has made them proud; and by
humbling our selves to them being now near us, should we not incur an infamy
worse than death it self. True it is, Peace is better than War.
I think peace better than War; yet being once provoked to War, and the War
once begun, I had rather die a glorious death, than live in Captivity. Do they
inform you that we have secretly sent the chief of our City to the Romans, or
that by common consent of all the people we have done it? If they say we did it
secretly, let them then tell what Friends of ours were sent, or what Servants
of ours were Ministers to effect this Treason. Romans? Let them tell you who
was appointed for that Embassage. These are but devices and contrivances

If Fate had so decreed that our City should be betrayed to the Enemy, Jesus
exhorts the Idumeans that since they are come, they should oppose themselves
against the Zealots.
assure your selves they who thus accuse us, would have betrayed it themselves;
having committed already all sort of impieties, Treason only excepted. It is
your part, seeing you are come hither in Arms first (as Reason and Justice
requires) to assist your Mother-City against them who tyranni^e over us, and
violate our Laws, make all that Justice, which they can effect with their
Sword. First of all they took Noblemen and cast them into prison, having drawn
them from amidst the public assembly; and never being accused nor condemned,
nothing respecting their entreaties, they put them to death. If it please you
to come in peaceably and not in hostile manner into our City, your selves shall
plainly behold evident tokens of this that I for there is none amongst us,that
has tasted the persecution of these wretched men, who are Jesus requires the
Idumeans to judge the discrences between the Zealots and them.
And consider what favor we show them, who permit them to plead their own
causes before you, they being guilty of so heinous crimes, and having put to
death persons of such account, never accused nor permitted to speak for
themselves: yet this favor we will grant them for your sake. But if you
continue your indignation against us, and refuse this offer to be our Judges,
then let us entreat you, that The end of Jesus Oration to the Idumeans.
If you like none of these, marvel not that we shut our gates against you,
coming in an armed and hostile manner. But the Idumeans being angry, were not
moved hereby, and so much the more for that entrance into the City was denied
them, and their Generals were exceedingly displeased, thinking it shameful to
lay down their Arms at the command of others who had no Authority over them.

Then one of the Captains named Simon, Simons answer to Jesus.
the Son of Cathla, having with much ado gotten his Soldiers to be silent,
stood up in a place where the High Priests might hear him, and said, That he
now did not wonder that those who maintained Liberty, were besieged in the
Temple, since they of the City now shut their Gates against them, the City
being common and free for all the Nation; and that perhaps they were ready to
open the City Gates to receive the Romans. That they spoke to the Idumeans from
a Tower, and commanded them to cast down their Arms, The Idumaeans are
displeased because the City gates were locked against them.
which they had taken only for the Liberty of the City, when they durst not
trust their own Nation to keep the same, and yet would have them Judges of the
discord: and that accusing others for killing some not convicted, they
themselves would condemn (says he) toward you, to fight against our own
Nation, when we came only to preserve your Liberty? The reproaches the
Idumaeans object against the high Priest and Citizens
But this is as true, as that they whom you thus besiege have wronged you, and
as the accusation you forge against them. But your keeping in hold those that
are the defenders of the Commonwealth, shutting the City gates against Men of
your own Blood, you impose upon us contumelious commands. Who can any longer
endure this your mockery, that perceives how contradictory your allegations
are? For who can justly accuse those that ye keep shut up in the Temple,
because they presumed to punish Traitors whom you grace with the title of Noble
and Innocent, because they were your Confederates? Only in Id^means shut you
out of your City, you your selves not permitting us to come and offer
Sacrifice. But though they were too merciful, yet we the Idumeans will preserve
the House of God, and will fight for the common good of our Country, and will
be revenged both of the Enemies that are without the City, and the Traitors
within. And here will we remain before the City till either the Romans come and
deliver you, or till you change your minds, and bethink your selves what
advantage it is to have Liberty.


Of the Massacre of the Jews by the Idumeans.
ALL the Idumeans assented with a loud cry to these speeches of Simon. And
Jesus departed sorrowful, seeing that the Idumeans would agree to no reason,
and that thereby their City should suffer a double War. For the Idumeans were
no less disquieted, who took the matter in great disdain that they were not
permitted to enter into The Idumeans pitch their Tabernacles near the Walls.
Yet would they not for shame return, nothing being done by them: and so rashly
placing their Tabernacles near the City walls, they determined to stay there.
But that night there arose a most furious Tempest; for there was a great stormy
Wind, A huge Storm.
and an exceeding great Rain, mixed with fearful Thunder and horrible Lightning,
and an Earthquake, with strange Noises; so that all men thought this motion of
the Earth would overturn the whole order of Nature, or at least portend some
great Calamity. The Idumeans and Townsmen were both of one mind: For they
thought that God was angry with them for bearing Arms against their Metropolis,
Ananus and his followers persuaded themselves that they had now overcome them
without War, and that God had fought for them against the Idumeans. But they
were false Prophets, and what they judged would befall their Enemies, fell upon
themselves. In the mean while the Idumeans lay as close together as they could,
and covered their heads with their Shields, by which means the Rain did them
not so much harm. The Zealots consult to break open the Gates, to assail the
Watch and let in the Idumeans.
The Zealots were concerned for the Idumeans more than for themselves, and
devised which way they might succor them. The boldest amongst them advised the
rest, by force to set upon the Guard, and so to get into the City, and open the
Gates to the Idumeans that were come to help them: for it was easy to surprise
the Watch, by Idumeans: and moreover they could not think that Ananus was
careless, but went up and down, first from one Watch, and then to another; yet
this night he did not so, The watchmen are oppressed with sleep.
not for slothfulness, but because that the Destinies had so decreed that
thereby both he and the Watchmen should perish. For about midnight the storm

Then the Zealots determined to file the Bars and Bolts of the Gates asunder;
to effect which, they took the Instruments which were consecrated to the
Temple; and this attempt was much furthered by the great Wind and Thunder,
which made such a noise that they could not be heard: So issuing out of the
Temple, they went privily to the Walls, The Idumeans by the means of the
Zealots enter by night.
and opened that Gate near which the Idumeans lay: and suspecting that Ananus
would make some resistance, they first of all drew their Swords, and then
together with the Idumeans came in: and if at that time they had assaulted the
City, they had without any let or hindrance destroyed all the People therein;
so great was their rage at that time. But first of all they hastened to assist
their fellows, whom they left besieged, Idumeans not to leave them in danger,
for whose succor they were come, nor permit them to incur greater damage: for
having first surprised the Watchmen, it would be more easy for them to assault
the City; which if they did not, but first set upon the Citizens, The Idumeans
joy^ thems^l^es with the Zealots in the Temple.
they would presently assemble together, and oppose themselves against them,
and not permit them to ascend up into the Temple. The Idumeans consented to
this; and so they passed through the City into the Temple: and the Zealots
remaining in the Temple impatiently expected their coming; at whose arrival
they took Courage, and joining with the Idumeans, came out of the inner Temple,
and set upon the Watch: and some being slain who were fast asleep, the rest
were awaked by the cries of others, and so betook themselves to their Arms to
defend others without the Temple also assailing them, they judged that the
Idumeans were broken Idumeans, and for a good space defended their idle
fellows; others went and advertised the Inhabitants what was done, yet none
durst come to help them, because they now knew that the Idumeans were got in,
but every one lamented their hard fortune, and the Women made great lamentation
when the Watchmen were slain. The Zealots also answered their cries with the
like, The immanity of the Idumeans and Zealots against the Citizens of
Jerusalem.
and the Tempest and Thunder made all more dreadful. The Idumeans spared none,
because they were naturally cruel and fierce to shed blood, and angry that they
were so beaten with the Tempest, they used them most cruelly, by whose means
they were shut out of the City, sparing neither Idumeans rage; but turning
themselves Ananus and Jesus the high Priest executed.
They made diligent search for the Priests, and many laid violent hands upon
them, and killed them: and standing upon their dead bodies, sometime they
upbraided Ananus with the Peoples favor toward him, sometime Jesus with the
words he spoke upon the Wall to them; and they were so impious, that they cast
away their dead Bodies unburied; notwithstanding the Jews in this point are so
religious, that after Sunset they take down the dead bodies of Malefactors,
who by sentence have been adjudged to the Cross, and bury them.

I think I shall not greatly miss the mark if I affirm Ananus his death to have
been the beginning of the destruction of the City, Ananus death the first cause
of the destruction of the City.
that the Walls of Jerusalem were overthrown, Jews perished in that day, when
this their High Priest and Governor was so cruelly massacred in the midst of
the City. The praise of Ananus the high Priest.
He was of a laudable and just Life: and though Great in Dignity, Birth and
Reputation, yet would he not exalt himself above any one, were he never so
base. He was a man who thirsted to preserve Liberty to his Country, and
Authority to the Commonwealth. He continually preferred the Public Interest
before his own Private Gain, and was always desirous of Peace, because he
foresaw that the Romans could not be withstood, and that if the Jews did not
quickly accord with them, their Ruin was inevitable: and I doubt not but if
Ananus had lived, he had succeeded in his design. For he was an eloquent
Orator, and could persuade admirably: and he had already reduced to extremity
Jesus, who next him excelled all the rest. But I think Almighty God having
decreed the total ruin of the City, which was now pollu^ed and filled with
Iniquity, and meaning by fire as it were, to purify the holy Temple, which was
profaned, he first took up the Defenders thereof, and those that loved it most
dearly. So they who a little before were clothed with the sacred apparel, and
reverenced of all that from the furthest parts of the World came to Jerusalem,
now lay murdered and naked in the open streets, left as it were a prey to be
torn in pieces by Dogs and wild Beasts. Was Virtue ever more insolently
outraged! And could she Vice thus triumph over her?



The Contents of the Chapters of the Fifth Book.
1 OF another Massacre; and of the Return of the Idumeans, and the Cruelty of
the Zealots. 2 Of the Civil Discord amongst the Jews. 3 Of the Yielding of
Gadara, and the Massacre there. Jericho. 5 Of the Lake called Asphaltites. 6
How Gerasa was Destroyed; the Death of Nero, Galba, and Otho. 7 Of Simon of
Gerasa, Author of a new Conspircy. 8 Of Galba, Otho, Vitellius, and Vespasian.
9 Of Simon's Acts against the Zealots. 10 How Vespasian was chosen Emperor. 11
The Description of Egypt and Pharus. 12 How Vespasian Redeemed Joseph from
Captivity. 13 Of Vitellus his Death and Manners. Titus was sent against the
Jews by his Father.


CHAP. I.
Of another Massacre; and of the Return of the Idumeans, and the Cruelty of the
Zealots.
SUch was the end of Ananus and Jesus: After whose death the Idumeans and The
cruelty of the Idumeans and the Zealots.
in hope that by deferring their death, some of them would become partakers
with them; Yet none was hereby moved, but every one desired to die, rather than
impiously to join with these Wretches against their own Country: Whereupon they
were most cruelly whipped before they were put to Death, their Bodies being
made as it were one sore place by Whipping and Stripes: and when they could not
endure these Torments any longer, they were killed. Who so was taken in the day
time, was in the night carried to Prison; and those that died in Prison and
Torments, they cast their dead Bodies out, 12000 of the Nobility executed.
And in this general slaughter were twelve thousand young Noblemen slain in
this manner. After which, being hated for these Massacres, they mocked and
flouted the Magistrates, and made no account of their Judgments. So that when
they determined to put to death Zachary the Son of Baruch, one of the chief of
also to be rid of one who might be able to resist their bad purposes) they
called seventy of Zachary, that he had betrayed the Commonwealth to the
Romans, and for that intent had sent to Vespasian: but they neither showed any
evidence or proof thereof, but only affirmed it to be so; and therefore would
have credit given to their words.

When Zachary perceived that under pretense of being called to Judgment,
Zachary condemned to death by the Zealots.
he was unjustly cast into Prison; though he had no hope of Life, yet he spared
not to speak freely his mind, and began to scorn the rage and pretense of his
Enemies, and purged himself of the crimes whereof he was accused; and
converting his speech against his Accusers, he laid open all their Iniquities,
and much lamented the miseries and troubles

In the meanwhile the Zealots gnashed their teeth, and could scarcely contain
themselves from drawing their Swords, and were desirous that their pretended
Accusation and Judgment might be ended. He also requested them, who by these
Miscreants were appointed his Judges, Seventy Judges absolve and acquit
Zachary.
to remember Justice, notwithstanding the danger they might incur by it. The
seventy Judges all pronounced that he was to be absolved and freed as
guiltless, and rather chose to die, than to cause his death who was Innocent.

This Sentence being pronounced, the Zealots began to shout and cry with a loud
voice; and they all were angry at the Judges, Zachary slain in the midst of
the Temple.
who did not understand to what end that counterfeit Zachary and killed him in
the midst of the Temple, and insulted over him saying, Thou have now our
Sentence and Absolution, far more certain than the other was: And presently
they cast him down from the Temple into the Valley below: and then
contumeliously with the Hilts of their Swords they beat the Judges out of the
Temple; yet they did not kill them, to the end that being dispersed through the
whole City, they might tell the People, as Messengers from them, of their
miserable condition.

The Idumeans were now sorrowful for their coming, One of the Zealots
discovers their cruelty and barbarous dealing to the Idumeans.
for they misliked these proceedings: and being assembled together, one of the
Zealots secretly told them all that their Faction had done from the beginning;
that it was true the Idumeans had taken Arms, Ananus himself was slain, and
almost all the People in one night (whereof Idumeans, because they neither
hindered their mischievous Practices, nor forsook their Society. That therefore
it was their part (seeing it was now evident that the report of Treason was
only Calumny, and that no assault by the Romans was to be feared; and that the
City was impregnable, provided there were no domestic divisions) to depart
home, and by forsaking the Society of the Impious, to acquit themselves of
their Impiety, as being by

The Idumeans were hereby persuaded, The Idumeans depart out of Jerusalem.
and first of all they freed those that were in Prison, in number two thousand
of the Vulgar; and presently leaving the City, they went to Simon, (of whom we
will speak hereafter) and so they departed home.

Their sudden departure was against the expectation of both parts: for the
People not knowing the Idmmeans were sorry for what they had done, rejoiced as
now delivered from their Enemies: and the Zealots grew more insolent and proud,
as though they never had needed help, and now were delivered from those, in
consideration of whom they abstained from some Villainies. Whereupon they used
no delay to effect all their Villainy: for they spent not much time in taking
advice; but whatsoever seemed best to them, presently without any delay they
put it in practice. But Gorion, a Nobleman of great Birth and Dignity, who
loved his Country, was very bountiful, and a lover of Liberty; so that there
was none amongst the Jews like him; but for his desire of Liberty, Gorion's
Death and Niger Peraita.
and his other Virtues he was put to death. Neither could Niger Peraita escape
their hands, a man who in War against the Romans had showed himself valiant:
and although he often cried out and showed the scars of his Wounds received in
defense of his Country; yet they ceased not for all this most shamefully to
drag him through the City: and being led out of the City, despairing of life, he
entreated that Niger's Prayers took effect as the end testifies.
But the barbarous People denied his request and slew him. At his death he
besought God that the Romans might come and revenge it upon them, and that
Plague, Famine and Civil Discord might light upon their City.

God heard his Prayers, and sent upon them all which he imprecated; and first
of all, they were plagued with Civil Wars amongst themselves. Niger being thus
slain, they were freed from the fear they had of him, that he would resist
their wickedness. Many of the Common People were by some forged tale or other
put to death. Some were slain, because they had formerly born Arms against
them; and they who were innocent in all points, were put to death for some
occasion devised in the time of peace: and they who did not converse with them,
were murdered as those that contemned them; and they

CHAP. II.
The Civil Discords amongst the Jews.
IN the mean while the Roman Officers had their Eyes open upon what passed in
the City of Jerusalem; The Soldiers incite Vespasian to resort to Jerusalem.
and seeing the Citizens at great variance among themselves, they thought this
to be for their great advantage. Wherefore they pressed Vespasian their General
not to lose this opportunity, affirming that it was Gods providence (who fought
for them) that the Jews should be at Civil Discord among themselves; and that
therefore he should not overslip so good an occasion, lest the Jews should
quickly be friends again one with another, either by the weariness of Civil
War, or else repenting themselves of that which they had done. To whom
Vespasian answered, That they were ignorant what was to be done, Vespasian
expects Victory by the civil dissension of his Enemies.
and desirous rather as it were in a Theater to show their forces and strength,
than with him to consider what was profitable and expedient. For (said he) if
we presently assault them, our coming will make concord amongst our Enemies,
and so we shall bring upon our selves their forces yet firm and strong; but by
expecting a little while, we shall have less ado to conquer them, their
chiefest forces being destroyed by their own Civil War. God is more our friend
than you are aware of, who without our labor and pain will deliver the Jews
into our hands, and will give us the Victory without endangering our Army.
Wherefore it is rather our part to be beholders of the Tragedy, than to fight
against men desirous of death, and troubled with the greatest evil possible, to
wit, domestical Sedition, and Civil War. And if any think that the Victory is
not glorious, because gotten without fight, let him know and consider the
uncertain events of War: and that it is better, if it be possible, to get a
Victory without bloodshed, then therewith to hazard a Defeat. For they who by

Many Citizens to fly the Zealous, resorted to Vespasian.
and thought this advice of Vespasian best: and presently it appeared how
profitable this Counsel was. For every day many Jews fled to him to escape the
hands of the Zealots; though it was dangerous to fly, because all the ways
were guarded with Watchmen. And if any man upon any occasion whatsoever were
The Zealots tyrannize both over the living and the dead.
returned again into the City, choosing rather to die there: for the hope they
had to be buried in their native soil, made death there seem more tolerable.
But the Zealots became so cruel, that they neither permitted them who were
slain within, nor them without the City to be buried. But like men that had now
determined together, with their County-Laws to abolish the Law of Nature, yea
and by

To be brief, nothing so much increased their indignation as Mercy: for the
wicked People were herewith provoked to wrath; their displeasure and cruelty
was extended from the living to the dead, and from the dead to the living. And
such fear fell upon the whole City, that those that were left alive, deemed
them happy, that being dead, were at rest, and free from those miseries: and
they that were in Prison, in respect of the torments they endured, thought
themselves more unhappy than they who lay unburied.

CHAP. III.
How Gadara was yielded: and of the Massacre there.
BUt John who long ago aspired to be Tyrant over all the rest, could not endure
that others should partake in Authority with him; John's Pride and Ambition
wherefore by little and little he divided himself from their union and
fellowship, after he had drawn to himself such as by their impious life were
capable of the greatest crimes, so that now every The greater part of the
contrary faction fall from John.
Fear also terrified them from living under the Government of one man; for they
thought that if he once prevailed, he could not easily be overcome: and again,
if he John was chief of one Faction: so between them they appointed Guards in
every place; and if by chance they combated together, they did little or no
hurt to one another: but the chief contention was, who should bear most sway
amongst the People, and who should have the greatest part of the Spoil. Thus
the City at one time was vexed with three intolerable mischiefs and evils, The
tempest of of three misaries assailed Jerusalem at once.
to wit, War, Tyranny, and Sedition: and yet the War seemed a less evil than
the rest to the Commonalty. Wherefore many leaving their native soil, fled to
strangers for succor, and found among the Massada, built by the ancient Kings
of Jerusalem, very strong, to lay up their treasure and munition for War, and
to retire themselves thereunto in time of need, for the safety of their
persons. This Castle was taken and kept by that sort of Thieves that were
called Sicarii, by reason of their small number durst Rob no more openly. These
Thieves seeing the Roman Army now idle, and the people in Jerusalem at civil
War and Sedition among themselves, took courage, and again fell to their
Villainies. Of those desperate Rebels that kept ^he Castle of Massada.
And so on that day, which is the Feast of unleavened Bread (which the Jews
keep holy, in memory of their deliverance from the Egyptian Captivity)
deceiving the Watchmen, they seized upon a Fort, called Engaddi: Massada: and
so they wasted all the Villages and whole Country round about them, many wicked
persons daily flocking unto them, and joining with them: and by their example,
other Thieves that a while had been quiet, now robbed again, and spoiled in
every part of Judea. Slaughter and desolation through Jurie.
And as in a body, if the principal member thereof be sick, all other parts of
it are afflicted; so Jerusalem being filled with tumults and discord, those
that were without the City found license to rob and spoil: and all those that
had A similitude.
they broke into the Towns and Temples; and, as in War it comes to pass, the
Country people purposed to assault them, by whom they had suffered such injury:
but they were prevented; for the Thieves understanding their coming, fled with
the spoil they had gotten. And there was no part of Judea, that did not suffer
together with Jerusalem their Mother-City. Those that fled to the Romans,
certified Vespasian hereof: for although the seditious persons kept and
observed all passages, and killed them that offered to fly, yet many secretly
stole away from them, The Fugitives beseech Vespasian to assist the City, and
preserve the rest of the people.
and besought Vespasian, both to help the oppressed City, and Vespasian moved
to compassionate their calamities, came with his Army nearer Jerusalem, as
though he would have besieged, it (but indeed his intent was to deliver it from
the oppression of these wicked persons, who in a manner kept it continually
besieged,) hoping in the mean time to conquer that part of the Country that was
yet untoucht, and so to leave nothing to hinder him when he should begin the
siege. Wherefore coming to Gadara, the strongest of all the Cities beyond the
River, he entered into it the fourth day of March: for the Chiefest of the City,
unknown to the seditious people, had sent Ambassadors to him to desire Peace;
and to save Gadara: but their Enemies knew not of their Embassage, till they
saw Vespasian at the City Gates. And so despairing that they were able to keep
the City, by reason they had in the Town many Enemies more in number and
stronger than themselves; and moreover, seeing Vespasian even now almost at the
City: and thinking shame to fly, and not to be revenged of their Enemies, they
took Dolesus (a Nobleman and chief of the City, The Gadarensians entertain
Vespasian with joy and acclamation.
and also the Author of that Embassage) and killed him; and for anger beating
him after he was dead, they fled out of the City. Now the Romans Army
approaching near the City, the people of Gadara went forth and received
Vespasian joyfully, who also confirmed a League betwixt

Vespasian then sent Placidus with five hundred Horsemen, Placidus conflict
with the Fugitives.
and three thousand Footmen to pursue those that were fled out of Gadara; and
he with the rest of his Army returned to Caesarea. But the Fugitives perceiving
themselves to be pursued by Placidus, before he could overtake them, got into a
Town called Bethenabris: and finding there many young men, partly for that they
were willing, partly by force they compelled them to arm themselves, and so
rashly they came against Placidus. Placidus and his Army seemed a little to
give back, to the intent to draw them further from the Wall; and then having
compassed them about in a fit place, they wounded them afar off with Darts and
Arrows. The Jews seeking to fly, were Placidus takes and burns Bethenabris.
For Placidus was careful to intercept their passage to the Town; and to hinder
their recourse unto it, and forced those back again that fled toward it, using
his Darts, and killing those that were next him; till at last the strongest
amongst them broke away, and got to the Town Walls. Those that were within the
City knew Gadara out of the City, because they desired to let their own
Citizens in; and again they perceived that if they let these in, the other
thereby would work the overthrow of the City, as it fell out indeed they did.
For the Gates being set open for them to come in, the Roman Horsemen almost
broke into the Town with them; yet the Gates were shut before they could get
in. Then Placidus with all his Soldiers assaulted the Town, and after a sore
fight which continued till the Evening, at last he got the Walls, and the Town,
and slew the weaker sort, for the stronger fled: so the Soldiers first sacked
the Houses, and then fired the Town. They who escaped thence, incited the whole
Country to fly with them, reporting their Calamities with the most, and
Jericho, in which place they put their confidence, for that it was strong and
populous. Placidus having Horsemen, and encouraged with his former Victory,
pursued them to Jordan, and whomsoever he overtook he slew, and at the River he
fought with all the multitude there gathered together; because that the River
being grown deeper by abundance of Rain that had lately fallen, they could not
pass over it.

Wherefore necessity forced them to fight, because they could not fly: and
placing themselves along the Banks of the River, Placidus Victory over the
Fugitives.
they there received the Horsemen, and warded their Darts. Many for fear fell
into the River; and the Romans slew Jordan was so filled with dead Carcasses,
that none could pass over it: and also the Lake Asphaltites, was full of dead
bodies, brought thither out of diverse Rivers. Placidus makes use of his good
fortune against the Jews.
Placidus having so good success, went to the Towns and Villages adjoined, and
took Abila, Julias, Besemoth, and all the Towns even to the Lake Asphaltites,
and placed in them Garrisons of the Jews that had fled to him: and afterward
preparing Ships and furnishing them with Soldiers, he pursued Jordan as far as
Machaeron, was reduced under the Power of the Romans.

CHAP. IV
How certain Towns were taken; the Description of Jericho.
AT this time came news of the troubles in Gallia; Troubles in France.
and how that Vindex, together Nero; whereof we have made mention in another
place. This news caused Vespasian to be more earnest to end the Wars of the
Jews: for even then he foresaw the Civil War that ensued, and the danger of the
whole Empire: and he thought that if he could before the beginning of those
troubles end the Wars in the East part of the World, that then Italy was not in
so much danger. But Winter hindering him, he in the mean time placed Garrisons in
all Towns and Villages about the whole Country, and appointed Officers in every
City, and repaired many places, which he had before destroyed. And first of
all, he with his whole Army that was at Caesarea marched to Antipatris; and
having settled the Estate of that City, after his abode there two days, the
third day Thamnia the Toparchy, and so went to Lydda and Jamnia. But seeing
that those two places submitted themselves unto him, he left there such
Inhabitants as he thought good, and went thence to Ammaus; and placing himself
in the way to Jerusalem, he there entrenched his Camp, and leaving the fifth
Legion there, with the rest he went into the Toparchy of Bethlepton, Vespasian
visits all Judea
firing it and all places thereabout, as also the Borders of Idumea: but he
reserved certain Castles in fit places and fortified them. And having taken two
Towns in the midst of Idumea, to wit, Begabri, and Caphartopha, he slew there
above ten thousand men, and took almost a thousand; and driving out the rest of
the Inhabitants, he left a great part of his Army there, who made Incursions,
and wasted all the High Places thereabout: with the rest he returned to Jamnia;
and Samaria and Neapolis, called by the Inhabitants Nabortha. The second day of
June, he came to Corea; and pitching his Tent there, the next day he came to
Jericho, where one of his Captains, named Trajan, met him with the Soldiers he
brought from beyond Jordan, which place he had conquered. But before the Romans
came, Vespasian comes to Jericho.
many fled from Jericho into the high Country over against Jerusalem; and many
that stayed behind were there slain. So he found the City desolate, being
situate in a Plain, under a great barren Mountain, which is of a huge length:
for it reaches on the North side, to the Borders of Sythopolis, and on the
South to the Borders of Sodom and the Lake of Asphaltites. It is Rocky, and not
inhabited, because it bears no fruit. Over against this, near Jordan, is
situate another Mountain, beginning on the Julias, and reaching to Bacra on the
South, which is the Limits of Petra, a City of Arabia. In this place is that
Mountain which is called the Mountain of Iron, reaching to the Country of the
Moabites.

The Country between these two Mountains is called the Great Field, reaching
from the Village Gennabara to the Lake of Asphaltites, The great Field.
being in length two hundred and thirty Furlongs, and in breadth a hundred and
twenty; in the midst it is divided by the River Jordan. These are also two
Lakes of contrary natures, Asphaltites, and Tiberias; for one of them is Salt
and has no Fish, but that of Tiberias sweet and abounds with Fish. Two Lakes,
Asphaltites and the Tiberian Lake.
This Plain in Summer time is burnt with the heat of the Sun, and the Air is
infected in all places thereabouts, save only about Jordan: and this Jericho
there is a large great Fountain, which plentifully waters the fields
thereabout, and rises with a great stream out of the ground near the old City:
which Joshua the Son of N^^, General of the Hebrews, took by War, the first of
all that he took in the Land of Canaan. It is reported that in the beginning,
the Waters of this Fountain destroyed all Fruits of the Earth, and also made
Women be delivered before their time, A large Fountain near Jericho.
and infected all places with diseases, and the plague; but afterward by
Elisha, the successor of Elias, was made sweet and good for conception; which
happened in this manner: That admirable person being once courteously
entertained by the Inhabitants of Jericho, did thus reward them, and A miracle
wrought by Elias
and to make it slow with more sweet Streams: which both might cause plenty of
Fruits, and also of Children, to the Inhabitants: and that the Water might have
the virtue to make Women Fruitful, so long as they persisted in piety. These
prayers had the Power to alter the Fountain: and from that time, this Fountain
which before was the cause of Famine and Sterility, became the cause of Plenty
and Fertility. And so it waters the ground, that where a little of it comes,
it does more good than all other waters which lie long upon it: Fruitful and
pleasant Gardens about Jericho.
and twenty broad. Here are most pleasant and goodly Orchards, and many sorts
of Palm Trees growing by brooks sides, which are diverse in the taste of their
Fruits; the fattest whereof being pressed, yield a juice like Honey, nothing
inferior to other Honey: yet there is great store of Honey in the Country, and
the juice of Balm, which is more precious than all other Fruits whatsoever.
Here grow also Cypress-Trees and Myrabolans: so that one may justly say that
this part of the Earth has something Divine, where sooner there. The cause
hereof I judge to be these pleasant Waters, and the The cause why the ground
about Jericho is fruitful.
by the blowing of a mild and temperate wind, it is refreshed, and it receives
a contrary nature: In Wintertime it is almost lukewarm and temperate to them
that go into it. The Air here is so temperate, The Air temperate and Warm.
that when it snoweth in other parts of Judea, and is extreme cold, the
Inhabitants in this place only wear a linen Garment. This Country is distant
from Jerusalem a hundred and fifty Furlongs, and threescore from Jordan; and
all the ground betwixt it and Jerusalem is desert and stony, and so likewise
between it and Jordan and Asphaltites, though it be lower ground than the
other. Thus we have sufficiently declared the fertility of Jericho.

CHAP. V.
The Description of the Lake Asphaltites.
IT is worth the labor to describe the Lake Asphaltites, An admirable property
of the Asphaltite Lake.
which is Salt and incapable Vespasian coming thither to see it, took men who
could not swim, and caused their hands to be bound behind them, and cast them
into the midst thereof, and all of them came up to the Top of the Water, as if
some Wind had forced them from the bottom. Moreover, it is admirable, how this
Lake thrice in every day changes color, and shines diversely, according as
the beams of the Sun sundry ways fall upon it. And in many places it casts up
pieces of black Bitumen, in greatness and shape like a Bull without a head; and
these float above the Water. They that get Bitumen, draw it to their Boats, and
it is so tough and clammy, that having filled their Boats herewith, it is not
easy for them to get them away, but their Boat is as it were fastened, and
hangs upon the rest of that mass of bituminous matter, till it be separated
from it by the terms or urine of a Woman. This bitumenous matter is good to
close the rifts of Ships, and also to cure many diseases. The Land of Sodom is
near unto the Lake Asphaltites.
This Lake is five hundred and eighty Furlongs long, extending to Zoar which is
in Arabia; and it is a hundred and fifty Furlongs broad. Near this Lake is the
Land of Sodom and Gomorrah, sometime both fertile and rich: now all burnt,
having been for the impiety of the Inhabitants consumed with lightning and
thunder. To be short, one may here behold as it were the relics of that
Te^tul. Apolog. c. 39.
And so the History of the destruction of Sodom is verified to the Eye of them
that behold it.

CHAP. VI.
How Gerasa was destroyed: of Nero's Death, and of Galba and Otho.
VEspasian desirous to besiege Jerusalem on every side, built Castles at
Jericho and Adida, and left there Garrisons of the Soldiers that came to assist
him, and also Romans with them. L. Annius takes Gerasa.
And he sent L. Annius, to Gerasa with a Body of Foot and Horse; who at the
first assault took the City, and slew a thousand young men, who had not time to
fly, and made whole Families Slaves, giving the Soldiers the spoil of their
goods: and so firing their Houses, he went to other places adjoining. They who
were able, fled; and the weaker sort who could not fly, were slain: and
whatsoever came in their way they consumed with fire. Thus all places both
Mountains and Plains Jerusalem had no whither to go, The year of the World,
4033. after the Nativity of Christ, 71.
And they themselves who were against the Romans, were also kept in; the City
being on every side enclosed and encompassed with the Roman Army.

After Vespasian was returned to Cesarea, and with all his Army purposed to go
to Jerusalem, Vespasian has tidings of Ner^es death.
news was brought him that Nero was slain, having reigned thirteen years and
eight days. Touching whom I will not recount how he dishonored the Empire,
committing the whole sway of all the Commonwealth to two most wicked men, to
wit, Nimphidius and Tigillinus, who were of least worth amongst all his
Freed-men: and how being betrayed by these two men, he was forsaken of all his
Guards; and so fled only with four trusty Freed-men into the Suburbs, and there
killed himself: And how that Gallia; Galba.
and that Galba being created Emperor, returned to Rome out Spain: and how he
was accused of Cowardice by the Soldiers, and by them killed in the
Marketplace, Otho.
as one of base condition: Vitellius.
and how Otho was declared Emperor, and led his Soldiers against Vitellius:
also Vitellius his troubles and his fight before the Capitol: and how Antonius
Primus, and Mutianus slew Vitellius, and so appeased the German Troops and the
Civil War. Of all these I have forborne to speak, because I presume both the
Greeks and Romans have written these things at large; yet I have briefly
recapitulated this to continue my History.

After Vespasian heard this news, Vespasian deferreth his siege at Jerusalem.
he deferred the Siege of Jerusalem, expecting who Nero. And when he was
certified that Galba reigned, he determined to do nothing, but lie quiet till
such time as he should write to him his mind, whether he would have him proceed
in the War against the Jews. And he sent to him his Son Titus, both to salute
him, and also to know his pleasure concerning the Jews. Likewise, King Agrippa
went with Titus for the same cause to Galba. But as they were passing by Achaia
with long Ships in Winter time, as the Custom is, news was brought that Galba
was slain, having reigned seven Months and seven days: After whom succeeded
Otho, who governed the Empire three Months. Agrippa not dismayed with this
alteration, still kept on his Journey to Rome. But Titus (as God would have it)
returned from Achaia to Syria, Galba is slain, and Otho governs.
and so to Caesarea to his Father. They

CHAP. VII.
Of Simon of Gerasa, Author of a new Conspiracy.
Jerusalem among the Jews; For there was one Simon the Son of Giora born in
Gerasa, young in years, and inferior to John in subtilty, Simon of Gerasa
resorteth to the Thieves.
who now already had gotten the dominion over the City; yet in Vigor and
Boldness exceeded John. This Simon having been for this cause also driven out
of the Country of Acrabatena, where he was Governor, by the means of Ananus
the high Priest, Simon assembleth all robbers in the mountanous places.
came to the Thieves that seized upon Massada. At his first coming he was so
suspected by the Thieves, that they only permitted him, and the Women that came
with him, to dwell in the lower part of the Castle, and they themselves kept
the higher part: yet afterward, his manners and behavior was such that they
put confidence in him, and he became their Captain always when they went to
spoil and rob any part of Massada. After which he did all that he could to
persweade them to attempt greater matters: for being desirous of rule, after he
heard that Ananus was dead, he departed into the high Places of the Country,
and with the voice as of a Crier proclaimed, that all Bondslaves that would
follow him should have their Liberty, and all others should be richly rewarded;
by which means he gathered together all the wicked and desperate People in the
Country. And having now a considerable Army, he robbed and spoiled all the
Towns and Villages thereabout; and his number daily increasing, he also
presumed to come into the plain Countries: so that now Cities stood in awe of
him, and many considerable persons fearing him for his strength and prosperous
success, joined with him. So that his Army did not only consist of Thieves and
Acrabatena, and into the greater Idumea. For he had fortified a Town called
Nain, walled about, which he used Pharan, he made many Caves, and found many
already made, and in these Caves he kept his Treasure, and the Booties he got:
also all Fruits of the Earth that he robbed and stole, there he laid up in
store; as also Ammunition for many Companies. The Fight between Simon and the
Zealots.
And now no man doubted, but that being thus furnished with Men and Ammunition
he would go to Jerusalem. The Zealots fearing this, and desirous to prevent him
who they saw every day increased his number, and grew more potent against them;
they armed many of their Company, and went out to meet him. Simon was not
daunted at this, but boldly encountered them, and gave them so sharp a Battle,
that he slew many of them in fight; and forced the rest to retire themselves
into the Town; yet not having men sufficient, he would not besiege the Idumea;
and so accompanied with 20000 armed men, he hasted toward the borders thereof.

The Princes of Idumea understanding this, presently assembled five and twenty
thousand armed men: and leaving at home sufficient Garrisons to defend their
Country against the Sicarii, who held the Fortress of Massada, they accompanied
with these Forces, went out and expected Simons coming into the borders of
their Country, where having met him they joined battle, and fought a whole day;
yet it appeared not which part got the Victory. Then Simon returned to Nain,
and the Idumeans home. Not long after Simon with a greater Army than before,
assaulted the borders of their Country, and pitching his Tents in a Village
called Thecue, he sent one of his Companions, Eleazar, to them that kept the
Castle Herodium, not far from that place, to solicit them to yield it to him.
The Garrison there presently received him into the Castle, not knowing the cause
of his coming. But so soon as he began to persuade them to Treason, they drew
their Swords to kill him: and he not having any place to fly to, cast himself
from off the Castle Wall into the Valley underneath, and so died.

The Idumeans something fearing Simons Forces, Eleazar Simon's fellow casts
himself headlong into the trench, and presently dies James of Idumea the
Betrayer of his Country.
before they would offer him Battle, thought best to epsy what number of men
he had: to effect which business, one Jacob a Captain among them offered
himself, meaning indeed to betray his Country to Simon. So departing from
Olurus, where the Idumean Forces were assembled, he went to Simon, and promised
him to betray his Country to him, receiving of him an Oath, that for reward
Simon himself, and so he presently promised to help subdue all Idumea. For this
cause he was welcome to Simon, and feasted liberally, and had great Promises if
he performed that which he offered; and then returned to the Idumeans; and
fained that Simons Army was far greater than indeed it was. And so terrifying
the Governors of his Country, and the People, he by little and little
persuaded them to receive Simon, and without any more fight to yield to him the
Sovereign Authority over them.

Jacob studying to bring this his purpose to pass, privily sent Messengers to
Simon, willing him to come with his Forces, and promising him to dissipate the
Idumeans for Simons Army drew near, he first of all got upon his Horse, and
together with his Associates that were partakers of his Treason, fled to the
Enemy. Then fear fell on the Idumeans; and every one without any more ado fled
home.

Thus Simon against his own expectation entered Idumea without bloodshed: Simon
beyond all expectation enters Idumea without bloodshed.
and first of all assaulting a little Village called Chebron, he took it, and
in it an exceeding great Booty, a great quantity of Corn, and many Fruits; all
which he carried away. The Inhabitants report that this Chebron is not only
more ancient than all Cities of that Land, Hebron an ancient City where
Abraham's house was.
but also than Memphis in Egypt; for they affirm it to have been built two
thousand three hundred years since. They also say, that this was the place
where Abraham Mesopotamia; and that his Posterity departed from hence to
Egypt. Indeed there are yet seen Monuments in the City, richly wrought in fine
Marble.

Six Furlongs from the Town there is an exceeding great Turpentine Tree, A
Turpentine Tree, that has continued ever since the Creation of the World.
which they affirm to have endured ever since the Creation of the World, until
this day.

Simon having obtained this place, from hence invaded all Idumea, and not only
robbed and spoiled all the Towns and Cities thereof, but also wasted and
destroyed much of the Country: for besides his Army, there followed him forty
thousand men, so that he could not find Victuals for such a Multitude.
Moreover, besides this Calamity that he brought upon Idumea, he exercised great
Cruelty and Outrage upon the Country, and caused great spoil therein. And as
after great swarms of Locusts, the Trees and Simon had been, all the Country
was left desolate.

Hereat the Zealots were again animated against him; Simon spoiled all Idumea.
yet durst they not fight with him in open field: The Zealots take Simons Wife.
but placing Ambushes in the way he was to pass, they took Simons Wife, and
many of her Servants, and so came again into the City, rejoicing as though they
had taken Simon himself. For they persuaded themselves, that Simon would
presently lay down Arms, and come in humble manner to entreat them to restore
Simon was not moved with compassion for the loss of his Wife, but with fury:
and coming to the Walls of Jerusalem, like a cruel Beast that had been wounded,
and could not come to them that hurt him, he killed all he met. And taking them
that went out of the City to gather Herbs and Wood, he caused them to be whipped
to death, whether they were young or old: This cruelty seemed only wanting in
him, that he did not eat the flesh of the dead Bodies. Also he took many and
cut off their hands, and so sent them into the City, thereby to terrify his
Enemies, and to cause the People to abandon the Zealots: and he bad them tell
the Citizens, that except they presently restored his Wife to him, he swore by
God who governed all, that he would break down their Walls, and use all he
found in the City after that fashion, and that he would spare no age, nor
respect the innocent more than the guilty. The Zealots send back Simons Wife.
but also the Zealots, insomuch that they sent him his Wife again; and so his
anger being somewhat assuaged, he ceased a while from his Murders.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Galba, Otho, Vitellius and Vespasian.
Judea, Sedition through the whole Roman Empire.
but also in Italy at this time was Civil War: for Galba was slain in the midst
of Rome; after whom Otho was created Emperor, and fought against Vitellius,
who affected the Empire, being chosen Emperor by the German Legions. The
Battle was fought near Bebrias, a Town in Gallia Cisalpina; the first day, Otho
got the Victory against Valens and Cecinna, the Generals of Vitellius his Army.
But the day following they overcame Otho: and so many being slain on both
parts, and news being brought that Vitellius his Army had gotten the Victory,
Otho being at Brixels slew himself, when he had held the Empire three Months
and two days. Otho's Soldiers turned to Vitellius his Captains, and joined
with them, and so Vitellius came Rome with his Army. Vespasian once more
invades Judea.
In the mean time Vespasian the fifth day of June departed from Cesarea, and
went to those parts of Judea, which were yet unconquered: and first of all he
went into the high Countries, and subdued the two Toparchies of Acrabatena and
Gophnitis, and after them two Towns called Bethel and Ephrem, and placed
Garrisons in them, and so went to Jerusalem, killing many that he found in the
way, and taking many Captives.

One of his Captains, called Cerealis, with a party of Horse and Foot, wasted
all the higher Idumea: Gaph^^mitts (...).
and in the way as he went, he took Caphetra a Castle, and burnt it, and
besieged another called Capharis, enclosed with a strong Wall: by reason of
which he deemed he should have made long abode there: but contrary to his
expectation, the Cerealis bu^^eth the anci^^ City of Hebron
beseeching him to be good to them. When he had overcome them he went to
Hebron, an ancient City, and set it on fire; this Hebron, as I have already
said, was situated upon the Mountains, and near Jerusalem: and breaking into
it by force, he slew all them that he found there, and fired the City. And
having subdued all places, save only three Castles, to wit, Herodium, Massada
and Macheron, which were kept by the Thieves, now only Jerusalem remained to be
Conquered.

CHAP. IX.
Of Simons Acts against the Zealots.
AFter Simon had recovered his Wife from the Zealots, he went into Idumea, to
rob and spoil that which was left: and chasing the Inhabitans up and down, at
last he forced them to fly to Jerusalem, and he himself pursued them thither;
and at the foot of the Walls, The Zealots fill the whole City with iniquity.
he killed all the People he took, that returned out of the fields from their
labor. Thus Simon without the City, was more terrible to the People Galileans.
For they had put John in Authority: and John in reward thereof permitted all
things to be done as they requested. There was no end of robbing and spoiling
rich men's Houses, and of slaughtering both of Men and Women, and to kill Men
and Women was but a Pastime. And having with blood bedewed their prey, and
without all fear gotten what they liked, they now began to lust after Women:
yea they became effeminate and lascivious, they curl their Hair, and clothed
themselves in Women's Apparel, and anointed themselves with sweet Ointments,
that their beauty might be pleasing and alluring; they now not only imitate the
Attire of Prostitutes, but also their impudency, and became so shameless,
Jerusalem were become a Stews, and so profaned the whole City with their
execrable impurities. Yet though they effeminated their Faces, their Hands were
prone to bloodshed; and though they lived in ignominious manner, as People
given over to pleasure, yet could they quickly become Warriors, and in the
habits of Women, drawing their Swords they killed whomsoever they met.
Whosoever escaped John's hands, Simon the more cruel murdered; and whosover
escaped the Tyrant within the City, The way of flight was quite cut off.
was slain by the Tyrant without; and there was no way to fly to the Romans.

Furthermore, The discord between the Zealots and the Idumeans.
the Army of John began to be divided, for all the Idumeans separated
themselves from the other People, and there rose a mutiny against the Tyrant,
partly Grapta, The flight of the Zealots with the Idumeans into the Temple.
Father of Izat, King of Adiabena. The Idumeans also broke in thither with
them, and drove them from thence into the Temple, and seized upon John's
Treasure: for John lived in the Palace, and had carried thither all his Spoils.
Then those Zealots that were dispersed in the City, came to those that were in
the Temple, and John purposed to send them against the Townsmen and the
Idumeans. But they feared not so much their Forces (although they knew them to
be the better Warriors,) as they did, lest now being desperate, they should
steal out of the Temple in the night, and so slay them, and fire the City.
Wherefore assembling themselves, they deliberated with John, they devised to
introduce Simon, and as it were to entreat another to Tyrannize over them. This
counsel was thought best; and Matthias the Priest was sent to Simon (of whom
before they stood in great fear) to request him to come into the City. With him
also came such as had fled from Jerusalem for fear of the Zealots, entreating
him in like manner, because they desired to return to their Wives and Families.
So he entered into the City proudly, promising them to be their Deliverer; Simon
enters the City with a great Army.
and all the People made Acclamations as he entered into the City, that he was
their Preserver. Simon being now within the City, presently deliberated John
and the Zealots with him finding no way to come out of the Temple, and having
lost all that he had in the City (for Simon and his Followers, at their
entrance, took all that belonged to him) began now to despair of his safety.
And Simon, being assisted by the Citizens, assaulted the Temple, Simon assaults
the Temple, wherein the Zealots kept.
and the Zealots placing themselves upon the Porches, and in Towers of Defense,
made resistance, and hurt many of Simons followers. For the Zealots were upon
the higher ground on the right hand, and so had the advantage against Simon.
And although by reason of the place wherein they were, they prevailed against
Simon, yet they raised four high Towers, that from hence they might shoot
Simons Men. One of these Towers they built upon the East Pastophorium, where
one of the Priests used to stand before Sunset, to signify to the People with
the sound of the Trumpet the beginning of the Sabbath, and to declare to them
the other holy days, The Office of the Priests to signify the beginning of
the seventh day by the sound of a Trumpet.
and in what days they might go about their business. In these Towers they
placed all kind of Engines to cast Stones, and Men with Slings. Then Simon
perceiving many of his Soldiers languish, was more remiss in his business; yet
when his number increased, he came nearer; for a-far off many of his men were
slain with the Shot of those Engines.

CHAP. X.
How Vespasian was Elected Emperor.
AT this time Rome also suffered the Evils of Civil War; Vitellius Encamps his
Army in Rome.
for Vitellius was now arrived out of Germany with his Army, bringing besides
them an infinite multitude with him; so that his Army was so great, that the
places appointed for quartering his Soldiers could not contain it: insomuch
that his Army occupied all the whole City, Italy. Vespasian having wasted all
about Jer^salem, returned to Caesarea, where he understood the troubles at
Rome, and how Vitellius was Emperor. Vespasian knew both how to govern and how
to obey.
Hereat, though he knew as well to obey, as to be obeyed; yet he was moved with
indignation, and disdained to call him Lord, who had invaded the Empire being
destitute of a Ruler. And much grieved hereat, he could not conceal his grief,
nor follow the Wars against Strangers whilst his own Country was so endangered.
But the distance between him and Rome did as much repress him, as anger incited
him to Rome, The Captains consult with the Soldiers openly of a change.
especially, it being Winter: and so he sought to bridle his wrath, which yet
daily increased. But his Officers and Soldiers began openly to consult of a
Change, and with Indignation exclaimed against the Soldiers at Rome, who lived
in pleasure, and never heard so much as the report of War; and notwithstanding
took upon them to create whom they pleased Emperor, and in hope of gain
disposed of the Commonwealth at their own pleasure: whereas they on the
contrary after so many labors and dangers, still continued in Arms till they
became old and gray headed, and suffered the Authority due to themselves, to be
enjoyed by others; when notwithstanding they had amongst them one who deserved
the Empire more than any other; and Vespasian's shamefastness and modesty.
And they thought that Vespasian was so much more worthy of the Empire than
Vitellius, by how much they who created Vitellius Emperor, were in very many
respects much inferior to themselves. For (said they) we have endured no less
toil than those that came out of Germany: neither are we less Valiant than
^^ey, who bring a Tyrant with them out of Germany. And that no body would
resist Vespasian: For the Senate, and the People of Rome would not rather
endure Vitellius his unsatiable Lust, than Vespasian's Chastity and Temperance;
nor a cruel Tyrant rather than a good and courteous Emperor, whose Son also
was of extraordinary Merit, and d^served the Empire. For true Valor in (...)
Emperor is a great defense of Peace. Therefore if the Empire were due to aged
Experience, they had Vespasian; if to Valiant Youth, they had amongst them
Titus: that they might (...) commodity by both their Ages: and that they would
not only assist him with the Forces of the Empire, having there three Legions,
besides the Auxiliary Troops of the King; but also all the East part of Europe
was out of fear of Vitellius. The causes that moved the People to elect
Vespasian Emperor.
Moreover, they had in Italy some that would assist Vespasian, to wit, his
Brothor and his Son, whereof the one (they hoped) would get many young men to
follow him, and the other was Prefect of the City, an Office very considerable,
especially in the beginning of such an Enterprise. Lastly, it might so fall out
that the Senate would declare him Emperor, whom now the Soldiers, being as it
were their Preserver, had Elected.

Vespasian Emperor, and requested him to accept this Dignity for preservation
of the Empire, being in great danger to be lost. Albeit Vespasian had always
been careful of the Publick-Good, yet he refused to be Emperor: deeming
himself indeed to have deserved it, but he rather chose to live a Private Life,
wherein was security, than in the height of Fortune and Honor with perpetual
danger. The Soldiers elect Vespasian Emperor.
The Captains were the more earnest because he refused it; and the Soldiers
flocked about him with drawn Swords, threatening his death, except he would
consent to live as he deserved: but after long time striving to avert this
their determination to make him Emperor, at last, seeing he could not avoid
it, he accepted their offer.

CHAP. XI.
The Description of Egypt.
MUtianus and the rest of the Captains that had elected him to the Empire,
together with the whole Army, with great Acclamations desired Vespasian to lead
them against their common Enemy. But Vespasian thought it best, first to make
sure of Alexandria, knowing that Egypt for the supply of Corn was the greatest
and best part of the Empire: which if he once were sure of, he hoped that
although Vitellius were Egypt.

Moreover, he desired to join to himself those two Legions that were at
Alexandria; and he considered that that Country might be a defense and refuge
for him, if any adverse Fortune should betide him: for it is not easy to be
entered by an Army, and the Seacoasts have no Havens, The bounds of Egypt.
nor Harbors to receive Ships. On the West it bordereth upon the dry and
barren part of Lybia; on the South upon the Frontiers which separate Syene from
Aethiopia, and the Cataracts of Nilus hinder the entering of it by Ships. The
length and breadth of Egypt.
which defends it as far as the City Copton; on the North it reaches to Syria,
and is defended by the Egyptian Sea, wherein there is no Haven. Thus Egypt is
strong on every side, and reaches in length 2000 Furlongs from Pelusium to
Syene: and from Plinthia to Pelusium, they sail 3600 Furlongs. And Nilus is
navigable even unto the City Elephantine. Moreover the Haven of Alexandria is
dangerous to enter into even in a Calm, for the entrance into it is very
strait; and beside that, the way goes not directly on, but is made crooked by
great stony Rocks, and the left side is compassed artificially with a strong
Dike, but on the right side is the Isle Pharus, A most high Tower in the Island
Pharus, giving light to those that sail 300. stands off.
having a Tower upon it exceeding great: so that a Light in it is seen by
Mariners 300 Furlongs off, to the end that before they come near it, they may
provide to bring their Ships in with safety.

This Isle is enclosed with high Walls made by Art, against which the Sea
beating, and so returning back again, makes the entrance into the Haven more
dangerous. Yet this Haven within is very safe, and 30 Furlongs long: so that
whatsoever this Country wants, it is brought them into that Haven; and
whatsoever abounds amongst them, and which other Nations need, is carried
from thence all over the whole World. So that Vespasian did not unadvisedly
seek to make himself Master of Alexandria, and to dispose thereof for his own
profit, being to begin his Empire. Wherefore he sent Letters to Tiberius
Alexander, Tiberius Alexander governs Alexandria and Egypt.
who was Governor of Alexandria and Egypt, and told him of the Soldiers
Resolution: and how that seeing he could not avoid it, but was forced to
Alexander receiving Vespasians Letters, agreed willingly thereto, and presently
caused his Army and the People also to swear to Vespasian: which they all did
willingly, having understood Vespasians Virtue, by reason that he Governed so
near them. And so Alexander having now engaged himself, prepared all things
necessary for the reception of this Prince.


How Vespasian delivered Joseph out of Captivity.
IT is incredible how quickly the news was carried into all parts of the World,
Vespasian by Common voice is created Emperor, and Crowned.
that Vespasian was declared Emperor in the East; and how all the Cities
rejoiced and made Triumphs, and offered Sacrifices for his fortunate success.
Moreover, the Legions in Moesia and Pannonia, who not long before revolted from
Vitellius, by reason of his cruelty, now willingly swore obedience to
Vespasian. Vespasian returned by Berytum to Caesarea; where many Ambassadors
came to him, offering him Crowns, Syria, and all other places thereabout.
Thither came also Mutianus, Governor of Syria, who brought tidings how
joyfully all the People received him for their Emperor, and had sworn
obedience to him. So all things falling out prosperously on Vespasians side,
and Fortune seconding what he desired, he began to think with himself, it was
God's providence that he was made Emperor, and brought to that estate. And so
he called to mind all tokens and signs (as there had happened many, which
foretold that he should be Emperor) and among the rest, he remembered that which
Joseph had told him; and though Nero was yet alive, presumed to call him
Emperor; and he admired the man, Vespasian consults with his Captains about
Joseph's liberty.
who was yet in hold. But calling Mutianus and the rest of his friends Joseph
had been, and what difficulty he had to win Jotapata, only because of his
Valor; and then his Prophecies, which at that time he esteemed only Fables,
fained for fear; but now time and event had proved them true. Wherefore it
seemed an unreasonable thing, that he, who had been the foreteller of his
Exaltation, and a Messenger to him from God, should still continue in bonds
like a Captive, and be left in adversity. So calling for Joseph, he commanded
him to be set at liberty. This fact of his made the Captains under him hope for
great reward at his hands, seeing he had been so kind to a stranger. Titus
being there present, said; It is meet, O Father, that as you acquit Joseph from
Captivity, so you also take away the shame of that which he has already
endured. For if we not only unty his Chains, but also break them in sunder, he
shall be as though he had never been in bondage: for this is the manner used
for redress, when any one being guiltless is committed to bonds. Vespasian
hereto agreed: and so one came with an Axe, and hewed his Chains in pieces.
Thus was Joseph rewarded for his Prophecy; and thenceforward he was esteemed
worthy to be believed.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Vetellius his Death and Manners.
Vespasian had answered the Ambassadors, and disposed of all the Commands of
his Army according to every ones merit, he went to Antioch, and there
deliberated whither to go first; Vespasian bethinks himself to return to Rome.
and it seemed best to him to go to Rome, rather than to Alexandria: for he
knew that Alexandria was quiet and firm, but Rome was held by Vitellius.
Wherefore he sent Mutianus into Italy, with many Troops of Foot and Horse: who
fearing to go by Sea, went through Cappadocia and Phrygia; for it was
Wintertime. Antonius Primus, who was Governor of Moesia, brought from thence
the third Legion remaining there, and marched against Vitellius. Vitellius sent
Caecinna to meet him with a great Army: who departing from Rome, met with
Antonius at Cremona, a Town of Lombardy, Italy; but beholding the discipline
and order of his Forces, he durst not fight with them: and thinking it very
dangerous to fly, designed to revolt; and so calling to him the Centurions and
Tribunes of his Army, he persuaded them to go and join with Antonius, after he
had extenuated Vitellius his Power, and extolled that of Vespasian: Cecinna
persuades the Soldiers to forsake Vitellius, and honor Vespasian.
affirming the first to have only the bare name of the Emperor; and the last
to have also all Virtues meet for an Emperor. Moreover, that it would be
better for them to do that of their own accord, which otherwise they should be
compelled to; and seeing themselves already surpassed in number, it was
Prudence to prevent all danger. For Vespasian was able without their assistance
to subdue all the rest: but Vitellius was not able with their help to keep that
he had. And speaking to this effect, he persuaded Antonius.

The same night, the Soldiers repenting themselves of what they had done, and
also lest fearing Vitellius should get the upper hand, who sent them against
Antonius, drew Cecinna; And they had done it, had not the Tribunes come and
entreated them to the contrary: wherefore they did not kill him, but kept him
bound, meaning to send him to Vitellius as a Traitor. Primus Antonius hearing
this, went with his Army and assaulted them who revolted from him, Caecinna is
apprel ended for Treason.
and they a while resisted; yet at last forced to retire, they fled to Cremona;
and Primus accompanied with Horsemen, prevented their escape, and so slew most
of them before they got into the City; and afterward setting upon it, he gave
his Soldiers the spoil of it. Many Merchants of other Countries, and many
Townsmen were slain, and all Vitellius Army, consisting of 30200 men. Antonius
lost in this battle 4500 of those whom he brought out of Moesia: And delivering
Cecinna from Prison, Vespasian honors Caecinna with unexpected honors, and is
acquitted of Treason.
he sent him to carry the news hereof to Vespasian: who praised

Sabinus, who was at Rome, hearing that Antonius was at hand, greatly rejoiced,
and took courage: and gathering together the Companies of the City-watch, in
the nightime he seized on the Capitol; Sabinus takes the Capitol, and leaves
Vitellius.
and in the morning, many of the Nobles joined with him, amongst others
Domitian, his Brothers Son, who was a great cause and help to obtain the
Victory. Vitellius little esteeming Primus, turned his anger against Sabinus,
and those that had revolted with him: as it were naturally thirsting after the
blood of the Nobility, he sent all the Army he brought out of Germany with him,
to assault the Capitol, where many valiant deeds were showed on both parts: and
at last the Germans, being most in number, got the Capitol Hill. Domitian with
many brave Noblemen, as it Sabinus was carried to Vitellius, and by his
commandment instantly put to death: and the Soldiers taking away all the gifts
and treasure in the Temple, set it one fire. The day after Antonius arrived,
Vitellius slain.
and Vitellius his Soldiers met him; there was fighting in three several
places of the City, the forces of Vitellius were all defeated: whereupon
Vitellius came out of his Palace drunk and full gorged with delicate meat; he
was imediately seized upon, and drawn through the midst of the streets, and
after many contumelies, slain; having reigned Eight months, and five days: if
he had lived longer, the whole Empire had scarce been sufficient to have
maintained his Gluttony. There were slain above 50000 of other people. And this
was done the third day of October. The day after, Mutianus with his Army entered
Rome, and repressed the Soldiers of Antonius, who still sought about in every
place for Vitellius's Soldiers, The people of Rome proclaim Vespasian Emperor.
and many of his favorites, and slew whom they thought good, not examining any
matter, by reason of their fury: and bringing out Domitian, he declared to the
people that he was to govern the City till his Father came. The people being
delivered from fear, proclaimed Vespasian Emperor, and made Feasts and
Triumphs both under one, for his establishing in the Empire, and for joy that
Vitellius was deposed.

CHAP. XIV.
How Titus was sent by his Father against the Jews.
WHen Vespasian came to Alexandria, Titus repairs to Jerusalem.
news was brought to him of what was done at Rome. And Ambassadors came to him
from all parts of the World to congratulate him. And although next after Rome,
this City was the greatest in the World, yet was it scarcely able to receive
the people that came thither to him. Vespasian being now established Emperor
of all the World, and the Commonwealth of the Romans being contrary to his
expectation freed from troubles, he now began to think upon the relics of
Judea. Titus comes to Cesaeea, and gathers his ^orces there.
And he himself, winter being ended, prepared to go to Rome, and in the mean
time he hasted to dispose of all things at Alexandria. Moreover he sent his Son
Titus Jerusalem. Titus departed by land from Alexandria to Nicopolis, which is
distant from it 20 furlongs, and there he shipped his men, and sailed along the
River Nilus by Medensia to Thumin; here landing his men, he came to the City
called Tanis. The second place he rested in was the City Heraclea, and the
third Pelusium; where having refreshed his Soldiers two days space, the third
day he past the borders of Pelusium, and having gone one days journey through
the wilderness, he pitched his Camp at the Temple of Jupiter Cassian, and the
next day at Ostracine, where there is no water, but all that the Inhabitants
use, they have from other places. After this, he rested at Rhinocolura, and
from thence in four days he went to Raphia, where begin the borders of Syria;
and the fifth day he lodged at Gaza; and from thence going to Ascalon Jamnia
and Joppa, he arrived at Caesarea; purposing to gather some other Forces there.

The year of the World, 4034. after the Nativity of Christ, 72.


The Contents of the Chapters of the Sixth Book.
1 OF Three Seditions in Jerusalem. 2 How Titus went to Jerusalem to see their
strength, and how he was in danger. 3 How the Jews did issue out upon the
Romans pitching their Tents. 5 Of the deceit of the Jews used against the
Romans. 6 The Description of Jerusalem. 7 The Jews refuse to yield, and assault
the Romans. 8 Of the fall of the Tower: and how two of the Walls were won. 9
How Castor the Jew did flout the Romans. 10 How the Romans did twice get the
second Wall. 11 Of the Mounts raised against the third Wall, and a long Oration
of Joseph, persuading the Jews to yield, and of the Famine within the City. 12
Of the Jews that were Crucified, and how the Towers were burnt. 13 How the
Romans in three days space built a Wall about Jerusalem. Jerusalem: and how
they built another Tower or Mount. 15 Of the Massacre of the Jews both within
and without the City. 16 Of the Sacrilege about the Temple: and the dead
Bodies that were cast out of the City: and of the Famine.


CHAP. I.

TItus being thus come out of Egypt by the Desert into Syria, he departed for
Caesarea, purposing there to set his Army in order. And whilst he was with his
Father Vespasian at Alexandria, disposing of the Empires that God had given
him, it happened that the Sedition at Jerusalem divided into three parts, and
fought one against another: and well it was they were so equally divided.

We have already sufficiently declared who were the Authors of the Faction of
the Zealots, A threefold Sedition in Jerusalem.
whose tyranny over the City was the ruin thereof: and this may be said to
Eleazar the Son of Simon, who was the first that in the Temple divided the
Zealots from the People, faining himself to be displeased with that which John
every day did; yet in Truth, for that he envied that a greater Tyrant than
himself should be Ruler, desirous to be Chief, and make himself Mighty, he
revolted from the rest: and with him Judas the Son of Chelcias, and Simon the
Son of Ezron, two of the most potent amongst them. Besides them, was also
Ezechias the Son of Chobarus, a Nobleman, all of which had many of the Zealots
following them: and possessing themselves of the inner part of the Temple, they
set a Guard in the entrance, and in the sacred Gates, presuming upon the
fullness of their Stores: for there was great quantity of sacred Provision,
which they thought it no impiety to make John was superior in number, but
inferior in the quality of the place: for having his Enemies above his head,
he Eleazars, and he still assaulted them to his own cost: Thus many Assaults
were continually made, and many Darts cast, and the Temple was profaned with
murders. Simon the Son of Giora (incited by the People to be their Leader, in
hope he would have assisted them, having in his hands both the higher part of
the City, and greater part of the lower) did now more boldly than before
assault John and his followers, because they were assailed by those above: yet
he being as it were beneath John and his party, sustained as much loss at their
hands, The fight between John and Eleazar.
as John himself did from them who were above him. Thus John was doubly engaged
with Eleazar, who infested him from above, and Simon from below: But Simons
assaults from below were easily repulsed, and it was not a little mischief he
did those who gaul'd him with their Darts from above, Simon and John skirmish
in the Temple.
by certain Engines that he invented, by which he cast Stones and Darts among
them, and slew several both of their Soldiers and Priests, as they were
offering Sacrifice to their God. For though they were generally too prone to
all manner of wickedness, yet those that would were permitted to offer
Sacrifice, watching and diligently guarding those of their Nation. For
Strangers which came thither for devotion, were not mistrusted: But after these
wicked People had permitted them to Sacrifice, when they had finished their
devotions, Great slaughter in the Temple.
they were made a prey, and consumed by this Sedition. For Darts and other shot
with force of the Engines came into the Temple and Altar, and slew the O
miserable City! What did thou suffer at the Romans hands, to be compared to
this, although they set thee on fire to purge thee from Iniquity? Now thou were
separate from the service of God, and could not subsist long, being made a
Sepulcher of thine own Inhabitants, and thy Temple by thy Civil Wars become a
Grave of dead Bodies. Nevertheless, It is not impossible but thou may be
restored to thy former Estate, if first thou appease Gods wrath that has made
thee desolate. But I must not give place unto sorrow, and write a Lamentation
of my miserable Country, seeing I have undertaken to write a History of all
things that past there. Wherefore I will recount the rest of the Impieties of
these Seditious.

The seditious People being divided into three Companies; John assaulted on
both sides.
Eleazar and his followers who had the keeping of the holy first fruits, and
all the sacred Oblations, came against John when they were drunk. And they who
followed John spoiling the People, assaulted Simon, who was succored by the
City. Wherefore when John was assaulted on both sides, he turned some of his
Soldiers against Simon, and the rest against Eleazar: against Simon he used
Darts to cast from the Porches of the Temple; and against Eleazar he used
Engines for shot. And always, so often as they above his head ceased (as They
of Jerusalem had wel-nigh burnt all their Corn.
being either weary or drunken) he fiercely assaulted Simon and his men. Also
as far as he drove them into the City, so far did he fire all, and burnt Houses
full of Corn and other Necessaries; and that which he left unburned, Simon at
his return (when John was gone into the Temple) set on fire: as if on purpose
to give the Romans an advantage, they had consumed all their Provisions for the
Siege.

To be short, all was consumed with fire about the Temple, and the City was
levelled and made plain ground to fight in, and the Corn burnt that might have
sufficed for many years; A wretched calamity in Jerusalem.
by which means they were reduced by a Famine of their own making, which could
not have been brought upon them had they not caused it themselves. The Citizens
were in every place a prey to those that were Seditious on one side, and to
them

This was the occasion of great fear and terror among them all; and the more,
because it was no time now to consult, and no hope left of accommodation, or
flight to them that desired it. For all places were kept, and the Rebels within
killed whoever they perceived well-wishers to the Romans, or did endeavor to
fly to them, as common Enemies. However these wicked persons agreed in this, to
put the just Men to death, who best deserved to live. Day and night nothing
could be heard but the noise of them Lamentation and mourning in Jerusalem
that every man despaired of himself. For whosoever were not joined with the
Seditious, grew to be careless of all things, as making account presently to
die a thousand deaths. But the Seditious gathering the dead bodies upon heaps,
continued their fighting, and trod upon them; and as it were encouraging
themselves by the dead under their feet, The cruelty of the Seditious in
Jerusalem.
they became more cruel, still devising new stratagems one against another, and
immediately executing whatsoever they devised without any John profaned the
holy things of the Temple, and made them Engines of War. For formerly the
Priests and People had determined to underprop the Temple, and build it twenty
Cubits higher, and King Agrippa, with great labor and expense, had sent them
in Timber for that purpose from Mount Libanus. Which being put off by the Wars,
John made use of the Wood, that was kept for holy uses, to make Engines of.
John took the Timber and made use of it: for that design he erected a Tower to
fight against those that assaulted him from off the Temple; and this Tower he
built along the Wall over against the Chapter House that stands on the West
side of the Temple; for he could build it in no other place so conveniently.
And having thus impiously furnished himself with Engines, he hoped hereby to
have destroyed

For after that Titus had gathered together part of his Army, The order of
Titus Army.
and ordered the rest to meet him at Jerusalem, he departed from Caesarea,
having three Legions that lately under the conduct of his Father Vespasian had
wasted all Judea, and the twelfth Legion that sometime under Cestius were
overcome, and put to flight by the Jews: who being valiant enough of
themselves, were impatient to be employed again against the Jews, to revenge
themselves of their former disgrace. Titus commanded the fifth Legion to meet
him at Jerusalem, and to march by Emmaus, and the tenth Legion by Jericho: the
rest he took with himself, accompanied with the Kings forces that came Syria.
Titus also brought forces with him to supply the number that was wanting, which
forces were sent by Vespasian under Mutianus into Italy: for he brought two
thousand select men from the Legions at Alexandria, and three thousand followed
him from Euphrates, together with Tiberius Alexander his chiefest friend, and
one next him in Authority, who before was Governor of Egypt, and thought a fit
man to be Governor of the Army; for that he was the first that entertained the
Emperor being new elected, and joined faithfully with him before he knew what
success he should have: he was present with him in all his affairs as his
chiefest Counselor, and was renowned both for his Wisdom and Experience.

CHAP. II.
How Titus went to Jerusalem to see their strength, and how he was in great
danger.
TItus being now to go into the Enemies Country, Titus com^^ to Judea*
caused all his Auxiliaries to march in the Van: after whom followed the
Pioneers and those appointed to Titus himself accompanied with his choice men,
and many that bare his Colors: next, the Horsemen marched immediately before
the Engines. And the Prefects and Tribunes with certain chosen men, and their
Companies followed. After them the Eagle, with many other Ensigns: and the
Trumpets went before them. And after them followed the Army marching six in a
rank: then the multitude of Servants that followed every Legion did drive their
baggage before them: lastly came the Hirelings, and those that were appointed
to guard them. Marching in such comely and warlike manner, as the Romans are
wont, he came by Samaria into Gophna, which place was already conquered pitched
his Tents in a place, which in the Jews language ^^^lled Acanthonaulona, Gabah
Saul, which signifies the Valley of Saul, which is almost thirty Furlongs from
Jerusalem. From thence accompanied with 600 chosen Horsemen, he went to
Jerusalem, to view how strong it was, Titus repairs to Jerusalem to ^ound the
dispositions of the people.
and of what courage the Jews were, to see if peradventure at sight of him they
would yield without any further ado. For Titus understood (and it was true)
that the people desired Peace, but were overpowerd by the Seditious, and so
durst not attempt any thing. Titus riding along the highway that went to the
Walls, saw no man: but turning aside toward the Tower Psephinos with his
Horsemen, an infinite number presently issued out by the Towers of Women, at a
Gate opposite to Helens Tomb; brake his Guard of Horsemen into two parts, and
advanced to hinder Titus in danger.
from joining with the rest that had crossed the way, by which means they had
divided Titus from the rest of his company, in so much as he could proceed no
further for the Ditch of the Town-Wall on one side, and for the Garden Pales on
the other side: and there was no way for him to return unto his Soldiers, the
Enemies being between him and home. Many of his Soldiers not knowing their
General was in any danger, but supposing him amongst them still, fled away.
Titus seeing that he had only his own valor to trust to, turned his Horse
against his Enemies, and with a loud voice exhorted his followers to do the
like, Titus fights valiantly with his Enemies
and so he brake violently into the midst of them, hasting to get unto his
Company. It was evident at that time that God gives the Victory, and has a
Titus, and he had no Armor at all (for as we have already said, he came to
view, not to fight) yet had he not one wound, but all past him; as though
purposely every one had striven to miss him. But Titus with his Sword made way,
cut down many that opposed themselves against him, Titus puts his Enemies to
flight, and returns in safety to his Camp.
and with his Horse past over them. The Jews seeing Titus his valor, cried out
and exhorted one another to set upon him; but whithersoever he turned, the Jews
fled, and would not abide by it: likewise those Soldiers that were with him,
encompassed him round. For every man's hope lay in charging through with Titus,
before they were closed in and oppressed. Two of the most valiant amongst them
Titus and the rest came safe into the Cam^* And thus the Jews being succesful
at first, were mightily encouraged, and that encouragement being of moment,
made them confident, or rather rash, a long time after.

CHAP. III.
How the Jews sallied out upon the Romans as they were
THe Legion that was to pass by Emmaus, being joined to the rest of the Army
over night, Caesar the next morning removed, and came to Scopos, where he had a
full view of the City and Temple on the North part, the ground adjoining unto
the City being very low, and not improperly called Scopos, being distant seven
Furlongs from the City: Titus Camp was 7. stades o^ the City.
in that quarter Titus commanded two Legions to encamp themselves, and the
fifth Legion to retire three Furlongs off, to the intent that the Soldiers who
were wearied with traveling all night, might entrench themselves without fear
or danger; no sooner had they begun their work, but presently the tenth Legion
came, Jericho; which Vespasian had already subdued, and placed a Garrison there.
This Legion was commanded to encamp six Furlongs from Jerusalem, near Mount
Olivet, on the East part of the City, and is enclosed with a deep Valley called
Cedron. This great Army so suddenly arriving reconciled the dissentions within
the City for some time: and the three Factions beholding with admiration the
Roman Camp, became friends, and all differences were composed. They began to
examine and consider what madness had caused them to suffer themselves to be
enclosed with three Walls, The Seditious agree among themselves.
to their prejudice, and loss of their lives: and that they should stand still,
and be spectators as it were of such dangerous preparations, without making the
least Countermine or provision to defeit them; whilst some cried,

Thus being assembled they exhorted one another: and betaking themselves to
their Arms they issued out of the City, first upon the tenth Legion, and with a
great shout set upon the Romans that were entrenched in the Valley. The
Citizens assail the Romans.
The Romans being all at work in the Trenches, and most of them having laid
down their Weapons (presuming the Jews durst not have made any salley by reason
of the variance amongst themselves) were so much surprised, that great part of
them immediately fled; some of them stood to their Arms, but were slain before
they could get into a posture of defense. The number of the Jews was daily
increased by their first success, and The Jews drive the Romans from their Camp.
they easily wounded the Jews, partly because their eagerness was such that
they did not much seek to defend themselves, insomuch that they easily stayed
the Jews from pursuing them. Yet the number of them that pursued them still
increasing, they were much disordered and at last forced to forsake the field,
and leave their tents: and the whole Legion had been in great danger, had not
Titus upon the news thereof speedily relieved them, and upbraiding their
cowardliness recalled The fight of the Jews with the Romans.
since fortune frowned upon them, turned again, and having the Valley between
them, they fought with the Romans; And the fight continued till noon.

A little after midday, Titus guarding the the rest with those that he brought
to succor them, and placing others to prevent the excursions of the Jews,
commanded the rest to entrench themselves in the top of the Mountain. The Jews
thought the Romans had fled, and their Sentinel upon the Walls, making a sign
to them by shaking The Romans are dispersed by the Jews, and driven to the
Mountain.
but as though they had been stricken with some Engine; so all of them were
diversely scattered and forced to fly into the Mountain. But Titus on the side
of the Mountain remained with but few with him; notwithstanding his friends,
who for their love to their Emperor stayed with him, and abode the danger, did
earnestly persuade him to fly from the Jews, who desperately charged them, and
not to endanger himself for them, who ought rather to abide it than he: That he
should think upon his quality and condition, who was not a private Soldier,
but General of them all, and Lord of the whole World, and not abide where there
was such Titus Valor against the Jews.
and forced them to retire. The Jews were amazed at his Valor, yet did not
fly into the City, but avoided him both sides, and fled into the Valley: and
he pursuing them hindered their flight. In the mean time those that were
encamping above, seeing their Comrades beneath put to flight, fled likewise,
thinking themselves not able to resist the Jews, and imagining that Titus was
likewise fled: for had they thought he had made head, they never would have
forsaken their quarters; but now in disorder, Fear and trouble among the Romans.
they knew not wherefore, some fled one way, and some another, till perceiving
the Emperor engaged, and fearing what might befall him, they with The Jews
fight in their retreat, and are driven unto the Valley.
because they were upon the higher ground, they drew down into the Valley.
Titus assaulted them that were drawn up against him, and commanded the rest to
go and finish their Trences. And he with those that were with him to defend the
workmen, kept the Jews from molesting them. So, if I may speak without flattery
or envy, Caesar himself did twice preserve the whole Legion from destruction,
and gave the Soldiers opportunity to entrench themselves.

CHAP. IV.
Of the fight within the City upon the feast of unleavened Bread.
DUring the intermission of the Foreign Wars, John enters and seizes the
inward Temple and all the furniture thereof, puts the Zealots to flight, and
raises a mighty sedition.
they fell to their former sedition again, which caused Civil Wars among them.
And against the feast of Unleavened bread, which is the fourteenth day of April
(for upon this day the Jews say that they were delivered out of the Bondage of
Egypt) Eleazer and his Companions opened the Gates, to the intent that all that
would might come in to adore and do their devotion. John used this Festival-day
as a means to effect his deceit; and caused many of his Company that were
unknown, to enter in among the people with Weapons under their Garments, giving
them charge when they were entering to possess themselves of the Temple: and so
soon as they were within, they cast off their Garments, and showed themselves
in Armor. Presently a great tumult arose within the Temple; for all the people
that were not of the Sedition, thought themselves betrayed: and the Zealots
thought this Treason only practiced to prejudice them; so that leaving the Gate
which they kept before, and leaping down from the Towers without offering to
fight, they fled into the Vaults of the Temple. The people flock about the
Altar, and others were driven with them into the Temple, and killed with Clubs
A threefold Sedition divided into two parts.
he was put to death, as though he had been one of the Zealots. But they who
had cruelly raged against the Innocent, gave the wicked leisure to escape out
of those Caves whereby they had no harm: and having gotten the inner part of
the Temple, Whatsoever about Jerusalem is hollow or troubled with Valleys, is
filled up.
and all belonging thereunto, they did now more confidently than before fight
against Simon: Thus the Sedition that was before divided into three parts, was
now reduced into two. Titus being desirous to bring his Army nearer the City,
sent out a commanded party of Horse and Foot, which he thought sufficient to
hinder the excursions of the Jews from Scopos, and another Company he sent to
plain all the Jerusalem, who cut down all Hedges, and Pales, and Fences, and
Wood (though they were fruit trees) filled the Valleys, and made it plain
ground; levelling the Rocks and Mountains that made the Country unequal; by
doing of which all the way was plained from Scopos to Herod's Monument, which is
not far from the Lake of Serpents, called formerly Bethora.

CHAP. V.
The Jews stratagem against the Roman Soldiers.
ABout this time the Jews devised this stratagem against the Romans. The most
courageous among the Seditious people went out unto the places called the
Women's Towers, and pretended to be driven thither by that party in the City
that desired peace; and that fearing the Romans, they were come thither for
shelter; others got up on the Walls, and pretended themselves Citizens, they
called out for Peace and desired their friendship; promising to throw open
their Gates that the Romans might enter: and whilst they were so doing they
threw stones at their Companions aforesaid, pretending to drive them from the
Gates. The alacrity of the Soldiers among the Romans, contrary to Titus
ordinance.
They pretend likewise great earnestness Titus suspected their Kindness, as
seeing no reason for it. For the day before, having by Joseph offered them
peace, he perceived their minds far from any such thoughts: wherefore he
commanded the Soldiers to keep their quarters and not remove; yet some of
them, appointed to work in the Trenches, taking their weapons ran unto the
Gates, and the Jews who The Victory of the Jews
and in fear of being punished, caused them to resist the more stoutly; so that
after a long conflict, and many wounds given and received, at last the Romans
were worsted, and the Jews pursued them to Herod's Monument. And having done
them much mischief, the Jews returned with great joy, deriding the Romans for
being so easily deceived, lifting up their Shields and Bucklers, by way of
exultation.

The Roman Soldiers were highly threatened by their Captains, and Caesar
accosted Caesar's sharp oration to his Soldiers.
The Jews led only with desperation, do all things with advice and counsel,
devising deceits: and fortune favors their practices because they are
orderly, and true one to another. But the Romans (whom for their Obedience and
Discipline fortune was wont formerly to favor) do contrariwise offend herein,
and for their rash and unadvised fighting, are overcome: and which is worst of
all, in Caesar's presence offering to fight without Orders, contrary to military
Law and Discipline; which I am sure my Father will be unsatisfied to hear. For
he who from his infancy, has been trained up in Arms, never offended in this
sort; and what shall we say to our Law that punishes the least disobedience
with death, when our whole Army disobey the Emperors command? But (says he)
they who so arrogantly have disobeyed our command, shall presently understand,
that among the Romans, Victory against the Generals command, is but infamy.
Titus having spoken in anger, declared what he would do, and how he purposed to
punish them. Which struck them so deeply, The Romans Soldiers beseech Titus
for their fellows in Arms.
they looked upon themselves as desperate, and people appointed to die. But all
the other Legions flocking about Titus, besought him to pardon their
Fellow Soldiers, and to remit the rashness of some few, for the obedience of
the rest, assuring him that their future valor should be a recompense for this
their offense. Whereupon Caesar was pacified, partly thinking it most
profitable, partly to gratify the rest; for he purposed to punish one man
only, but to rebuke all, and signify his displeasue, and so he was reconciled
to his Soldiers; strictly charging them to be wiser for the future: after
which he devised how he might be revenged on the Jews. Jerusalem and his Army
was in four days made plain; Titus being desirous to conduct the baggage, and
the rest of the multitude in safety, placed the best of his men in good order,
and caused them to march from the North part of the City unto the West, along
by the Walls of the City, placing his Foot in the Front, his Horse in the Rear,
and between them both the Archers, whereby the Jews were disabled to make any
Salley. Titus Soldiers being thus disposed, the baggage of the three Legions
and the multitude passed along without any interruption. How and in what places
Titus besieged Jerusalem.
And Titus himself being advanced within two Furlongs of the City Walls,
pitched his Tent against that Angle that is called Psephynos, where the compass
of the Wall from the North bends into the West: the other part of the Hippicos,
distant in like manner two Furlongs from the City. But the tenth Legion
remained upon Mount Olivet where it was before.

CHAP. VI.
The description of Jerusalem.
JErusalem was compassed round with a treble Wall, The treble Walls of
Jerusalem.
only on one side it was enclosed with Valleys inaccessible: and on that side
it had only one Wall. It was built upon two little Hills, opposite to one
another, and separated with a Valley, wonderfully thick built with houses. One
of these Hills is far higher and steeper than the other, insomuch that because
of the strength of it, The Castle of David.
King David in times past called it a Castle (this David was the Father of King
Solomon, who first builded the Temple in that place) but we at this day call it
the high Marketplace. The other Hill called Acra, Acra sustains the lower part
of the City.
is the place where the lower part of the City stands. Opposite against this
Hill, there was also another lower than this Acra, and divided from it formerly
with a large Valley, but afterward when the Asmoneans reigned, they filled up
this Acra, and making it lower, that it might not hide the Temple. The Valley,
by which the two higher Hills are separated is called Tyropoeon, and reaches
unto Siloa (which is a Fountain The Fountain of Silo.
for beside the difficulty of the situation, it was very strongly built, and
repaired by David, Solomon, and other Kings. This Wall, beginning at the Tower
called Hippicos, The oldest Wall.
passes on to that called Xystus, and so to the Palace, and at last ends in
the West porch of the Temple: on the other side toward the West it begins at
the same Tower; and passing by the place that is called Betiso, it descends to
the Gate of the Esseans, and so into the South, and from thence again it
bends into the East, where is also Solomon's Pond, and reaches unto the place
called Ophlan, The Second Wall.
where it is joined unto the East Porch of the Temple. The second Wall
beginning at the Gate that is called Genath (which is a Gate of the former
Wall) and encompassing the North part of the City, it reaches to Antonia, a
Castle so called. The third Wall begins at the Tower Hippicos, The third
Wall.
from whence it goes to the North-part, and from thence to the Tower Psephina,
over against the Sepulcher of Helena, that was Queen of Adiabena, and Mother of
King Izates: and passing along by the Kings Caves, it turns toward the Tower
near the Monument of Fullo, and in the Valley called Cedron it joyneth with the
old Wall. Agrippa encompassed that part of the City that he built, with this
Wall; it being before all open and without defense. The City grew afterward so
populous, that by little and little they were forced to inhabit without Bezetha
the fourth Hill.
named Bezetha, situate against Antonia, but separated from it with very deep
Ditches, made on purpose to render the approaches to the Fort Antonia more
dangerous and difficult; the deepness of which ditches, made the Fort seem
higher than it was. This place being added unto the City, is called in that
Country-language Bezetha, which signifies the new City. And the Inhabitants
desired it might be fortified, Agrippa's cost in building the Wall.
Agrippa, Father to this Agrippa that finished the Wall, begun the Wall
aforementioned: But fearing Claudius Caesar, hearing how sumptuous a Wall he
built, should suspect him for designing to revolt, he only laid the Foundation
of it, and left it

The City could never have been taken by force, had he finished that Wall as he
began; it being built twenty Cubits long, and ten Cubits broad with hard Stone,
which could neither easily be undermined, nor battered with Engines: and this
Wall was built ten Cubits high, and no doubt had been raised higher, had not
the liberality of the founder been checked. Yet afterward by the Jews industry
the same Wall was raised twenty Cubits high; the Battlements hereof were two
Cubits high, and the Tower three Cubits, and in all it was twenty four Cubits
high, as before. Upon the Wall were three Towers, twenty Cubits broad, and
twenty Cubits high, The third Wall had 90. Towers.
and between every Tower were two hundred Cubits space. The middle Wall had
fourteen Towers, and the old Wall had threescore, and the compass of the whole
City was three and thirty Furlongs. And although the third Wall was admirable,
yet the Tower of Psephina, which was built upon a Corner of the Wall, Psephina
was 70. Cubits high.
between the North and the West part of the City, was more admirable, (against
which part Titus had encamped himself) for Arabia, and see the uttermost parts
of all the dominions of the Hebrews unto the Sea. Just opposite to this was the
Tower Hippicos, and near unto it were other two, that King Herod builded upon
the old Wall, which in bigness, beauty and strength, surpassed all the rest in
the World.

For King Herod, Herod called three Towers by the names of three his most
dearest Friend^.
besides his natural liberality and desire to adorn this City, pleased himself
so much in beautifying these Towers, that they excelled all other; and then he
dedicated them to three most renowned persons, whose names they also did bear,
to wit, to his Brother, his Friend, and his Wife: she (as is aforesaid) having
been put to death for jealousy; and the other two been slain in the Wars,
after they had fought Hippicos, called by the name of his Friend, had Hippicos
85 Cubits high.
and above them were Battlements two Cubits high: and Turrets three Cubits
high: so that the whole height was accounted to be eighty five Cubits. The
second Tower that by his Brothers name he called Phaselus, Phaselus 90 Cubits
high.
was in breadth and length forty Cubits, and so many Cubits high, in figure of
a square Pillar, all which height was solid, and not hollow within: and above
this a Porch ten Cubits high, decked with Turrets and Pinacles. Over the midst
of this Porch he built another Pharus at Alexandria, wherein continual light is
kept to guide the Seamen that sail thither, but this was of greater
circumference. In this house at that time Simon lodged, and tyrannized over the
people. The third Tower was, according to the Queens Name, Mariamme a goodly
Tower 55 Cubits high.
called Mariamme, the Wife of Herod, twenty Cubits high, all solid, and other
twenty Cubits broad, having more magnificent and beautiful Houses and Lodgings
than the rest. For the King thought it meet, that the Tower called by his Wives
name, should be more beautiful than the other who only

These three Towers were of great height, yet by reason of their situation they
seemed far higher: for the old Wall whereupon they were built was placed upon
high ground, and the top of the Hill whereupon they stood was above thirty
Cubits high, whereby their height was much increased. The richness also was
admirable; for it was not ordinary stone, but all White Marble, every stone
being twenty Cubits long, ten Cubits broad, five Cubits thick, and all so
ingeniously contrived, that every stone by it self seemed a Tower; and every
Tower seemed to be but one Stone. These were placed on the North side of the
City; and adjoining to them within the City The Kings Palace.
every one of like distance from other, beautified with dwelling Houses and
Lodgings for a hundred of the Nobility. The variety of the Marble it was built
withal was admirable, for there was no sort, how rare or costly soever, but was
there. The Ceiling of the Rooms for the length of the Beams and the beauty
thereof, passed all credit; and then their number; and richness of their
furniture was extraordinary. In every room there were many Vessels of gold and
silver, and many Porches round about, one answerable unto another, and Pillars
in every one. There were many pleasant Walks with The Kings Palace burnt by the
Theives and Rebels.
the Theives did there set on fire: for these things were not burnt by the
Romans, but by the Seditious Thieves (as is before said,) at the beginning of
this Rebellion, who consumed all with fire, even from the Castle Antonia from
whence the fire came, and destroyed the Kings Palace, and the Covers and Tops
of the three Towers. The Temple was, as is before said, built upon a hard
Mountain, and at the first, The Temple built upon a most strong Hill.
the Plain upon the top thereof was scarcely big enough to contain it and the
Solomon, who also built the Temple, had compassed the East part thereof with a
Wall, he also placed a Porch upon the Rampire, and so for many ages after, it
lay unfenced on other parts: wherefore the People every day bringing earth
thither, at last made it plain and large enough: and breaking down the North
Wall, they took in all that space which the Temple had formerly taken up: and
the Hill being now enclosed with a threefold Wall, it was a work beyond all
imagination. In the finishing whereof many Ages were spent, All the sacred
Treasures spent in the building of the Temple.
and all the holy Treasure offered to God, even from all parts of the World,
was employed therein, as well in the Buildings of the higher, as of the lower
part of the Temple; the foundations whereof were laid three hundred Cubits
deep, The stones of this building were of forty Cubits: for the abundance of
treasure and

The building was answerable unto these Foundations. The Porches were built of
white Marblestone, sustained by Pillars.
For all the Porches were double, and every one was supported by Pillars, each
of them being five and twenty Cubits high, and all of one piece, and of white
Marble: the top whereof was all of Cedar, whose natural beauty, for the good
joining of the wood and polishing thereof, did astonish all that beheld it,
being adorned neither with painting nor carved works. These Porches were thirty
Cubits broad; and the compass of them altogether, with the Fort of Antonia, was
six Furlongs. The Court was curiously wrought and paved Greek, forbidding all
strangers to enter into the Holy-place: for the second Temple is called the
Holy-place. To go unto the second from the first, we must pass fourteen stairs,
and it was foursquare aloft, and enclosed with a Wall by itself; whose outside
being forty Cubits high, was all covered with stairs to ascend up into it; and
within it was five and twenty Cubits high: for all the part of the inner side
was unseen, because it was built on the descent of a Hill. After the fourteen
Stairs, there was a Plain made level with the A peculiar place destinated for
Women for Religion sake.
and two on the East. For it was necessary that there should be a peculiar
place for Women to exercise their devotion in, which also was enclosed with a
Wall. And so it was necessary there should be two doors: and against the first
Gate there was opposite unto it, one Gate on the North-side, and another on the
South, both separated from the rest, whereby we entered the Women's appartment,
for it was not lawful for any to pass by any other Gate unto the Women, neither
could they go beyond their own door, because of the Wall: for that place was
common both to the Women of that Nation, and all strange Women that came for
Religion sake. There was no Some of the Gates were of Gold, some of Silver, and
one of Corinthian Brass.
The Gates were covered with Gold and Silver, as also the posts and foreparts
thereof were, one only excepted that was covered with Corinthian Brass, far
surpassing in beauty the other that were covered with Silver and Gold. In every
Gate there were two doors, each one thirty Cubits high, and fifteen Cubits
broad: and after the entrance where they were made larger, every one had on
each side Seats thirty Cubits long, and large like a Tower, and forty Cubits
high, each one supported with two Pillars twelve Cubits thick. All the other
Gates were Alexander Tiberius his Father had melted, to cover all the nine
Gates. And there were fifteen Stairs, that went from the Wall that separated
the Women, unto the great Gate of the Temple: for these Stairs were shorter by
five steps than those that went to the other Gates. The Temple it self was
situated in the midst of all, to wit, the holy Sanctuary, The Sacred Sanctuary.
and had twelve Stairs to go unto it. The Front whereof was in

The Hangings were also of the same length, being a Babylonian Vail, wrought
with Violet, and Purple Silk and Scarlet, admirable to behold: the permixtion
of which colors had a mystical meaning, The Babylonians Vail of admirable
workmanship.
bearing as it were the signification of the whole World. For the Scarlet
seemed to express the Fire, the Silk the Earth, the Violet the Air, and the
Purple the Sea; partly in their colors resembling them, partly also as having
their beginning from them: The signification of the Vail.
for the Purple is engendered in the Sea, and the Silk is produced by the Earth.
In this Tapestry work was curiously wrought, and deciphered all the
Speculations of the Heavens, only the Celestial Signs excepted. Being Three
admirable works: The Candlestick, the Table and Censer.
having in it three most admirable things, famous throughout the World, to wit,
a Candlestick, a Table, and the Altar of Incense. Upon the Candelstick seven
Lamps were placed, signifying the seven Planets, (for so many did there come
all out of one stem of the Candelstick). Upon the Table were standing twelve
loaves of Bread, signifying the twelve Celestial Signs, and Revolution of the
Year. By the Altar of Incense (out of which proceeds thirteen Odours, coming
partly from the Sea which is unhabitable, and partly from the Earth which is
inhabited) is signified that all things are in the hands of God, and owe him
The outward Court of the Temple coveed with massy Plates of Gold.
yet was it higher than it by 40 Cubits, neither was it so sumptuous as the
lower. For the whole height was 100 Cubits, and the ground thereof 60. The
outermost part was so curious and richly wrought, it was impossible to imagine
any

The Priests that were admitted to the Altar and Temple had no infirmity, The
Priests in the old Testament, abstained from wine, and were sober.
they were clothed in fine Linen, abstained from Wine, and lived in abstinence
for reverence of Religion, lest they should sin whilst they offered Sacrifice.
The High Priest also ascended with the Priests into the Temple; yet not always,
but every seventh day, and in the Calends of every month, or on a Festival,
celebrated according to the custom of their Country, The high Priests Garment.
wherein all the people were present. When he sacrificed he was girded with a
Vail, which covered his Thighs to his Privities, under which he wore a Linen
Garment hanging down to his feet, and above it a round Violet Garment fringed
of five colors; Gold, Purple, Scarlet, Silk and Violet, wherewith (as we have
The precious stones in the high Priests Garment.
bearing the names of the 12 Tribes of Israel engraven. On the other side did
hang 12 precious Stones, three and three in a rank, divided into four rows. In
the first was the Ruby,, the Topaz, and the Emerauld: in the second the
Carbuncle, the Jasper, and the Sapphire: in the third the Agate, the Amethyst,
and the Diamond: in the last the Onyx, the Beryl, and Chrysolite: in every one
of which one name of the twelve Tribes was written. Upon his head he wore a
Miter of Silk, which was The description of Antonia.
The Castle Antonia was situate between the two Porches of the first Temple,
which looked unto the West, and the North: and was built upon a Rock of Stone
of fifty Cubits high, on every side was inaccessible: it was built by King
Herod, to show the greatness and magnificence of his mind. For first of all the
Rock Antonia was built forty Cubits high, being within richly furnished, and
contrived like the Palace of a King, with all kind of Offices and other
necessary Rooms. For there were Porches, Baths, and large Halls to place Tents
in: so that in respect of the number and convenience of the Rooms it seemed to
be a City, Antonia not much unlike a City.
and for the magnificence thereof a Kings Palace. The Model of it was like a
Tower environed with four other Towers, at every Corner one, whereof they that
were on the South and East Side were seventy Cubits high, the other two were
but fifty. So that out of the two highest, there was a perfect view of Antonia
commanded the Temple: and had its Guards likewise, as there were also in Herod's
Palace, which commanded the higher part of the City. The Hill Bezetha was
divided from the City, as is before mentioned; and being the highest part of
all, was joined to part of the new City, which hindered the prospect of the
Temple on the North-side. And thus I have spoken sufficiently of the City, and
the Wall in this place, because we mean hereafter to describe

CHAP. VII.
How the Jews refused to yield, and sallyed out upon the Romans.
THe most warlike of the people joined with Simon, 15000 follow Simon.
being in number ten thousand, beside the Idumeans: and those ten thousand had
fifty Captains, all subject unto Simon. The Idumeans that took his part were
five thousand, and had ten Captains, the Chief of whom were Jacob the Son of
Sosas, and Simon the Son of Cathla. John, who kept the Temple, had six thousand
Armed men, over whom were twenty Captains: to these there joined two thousand
of the Zealots; and four hundred, who before had followed Eleazar, and Simon
the Son of Jairus. So that warring one against another, the people was their
booty, and the multitude that was not so Seditious as they, Simons Camp against
John.
was their prey. Simon kept the upper part of the City, and the greater Wall as
far as Cedron; and all that part of the old Wall which is between Siloa, and
the Palace of Monobazus, who was King of Adiabena, that lies beyond the River
Euphrates: he also kept all the Hill Acra (which is the lower part of the City)
unto Helenas Palace, who was Monobazus his Mother. But John kept all the Temple
Ophla, and the valley of Cedron: and that which was between these two places
which Simon and John kept, was consumed with fire, and made a place to fight
in. For although the Romans Tents were pitched near unto the Walls of the City,
yet did not this Sedition cease; for being fleshed with their success at the
Romans first coming, they returned presently to their former animosity. And
dividing themselves again, every man fought for his own interest, doing all the
Romans could have wished to be done. The Romans did them less harm than they
did themselves: for by them the City suffered no new calamity, but endured far
more misery before it was taken and destroyed by the Romans than it did at that
time. The Romans by destroying it, The Seditious took the (...) and the Romans
overcame and took the Seditious.
did rather end than increase their misery. For the Seditious

The City being in this estate, Titus circuiting the Wall, seeks which way he
should attempt his battery.
Titus with a select body of Horse went up and down without it, to epsy where
he might most easily assault the Walls. And being in doubt a long time what to
do, for that by the Valley his Foot could not possible get up; and the Walls
were not possible to be battered with Engines: at last he determined to assault
it on that part where was the Monument of John the High Priest, for there the
first Wall was lower than in other places; and not fortified with a second
Titus was persuaded that the higher City, and the Temple, and Antonia, might
easily be taken. As he was thus viewing the place, Nicanor is wounded with an
Arrow in the left shoulder.
one of his friends, called Nicanor, came unto him; being shot in the left
shoulder with an Arrow, as he attempted to come near Joseph, who went thither
of purpose to persuade the Jews which were upon the Wall to yield: for Nicanor
was very eloquent. Caesar perceiving their minds, by their violence to him who
persuaded them to that which was most expedient for them, was moved, and began
with more eagerness to besiege them: wherefore he permitted his Soldiers to
demolish the Suburbs, and to gather all the Rubbish, Stones, and Wood, and
other matter together, John still kept where he was, fearing Simon, Simon being
next unto the siege, did not rest, but placed all along that part of the Wall,
men with Darts, which before were taken from Sesteis Governor of the Romans,
and found in the Castle of Antonia. The darts did the Jews little good, because
they were not expert in using them.
But the Darts did the Jews small pleasure, by reason that few of them knew how
to use them; only some who were taught by some of the Fugitive Romans used them
a little. Nevertheless they assaulted the Roman Soldiers that were building
the Mounts with Arrows and Stones, made Salleys upon them by companies, and
gave them disturbance: But the Roman Pioneers were defended by Hurdles, that
were of purpose set before them: and every Legion had strange and admirable
Engines against the excursions of their Enemy, and especially the Engines that
the tenth The Stone comes: so the Jews upon the Walls knowing what they meant,
avoided the Stones, and received no harm. Then the Romans devised peaceably to
build the Mount, but Night and Day they hindered them with Stratagemss Titus
commanded the Wall to be battered in three places.
they set them up, and Titus commanded the Wall to be battered in three places;
to the end that the Battery might not be hindered. The noise that these Rams
made was heard round about the City, which was a great terror to the Citizens,
and the Seditious were no less afraid. And seeing themselves all in the same
danger, they determined to join unanimously together against the Romans: the
Seditious upbraiding one another that they rather assisted the Enemy, than
resisted them: and therefore The Seditious forgetting their hatred and discords
join in one.
And Simon sent an Officer unto the Temple, to proclaim leave for all such as
would, to come unto the Walls: which also John did permit, notwithstanding he
mistrusted Simon: so forgetting their old quarrel, they joined all together
against the Romans, and placeing themselves upon the Walls, they cast fire upon
the Engines of the Romans, and those who managed them; throwing Darts against
them without intermission, whilst the bravest amongst them in great companies
leapt down, and destroyed that wherewith the Engines were covered, and
assaulted those that stood to defend them; by which means they did the Romans
much harm, and more by their desperate boldness than their skill.

But Titus was still at hand to succor them that stood in need: The Ram shakes
a corner of a Tower.
and placing Horsemen and Archers about the Engines, he repulsed the Jews who
come to cast Fire, beat off them that cast Darts and shot Arrows from the
Towers, and so gave the Rams time and opportunity to play; yet these Rams did
not great execution, only a corner of a Tower was shattered by the Ram of the
fifth Legion. But without any detriment to the Wall: for the Tower being much
higher than the Wall, when the Tower tumbled, it fell over the Wall, and
carried nothing along with it. The Jews being repulsed, and for some time
discontinuing their Sallys, perceived the Romans were grown secure, and
dispersed carlesly over their Camp, as presuming their late ill fortune would
discourage the Jews from any new attack, but they were mistaken in their
account: for the Hippicos, threw fire into their Trenches among their Engines,
and assaulted them bravely when they had done. But the Romans being quickly
sensible of their danger, got immediately together, and with the excellence of
their Discipline, repelled not only the first insult and fury of the Jews, but
beat back all their supplys. So there began a grievous Battle about the
Engines; the Jews striving to fire, and the Romans to hinder them; great noise
and clamor there was, and many in the Front were slain on both sides. At first
the Jews had the better; Titus puts the Jews to flight and drives them into
the City.
and their fire did some mischief upon the Engines: and all had been quite
consumed, had not the Soldiers from Alexandria hindered it, who for the opinion
that John Captain of the Idumeans, by the shot of an Arrow that wounds him in
the breast, dies.
and Titus commanded that he should be crucified before the Wall, what perhaps
the rest being terrified, might yield. After Caesar was retired, John the
Captain of the Idumeans talking upon the Wall with one of his friends, being
stricken in the breast with an Arrow by an Arabian Soldier, presently died:
which caused great lamentation among the Jews, and sorrow amongst the
Seditious, for he was very valiant, and wise.


The fall of the Tower, and how the two Walls were taken.
THE night following, there was a great tumult among the Romans: For Titus the
Emperor had commanded to build three Towers, 50 Cubits high a piece, each one
upon a several Mount, that from thence he might the more easily beat the
Enemies from the Walls: But one of these Towers in the midst of the night fell
down Titus understanding the matter, caused the truth thereof to be presently
proclaimed throughout the Camp; and the Tumult (with much ado) was appeased.

The Jews bore up courageously against all other dangers, but were much gauled
from these Towers which Titus had erected; for they were slain and wounded from
thence with small Shot, Darts and Arrows, for they could build nothing to
defend themselves Nicon, that is to say, Victor, the Romans great Ram.
at last prevailed somewhat. So the great Ram, which the Jews called Nicon,
because it overcame all, at last battered the Wall; and the Jews being weary
with fighting, having watched all night before, out of sleepiness, or because
they persuaded themselves that the Wall was superfluous, they having two more
beside it, they all forsook their quarters, and retired to the second Wall; and
the Romans entered the first, that the Ram called Nicon had battered. The Romans
get the first Wall.
Then the Romans that had passed and entered the first Wall, went and opened
the Gates, and let in the whole Army. Having thus gotten May, they destroyed
the greatest part thereof; and also the North-side of the City which before
Cestius had wasted.

Titus removed his Camp from thence, and went unto the place called the
Assyrians Camp, and seized upon all between that and Cedron; and being without
shot of an Arrow from the second Wall, he began again to assault it. Then the
Jews dividing the Wall betwixt them to defend each others part, resisted most
valiantly: John and his partakers defended all Antonia, and the North part of
the Temple from Alexanders Tomb: and Simon defended all from John's Tomb unto
the Gate by the Tower Hippicos. The Jews conflict with the Romans.
And many times issuing out of the Gates, they fought hand to hand with the
Enemy, but always repulsed by the discipline of the Romans, only for want of
knowledge in Warlike The Jews boldness.
yet in all fights upon the Wall, the Jews had the Best; for though the Romans
had the advantage in fortune and knowledge, yet the Jews being desperate,
attaqued them without fear; for they are very courageous in Adversity.
Moreover, the Jews were necessitated to fight to save their own lives; and the
Romans were as hasty to conquer. Neither party was weary, neither party
desisted in their assaulting of one another: In the day time the Jews in
Commanded-Parties made their Salleys upon the Romans, who omitted no kind of
fight from Sunset, all the night long; which was more terrible to them both,
than all the service of the day before: The Jews feared, lest the Romans should
get the Wall; and the Romans apprehended lest the Jews should have Sallied out
upon their Camp. Thus all night long they stood to their Arms, Simons followers
were so much at his beck, that if he should have commanded any of them to have
killed himself, The custom of the Romans to Conquer.
he would presently have done it. The Romans were encouraged to fight, by their
discipline and success, as having never been used to be overcome. Again; their
frequent Wars, continual Exercises, and large Dominions gave them great
Courage, especially Titus their General being present to provoke them; for it
was thought a heinous crime to be a Coward in the presence of such a Captain as
Caesar was. Caesar himself beholding and looking on, was a witness of their
deeds that behaved themselves valiantly, and rewarded every man as he behaved
himself: It was an advantage

At this time Longinus one of the Horsemen coming out of the Roman Army,
pressed Longinus breaks into the midst of the Jews army and disturbeth it.
having broken through a strong Body of the Jews that were placed before the
Walls, and cast Darts at him on either side. Many of the Romans by this his
Example were enticed to do the like.

The Jews now regarded not what they suffered, but only devised which way to
harm their Enemies; not reguarding death, so that they might kill any of the
Romans. But Titus had as much care to preserve his Soldiers, as he had to get
the Victory, attributeing these rash Sallyes to the desperation of the Jews,
and accounting that only Virtue

CHAP. IX.
How Castor the Jew derided the Romans.
THen Titus commanded the Ram to be set up against the Tower on the North part
of the City, wherein a crafty and politic Jew with ten men had hid himself,
all Castor a subtle and politic Jew.
this Jew was named Castor. These men having lain still a while in their Arms,
at last being afraid, and the Tower beginning to shake, they Iept up, and
Castor stretching forth his hand, did as it were humbly crave favor at Caesar's
hands, and with a lamentable voice besought him to spare him. Titus seeing the
man's simplicity, as he thought, and persuading himself that the Jews did now
repent of their Obstinacy, he caused the Ram to cease from battery, and the
Archers to hold their hands; and permitted Castor to speak his pleasure. Castor
said, That he desired to treat, and make a League of Peace.

And Titus answered, That he would grant it, if all the rest would be
concluded, and that he would presently confirm a League of Peace between him
and the City. Five Castors fellows seemed to be willing, but the other five
seemed to oppose it; Crying out aloud, That they would never be sleves to the
Romans, whilst they could die in liberty. Whilst Castor and his fellows were
debating the matter, the battery ceased. In the mean time Castor privily sent
word unto Simon, willing him whilst the Battery was stopped, to think of some
expedient to be done in this necessity: for, for a while he would undertake to
delude the Roman Emperor, and hold him in suspense. In the mean time he seemed
to exhort his Companions, to accept the kind offer of Titus: and they as it
were angry thereat, drew their Swords and struck upon their Corslets, and fell
down, as though they had been slain. Titus and his Soldiers were amazed at
their obstinacy, for being on the lower ground, they could not well perceive
what was done; Castor in the Buttock with a Dart, and Castor pulling it out of
his flesh, showed it unto the Emperor, and complained of it, as a breach of
the Truce. Titus with sharp words corrected him that shot it, and forthwith
would have sent Joseph to promise Castor pardon and peace. But Joseph denied to
go, affirming that Castor only dissembled, and hindered his friends that would
have gone. At last one Aeneas, who had fled unto the Romans, offered himself to
go. Castor invited him, as though he would give him something to secure him of
his true meaning. Aeneas opened the skirt of his garment, thinking Castor would
have cast him down something of worth; and when he came underneath the Tower,
Castor took a great stone and threw it down upon Caesar considering this
deceit, began to think that Pity and Mercy in War was hurtful, Mercy in Wars
hurtful.
and that Cruelty was not so easily deceived; and being very angry at this
deceit, he caused the Wall to be beaten with the Ram more than before. Castor
and his fellows perceiving the Tower to shake, they set it on fire, and so
passed through the flame, and conveyed themselves into a mine of the Tower;
giving the Romans fresh occasion to admire their Courage, in passing through the
Flames.

Titus assaulting the Wall on his part, Titus takes the second Wall.
took it five days after, and forcing the Jews from thence, He, accompanied
with a thousand choice men, entered where the Woolmen,


How the Romans did twice take the second Wall.
TItus having entered the City, suffered none of them that were taken, to be
slain, nor the Houses to be burned, but permitted the Seditious (if they were
so minded) to fight, and that without prejudice to the People: he also promised
the People to restore unto them all their Goods. They interpret warlike Titus's
humanity for Cowardice.
For many besought him to spare the City for them; and the Temple for the City.
The People were glad hereof: and many of the warlike Jews thought the humanity
of Titus to proceed from cowardice; and judged that Titus, for that he
despaired to win the rest of the City, did now Coward-like propound these The
Romans are driven out by the Jews.
and yielding unto the Romans, should presently die: and some of them did
resist the Romans from out of their houses, others in the narrow ways: and
others going out at the higher Gates renewed the fight, wherewith the Watchmen
being troubled, fled from the Wall, and forsaking the Towers, retired
themselves into the Camp. The Roman Soldiers within the City cried out,
because they were enclosed with Enemies, the Gates being shut, and assaulted
without, by those who apprehended their Companions to be in great danger. The
number of the Jews increasing, and prevailing, for that they knew the ways and
turnings of the Streets, many of the Romans were slain and violently born down,
when they offered to resist in that necessity; Titus succored them. For
placing at the end of every Street Archers, and himself being where most need
was, he repulsed the Jews with Darts and Arrows, with the help of Domitius
Sabinus, who in that fight proved himself a stout Warrior, and continued
fighting with the Jews till all his Fellow Soldiers were got off.

Thus the Romans having got the second Wall, The Jews courage increases.
were beaten from it again; and the Citizens so encouraged, they were as it
were drunk with their good fortune, thinking the Romans durst no more attempt
upon the City, and that they themselves were invincible, when they were
prepared to fight. God, because of their Iniquity, had darkened The People in
want, and many die for hunger.
and drank the blood of a City: but the good People did even suffer Famine
already, and many of them perished for want of food; yet the Seditious did
rejoice at the death of the Citizens, as though thereby they were eased of a
great burden, only desiring they might live that bear rebellious minds, and
would join with them against the Romans, rejoicing at the death of the rest;
and this was the affection they bare unto their Citizens. In this manner they
armed themselves and resisted the Romans, who now again did attempt to enter
the Breach: whilst the Jews threw down Stones and part of the Wall upon them as
they came up, Titus once more gets the second wall
Titus his assault, they were forced to retire as before: and he having gotten
the Wall, destroyed all the North part thereof, and placed a Garrison in the
Towers and Fortresses of the South part.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Mounts raised to batter the third Wall. A long Oration of Jesephus to
persuade the People to yield: and of the Famine in the City.
TITUS now determined to batter the third Wall, conceiving the Siege would be
now but short: He thought it convenient to give the Seditious some time to
bethink themselves, to see that if either by the taking of the second Wall, or
terrified with Famine, they would repent. For there was little or nothing left
in the City to Roman Soldier to receive his proportion of Victuals, Titus
surceasing the Siege, commands money to be distributed to all his Soldiers.
Titus caused them to be led every one in order into a place, where the Jews in
the City might behold them; he caused his Captains to distribute money to every
one, and the Soldiers (as their Custom is) all armed, and drawing their Swords
out of their sheaths, marched along, the Horsemen leading their Horses in great
Pomp, and a great part of the Suburbs glistered with gold and silver. This
spectacle was grateful to their own Soldiers, and terrible to the Jews: for
all the old Walls, and the North part of the City, and many Houses were filled
with the multitude of them who came to view this sight; and there was no part
of the City that was not filled with People to behold it. This Spectacle struck
a great Destiny had decreed that the innocent should perish with the nocent,
and the City with the Seditious.
it being decreed that the innocent should perish with the wicked, and the City
with the Seditious: hereupon for four days space they distributed necessaries
to the Soldiers; and on the fifth day, Titus perceiving the Jews were still
obstinate, divided his Army into two parts, and about John's Tomb he began to
raise Mounts, and against Antonia, hoping by them to take the higher part of
the City; and by Antonia to seize the Temple; which except he could effect, he
could not safely take

The Jews and Simons followers opposed the work that was begun before John's
Tomb, The Romans in their labor are hindered by the Jews.
and John likewise with a great number of the Zealots hindered them that made
the Mounts over against Antonia: who not only fought with the advantage of the
higher ground, but had learned also the use of Engines: for continual use by
little and little made them skilful: and they had 300 Engines called Balistaes;
and 40 Engines to cast Stones, wherewith they greatly annoyed the Romans, and
obstructed them in their work.

Titus foreseeing that Fortune would favor him, Titus bounty toward the Jews.
and that the City would be taken, Jews to yield: adding many Arguments to his
importunity, for he knew that many times words prevail more than violence,
wherefore he exhorted them to save themselves, and yield the City unto him,
referring them to Joseph, who should make a speech to them in their own
Language, and he hoped they would hear their own Countryman.

Then Joseph keeping himself out of the danger of their shot, Joseph's Oration
to the Jews
called out unto them to commiserate themselves, the City, the Temple, the
People, and not be more hard-hearted unto them than strangers. For the Romans
had a reverence for the Holy-places, notwithstanding they had no society or
portion in them. That till that very day they had abstained from violating of
them: whereas they who were brought up among them, and might save them, Roman
Forces; and that it was no novelty to the Jews to be subject to the Romans. For
although it be a good and commendable thing to fight for Liberty, yet that was
to have been done in the beginning: for he that was once subject and rebelled,
having a long time lived under the obedience of the Romans, seemed rather to be
desirous of a shameful Death, than an honorable Liberty. Moreover, he
reproached them that they should choose rather to be subject to a base People,
than to them whom the whole World obeyed. For (says he) What habitable place
is it that the Romans have not Conquered? They themselves may perceive, how
Fortune has still favored them: and that God had Italy. That by the Law of
Nature, and the Example of (said he) was the cause that your Ancestors (who
were far more strong aad politic than you, and had better means to resist) did
submit themselves unto the Romans: which if God had not been pleased withal, he
would never have permitted. And how could they hope to resist, seeing the City
was as it were already taken, and the Citizens, whilst their Walls were whole,
most of them destroyed? For the Romans well knew the Famine that was among
them, how it every day wasted the people, Famine in the City.
and would in short time devour their Soldiers. For suppose (said he) the
Romans would desist, withdraw their Siege, and offer no violence; there is a
Civil War within the City, which you cannot overcome, or avert; unless you He
added, That it was best, before intolerable Calamities befell them, to change
their opinion, and whilst they had time, to be counseled by good advice. That
the Romans would not punish them for what was already past, except they
persisted in their obstinacy. For they are (said he) Kind, Courteous, Gentle to
their Subjects, and prefer their Commodity before Revenge. They thought it
their interest to have the City in their Power, and the Country about it; and
therefore the Emperor proposed to make a league of Peace with them: but if he
took the City by force, he would spare none, seeing they were admonished so
kindly before, and in their greatest necessity refused to obey him. He told
them also, that the third Wall would in a short time be taken, as they might
perceive by the other two: and though the City were inexpugnable, yet the
Famine would force

As Joseph did thus advise them, those upon the Walls railed at him, upbraided
him, and shot at him. Joseph seeing he could not avert them from their imminent
calamities, recounted unto them out of their own Histories whatever made for
his purpose. O wretches (says he) and ungrateful to your Friends. The Emperor
striveth to be at Peace with the Romans.
You resist the Romans, and continue perverse, as though you had conquered
others that came, as they now do, against you. When does God the maker of all
things deny help unto us if we be oppressed? Will you not remember your selves?
Joseph rippeth up the ancient Histories, and some foreign.
For what cause did you enterprise these Wars? And how great a Friend and
Protector do you daily offend? Do ye not remember the miraculous Works of your
Ancestors in this Holy place, and how in times past it was by the Enemies
destroyed? But I God to such unworthy hearers: Nechias, a King of Egypt.
But consider and you will find, that you do not only resist, the Romans, but
God himself. Nechias at that time King of Egypt, who also was called Pharao,
came, and with an infinite Army took away Queen Sara, the Mother of our Nation.
And what did our first Father Abraham in this case? Did he betake himself to
Arms to revenge that injury? though he had under his command three hundred and
eighteen Captains, and under them an infinite multitude: Did he not rather
desist from War, perceiving God not to accompany him? and lifting up his pure
hands toward this Holy-place, which now you have defiled and profaned,
implore the assistance of his invincible God? And was not the Queen the second
night after sent home again unto him untouched? whilst the Egyptian adoring
this Holy-place (which ye have polluted with Hebrews with Gold and Silver, whom
he perceived to be so beloved of God. Shall I recount unto you the going of our
Ancestors into Egypt? The Hebrews under the Tyranny of Egypt four hundred years.
who having for four hundred years been slaves to the Egyptian Tyrants and
Kings, and able to have revenged themselves by force of Arms, yet did they
rather expect and stay Gods leisure. Who knows not that then Egypt, in
revenge of their tyranny to the Hebrews, was overrun withal kinds of Serpents,
and infected with all kind of Diseases, the Earth became barren, Nilus dry, and
the ten plagues followed one another; our Ancestors were safely delivered
without bloodshed, God Almighty conducting them, as willing to reserve them for
his Priests?

When the Assyrians had taken away from us the Holy Ark, The Sacred Ark taken
away by the Assyrians, and restored to the Jews.
did not Palestina and Dagon Senacherib. King of Assure.
It was God that did this for our Ancestors, because that, depositing their
Arms, they resigned themselves wholly to his pleasure. Was Senacherib King of
Assyria, with all his Power out of Asia incamping before this City, overcome by
humane force? Did not our Ancestors wave their own force and betake themselves
to prayer, The Captivity of Babylon.
and God by his Angel in one night destroyed an infinite Army? so as that the
next day the Assyrian found a hundred fourscore and five thousand of his men
dead and, fled with the rest from the unarmed Hebrews, though they never
pursued? You know also, Babylon, where the people lived the space of seventy
years, they got not their liberty till such time as God disposed Cyrus to
suffer them to depart into their own Country. And continuing his assistance,
they again (as the Priests in old time were Zedechias our King, contrary to the
admonition of the Prophet Jeremy, went forth to fight with the King of Babylon
at that time besieging the City, both he and his whole Party were taken, The
destruction of Jerusalem by the King of Babylon.
and this City destroyed. Yet consider how far your Generals are inferior to
that King, and your selves to the people of those times. For Jeremy declaring
to the City, that God was offended at their iniquity, and that except they did
yield, it should be taken by force; yet did not the King nor any of the people
lay hands upon him. And you (that I Antiochus, surnamed Epiphanes, besieged the
City, God was highly displeased at our Ancestors, permited them to be slain,
the Town spoiled, and this Holy-place for three years and six months to be made
desolate. What should I show unto you any more examples? Who first incited the
Romans against the Jews? Was it not the impiety of our own Contrymen that
did it? Whence was our bondage at that time? Did it not proceed from the
Sedition of our Ancestors, Joseph's bitter invective against them.
when the fury of Aristobulus and Hircanus brought Pompey into our City, and
God subdued them by the Romans, being grown unworthy of Antigonus the Son of
Aristobulus, who invaded the Kingdom, and brought our Nation again into
subjection; God laying this bondage upon them being provoked by the iniquity of
our Nation? Herod the Son of Antipater, brought Sosius and the Roman Army, and
besieged the City six months: and at last, for the greatness of our iniquity,
it was, taken and punished, and sacked by the Enemies. Thus you evidently see
that our Nation never prevailed by force of Arms. And assure your selves that
even now the City will be taken. It is meet therefore that you who keep this
Holy-place commit your selves wholly to God, and then you need not fear the
forces of your Enemies, when your piety assures The Jews sins against the Laws.
But what one Article of Gods Law have you observed? Nay, what have you not
done that he forbad? How far greater is your impiety than theirs? and yet they
suddenly perished for their sins. For making small account of secret sins, as
Stealing, Deceit, and Adulteries, you violently take away men's Goods by force,
you murder whom you please, devise new ways to sin; have made the Holy Temple
the place of your impieties; and what the Romans themselves did adore, is by
your own Nation polluted and defiled, whilst you derogate from the honor of
our Religion by the impiety of your actions, and yet hope for his help, whom
you have so heinously offended: you are very just people and obedient, The
Romans use the same manner of overthrow against the Jews, as the Assyrians did.
and it is with pure hands you beg assistance of God. Did our King pray so unto
God, when he obtained, that in one night so many of the Assyrians should be
destroyed? Or Romans commit such impiety as the Assyrians did, that you may
hope of the like revenge upon them. The Assyrian received a sum of Money to
save the City, and yet not regarding his Oath, endeavored to destroy it. The
Romans do only request the same Tribute that was paid by our Ancestors: and if
they may have it, will never destroy the City, nor touch our Holy things. They
will also permit you to enjoy freely your Familes and Possessions, God knows
when to revenge.
and suffer your Laws to remain inviolate. It is madness for you to hope that
God will punish just men, as he did sinners and impious persons, seeing he can
punish as he pleases. To be short, he destroyed the Assyrians the first night
they encamped before the City. And if he had purposed to deliver you, and
punish the Romans, he would have done it, when Pompey and Sosius came against
the City, or when Vespasian wasted Galilee, or now Titus made his assault. The
Fountains that before-time were dry, now slow to Titus.
But neither Pompey nor Sosius suffered any harm, and both of them took the
City. Vespasian prospered so well in his Wars against you, that he has got the
whole Empire. And the Fountains which yielded you no Water before, do give it
to Titus in abundance. For you know that before his coming, the Fountains
without the City and Siloa were so dry that Water was sold by measure, yet now
they flow plentifully and do not only serve his Army, but water all the Gardens
about. What this wonder foretells, you have already experienced, when the
King of Babylon came with his Army and destroyed the City, took it, and fired
it, and the Temple; notwithstanding that (as I am persuaded) the Jews at that
time were not so wicked as now. I think therefore that God has forsaken this
Holy place, and is gone over to your Enemies. Will not a good man fly a wicked
house, God is wont to show mercy to those who confess and be peditent.
God's wrath will be appeased, if ye acknowledge your sins, and be penitent for
your offenses. Throw away your Arms then, and pity your Country now ruined by
your own means. Turn your Eyes and behold the beauty of the Place, whose ruin
you seek. How brave a City, how magnificent a Temple, how rich with the Gifts
of all Nations! Who would fire these? who would desire the ruin of these? Or
what is there

Whilst Joseph made this speech unto them the Tears trickled down his Cheeks;
but the Seditious being nothing moved, Joseph love and constancy toward his
Country.
replied, that it was not safe for them to yield. The The people fly with
their money.
And when they had escaped to the Romans Camp, they emptied their Bellies, and
found it again, and had wherewithal to buy them necessaries. Titus also
permitted many to go away withersoever they pleased: which caused diverse to
fly, thereby to be delivered from the calamity which they endured in the City.
But John and Simon were as diligent to stop the ways, lest the Citizens should
escape, as they were to hinder the Romans from entering into the City: so that
upon the least suspicion of any man's flight, he was presently put to death. The
richer sort, whether they stayed or fled, were slain for their wealth and
possessions. The Famine of the City, A wonderful Famine in the City.
and the desperation of the Thieves increased alike every day; and when no more
Corn was to be found, the Seditious persons brake into the houses, The argument
of store of meat*
Whosoever was strong of Body, and in good liking they killed; upon presumption
that he had some secret stores, or else he could not have been in so good
plight and fat as he was. They that were pined with Famine, were slain; because
they thought it no offense to kill them, who in a short time would die of
themselves. Many gave all they had for one bushel of Corn, and shutting
themselves up privately in their houses, eat their Corn as it was unground:
others made bread thereof as necessity and fear required. No man in the whole
City sat down to eat his meat at the

Most miserable was this manner of living, A miserable kind of living, and a
spectacle of great compassion.
and a spectacle which none without Tears was able to behold; the strongest
still got the most, and the weakest bewailed their misery: for now Famine was
their greatest calamity. And nothing does arm men more than shame; during this
Famine, no reverence was had toward any man: Wives took the meat out of their
Husbands mouths, Children from their Parents, and Mothers from their Infants,
which was the saddest spectacle of all. No body had now any compassion, neither
did they spare their dearest Infants, but suffered them to perish in their
Arms, by taking from them the very drops of Life. Yet could they not eat in The
souldie^s enter the houses, and take the meat unchewed out of the Citizens
mouths.
and forthwith breaking down the Doors, they came in, got them by the throat,
and took the meat halfe-chewed out of their mouths as it was ready to be
swallowed down. The old men were driven away, and not permitted to keep and
defend their food: the Women were drawn up and down by the hair of the head,
for that they hid between their hands some part of their meat, and would not
forgo it. No pity remained either to old age or infancy; They took the young
Babes, their mouths full of meat, and dashed them against the ground. If any
had prevented these Thieves, and eaten their meat before they could get at
them, they were more cruelly and more tyrannously handled, as having committed
a greater offense against them. Fundaments: and it is abominable to hear what
the people endured to make them confess

These Miscreants did not yet for all this feel either hunger or thirst: for
then their impieties had been more tolerable; but they did it only to exercise
their cruelty, preparing six days food for themselves aforehand. Some poor
creatures eluding the Roman-Guards had been abroad in the night to gather Wood
or Grass in the Field, and returning into the City were rejoicing in their
felicity, having escaped the danger of the Enemy, but they were seized by these
miscreants* their Herbs taken from them (though gotten with the hazard of their
lives,) denying them a small part of that, for which they had undergone such
danger, yea they thought themselves obliged though robbed and spoiled, if they
escaped the Swords of these Tyrants. These were the Calamities The Honorable
and Rich are drawn before the Tyrants.
accused before them of Intelligence with the Romans; and for some forged
Treason or other put to Death, Many times they suborned people to accuse them
of intending to fly to the Romans. Those that Simon robbed were sent to John;
and those that John spoiled were sent to Simon: drinking as it were one to
another in the Blood of the People, and dividing their dead Carcasses between
them; The dissension between John and Simon was for Rule, their concord was in
wickedness.
insomuch that though they disagreed in their desire of rule and domination:
they both conspired in mischief and iniquity. For he that did not give the
other part of what by his cruelty he had extorted from the miserable Citizens,
was accounted ungenerous: and he that received not his share, complained of the
injustice,

I am not able to recount all their iniquities: but in short, I think never any
City endured the like, nor never any People since the memory of men were so
cruel and barbarous: and that their impiety to strangers might seem the less,
they spoke evil of the Nation of the Hebrews, and cursed them, and openly
confessed themselves to be slaves, People of diverse Countries, united together
in wickedness, bastards and abortives of their Nation. They demolished the
City, and forced the Romans (though against their will) to except of a dismal
Victory, hasting the Fire into the Temple, as though it stayed from it too
long. Neither were they at all affected, when they saw the higher part of the
City on fire; though many among the Romans beheld it with sorrow, as we will

CHAP. XII.
Of the Jews that were crucified, and the burning of the Rampires.
THe Mounts and Rampires that Titus built, The poor peoples misery.
did greatly advantage him: Yet his Titus crucifieth many Jews, before the
Walls.
Titus looked upon their condition as very deplorable, for scarce a day past in
which there were not 500 Jews taken and served in that manner by those partys
of Horse, yet he thought it inexpedient to remove them, because they were a
great security to the rest of his Army: But his great design was by the cruelty
of that spectacle to terrify the City and hasten its surrender. Wherefore the
Soldiers in hatred to our Nation, crucified all they took, one after one
fashion, and another after another, in derision. And the multitude of the
Captives was become so great, there was left no space for the crosses, nor
indeed crosses for their bodies to be crucified upon. But the seditious Jews
within the City were so far from relenting by this massacre, that rather their
hearts were more hardened; so that herewith they terrified the rest of the
multitude: The Jews carried the kindred of those that were fled out of the City
to the Romans* and showed them the tortures they suffered.
carried the relations of those who were taken by the Romans to the Walls,

Hereupon Titus cut off many of the Captives hands, and sent them into the City
to Simon and John, that their Calamity might testify them to be Captives, and
not such as had fled voluntarily to the Romans, willing them to admonish their
Friends to yield, The Jews both curse Caesar and is Father.
The Jews that stood upon the Walls, reviled both him and his Father, affirming
that they contemned Death; and would choose rather to die, than become slaves:
That whilst they lived, they would to their power defend themselves against
the Romans, without any care either of themselves or their Country; which
Caesar sent them word were both in imminent danger. Moreover, they said that
the whole World was a Temple dedicated to God, far more excellent than theirs,

At this time arrived also Antiochus Epiphanes, and with him a considerable
supply of Men, among which there was a company called the Macedonians, of equal
years, and little older than young men, all trained up in Martial Discipline,
and armed after the Macedonian manner, from whence they took their name: yet
for the most part they did not answer the expectation that men had of the
Macedonians. For the King of Comagne was the most fortunate and happy of all
Kings that were subject to the Roman Empire, Comagne was in prosperity, his Son
said, he marvelled that the Romans did delay to assault the City, and enter the
battered Walls (for this young Man was a great Warrior, and of exceeding
strength, to the which he trusting too much, did many things rashly.) Titus
smiled, and answered, The insolence of Antiochus and the Soldiers.
that that was a work too great for the Romans. Upon which young Antiochus,
accompanied with his Macedonians, assaulted the Wall, and himself with his
strength and dexterity avoided the darts of the Jews, and cast his darts at
them: but his whole Party (a few excepted) were there slain: for obliged by
their extravagant boasting, they continued longer in ^ight than it was
expedient for them: at last many Alexanders fortune. The Romans iu seventeen
days build four huge bulwarks.
The Romans the twelfth day of May began to build their Rampires: and laboring
seventeen whole days, with much ado they ended them the nine and twentieth of
the said Month. For they builded four vast Rampires, one of them over against
Antonia, which was built by the fifth Legion opposite to the midst of the
Struthian Waters: another was built by the twelfth Legion, twenty Cubits
distant from the other. But the tenth Legion, which was of more account than
the two former, erected a Mount opposite to the Pond called Amygdalon on the
North-side: and the fifteenth Legion made the fourth, thirty Cubits distant
from the other, over against the Monument of the High Priest John.

John undermined that which was over against Antonia, and underpropped it with
posts of Wood, and filling the Mine with Wood, Bitumen and Pitch, he fired it:
so the posts that held it up, being burnt, the Mine fell, and the Mount also
with a hideous noise fell into it: and first of all there arose a great smoke
and dust, for the Mines covered the flame: at last the fire having consumed the
matter that covered it, the flame appeared. The Romans at this sudden and
unexpected exploit were much amazed and disordered: so that thereby those who
before made account of the victory as certain, began now to despair. Two days
after Simon and his associates set upon the other Rampires: for thereon were
planted Rams, wherewith the Romans began to beat the Walls. Amongst the rest, a
T^ptheus of Garsus a City of Galilee, Megassarus one of Queen Mariammes
Servants, Three Valiant Jews.
and with them one of Adiabena the Son of Mabateus, who for his fortune was
named Agiras, which signified lame: these three taking firebrarnds, ran unto
The Romans environed with fire, lose the Mounts they had built*
they fired their Engines: and notwithstanding that on every side they were
assaulted with Darts and Arrows; yet did they not give back, nor seek to avoid
the danger, till such time as the fire had taken hold of the Engines. The flame
mounting on high, the Romans came running out their Camp to succor their
fellows: and the Jews upon the Wall with Darts and Arrows hindered them that
sought to quench the flame, exposing their own Bodies. The Romans endeavored
to draw off the Rams: And the Jews were as earnest to hinder them: A most
bitter Law among the Romans against those that forsook their places.
and so encouraged by their Victory, they rashly adventured unto the Romans
Camp and assaulted the Guard there. Which guard was a Company placed round
before the Camp in Armor; with orders not to leave their ground upon pain of
death. And these men esteeming it better to die gloriously, than ignominiously
to suffer, resisted very valiantly: so that many that had fled retired
themselves,

Titus repairing with all speed from Antonia, Titus accused his Soldiers of
negligence*
where he had been viewing a place for another Rampire, blamed the Soldiers
exceedingly; who having gotten the Enemies Walls, The Jews retire within the
City.
and for that Caesar himself was in danger amongst them. So that I think, that
had not the Jews retired into the City, the fury of the Romans had then
consumed the

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Wall which the Roman Army built about Jerusalem in three days space.
TItus deliberated with his Captains what was to be done; Titus confu^^eth with
his Captains.
and they that were most forward amongst them, thought it best with the whole
Army to assault the Walls: Titus to repair his Rampires: but others counseled
the coutrary, to hold themselves quiet there, and only to keep all places
about, that no food should be conveyed into the City, and so famish it without
fighting. For that the Jews being now desperate, and desirous to be slain,
would not be overcome by force. But Titus, thought it dishonorable to lie idle
with so huge an Army, and do nothing; yet he deemed it superfluous to fight
with them who would willingly fight to be slain: and he could not make any
Mounts, because he wanted Materials, and it was most difficult, of all to guard
every place about the City, that none could go forth, for that it could Titus
determines to enclose the City with a Wall.
for so all ways and passages might be blockt up, and the Jews seeing no hope
of safety, should be compelled either to yield the City, The Romans with
ceasless labor build the Wall.
the Decurio to content the Centurion, and Centurion Caesar, who every day went
round about and beheld the Work: and so beginning at the place called the
Assyrians Camp, where he was encamped, he drew a Wall all about, even to the
new City; and from thence by Cedron and Mount Olivet; and so turned toward the
South, and enclosed the Mountain with the Rock called Peristereonos, and the
Hill next adjoining thereunto which hangs over Siloa: and from thence bending
his Work to the West, he brought it down all along the Valley of the Fountain:
from whence ascending to the Monument of Ananus the High Priest, where Pompy
pitched his Tents, he brought it about by the North side of the City, and
coming along to the Village called Erebinthonicus, he compassed the Monument of
Herod toward the East, One Wall of 39 Stounds, whereof one contains 8
Furlongs or thereabout.
where he began. This Wall was nine and thirty furlongs about. Without this
Wall he built also thirteen Forts, every one ten furlongs in compass. And all
this whole work was finished in three days space, which yet required Months to
have been built in: so that the celerity in the building thereof makes it
scarcely credible. The Romans plant their courts of guard in several Castles.
The City being thus encompassed with a Wall, and Gaurds placed in every Fort,
Titus himself continued to go round the first Watch, to see all things in good
order: the second Watch he allotted to Alexander: and the third to the Captains
of the Legions, and the Watchmen appointed every one his turn to sleep: and so
all night long some of them went about the Castle.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Famine in Jerusalem: and of the building of the second Rampire by the
Romans.
THe restraint of liberty to pass in and out of the City, took from the Jews
all hope of safety; and the Famine now increasing, consumed whole Households and
Families: The houses and ways full of dead men.
the Houses were full of dead Women and Infants; and the Streets of the
Carcases The dead lie unburied in the streets.
fell down themselves dead upon them as they were burying them. Many being yet
alive, went into their Graves and there died. Yet for all this Calamity, was
there no weeping nor lamentation; for the Famine overcame all affections. And
they who were yet living, without tears beheld those, who being dead were now
at rest before them. There was no noise heard within the City, and the still
night found all full of dead bodies: and which was most miserable of all,
pleasure only thrust many through, The year of the World, 4034. after the
Nativity of Christ, 72.
yet breathing. Yet if any desired them to kill The cruelty of the Thieves
against those that lie a dying.
first commanded that all such should be buried at the charges of the City: and
at last finding no place wherein to bury them all, they threw them over the
Walls into the Ditch. When Titus, going about the Walls, beheld all the Ditch
filled with dead men's bodies, Titus lifting up his hands to heaven, calls God
to witness that the fault is not his.
he lamented; and lifting up his hands to Heaven, called God to witness, that
it was not his doing. Such was the estate of the City. But the Romans when none
of the Seditious durst make any more excursions, passed their time in Syria,
The Romans show the Jews their abundance of victuals.
and the Provinces adjoining, and many standing before the Walls, and showing
their abundance of Victuals to the Jews, did so much more increase their
misery. Yet were not the Seditious people moved at these Calamities: wherefore
Titus pitying the relics of the Nation, and minding at least to save them
that were left alive, Titus pitying the remainder of the Nation labors to
save them.
hasted to take the City; and so he begun anew to build Mounts, though he
scarcely found matter to do it withal. For all the Wood near the City was
consumed in the first works; so that now the Soldiers were forced to fetch
more Wood ninety furlongs off; and only against Antonia were erected in four
places, four Mounts greater than the former. Caesar went about and hastened The
blindness of the Jews.
they would not repent: and being as it were deprived of the exercise of their
Wits and Bodies, they used both as though borrowed, and not their own. For
neither did any affection move their minds, nor any grief there bodies: for
they rent and tore the dead Bodies like Dogs, and filled the prisons with weak
and languishing people.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Massacre of the Jews, both within and without the City.
AT last, Simon's cruelty against Matthias and his Sons.
Simon having tormented Matthias, put him to death notwithstanding that by his
means he had obtained the City. This Matthias was the Son of Boethus a Priest,
whom the people for his fidelity toward them greatly esteemed: he seeing the
outrages of the Zealots toward the people after John was joined with them,
persuaded the people to call in Simon to help them, conditioning nothing with
him before, for that they misdoubed no evil. And when he was come into the
City, he held him for his Enemy as well as the rest; notwithstanding, that by
his only advice he was received into the City, as though Matthias had only done
it through weakness. Titus. Matthias requested Simon that he might be put to
death before his Sons: but Simon, in regard that by his means he had gotten the
City, caused him to be executed last of all. And so he was killed upon the
murdered bodies of his Sons, in a place where the Romans might behold him: for
so Simon commanded Ananus his Executioner, who was the Son of Bamadus. This man
was the most cruel of all Simon's followers; Ananus one of the cruellest
Soldiers about Simon.
who even when he was to kill Matthias, derided him, asking whether they could
now help him, to whom he sought to fly: and he permitted not their bodies
Ananias a Priest, the Son of Masbalus a Nobleman, and chief Secretary to the
Council, Ananius the Priest, with fifteen of the noblest people slain.
a valiant strong man, born at Emaus, and with him fifteen of the chiefest men
in the City were put to death. They took also Joseph's Father and kept him in
prison, and with the public voice of a Crier proclaimed, that no man should
talk with him, Joseph's Father taken.
nor visit him, pretending fear of Treason: and whosoever bewailed his estate,
J^das consultation with his companions
he was put to death without any Trial. It happened that a certain man called
Judas, the Son of Judas, who was one of Simon's Captains, and Governor of one
of the Towers of the City, being moved with compassion toward these that
perished without desert, and more with fear of his own life, assembled together
ten of his most trusty Soldiers, and said to them: How long shall we endure
these Calamities? or what hope have we of life, in being obedient to the most
impious of all Famine consumes our City; the Romans are almost within our
Walls, and Simon is cruel and faithless, even toward these that have well
deserved at his hands, and we are in daily fear of his cruelty. On the
contrary, the Romans keep their Faith inviolably. Wherefore let us deliver this
Tower to them, and so save our selves and our City. And what punishmnt c an
Simon suffer which he has not deserved? The ten men to whom in this manner he
brake his mind, agreed hereunto; and so he in the morning sent the rest of his
Soldiers under his command into diverse places, that they might not perceive
his intent, and at the third hour of the day, standing upon the Tower, he
called the Romans and told them his design. But some of the Romans proudly
contemned the offer; others scarcely believed them, and the rest made no speed
to come. In the mean Titus with certain armed men came unto the Wall, Simon had
notice of the matter, Joseph wounded in the head with a stone, the Rumor is
spread through he City.
and speedily got to the Tower, and slew those that were within, in the sight
of the Romans, and cast down their bodies over the Wall. Joseph going about the
Wall, and coming thither (for he never ceased requesting the Jews to remember
their desperate estate) was struck on the head with a stone, and so amazed with
the blow, that he fell down: whereupon presently the Jews made a Salley out of
the City, and had carried him away prisoner into the City, had not Titus sent
men to defend him: and whilst they fought, Joseph was carried away, scarcely
knowing what was done. The Seditious with loud cries rejoiced, as having slain
him whose death they chiefly desired; and so they reported within the City.
Hereupon the people

When Joseph's Mother, who was in prison, heard this, she said to those of
Jotapata that were her Keepers, that she had no hope ever to see her Son again;
and with many tears lamenting to her Maidens, Is this the benefit (said she) of
my having born a Son, Joseph recovereth of his wound.
that I shall not bury him, by whom I hoped to have been buried my self? But
this false report did not long grieve her, nor comfort the Thieves: for Joseph
was quickly healed of his wound, and recovered; and showing himself, he cried
out to them, That ere long they should find he would be revenged on them for
his wound; And he ceased not to exhort the people to remain faithful to the
Romans. But the Many that fled from Famine at home, met with more speedy death
among the Romans.
and the people conceived good hope. Many (present necessity urging them) leapt
over the Wall, and fled to the Romans; diverse with stones going forth under
pretense to fight with the Romans, yielded themselves; but they had worse
Fortune there, than within the City; being now more harmed by plenty of
Victuals which they found amongst the Romans, than with the Famine they
suffered in the City: for being become by Famine all swollen, as though they
had the Dropsy, upon the sudden filling of their empty Bodies they burst; and
so all died, save only those who being wary, did by little and little accustom
their bodies to food, which they had long wanted. Yet they who thus escaped,
fell into another grievous misfortune: for one of the Jews that fled to the
Romans, was found Two thousand Jews imbowelled in one night. Titus displeased
at this cursed act.
for in one night the Bellies of two thousand Jews were ripped up. Titus hearing
of this cruelty, resolved to cause the Authors hereof to be compassed round
with Horsemen, and to bring him word thereof. But avarice is not terrified by
fear of punishment; cruel Avarice is not terrified with any punishment.
for that which Caesar did so strictly forbid, was still secretly committed upon
the poor Jews that fled for mercy to the Romans. So that now whosoever fled out
of the City, the Soldiers first looking about them, left any of the Romans
should see them, ripped up their Bellies, and so got an ungodly and impious
booty; yet in very few did they find that they sought for; for the most of them
that were slain, had no Gold nor Silver found within them. And this mischief
caused many that had fled to the Romans to return again into the City.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Sacrilege committed about the Temple, and the dead Bodies cast out of
the City, and of the Famine.
WHen John could rob no more, John falleh to Sacrildge and takes away many
Presents out of the Temple.
nor get any spoil from the Citizens, whom he had robbed of all they had, he
presently fell to Sacrilege, and took away many of the gifts that had been
offered to God in the Temple, and of the Sacred Vessels Augustus and his Wife
had sent thither. Thus a Jew robbed and spoiled the Temple of those tokens of
respect, wherewith the Roman Emperors and other Nations had honored it: and
he had the boldness to affirm to his Associates, that without fear they might
use the Holy things of the Temple, seeing they sought for God and the Temple.
Moreover, he dared to share amongst them the Holy Wine and Oil, which the
Priests kept for Divine Sacrifice in the inner part of the Temple. I will not
cease to speak that which grief compels me: I verily think, that had the
Romans forborne to have punished so great Criminals, either the Earth would have
swallowed the City up, or some deluge have drowned it, or else the Thunder and
Lightning which Sodom, would have light upon it: for the people of the City
were far more impious than the Sodomites. In brief, their wickedness and
impiety were the cause that the whole Nation was extinguished. What need I
recount every particular misery? Mannaeus the Son of Lazarus, flying to Titus
out of the Gate that was committed to his custody, and yielding himself to him,
related to Titus, that from the time that the Roman Army encamped near the
City, from the fourteenth day of April until the first of July were carried out
of that Gate he kept, a hundred and fifteen thousand eight hundred and
fourscore dead bodies; and nevertheless, he had reckoned only those, the number
of whom he was obliged to know by reason of a Public Distribution, of which he
had the charge. For others were buried by their Parents; and this was their Six
hundred thousand dead carcases cast out of the City.
to carry them out of the City, and there let them lie. And certain Noblemen
flying to Titus after him, reported that there were dead in the City six
hundred thousand poor people which were cast out of the Gates; and that the
others that died were innumerable: and that when so many died that they were
not able to bury them, that then they gathered the Bodies together in the
greatest houses adjoining, and there shut them up. And that a bushel of Corn
was sold for a Talent, which is six hundred Crowns: and that since the City was
compassed with a Wall by the besiegers they could not go out to gather any more
herbs, so that many were driven to that necessity, that they raked Sinks and
privies to find old dung of Oxen to eat; and even the dung that was loathsome
to behold, Cow Dung and dirt gathered together is the Jews food.
was their meat. The Romans hearing this, were moved



The Contents of the Chapters of the Seventh Book.
1 OF the breach made in the Walls, and how the Mounts were fired: and how
Sabinus assaaulted the Wall. 2 How the Romans assaulted Antonia, and were
repulsed by the Jews. 3 Of the exceeding valor of Julian a Roman Soldier. 4
Joseph's speech persuading the Jews to yield their City, and how the Jews fled
to the 5 Of another Battle, the Rampires being again built: and of the
excursions of the Jews. 6 How the Romans were by a device of the Jews destroyed
with fire. 7 Of the Famine amongst the Jews. 8 Of a Woman that for hunger did
eat her own Son. 9 How the Walls were taken, and the Temple burnt. 10 How the
Temple was set on fire against Titus his will. 11 Of the Priests, the
Treasure-house, and the Porch. 12 Of the Signs and Tokens which appeared before
the destruction of the City. 13 Of Titus his Rule and Government; and how the
Priests were s^ain. 15 How the higher part of the City was assaulted, and how
some of the Jews fled to Titus. 16 How the rest of the City was taken. 17 Of
the number of the Captives, and of those that were slain. 18 A brief History of
the City of Jerusalem. 19 How the Soldiers were rewarded. 20 Of Vespasians
sailing away, and how Simon was taken: and of the spectacles, and shows made
upon Vespasians birthday. 21 Of the calamity of the Jews amongst the
Antiochians. 22 How Vespasian at his return was received by the Romans.
Domitians acts against the Germans and Frenchmen. 24 Of the River Sabbaticus;
and of the famous triumph of Vespasian and Titus. 25 How Herodium and Machera
were taken by Bassus. 26 Of the Jews that were slain by Bassus: and how Judea
was sold. 27 Of the death of King Antiochus: and how the Allans broke into
Armenia. 28 How Massada, the strongest Castle of all, was taken and destroyed.
29 Of the death of the Sicat^i, or murderers, that fled into Alexandria and
Thebes. 30 How the Temple which Onias built at Alexandria was shut up. 31 Of
the Massacre of the Jews at Cyrene.



Of the breach made in the Walls: and how the the Mounts were burned: and how
Sabinus assaulted the Wall.
THE misery of Jerusalem every day increased, the Seditious being by reason of
their misery more and more incited against the people: For now the Famine was
not only amongst the People, but amongst them also. And it was a miserable
making excursions. For they were forced to tread upon dead bodies, as though
The multitude of Carcasses heaped in the City, is hideous to behold.
After having in a Domestic War embru'd their hands in the Blood of those of
their own Nation, they thought of nothing but employing them against the Romans
in a foreign War: wherein they seemed to reproach God for delaying to punish
them, since it was no longer hope of overcoming, but despair, which inspired
them with this Boldness. The Jews upbraided God, in that he so long delayed to
punish them.
The Romans though much troubled to get Wood to build withal, yet in one and
twenty days finished their Mounts, having cut down all the Woods near the City
for ninety Furlongs. It was miserable to behold that Country Judea a desert and
desolate.
formely all beset with Trees and Fertile plants, now lying plain like a
Desert: neither was there any stranger that before-time had seen Judea and the
beautiful Suburbs of Jerusalem, who now beholding it, could abstain from tears,
and not lament so woeful a change. For this War extinguished utterly all signs
of beauty: neither could one coming suddenly know the place, which he well knew
before

When the Mounts were finished, The Jews and Romans are equally afraid.
both the Romans and the Jews greatly feared: the Jews, for that except they
were destroyed, their City would be presently taken; the Romans, for that if
these were overthrown, they knew not how to erect more, wanting matter: and now
their bodies were wearied with labor, and their The Romans most of all fear
the desperateness of the Jews.
did nevertheless stoutly defend their Walls: but the courage of the Romans
failed, when they saw that the Jews policy made their Mounts unprofitable; that
the strength of the Wall resisted the Engines, that the Jews boldness overcame
their strength in fight: and especially, seeing that the Jews having endured
such Calamity, Famine, and Misery, were still more courageous than before: so
that they deemed their strength not possible to be overcome; and that their
minds were invincible, being hardened and encouraged by misery. What would they
do (said they) if Fortune were favorable to them, since even now she is
contrary to them, all that she does John's followers who were in the Castle
Antonia, fearing what might ensue if the Wall were battered, endeavored to
prevent it what they could, before the Rams were set up: and taking firebrarnds
in their hauds, The Jews with firebrarnds set upon the Engines: but losing
their hope return back again.
they assaulted the Mount; but deceived with a vain hope, they were forced to
retreat. For first of all, they seemed to disagree among themselves; so that
they came from their Walls one after another in little parties, and by
consequence softly and fearfully, and briefly, not after the manner of the
Jews, but with less courage then they were wont. On the other side, they found
the Romans better prepared: and more courageous than of late, The valor and
violence of the Jews decreaseth
who so defended their Mounts with their Bodies and The Jews retire, arguing
one another of cowardice.
he hindered them that followed; and the danger of him that went before,
terrified those that came after. They also that rashly adventured within the
shot of a Dart, either were terrified with the discipline, and multitude of
their Enemies, or else wounded with their Darts: and so they all retired

The first day of July the City was assaulted* The assault of the City the
first day of July.
and the Jews being now retired, the Romans set up their Rams, notwithstanding
that they were assaulted from Antonia with stones, fire and Sword, and
whatsoever their Enemies in that extremity could find. For though the Jews had
great confidence in their Walls, that they could not be battered, yet would
they not permit the Romans to place their Rams against them. And the Romans
being persuaded that the Jews so labored, because they knew their Walls to be
weak, and lest Antonia by the breach of the Wall should be hurt; the Romans
resolutely and undauntedly (notwithstanding that many Darts were cast at them
from off the Walls) persisted to beat the Wall with their Rams. But when they
saw John had undetermined to destroy the Mounts) fell down. This fell out
otherwise than either part expected: For the Jews, who had caused indeed to be
sorrowful for the fall of the Wall, and that they had not prevented this
mischance, yet were as joyful and courageous, as if Antonia still remained firm
and strong: And the joy of the Romans for this unexpected fall soon ceased, No
man durst ascend the Wall that John built.
when they saw the other Wall that John had built within. Yet they judged it
easier to be taken then the former; but no man durst ascend it; because those
who first assaulted it could not hope to come off alive. Titus, thinking that
by hope and persuasion his Soldiers might be encouraged, and knowing that many
times promises and exhortations make men forget danger, and sometimes to
contemn death it self, he called together the most valiant of all his Army, and
spoke to them as follows:

Fellow Soldiers, Titus's exhortation to the most valiant and strongest.
It were a shamfull thing to exhort men to enterprise a thing without danger,
both to them that are exhorted, and to him that exhorts: for exhortations are
only to be used in doubtful Affairs, where it is prais-worthy for every man to
adventure himself. I confess it is a hardy attempt to ascend the Wall: yet it
is also a glorious death to die in The patient minds of the Jews, and their
constancy in misfortunes.
which terrifieth others, to wit, the patient mind of the Jews, and their
constancy in adversity. For it is a shame for the Roman Soldiers, who in time
of peace exercise themselves in Warlike Feats, and are accustomed in time of
War to get the Victory, now to be overcome by the Jews, and that at the end of
the War* we having also God to help us: for all our harms proceed from the Jews
desperation; and their destruction and calamity by Gods favor and your valor
is every day promoted. For what else is betokened by their sedition amongst
themselves, their Famine, the fall of their Walls without our Engines to batter
them, and the siege it self, but the wrath of God toward them, and his favor
toward us? The wrath of God against the Jews, is the Romans furtherance.
Is it not a shame that the Jews, who, were they conquered, would sustain no
great reproach, as being accustomed to serve and obey others, should so
valianty contemn death lest they should hereafter suffer or endure the like;
and many times boldly adventure and make excursions even amongst the midst of
us, not out of hope to overcome us but only to show their valor? and that we,
who have conqured almost the Earth and Sea, to whom it is an infamy not to be
victorious, lie idle never make valiant assault upon our Enemies, but being
thus armed, expect till Fortune and Famine, deliver them into our hands?
Especially, seeing that by undergoing a little danger, all will b^ ours. If we
get into Antonia, we have taken the City. For suppose that we were then to
fight against them that are within Titus speaks of the life to come, after a
poetical manner.
and whom immortal Glory keeps alive always in the memory of men of this life:
and those that do not so think, and whose Souls and bodies descend together
into the grave, I pray, that they may die of some evil death in peace. For what
valiant man knows not, that the Soul of him that dies in War, is presently
received into the most pure Airy Element, and from thence carried and placed
among the Stars of Heaven, from whence their heroic Souls appear to their
posterity as blessed Spirits to animate them to virtue by the desire of
possessing the same Glory one day? And that those (...) peace die of some
disease and sickness, their Souls are kept in The reward of valiant men.
and the Wall new-built is not hard to be thrown down: and many of you together
enterprizing this work, may one exhort and help another, and your audacity and
courage will quickly daunt the Enemies, and perhaps we may succeed will never
more endure us, though we be but few in number. I engage my self so to reward

Though these words of so generous a Commander were enough to inflame the
coldest breasts, Sabinus a man of a low Stature, yet both in hand and heart
valiant.
yet the greatness of the danger had made such an impression in their minds,
that no body presented himself to go to the breah c but one Sabinus, a Syrian,
a man of excellent courage; yet of so small stature, that by his outward
appearance one would have deemed him unfit to have been a Soldier: for he was
of very small stature and of black color, but he had a mind far greater than
his body, and strength scarce able to be contained in so little room. Sabinus
rising up, said; I offer my self to thee, O Caesar, first of all to ascend the
Wall, and that with a willing mind; and I wish your good fortune may second my
affection. Sabinus with eleven men approaches the Wall.
But though it should not so fall out, but I happen to be slain before I get to
the top of the breach, yet I shall have succeeded in my design; since I propose
nothing to my self but the Glory and happiness of employing my life for your
service. When he had so said, he took his Shield in his left hand, and holding
it above his head, with his drawn Sword in his Right hand, about the sixth hour
of the day, he went to the Wall: and eleven men followed him, who only imitated
his virtue. But Sabinus with a divine fervor of Spirit went before them all;
notwithstanding, that on every side the Jews upon the Wall cast an infinite
number of Darts at him, and rolled down upon him huge Stones, which Sabinus for
all the Darts and Arrows stopped not, The power of Fortune.
till such time as he had got to the top of the Wall, and put the Enemies to
flight: who, terrified with his boldness and courage, and indeed thinking that
more had come up after him, fled. But who may not justly blame Fortune, as
taking pleasure to cross heroic actions? Sabinus, after having so gloriously
executed his enterprise, was struck with a Stone, and thrown down flat upon his
face most violently with a great noise: so that now the Jews seeing him alone,
and lying on the ground, returned again, and shot at him on every side: and he
kneeling upon his knees, and covering himself with his shield Strove to revenge
himself upon his Enemies, and wounded many that came near him, Sabinus with
three companions slain.
till with wounding them, he was so weary, that July.

CHAP. II.
How the Romans assaulted Antonia, and how they were driven back from thence by
the Jews.
TWo days after, The Romans invade Antonia.
twenty of the Soldiers which guarded the Mounts, two Horsemen, and an Ensign
of the fifth Legion with a Trumpeter, gathered themselves together: and about
the ninth hour of the night they ascended by the ruins into Antonia without
any resistance: and finding the first Watchmen asleep, they slew them and got
the Wall, and commanded the Trumpeter to sound; by which sound the rest of the
Watchmen being awaked fled for fear, imagining that a great number of the
Romans was gotten upon the Wall: Titus haueing notice of it presently gathered
his Soldiers together, and accompanied with his chief Captains, and his
Guards, he ascended the Wall. The Jews fled into the inner Temple, and the
Romans broke in John had made to destroy the Mounts of the Romans. The
followers both of John and Simon fought courageously to drive them Back: A most
stout fight about the entrance of the inner Temple.
for they thought it the utter ruin of all, if the Romans got into the
Holy-place, which indeed was of importance to their victory. So they began a
sharp fight in the very entrance; The Straitness of the place was incommodions
for the fight.
the Romans striving to get the inner Temple, and the Jews endeavoring to beat
them back toward Antonia. And now Arrows, Darts, and Spears, nothing availed
either part, but they fought it out at handy blows with Swords: and in the
conflict no man could discern on which side any one fought; for the Soldiers
on both parts were mingled together, and through the straitness of the place,
could not keep Antonia.

CHAP. III.
Of the incredible valor of Julian a Roman Captain.
THere was one Julian, Julian's famous fortitude.
a Centurion, born in Bithynia, of good parentage, who Julian seeing the Romans
to have the worst, as he was standing by Titus in Antonia, he presently leapt
down, and all alone charged the Jews who had the Victory, and made them retire
into the inner Temple* and the whole multitude fled, deeming him by his force
and courage, not to have been a man. But he amongst the midst of them, slew
whomsoever he light on, one of them for haste casting down another. So that
this his deed seemed admirable to Caesar, and terrible to his Enemies. Yet did
that destiny befall him which no man could foresee, Julian running, falls upon
the pavement.
for having his shoes full of Nails, as other Soldiers have, and running upon
the pavement, he slipped and fell down, his Armor in the fall Antonia fearing
his life, cried out: but the Jews ^^ny at once, struck at him with Swords and
Spears. He warded off many blows with his Shield; and many times attempting to
rise, they struck him down again: yet as he lay, he wounded many; neither was
he quickly slain, because all parts of his body were very well armed, and he
covered his head wi^h his buckler, but no man helping him, his strength failed.
Julians death
Caesar was very sorrowful to see a man of so great fortitude slain in the sight
of such a multitude, and that the place wherein he was, hindered him from
helping him: and that others that might have helped him, durst not for fear.

At last, when Julian had a long time striven with Death, and wounded many of
Antonia. In this Battle Alexas and Gypthaeus, Valiant Soldiers amongst the
Jews*
two of John's faction, and of Simons faction Malachias and Judas, the Son of
Merton, and James the Son of Sosa Captain of the Idumeans, and two brethren of
the Zealots, the Sons of Jairus, Simon, and Judas, signalized themselves.


Joseph's speech, persuading the Jews to yield the City: many of them fled unto
the Romans.
AFter that Titus had commanded his Soldiers to ruin the foundations of
Antonia, and make an easy entrance for the whole Army, he called Joseph to him
(for he understood, that that day, being the seventeenth of July, the Jews were
wont to celebrate a certain Feast to God, which they called Entelech^smus, that
is to say, the breaking of the Tables; and that they were much troubled that
they could not celebrate the ^ame) and again commanded him to tell John, as he
had formerly done, That if he from profaning the Holy-place, and from sinning
against God: and that if he so Joseph to the intent that not only John might
hear this offer of Titus, but also the rest of the people, got upon an eminent
place, Titus wills John to come out to fight, lest with him the City and
temple should perish also.
from whence he might be heard, and in the Hebrew tongue declared to the Jews
Caesar's pleasure, earnestly requesting them to spare their Country, and prevent
the fire now ready to take hold of their Temple, and to offer the accustomed
Sacrifices to God. When he had thus said, the people were very sorrowful, and
all held their peace, not daring to speak. But the Tyrant John, having used
many railing speeches against Joseph, John raileth against Joseph
at last answered, that he need not fear the destruction of the Temple and
City, seeing that it belouged to God.

Then Joseph with a loud voice cried out, True it is, you have kept it pure and
unprophaned for God, and the Holy-things you have kept inviolate, neither have
you committed any iniquity against him, from whom you expect help, but have
offered solemn Sacrifice unto him. If any man should take from you your daily
food, no doubt you would account him your Enemy: And can you then hope that
God, whom you have deprived of daily Sacrifice, will assist you in this War? Do
you impute these offenses to the Romans? why they even now defend our Religion,
and command the Sacrifice to be offered, which you have forbidden. Who does not
bewail this unexpected change, and lament our City? Strangers and Enemies
correct your impiety, and you a Jew born, and brought up in our Law, are more
cruel than they. But consider, John, it is no shame to repent your wickedness
in extremity: and at Jechonias sustained a voluntary banishment in Babylon.
If you be desirous to save your Country; you have a good example of Jechonias,
sometime King of the Jews; Who, when the Babylonians warred against him, of his
own accord went out of the City before it was taken, and willingly endured
Captivity with all his Family and Kindred only, to hinder the ruin of the
City, the profanation of the Holy-things, and the burning of the Temple. And
for this act of his, he is of Sacred memory among the Jews, and has thereby
gained immortal praise amongst all posterity. This is a good example, O John,
now danger is at hand: and I will promise you pardon from the Romans, consider
that I your Countryman admonish you and promise this unto the Jews: and that
in the name of Caesar. God forbid, that ever I should be such a wretch as to
forget whence I took my birth, and what love I ought to have for the Laws of my
Country. Yet, you are incensed The City, by the ordinance of fate and Gods will
was to be overthrown.
and strive to save them whom his sentence has condemned. Who is ignorant of
the writings of the ancient Prophets and their Prophecies, wherein this
wretched City is foretold to be destroyed by those that being born Jews murder
our own Nation: and now not only the City, but also the Temple is full of your
dead bodies? Certainly, it is God that joins with the Romans, to expiate all
these Abominations with fire.

Joseph thus discoursing with Tears and Lamentations, Joseph's speech is
interrupted with sighs.
could speak no more for sighing: And the Romans compassionating his sorrow and
affliction, were astonished. But John and his confederates were so much the
more incited against the Romans, and Joseph; yet his speech moved many of the
Nobles; and diverse fearing the Seditious Guards remained still where they were,
making full account both of their own destruction, and the subversion of the
City. Yet some there were, who finding opportunity, fled to the Romans: amongst
whom were two Priests, Joseph and Jesus; and three Sons of Ismael the Priest,
who was beheaded at Cyrena, and the fourth Son of Matthias the Priest, who
escaped to the Romans before his father was put to death by Simon Giora, Some
of the Nobility among the Jews escape to the Romans.
with his three other Sons, as is before related: many other Nobles also came
away with the Priests, whom the Emperor received very courteously, and sent
them to Gophna; knowing that it was a grief to them to converse amongst people
of different manners from them; and he willed them to remain there, Caesar's
humanity toward the Jews.
and thus their device a while prevailed, as their former did; and they that
fain would, durst not now fly for fear. But afterward, Those Jews that were
fled besought the besieged with tears and sighs to submit themselves.
when Titus recalled them from Gophna, and commanded them to go about the Walls
with Joseph, and show themselves to the people; then many more of the Jews fled
to the Romans.

And after they had gathered themselves together, standing all before the
Romans, they besought the Seditious with tears to receive the Romans into the
City, and save Titus wills John to come out to fight, lest with him the City
and Temple should perish also.
and the Temple it self resembled a Citadel, and they now with their Weapons,
having their hands imbrewed with the blood of their Countrymen, presumed to
enter into the Sanctuary where none ought to come: and they became so injurious
against their own Laws, that what indignation the Jews ought to have conceived
against the Romans, if they had so profaned the Holy-places, the same they
caused the Romans to have against them for doing John raileth against Joseph.
and adore it, and that did not heartily wish that the Thieves would repent
themselves before it was too late. Moreover, Titus pitying the Seditious, once
again spoke to John, and his adherents, saying: O ye impious people, have not
your Ancestors environed the Temple about with a Ballester, and erected Pillars
whereon are engraven Greek and Roman Letters, forbidding all men to enter into
those limits? and Did not we license you to kill any man that should pass them,
though he were a Roman? What rage then is it which carries you wicked wretches,
to pollute the Temple with the blood not only of strangers, but of your
Countrymen? I call my Country Gods to witness, and him who sometime dwelt in
this Place, (I say sometime, for now I am persuaded there is none;) Titus in
despite of the Jews, Strives to save the Temple.
I call also my Army to witness, and protest to the Jews that are with me, and
to your selves, That I have no share in this profanation: but that if your Army
will depart this Holy-place, that then no Roman shall come into the Sanctuary,
nor commit any thing of contumely of them, but I will preserve this famous
Temple for you against your wills.

CHAP. V.
Another assault given by the Romans to the Jews who defended the Temple.
TItus having spoken thus, and caused Joseph to tell them in Hebrew what he
said to them, the Seditious thinking that the same proceeded not of good will,
but of fear, began to be more proud thereupon. Then Titus, seeing they neither
pitied themselves, nor the Temple, determined again to use force, though very
loath so to do; yet could he not bring all his Army against them, the Room was
so little. Wherefore out of every Company he made choice of thirty of the
strongest among them, Titus chose thirty out of every hundred, most strong and
able men, and bids them charge the besieged.
and over every thousand he appointed a Tribune, and made Cerealis their Captain
or General, commanding him at the ninth hour of the night to assault the Guard
of the Enemy. Also he himself would have gone with them; but his friends, and
the Antonia, and encouraging the Soldiers that fought, then if he should go
and endanger himself: for every man being in the view of the Prince, would
fight more courageously. Titus was herewith persuaded, and told the Soldiers
that the only cause he went not with them was this, that he stayed behind to
view and judge of every ones valor, to the intent that none that behaved
himself valiantly might go away unrewarded, nor any Coward escape unpunished;
but that he himself might be a beholder of every man's virtue. Having thus
spoken he commanded the assault to be given.

Then he went up a Watchtower in Antonia, from whence he beheld what was Titus
beholds from a window in Antonia what his Soldiers perform.
But they whom Titus sent did not find the Guards asleep, as they hoped; but
with a great shout they received the Romans that came against them: and at this
noise they awaked their fellows, who came in whole Companies to assist them,
and made a Salley upon their Enemies. So the Romans sustained the violence of
their first Companies: but the second that came, fell upon their own fellows,
and used them like Enemies: for no man could know one another voice for the
noise, neither could one see another by reason it was night: and moreover, some
were blinded with fury, some with anger, some with fear; so that every one
struck him that met him, without any respect. The Romans received small damage
thereby, because that they were defended with their Shields, and remembered one
another Watchword. falling upon those that rallyed, as though they had been
Romans, assaulting them in John standing by, encouraged them to fight, some
with blows, and others with threatenings. They fought almost all with handy
blows; yet fortune often changed: for neither part had either far to fly, or
any space to follow those that fled. Antonia cried to their fellows that fought
the Battle, The events of Battle are changed very shortly.
Now for the Victory: encouraging them to stand to it, when they began to give
back; so that Antonia was as a Theater for this Battle: for Titus, and they
with him, beheld all that was done. At last, in the fifth hour of the day the
fight ceased, having continued from the ninth hour of the night, neither party
forsaking the place where first they began Battle, nor any part having the
Victory. Many Romans there fought courageously, and amongst the Jews these that
follow: Judas the Son of Merton; Simon the Son of Josias; and Jacob and Simon,
Idumeans; this, the Son of Cathla, but Jacob the Son of Sosa: these were of
Simons company: And of John's followers, Gipthaeus and Alexas; and of the
Zealots, Simon the Son of Jairus. But on the seventh day, the Romans Antonia,
made a large entrance for the rest of the Army; and the Legions coming to the
Wall, presently began to raise Mounts; one against the corner of the inner
Temple, Four Mounts raised near to the Temple.
which was situate between the North and East: another against the Gallery on
the North side, betwixt the two Porches: and other two, one against the Porch
of the West side of the outward Temple; and another against the North Porch. So
with much toil and labor they finished this work, fetching wood to build it
with one 100 Furlongs off. And many times they were endamaged (...) Ambushes,
not being wary by reason of their confidence: and the Jews despairing of
themselves every hour, more and more were encouraged. For many of the Horsemen
going to get either wood or hay, The Jews surprise the Romans Horses.
while they were about it, took the Bridles from off their Horses, and
permitted

Titus seeing that this fell out, deemed (as indeed it was) that his men's
Horses were stolen rather by their negligence, than their Enemies valor:
wherefore he thought by the severe punishment of one, to make others look
better to their Horses. And so he put to death one of the Soldiers that had
lost his Horse: by whose punishment the rest of the Soldiers being terrified,
kept their Horses better. For after that, when they went about any business,
they never left their Horses in the pastures, but kept always with them. Thus
the Romans assaulted the Temple, and built their Mounts. The day following,
certain of the Seditious, who now could get no more booties in the City,
Olivet, about the eleventh hour of the day: for they hoped to take them
unawares, as being at dinner. But the Romans perceiving their intent, came out
of their places, and resisted them who attempted voilently to break in upon
them over the Wall: The fight of the Jews and the Romans; near unto the Mount
Eleo.
so that there was a hot fight; and many other deeds were done on either party,
the Romans having both courage and skill in warlike affairs. The Jews were led
with desperate fury: and necessity and shame forced the Romans to fight. For
the Romans accounted it a shame not to overcome the Jews; and the Jews thought
it the only way to save their own lives, to break down the Wall by force. One
of the Horsemen called Pedanius did a thing almost incredible, the Jews being
put to flight, and driven into the Valley, Pedanius, a strong and expert
Horseman
he pursued them with his Horse as fast as he could gallop, and overtook a
young man one of his Enemies, being heavy of body, and armed all over; and
taking him by the ankle, he carried him violently away (thereby showing the
strength of his arm and his skilful Horsemanship) and so brought the Captive to
Caesar, as a present. Titus amiring Pedanius his strength, The captive punished.
and punishing the Captive for having attempted to assault the Wall, he hasted
to assail the Temple, and commanded the workmen quickly to dispatch the Mounts.
In the mean time the Jews being ill handled in the former encounters, which
still increasing to the overthrow of the Temple, they did, as the custom is in
a putrified body, prevent the Plague from going any further, by cutting off the
corrupted members. For that part of the Porch that reached from the North to
the East, joined to Antonia: which they

Antonia; when it was easy for them, and that they ought to have hindered the
fire. The Porch being on fire, they permitted so much to be burned, as they
thought good for their purpose. The fight about the Temple never ceased, but
many Excursions were made each against the other.

About this time a certain Jew of low stature, The Romans burnt the porches of
the Temple.
and in appearance a contemptible person, every way an abject, both by reason
of his base Parentage, and otherwise, named Jonathan, The Jews are too ^^ack in
putting out the fire.
going to the Monument of John the Priest, dared the strongest amongst the
Jonathan provokes the stoutest Roman to a single combat
that they ought not to fight with one that was desirous to dye: because they
that are desperate, neither fight advisedly, nor have the fear of God before
their Eyes: and consequently, that it was not a sign of Valor, but of overmuch
hardiness, to fight with such a one, whom though they overcame, yet they could
win no credit, but only hazard themselves to be vanquished. So a long time none
of the Romans came against him; and he upbraided them of cowardliness. At last,
an arrogant and proud fellow, Pudens fighting with Jonathan, is slain by him.
one of the Roman horsemen, named Pudens, disdaining his insolency, Jonathan
slew him; after which setting his foot upon the dead body, Priscus the
Centurion, kills Jonathan with an arrow.
with his left hand he flourished his shield, and with his right his bloody
sword; and striking his weapons one against another, he insulted over the dead
body, and upbraided the Romans, till at length one Priscus a Centurion, as he
was thus vaunting, shot him through with an Arrow, and so he fell down dead upon
the body of his Enemy; at which deed, both the Romans and the Jews raised a
confused noise. So Jonathan was justly punished for having made too much Triumph
for an advantage which he owed to Fortune, and not to his own Valor.


How the Romans by a Stratagem of the Jews were consumed with Fire: And of one
Artorius.
THE Seditious that kept the Temple, The Jews fill the void part of the
East-porch with dry wood, sulphur and bitumen.
were now every day openly in fight engaged against the Romans that kept the
Mounts; and on the twenty seventh day of the Month of July they devised this
Stratagem: they filled the void part of the East Porch The Romans calamity in
the fire.
kept their place. The Porch being now full of Romans, that were got up into
it, the Jews gave fire to the Wood and Brimstone, and upon a sudden all the
Porch was encompassed with the flame: so that the Romans who were out of danger
were amazed at it, and those that were amid the flames became desperate: and
being environed with the flames, some sought to run back into the Town, and
others to the Enemies, others killed themselves, so preventing the fury of the
fire: C^sar has compassion of the Romans that were in the fire.
and presently the flame overtook those that sought to fly. Caesar

A young man named Longus signalized himself amidst all this misery: and
notwithstanding man, for that he was strong, and willed him to come down to
them, swearing unto him Cornelius, who stood on the other side, entreated him
not to blemish his own honor and that of the Romans, whom he obeyed: and so
lifting up his Sword on high, that either part might see, he slew himself. Yet
one Artorius from amidst the fire escaped by this device; Longus kills himself.
calling unto him one Lucius his fellow-Souldier and Chamber-fellow; I will
(said he) make thee heir of all my Inheritance, if thou will catch me in thy
arms. Lucius willingly endeavoring to do it, Artorius cast himself down upon
him, and so escaped with his life, but Lucius, upon whom he fell, was bruised
against the pavement, Lucius dies but Artorius saves himself by a Stratagem
and so died. This Calamity a while greatly afflicted the Romans, yet it made
them more wary afterward, and acquainted them with the Jews Subtilties, whereof
before being ignorant, they sustained great damage. So the Porch was burnt
John built during his Wars against Simon; and the Jews, after the Romans that
were ascended into it were consumed, The porch of the Temple fired.
pulled down the rest. The next day the Romans fired the North Porch, as far as
the aforesaid East-Porch, which contained the corners of the Wall built over
the Valley Cedron, so that it was terrible to behold the Valley from thence, by
reason of the depth.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Famine amongst the Jews.
SUch were the affairs about the Temple: The intestine Wars of the Jews that
were well nigh famished with hunger.
but an innumerable multitude perished within the City through Famine, for in
every place where any show or sign of food was, presently arose a Battle; and
the dearest friends of all fought one with another to take the food from each
other; neither did they believe those that were now a dying for Famine, when
they said, they had nothing left to eat; but the Thieves searched those whom
they saw yielding up the ghost, thinking that they had hid about them some
food: but when they were deceived of their hopes, they became like mad-dogs;
and the least The Jews eat their own girdels, shoes, the leather of their
Targets, and old hay.
gathering such things to eat, as the most filthy living Creatures in the world
would have loathed. In brief, they eat their Girdles, Shoes, and the skins that
covered their shields, so that a little old Hay was sold for four Attiques. But
what need is it to show the sharpness of this Famine by things that want life?
I will recount an act never heard of, neither among the Greeks, nor any other
barbarous People, horrible to be rehearsed, and incredible; so that I would
willingly omit this Calamity, lest posterity should think I lie, had not I many
witnesses hereof, and perhaps should incur reprehension,

CHAP. VIII.
Of a Woman that for Famine killed her Son, and dressed him for meat.
A Certain Woman named Mary, dwelling beyond Jordan, the Daughter of Eleazar of
the Town of Bathechor, which signifies the house of Hysope, descended of
Jerusalem, was there with them besieged. Her richest goods the Tyrants had
taken from her, which she had brought from beyond the River into the City: and
whatsoever being hid, escaped their hands, the Thieves daily came into her
house and took it away: whereat the Woman greatly moved, cursed them, and with
hard speeches animated them the more against her; yet no man either for anger
or compassion would kill her, but suffered her to live to get them meat: but
now could she get no more, and Famine tormented her with rage and anger more
than danger. The Mothers speech before she slew her son.
Wherefore by rage and necessity she was compelled to do that which Nature
abhorred, and taking her Son to whom she then gave suck: O miserable Child
(said she) in War, Famine and Faction; for which of these shall I keep thee? If
thou come among the Romans, thou shall be made a slave; yet Famine will prevent
Bondage, or else our own Tyrants worse than them both. Be therefore meat for
me, a terror unto the Seditious, a Tragical Story to bespoken of by Posterity,
and such as is only yet unheard of among the Calamities of the Jews. Having
thus spoken, she slew her Son, and sod the one half of him, and eat it; the
rest she reserved covered. In a little time after came the Seditious, who
smelling the sent of that execrable meat, threatened presently to kill her,
except she forth with brought some of that unto them which she had prepared. The
seditious challenge the meat which the desolate mother had dressed.
She answered, That she had reserved a good portion thereof for them; and
presently uncovered that part of her Son which she had left uneaten; at which
sight they trembled, and horror fell upon them. But the Woman said, This is
truly my Son, and my doing; eat you of it, for I my self have eaten thereof. Be
not more effeminate than a Woman, nor more merciful than a Mother. If Religion
make you refuse this my Sacrifice, I have already eaten of it, and will eat the
rest. The The calamity recounted to the Romans.
This unnatural fact was soon after recounted to the Romans; some of them would
not believe it, others pitied them within the City; and many hereat increased
their hatred toward the Nation.

Titus, to justify himself before Almighty God, protested, That he was not the
cause of this misery; having offered the Jews Peace, General Pardon and
Oblivion for all 4 Reg. 6. Ant. l. 9. c. 4.
wherein Mothers eat their own Children; and where the Fathers were no less
culpable than the Mothers, because, for all their miseries, they would not yet
cease from Arms. Having thus spoken, he considered the Desperation of the
Enemies, and that they would not recall themselves, who had already endured all
such Calamities, which might, if it had been possible, have altered their
Opinions, rather

CHAP. IX.
How the Wall was taken, and the Temple burnt.
THE Eighth day of August, two of the Roman Legions having finished their
Mounts, began to place their Rams against the East-Galleries without the
Temple, having The Jews overcome the Romans, and seize their Ensigns.
were with Swords stricken down; they also thrust down some Ladders full of
armed men. So that there was a great Massacre of the Romans, who fought most to
recover their Ensigns, which the Jews had taken from them, esteeming the loss
thereof a great shame to them. At last the Jews kept their Ensigns, and slew
those that bore them; and the rest terrified with their death, went down again;
although not one of the Romans died, who before he was slain did not some
valiant act. Besides those Seditious persons, who in the former Battles had
showed themselves valiant, Eleazar, Son to the Brother of Simon, one of the two
Tyrants, got great honor. Then Titus perceiving that he spared the Temple of
the Jews to his loss, and with the death of his Soldiers, commanded fire to be
put to the Porches of the Temple; whereupon Ananus Emmaus the most cruel of all
Simons followers, Two of Simons guard revolt from him.
and Archelaus the son of Magadatus fled to Titus; who, for their Cruelties
committed, determined to put them to death; though they hoped for pardon
because they had now forsaken the Jews when they had Titus affirmed they came
not of good will, but for necessity, and that they did not deserve to live, for
forsaking their Country now set on fire by their Crimes: Yet his promise
bridled his wrath, and he dismissed them; but they were not so much esteemed as
the rest. Titus promise (...) his wrath.
The Roman Soldiers had already put fire to the Temple Gates: and, the Silver
plate wherewith they were covered being melted, the flame quickly fired the
wood, and increasing took hold presently of the next Porch. The Jews seeing
themselves environed with flames, None of the Jews go about (...).
were now altogether discouraged, and their hearts failed them; and being
amazed, no man sought to extinguish the flame; and so they stood still
beholding the fire, yet not lamenting that which was set on fire, nor
endeavoring to save the rest: and so that day and all the next night the fire
increased:

The next day Titus caused part of his Army to quench the fire: Titus calls
the (...) before him.
and calling to him his Captains, and six that were the chifest among them, to
wit Tiberius Alexander, his Lieutenant General, Sextus S^rea^^s Commander of
the fifth Legion, Largius Lepidus of the tenth, (...)
Titus Frigius of the fifteenth, Aeternius Fronto Commander of the two Legions
that came from Alexandria, and Marcus Antonius Julianus Governor of Judaea,
besides some other Colonels and Captains; he deliberated with them what was to
be done concerning the Temple. Some counseled to use the right of War, for
that the Jews would never live peaceably whilst their Temple was standing;
Titus counsel concerning the Temple.
for all their Nation wheresoever living, would assemble themselves thither at
certain times. Others persuaded Titus, to save it, if so be the Jews abandoned
it, and ceased to defend it; but if they fought for it, then to burn it: for it
was to be considered as a Castle, not a Temple: and if any man were offended
hereat, it would not be imputed to the Romans or to their General, but to the
Jews who constrained them to do it; and he should not offend, they forcing him
to fire it. But Titus affirmed, that although the Jews made use of their Temple
as of a Fortress, yet it should not be destroyed: for he would not so be
revenged upon inanimate things, neither would he ever fire so goodly a
building; for it would redound to the dishonor of the Romans; as on the
contrary it would be a credit unto them, if it were left remaining. Whereupon
Alexander Fronto, and Caerealis perceiving Caesar's mind became of his opinion;
and so he dismissed the Council, and commanded Titus with his chosen horsem^n
comes to (...) the Romans.
and not so desperate, had not Caesar (beholding the fight from Antonia) came
with certain chosen Horsemen, before they retired to succor them. Whose force
the The Temple was burnt by the Romans the tenth of the month of August; on
which day before time it was burned by the King of Babylon.
presently they fled; till about the fifth hour of the day the Jews were forced
to betake themselves to the Temple, and there they shut themselves up. Then
Titus returned to Antonia, purposing the next day to assault them with all his
Army, and win the Temple. But the providence of God had already determined,
that it should be consumed with fire. And now the fatal day was come after many
years, which was the tenth of August, upon which day also the King of Babylon
once before burnt it; yet it was now first ^et on fire by our own Countrymen,
who were indeed the cause thereof. For the Seditious being quiet till Titus was
departed, then again they assaulted the Romans,


How the Temple was burnt against the Will of Titus.
THen a certain Soldier, who expected no Command, nor feared to do so
execrable a Fact, A Soldier* contrary to Caesar's will burned the Temple.
moved with some divine fury, and lifted up by one of his fellows, took in his
hand a flaming Firebrand, and cast it into the golden window, which entered into
the buildings on the North part of the Temple, and the flame presently arose;
which Titus, who then was resting in his Tent, and he presently arose, and ran
to the Temple to hinder the fire, and all the Captains after him; whereupon the
Soldiers followed in great confusion, and there arose a great cry and tumult
in the Army being disordered. Caesar both with his voice and hand made a sign
to the Soldiers that were fighting, The burning of the Temple: Great slaughter
in the Temple.
to quench the fire. But they did not hear him, there was so great a noise;
neither did they perceive the sign he made unto them with his hand, because
some were distracted with fear, and others with anger: and the Soldiers issued
Caesar's command, and so exhorted his fellows that were before him to fire the
Temple. The Seditious now had no hope to withstand them, but either fled or
were slain: and many unarmed and unable people, wheresoever they were found,
were slain: so that about the Altar were an innumerable company of dead bodies
heaped together, and their blood flowed down the Temple stairs; and their
Bodies were rouled down. Caesar, seeing he could not restrain the fury of the
Soldiers, and that the fire increased, Titus striveth to save the inward
Temple.
nor consumed the Houses and Rooms about it, he deemed that as yet it might be
preserved; wherefore himself went, and entreated the Soldiers to extinguish
the fire, and commanded Liberalis, the Centurion of his Guard, to beat those
with a Trunchion that would not be obedient, and to drive them away. But their
fury, and the hatred they bare against the Jews, rendered them deaf to Caesar's
commands, and regardless of punishment, many were carried on with the hope of
some booty, thinking that all the Temple within was full of money, because they
saw the Caesar sought to quench the flame, fired the Posts about the doors: and
presently the flame appearing within, Caesar and the Captains departed out; and
so every one stood looking upon it, and no man sought to extinguish it. Thus
the Temple was burnt against Titus his will. And although every man will judge
it a lamentable case, in such a Building surpassing all that ever was seen or
heard of, both for greatness, workmanship, costliness and plenty of all things;
yet in this we may comfort our selves, that Providence had so determined. For
neither living Creatures, nor Places, nor Buildings, can avoid their Destiny.
How many years there were between the first building of the Temple under King
Solomon and the destruction under Titus.
One may also admire the exact and just revolution of time, for it was now
destroyed in the same month, and on the same day, that the Babylonians first
destroyed it. Solomon began the first Temple, unto the destruction of the
second Temple, which happened the second year of Vespatians Reign, were a
thousand a hundred and thirty years, seven months, and fifteen days; and from
the building of the latter Temple, which Haggai caused to be built in the
second year of the Reign of King Cyrus, unto the destruction thereof, were six
hundred thirty nine years and five and forty days.

CHAP. XI.
A horrible slaugher continued in the Temple, of the Priests, the
Treasure-house, and the Porch.
WHen the Temple was thus consumed with fire, whatsoever the Soldiers found
there, they carried away, and put all to the Sword that were in it, which were
an infinite number: they showed pity neither to old age, nor infants: but old,
young, Priests and common People, all were slain without respect, and all sorts
of persons tasted The cry and howling of the murdered Jews.
Then a most lamentable cry was raised between the Roman Legions, and the
Seditious now environed with fire and sword, and the people that were taken in
the higher part of the City, and had fled to the Romans, lamenting their
calamity. They of the City answered the cries and tears of those in the Hill,
and many, whose Eyes death by Famine had almost closed, took strength a while
to bewail the Temple, which they now beheld on fire. The Country beyond Jordan,
and the Mountains about did echo to their Lamentations: and yet the Calamities
surpassed all expression. For The Temple filled with fire and blood.
to have been burnt up by the roots, it was so all over fire: Yet the great
quantity of Bloodshed seemed to contend with the fire. Many that were slain
were covered with those that slew them, and all the ground was overspread with
dead bodies; so that the Soldiers ran upon the dead bodies to pursue those
that fled. At last the Thieves having driven the Romans without the Temple, ran
into the City; and the rest of the People that were left fled into the outward
Porch. And many of the Priests used Spits of the Temple in stead of Darts, and
threw their Seats made of Lead, instead of Stones, against the Romans; at last
nothing at all prevailing, and the fire falling upon them, they got to the
Wall, which was eight Cubits broad, Two Noblemen cast themselves into the fire.
and there stayed a while. Yet two of the principal, when they might Meierus
the Son of Belga, the other Joseph the Son of Daleus.

The Romans thought it in vain to spare the Buildings about the Temple, seeing
the Temple was already consumed; and so they set fire on them all, the Porches,
Galleries, and Gates; two only excepted, one on the East Side, and the other on
the South Side; both which afterward they razed to the ground. They also put
fire to the Treasury, which was full of an incredible quantity of Riches, as
well in money as in rich clothing, and other things of great price; and indeed
all the Jews treasure; for the richest of the City had brought all their wealth
thither. There came into the Porch that was Caesar and the Captains determined
any thing what should be done with them, Six thousand in the Porch consumed by
fire.
the furious Soldiers fired the Porch wherein they were, and so they all
perished in the flames, save a few, who leaping down to avoid the fire, were
slain in the fall; so that not one escaped of all that multitude. A certain
false Prophet was cause of their deaths, who the same day preached in the City,
and commanded them to go into the Temple, where he assured them they should
that day receive the effects of Succor from God; for many false Prophets were
then suborned by the Tyrants, False prophets* suborned by the Seditious.
to persuade them to expect Gods help, thereby to hinder them from flying to
the Romans, and to cause the Soldiers to fight more valiantly to defend their
City. Men easily believe, and are credulous in


Of the strange Signs and Tokens that appeared before the Destruction of
Jerusalem.
THese miserable People were thus easily persuaded by Impostors who abused the
Name of God; The blindness of the people.
yet would they not believe, The first Prodigy.
nor give any ear or regard unto certain Tokens and Signs of the ruin of their
City: A Comet like unto a Sword.
but as it were blinded, neither having The second prodigy was that a bright
light shined about the Altar and Temple by night.
which for a year together hung over the City. Another time before the first
Revolt and War, the People being gathered together to the feast of
Unleavened-Bread (which was the eighth day of April) at the ninth hour of the
night, there was so much Light about the Altar and Temple, as though it had
been bright day; The third prodigy was a Cow that brought forth a Lamb in the
midst of the Temple.
and it remained half an hour: This the ignorant People interpreted as a good
Sign; but they that were skilful in holy Scripture, presently judged what would
ensue before it came to pass. At the same Festival, a Cow led to be sacrificed
at the Altar, brought forth a Lamb in the midst of the Temple: and the inner
Gate of the Temple, on the East Side, being of massy brass, and which at night
The fourth, the brazen gate of the Temple opened it self.
and was bound with Locks of Iron, and barred with bars, the ends whereof went
into Mortice holes in the stones on either side the door, (the foresaid stones
being on each side one whole Stone) was seen at the first hour of the night to
open of its own accord: which being presently related to the Magistrate by the
Keepers of the Temple, he himself came thither and could scarcely shut it. This
also to the ignorant seemed a good sign, as if God opened to them the Gate of
his blessings, but the wiser sort judged, that the defense of the Temple would
fail of its own accord, and that the opening of the Gate foretold, that it
should be given to the Enemies, and that this sign signified Desolation. A
little while after the Feast days, on the one and twentieth day of May, there
was seen a Vision beyond all belief; and perhaps that which The fifth, armed
Chariots and men seen in the air.
and begirting the City. And upon the Feast day, called Pentecost, at night the
Priests going into the Inner Temple to offer their wonted Sacrifice, at first
felt the place to move and tremble, and afterward they heard a voice which
said, Let us depart hence. The sixth, a voice in the inward Temple
And that which was most wonderful of all, one Jesus the Son of Ananus, an
ordinary Pesant, four years before the War begun, when the City flourished in
Peace and Riches, The seventh, Jesus a Countryman's cry and death.
coming to the celebration of the Feast of Tabernacles, in the Temple at
Jerusalem, suddenly began to cry out thus; A Voice from the East; a Voice from
the West; a Voice from the four Winds; a Voice against Jerusalem and the
Temple; a Voice against Men and Women newly married; a Voice against all this
People: And thus crying night and day, he went about all the streets of the
City. Some of the best quality not able to suffer words of so ill presage,
caused him to be taken and severely scourged; which he endured without speaking
the least word to defend himself, or to complain of so hard treatment; but he
continued repeating the same words. The Magistrates then thinking (as indeed it
was) that the man spoke thus through some divine motion, led him to Albinus
General of the Romans, where being beaten till his bones appeared, he never
entreated nor wept, but as well as he could, with a mournful voice he cried,
Woe, woe to Jerusalem. Albinus asked him what he was, and whence, and wherefore
he said so; Jerusalem, till Albinus thinking him to be out of his wits,
suffered him to depart. After which till the time of War, this man was never
seen to speak to any one: but still without ceasing he cried, Woe, woe to
Jerusalem. Neither did he ever Curse any one, though every day some one or
other did beat him; nor did he ever thank any one that offered him meat. All
that he spoke to any man was this heavy Prophecy. He went crying as is said,
chiefly upon holy days; Jesus for seven years and five months cried about the
City
doing so continually for the space of seven years and five months; and his
voice never waxed hoarse nor weary, till in the time of the Siege, beholding
what he foretold them, he ceased; and then once again upon the Walls, going
about the City, A stone from an Engine kills Jesus.
with a loud voice he cried, Woe, woe to the City, Temple and People: and lastly
Woe also to my self. Which words were no sooner uttered, but a Stone shot out of
an Engine, smote him, and so he yielded up the Ghost, lamenting them all.

If any one diligently consider all these things, he will find that God has a
care of Antonia was taken, made the Temple apiece: notwithstanding that it
was written in the holy Scripture, that the City and Temple should be taken,
when the Temple was made apiece. But that which chiefly incited them to
this War, was a doubtful Prophecy likewise found in the holy Scriptures: That
at the same time one in their Dominions should be Monarch of the whole World;
And many wise men were deceived in their Interpretation, The Jews interpreting
the signs to their own good li^king, are their Countries (...), and the cause
of their own calamity.
making account that he should be one of their own Nation; but indeed thereby
was foretold Vespasian's Empire. But men cannot prevent Destiny, though they
foresee it. Thus the Jews interpreted some of the Signs

CHAP. XIII.
How Titus was made Emperor: and of the Death of the Priests.
AFter the Seditious were fled into the City, whilst all the Temple and places
there about were still on fire, the Romans placing their Engines over against
the Eastgate of the Temple, and there offering sacrifice to God; with great
shouts they declared Titus Emperor. Gold was sold for half price.
The Romans got much Spoil and Booty, so that they sold Gold in Syria for half
the value. And among those Priests that kept on the Wall, a Child being
thirsty, desired drink of the Roman Watchmen, saying, that he was thirsty.
They, pitying both his years and his need, gave him their hands that he should
have no harm, and then he came down and drunk, and filled a bottle which he
brought with him: and when he had done, he ran up again to his fellows, and
none of the watchmen were able to overtake him; The craft of a Boy.
and they could only upbraid him with falsehood. But he answered, That he had
done nothing, but that which he and they intended: for they did not give him
their The Roman watchmen greatly admired the subtilty of one that was but a
Child. The fifth day, The Priests ^^ave pardon, but Titus commands them to be
led to execution.
the Priests being almost famished came down, and the watchmen carried them to
Titus, whom they besought to grant them their lives. But he answered them, That
the time of pardon was past, seeing that was destroyed, for the sake of which
he might have pardoned them, and that it was meet that the Priests should
perish with the Temple: and so he commanded them to be put to death. Then the
Tyrants with their followers being on every side beset by the Romans, The
Seditious summon Titus to a Parley.
and having no way to flee, they being thus beleagured round, requested to
speak with Titus; who out of his natural gentleness, yielded to their request,
his friends also persuading him thereto, that at least he might save the City
(judging indeed that now the Seditious had already their minds) and so he went
to the West part of the Inner Temple: for there was a Gate built above a
Gallery, and a Bridge that joined the Temple and City together, which was then
between Titus and the Tyrants. Many Soldiers on both parts flocked about their
Generals; the Jews about Simon and John, hoping for pardon: the Romans about
Titus, desirous to hear what he would say unto them: and Titus having commanded
his Soldiers to be quiet, and to forbear shooting Arrows, spoke to them first
(in token of his Victory) by an Interpreter to this effect: Titus Oration to
the Jews by an Interpreter.
Are ye not wearied (said he) with the Calamities suffered by your Country? You
who without considering our power, and your own weakness, have with rash fury
destroyed your People, City and Temple: Your selves also have justly deserved
Pompey first Conquered you, have never ceased to be Seditious, and at last have
openly declared War against the Romans. Did you trust to your multitude? You
have seen that a small parcel of the Roman Army has sufficiently resisted you.
Or did you expect foreign aid? What Nation is not under our Dominion? And who
would rather make choice of the Jews than of the Romans? Did you trust in your
strength of Body? Why you know the Germans serve us. Or in the strength of your
Walls? What Wall, or what greater hinderance than the Ocean, wherewith the
Britains environed have yielded to the Roman Forces? Or to your Courage, and
politic Counsel of your Captains? You have already heard that the
Carthaginians have been by us surprised. The Romans humanity incited the Jews
against them.
It was therefore the Romans humanity that incited you against themselves, who
first of all permitted you to possess your Country, and gave you Kings of
Nero's negligence you became forgetful of your duty, and like some Member in
the Body broken or shrunk, you being still tamultuous, at last were taken in a
greater offense, and were encouraged with immoderate desires to hope for
unlawful liberty. My Cestius, but by good counsel and gentleness to reduce you
to good order. And whereas if he had come to destroy your Nation, he ought
first to have cut down the very Root, to have come to this City and destroyed
it with the Inhabitants: he rather chose first to enter Galilee* and the places
adjoining, that in the mean time you might repent you, and consider of your
Estate. But this his mercy toward you was held for cowardliness and weakness
in him, and by our long-suffering you were emboldned against us: and when Nero
was dead, you did as treacherous subjects are wont to do, and took occasion by
our civil dissension to revolt from us: and whilst my Father and I were gone
into Egypt, you prepared your selves for a War against us: neither were you
ashamed to oppose us, when my Father was declared Emperor, whom
notwithstanding you had found most Euphrates, only to get aid to your
Rebellion: You walled and fortified your Towns anew, and falling into factions
among your selves, at last you came to a Civil War: all which none but the most
vile people in the world would have committed. Wherefore being commanded by my
Father, who was now urged thereunto, I came against this City with a heavy
charge; yet did I rejoice when I heard that the People desired Peace. Before I
exercised Hostility against you, I exhorted you to Peace: after the War was
begnn, I desisted a while from using severity; I spared all those that of their
own accord fled to me, and kept my Promise to them, pitying those that were
Captives. Titus grants the Jews life, on condition they should lay aside their
weapons, and submit themselves*
I will spare your lives; and I shall reserve the rest to my self to use as a
good Master, who punishes not but with regret even the most unpardonable crimes.

To this they answered, That they could not yield themselves to him, though he
gave them his word, having vowed the contrary, but they requested license to
depart with their Wives and Children into the Desert, and leave the City to the
Romans. Titus was greatly enraged that they being in a manner already his
Captives, should impose upon him Conditions, The Soldiers set the City on fire.
but the next day following they fired the Council house, the Palace Acra, and
Ophia, the place of Justice, and the fire came to Queen Helens Palace, which
was situate in the midst of Acra: also the houses and streets of the City full
of dead Bodies were set on fire. The same day, the Sons and Brethren of King
Izates, and with them many Persons of quality assembled together, Caesar
constan in his resolution.
and supplicated Caesar to pardon them: Rome, there to remain as Hostages.

CHAP. XIV. The year of the World, 4034. after the Nativity of Christ 72.

The Seditious get into the Palace, pillage it, and kill there 8400 of the
People, who had fled thither for refuge.
THE Seditious went to the Kings Palace, where many had left their wealth,
because it was a strong place: The Seditious resorting to the Kings house take
away the treasure.
and driving the Romans from thence, they slew all the people there assembled,
amounting to the number of 8400, and carried away all the Money; and they took
there two Roman Soldiers alive, one a Horseman, and the other a Footman; The
punishment of a Roman Soldier taken by the Jews.
he was carried to Simon; and not having there any thing to say, Simon
delivered him to one of his Captains called Ardala to be slain; and he brought
him where the Romans might behold him with his hands bound behind him, and a
veil before his eyes, meaning there to behead him: but he, whilst the Jew drew
out his Sword, escaped to the Romans. Titus would not put him to death, because
he had escaped from the Enemies: yet deeming him unworthy to be a Roman
Soldier, who suffered himself to be taken alive, he took from him his arms,
and discharged him from bearing them any more, Siloa; rejoicing that the Town
was destroyed: yet they got no booties, because the Seditious had already
robbed and spoiled all, The Jews are arrogant in the midst of their calamity*
and carried it into the higher City. For they nothing repented them of their
wickedness, but were as arrogant as though they had been in prosperity: so that
with joy they beheld the City on fire, and said, That they desired death, for
that the People being slain, the Temple destroyed, the City on fire, they
should leave nothing to their Enemies. Yet Joseph in this extremity labored to
save the Relics of the City, The Jews refuse to submit themselves to the
Romans, yet are they unable to wage war with them.
much inveighing against their cruelty, and earnestly exhorting them to save
themselves: but he nothing profited by all this, being only derided for his
labor: for neither

Thus dispersed all over the City, they lurked in the ruins, lying in wait for
those that sought to flee to the Romans; many of them were taken and slain; for
Famine had so weakened them that they could not fly: and any death was more
elegible than Famine. So that many fled to the Romans, having no promise, nor
hope to be spared by them; and feared not to expose themselves to the fury of
the Seditious, who never ceased from murder. The Tyrants uttermos^ hope was in
their Vaults.
And now there was no place in the whole C^^y void, but was filled with dead
bodies, who either perished by Famine or Cruelty. But the Tyrants and Rapine
and slaughter in the Vaults.
and cruelly murdered those, that having escaped the flames, fled into secret
places, and spoiled them: also if in any place they found any meat, though all
bloody, yet they took it and eat it; and now they fell to fight one with
another about the spoil they got. And I doubt not, but if they had not been
prevented by the destruction of the City, their cruelty would have been such,
that they would have eaten the bodies of dead men.


How the higher part of the City was assaulted: and how some of the Jews fled
unto Titus.
TItus perceiving that the higher part of the City could not be won without
Mounts, being situate in a soil, round about which were high and deep
Precipices, on the twentieth day of August he set all his Soldiers on work:
and the carrying of Wood for The Idumeans consult in their assembly about their
submission*
Bridge and Tower, which Simon, during his War with John, had built. About this
time the Captains of the Idumeans assembling together, deliberated to yield
themselves, and sent five of their Company to Titus, beseeching him to receive
them to mercy: and he hoping that the Tyrant would yield after them, who were
the greatest part of his Army, with much difficulty granted them Life, and so
sent them back to their fellows. But Simon having notice of their design,
presently slew those five that were sent to Titus; and taking the Captains (the
chief of whom was James the Son of Sosa) he put them in Prison, and carefully
watched the Idumaeans, who now having no chief Commanders, knew not what to do.
But the Guard could not hinder them from fleeing; for although many of them
were killed, yet diverse fled and escaped, and were all received by the Romans;
Titus's courtesy being such, that he remembered not his former Orders to the
contrary. And now the Soldiers abstained from murders, and minded only the
getting of Wealth; the common People they sold with their Wives and Children
for a small price; many being exposed to sale, and few coming to buy them.
Titus having published that none should fly unto him without their families,
yet now received those also that came alone, appointing some to enquire who had
deserved punishment, and to inflict it on them. So an infinite number was sold;
and Forty thousand of the people saved.
whom the Emperor dismissed, and permitted to go whither they pleased.

At the same time a certain Priest, Jesus a Priest the son of Thebathus.
Jesus, the Son of Thebathus was promised pardon on condition he would deliver
certain holy things belonging to the Temple: and so he came and brought out of
a Wall two Candlesticks, like to those that were in the Temple, Tables,
Goblets, Cups, all made of solid and massy Gold: also the Veil and the
Ornaments of the Priest, Phineas* the Treasurer of the Temple, taken.
some precious Stones, and many Vessels made for sacrifice. Moreover, the
Keeper of the holy Treasure, called Phineas, brought forth the Garments, and
all things that belonged to the Priests, and much Purple and Scarlet, which
were laid up in store, to make Tapestry or Hangings, among which also was some
Cinnamon, Cassia, Caesar.

CHAP. XVI.

THE seventh day of September the Mounts being finished, Some of (...)
seditious kept in Acra, the ^est in the vaults of the City.
which was the Eighteenth day after they were begun, the Romans planted their
Rams and Engines for battery, whereupon some of the Seditious, despairing to
keep the City, left the Walls, and fled to the Mountain Acra; others hid
themselves in Vaults; but the most resolute endeavored to hinder the Romans
from placing the Rams against the Walls. The Romans, besides that they were
more in number, had their Courage increased by Victory. But on the contrary,
The fear and amazement of the seditious.
the Jews being now all dis-heartned and sorrowful, so soon as any part of the
Wall was broken down or shaken by the force of the Rams, straightways fled; and
the Tyrants were surprised with greater Fear than needed. For even before such
time pitiful to see such a change in them, though they were wicked persons.
But in order to Titus had built to compass the whole City withal: but seeing
themselves forsaken of all those that were wont to be trusty to them, every one
fled whither necessity drove him. In the mean time news was brought that all
the West-wall of the City was beaten down; The Tyrants en^eeble themsel^es, and
of their own accord forsake the Towers from whence by no means but famine they
might be driven.
others affirmed that the Romans had entered, and that they had seen the Enemy
in the Towers, fear troubling their Judgment, and making them think they saw
things which were not, whereupon they bewailed their misfortune; and as though
they had been lame, they stood still and sought not to fly. From whence one
may plainly perceive Gods justice toward the impious, and the Romans Fortune;
for the Tyrants deprived themselves of their strong holds, and voluntarily
departed out of their Towers, wherein they could Siloa: where after the fear
was past, they again took heart, and attaqued the new Wall that was in that
place, yet not using such courage and vigor as need required, they were beaten
off by the Guards that defended it, The Romans enter the town and obtain the
Victory.
their strength now failing, and being wearied with labor, fear, famine, and
calamity. Some were driven one way, and some another, and they were forced to
hide themselves in Vaults and Sinks. The Romans having Victory, finding the end
of the War nothing so terrible as the beginning. The houses and families of
best reckoning are (...) full of dead bodies.
Yet they did not believe that this was the end, because they got the Wall
without any bloodshed; but they admired that no man offered to resist them.
Whereupon issuing into every Street, they slew whomsoever they found without
any respect, and fired Houses, and killed all the People that had fled into
them; and where they entered to get prey, they found whole Families dead, and
houses full of Car^ases consumed by Famine. Thus terrified with the heavy
sight, they departed, not taking any thing away; yet for all that they pitied
not those that were left alive, but slew whomsoever they met, whereby they
filled the narrow streets so full of dead bodies, that none September, all was
set on fire; the City in the time of the Siege having endured more misery and
calamity, than ever it received joy and happiness from the time of the first
foundation, notwithstanding that the same had been so great, that all Cities
might justly envy it; and it no wise deserved to be so oppressed with such
misery, save only for that it fostered and bred such impious persons as wrought
the overthrow thereof.

Titus entering into the City amongst the rest, admired the strong holds
thereof, and the These muniti^^s of the City and de^^nce of the Tower which the
Tyrants abandoned for fear, (...) monument.
he said, Surely God has assisted us in this War, and he it was that drove the
Jews from these Fortresses. For what could men's hands and Engines prevail
against them? And having spoke much to this effect to his Friends, he set those
at liberty whom the Tyrants had left prisoners in the Towers: and when he
destroyed the rest of the City and Walls, he left those Towers standing, as a
Monument of his good fortune and victory, by which he had gained them, though
inexpugnable. The Soldiers now being weary with killing the miserable Jews,
and yet a great multitude remaining alive, Titus commanded that only the armed
Jews, The old and weak Jews are (...) and the strong and lusty r^s erved.
and those that resisted should be slain, but the rest Caesar left one Fronto a
Libertine, and his friend to keep them, giving him also charge to make enquiry
who had deserved punishment. Fronto slew all the Thieves and Seditious, who
accused one another; and reserved certain men of large stature and beautiful
for the Triumph: And all the rest that were above seventeen years old, he sent
bound into Egypt, to be employed in certain works there, as digging, delving,
manuring the fields, and other public businesses.

Titus also sent many of them into diverse Provinces, Titus (...) the Jews.
to serve in the Theaters for the fights with Beasts or Sword-players; and
those that were under seventeen years of age Fronto kept them, ten thousand
died for hunger;

CHAP. XVII.

THE number of all the Captives that were taken during the whole time of the
War, The number of the Captives and such as died during the siege of the City.
was 97000; and the number of all that died and were slain during the Siege,
was 110000, most of them Jews by Nation, but not natives of Judaea. For being
assembled together from all parts to the Feast of unleavened bread, on a sudden
they were involved in the War; and first of all a Plague fell among them by
reason of the straitness of the place, and immediately after, Famine, worse
than it. That the City was capable of so many men, it is evident; for Cestius
desirous to signify the flourishing Jerusalem to Nero, who contemned our
Nation, requested the Highpriests, that if possible they could, they should
number all the People in their City: and upon the Feast of Easter, when they
killed Offerings from the ninth Hour of the day until the eleventh (and to eat
a Lamb not fewer than ten persons were assembled; for it is not lawful to feast
alone, yea, many times twenty are in a Company) they numbered two hundred fifty
six thousand five hundred Oblations, or Lambs to be killed; so that if we
reckon to every Lamb ten men, the number amounts to two Millions seven hundred
thousand men, all purified, whole and sound: for it was not lawful for any that
were Lepers, or had a flux of seed, nor for Women that had the monthly

So this great multitude was assembled together from other places, and was
there by the providence of God shut up as it were in a Prison. And the City
being filled with men of War, was besieged; so that the number of those that
were slain surpassed all that ever perished, either by any Plague sent from
God, or by the means of men; they were partly openly slain, The Romans
searching the Graves and Vaults, find much treasure.
partly taken by the Romans: who searching the Vaults, and opening the
Sepulchers, spared none they met with. There also were found more than two
thousand, whereof some slew themselves with their own hands, others were killed
by others, the rest perished by Famine. The stink of dead bodies was so great,
that

Moreover, John and Simon apprehended in the Vaults.
many were taken out from thence, whom the Tyrants, who even in their extremity
ceased not to tyrannize, kept Prisoners: yet God plagued them both according to
their deserts: for John being almost famished with his Brethren in a Vault,
besought the Romans to save his Life. And Simon, having long striven with
necessity, as we shall hereafter relate, at last yielded himself, and was kept
for the Triumph; but John was condemned to perpetual prison. The Romans beat
down the Walls, and

CHAP. XVIII.
A brief History of the City of Jerusalem.
THus was Jerusalem taken in the second year of Vespasian's Reign on the eighth
day of September. Jerusalem being five times spoiled, was at that time once
more sacked.
It had been formerly five times taken, and was now finally destroyed. First,
Asocheus King of Egypt; after him, Antiochus; then Pompey; and after them,
Herod with Sosius took the City, and yet destroyed it not: But before them
Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon destroyed it, when he had enjoyed the same, a
thousand Canaaanites, surnamed the Just, by reason of his Piety. He first
consecrated this City to God, by building a Temple to him, and changed the Name
Solyma, into that of Jerusalem: But David the King of the Jews having driven
out the Canaanites, gave it to his own People to be inhabited: and after four
hundred threescore and four years and three months, it was destroyed by the
Babylonians. From King David, who was the first Jew that reigned there, till
the time that Titus destroyed it, were a thousand one hundred seventy and nine
years; and from the time that it was first erected, until it was by him
destroyed, were two thousand one hundred and seventy seven years: yet neither
the Antiquity, nor Riches, Jerusalem. When there was none left to kill, nor any
thing remaining for the Soldiers to get to exercise their outrage against (for
they would have spared nothing that they could spoil) Caesar commanded them to
destroy the City and Temple, The Romans wholly ruinate both the City and the
Temple.
leaving only standing certain Towers, that were more beautiful and strong than
the rest, to wit, Phaselus, Hippicos, and Mariamme; and the Wall that was on
the West side; meaning there to keep a Garrison, and that they should be
Monuments of the Valor of the Romans, who had mastered a City so well
fortified as by these it appeared to have be. All the rest of the City they so
plained, that those who had not seen it before could not Jerusalem, a most
beautiful City and famous amongst all Nations.

CHAP. XIX.
How the Soldiers were rewarded.
CAesar determined to leave the tenth Legion for a Garrison in Jerusalem, with
some Troops of Horse, and other Companies of Foot: and all Wars being now
ended, he purposed to give solemn praise to the whole Army for their valiant
Acts, and to reward the most Courageous for their deserts. Titus thanketh his
Soldiers, for that they had continued their love toward him.
Wherefore placing a great Tribunal in the midst before the Camp, and standing
up in it with the chief Officers about him, from whence the whole Army might
hear him, he gave them hearty thanks that of their good will toward him, they
had patiently abode with him during those Wars; praising them for their loyalty
during all the time, and that in many actions they had showed themselves
valiant, and by their valor had enlarged the dominions of their Country: Titus
promises recompense to his valiant Soldiers.
or escape their hands; notwithstanding that in many things fortune favored
them: adding, that it was glorious for them to have ended this War that had
continued so long; which was all they hoped for at their coming; and especially
that his Father and himself, whom they had elected to be the Roman Emperors,
were approved and embraced by all men, all standing to their appointment, and
acknowledging themselves beholding to them that elected them. Moreover, that he
admired them and loved them all, for that they had showed themselves valiant
and courageous: and that he would now recompense those with honors, Titus
largest unto his Soldiers.
and put Chains of Gold about their necks, and gave them Spears pointed with
Gold, and Silver Medals; he also distributed to every one of them Gold and
Silver money, rich Garments, and other things of value which were part of the
Titu's Sacrifice for his Victory*
He caused a great multitude of Oxen to be Sacrificed, and distributed the
flesh to his Army; and during three days he feasted all his principal Officers,
after which he dismissed all the Troops to the places designed for them,
appointing the tenth Legion to keep Jerusalem, and not sending it back to
Euphrates, The twelfth Legion under Cestius leading, gave place to the Jews.
where before it was. He also removed the twelfth Legion out of Syria,
remembering that under Cestius his Government they had fled from the Jews, being
before at Raphanaeas; which he sent unto Malta that is situate by Euphrates, in
the confines of Armenia and Cappadocia; the other two he kept with himself, as
sufficient to Egypt, which were the fifth and fifteenth Legions. And coming to
C^esarea by the Seacoast, he there laid up all his spoils, and caused the
Captives to be kept, because the Winter-Season permitted him not to sail into
Italy.

CHAP. XX.
How the Emperor Vespasian went from Alexandria into Italy during the siege of
Jerusalem; and Titus went to Caesarea Philippi,
WHilst Titus was busied in the siege of Jerusalem, Vespasian's sailing and
journey.
Vespasian in a Merchants Ship sailed to Rhodes, and from thence departing in a
Galley he visited all the Cities by which he passed, being joyfully received of
them all, and went from Ionia into Greece, from thence to Co^cy^a, and into
Slavonia, and afterward by Land. Titus being returned from Caesarea on the
Seacoast, came to Caesarea Philippi, and there made a long abode, Shows at
Caesarea.
proclaiming all sorts of pastimes: wherein many Captives perished, some being
cast to wild Beasts, other ^orced in great Companies to fight Simon the Son of
Giora, was taken. This Simon at such time as Jerusalem was besieged was in the
higher part of the City, when the Roman Army entered the Walls, and begun to
waste it: and with his most trusty Friends, and certain Masons, having provided
them all necessary Tools, and Victuals that might suffice them all for many
days, he went into a secret Cave, Simon gets down into the Vault, and hops to
escape, from thence in safety.
unto the end thereof, and there he caused them to dig further, hoping so to
get out at some place where he might safely escape away. Yet this his hope had
not so good success as he expected: for they had dug but a little way,
before their Victuals failed them: notwithstanding that they had made very
great sparing thereof. Then Simon thinking to deceive the Romans, clothed
himself in white, and put on a Simon would not tell them, willing them to call
their Captain unto him, and presently some of the Soldiers run to call him,
and so he came: at that time Terentius Rufus was Captain of the Soldiers.
Terentius having learned the truth of all, kept him bound, Simon is taken by
the Romans.
and related to Caesar the manner of his taking; and thus Simon was by the will
of God delivered into his Enemies hands, who hated him above measure, and so he
was justly punished, for having so cruelly tyrannized over his own Countrymen,
not taken by their force, Sin cannot shun Gods justice.
but yielding himself unto them, having cruelly butchered many

But impiety cannot escape Gods vengeance, neither is the Divine justice of so
weak force, but that it can at one time or other punish those that violate it;
and it many Simon felt, after he fell into the Romans hands: his coming out of
the earth caused a great many more of the Seditious at that time to be taken in
the Caves. A great multitude of the Seditious taken in Vaults.
When Caesar was returned to Caesarea by the Seacoast, Simon was presented
bound to him; and he commanded that he should be reserved for his Triumph,
which he purposed to make at Rome. After making some abode in that place, he
celebrated his brother Domitian's birthday with great solemnity: In a show in
Caesarea two thousand five hundred Jews dies.
and in this solemnity he brought forth diverse Jews, whose punishment he had of
purpose deferred till this time; the number of all that perished there with
fighting against Beasts, and amongst themselves, Titus celebrateth Vespasians
Birthday.
and by fire, amounted to more than 2500 men. Yet the Romans thought all Titus
went to Beritus, which is a City in Phoenicia, (and a Colony of the Romans:)
and here also he made some long abode, and celebrated the birth of the Emperor
his Father, with far greater Solemnity then the former, as well in giving
diverse Shows to the people, as in great expense and Sumptuousness, and causing
many Captives to perish, as before.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Calamity of the Jews at Antioch.
AT the same time the Jews who lived at Antioch were in great misery; for the
whole City was incited against them, both for some new crimes laid to their
charge, and for certain offenses before committed; which necessarily I must
recount before I proceed. The Nation of the Jews was mixed amongst almost all
Nations of the World; The Nation of the Jews intermixed among the people of the
World.
and especially amongst the Syrians, by reason of their vicinity; and many of
them were at Antiochia, because it was a great City: and the Kings that
succeeded Antiochus permitted them freely to inhabit there, and to enjoy all
the liberties of the City. For Antiochus, surnamed Epiphanes, destroyed
Jerusalem and sacked the Temple; but Antioch, A number of Jews in Antioch.
and permitted them to have the same liberties in the City, that the Greeks
enjoyed; and the other Kings also of latter times used them after the like
sort: so that their number greatly increased, and they enlarged their Temple,
and enriched it with sundry offerings, and oftentimes gained some Pagans to be
of their Religion; and so rendered them also a part of their Nation. Now about
the time that the War broke out, and Vespasian arrived in Syria, the Jews begun
to be generally hated of all men: A Jew called Antiochus, is the cause of their
mighty misery in Antioch.
and one of them named Antiochus, of considerable parentage, whose Father was
chief of all the Jews in Antioch, at such time as the people of Antioch were
assembled in the Theater, came in amongst them, and accused Antiochus
perfidious to his Citizens.
Antiochus, to enrage them the more, offered to sacrifice according to the
custom of the Pagans, thereby as it were assuring the Antiochians, Antiochus
forbids to Sanctify the seventh day.
that he hated the Jews and their customs; moving them also to compel all the
rest of the Jews to do the like, and whosoever refused so to do, were to be
judged Traitors. The Antiochians followed his counsel: but few Jews would
Antiochus receiving a party of Soldiers from the Roman Governors, became most
cruel against his Countrymen, and would not permit them to keep holy the
Seventh day; but in it obliged them to do all labor and business, that they
were acustomed to do upon any other day; and he so urged them hereto, that
within short time the seventh day was not only violated among them of Antioch,
but also in other places and Cities round about.

The Jews at Antioch having endured this persecution, Another calamity at
Antioch.
fell into another as great calamity, whereof I intend to speak. It happened that
the foursquare Market and the public Places, where all Writings and Registers
were kept, as also the Kings House, were burnt: and the fire so increased, that
with much ado it was hindered Antiochus accused the Jews, thereby inciting
Antiochians, against them; The year of the World, 4035. after the Nativity of
Christ, 73.
and it was not hard for him to believe his calumniatious although they had not
hated them before, by reason of that which lately past: so that now they almost
persuaded themselves, that they had seen the Jews put fire to the houses; and
so in a great rage all of them set upon those that were accused. Wherefore
Collega the Lievtenant-Governour, had much ado to pacify the people,
notwithstanding that he reqeusted them to permit him to inform Caesar of all
that was past. For Vespasian had already sent Cesennius Portus to be Governor
of Syria, but he was not as yet arrived there. Then Collega making diligent
enquiry of the matter, found out the truth; A sort of wicked men, by means they
were indebted, burn the Marketplace, and and the public Records.
and not one of the Jews accused by Antiochus was proved guilty: for certain
impious people had done all this mischief, being indebted; thinking that if
they burnt

CHAP. XXII.
How Vespasian at his return was received by the Romans.
Titus had received Letters from his Father, The City of Rome entertaineth
Vespasian with all willingness and pomp.
that he was arrived in Italy, and that all the Cities where he came welcomed
him very joyfully, and that especially Rome had entertained him with great pomp
and triumph, he was eased of the care he had before, and very joyful for his
Fathers welfare, and good fortune. For all the people of Italy reverenced
Vespasian, though absent, as though he had been present with them, desiring to
see his arrival, whose coming they so heartily wished for. The Senate,
remembering what calamities had befaln the City in the change of Princes,
desired to receive their Emperor honorable for his old age, and martial
renown, whose presence alone would be to his subjects advantage and safety. And
the vulgar sort also troubled before with civil Wars, long expected his
arrival, assuring themselves thereby The Romans issue out to meet with
Vespasian.
could no longer wait his coming, but went and met him at some distance from
the City, and accompanied him; and no man stayed his coming, but in whole
multitudes they went to meet him, they were so desirous to see him: so that
more went to meet him, then stayed at home.

When news was brought that he approached near the City, and how friendly and
Vespasian celebrateth gr^^latory Sacrifice for his safe (...).
he offered Sacrifice; to his household gods for his safe return; and all the
people were feasted by their Tribes, Kindred, and Neighbors, and made vows to
their Gods, that Vespasian might long continue their Emperor, and his Son
after him, and that the Empire might never depart from his lineage. The City of
Rome having Vespasian, it was soon after blessed with all happiness and
prosperity.

CHAP. XIII.
The exploits of Domitian against the Germans and French.
SOme time before Vespasian went to Alexandria, and whilst Titus besieged the
City of Jerusalem, a great part of Germany was revolted, with whom the French
that bordered upon them, The causes of the revolt of the Germans and French,
from the Romans.
were confederated, renouncing their allegiance, in hope to free themselves
from the Yoke and Government of the Romans* The first motive that caused the
Germans to revolt, and to war against the Romans, was their temerity Cassius
and Civilis, two of the most potent amongst them, who long before desired
alteration, and now finding opportunity, showed what minds they bare. Whereupon
taking courage they made trial what the common people thought of this point,
and the greatest part of Vespasian sent Letters to Petilius Cerialis (who
before had been Governor of Germany) and declared him Consul, Cerealis
compels the Germans to subjection.
commanding him to go into Britain and take the Rule of the Country. He
forthwith obeyed Vespasians command: and hearing that the Germans had revolted,
he went against them, they having now levied an Army, and gave them a great
overthrow, killing many of them, and forcing them to return to their obedience
to the Romans. Notwithstanding, if he had not come thither, not long after they
had assuredly been punished for their offense. For so soon as news of their
Rebellion was brought to Rome, Caesar* Domitianus, Domitianus Titus Brother.
Vespasian's Son (who although very young understood matters of Gallia being
well disposed of, so that it was not easy for them, although they would, to
rebel any more, Domitian returned again to Rome, having gained great Credit to
his Age and Country. The Sythians Rebellion against the Romans.


At the same time also the Scythians rebelled; and assembling in great
multitudes, passed over the River Ister, and with great violence and cruelty
coming unexpected, slew many Roman Garrisons, whom they found in strong holds:
and Fonteius Agrippa Vespasian heard thereof, and how M^esia was all wasted, he
sent Rubrius Gallus to chastise them; he having slain many of them in fight,
forced the rest to retire into their own Country. This General having thus
ended that War, provided to prevent them if hereafter they attempted the like;
for he built far stronger Forts than were before, so that the Enemy could no
way pass out of their own Country; by which means the Wars in M^esia were
quickly ended.

The year of the World, 4036. after the Nativity of Christ 74.

Of the River Sabbaticus, and the Famous triumph of Vespasian and Titus.
TItus having some while remained at Berytus (as is before said) returned from
thence, Titus celebrateth many sumptuous pastimes in all the Cities of Syria.
and showed many spectacles in all the Cities of Syria, where he came,
reserving for that purpose the Jews that were Captives, to let all men
understand their Arcas and Raphaneas, two Cities of the Kingdom of Agrippa, and
has a miraculous nature: for when it flows, it is very full of Water, and
runs with a swift st^ream; but having flowed six days, it is on the seventh
day so dry that you may see the bottom, The flood Sabbaticus.
and the next day it coutinueth his course; for which cause the Jews call it
Sabbaticus, taking the name thereof from the Jews Sabbath, which is the seventh
day. When the Antiochians understood, that Titus was coming to their City, they
could not contain themselves within their Walls for joy, but all went out to
meet him; and not only Men, but also Women and Children expected his coming
thirty Furlongs off; and when he approached near them, they holding up Titus
comes to Antioch.
But Titus returned no answer, making as though he heard not what they
requested. Yet the Jews doubtful what he would do, The Prayer of the Citizens
against the Jews.
and what his intent was, were all in exceeding great fear. Titus tarried not
at Antioch; but passed from thence to Zeugma toward Euphrates, where the
Ambassadors of Vologesus ^ing of the Parthians came to him, and presented him a
Golden Crown for his Conquest of the Jews: which he receiving, feasted the
Ambassadors, and so returned to Antioch, where the Senate and people besought
him to come into the Theater, all the people being assembled there expecting
him, and he accorded so to do: Titus would not grant that; but leaving the Jews
in the same Estate he found them, he departed from thence into Egypt. And as in
the way he past by Jerusalem, comparing the desolation of that place with the
beauty and goodly buildings it had before it was destroyed, Titus lamenteth the
loss and desolation of Jerusalem.
he lamented and pitied the overthrow thereof, not insolently rejoicing as
another would have done* for having destroyed so fair and strong a City, but
cursing the Seditious The Romans find no small part of the Riches of Jerusalem.
and being sorry he had made his virtue known by the calamity of that miserable
people. For still great part of the Treasure of the City was found in the
Ruins; and some the Romans found of themselves; but the most they got, the
Captives told them of, which was Gold and Silver, and other precious things
buried by the owners in the Earth being uncertain what would betide them. Titus
going forward in his journey speedily past through this deplorable Solitude,
and came to Alexandria: and determining now to sail in to Italy, he sent the
two Legions, that accompanied him, unto the places from whence they came, the
fifth into Maesia, and the tenth into Pannonia, commanding John and Simon, the
two chief of the Prisoners, and others, John and Simon, and seventy other
goodly Jews are reserved by Titus to be sent unto Italy.
to the number of seven hundred, all of goodly stature and beautiful, to be
Italy, in order to use them in his triumph. When he arrived at Rome, as he
desired, the people were affected toward him, as if he had been their Father,
and went out to meet him. Vespasian also honored his Son Titus, meeting him in
his own person with great joy: all the Citizens likewise received him with
exceeding joy, seeing that now the Father and his two Sons were met. Within a
few days after they purposed to make but one Triumph for both, though the
Senate had decreed to each a peculiar Triumph for their valiant deeds; and in
the day prefixed for the same no man in all the City remained at home, but
every one got a place to stand in, that they might see the Emperors, leaving
only Room between them for their passage. All the Soldiers before daylight
with their Captains in the head of the Companies came and Isis, where the
Emperors that night lodged: and at daybreak Vespasian and Titus came forth,
both crowned with Laurel, The year of the World, 4036. after the Nativity of
Christ 74.
and in Purple Garments made after their Country fashion; Octavian's walks,
where the Senate, Nobles and Roman Knights expected their coming. Before the
Porch was raised a Tribunal, and in it were placed Seats of Ivory, on which
they ascending sat down, and presently all the Soldiers with a loud voice
shouted forth their praises. The triumphant attire of Vespasian and Titus.
The Emperors were unarmed, and clothed in Silk, and crowned with Laurel.
Vespasian having received their praises, as they offered still to speak more in
his commendations, he beckned with his hand, and made a sign to them to be
silent: which done, he rose up, and covering the greatest part of his head with
his Garment, he made the accustomed prayers and vows; and Titus also did the
like. Their vows and dinner before their Triumph.
Then Vespasian spoke to them all in general, but in few words, and so
dismissed the Soldiers to go to dinner, which, according to the custom, the
Emperor The magnificence of the Triumph.
and so went in triumph all along the places designed for public Shows, to the
end that all people might have a better view of their magnificence. But the
spectacles there exhibited, both for number, variety, and constliness, cannot
be described sufficiently, being excellent in all things, which any man could
devise, both workmanship, Riches, Variety, and Novelty. For almost all things
that ever were in any place amongst men that lived in felicity, either Rich or
Glorious, and pleasant to behold, all were that day showed and seen in this
Triumph, as a Testimony of the grandeur of The most precious Garments.
For there was such store of works of Gold, Silver, and Ivory, that one would
not have deemed them to have been made only for the pomp of that day, but to
have been so plentiful, as if they had flowed all about the City: some carried
fine Tapestry made of all sorts of Purple, and curiously wrought with Pictures
and Babylonian works and there was so many Gems and precious Stones, some set
in Crowns of Gold, some in other works, that it appeared that without reason we
judged them to be rare and scarce. Moreover, the Pictures of their Gods were
carried with them, which were admirable both for greatness and workmanship, and
all of precious matter. Moreover diverse sorts of living creatures were there to
be seen, all adorned with some attire agreeing and alluding unto their nature.
There was also an infinite multitude of men in Purple Garments wrought The
building of the Pageants.
but the variety and beauty of the Garments made the Sadness of their
countenances less remarkable. The Pageants, that were born in the Triumph, were
of admirable bigness, so that the people that beheld them, wondered how it was
possible that men should carry them: for many were built with three or four
lofts one above another, surpassing all that can be imagined for work and cost;
some of them being hanged about with Tapestry of Gold; and all things annexed
unto them, whereon they were carried, were made of wrought Gold or Ivory:
Wherein was curiously represented the manner of War, and all Stratagems, and
Arts of A Table of Gold of the weight of a great talent.
which consumed the City to ashes; all which the Jews in their War Jerusalem
were most remarkable: The last of the spoils was the Law of the Jews.
for there was a Golden Table weighing many Talents, and likewise a Golden
Candelstick, the use whereof was now not such as we were wont to put it to; for
in the midst of the stem thereof was fixed a Base, and out of it proceeded many
small branches, framed like a three-forked spear, every one being at the top
made like a Lamp, which were 7 in number, showing the honor of the seventh
day, which is called the Sabbath amongst Vespasian, followed by Titus, and
Domitian accompanied them gallantly adorned, and Mounted on an excellent Horse;
and so they went all to the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, and there was the
end of all this pomp. Here they made some stay.

For it was an ancient Custom of their Country, to repose themselves there,
till some came and brought news to them of the death of him who was General of
their Enemies. This at this time was Simon Giora, Simon the Son of Giora is
drawn with a Halter about his neck through the market place.
who was also carried in the Triumph, and having a Rope fastened about his neck
was drawn all along the Marketplace, where they that drew him killed him. For
it is the custom of the Romans there to put malefactors to death that are
condemned. After word was brought that he he was dead, all the

When the Triumphs were ended, Vespasian builds and dedicateth a Temple to
Peace.
and all the Roman Empire quieted, Vespasian built a Temple, and dedicated it
to Peace, which he did in so short a space, that it was admirable: and having
bestowed great cost upon it, he also beautified it with diverse Pictures and
carved works. And he placed in that Temple all things

CHAP. XXV.

CAesar sent Lucius Bassus into Judea to be Lieutenant General there, who
receiving the Army of Cerealis Vetilianus, took the Castle and Garrison of
Herodium by composition. After this, gathering together all his Troops which
were dispersed in diverse places of the Country with the tenth Legion he
purposed to War against Machaeron; for he thought it necessary to destroy that
Castle, left its strength might move many to rebel: for by reason of the
situation of the place, they that werein it had great assurance of safety; and
those that sought to assault it, were in great danger: For it was built upon a
Rock that was exceeding high, and which made Asphaltites; on which side
Machaeron has a very high Prospect: and it is environed on the North and South
with Valleys of the like depth; whereby it is impossible to win the Castle; but
that Valley which is on the East side, is at least a hundred Cubits deep, and
ends upon a Mountain near Macheron, Alexander King of the Jews seeing the
Nature of the place, there built a Castle, which afterward Gabinius in the War
against Aristobulas destroyed. But Herod when he was King, Herod environeth
Macha^ron with a great Wall and Tower.
judged this place worthy to be fortified, as a Principal defense Wonderful
store of Arrows and other Engines in this Tower.
which served the people abundantly, striving as it were with nature, that the
places which she had made Strong, he by Art might make yet inexpugnable. He
also laid up there in store Arms and warlike Engines, and also all provisions
wherewith the Inhabitans might be able to hold out a long siege.

Rue of admirable greatness*
grew the Herb called Rue, which was very admirable for the greatness; for no
Figtree was taller or broader then it; and it was reported that it had
continued ever since Herod's time; The year of the World, 4037. after the
Nativity of Christ, 75.
and had endured longer, had not the Jews ruined it when Baaras, where also
grows a Root of the same name, the color whereof resembles flame, and it
shines at night like the Sunbeams, and is not easy to be pulled up, till one
cast upon it the Urine of a Woman or her flowers: whosoever touches it is sure
to die, except he carry the Root hanging on his hand. It is also gathered
another way without danger, How Baaras is to be gathered.
after this manner: They dig all round about it, so that they leave a very
little of the Root covered with Earth, and then they tie a Dog to it, Another
fashion how to dig the Roots
who striving to follow his Master, who makes as though he would go away,
easily pulls up the Root; and the Dog presently dies, as it were in his
stead that seeks to get it; but afterward none that handles it or takes Hot
Baths.
out of that place also do spring certain hot Waters, very different in taste
one from another; for some are bitter, some sweet: there are also sources of
cold Waters, one near another in a Plain: but which is most admirable, there is
a Cave hard by, not very deep, environed with an eminent Rock above, from which
there stands out as it were two Duggs or Paps hard by one another, and out of
one of them flows very cold Water, out of the other very hot; which mingled
together

Bassus having viewed this place on every side, resolved to besiege it; and he
endeavored to fill up the Valley that was on the East side, and so make away
to it: which he began to do, hastening to raise a very high Mount in order to
batter the Castle. The Jews that were foreigners dwelt in the lower City.
Those that were inhabitants, constrained the Jews that were strangers to go
into the lower City, judging them an unprofitable multitude; and so they caused
them to endure the first brunt of the Enemies, and they themselves kept the
Castle, both for that it was strong, and easy to defend, and that they The
conflict of the Jews with the Romans.
they might obtain pardon of them. Yet first they purposed to make Trial if
they could avoid the siege: and therefore very courageously every day they made
excursions, Eleazar a Jew strong in hand, and fierce in bold attempts.
and fought with those they met, and many were slain on both parts. Fortune and
opportunity sometime caused one side to be victors, sometime another: for the
Jews got the best, when they could assault the Romans unawares, and the Romans
overcame, when they were aware of the Jews coming, and armed themselves. But
the siege was not ended by these Skirmishes: at length a chance befell, which
obliged the Jews to yield the Castle.

Amongst those that were besieged was one Eleazar a young man, very hardy and
bold in any enterprise, and who oftentimes made excursions, and sought to Rufus
an Egyptian, one of the Roman Army, spying this opportunity ran upon him so
suddenly, that he unawares took him all unarmed as he was, and they upon the
Walls stood amazed, whilst Rufus led him into the Roman Camp, Bassus seeing
this contrived this device against them in order to move them to compassion, so
that for to save him they should yield their Castle: Eleazar's calamity moves
the Jews to submit themselves.
which fell out as he desired. He presently commanded a Cross to be erected, as
though he would presently have crucified Eleazar: which sight greatly moved
them in the Castle to sorrow: whereupon with loud cries they lamented, saying,
that this calamity was insupportable. Eleazar besought them not to neglect him,
who was now to die a most miserable

They moved with his words, and many also within the City entreating for him
(for he came of great Parentage and had many Kindred) though contrary to their
natures, compassion took place in them: and so sending some of their company
speedily; they desired to parley, declaring that they would yield the Castle on
condition that they might safely depart away, and Eleazar might likewise be
restored to them. Which offer of theirs the Romans accepted; and the Jews in
the lower part of the City having intelligence of this agreement, resolved
likewise to fly away in the night: but so soon as they had opened their Gates,
those that had agreed with Bassus, Bassus would punish them for their flight:
yet for all this, the most valiant of those that fled, who got out before the
rest, escaped, the rest were slain to the number of one thousand seven hundred
men; 1700 Jews slain by the Romans.
the Women and Children were made bondslaves. And Bassus thinking it meet to
keep his promise to them of the Castle, permitted them safely to depart, and
restored Eleazar to them.


Of the Jews that Bassus slew: and how the Emperor caused the Lands of Judea to
be sold.
THis done Bassus prepared to carry his Army into the Forest called Jardes,
Jardes a wood environed by the Romans.
where he had notice that many Jews were assembled together, having escaped
from Jerusalem and Machera during the Siege. So coming to the place, and
finding it to be as it was reported to him, he first of all environed it with
Horsemen, that if any of the Jews sought to escape, the Horsemen might dispatch
them: and he commanded the Romans, of whom only twelve were slain, and very few
wounded, 3000 Jews slain.
but all the Jews were slain in the fight, being in number three thousand, and
also their Captain Judas the Son of Jairus (of whom we have already made
mention, and who during the siege of Jerusalem was Commander of a Company
there, and hid himself in a certain Cave, and secretly escaped from thence) At
that time Caesar Liberius Maximus his Governor, A tribute imposed by Caesar on
all the Jews
and to Bassus, to fell all the Lands of Judea: for he would not build any more
Cities, but appropriated it to himself, leaving there only eight hundred
Soldiers, and giving them a place to dwell in called Emaus, thirty furlongs
distant from Jerusalem: and he imposed a Tribute upon all Jews wheresoever they
lived, commanding every one of them every year to pay two Drachms to the
Capitol, according as in former times they were wont to pay to the Temple of
Jerusalem: and this was the miserable estate of the Jews at that time.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the Death of King Antiochus: and how the Alans invaded Armenia.
IN the fourth year of Vespasian's Reign, it happened that Antiochus King of
Comagena^ with all his family fell into great misfortune upon this occasion.
Cesennius Petus President of Syria accuses Antiochus before Caesar.
Cesennius Petus Governor of Syria (either for envy, or for that indeed it was
so; for it is not well known) sent Letters to Caesar, declaring to him that
Antiochus was determined to revolt from the Romans, together with his Son
Epiphanes; that he had made a League with Parthians; and that therefore it was
necessary to prevent them in time, lest if they first began to revolt openly,
they might trouble all the Roman Empire with War. Caesar did not neglect this
news, for that the nearness of both the Kings Countries one to another seemed
to require that they should be quickly prevented: for Samosata the greatest
City of Comagena is situate upon Euphrates, and so might both easily receive
the Parthians, and be a strong Hold for them; and also there they might easily
pass over the River. Wherefore Vespasian sent word to Petus, That he permitted
him to do what he thought expedient: and he forthwith, Antiochus thinking
nothing, suddenly entered into Comagena with the sixth Legion, and certain other
Companies of Foot, and Aristobulus King of Chalcis, and Sohemus King of Emesa,
who came to assist him. They entered the Country without any fight; for none of
the inhabitants offered to resist. Antiochus is suddenly invaded by Cesennius.
Antiochus though surprised with this unexpected news, yet did not so much as
think of any War against the Romans; but determined to leave the whole Kingdom
in that estate that then it was in, and with his Wife and Children to depart
from thence, hoping hereby to clear himself to the Romans, from that which they
suspected of him: and going almost a hundred and thirty furlongs from the City
into a Plain, there he encamped. Petus sent men to Samosata to take it, as they
easily did, and were left to keep the City, whilst he with the rest of the
Soldiers purpose to go against Antiochus: But the King, though by necessity
urged thereto, yet would Romans; but bewailing his misfortune, endured
patienrly all whatsoever: But his two Sons being lusty strong young men, and
skillful in martial affairs, could not easily abstain from fight in this their
distress. Wherefore they had recourse to their forces, and in a great fight
that endured a whole day, they showed their Valor, and came off with little
loss. Antiochus chooses rather to depart out of his Country with his Wife and
Children, than to fight with the Romans.
Yet Antiochus after this fight would not any longer abide in his Country, but
taking his Wife and Daughters he fled into Cilicia, and thereby discouraged his
Soldiers, who dispairing to keep the Kingdom for him, revolted to the Romans.
But Epiphanes and the rest were forced to seek to save themselves, before such
time as they were left destitute, and so accompanied with ten Horsemen, they
passed the River Euphrates: And so being out of danger, they went to Vologesus,
by whom they were received, Antiochus flies with his wife into C^licia.
not as Fugitives, but with great honor, and according to their degree,

Petus coming to Tarsus of Cilicia, sent a Centurion to arrest and carry
Antiochus bound to Rome. Epiphanes flies to Veloge^us the King of Parthia.
But Vespasian permitted not the King to be so ill treated, considering more
the old Friendship between them, than the offense which he believed had given
occasion to this War. Wherefore he commanded, that in the way as he came, he
should be unbound and stay a while at Lacedemon, and forbear his journey
toward Rome; allowing him money sufficient to maintain his Kingly dignity.
Antio^hus taken.


Epiphanes, and those with him hearing this, were eased of the great concern
they took for their Father, whom they greatly feared to be fallen into some
danger; and now they also conceived some hope to be reconciled to Caesar;
whereof Vologesus writ to Vespasian, Rome; and their Father was presently sent
for to them from Lacedemon, and so they remained at Rome in great honor.

The Nation of the Alanes, Antiochus reconciled to Caesar.
being originally Scythians, inhabit about the River Tanais, and the Marshes of
Meotis, as in another place we have recounted. They conspiring with the King of
Hyrcania to pass into Media and sack it (for he was Master of that passage
which King Alexander had made in such wise, that it was shut up with Iron
Gates) obtained leave to pass, and so came into Media, whilst the Medes nothing
feared any such matter, The Alans (...) same.
and sacked and spoiled all their populous and wealthy borders being full of
Cattle, none daring to resist them; for Pacorus King of that Country, for fear
fled into the strongest hold he had, and left all his goods behind him, and
with much The year of the World, 4035. after the Nativity of Christ, 73.
for that no man resisted them, they came into Armenia, and wasted all the
Country thereabout. Tyridates was then King of that Country, who with an Army
coming to fight against them, was almost by them taken alive in the Battle; for
one cast a halter about him and began to draw him amongst the Enemies: Armenia
wasted.
and so had done, but that he with his Sword quickly cut the rope and fled: and
they being more enraged, by reason he fought against them, wasted all the
Country, and carrying with them a great multitude of Men and Cattle out of both
Countries, they returned into their own.


How Massada, a very strong Castle, was taken.
BAssus dying in Judaea, Flavius Sylva succeeded in his place; who perceiving
that all the Country else were Conquered save one only Castle, he with all the
forces he could make went against it. This Castle is called Massada. The
Captain of the Sicarians, named Eleazar, who commanded in it, was a very strong
and valiant man, of the Tribe of Juda, who persuaded a great many Jews, as is
beforesaid, not to enrol themselves Cyrenaeus was Censor, and sent to tax
Judea. For at that time the Sicarians had conspired against those that obeyed
the Romans, and in all things used them like Enemies, taking and driving away
their Goods, and firing their Houses, affirming that they nothing differed from
strangers, who betrayed the libertty of their Country, rather than they would
fight for it, and that they had rather they were on the Romans side. But this
was only an excuse to hide their avarice and injurious dealing, as the proof
made manifest; for they themselves revolted and bore Arms against the Romans,
and their enterprises against the Romans were worse than the rest; and when
their first forged pretense was known and confuted, they raged more than before
against those that upbraided them with it.

The time among the Jews which was most fruitful in all manner of impiety.
so that none was left uncommitted, yea, though one endeavored to invent some
new Villainies, yet could he devise none that was not then practiced: All
labored with this malady, both in particular, and in common; and every one
strove with other to surpass his fellow in impiety against God, and injustice
toward his Neighbor. The mighty vexed the weaker sort; and the meaner sort
destroyed the Potentates, and took their riches away from them; those gaped
after rule and dominion, these after mischief.

The Sicarians were the first that were so cruel and injurious against their
neighbors: John Giscala^.
for not provoked thereunto, either by deed or word, they slew and injured all
men without cause; but in comparison of John they were very moderate. For he
did not only Simon Son of Giora.
so that it was no wonder to see him observe no justice nor fidelity toward
men, who had now infringed the Laws of God. Again, what Villainies did Simon
Giora leave undone? Or what injury did he abstain from offering to their
Bodies, who had chosen him for their Ruler? What did kindred and friendship
then avail any man? Yea, it occasioned them to be more cruelly used, and more
tyrannously butchered, than otherwise. For they thought it a pitiful offense
to abuse Strangers, but a glory to exercise cruelty upon their most familiar
Friends.

Iduma^ans were followers of this fury, The Idumaeans
who killed the high Priests, and left not any one of note in the City, by whom
God might be honored; and induced all injustice possible, The Zealous.
wherein the Zealous excelled. For they committed all mischief, leaving nothing
unattempted, that had ever before that time been practiced: yet they took their
Name from those that practice good and godliness, but in truth it was to mock
and flout those that did well (so savage and cruel was their nature) or else
accounting the greatest impiety to be goodness. The end of the Jews answerable
to their lives.
But their end was as they deserved; God punished their impieties with his just
vengeance: For even till the end of their lives, they endured all the miseries
that is possible for man's nature to abide, undergoing all sorts of torments.
Perhaps one will say that their punishment was not so great as they deserved:

Sylva being advanced against Eleazar, The year of the World, 4038. after the
Nativity of Christ, 76.
and those that kept Massada with him, who Sicarians, he presently subdued all
the Confines and borders round about, and put in every fit place Garrisons, and
environed the Castle with a Wall, lest any of the besieged should escape, and
that the besiegers might there keep a continual guard. Moreover, S^lva the
Captain of the Romans besieges Massada.
he placed his Camp in a fit quarter for the Siege, where the Rock that the
Castle was built upon joined to the other Mountain; but it was an unfit place
to get necessaries in: For not only victuals were fetched far off by great
labor of the Jews, who were commanded to do it; but also water for the whole
Army some-where else, for there was no Fountain near that place.

This done, Sylva attempted the Castle; wherein it was requisite for him to use
both art and labor, The situation of Massada.
by reason of the strength of the Castle, which is thus situate. It is
environed Asphaltites toward the East, The journey by the Rock called the
Snake.
and the easiest of the two on the West side: the first is called a Snake;
taking its name of the straitness and crooked turnings; for the Rock that is
eminent, seems as it were broken in sunder, and by little and little often
returns again into it self, and is by degrees extended in length, so that he
that goes that way, can make no have, but must step with one foot first upon
them, and the other upon another, and must stand upon one foot while he
removes the other, and he that falls is sure to be killed in the fall: for
there is such a hollow place on either side between the Jonathan the high
Priest was the first that built a Castle in this place, and called it Massada:
and Herod after him bestowed great labor and cost in fortifying it, for he
invitoned it with a Wall of seven furlongs Circuit, all of white stone, twelve
Cubits high, and eight Cubits broad; and placed in it twenty seven Towers that
were fifty Cubits high, by which men passed into the houses that were round
about the Wall within. The King appointed the top of the Hill for Tillage, The
top more fruitful and ^^^tter soil than the Plain.
because it was a more fertile and fat soil than any ground else, so that if at
any time they within the Castle wanted provision, yet they might not be
famished, Herod's Palace.
having this ground to furnish them. He also built in A Tower to the west side.
by which it was impossible to pass; and it was not easy to get it by force;
and the more leisurely one went, the greater was the danger. Thus was this
Fortress strengthened both by Art and Nature.

The provision within the Castle was admirable for the plenty thereof; Great
store of provision in the Castle.
for there was Corn sufficient for many years, besides Wine and Oil, and all
sorts of Pulse, and great quantity of Dates. All which Eleazar, having
deceitfully obtained the Castle with his Sicarians, found there: which
provision was all as sound and as fresh, as though it had newly been laid up in
store: notwithstanding, that from the time it was placed there, Romans took it,
Fruit for an hundred years kept incorrupt
were a hundred years: And the Romans found the relics of the fruits
incorrupted: and one may justly think that the cause hereof is the Air about
the Castle, which by reason of the height of the place is most pure, and free
from all earthly corruption. There was also found all manner of Armor in great
quantity, which Herod had made, and would have armed ten thousand men; also
much unwrought Iron, Brass and Lead; so that one may judge that provision to
have been reserved for some great cause.

It is reported, Herod suspecting a double peril, builded the place for a
refuge.
that Herod prepared that Castle for his refuge, when he doubted two great
dangers: First, That the People of the Jews would depose him, and make them
Kings whose Ancestors had before reigned.

The other which was more considerable, was, for that he feared Cleopatra Queen
of Egypt, who without concealing her intent often req^ested Antonius that Herod
might be slain, and that she might have the Kingdom of the Jews given to her.
And it was a great marvel that Antonius doting so upon her, did not fulfill her
request. Herod upon these apprehension built Massada, and left it so furnished
that without taking it the Romans could not put an end to the War against the
Jews. Herod (...) a double (...), build^d the place for a refuge.
After the General of the Romans had now compassed all the place, without with
a Wall (as is before said) to the end that none might escape, he began to
assault the Castle, but found one only place that he could fill up with Earth.
For behind the Tower which on the West Side stopped up the passage to the
Castle and Palace, There was but one place about Massada to raise a mount to
batter on.
there was a great Rock very large and long, yet not so high as Massada by
three hundred Cubits: The Rock was called Leuce, which signifies white. When
Sylva had gotten this Rock, he commanded his Soldiers to build a Mount
thereon; and they cheerfully laboring, raised suddenly a mount two hundred
Cubits high: yet by reason of the height it seemed not firm nor sufficient
enough to bear the Engines; wherefore upon it was built a Platform with great
stones fifty Cubits high, and as many Cubits broad; the Engines were such as
Vespasian and Titus had devised to batter Walls with: and upon this Platform
they made a Tower threescore Cubits high, all plated about with Iron.

From hence the Romans with many shot from their Engines drove the Jews from
off the Castle Walls, The City battered wi^h alarge Ram. and by Sylvas
appointment.
not suffering them to lift up their heads. And Sylva having made a mighty Ram,
caused the Wall to be continually battered therewith; but it could scarcely
Sicarians quickly prevented it, by building another Wall within, which could
not be broken with the the Ram, because it was yet soft, and so broke the force
thereof; for they sawed Timber in pieces, and as it were made two rails; and
then filled the space between the two rails with Earth, and with other planks
they kept the Earth from falling down, so that they made a work like the Wall
of a house; which for that it yielded to the blows of the Ram (being soft
Earth) the Ram could not prevail against it, but rather made it more strong
than before by ran (...) Earth together.

Sylva perceiving this Judged that he might sooner destroy the Wall with fire
than with his Engine, Firebrands darted against the Walls.
and so he commanded the Soldiers to cast upon it many burning firebrands; and
the fire quickly took hold of the Wall, because it was for the most part

At the very beginning of the fire the North wind greatly annoyed the Romans;
for the fire blowing furiously from above against them, it drove so extremely
upon them, that they were in great despair, The North winds diverting the
flame, turns i^ on the Romans.
fearing their Engines would be burnt; but presently the Wind changing and
blowing from the South, (as it were by Gods providence) it turned the fire
again upon the Wall, so that all of it, even to the foundation thereof, was
wholly set on fire. The Romans thus assisted by God, returned again into their
Camp joyfully, purposing the next morning betimes to give the assault, and that
night to place stronger Watches, lest any of the Enemies should escape. But
Eleazar was

Generous Jews, Eleazars Oration to his companions.
we long age resolved with our selves to serve neither the Romans, nor any
other save only God: for he alone is the true and just Lord of all men. Behold,
the time is now come, that requires you to show your resolute minds: let us
not therefore dishonor our selves, and beside our slavery, suffer also
intolerable torments, if we be taken alive by the Romans. Eleazar confesses
Gods wrath to be kindled against the people.
For we were the first that revolted from them, and now the last that war
against them. And I verily think that God has given us this benefit, that we
may die well in our own liberty, which he denied to others, who were overcome
contrary to all expectation. We are certain to be conquered as soon as it is
day light: but to die valiantly with our dearest Friends, is a Glorious
resolution for valiant men; and of this our Enemies cannot debar us, who labor
to to take us alive, and carry us away Captives; and we are not able to
vanquish them in fight. For truly, at the first (when we who coveted liberty
suffered all misery at the hands of our own Countrymen, and worse at the hands
of our Enemies) we should have considered, that God, who was sometimes
favorable to the Nation of the Jews, had now condemned it to perdition: for
had he yet been favorable to us, or had be been but lightly offended all our
Nation have hoped to live in liberty, as though we had no ways offended the
divine The punishment of those crimes, which the Jews in Jury attempted against
the Gentiles.
who furiously raged against our own Nation: wherefore I request you, let us
not be punished by the Romans, whose forces are invincible, but of our selves
let us satisfy the anger of God, and so it will be more tolerable for us; even
by that means our Wives shall die undefiled, and our Children shall not taste
of servile Captivity. After whose The best grave is when liberty is maintained.
Yet let us first fire our Castle, and burn our Treasure: for it will be no
small grief to the Romans, if they neither get our bodies alive, nor find any
jot of our riches for recompense of their labor. Let us only leave our
victuals as a sufficient Testimony, that Famine did not cause us to be
conquered; but that we, as at first we resolved, preferred death before bondage.

Eleazar having thus spoken, they that were present did not all accord with
him; for some joyfully hasted to execute his advice, thinking it a glorious
death. But others moved with compassion toward their Wives and Families, were
something backward or else abhorred to kill themselves, and looking one upon
another with Tears, showed Eleazar advised. Which when Eleazar perceived, and
that his counsel through fear was defeated; fearing also that they who
courageously had at first accorded thereunto, would be withdrawn by the Tears
of others, he did not so end his exhortation; but standing up, he begun with a
vehement discourse to speak to them of the immortality of the Soul, and fixing
his Eyes upon those that wept with a great exclamation, said:

How much am I deceived, Eleazar's Oration as touching the immortality of the
Soul.
who thought that valiant men fighting for their liberty would rather choose to
die than to live? but ye show your selves not to excel any ordinary men, who
fear to die, notwithstanding that thereby you may escape great misery and
calamity; though in this point you ought not to have expected any admonition
thereunto, nor to have made any A Soul tied in a mortal body.
But whilst they are bound in a mortal body, and participate of his miseries,
they may in a manner be affirmed to be dead. The power of the Soul.
For there is no proportion between two things, one whereof is Divine, and the
other Mortal. True it is, that our Souls can do much being joined to our
bodies, which they use as their instruments, secretly producing in them motion,
and many other actions passing the Nature of Mortal things. But when the Soul
is loosed from that heavy burden, which weighs it down to the Earth, and has
recovered its proper Sleep the Argument of the immortality of the Soul.
so much does it participate of immortality. Sleep may be an evident argument
to you of this which I speak, in which the Soul not being distracted takes a
most pleasant and sweet repose; and communicating with God, it foreseeth many
future events. Wherefore then should we fear death, who love the rest that we
have in sleep? were he not a mad man that for a short life would hinder himself
of that which is enternal? It is necessary that we who are instructed The
professors of wisdom among the Indians burn themselves.
should give example to others to despise and contemn Death. But if we seek
confirmation hereof from strangers, let us see the examples of the wiser sort
of Indians: for they being just men tolerate this life as a necessary office of
nature for a certain time, though against their wills; yet do they even in
perfect health hasten to unloose the Soul bound in this Mortal Body, though not
urged thereunto by any calamity or necessity, but only for desire of
immortality, and solemnly take leave of their Friends; neither does any one
seek to hinder them, but esteeming them most fortunate, they send by them
commendations and other messages to their Friends departed: so firm is their
belief that the Souls of the dead have Communion and conversation together. And
thus having all instruction what to say to the Souls departed, they with great
applause leap into the fire, that thereby their Souls may An exhortation to
contemn death, drawn from the time and place.
But a more potent cause hereof there was which made them conquerours. Were
they the Romans that slew the Jews that inhabited at Caesarea, whom the
Inhabitants thereof upon the Sabboth-day, they being assembled in one place
together with their Wives and Children, massacred, notwithstanding that they
had no intent to revolt from them, nor ever lifted up their hand in their own
defense, nothing fearing the Romans, who only accounted those of our Nation
their Enemies that revolted from them? But some may object the Jews at
Caesarea, and the Inhabitants thereof were always at variance, and that now
they revenged their old quarrel, having gotten opportunity. What then shall we
say of the Scythopolitans, who bare Arms with the Grecians against us, and
denied to assist their own kindred against the Romans? Example taken from the
Jews that were slain in Caesarea.
What profit did they receive by this their good will and fidelity? for they
were Syria that has not massacred the Jews inhabiting in it, and that is not
more an Enemy than the Romans were. They of Damascus, although they could not
devise any probable cause for it, yet massacred all the Jews living among them,
The calamity of the Jews in Scythopolis.
amounting to the number of eighteen thousand, beside their Wives and Children.
And is it not for certain reported, that the number of the Jews slain by the
Egyptians were above 60000? 18000 Jews slain in Syria, and 60000 in Egypt.
It may be, that finding no assistance in a strange Country, they were martyred
by their enemies: but they that in their own Country fought against the Romans
wanted nothing that might have caused perfect hope of a full victory over the
Romans; The calamity of those Jews who were taken by the Romans.
the most miserable of all are those that are yet alive, who often wish for
death, and cannot find it. Where is now that potent City; that was once the
Capital City of Jerusalem the Metropolitan City razed from the foundations
wherein God himself was thought to dwell? What is now become of it? It is razed
down, even to the very foundations; and scarce any memory ^r relics thereof
left standing; the whole people destroyed, only a few old and unhappy men
survive, who sit among the Ashes of the Temple, and a few Women, whom the
Enemies reserved to satisfy their filthy lust. And will any amongst us,
considering all these things, desire to behold the light of the Sun, although
he could live without molestation? who is such an Enemy to his Native soil? who
is so effeminate, or desirous of his life, that he does not grieve to have
lived till this time? would God we had been all in our graves, before we had
seen that sacred City fired by a hostile hand, before we beheld We are born to
die, and the strongest cannot avoid the same.
who, when they might have died without it, did refuse for fear. We first of
all trusting to our strength, rebelled against the Romans; afterward they
exhorted us to obedience, but we denied: which of them then will not be
enraged against us, if they can take us alive? Most miserable shall those young
men be, whose strength will endure many torments; and those his Father for
help: who now whilst they are free from the thraldom of their Enemies, may
Eleazar tells the Jews of the Romans Tyranny.
who fear lest any of us should perish, and not fall into their hands alive.
Let us therefore hasten, that instead of their hope, whereby they verily
persuaded themselves to take us alive, we may contrary to their expectation
daunt them with sudden admiration of our glorious deaths. It is a happiness
among the Jews to die fice.


Whilst Eleazar was yet speaking, and desirous still to continue his
exhortation, they interrupted him: every one now in a fury bent to follow his
advice, made haste to effect it; and as though they had been urged by some
Spirit thereto, one labored to prevent Eleazars speech, every one retained his
good affection toward his Friends: yet permitting reason to take no place, and
persuading themselves that thus they had well provided for their Children, they
embraced their Wives and Children for their last farewell, and took their leaves
of them, kissing them with Tears, and then all at once slew them, as though it
had been done by the hands of other men, and not their own, comforting
themselves in being forced so to do, and that hereby they should escape the
tyranny and The Jews gathering all their goods together cast them into the fire.
and he upon whom the lot should fall, was to kill the other nine, and lastly
himself upon them all; and every one so encouraged one another, that there was
no difference between those that were to be killed and those that were to kill;
and so the rest offered themselves to death: which done, he who was the last of
all, being yet alive, went amongst the dead bodies, and searched to see if any
still lived that needed his hand in so great a multitude of slain people; Ten
chosen by lot to kill the rest of the Jews.
and finding all of them dispatched, he went and fired the Palace: which done,
he with all his force thrust his Sword into his own body up to the Hilts, and
so fell down by his dearest Friends.

In this manner they perished with a belief that they left not one person alive
to fall into the Romans hands: but a certain old Woman, and another who was
Eleazars Cousin, The Romans expect the fight.
This calamity happened the fifteenth day of April. In the morning the Romans
expecting that the Jews would encounter them, made Bridges from their Mounts to
the Walls, and so assaulted the Walls; and seeing none of the Enemies appear,
but all the Walls on fire, and a profound silence in every place, they could
not conjecture what was the cause of it; and at last they made a cry at once,
as though they had been beating the Walls with a Ram, thereby to see if they
could make any Enemies come out. The Women in the Vaults heard this cry, and
coming forth declared The Romans admire the Jews fortitude and obstinate
contempt of death.
The Romans did not easily believe their words, by reason the greatness of the
fact seemed incredible; but they endeavored to quench the fire, and passing
forward they came to the Palace, where they beheld all the dead bodies; yet
they did not insult over them as Enemies, but admired that so many should be so
obstinately minded to despise death.


Of the Death of the Sicarians that had fled to Alexandria and Thebes.
AFter that the Castle of Massada was thus taken, The murderers, authors of
new calamity.
the General of the Romans leaving a Garrison there, went to Caesarea, because
there was no Enemy left in all the Country. But not only Judea was destroyed
through the continuance of the War, but many of that Nation, though far distant
from it, tasted of its troubles; for it so fell Egypt at Alexandria. Those
Sicarians who had escaped thither, were not content to be safe and free from
danger, but there also they attempted alteration, and to recover their Liberty
against the Romans esteeming themselves nothing inferior to them, and that
only God was their Lord. And some of the nobler race of the Jews, seeking to
withstand this Enterprise, were by these Sicarians slain; which was no sooner
done, but they incited the People to revolt.

The better sort of the Jews seeing this, The Jews assemble and consult ab^ut
the murderers
and that they could not repress them without danger, they assembled all the
Jews together, and declared to them the temerity of these Sicarians, accusing
them as the Authors of all the misery that had befallen the Jews, Sicarians
were, and to provide for their own safety by delivering such people to the
Romans. The Jews were persuaded by these speeches: and foreseeing the danger
that might ensue, they furiously assaulted the Sicarians, and took of them six
hundred: and shortly after those who fled into Egypt and Thebes were taken and
brought back again; whose hard-hearted obstinacy was so great, that none can
without admiration hear of it. For notwithstanding that all torments and
tortures, Diverse sorts of torments and tortures inflicted on them who refuse
Caesar's Sovereignty.
that could be devised, were inflicted up-them, Caesar was their Lord; yet not
one of them would say so, or make any show thereof; but all persevered in their
former opinion, as though the Body tormented had been dead and not alive.
Moreover, the incredible obstinacy of their Children was most to be admired,
for not one of them could be constrained to call Caesar Lord. So much did their
Resolution overcome the Torments inflicted upon their Bodies.


How the Temple of Onias at Alexandria was shut up.
AT That time Lupus was Governor of Alexandria, and with all speed by Letters
gave Caesar notice of these troubles. The Emperor, seeing that it was
necessary to beware of the Jews, who were naturally inclined to sedition and
unquietness, fearing also that they would once again gather themselves
together, and cause some to join with them, he commanded Lupus to destroy the
Temple, which they had in the City Onion, Onias by Ptolom^^s consent builds a
City and Temple in Egypt.
which was built and so named upon this occasion: Onias the Son of Simon, one
of the high Priests, being driven out of Jerusalem, when Antiochus King of
Syria wared against the Jews, he came to Alexandria, and was courteously
entertained by Ptolomaeus, who was then also Enemy to Antiochus, affirming,
that he would draw into his Country the People of the Jews, if he would agree
to that which he required. The King according to all that could be granted, he
requested him to permit him to build a Temple in some place of his Country,
wherein he might worship God according to the custom of their Country: for so
the Jews would hate Antiochus the more, who had destroyed their Temple at
Jerusalem, and be friendly to him; and many of them would fly to him for
Religion's sake.

Ptolomaeus agreed so to do, and gave him a piece of ground for that purpose a
hundred Memphis, Onias Temple built in Egypt.
in that place which was called the Country of Heliopolis: where Onias building
a Castle, erected also a Temple, not equal to that of Jerusalem; The year of
the World, 4036. after the Nativity of Christ 74.
but yet with a Tower like that of Jerusalem, with very great stones,

But Onias did not this with a good Conscience, but for that he was at variance
with the Jews of Jerusalem, who had forced him to fly: and he persuaded
himself that by the building of this Temple, he might withdraw all men from
Jerusalem thither; and Isaias had foretold that a certain Jew should build a
Temple in Egypt.

Thus that Temple was built; and Lupus having received the Emperors Letters,
went to the Temple, Lupus (...) the Jews out of the Temple.
and taking away certain gifts from it he shut it up: and after him Paulinus
who succeeded in his stead, left not one gift there (for he threatened the
Priests if they did not bring forth all) and permitted not any, that came
thither to sacrifice, to come near it; but shutting up the Gate thereof, he
left no sign of divine Service there; and from the time it was built, till the
time it was shut up, were three hundred thirty and three years.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Massacre of the Jews at Cyrene.
THE Boldness of the Sicarians, like some infectious disease, spread over all
the Cyrene. For one Jonathan a Weaver, and a wicked man, having escaped,
persuaded many simple people to follow him, and led them into the Wilderness
promising to show them signs and visions, A part of Jonathans companions were
taken and slain, the rest kept captive alive, and brought to Catullus.
and so he deceived the simplest sort of the Jews: but the noblest of them of
Cyrene, understanding his deceit, gave Catullus notice of his preparation and
departure, who was then Governor of Lybia; who sending some Horse and Foot,
easily surprised them being unarmed, and the most part of them were slain; yet
some were taken alive and brought to Catullus. But their Leader Jonathan at
that time escaped: yet being diligently laid and sought for over all those
Countries, he was at last taken; and being brought to Catullus, he sought to
delay his own punishment by offering an occasion of Cruelty to Catullus: For he
accused the

Catullus was glad of these accusations, and exaggerated them very much with
Tragical terms, so that he might have a pretext of War against the Jews, and
not content to credit whatsoever was maliciously spoken, Three thousand Jews
slain by Catullus.
he himself instructed the Sicarians to frame scandalous accusations; and
commanding them to nominate one Alexander a Jew, whom he had long hated, and
his Wife Bernice, he put them first of all to death; and after them all that
were rich, who amounted to the number of three thousand. And this he thought he
did without control, because he confiscated their Possessions to Caesar.

And lest any Jew living in any other place, Joseph by Catullus persuasion is
accused by Jonathan.
should complain of his injustice, he extended Jonathan, and certain others
that were taken with him, to accuse the most trusty and faithful Jews both at
Rome and Alexandria: one of those who were thus falsely accused was Joseph, who
wrote this History. But this proceeding of Catullus had not such success as he
hoped: for he came to Rome, and brought Jonathan and the rest bound with him,
thinking that no more inquiry would be made of the false accusations invented
by himself. But Vespasian, suspecting the matter, made diligent inquiry to know
the truth: and finding these crimes injuriously imposed upon those men,
Jonathan being first beaten is burnt alive.
at the intercession of Titus, he acquitted them, and punished Jonathan
according to his desert; who being first whipped, was afterward burnt alive.

Catullus at that time, by reason of the mildness of the Emperor, had nothing
said The year of the World, 4038. after the Nativity of Christ, 76.
but not long after he fell into a grievous Disease, and was cruelly tormented
not only in Body but also in mind. For he was greatly terrified, and
continually imagined to see the Ghosts of those whom he had so unjustly slain
ready to kill him; so that he cried out, and not able to contain himself, leapt
out of his Bed, as though he had been tortured with torments and fire. And this
Disease daily increasing, his Guts and Bowels rotting, and issuing out of him,
at last he died in this manner, leaving behind him an evident argument, that
the Divine Justice punishes impious Malefactors.

This is the End of the History, The Conclusion of the seven Books of the Wars
of the Jews.
which we promised to set down with all fidelity, for those that are desirous
to know the event of the War between the Jews and the Romans. And as for our
Style, we leave it to the judgment of the Reader: but touching

The End of the seventh and last Book of Flavius Josephus, of the Wars of the
Jews.
The FIRST BOOK
Written against APPION, touching the Antiquity Of the RACE of the JEWS.
I Suppose, most worthy Epaphroditus, that I have sufficiently testified unto
those who shall read the Books which I have written touching the Authentic
History of the Jews, that our Nation is most Ancient, and that they had their
Original from themselves, and have from the first beginning inhabited that
Country, whereof they are possessed at this present. The History of the
Antiquity contains the events of five thousand years.
To which effect I gathered out of our sacred Writings, and published in the
Greek tongue, a History containing the occurrences of five thousand years. But
for that I see there are diverse, (who being too much seduced by the scandalous
Calumnies and Reports which some, who are ill The causes that moved him to
write this Book.
both to reprove the malice and impostures of those our Calumniators, and to
correct their Ignorance, by teaching those who are desirous to know the truth,
what the Original of our Nation is. For proof whereof, I will produce no other
Testimony but such as from Antiquity has been judged worthy of credit among
the Greeks; laying open before their Eyes, that they, who have slanderously and
falsely written against us, are convicted by their own mouths. I

First of all therefore, I do not a little marvel at those who in reference to
matters of Antiquity suppose that the Truth ought only to be gathered from the
Greeks; and that they alone can justly claim the honor and knowledge of
faithful writing; whereas they neither vouchsafe either us, or any others the
credit of Truth in that we set down; although I am able to prove, that all
things have fallen out quite contrary. For which cause it behooves us not to
look to men's various opinions, but to examine that which is All things among
the (...).
and of late memory, and has been brought to execution in a manner but
yesterday: I mean the Foundations of Cities, the Inventions of Arts, and the
Establishment of Laws, and their Application to write History with some care.

But for the Egyptians, Chaldees and Phoenicians, without mentioning us, they
themselves confess, the memory of their Writings is most ancient and credible.
For all these Nations dwell in such Countries as are not subject to the
corruption of Air; and have carefully provided, that none of those things that
have been done by them should sleep in obscurity, but be kept in memory in
public Writings of the learned men: whereas innumerable corruptions have
crept in among the Greeks, by which the memory

Innumerable corruptions invaded Greece.
that whosoever was the Founder of theirs, he was the first of the world. Yet
they have had the knowledge of Letters very late, and have attained the same
with very great difficulty.

For they that speak of the most ancient use of the same, The Phoenicians and
Cadmus the first Inventers of Letters.
boast that they received the knowledge thereof from the Phoenicians and from
Cadmus. Notwithstanding, there is not any one of them that can show any Record
of that time, either in their Temple, or in their public Registers: whereas
there is still great doubt and question, whether those Letters were in use
during their time, who managed the siege of Troy.

Among the Greeks there is not any writing more ancient than Homers Poem.
is not to be refuted. For it is most manifest, that there is not any Writing
extant among the Greeks, that is more ancient than Homers Poem, which, as is
most manifest, was composed since the time of the siege of Troy. And yet it is
reported, that he left no part of that his Poem in writing, but that it was
composed of diverse Songs, and only sung by roat; by which means it came to
pass, that there are so many contradictions in the same.

And as for those who have undertaken to write Histories among them, I mean
Cadmus the Milesian, and Acusilaus the Argive, and others, They lived but very
little time before the passage of the Persians into Greece.

Pherecydes the Syrian, Pythagoras and Thales, all of them confess with one
accord, that they were instructed by the Egyptians and Chaldees; and they
published some few writings, which are supposed to be the most ancient among
the Greeks, and it is hardly believed also that they were written by them. What
reason therefore have the Greeks to be so proud, as if there were none, but
themselves only, who knew the affairs of Antiquity, and could exactly write
the truth thereof? Or who cannot easily conjecture by their own Writers
themselves, that their Writings were founded only upon hearsay and supposition,
and that they followed only vain conjectures? Hence it comes to pass, that in
their Books

But it may be said, that I should oblige my self to a fruitless labor, if I
should go about to inform those who are better experienced than my self, in how
many points Helicanus differs from Acusilaus touching the Genealogies; in how
many places Acusilaus has corrected Herodotus; or how Ephorus has proved that
Helicanus was a liar in the greater part of that which he has recited. Ephorus
has been reproved by Timeus; and in general, all have taxed Herodotus. Neither
has Timeus vouchsafed to accord with Antiochus, or Philistus or Callias, in
the Histories of Sicily. Neither do those, who have writ the Histories of
Athens and Argos, agree better together.

Persian War, and the exploits performed therein, Thucydides writ a most exact
History of his time.
those of greatest authority are most at odds? Thucydides is accused by some
for a liar in diverse places, notwithstanding that he seems to have written
the History of his time most exactly. But the Causes of this discord are
diverse, as they who shall narrowly pry into them shall find. The causes of
discord among the Jews.
For my own part, those two which I shall here set down, in my opinion are of
greatest weight.

The first, and in my judgment the chiefest is, that amongst the Greeks from
the beginning they have not been industrious to keep public Registers of such
matters as happened in any time or place: which has occasioned them to err,
and given those a privilege Greece to be accused of negligence for not making
account of such Registers; but amongst the Athenians also (who glory in the
antiquity of their Country, and who are most exercised in Sciences) there is no
mention of them. For it is said, that the most ancient and public Writings
which they have are those Capital Laws which were set down by their Lawmakers
Draco, who lived but a little time before Pisistratus the Tyrant.

What need we speak of the Arcadians, who vaunt themselves of their Antiquity?
for who knows not, that they have learned the use of Letters long after those
before mentioned? Whereas therefore there was not any Writing published before
that time, which

A second cause is, Another cause of their discord, recorded by the Grecian
historigraphers
for that they, who addicted themselves to compose Histories, did

Some of them therefore applied their Style to Fables; others by flattering
praises thought to curry favor with Kings and Cities. The rest employed their
studies to accuse and calumniate the works of other Writers, in hope to build
their own reputation upon the ruin of others.

In effect they have followed that course in composing their History, that was
every way different from the true nature thereof. The sign of a true History.
For the assured sign of a perfect and true Grecians in all that concerns
Eloquence and the Ornament of Language, but not in that which appertains to
Antiquity or Truth of History, and especially in what concerns the truth of
ancient History, and what has passed in every Country.

Wherefore as the Egyptians and Babylonians long since used all diligence in
writing, because their Priests were hereunto enjoined, who did most curiously
treat of all such matters; the same also did the Chaldees amongst the
Babylonians, and the Phoenicians also (inhabiting amongst the Greeks) taught
them to use Registers both concerning public

I let pass also to recount what care our Nation has had of this point (no
doubt greater than those Nations above mentioned had) charging our High Priests
and Prophets to execute this Office; which Custom has been observed even until
this Age, and (if I may presume so far) will be observed in all succeeding
Ages, as by my ensuing discourse I will endeavor to make manifest. For our
Nation did not only depute this Office to the most virtuous and religious men
amongst them in the beginning, and to such as were consecrated to the Service
of God; but they also provided to preserve the Line and Descent of Priests from
all impurity, and from being intermingled with others. For no man amongst us
can be a Priest, who is not born of a Woman descended from the same

This Custom is not only of force in Judea, but wheresoever else any of our
Nation inhabit; A custom which the Priests observed.
as in Egypt and Babylon, and in any other place, where continually the Priests
in their Marriages have this respect, not to marry with any Woman that is not
of their own Line; and they send to Jerusalem the Name and Pedigree of the
Woman whom they have married, and all the Testimony hereof which they can
deduce from her Ancestors.

Now if War molest our Nation (as often it has in the time of Antiochus
surnamed Epiphanes, of Pompey the Great, Quintilius Varus, and especially in
this our Age) then The Priests amongst the Jews are every one registered, with
the name of their Fathers and this custom contiuued two thousand years
and if any one do err or falsify any of the things before-said, he is then
interdicted from the Altar, and from exercising any Priestly function. So that
in the Writings of such men, all things must of necessity be true and as they
ought to be; for that neither all men are permitted to write, nor yet any
dissonance and disagreement is found in their Writings. For such things as past
in ancient times beyond the memory of men, were only written by

The Books amongst us, containing the Histories of all Ages, are neither
infinite, nor one repugnant to another: Two and twenty Books of holy Writ.
for all our Chronicle is contained in 22 Books, to which Books it is impiety
to deny credit.

Five of these Books were written by Moses, comprehending Genealogies, and the
beginning of mankind, with such notable events as happened even from the
beginning of the World til his death; which is little less than three thousand
years.

After the death of Moses, till the time wherein Artaxerxes lived, who was King
of the Persians, and Son to Xerxes, every one of the Prophets of our Nation
wrote the History Artaxerxes until our time have happened, are also set down in
writing: yet the Books wherein they are registered, do not deserve so much
credit as the former of ancient times, for that there was no certain succession
of Prophets in that Age. Moreover, it is evident, that to the former works, we
give as great credit as to things which we our selves write; and
notwithstanding they have been so long written, yet in all that time no man
durst presume either to alter or to blot out any thing therein contained. For
all Jews even from their Cradle do believe these

Many Captives of our Nation have been cruelly tormented, and diverse ways put
to death in open Theaters, The Jews and Grecians are compared together.
only for that they would not commit any thing either in word or deed against
their Laws, nor violate the writings of their forefathers. Now who amongst the
Greeks did ever sustain the like? Nay, they are so far from doing it, that none
can be found among them, who would suffer any loss in his goods or fortunes, to
preserve all the writings of their Nation from destruction: and the reason
hereof is, because every one esteems the verity of their Histories to depend
upon the will of the Writer. And this they do also concerning their most
ancient Historians; and not Some others have written of ^he Wars of the Jews.
wherein neither themselves were present, neither yet do they vouchsafe to
credit the writings of such as were then eyewitnesses thereof; yea, some among
them have divulged Histories of such things, as of late befell our Nation, when
themselves never have been in the place where such matters past as they writ
of, nor have lived in any neighbor place, where they might have probable
report how matters past, but only compiling a few broken stories, they most
impudently arrogate to their patcht stuff the name of a History.

I my self have composed a most true History of the last War, Joseph was
present in all the Wars of the Jews.
and of every particular thing there done, as well I might, having been present
in all those affairs. For I was Galileans amongst our Nation, so long as any
resistance could be made against the Romans: and then it so fell out, that I
was taken by the Romans, and being: Prisoner to Titus and Vespasian, they
caused me to be an eyewitness of all things that past. First, In bonds and
fretters, and afterward freed from them, I was brought from Alexandria with
Titus, when he went to the Seige of Jerusalem. So that nothing could then pass
whereof I had not notice. For beholding the Roman Army, I committed to writing
all things with all possible diligence. My self did only manage all matters
disclosed to the Romans by such as yielded themselves, Joseph writ the History
of the Jews wars being at Rome.
for that I only did perfectly understand them. Lastly, Being at Rome, and
having leisure, after all business was past, I used the help of some Friends
(for the skill of the Greek tongue) and so I published a Vespasian and Titus
the chief Commanders in that War to witness for them. I first gave a Copy of
that Book to them, and afterward to many noble Romans, who also were present
in the War. I sold also many of them to our own Nation, to such as understood
the Greek language, amongst whom were Julius, Archelaus, Herod, Some do
derogate from Joseph's History.
a Man of great virtue, and to the most worthy King Agrippa, who all do
testify, that my History contains nothing but truth, and who would not have
been silent, if either for ignorance or flattery I had changed or omitted any
particular. Yet notwithstanding all this, some ill disposed Persons endeavor
to discredit my History, as though they were disputing pro and contra amongst
children in schools, never considering Vespasian and Titus, yet for all this,
they were not present in any action, repugnant

Thus (as I thought necessary) I have made a digression, to show how they are
able to Greeks. I will now first of all dispute against those, who labor to
prove our Nation of no Antiquity, because (as they say) no Greek Writer makes
any mention of it. Two things which Joseph intends.
This done, I will bring forth proof and testimony of the Antiquity thereof out
of other Writers; and so I will show that their malice, who seek to discredit
our Nation. First therefore, our Nation neither inhabiteth a Country bordering
upon the Sea, nor are we delighted in merchandise, nor for this cause wearied
with pilgrimages from place to place. The Jews care to bring up their Children.
But our Cities lie far from the Sea, in a most fertile soil, which we
cultivate with all industry; and our The ancient Jews had no need to traffic
with the Grecians.
and to keep our country Laws, and to leave to our posterity the knowledge of
Piety; in which work we think all our Age ought to be employed. Beside all
this, we have a form of living, different from all other Nations. All which
concurring together, we had no need to traffic with the Greeks, as the
Egyptians and the Phoenicians do, who give themselves to bargaining and
merchandise only for the covetousness of money. Neither were our Ancestors
delighted in thefts and robberies; nor did our Fathers make war upon any
Nation, for desire of larger possessions: nowithstanding our Country was
furnished with many thousands of strong warlike men. Wherefore the Phoenicians
sailing to the Greeks to traffic with them, they were thus made known to them;
and by them the Egyptians, Greece. The Medes also and Persians were known to
them, after such time as they reigned over Asia, and the Persians brought war
even into Europe.

Moreover, the Greeks knew the Thracians, because they were their Neighbors;
and the Scythians, by sailing to Pontus; and finally, all that were disposed to
write, knew all the Nations bordering either upon the Eastern and Western Seas;
but such as dwelt far from the Seacoast, were long time unknown; as also
appears in Europe: For neither Thucidides nor Herodotus, nor any other of that
time, make any mention of Rome; notwithstanding that so long since it was
mighty, and made so great Wars: because it was but lately that the Greeks heard
of it. The Romans were lately known to the Greeks.
Yea, their most exact Writers, Ephorus, were so ignorant of the French and
Spaniards, that they thought the Spaniards to be a People only denominated from
one City, Certain Historiographers report Spain to be only one City.
wherein they inhabited; whereas the whole World now knows them to inhabit a
vast Country, and a great part of the Western World. Likewise the said Greek
Writers relate the manners of the foresaid People to be such, as neither are,
nor were ever used among them. And the only cause why they were ignorant of the
Truth, was the distance of place; and these Writers would seem to tell
something, which others of former time had not spoken of. No marvel therefore
though our Nation was unknown, and none of them in their Writings made any
mention of us, being both so far from the Sea, and living after a different
manner.

Suppose therefore I should deny the Greeks to be of any antiquity; and to
prove my assertion should conclude their Nation to be modern, because our
Histories make no mention of them; Arguments to prove the Jews of more
antiquity than the Greeks.
would they not laugh at this reason, and use the Testimony of their neighbor
Nations to prove their Antiquity? I therefore may argue in like manner, and use
the Testimony of the Egyptians and Phoenicians, whose Record the Greeks cannot
deny. For all the Egyptians in general are our Enemies; and among the
Phoenicians they especially of Tire; which I cannot justly say of the Chaldees,
who having been Princes over our Nation, and because of their affinity and
alliance with our Countrymen, have in their Chronicles made mention of the
Jews. When I have proved what I now aver, and refeld the slanderous reports
against us, I will then also Greeks have spoken of us, that so the Greeks may
also be deprived of this shift and refuge, to excuse their malicious lies
falsely forged against our Nation. And first of all I will begin with the
Writings of the Egyptians, Manethon an Egyptian Writer.
who, as they well know, do nothing at all favor us. Manethon, an Egyptian
born, skilful in the Greek tongue, as by his Works appears (for he writ in
Greek) compiling a History of the Customs and Religion of his Forefathers,
collected (as himself reports) out of the Egyptian holy Writings, often
reprehendeth Herodotus of falsehood, through ignorance in the affairs of the
Egyptians. This Manethon, in his second Book of the Egyptian Customs, says
thus (I will set down his own Words, because I use them as a witness.) We have
a King (says he) named Timaeus, in whose Reign God being angry with us,
contrary to all expectation, an obscure People took courage, came from the
East, and pitching their Tents in our Country, overran it, and no man resisted
them; and committing our Princes to bonds, they burnt our Cities, and destroyed
the Temples of our gods, and behaved themselves most cruelly against the
Inhabitans, killing many of them, and making Slaves of the rest, with their
Wives and Children: Finally, they chose a King of their own, and gave him the
Government of our Country; his Name was Saltis, who coming to Memphis made the
higher and lower Provinces Tributaries, Saltis (...) the Egyptians.
leaving Garrisons in the strong holds, and fortifying certain places in the
East: And weighing with himself that the Assyrians were more potent than he,
and would in probability invade his Country, he found out in this Province an
ancient City called Saite fit for his purpose, as being situate on the East
side of the River Bubastis, which by an ancient Divine was called Avaris; he
repaired this City, compassed it with vast Walls, and put a Garrison in it of
two hundred thousand armed men. Saltis made this incursion in harvest time, to
the intent that he might both pay his Soldiers, and be a terror unto other
people, and after he had reigued nineteen years, he died.

After him succeeded anothe King called Baeon, who reigned four and forty
years: next to him Aphinas, who reighned thirty six years and seven months:
then Aphosis, who reigned threescore and one years: and then Iandas, who
reigned fifty years and one month: after them also reigned Alsis nine and forty
years and two months; and these six were the first Kings amongst them, Kings
Shepherds.
ever destroying and warring upon the Egyptians, and laboring to extinguish
their race. This Nation was called Hicsos, which signifies Kings shepherds:
For Hic in the sacred Tongue, signifies a King, and Sos Hicsos is a compound
word. Some say these People were Arabians: but in other Copies I find that
Hicsos is not interpreted Kings shepherds, but shepherds that were Captives:
For Hic, and Hac also when it is pronounced, does in the Egyptian tongue
signify a Captive; and this latter exposition seems to me to be the truest,
for it is more agreeable with the History. Wherefore Manethon reports these
foresaid Kings and Shepherds to have ruled Egypt five hundred and eleven years:
and after these the King of Thebes, and the King of the Residue of Egypt,
uniting their forces, invaded the said Shepherds, had great and long Wars with
them, and that the said Shepherds were overcome by the King Alisfragumthosis;
that then they lost all Egypt which had been in their power, and that they
Avarus containing ten thousand acres of ground, which, as Manethon reports,
these Shepherds environed round about with a huge Wall, to the end that their
whole Provision might be within their Fortifications, and the prey, which they
got, in a condition to be defended. That Themosis Son of the said
Alisfragumthosis endeavored by force to subdue them, and for this cause
besieged them with four hundred and 80000 men: That at last despairing to take
them by force, he capitulated with them that they should safely depart out of
Egypt whither they would; and that they upon these Conditions together with all
their Families and Goods, and Cattle, departed out of Egypt into the
Wilderness, and so into Syria, being in number two hundred and forty thousand,
and that fearing the puissance of the Assyrians, Asia, they builded a City in
the Country now called Judaea, which they made so large, that it might receive
them all, and this City they called Jerusalem. Further, the said Manethon in
another Book of the Egyptian Affairs says, That in the holy Writings, he
finds the feresaid Shepherds called Captives, wherein he says true. For our
Ancestors were wont to feed cattle, and so leading a pastoral life, were called
Shepherds, neither are they unjustly called Captives: For our fore-Father
Joseph told the King of Egypt that he was a Captive; and long time after called
his Brethren into Egypt by the Kings Command; but we will hereafter examine this
point more straightly: I will now cite the Testimony of the Egyptians concerning
this point, and relate the words of Manethon touching the time when this befell,
who says

After that the Nation of Shepherds were departed out of Egypt unto Jerusalem,
King Themosis who drove them out of the Land, reigned twenty five years and
four months, and then died: And his Son Chebron succeeded him, who reigned
thirteen years, and after him Amenophis twenty years and seven months, next,
his Sister Amesses one and twenty years and nine months, then reigned Mephios
twelve years and nine months, and Mephamuthosis twenty five years and ten
months, Themosis nine years and eight months, Amenophis thirty years and ten
months, Orus thirty six years and five months, after him his Daughter
Achemcheres, twelve years and one months, and the Brother of Rathotis nine
years, Achencheres twelve years and five months, another Achencheres Armais
four years and one month, Armesis one year and four months, Armesesmiamus
threescore and six years and two months, Amenophis nineteen years and six
months. Sethosis King of Egypt, made his Brother Armais Governor of his
Country.
Moreover, that Sethosis having prepared a huge Army Egypt unto his Brother
Armais, investing him with sovereign Authority, only he forbad him to wear the
Crown, and to oppress the Queen who was Mother to his Children, commanding him
also to abstain from his Concubines. After which Sethosis himself went to
Cyprus and Phoenicia against the Assyrians and Medes, and subdued them, partly
by the sword, partly by the fear of his power and greatness: and being
transported with his success, he advanced against the Eastern Country, and
destroyed with fire and sword the Cities and Provinces of that place: and
spending much time in these Wars, his brother Armais whom he left in Egypt, did
without fear commit all that he forbad him to do: for he oppressed the Queen
violently, and daily lay with the rest of the Kings Concubines, and Egyptians
holy Customs, sent Letters unto Sethosis, containing all that had happened, and
how Armais had rebelled against him: That Sethosis returning to Pelusia,
Whereupon Egypt took his Name.
recovered his own Kingdom, and by his name it was called Egypt: for Manethon
writes that this Sethosis was named Egyptus, and his brother Armais, Danaus.

Thus far Manethon; from whom it is evident by computation of the foresaid
times, that our Nation was delivered out of Egypt three hundred ninety and
three years before Danaus, and inhabited this Country of Judea so long before
Danaus came unto Argos: notwithstanding the Inhabitants of Argos boast their
City is most ancient. Manethon recounteth two things for us out of the Egyptian
letters: Manethon shows the Jews coming into Egypt and their departure.
first, That we came from another place to them, afterward went out of their
Country again, and that so long ago, as it was almost a thousand years before
the Trojan Wars. Touching those things which Manethon professes himself to
have gathered elsewhere than out of the Writings of the Egyptians, who wrote
down whatever was reported, I will show, with how little reason they are
alleged. For I will once again leave these, and refer to the testimony of the
Phenicians concerning our Nation. The Tyrians therefore have Chronicles of very
great Antiquity, which they have kept with all diligence, concerning that
which has been done among them, and indeed they are worthy of memory.

Amongst these Records it is written, Solomon built a Temple in Jerusalem 143
years and eight months, before the Tyrians built Carthage.
That King Solomon built a Temple at Jerusalem, a hundred forty three years
and eight months before the Tyrians erected Carthage. So they have registered
the building of our Temple; for Hircanus King of the Tyrians was our King
Solomon's friend, obliged to him for his fathers sake, who for this cause also
of of his own liberality gave Solomon a hundred and twenty talents of gold
toward the building of the Temple, The friendship of the Tyrians King and King
Solomon.
cut down the noble Wood called Libanus, and bestowed upon him, to make the
roof of the Temple: for which bounty Solomon returned him many great Presents,
and among the rest a Country of Galilee named Zabulon: But Solomon's Wisdom was
the chief cause of this Kings Friendship toward him. Problems of Hircanus and
Solomon.
For they sent Problems one to the other to be answered, and Solomon in his
Answers appeared most witty, Tyrians. But not depending wholly upon the
Authority of the Tyrians, I will prove by the Testimony of Dius (a man who by
common consent has faithfully written the Phenician History) who writes as
follows.

After the death of Abibalus, Hircanus his son reigned in his stead, who
increased the number of his Eastern Cities, and enlarged Jerusalem; he also
joined the Temple of Jupiter Olympius, situate in an Island, unto it (filling
up the water with Earth) and adorned it with gold.

After this ascending into Libanus, he cut down the Wood to build Temples; and
the Jerusalem named Solomon sent unto him certain Riddles to be expounded, and
he again the like unto him, covenanting together, that he who could not tell
the meaning of one another Riddles, should pay unto the other a sum of money,
and that Hircanus, confessing he could not expound Solomon's Riddles, did pay
unto him much money.

Lastly, that one Abdemonus a Tyrian did expound the said Riddles, and writ
more unto Solomon, which if Solomon could not interpret, he should pay unto
Hircanus a sum of money; and this testimony Dius bears us concerning the
foresaid matter.

But I will now recount the words of Menander an Ephesian, The testimony of
Menander the Ephesian.
who registered the Acts of all Kings both at home and abroad, endeavoring to
make a true History out of the Tyrian Kings, and coming to Hyramus, The
Genealogy of King Hyramus.
says thus of him, Abibalus dying there succeeded in the Kingdom his Son
Hyramus, who lived 34 years: and this King with a Rampire conjoined Eurichorus,
and erected there a Pillar of Gold in Jupiter's Temple, and went into the
Woods, and cut down the Cedars of Libanus to make coverings for the Temples;
with which (pulling down the old) he erected new, and dedicated Temples to
Hercules and Astartus; But that to Hercules in the Month of Peritius, and the
other to Astartus, when he with an Army went against the Tyrians, who pai'd him
no tribute, and when he had subdued them, he returned again.

At this time lived Abdemonus a servant unto the King, whose business it was to
expound the parables, which King Solomon of Jerusalem sent unto King Hyramus:
and Carthage, we may thus calculate. After the death of Hyramus, his Son
Beleastartus succeeded him, lived forty and three years, and reigned seven:
after him his Son Abdastartus, who lived twenty years, and reigned nine; but
this King was treacherously slain by the four Sons of his Nurse, the eldest of
which reigned twelve years. Next succeeded Astartus the Son of Beleastartus,
who lived fifty and four years, and reigned twelve: after him his Brother
Astarimus, who lived fifty and four years, and Governed nine: then he was slain
of his brother Phelletes, who reigned eight mouths, and lived fifty years, and
was slain by a Priest of Astarta named Ithobalus, who lived threescore and
eight, and reigned thirty two years: he was succeeded by his Son Badezorus, who
lived forty five Mettinus, who lived thirty two years, and reigned nine: After
him Pigmalion who lived fifty six years, and reigned forty: Carthge built in
Africa by Dido Pigmlion's Sister.
in the seventh year of whose reign, his Sister Dido builded a City in Africa,
and named it Carthage: so that from the time of King Hyramus unto the building
of Carthage, is by this computation a hundred fifty five years, and two Months:
and for as much as the Temple of Jerusalem was built in the twelfth year of
Hyramus his reign, the computation of the time since that year until the
building of Cartbage, is a hundred forty three years and eight Months. What
need we more beside this testimony of the Phoenicians? The truth is now
sufficiently made manifest; for our Ancestors must needs have come into this
Country we inhabit before such time as they

I will now speak of that which the Chaldees writ of us in their Histories,
Berosus the Historiographer a Chaldean.
which do much agree in all other Matters with those of our Nation. And first
let Berosus be my witness, who was a Chaldean born, a man famous and known unto
all that love learning, for he in the Greek tongue writ Astronomy, and the
Philosophy of the Chaldeans. Berosus imitating the most ancient Histories
writes of the Deluge, and how mankind was therein extinguished, and he in all
things imitateth Moses. He also speaks of the Ark wherein our forefather was
preserved, and affirms that it was carried into the tops of the Mountains in
Armenia: after this he prosecuteth the Genealogy of all that reigned Noe,
Nabulassarus Father to Nabuchodonosor the King of Babylon and Chaldea.
until Nabulassarus King of the Babylonians and Chaldeans. He likewise sets
down how long every one reigned, and in prosecuting the deeds of this King, he
recounteh how he sent his Son Nabuchodonosor into Egypt, and our Country with
great power, who finding them in rebellion subdued them, and burnt the Temple
at Jerusalem, Nabuchodonosor conquered the rebels.
and so departed, carrying with him all our Nation into Babylon: whereupon our
City was desolate seventy years, until the reign of Cyrus King of the Persians.
Moreover he affirms, that this Babylonian kept in subjection Egypt, Syria,
Phoenicia, and Arabia, exacting more of them than ever any King of Babylon or
Chaldea had done before his time. And the words of Berosus must needs be to
this effect: Nabulassarus his Father hearing that his Substitute in Egypt,
Coelosyria, and Phoenicia had rebelled, he himself Nabuchodonosor, gave him a
part of his Army (for that he was in the flower of his age) and sent him
against him: Nabuchodonosor fighting with the said Substitute, overthrew him,
and subdued the Country which of old belonged unto them, and at the same time
his Father Nabulassarus fell sick in Babylon, Nabuchodonosor succeeds in his
Fathers Kingdom.
and died, having Reigned twenty nine years. But Nabuchodonosor long after
understanding his Fathers death, disposed of Egypt and other Provinces as he
thought good, and taking the Captives of Judea, Phoenicia, and the Syrians that
lived in Egypt, he committed them to certain of his friends, to be brought
after with his Carriages and Army to Babylon; and so he himself, accompanied
with a very few took his jorney to Babylon; through the Desert: being for him:
he was made King, and commanded Houses to be built for the Captives that
Babylon, and with the spoil he beautified the Temple of Belus and other places
most richly, and built a new City without the Wall of the old: and providing
lest hereafter the Enemies might turn the River and so have access unto the
City, he environed the inner City with three several Walls, and the outmost
City likewise, the Walls whereof were made of Brick, but the Walls of the inner
City were of Brick and Bitumen: this done, he builded most sumptuous Gates
which might have become Temples: (...).
and moreover, near unto his Fathers Palace he builded another far greater and
more costly than they; the beauty and costliness whereof were hard, and perhaps
tedious, to express: Yet this we will say, and it is considerable, that this
rich and incredibly beautiful Palace was builded in fifteen days: in (...).


This he relates of the forementioned King and many things more in his Book of
the affairs of the Chaldeans, wherein he reproves the Greek Writers, who
falsely affirm that S^miramis the Assyrian Queen built Babylon, and that they
falsely report those wonderful works about Babylon to have been by her made and
finished. We must needs think, that the Chaldean History is true, seeing it
agrees with that of the Phoenicians, which Berosus writ of the King of
Babylon, who subverted both Phaenicia and Syria: with them also accords
Philostratus in his History of the siege of Tyria; and Megasthenes also in his
fourth Book of the affairs of India; The King of Babylon excelled Hercules in
strength and (...)
where he labors to prove, that the said King excelled Hercules in strength
and valor, affirming that he subdued the greatest part of Africa and Spain,
and that the Temple of Jerusalem was burnt by the Babylonians, and again
re-edified by Cyrus; and we may prove it out of Berosus, who in his third book
says as follows: Nabuchodonosor, having begun the third Wall, fell sick and
died, when he had reigned forty three years, and his Son Evelmeradochus succeed
him, who for his iniquity and licenciousness was treacherously slain by his
Sisters Husband, named Niriglissoroor, after he had reigned two years. He being
dead, the Traitor Niriglissoroor usurped the Kingdom, and reigned four years,
Laborosardochus, and he reigned nine months; The Walls of Babylon built of
brick and bitumen.
who for corruptness of his manners was slain by his own Friends: after whose
death they who slew him consulting together made one Nabonidus, a Babylonian,
King. At this time the Walls of Brick and Bitumen about the River of Babylon
were built. In the eighth year of this Kings reign Cyrus, coming with an Army
out of Persia, conquered all Asia, and came with his Forces against Babylon;
but the King of Babylon having notice of his coming, levied an Army, advanced
against him, and gave him Battle; but being overcome, he with a very few of his
men was forced to fly into Borsippa. Cyrus now besieged Babylon, and purposed
to destroy the outward Walls thereof; but finding them too strong and
impenetrable, he returned to Bersippa to besiege Nabonidus the King of Babylon,
Cyrus (...) Nabonidus from Babylon.
who was fled thither. But Nabonidus Cyrus, who dealt mercifully with him, and
gave him a Territory in Carmania, but expelled him out of Babylon: so Nabonidus
led the rest of his life in that Province. This History agrees with ours; for
in our writings we find that Nabuchodonosor in the eighteenth year of of his
reign destroyed our Temple, and that it so remained threescore and ten years:
also that in the second year of King Cyrus, the foundations thereof were laid
again, and was finished and re^edified in the second year of King Darius's
reign, This done, I will also relate the Histories of the Phoenicians, The
testimony of the Phoenicians touching the Jews Antiquity.
to reinforce what we say: for they make their computation after this manner.
In the reign of King Ithobalus Nabuchodonosor besieged Tire thirteen years,
after whom Baal reigned ten years, next him Judges were appointed, E^nibalus
the Son of Balachus judged two Months; Chelbis the Son of Abdaeus ten Months;
Abbarus the High Priest three Months; Mytomus and Gerastus Sons of Abdilimos
judged six years; after whom Balatorus reigned one year; and after his death
the Tyrians called Merbalus from Babylon, and made him King, and he reigned
four years: and he then dying, they sent also to Babylon for his Brother
Iromus, who reigned twenty years, in whose reign Cyrus obtained the Persian
Empire: so that this whole time is fifty four years and three Months: for
Nabuchodonosor began to besiege Tire in the seventh year of his reign, and in
the fourteenth year of King Iromus his reign Cyrus was made Emperor of Persia.

Chaldean and Tyrian Historigraphers agree with us concerning our Temple. The
Chaldees and Tyrians agree with the Jews History.
So that the Antiquity of our Nation above mentioned is now made manifest, and
without all controversy. And that which is already alleged to this end, may
be sufficient for them, who are not purposely contentious: To satisfy,
therefore, such as believe the Writings of other Nations of little or no
Authority, and will give credit to nothing but what is transmitted from the
Greeks, I shall produce Testimony from such of them as have been acquainted,
and writ of our Laws.

Pythagoras, a Samian born (a person of great Antiquity and Reputation above
the rest of the Philosophers for Wisdom and Holiness of Life) was not only
conversant in our Laws, but observed them in many things, as is testified
particularly by Hermippus Herimippus writings and testimony of Pythagoras.
who in his first Book of Pythagoras gives us an account, That a Crotonian
called Calliphon (a great friend of Pythagoras) being dead, his Soul
accompanied Pythagoras night and day, inculcating and pursuing him with
Instructions, and among the rest, That he would be careful how he passed by a
place where his Ass had stumbled; That he would drink none but pure Water, and
that he would be cautious of speaking ill of any Body, following therein the
Customs of the Greeks and Thracians: and what that Author said is most true,
for it is certain, a great part of his Philosophy was deduced from the Laws of
the Jews.

Our Nation in times past was well known to diverse Cities, so that many of them
do now observe our Customs, and others esteem them worth the imitation, as
Theophrastus De Legibus: Theophrastus.
for he says that the Tyrian Laws forbid to swear by any strange God, Corban
the gift of God.
and amongst these prohibited Oaths, he reckons the Oath called Corban, which
is used only amongst the Jews, and in our Language signifies the Gift of God.

Herodotus of Halicarnassus knew our Nation also, Herodotus the Halicarnassian
touching the Jews Circumcision.
and in a manner makes mention of it: for speaking of the Colchians, he says
thus in his second Book: The Colchians, Egyptians and Aethiopians only amongst
all other Nations did use Circumcision of old: for the Phoenicians and Syrians
living in Palestina do confess themselves to have learned this Custom from the
Egyptians; and the Syrians living near unto Thermodoontes and the River
Parthenius, and their Neighbors the Macronians, are reported but lately to
have learnt it of Colchians: and these are they only that use Circumcision, and
they do like unto the Egyptians; but I am not able to say whether the Egyptians
or Aethiopians learned it of the other. Herodotus therefore affirms the
Syrians in Palestina did use Circumcision, and it is manifest, that of all the
Inhabitants of Palestina the Jews only use it, which he knowing writes so of
them.

Cherilus also an ancient Poet makes mention of our Nation, Cherilus an
ancient Poet his Testimony of the Jews.
and affirms that our Countrymen warred under Xerxes against the Greeks, and
enumerating the Nations which followed him, at last he speaks thus of ours,
Their-Language was th'unknown Phoenician tongue:
In th'hills of Solymus their dwelling was,
Near to a Lake for greatness which did pass:
Their heads were shaved, and for their heads attire,
They wore an Horse-skin dried at the fire.


It is evident (as I think) that he speaks of the Jews: Asphaltites the Lake.
for the Mountains of Solymus are in our Country, and that Lake also called
Asphaltites, which is the greatest and vastest of all Lakes that are in Syria;
And that the Jews were not known only of the Greeks, The testimony of Clearchus
disciple of Aristotle touching the Jews.
For Clearchus, disciple unto Aristotle, and the best amongst all the
Peripateticks, in his first Book De somno, brings in a certain Dialogue his
Master Aristotle discoursing of a Jew that he knew, in this manner.

It would be too long to entertain you about the whole Nation, I shall content
my self to give you a hint only of this man's admirable wisdom. Hyperochides
told him, He could not do them a greater favor. I will begin then (said
Aristotle) according to the Rules of Rhetoric with what relates to his Nation.
He was born a Jew in the lower Syria, whose present Inhabitants are descended
from the Philosophers of the Indians, who among them are called Calani, but
among the Syrians, Jews; as living in Jewry, whose principal City is Jerusalem,
and very hard to be pronounced. This man entertained many strangers, who came
from the higher Country down unto the Seacoast, was very eloquent and
courageous. As I was traveling one time with some af my Disciples in Asia,
this person made us a visit,

Thus far Aristotle in Clearchus, recounting moreover at large his admirable
abstinence and chastity: Of whom they that are desirous to know more, are
recommended to Clearchus; Hecateus (...) brought up with King Alexander.
for I am loath to write any thing superfluous. So now it is evident how
Clearchus, by the way of digression speaking of another matter, makes mention
of us.

But Hecateus Abderita a Philosopher, and one brought up with King Alexander,
and dwelling with Ptolomeus Lagus, did not only briefly make mention of us, but
also writ a whole Book of our Nation the Jews, out of which I will briefly note
some few points that occur; but first I will show of what Antiquity he is: For
he records the Ptolomeus near unto Gaza fought with Demetrius, which happened
the eleventh year after Alexanders death, in the hundred and seventeenth
Olympiad, as Castor writes: who speaking of this Olympiad says, That in this
time Ptolomeus Lagus overcame Demetrius the son of Antigonus at Gaza in fight:
which Demetrius was called Poliorcetes: and all men confess, that Alexander
died in the hundred and fourteenth Olympiad: So that it is evident that at the
time wherein Alexander lived, our Nation flourished.

And Hecataeus says, That after that battle fought at Gaza, Ptolomeus was made
Lord of the places bordering about Syria, and that many men hearing of the
Clemency of Ptolomeus, followed him into Egypt, and conversed with him: amongst
the which one was called Ezekias, A thousand and five hundred Priests receive
the Jews tenths.
and most prudent and eloquent, one also who in all affairs had more experience
than any man else. He likewise reports, That the number of the Jews Priests,
who received their tenths, and rule all in general, is a thousand and five
hundred or thereabout.

And again making mention of the same Ezekias, he says, This man being in
reputation and honor, and conversing with us, by the help of some about him,
declared all things wherein we and this Nation differ, and showed unto us the
place of his dwelling, and the manner of his conversation, which he had in
writing.

After this, Hecateus shows what manner of People we are, and how religious
in our Laws, and how that we will rather endure all torments and death it self,
than violate them in any thing, and that we account it a worthy thing so to do:
adding moreover, That being much hated of our neighbors, and having suffered
all Contumelies both at the hands of the Persian Kings, and their Officers, yet
we could not be forced to change our Opinions, but that we are continually
exercised to give a reason thereof. He also records an example of the
constancy of our minds: The Jews constancy against Alexander.
For Alexander (quoth he) being at Babylon, and purposing to re-edifie the
Temple of Bell, commanded all his Soldiers to carry Timber to the building
thereof; and the Jews only disobeying his command, endured many stripes and
torments, till such time as the King freed them from it: And they (says he)
returning to their own Country, destroyed all the Temples and Altars that they
found there, and Adding, That we may justly be admired for these things, and
that our Nation is exceeding populous. He shows likewise that many of us were
carried Captives into Babylon, and there served the Persians. And that many
more were dispersed into Egypt after Alexanders death for a tumult begun in
Syria.

He also records the greatness of our Country, The largeness of Jury.
and the fertility thereof. They inhabit (says he) a Country that has almost
thirty hundred thousand acres of most fertile ground; Fifty ^^ounds are almost
six German (...).
(for Jury is of this largeness) and that in times past we inhabited a large
and very great City, which was very populous; he speaks also of the building
of our Temple in this manner: The Jews have many other Towns and Villages in
every Province; but they have Jerusalem; in the midst thereof is a building of
stone with four Porches a hundred cubits about, it has also double Gates;
wherein is a foursquared Altar made of unhewn stones joined together; and it is
twenty cubits square every way, and ten cubits high; and about it is a most
huge Building, wherein is on Altar and a Candlestick both of gold, weighing two
Talents; and there is kept a continual Light night and day which never goes
forth: But in it there is no Image, nor Grove about it, as about other Temples.
The Priests do dwell in the Temple and drink no Wine.
It is inhabited by the Priests, who spend their time there in great continence
both night and day, absteining from all manner of Wine.

The same Author gives an account of an action per^ormed by one of our Nation,
who Alexanders successors; and the Authors words are these,

(says he) to the Red Sea, a certain Jew, one of the Horsemen that conducted
us, named Mosollamus, a courageous man, and one who excelled all Archers else,
both Greeks and other Nations; This Jew (every one hasting on forward of his
journey, and being willed by a Soothsayer to stand) asked, for what cause the
multitude stayed and went not forward: Presently the Soothsayer showed him a
Bird, which he diligently viewed, and told the Jew that if that Bird did stand
still in the place, then it was expedient for them to stand, and if the Bird
did mount up and fly, that then they ought to march on forward; but if it slew
toward the place from whence they came, that then it was wisdom to retire. The
Jew hereat was silent, yet drawing his Bow he shot an arrow and killed the
Bird; whereat the Soothsayer and certain others were offended, and cursed him.
But he taking the unhappy Bird in his hand Mosollamus a Jew should have
stricken her with an arrow. But we will now leave the testimony of Hecateus,
for every one that list may read his Book, and there understand it more at
large.

I will not omit the Testimony of Agatarchides, Agatarchides his Testimony of
the Jews.
a man of no evil in his own opinion, yet indeed one who has used detraction
to our Nation. This man speaking of Stratonice, how leaving her husband
Demetrius, she came into Syria, and how Seleucus would not marry her as she
hoped (who having an Army at Babylon, warred against Antioch, and had taken the
City) and that she fled into Selucia, whereas she might have made a etc.
Agatarchides, having used this Preface, and inveighed against Stratonices
superstition, uses an Examyle of our Nation on this manner: The People that
are called Jews, inhabit a most strong City, which they call Jerusalem; these
People are wont to rest upon the seventh day, The Jews Sabbath.
and do neither bear Arms, nor till their Grounds, nor any other business on
that day, hut their custom is to remain in their Temple, and there with
stretched out arms continue in prayer till night. And so upon a time, they
persevering in that foolery, whilst they should have defended their City,
Ptolomeus Lagus entered it with a great Army, and greatly tyrannized over them,
instructing them by experience, that the solemnity appointed by their Law, was
prejudicial unto them. Such like Churches as this did teach them and all
Nations else to fly unto dreams, which their Law teaches, neither considering
that humane policy cannot prevail against that which must necessarily happen.
Agatarchides thought this which he reports of us to be ridiculous; but they
that weigh it with indifferency, shall perceive that it is greater commendation
to our Nation, who rather suffer their Country and safety to be lost and
endamaged, Why certain Writers omit to speak of the Jews.
than to violate the Laws of God.

I think I am thus able to show, that many Writers omitted to make mention of
our Nation, not for that they knew us not, but for envy. For Jerome writ a Book
of the Successors in the same time that Hecateus lived, and being a friend to
King Antigonus, and President of Syria, never mentions us in all his History;
notwithstanding he was brought up almost in our Country; whereas Hecateus writ
an entire Book of us; so Chaldeans, Egyptians and Phoenicians, may suffice to
prove our Antiquity, together with the Greek Writers: for besides those before
mentioned, Theophrastus also, Theodotus, Manaseas, Ariphanes, Hermogenes,
Euemeus, Conon, Zepyrion, and many others no doubt (for I have not perused all
men's Books) have manifestly testified of us. For many of the foresaid men were
blinded with errors, as not having read our holy Scriptures; yet they all
jointly testify our Antiquity, for which I now allege them. Truly Demetrius
Phalerius, Philon the elder, and Eupolemus did not much err from the truth,
and therefore reason it is they should be born withal: for they were not so
skilful

Being come thus far, it rests that I now present one point more, whereof I
made mention in the beginning of this Book, The last part, against certain
detractions and slanders.
to wit, that I declare the detractions and slanderous reports of diverse
concerning our Nation to be false and void of truth; and I will use the
Testimony of those Writers who record, that the lying Historigraphers, at such
time as they committed to writing the foresaid detractions, did also even
against themselves register such like slanders, as they did against us. And I
doubt not but that all those, who are conversant in Histories, can testify,
that the like has been done by most Writers upon private hatred, or such like
respects: For some of the Gentiles have attempted to deface the honor and
reputation of the most renowned Cities, and to defame Theopompus to Athens, and
Ptolicrates to Lacedemon; and the Author that writ Tripoliticum (for it was not
Theopompus as some suppose) used the City Thebes very hardly. And Timeus in his
Histories of the foresaid

To be short, The cause of malice between the Egyptians and Jews.
this is the cause of so many slanderous reports forged against our Nation:
some to gratify the Egyptians have attempted to deprave the truth, and so have
neither reported the Circumstances concerning our Ancestors coming into Egypt,
nor touching their departure from thence, and they have had many causes of
malice and envy urging them hereto: And chiefly for that our Progenitors in
their Country waxed mighty,

Secondly, The Egyptians Idolatry.
the diversity of our two Religions made great discord and variance amongst us,
our Religion so far excelling theirs in piety, as the divine Essence GOD
excels unreasonable Creatures: (for they commonly worship such bruit beasts
for gods, and every one worshipeth diverse kinds.) vain and foolish men, who
from the beginning have been accustomed to such sottish opinions, as would not
permit them to imitate us in our divine Religion, and comformable to Reason:
and yet seeing many favor and follow our Religion, they were hereby incited to
such hatred, that to derogate from us, they feared not to falsify their own
ancient Records, not considering that in so doing they were led through a blind
passion, to write against themselves. Moreover, I will prove Manethon an
Egyptian Historiographer.
by one man's words, whom a little before (being a famous Historigrapher) we
have produced as a witness of our Antiquity.

Manethon therefore (who confesses himself to have gathered the Egyptian
History out of their holy Writings) having by way of Preface recounted how our
Predecessors came into Egypt with many thousands, and there conquered the
Inhabitants, afterward confesses, Manethons fabulous reports of the Egyptian
Lepers.
that losing all their Possessions in Egypt, they got the Country which is now
called Jury, and in it builded a City named Jerusalem, and a Temple; and thus
far he follows ancient Writers. And then usurping to himself authority to
lie, protesting that he will insert into his History certain reports divulged
amongst the common People, he reports things of the Jews altogether incredible,
intending to mix with our Amenophis, which being a feigned name, he durst not
presume to speak determinately of the time of his Reign; though he speaks
exactly of the Reign of all other Kings. Hereupon also he adds certain Fables,
forgetting himself that he reported the Shepherds departure out of Egypt to
Jerusalem, to have been almost five hundred and eighteen years before his time:
For it was in the fourth year of the reign of Thermosis, when they departed out
of Egypt, and his Successors continued in the Government three hundred and
ninety three years, till the time of the two Brethren Sethon Hermeus, the first
of which was called Egyptian, the other Danaus, who supplanted Sethon, and
reigned alone fifty nine years, after whom his eldest Son Ramses reigned
threescore and six years. Having therefore confessed our Ancestors to have
departed out of Egypt so many years before; at length he adds Amenophis to
the number of their Kings. He tells us that the said Prince (as Orus one of his
Predecessors had done before) had an ardent desire to have a sight of the
Gods, and that a Priest of their Law named Amenophis (as he was) and Son of
Papius, whose wisdom in prediction was so admirable, that he seemed to be
inspired, told him his desire should be accomplished, if he would drive out of
his Kingdom all such as were Leprous, and any other way infected. The King
according to his directions assembled Nile, among whom there were certain
Priests who were likewise infected.

Manethon adds, That the Priest Amenophis, apprehending lest the Gods should
punish him for having given the King that counsel, and the King for having
followed it so strictly, and finding by divination that to recompense the
sufferings of those poor People, they would conquer and govern in Egypt for the
space of thirteen years, he was afraid to tell it to the King himself, but
having committed his Revelation to writing, he killed himself to the great
terror of the King.

This done* he speaks as follows: So the King being requested for their
quietness and defense to assign them a City to inhabit, appointed unto them a
desolate place Avaris, which had been the Shepherds City (this City the ancient
Divines call Triphon) but they, having got the possession of this place fit for
Rebellion, made choice of one of the Priests of Heliopolis to be their Captain,
Osarsi^hus Captain of Avaris.
whose name was Osarsiphus, and bound themselves with an Oath to obey him in
all things: and he presently made a Law, That they should neither worship the
Gods of the Egyptians, nor abstain from those Beasts which the Egyptians count
holy, and that they should marry with none but such as they judged to be their
Friends, and of their own persuasion.

Having ordained this and many things else contrary to the Religion of the
Egyptians, he commanded them to build a Wall about the City, to fortify it
well, and prepare to make War upon King Amenophis. Having taken some others of
the Priesthood into his Cabal, they sent Ambassadors to Jerusalem to the
Shepherds, which were driven out of Egypt by King Themusis, to inform them of
what had passed, and request The war of the banished against the Egyptians.
and that uniting their forces, they might jointly make War upon Egypt. He
promised to receive them into Avaris (which had been of old the possession of
their Ancessors) and supply them with what ever was necessary, and assured them
their opportunity was such, that without great difficulty they might conquer
that Kingdom. That the Inhabitants of Jerusalem embracing the motion, raised
an Army, and advanced to Avaris with 200000 men.

That Amenophis, King of Egypt, hearing of their invasion, and remembering what
Amenophis the Son of the Priest Papius had left in writing, was in great fear,
and presently assembling together the people of Egypt, and consulting with the
Princes of his Country, he sent away all the holy Beasts, and all that the
Priests esteemed, giving Sethon (who also by his Father Rampses was called
Rhamesses) and but five years old, into the custody of a Friend of his; The
Egyptian King fled into Ethiopia, and was by the Ethiopian King courteously
entertained.
and then with three hundred thousand fighting men, he marched against his
Enemies, but would not fight with them, lest he should fight against the
pleasure of the Gods; and so he retired himself to Memphis; and taking Apis and
the rest of the Egyptian Gods along with him, he, and his Troops of Egyptians
took Ship, and fled into Aethiopia. That the King of Aethiopia having a great
honor for him, received him very nobly, assigning his People Towns and
Villages for their residence and subsistence during their thirteen years exile,
keeping constant Guards upon his Frontiers, for the Amenophis. That in the mean
time the Auxiliaries from Jerusalem did much more mischief, than those who had
invited them. That there was nothing of cruelty or impiety that they scrupled
or omitted. That not contenting themselves with the demolishment and burning of
Towns, they added sacriledg to their sins, brake their Idols in pieces, slew
their consecrated Cattle, forced the Priests and Prophets to kill their own
Beasts, Osarsiphus was afterward called Moses.
and drove them naked out of their Country when they had done. To which he
adds, That they had for their Lawgiver a Priest of Heliopolis called Osarsiph,
from Osiris, which was the God that was worshipped in that City, and that that
Priest having changed his Religion, changed likewise his Name, and called
himself Moses.

Manethon further writes, that afterward Amenophis the King came with a great
power out o^ Aethiopia, and his Son Rampses with him accompanied with a great
Army; and that joining Battle with the Shepherds and polluted persons, he gave
them an overthrow, and pursued them unto the Borders of Syria. And this is
Manethon's report; but forasmuch as he writes old wives tales, dotages, and
lies, I will by manifest reason convince him, First distinguishing that whereof
I am to speak hereafter. He of his own accord grants and confesses, that our
Ancestors at first were not Egyptians, Manethon's lies are confuted.
but Strangers that came thither from another place, and conquered the Country,
and again departed from thence. I will now out of his own Egypt were not mixed
with us, and that Moses, who indeed was our Conductor out of Egypt, and lived
many ages before, was no ^eper.

He therefore first of all sets down a ridiculous cause of this
forementioned fiction, which was, that King Amenophis was desirous to see the
Gods: What Gods do you think? He could already see the Ox, the Goat, the
Crocodile, and the Munky, but the God of Heaven how could he see? And why had
Amenophis this desire? Forsooth because a certain King one of his Predecessors
had seen them; he therefore knowing by him what things they were, and how he
came to the sight of them, needed no new device to accomplish his desire: But
perhaps the foresaid Prophet was a Man of great the Kings desire? for that
which he promised was not brought to pass. Or what Egypt was to suffer, and
fearing the wrath of the Gods, killed himself, and left his mind in a Book
written unto the King. How chanced it then that the Prophet did not at first
foresee his own death, and so oppose

The King (says he) heariug this, Manethon's words repeated.
and stricken with fear, did not however expel those Lepers he ought to have
exiled, but at their request gave them (as he says) a City, wherein before
time the Shepherds did inhabit, called Avaris; whereinto being come, they made
a Priest of Heliopolis their Prince, who devised Laws for them: commanding them
neither to adore the Gods, nor to abstain from offering violence to such beasts
as amongst the Egyptians are sacred, but that they should kill and Avaris to
fight against the King. Adding moreover, that he sent to Jerusalem for help,
promising to yield Avaris unto them, being a place sometime possessed by their
Ancestors, and that they from that place leading their Forces, might easily
subdue all Egypt: he then says, that the Egyptian King Amenophis came against
them with 300000; and yet, for that he would not strive against the decree of
the Gods, he fled into Aethiopia, and carried with him Apis and other Holy
Beasts, and that the inhabitants of Jerusalem coming down invaded the Land,
fired the Towns and Cities, slew their Nobles, used all sorts of cruelty
possible, and that the Priests name, who made Laws and Statutes for Heliopolis,
Osarsiphus by name, deriving the same from Osiris, the God of Heliopolis: and
that this man, changing his name, was afterward called Moses.

Moreover, that Amenophis, having lived in banishment thirty years, came with a
strong power out of Aethiopia, and fighting with the shepherds and polluted, he
slew many of them, and put the rest to flight, pursuing them unto the borders
of Syria. Manethon remembers not, that here again he tells a very unlikely
tale: for although the Lepers and impotent persons were offended with the King
for appointing them to hew Stones; yet it is to be thought that receiving their
own desire at the Kings hands afterward, to wit, a City to dwell in, that then
they again became the Kings well-willers. Supposing also their hatred still
continued toward him, they rather should have

We have therefore cause to thank Manethon, A confutation of Manethon's words
alleged.
in that he clears us, and affirms his own countrymen (yea a Priest) to be
authors of this impiety, and that by oath they bound themselves so to do. What
can be more extravigant than to say that neither any of their countrymen nor
kinsmen rebelled with them, but that the poor distressed people were glad to
send to Jerusalem for succor? But what society or friendship had they with the
people of Jerusalem, of whom they came to demand help? Jerusalem (as he says)
presently did as they were willed to do, in hope that, according as they were
promised, they might subdue Egypt. Were they ignorant of that Country out of
which they had been driven by force? had they lived in poverty or misery,
perhaps they might have been induced to have done it: but seeing they inhabited
a fortunate and rich City, and possessed a goodly fertile soil far better than
Egypt, what might move them thereto? What reason had they, at the request of
their ancient Enemies (and they also so diseased, as they of Jerusalem could
not abide their own friends among them that had the Manethon himself he says,
he met them at Pelusia with 300000 men. And this they that went to War well
knew. But what reason had they to conjecture that the Kings mind would change,
and he fly? As to what he charges upon the Auxiliaries from Jerusalem, that
they seized upon the stores, and secured all the Corn that was in Egypt, which
brought great distress and exigence upon the people, has he forgot, that
considering they entered as Enemies, they are not thereby to be reproached,
Rapacity being unavoidable among Soldiers, especially if Strangers and
Conquerours? Has he forgot he said before that the Lepers had done the same
formerly, and had to that purpose obliged themselves by oath? and that he
assured us, that some years after Amenophis repelled the Jerusalem-Confederats,
and Lepers, slew Syria; as if Egypt was a Country so easily conquered, or that
those who were then in possession merely by conquest, would not (upon the first
alarm of Amenophis's march have blocked up the passages, and secured the
Avenues on that side toward Aethiope, which they might easily have done, and
drawn together what forces they had pleased to defend them? And is it not as
improbable when he says, that that Prince made not only a great slaughter among
them, but pursued them with his whole army (cross the Desert) to the very
frontiers of Syria? whereas it is notoriously known that Desert is so dry, that
there being no Water to be found in the whole tract, it is almost impossible
for an entire Army to march through it, though there was no Enemy to give them
Egyptians, as Manethon confesses; The Epilogue that the Jews came not of the
Egyptians.
neither was mingled with the diseased of that Country: for it is probable,
that many of those sick people perished in the Stone-works, many in the great
fight and battle, and the rest of them in the flight. It now remains that I
refute that which he speaks of Moses.

The Egyptians do all agree that this man was a divine person, An answer to
Manethons slanders touching Moses.
and one to be admired, and they commit great impiety in laboring to challenge
him for their Countryman, saying, that he was a Priest of Heliopolis, banished
with the rest for leprosy. For he is recorded to have lived five hundred and
eighteen years before this time, and to have guided our Ancestors out of Egypt,
Moses was not a Leper.
into that Country wherein we now inhabit:

He did not only make these severe Laws against Lepers, but he also interdicted
all that wanted any joint or parcel of the body, from being Priests, or
exercising any office at the Alter: Moses took his name of Moy, which in the
Egyptian tongue signifies Water.
yea he also appointed, that if any Priest should have any of these defects
betide him after he was a Priest, that then he should be deprived of the
dignity. How can it then be probable, that to his own prejudice and discredit
he would have enacted such Laws? And as to what he says about changing his name
Osarsiph into Moses, it is as incredible as the rest, there being no analogy
between them, the name of Moses importing preservation from the Water; for Moy
among the Egyptians signifies Water: Against Cheremon the Historiographer.
and now I suppose I have made it apparent, that Manethon, whilst he kept
himself Chaeremon, who professing himself to write the Egyptian History, makes
mention of the same King Amenophis his Son Rhamses, as Manethon does, and
reports that the Goddess Isis appeared to Amenophis in his sleep, checking
him for that her Temple was destroyed, and that Phiritiphantes, a holy Scribe,
told the King, that if he would expel all polluted and unclean persons out of
Egypt, that then he should not be any more terrified with these night-visions.
Moreover, that hereupon making search for all sick and diseased persons, he
banished them out of his Land, to the number of 250000. And that their Captains
were called Moses and Joseph, holy Scribes, Moses was named ^isithes; and
Joseph, Petesephus: and that they came to Pelusium, where they found 380000
left there by Amenohpis, whom he would not permit to come into Egypt: also they
all entering into Egypt, and Amenophis not abiding the brunt fled into
Aethiopia, leaving his wife great with child, who hiding her self in caves and
dens, did bring forth a child whom they called Messenes, Messenes Son of
Amenophis.
who afterward drove the Jews into Syria, being in number 200000, and this
done, he recalled his Father Amenophis out of Aethiopia. And thus Chaeremon
says.

But I imagine, that which I have already said, to be sufficient to declare the
vanity of both these Writers. For if that which they report were true, it were
impossible that they should so much differ: but they labor to devise lies, and
write nothing agreeable to other men's writings. Manethon's and Chaeremon's
history compared together.
For Manethon feigneth, that the cause of the banishment of the Lepers was the
^ings desire to see the Gods; and Chaeremon says, that it was for Isis after
appeared unto him in his sleep. Manet^on also says, that Amenophis gave the
King that counsel so to cleanse the Country; and Chaeremon says, that he that
counseled the King was called Phiritip^antes. Nor do they agree better in
their numbers: Manethon reports them 80000 the other 250000. Manethon says
these Lepers were sent directly to the Quarries to work there in the squaring
of Stone, and that afterward Avaris was given them for a Quarter, where having
begun their War, they sent Ambassadors to Jerusalem to get that City into
Confederacy. Chaeremon tells us on the other side that when they were forced
out of Egypt, they found at Pelusium 380000 men whom Amenophis had repulsed;
that joining with them they returned again into Egypt, and compelled Amenophis
to fly into Aethiopia. But that which is most observable Isis, should forget to
let us know from whence this great Army of 380000 did come, whether they were
Egyptians, or Strangers, and for what reason Amenophis refused to admit them.
Moreover, The difference between Manethon's and Chaerem^n's History.
Chaeremon feigneth a dream of the Lepers and Isis, and reports that Joseph
together with Moses was expelled, whereas Joseph lived four ages before Moses,
every age containing at least a hundred and seventy years. Ramesses also,
Amenophis Son, according to Manethons History, being a young man fled into
Aethiopia, and was banished with his Father, and afterward assisted him in the
Wars: whereas Chaeremon reports that he was born in a Cave after his Fathers
departure, and that he getting the victory, did drive the Jews into Syria, who
were in number two hundred thousand. Ramesses: and which is most to be admired,
one cannot gather out of his words whom he calls Jews, or whether he
attribute this name unto the two hundred and fifty thousand Lepers, or unto the
three hundred and fourscore thousand which were at Pelusium.

But it is folly to oppose my self against them, who have sufficiently
contradicted themselves: for had other men controlled their Writings, they had
been the more to be born withal. Lysimachus is reproved for lying.
Lysimachus was another of the same Stamp, and one that not only seconds but
surpasses them in their Lies, in so much that we need no more than the Bocch^r
King of Egypt, the Jews that were Leprous or otherwise infected, resorted in
such numbers to the Temples to beg the charity of the people, that they
communicated their distempers to the Egyptians. According to Lysimachus, the
scabbed and Leprous Jews were to be conveyed into the Wilderness, and ca^^
into the Sea.
Bocchor consulted the Oracle of Ammon, and received this answer, that he
should purify the Temples, and send into the desert all those sick and
infectious people, upon whom the Sun could shine no longer without regret, and
that by so doing the Earth should recover its primitive fertility. That
hereupon the said Prince by advice of his Priests assembled all those diseased
persons, delivered them into the hands of certain Soldiers, who lap'd some of
them in lead, and threw them into the Sea, conducting the rest into the
wilderness, and leaving Moses advised them to remove the next day, and march on
till they found better quarters; to trust no man; to give no man good Counsel
that asked them; to ruin the Temples and Altars where ever they came; and that
this Counsel having been approved, they passed the Wilderness, and after much
trouble and frequent distresses, arrived in a Country that was inhabited, where
they gave the first instances of their crulelty by abusing the Natives, and
robbing their Temples; in which course they continued, till they came at length
to Judea, where they built a City, and called it J^rosula (which is Jerusalem,
and themselves inhabitants of Jerusalem.

This fellow found not that King, which the two former speak of, but he joined
a more new name, and leaving the Dream and the Prophet, goes to Ammon for an
answer touching the scabbed and Lepers; he says, that a multitude was gathered
together at the Temples; Lysinius his opinion confuted.
but he leaves it uncertain, whether the Jews only were infected with this
Disease; for he says the people of the Jews; or whether they were strangers
and such as were born in that Country. If they were Jews, why do thou call
them Egyptians? If they were strangers, why do thou not tell of whence they
were? Or how came it to pass, the King having drowned so many of them in the
Sea, and left Nothing is to be said against an impudent lie.
marry for that the former name was ignominious to their posterity. But the
Gentleman underdood not, that Jerusalem signifies otherwise in Hebrew, than in
Greek: And therefore what should I stand to inveigh against a lie so impudently
told? But this book having been long enough, I will begin another, in which I
shall endeavor to acquaint my self of what I have undertaken.

The SECOND BOOK
THrice honored and beloved Epaphroditus, I have in my former Books, so far
forth as I was warranted by truth, proved the Antiquity of our Nation out of
the Writings of the Phoenicians, Chaldees, and Egyptians: And for the further
confirmation thereof, I have produced the Testimony of diverse Greek Authors.
Furthermore, I have opposed my self against Manethon, and Cheremon, and diverse
others. It remains now that I convince those who defied me more particularly,
and gives an Appion, Appion wrote something very coldly.
though indeed I am scarce satisfied that he deserves it. For as touching part
of what he has written, it seems to be one and the same with that which the
rest have written; And as touching the rest, it is very cold and barren. The
greatest part thereof is stuffed with follies and detractions, and betrayeth
his ignorance, showing him to be a Man both loose in condition, and turbulent
in his life. And forasmuch as diverse men are so weak in their judgments, that
they rather suffer themselves to be won by these follies, than to be wrought
upon by that which is written with better consideration, vainly doting on
detractions, and growing discontent to give ear to other men's well deserved
praises: I have thought it necessary to examine his Labors, the rather, for
that he has written against us, as if he intended to accuse us before a

The Discourse of this Appion is so difficult and perplexed, that it is no easy
matter to understand what he means: For troubled and confused with the
incoherencies of his stories, sometimes he relates the departure of our
Ancestors out of Egypt according to the description of those, whom I have
confuted before. Sometimes he calumniates the Jews of Alexandria, and sometimes
condemns the ceremonies of our Temple, and our whole Doctrine and Religion.

Now that our Predecessors have not taken their original out of Egypt, neither
have been driven from thence for any infirmity, Appion concerning Moses and the
Jews.
or deformity of their Bodies, or for any Wound, Ulcer, or Pollution, I suppose
that I have not only sufficiently proved, but also produced far more Arguments
than was requisite. I will therefore briefly report and repeat that which
Appion alleges: For in the third Book of his Egyptian History, he writes
thus: Moses, as I have heard it from most ancient Egyptians, was born at
Heliopolis, and being instructed in the fashions of his Country, such Prayers
as were wont to be said in open places and abroad, he caused to be said in
private within the City, and ordained that in praying they should turn
themselves toward the rising Sun, (for such is the situation of the City
Heliopolis) and instead of Obelisques or Pyramides, Appions fiction concerning
the Temple and Moses is refuted.


Now this lie of his needs no words to refute it, seeing it is clearly
refelled by the effects. For when Moses first built that Tabernacle in honor
of God, he had no such intent, nor fashioned any such form, neither ordained
his Successors to do the like: And after this when as Solomon builded the
Temple in Jerusalem, he never thought of any such curiosity as Appion forgeth.
He says that he has been informed by those of Antiquity, that Moses was a
Heliopolitan: for you must understand that Appion himself was young, and
believed the relation of the aged sort of his acquaintance, which Homer was
born, neither from what Country Pythagoras came, although in respect* they
lived but yesterday: And as touching Moses, who lived so many ages, and so
great a number of years before them, he decideth the matter so easily, and
gives credit to the reports of Antiquity so slightly, that it appears most
manifest, that he is but a liar. As touching the time wherein he says that
Moses led away the Blind, Leprous, and Lame, this diligent Author accords
very willingly with that which he himself has said. The computation of the
time is different among the Historiographers.
For Manethon says, that the Jews departed out of Egypt about the Reig^ of
Themosis, three hundred ninety six years before Danaus fled out of Greece.
Lysimachus Bocchorus time, that is to say, one thousand and seven hundred years
before that time. Molon also and some others have alleged their Opinions. But
Appion, who pretends to be a Man of more credit than the rest, has precisely
and exactly set down the time, averring that our departure was about the
seventieth Olympiad: Nay more, in the first year thereof, wherein, as he says,
Carthage was builded by the Phoenicians. Now has he purposely made mention of
Carthage in this place, as an infallible argument of the truth of his
Allegation, not considering that he draws an argument against himself, by
which himself may be convinced. For, if we may give credit to the Phoenician
Chroniclers as touching this Colony, it appears by them, that King Hyram
lived more than one hundred and fifty years before the foundation of Carthage.
The friendship between Hyram and Solomon, whereof we made mention in the first
Book against Appion in the beginning.
The truth whereof I have Hyram was in amity with Solomon, who builded the
Temple of Jerusalem; and that he furnished him with much Timber and other
matter toward the finishing of that building. Now Solomon builded the Temple
six hundred and twelve years after the departure of the Israelites out of
Egypt. And after he had inconsiderately reckoned the number of those which were
driven out of Egypt, The Egyptians do call a disease about the privy parts
Sabbatosis.
in like manner as Lysimachus had done, namely; of one hundred and ten thousand
men, he yielded a most admirable reason, and such as may be easily believed:
From whence he pretends that the name of Sabbath was derived. For (says he)
after they had traveled for the space of six days, there grew certain
inflammations in their Groins, by reason whereof they rested on the seventh
Judaea, because the Egyptians call Sabbatosis an Ulcer that grows about the
Groin.

Can any man read these stories without laughter, or indeed indignation, to see
a grave Author aver such trifles with that impudence and Authority? How
improbable is it, that 110000 men should at one time be infected with the same
disease? and if they were made up of blind, and lame, and other infirmities (as
he affirms in another place) how could they have been able to have marched one
day in a desert? or how could they have been able to have fought, much less
subdued the Nations that opposed them? Can it be naturally believed of so great
a multitude? or can it without great absurdity be imputed to accident? Yet
Appion affirms, that these 110000 men arrived all of them Judaea; and that
Moses being yet upon the Mount Sinai (which in those parts parts Egypt and
Arabia) he continued there privately forty days; and when he came down, he
delivered those Laws to the Jews which are still observed: Appions fiction of
the six days journey is confuted.
Upon which I would be resolved in two things; How it was possible for so great
a number of men to cross so vast a desert in six days? and how he could subsist
forty days in a place so wild and barren, that there was not so much as water
to be found for his refreshment?

His Etymology of the word Sabbath is so idle and impertinent, it can proceed
from nothing but ignorance and folly: for these words Sabbo and Sabbatum do
greatly differ: Sabbatum in the Jews language, signifies rest from work: but
Sabbo in the Egyptian tongue, betokens a Disease about the privy parts, as
Appion says. See here what Appion uses concerning Moses, and our departure
out of Egypt: wherein he counterfeiteth and coineth absurdities unthought of by
any others. Shall we then wonder if he belie our forefathers, Appion denies his
Country and Origin.
who makes no bones to belie himself? Oasis, a Town in Egypt, he forsweareth
his Country and Nation, and counterfeiting himself to be an Alexandrian,
ratifieth his Nations wickedness. No marvel then, though he term them
Egyptians, whom he hated and railed against; for if he had not been persuaded
that the Egyptians were wicked base people, he would never have denied himself
to be their Countryman: for such as proudly boast of their famous Country,
esteem it a credit to bear the denomination thereof, and reprehend such, as
without just cause make themselves of their Nation. Wherefore the Egyptians are
one of these two ways affected toward us Jews, either they claim us to be
their Countrymen, as glorying in us and their Country; or else they and their
Country being infamous, they desire that we should be partakers of their
ignominy. But indeed Appion seems so to inveigh against us, as thereby
rewarding the Alexandrians for bestowing their Cities upon him: Appion raileth
against the J^ws, as thereby rewarding the Alexandrians.
and knowing them to be at variance with the Jews at Alexandria, he as it were
casts a bone between them, raileth not only on the Jews of that City, but on
all wheresoever: and belieth both of them most impudently.

But let us examine those heinous and enormous matters (and as he says) such
as are not to be suffered, The Seacoast of Alexandria.
of which he accuses the Alexandrian Jews. Coming (quoth he) out ^f Syria,
they seated themselves near the Sea coast in a place where, though the Sea came
up, there was no Harbor.

Now if this place which they inhabited were ignominious, yet it follows not
that the Jews own Country was so also: yea herein Appion raileth against
Alexandria, which Alexandria, and, as all men judge, the best place to dwell
in. Now if the Jews by force of Arms so vanquished this place, that they could
never since be driven out of it; it is no discredit to them, but rather an
argument of their valor. But Alexander gave them that place to inhabit, and
the Macedonians did allot them as great Privileges as the Alexandrians had. I
know not what Appion would have said, if the Jews had dwelt about Necropolis,
their Tribes being even at this time called Macedonians. The Liberties and
privileges granted unto the Jews.
If therefore Appion have read the Epistles of King Alexander, and Ptolomeus
Lagus, or others their Successors Kings of Egypt, or seen the Pillars that are
erected in Alexandria, containing the privileges that Caesar the Great granted
unto the Jews: if (I say) he knew of these, and yet did presume

The like ignorance also discovers he, where he wondereth that the Jews in
Alexandria were called Alexandrians: For an entire Colony, though of different
Nations, do all bear the name of their founder; and, that I may shun prolixity,
the Jews of Antioch are called Antiochians; Seluceus the Founder having made
them also Citizens: the like may be said of the Jews of Ephesus, and of the
other of Ionia, who by the Kings Gifts enjoy the same privileges with the rest
of the Citizens.

The Romans also of their Clemency have granted the name of their Nation, which
is no small gift, not only to private persons, but to great Nations in general.

To be short, the ancient Spaniards, the Tyrrhenes and Sabines are called
Romans; or if Appion will take away this denomination of the City wherein men
inhabit, let him cease to call himself an Alexandrian; for he being born in the
heart of Egypt, can in no wise be an Alexandrian if the privilege of the City
be taken away from him, as he would have it from us.

And the Lords of the whole World, the Romans, have amongst all other Nations
only prohibited the Egyptians from having the privileges of any City: and so
this Gentleman being himself incapable of dignity, endeavors likewise to
hinder them from it who have true right unto it.

For Alexander laboring with all diligence to build that City, Alexander.
did not make choice Hecateus reports that Alexander, for the Jews good
service and fidelity, bestowed upon them the Country of Samaria, and freed them
from paying tribute for it.

The same good affection toward the Jews of Alexandria, 1 Ptolomeus Lagus.
Ptolomeus Lagus continued after him, for he delivered into their hands the
strong holds of Egypt (judging that their valor and fidelity would keep them)
and intending to make himself Lord of Cyrene and other places in Lybia, he sent
certain Jews to inhabit the same.

After him Ptolomeus Philadelphus did not only release and set free all
Captives of our 2 Ptolomeus Philadelphus.
but also did many times remit their payments of money, and The seventy
Interpreters.
and for this cause sent unto us, requesting that we would send him some
learned men to interpret them unto him: and that this might be performed with
more diligence, he committed the care hereof to Demetrius Phalereus, Andreas
and Aristeus, Demetreus being the only mirror of learning in his Age, and the
other two Esquires of his own Body: neither would he ever have desired to have
been instructed in our Laws and Customs, if he had despised us, and not rather
admired us. But Appion knew that almost all the Macedonian Kings, his
Successors in order, did peculiarly affect our Nation.

For Ptolomeus the third, 3 Ptolomeus Euergetes.
which was also called Euergetes, conquering Syria by force, Egypt for his
Victory, but came to Jerusalem, and there after our manner sacrificed unto our
God, and to him dedicated gifts worthy of such a Victory.

Ptolomeus also, 4 Ptolomeus Philometor.
surnamed Philometor, and his Wife Cleopatra committed the Rule of his whole
Kingdom unto the Jews, and Onias and Dositheus, both Jews, were Generals of his
Army, from whose credit Appion detracts; whereas he rather ought to have
admired them, and have thanked them for delivering Alexandria, whereof he
makes himself a Citizen.

For when there was a Rebellion in Cleopatra's Kingdom, and all was in peril to
be destroyed, these two men delivered Alexandria from Civil War: But Appion
says, that Onias came and brought a little Army into the City, at such time as
Termus the Roman Ambassador was there present. True it is, and that Fact of
his was most just.

For Ptolomeus Physcon after the death of his Father Ptolomeus Philometor, 5
Ptolomeus Physcon ceased to persecute the Jews.
coming out of Cyrene, endeavored to expel Queen Cleopatra and the Kings Sons,
to the end that he (contrary to all justice) might possess the Kingdom: and
this was the cause why Onias took Arms against him in Cleopatra's behalf, not
forsaking his fidelity unto Kings in the time of necessity: yet God himself did
manifestly witness his justice in this action: For when Ptolomeus Physcon
presumed to fight against Onias his Army, and took all the Jews, their Wives
and Children that were in the City, and bound them, Ptolomeus his friends that
stood by, and slew many of them: which done, there appeared unto Ptolomeus a
most horrible Vision forbidding him to harm the Jews; and his chiefest and best
beloved Concubine also (whom some call Ithaca, others Herene) came unto him,
and besought him to abstain from such impiety: whereupon he being sorry, did
penance for that he had already committed, and that which he thought to commit:
So that the Jews of Alexandria celebrate this day in remembrance, that upon it
God did manifestly deliver them; Appion (who speaks well of no man) accuses
the Jews of impiety for bearing Arms against Physcon, whereas indeed he ought
rather to have commended them for it.

But Appion extolleth Cleopatra the last Queen of Alexandria, Of Cleopatra the
last Queen of Alexandria*
only for that she was unjust and ungrateful unto us; when he rather ought to
have reproved her, in whom all Impiety and wickedness reigned, both concerning
her own kindred and her husbands who loved her, and also generally against all
the Romans, and the Emperors his Benefactors. She killed her own sister
Arsenoe in the Temple, who had not any ways offended her; she also
treacherously slew her own Brother, and destroyed her Ancestors gods and
sepulchers; and receiving the Kingdom from the first Cesars gift, she
ingratefully Antony with her poisoned drinks and amarous enchantments, she made
him rebel against his Country, and to be unconstant unto his own friends,
depriving some of Kingly dignity, and compelling others to be Instruments of
her impiety.

What else shall we say of her, Antony the husband of Cleopatra.
who in the Battle by Sea forced Antonius her own husband (who also had many
children by her) to yield himself, the Empire and Army unto her, and become one
of her followers? Lastly, when Alexandria was taken by Caesar, she was so
cruelly minded, that not remembering her own estate, she accounted it her safety
with her own hand to kill the Jews, that she might be cruel and perfidious to
every body.

Appion reports) in time of dearth and famine wheat was so plentiful in Jury,
that it was not sold by measure? But Cleopatra was punished as she deserved.
And we call great Caesar himself to witness of our Egyptians, the Senate also
and their Decrees, and the Writings of Augustus Caesar, wherein our deserts are
testified. These Letters Appion ought to have read, and to have examined all
Testimonies of us, which were left first by Alexander, and then by all the
Ptolomies, and what the Senate of Rome decreed, and the mighty Emperors. And
if so be Germanicus could not get corn to suffice all the Inhabitants of
Alexandria, that was a token of scarcity and death, and not the Jews fault. For
what all Emperors thought of the Alexandrian Jews it is manifest enough: for
the Jews want of Corn was not only left unsupplied, but also the want of other
Alexandrians. The Jews have been always trusty to their Prince.
But they have always kept that wherewith the ancient Princes did put them in
trust, to wit, the keeping of the River and whole Country, as

But Appion thus urges us; If (says he) the Jews be Citizens, how hap they
worship not the same God, nor have the same Religion with the rest of the
Alexandrians? To whom I thus answer; The Egyptians do worship Beasts not
agreeable to man's nature.
How happens that you Egyptians do so contend and war one against another only
for diversity of Religion? Shall we hereupon conclude, that you are all
Egyptians, or not all men, because you worship and with great diligence nourish
Beasts against nature? Yet our Nation seems one and the same. It therefore
amongst you Egyptians such difference of Opinions be; why do thou so marvel
at this, that we in a strange place, to wit, at Alexandria, do constantly
persevere in our first Religion? But he says that we are the cause of all
Sedition; The discord of the Jews and the Alexandrians in Religion*
which suppose he speak true of the Jews of Alexandria, Appion himself, are
Authors of Sedition in Alexandria. For whilst the Greeks and Macedonians held
Alexandria, they and we lived peaceably together, and they permitted us quietly
to use our own Solemnities: The cause of their discord.
but when the number of Egyptians increased, by confusion of time, Sedition
also by their means increased: But our Nation remained unmixed. Appion's
fiction touching the Jews being Authors of sedition at Alexandria is confuted.
They therefore were Authors of those troubles, not having the Government of
the Macedonians, not the wisdom of the Greeks; but using their Egyptian
manners, and renewing their old hatred against us, and that wherewithal they
hit us in the teeth, befallen them: for most of them not having the privileges
of the City themselves, call Rome bestowed the privilege. But Alexander
himself brought us into the City; the Kings after him increased more
privileges; and it has pleased the Roman Emperor to ratify and confirm them.

But Appion upbraids us for not erecting Statues to the Emperors, as though
the Emperors knew not hereof, The Romans magnanimity toward the Jews.
or that they needed Appion to speak for them: whereas he should rather admire
the Roman magnanimity, and modesty, who compel not their Subjects to violate
their ancient Laws and Religion, but content themselves with such honors as
the giver may with piety and equity give them. For they account not of forced

The Greeks and diverse others think it not amiss to erect Statues; for they
delight to have the Pictures of their Ancestors, Wives, and Children, and some
of their beloved Servants also: what marvel then if they accord to yield the
like honor to Princes and Emperors? The Jews may have no Imag^s*


But our excellent Lawmakers forbad all kind of Images, as well of inanimate as
animate Creatures (not having at that time the least thought or prospect of the
Roman Empire) because our God being incorporeal and spiritual, could not be
reduced to humane representation, How Emperors and Magistrates ought to be
honored.
without great inconvenience; nevertheless he did not forbid us from paying
honor and respect to such great persons, as being next in their places, may
deserve Rome; and, as a testimony of it, a day does not pass, in which we do
not offer up Sacrifice (at our own expense) for their safety and prosperity;
which is more than we do for any other Prince or Nation in the World.

And let this suffice to answer that which Appion alleges against the Jews of
Alexandria: yet can I not but admire at them who gave him this occasion, namely
Posidonius and Apollonius Molon, The lie of Posidonius and Ap^ll^niu^
concerning the Jews confuted.
who accuse us for not worshipping the same gods that others do, although they
lie all alike, slandring our Temple most absurdly: and yet for all this they do
not believe that they herein commit any impiety: whereas it is a most
ignominious thing for any freeman to lie upon any occasion: much more of a
Temple famous over Appion affirms that the Jews in that sacred Temple place
the head of an Ass, and worshipped it most religiously. And this (quoth he) was
manifestly known at such time as Antiochus Epiphanes spoiled that Temple, who
found that Asses head being of massy gold, and of great value.

To this first slander I answer, An answer to the objection of the Asses head.
That were that true which he reports, yet an Egyptian ought not to have
spoken against us for it, seeing that an Ass is of no less worth than a Goat,
and other bruit beasts that they honor for Gods.

Is it possible he should be so blind as not to perceive, that never any fable
was more evidently absurd? every body could tell him that we have constantly
used the same Laws without the least change or alteration. Nevertheless though
Jerusalem has had her Antiochus, Pompey, Crassus, and at length by Titus, and
our Temple been in the possession of all of them: yet what is it they ever
found there but great piety and devotion? Upon which subject I do not think it
necessary to enlarge in this place.

And as touching Antiochus, many Writers of good credit report that he never
had any just cause to spoil our Temple, but that he was drawn unto this fact
for want of money; Not that he was our Enemy, but for that as from his friends
and fellows he sought supply, and found nothing in that place that was worthy
of derision: and thus do Polybius Megapolitanus, Strabo the Cappadocian,
Nicholas Damascene, Timagenes Castor the Chronicler, and Apollodorus avow, who
all do witness, that Antiochus wanting money, brake Jews, and robbed and spoiled
their Temple being full of gold and silver.

Appion ought to have considered this, Who are accounted Asses among the Jews,
and other wise men.
had he not had an Asses heart, and a Dogs impudency, which he and his
Countrymen worship for gods. As for us, we do neither honor nor reverence
Asses, though the Egyptians do their Crocodiles and Aspes, esteeming them that
are bitten by Aspes, and devoured by Crocodiles, to be happy and fit for God:
For Asses are employed among us (as they are in all places, where a rational
use is made of them) only in carrying burdens and doing such things as are
necessary about Agriculture, and when they are lazy, or trespass upon their
neighbors Corn, we do not scruple to give them correction.

Appion was either the greatest Ass that ever was, in telling a lie; or else
having begun to do it, he could not compass his enterprises, in that he found
not any just cause of detraction against us.

He adds another Fable of the Greeks to our detraction; Certain
Historiographers endeavor to cover and hide Antiochus his perjury and
sacrilege.
to the which I will make only this reply, That it is more commendable and
agreeing to piety, and less uncleanness, to pass through the Temple, than for
Priests to come and feign impious words and speeches; which they not
respecting, labored rather to excuse the sacrilegious Kings, than to write the
truth of us and our Temple, endeavoring to curry favor with Antiochus, and to
cover and hide his Sacrilege, used against our Nation, for that he wanted
money.

with reflection upon the rest, says, That Antiochus found a Bed in our
Temple, and in it a Man lying, and a Table set before him, furnished with all
fowls belonging either to the Sea or Land; that the Man was astonished to see
him: And that so soon as Antiochus came into the Temple, the man adored him as
though he hoped for great help from the King, falling down at his feet, and
with a stretched out arm craving license to speak: which the King granting,
willed him to declare what he was, why he dwelt in the Temple, and the cause of
his meats before him, the man with sighs and tears unto Antiochus bewailed his
Calamity, saying, He was a Grecian; and that traveling in the Country to get
his living, he was suddenly seized upon by certain Outlandish men, and brought
unto the Temple, and shut up therein, and that no man might see him, and that
That the Jews ought on^^^^ year to sacrifice a Grecian*
and to take a Grecian stranger, and feed him a year, and then to carry him to
a Wood, and there to kill him, and sacrifice him according to their Rites and
Ceremonies, and to taste and eat of his entralls: and in the sacrificing of the
Grecian, to swear to be Enemies to the Greeks; and the remainder of the
murdered man they cast into a certain pit. And that then this Greek reported
unto Antiochus, That the time allotted unto him by the Jews to Grecian gods, to
save his blood from being spilt by the Jews, and to free him out of that
imminent calamity.

This Fable is not only full of all tragical cruelty, but also mingled with
cruel impudency: Antiochus from Sacrilege, as they hoped hereby to do, who
write it purposely to flatter him. For that which they report of the Greek
found in a bed, did not move him to come and sack our Temple, he not knowing of
it before he came and found it so (as they say.) Antiochus therefore was most
impious, and not assisted by Gods favor in that enterprise, (whatsoever those
lies mutter) as it is easy to learn by the fact he committed. For we do not
only differ from the Greeks in Religion, but a great deal more from the
Egyptians, and other Nations; and what Nation in the World is there, that
sometime does not travel through our Country? Is it then probable that we only
renew that Conspiracy against the Greeks? Or how is it possible that so many
thousand people as are of our own Appion reports? Or why did he not name this
man, whosoever he was? Or why did not the King carry him with Trumpets before
him into his Country? seeing that in so doing he might have been esteemed full
of piety, and a great favourer of the Greeks, and greatly strengthen himself
against the hatred of the Jews by their aid? But I omit to speak more of this:
for insensible people void of all reason, must not be reprehended in words, but
by deeds: for all men that have seen the building of the Temple, can testify
what it was, and the undefiled purity thereof. For it consisted of four
Portico's, or appartements, each of which by our Laws belonged to several
persons: into the first Strangers, and all people were admitted, The
description of the Temple and Porches.
Women only excepted that have their monthly courses. Into the

For in the morning when the Temple was opened, the Priests that were to
sacrifice entered into the Temple: and at noon again when it was shut; yea it
was not lawful to carry any vessel into the Temple, but there was only there an
Altar, a Table, a Censer, and a Candlestick, as is in our Law mentioned, and
there is no other secret or What was in the Temple*
neither is there in that place any eating; and all the people can testify
this which I have here set down, and our Writings do the like. For
notwithstanding that there are four Ranks of Priests, and every Priests Tribe
contains above five thousand men: yet every one waits on certain appointed
days in their turn, and their time of waiting being expired, Four T^ibes of
Priests, and of every Tribe more than five thousand men.
others succeed them in Sacrificing; and the day before they are to finish
their waiting, they deliver up unto their successors the keys of the Temple,
and all vessels belonging thereto, in the full number that they received them:
and nothing is brought into the Temple, pertaining either to meat or drink,
which are forbidden to be offered at our Altar; those things only excepted
whereof Appion, who examining nothing of all these, has raised such incredible
reports of us? How ignominious a thing is it for a Grammarian, not to be able
to deliver the truth of a History? Well, he knew the piety used in our Temple,
but he purposely omitted it: yet could he remember a fained tale of the
Sacrificing of the Greek, his dainty fare, and hidden food, that all men that
would passed through our Temple: whereas the most noble among our whole
Nation,are not permitted to come there, except they be Priests.

This therefore is great impiety, and a voluntary forged lie, to seduce them
that will not search into the truth. For they have attempted to slander us by
those impieties before mentioned. And again, like one full of all piety, he
derideth the vanity Another tale devised by Appion of Zabidus.
and reports that at such time as the Jews for a long time together warred
against the Idumeans, Zabidus departing out of a City of Idumea where Apollo
was worshipped, came unto the Jews, promising to deliver unto them Apollo the
Dorians god, and bring him unto their Temple, if so be that all of them would
there assemble themselves together: and that afterward Zabidus making a wooden
Engine, and putting himself into it, he caused three rows of Candles to be
stuck about it, which made it at a distance appear like a Comet to the great
amazement of the Jews, who being terrified and astonished at the vision, gave
Zabidus opportunity to pass into the Temple, to possess himself of the Asses
Golden head, and convey it to Dora. Wherefore we may say that Appion leads an
Ass, to wit, himself with fooleries and lies; for he names places that are
not, and sets down Cities to himself unknown: for Idumea Gara, and there is
no City in it called Dora; Dora is a City of Phaenicia and not of Idumaea.
but in Phoenicia near unto the Hill Carmelus, there is a City of that name,
yet nothing consonant to Appions slanders, for it is four days journey from
Judaea.

Why therefore does he so rashly accuse us for not worshipping the gods of
others Nations, seeing (as he says) our Predecessors did so easily believe
that Apollo would come unto them, and that he walked upon the earth with Stars
about his back? Perhaps indeed they had never before seen a Candle or lamp,
themselves having so many: or is it likely that he walking thus quite through
our Country, where so many thousand men are, no one of them all met him? Did he
in the time of War find the Towns and Villages, by which he past, without any
Watchmen? Well, to pass the rest; The The gates of the Temple.
twenty Cubits broad, all covered with Gold, yea, almost all of clean Gold, and
these Gates every day were shut by two hundred men: and it was too impious a
thing to leave them open. Is it then credible that this Candle-bearer could
easily open them, who alone was judged to have the Asses head? So that now it
remains doubtful whether Zabidus did bring back again the Asses head, or else
Appion took it of him, and brought it again to our Temple, that there Antiochus
might find it, and so Appion might have another occasion of lying. Appions lie
concerning the oath is confuted.
He also belieth us concerning the oath which he says we Jews do take,
swearing by the God of Heaven and Earth, and Sea, never to favor any stranger,
and especially the Greeks. This liar might better have said, not to favor any
stranger, and Egypt, not for their wickedness, but for their calamity. But we
are so far from the Greeks, that we scarcely ever think of them: so that no man
can say that there is any emnity between us and the Greeks. But contrariwise,
many of them have embraced* our Religion, and some of them therein persevered:
others again have forsaken it; yet none of them will say that he heard this
oath spoken of among us: but it should seem that only Appion heard of it, in
that he himself forged it. Truly his wisdom and great providence is worthy to
be admired (as shall hereafter appear:) for he, to prove these his lies to be
true, says, that it is a certain testimony, that the Laws we observe Appion
upbraideth the Jews with captivity.
and our City endured many calamities: Whereas touching themselves, they are of
a City that flourishes in absolute Authority, accustomed to govern from the
foundation thereof, and not to serve the Romans. In effect, who can resist
their valor? Truly no man but Appion would ever have flouted us herewith,
seeing that few Cities so flourish and reign over other, that they again at no
one time have been brought into subjection; for many Nations are subject to
others: only the Egyptians are freed from the Captivity of such as rule Europe
and Asia, for that (as they say) the gods fleeing into their Country, were
saved by entering into the bodies of Beasts. Yet have they not indeed had one
days liberty since the beginning of

I will not stand to reckon how often the Persians have wasted their City,
destroyed their Temples, and slain their supposed Gods. For it is not decent
that I should imitate herein Appions foolishness: neither am I calling to
memory what befell the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, the last of which are
recorded to have been most valiant, and the first to have been most devout and
Religious: neither will I reckon up those most godly Kings, amongst whom
Cr^esus was one, who notwithstanding fell into great calamities. Moreover, I
will not recount how the Castle of Athens was set on fire, and the Temples of
Ephesus and Delphos likewise, and many others. There is now Appion, a new
accuser of the Jews, who upbraideth them with their calamities, forgetting the
misery that has befallen his Countrymen the Egyptians: but he was blinded
with the fable of Sesostris (whom he says to have been King of Egypt.) David's
and Solomon's power.
We could report and boast of our Kings, David and Solomon, who subdued many
Nations unto them: but it is not fit here to speak of them. But Appion was
ignorant of that which all the World knows, to wit, that the Egyptians have
served first the Persians, and afterward the Macedonians, and that as
bondslaves: whereas we remaining in free liberty, reigned over all the Cities
about us 120 years, even unto the time of Pompey the Great; and when all the
other Kings were subdued by the Romans, only our Kings for their fidelity and
friendship toward them were dear unto them. O but Appions Stomach! that we
have not had any famous men of our Nation, who have invented Arts and Sciences,
and been excellent in wisdom, such as Socrates Zeno, Appion praises himself.
Cleanthes, and others whom he sets down: and which is most to be Appion
puts himself into the number of these famous men: and says, that Alexandria is
blessed and happy, that has deserved to have such a Citizen as he is: and
great reason that he should testify that of himself, which all men else
perceive in him, to wit, that he is an impudent deceitful fellow, both of
corrupt life and manners. So that the Alexandrians had just cause to be sorry
that they ever had any better opinion of him. But that our Nation had men equal
at least unto those whom he mentions, all men know that please to read the
Book of our Antiquity. The rest that his accusation contains, it is not amiss
to let pass without answer, for that it rather impeacheth the Egyptians, his
own Countrymen, than us: for he does complain of us for Sacrificing ordinary
Beasts, and abstaining from Swines flesh and laughed Why the Jews do Sacrifice
common beasts, and do not eat Swines flesh.
Touching the Sacrificing of Beasts, we do as all Nations else do: and Appion,
inveighing against our sacrificing, shows himself to be an Egyptian; for were
he either a Grecian or a Macedonian, he would not be herewith offended; for
both Greeks and Macedonians do vow to Sacrifice Hecatombs to their gods, and
use Priests in their banquets; and yet for all this, the World is not desolate
of living creatures, as Appion ^eareth.

But were all men so mad as the Egyptians, it would indeed be desolate of men,
and filled with cruel Beasts, which they (supposing them to be gods) do
diligently nourish. If any man shall ask of Appion, whom of all the Egyptians
he judged to be a wise man, and most religious toward their gods; The Egyptian
Priests circumcised, and eat no Swines flesh*
no doubt he would answer the Priests. For Appion therefore was surely blind,
when, instead of detracting us, he speaks ill of them, to gratify whom he
took all this pains. For the Egyptians do not only use those customs which
Appion in us disalloweth, Appions death.
but also do teach others to circumcise themselves, as Herodotus reports. So
that I verily think, that Appion was justly punished for blaspheming his
Country-Laws and Religion. For being forced to circumcise himself to avoid a
great disease, The defense of Moses against Appollonius and Lysimachus.
he was hereby nothing helped, but for all this, his privy member rotting, he
in extreme grief and misery Appion forsook his own Religion, and slandered and
belied ours. And this was Appions end: and here also should end this Book, but
that Appollonius, Molon and Lysimachus, and certain others, partly for
ignorance, partly for madness, have most injuriously belied our Lawmakers
Moses, and the Laws he made, detracting him as a deceitful Magician, and Author
of all the malice and impiety amongst us; and for such as teaches no virtue
nor goodness at all.

I will therefore, as far as in me lies, declare both our Conversation in
general,

Appollonius does not continually inveigh against us as Appion does, Wherein
Apollonius accuses the Jews
but only here and there; sometimes affirming us to be hated both of God and
man, sometimes to be Cowards, sometimes contrariwise complaining of our Nations
Boldness. Saying moreover, that we are more sottish than any barbarous Nation;
and that therefore we only have had none of our Nation founders of Arts or
Sciences, which

If therefore I be forced to show that other Nations have made contrary Laws,
The lovers of order and common laws are excellent in meekness and virtue.
not I; but they are to be blamed, who comparing ours with them of other
Nations, affirm ours to be the worse: neither of which can charge us; eitheir
that these Laws, which I will briefly set down, are not ours, or else that we
have not persisted in them as we ought. Making therefore this beginning, I
affirm, that they who have framed themselves to live together under certain
Rules and Ordinances, and kept them inviolate, and were the first founders of
them, were more to be commended Moses more ancient than all other Lawmakers.
in proving their Laws to be good and right, and both in wealth and woe,
calamity and felicity, to remain in them, never changing nor altering them. I
therefore aver, (...) This word, Law, is not in Homer.
that our Lawmakers is more ancient than any Law maker mentioned. For Lycurgus,
and Solon, and Seleuchus of Locris, and those the Greeks admire, are modern,
and of late times in in respect of him, as is well known. For the Greeks Homer
can witness, who in his whole Works never mentions this word, Law, for the
people of those times were not governed by Laws, but by indefinite sentences,
and the Princes pleasure, The life of Moses.
using customs but not written, and altering and changing them also as occasion
served.

But our Lawmakers being very ancient (for this is every way manifest, even by
our adversaries own confessions) showed himself both a good Prince and
Counselor unto his people: for making Laws to direct and govern men's lives, he
persuaded them voluntarily to embrace them, and firmly to persist in them with
all wisdom.

Egypt into our own Country, delivered them from many calamities almost
impossible to be avoided: for they being to pass through a place wherein was no
Water, and a very sandy ground, being also to War, and preserve their Wives and
Children, and goods from the variable event of Wars, he in all these showed
himself a most wise and prudent Counselor, and a true Patron and Guide unto
them all. For he made all the multitude so to depend upon him, Moses makes God
his guide and Counselor.
that he might persuade them to what he pleased, and yet in none of all these
did he usurp any Authority over them: and in that time and place wherein all
men of Authority assume The origin of Laws amongst the Greeks.
as his Enemies injuriously report, but such a one as the Greeks do boast Minos
and others after him to have been: for some of them affirmed their Laws to be
made by Jupiter, others by Apollo and Delphos Oracle; either so believing
themselves, or else thinking that the people would be easily so persuaded. Now
who of all the Lawmakers made the best Law, and who did most rightly think of
God, he that compares all their Laws together may easily know; for now
occasion is offered to speak of them: there are therefore an infinite company
of Nations and Laws amongst men; and some Nations are ruled by Monarchs, others
by the common consent of the people. But our Lawmakers doing neither of these,
did, as one should say, therein declare his Commonwealth to be Divine, The
opinion of the wisest Greeks concerning God.
differing in a most excellent shape from all mortal creatures: and this we
knew, but we are altogether ignorant what God is as touching his Substance and
Essence.

And thus the wisest Greeks that ever were, judged of God, who how learned they
were (he giving the ground of all their knowledge) I now omit to rehearse: and
that these things before rehearsed are best and most agreeable to the nature and
magnificence Pythagoras, Anaxagoras, and Plato and after them the Stoics, and
almost all other Philosophers have so thought Moses compared with other
lawmakers.
and they that were to be born of them, and their successors, inspiring as it
were a certain constancy into them to persevere in the same, still referring
the cause of his Laws to their own profit and commodity. For he did not affirm
the worship of God only to be part of virtue, but he assigned other part
thereof, to wit, fortitude, justice, and mutual concord of all his Citizens.
For all our actions, speeches, and what else soever, The methods of morality
and discipline.
are all referd to divine piety. Which he left not touched without any Crete
were: but the Athenians, and almost all the Greeks, were directed and trained
up by Laws in every thing they were to do, yet never could they put their
written Laws in practice. But our Lawmakers very industriously did conjoyn both
these together: for he neither omitted the training them up in manners and good
exercises, neither did he surcease to leave them written

And first of all, making his entrance from the very meats, and prescribing to
every one a convenient diet, he left no man liberty amongst us to direct
himself in the least matter concerning his meat, but he by Laws defined, both
from what meats we were to abstain, Moses commands all the Jews to come and
hear the Law.
and what to eat, and what ought to be our ordinary diet, as also when we ought
to labor, and when to cease from work; so that we, as it were under the
government of a Father or Master, might neither sin willingly, nor for
ignorance: for he did not apoint punishment for them that were ignorant of it,
but by Law enacted a most necessary and mild chastisement for the voluntary
offenders: and for this cause he did not only will, that

Whereas every one of our Nation being demanded of our Laws can answer as
readily, as he can tell his own name: for every one of us learning them, as it
were, so soon as we come to the use of reason, we have them, as it were,
written and printed in our minds, and by this means both we offend more seldom,
and when we offend, we are sure to be punished.

And this especially is that, which has caused such an unity and concord
amongst us. For to worship one God after the same manner without any difference
in manners and conversation is the only way to establish amity and concord in a
Commonwealth. The concord of the Jews in Religion.


Amongst us no man shall hear any different speechs and opinions concerning
God, whereas amongst all other Nations it is most frequent and ordinary: for
amongst them not only every one of the common people does speak his pleasure in
this point, but diverse Philosophers also presume to do it, some of them with
their blasphemous speeches altogether destroying the nature of God, and others
with the like impudency denying* him to have any care of men; neither is there
any difference amongst us of affairs pertaining to man's life, but all men with
us follow one common express labor, and we all jointly affirm the Son of God,
and that he has care of humane affairs, and all our actions and exercises:
yea, any one may learn of our Women and Children, that all things whatsoever
are to be reduced to piety.



What Monarchy then or Kingdom can be more holy than this? What sort of People
are to be made Priests
Or how can God be better honored than amongst us, where all people are
prepared to piety, and the Priests commanded so to rule and govern the
Commonwealth, as if they were celebrating some festivity?

And whereas other Nations are weary of celebrating their Mysteries (which they
term Sacrifices) in a few days; we with joy, pleasure, and immutable wills, do
celebrate our Sacrifices continually without intermission. It rests now that
I set down our Precepts and Laws, as Arguments of that which I have said.

The first is of God: Of God, and of the divine Providence.
of whom our Law says, God comprehends all things, he is most

He is holy, The works of God.
for we see his Works; the Light, the Heaven, and the Earth, the Sun, the Moon,
Rivers, and Sea, so many different shapes of living Creatures, and increase of
Fruits: All these God himself made, not with hands or labor, nor as one
needing any to help him, but he seeing them to be good, they were presently
made. He is to be followed

We have one Temple, as also one God, which Temple is common to all men, as he
is the common God of all men. Our Conformity is pleasing to him, and with that
our Priests do constantly adore him, and he amongst them has the first place,
who by birth is the chiefest: He it is who first sacrifices to God, sees the
Laws observed, judges Controversies, and punishes those that are convicted by
the Law: whosoever disobeyeth him shall be punished as one that rebels against
God himself: The sacrifices of the old Testament.
He offers sacrifices not of gluttony or drunkenness, for God is not pleased
with such sacrifices, but rather

But God loves them that are temperate, and orderly, and of good behavior,
and especially requires in us that sacrifice, and inviolable chastity. In our
sacrifices offered for our common good, we first of all pray in common, and
then every one for himself, because we are all fellows, and he that delights
herein more than in his own life, is most acceptable to God.

We pray and vow unto God, not requesting riches of him, for he of his own
accord bestows them upon every one, and left them amongst us: but we pray
that we may have part of them, and having gotten them may keep them.

Our Law has also appointed purifications and abstinence from carnal
copulation, Purifications used in sacrifice.
and many other things, which are too long to rehearse: And this is our speech
and opinion

And as concerning Marriage; Our Law only allows natural copulation between
Man and Wife, done to the intent to get Children. But that men should abuse one
another Of marriage.
not respecting the dowry, neither must we take Women violently and by force,
nor allure them by deceitful persuasions, but that we rather obtain the good
will of the Parent, and use ordinary means to persuade. It also appoints that
the Woman shall be in all things inferior to the Man, neither is she to obey
in committing wickedness, but as one under Government: For it is God that gave
man this authority. With her the Husband only may lawfully accompany, and it is
abomination for her to make trial of another man: The punishment for one that
does ^avi^h a Virgin.
and whose attempteth this, can no ways avoid death: the like penalty attends
him if he offer violence to a Virgin espoused unto another man, or if by
persuasions he overcome a married Woman or The purification for the body
and Women after lawful copulation must wash themselves, judging that a part of
their Soul was by this act defiled, and she being puffed up was wounded in her
body, and therefore our Law ordained water of purification for them. Neither is
it lawful for them to feast and banquet at their Child^ birth, whereby an
occasion of drunkenness may grow, but that their beginning should be tempetate:
they are likewise commanded to train up their Children in learning, that they
may learn the Law, and actions of their forefathers, and imitate

Our Law has also provided for the burial of the dead, Of the funerals of the
dead.
that our Funerals should neither be pompous, nor our Sepulchers gorgeous,
commanding every Household to perform all necessaries touching the burial of
their dead, permitting all men at any ones death to assemble themselves
together, and bewail the dead: It also commands every one (yea even the dead
man's own family) to purify themselves after the burial, and to go afar off, as
seeming to be unclean.

It also appoints punishment for them that have committed murder, either
wilfully or against their will.

It binds every man to obey his parents next after God, and commands that
those Children that do not show themselves grateful unto them, The honor due
to Parents*
or in any thing do grieve them, that they should be stoned to death: It also
commands all young men to reverence old Men, because God is Elder to us all.

It permits not friends to conceal any impiety; for God is not their friend
who does not disclose them: And if friends fall out that do know one another
secrets; yet they are commanded not to bewray them.

If any Judge take a bribe, he is to be punished with death for omitting
Justice, and assisting the guilty. Against theft and usury.
No man must take any thing away that he himself placed not, and no man must
take that which is not his own. No man for lending must take usury;

It is also not amiss to recount how our Lawmakers provided for the
entertaining of strangers amongst us: For he seems so to have provided, that
to our knowledge we neither corrupt our own Laws, nor deny to impart them to
others: but he entertaineth all liberally, that will come and live under our
Laws, judging the community of man's life, not so much to consist in the Nation
whereof we come, as in the unity of our minds and conversation. He forbids
others that are strangers, and come not with that intent to be admitted to our
solemnities: yet he commanded us to exhibit unto them all other things
necessary: and that we should give unto all men fire, water, meat, and bury

We are also forbidden to rob and spoil those that are slain in fight, and deal
injuriously with our Captives; How we ought to (...) Enemies.
and especially, if they be Women: yea, he so endeavored to teach us humanity
and mildness, that he provided, that we use even unreasonable beasts
courteously, and only employ them to serve our lawful need, and no further: for
he forbids us to kill any tame thing bred in houses, and that we should not
kill the old birds and their young together; and because many wild Beasts,
enemies to mankind, do assist us in our labors, he commanded to spare them
also. And in every point he

We also have Laws concerning our Servants, A repetition of the precepts of the
Law.
and our Measures, and Weights, and unlawful bargains and sales, or deceit, if
either one take any thing that is another man's, or which is not his own; all
these are to be punished, not as other Nations punish them, but much more
grievously. But whosoever either injureth his Parents, or commits impiety
against God, he shall presently be destroyed. But they that observe this Law
are rewarded, not with gold or silver, nor with a Crown beset with precious
stone; but The reward of such as keep the Law.
And if it chance that we be forced to suffer death for them, yet do we
joyfully go to execution, nothing doubting but that we shall so exchange this
Life for a better.

I should be loath to report this, if our deeds did not make it manifest; for
many of our forefathers, only for that they refused to speak against our Laws,
or otherwise than our Laws permitted, have most manfully and constantly endured
all torments and death it self.

If our Nation were unknown to all the world, and that this our voluntary
observa^ion Greeks, that either he had read this which I have declared, or else
that he had found People in a strange Land, such as we be, having so pious and
honest opinions concerning God, and who had for many ages persevered therein; I
doubt not but they would all admire and wonder hereat, considering the great
mutability amongst themselves.

To be short, The continuance of the Laws amongst the Jews.
there are some, who stick not to deride them, who have lately written of the
Government of Common wealths and Laws, as though they had written things
fabulous and altogether impossible. And (to speak nothing of other
Philosophers, who have written of this Argument) that divine Plato amongst the
Greeks, a man who in honest life, Plato admired amongst the Greeks.
virtuous speech, and sound Philosophy excelled all others, this man is Plato
himself confesses, that he dare not by reason of the common peoples ignorance
set down the true opinion of God.

But many think Plato's words full of vanity, Lycurgus the Law-m^ker amongst
the Lacedaemonians.
and licentiousness, and admire Lycurgus and the City of Sparta, for that it so
long time persevered in his Laws. It is therefore an evident demonstration of
Virtue to remain in their Laws. But if those who so admire the Lacedaemonians do
compare them with us, and the time during the which their Laws were in force,
with the time of our Commonwealth; they shall find that ours has
Lacedaemonians did only perfectly observe their Laws, during such time as they
were in prosperity and liberty, and that when their Fortune changed, they then
became unmindful of their Laws.

But we, who have felt many thousand mis-haps, by reason of the often change of
Princes in Asia, have not in these our last miseries and evils forsaken our
Law. Neither can any man say, that liberty and licentious Life is the cause why
we so diligently observe them, The Jews compared with the Lacedaemonians.
seeing that whosoever please may see sufficient proof, that they tie us to more
strict Life and laborious, than those of the Lacedaemonians did them. For they
neither tilled the Earth, nor used any handy-craft, but ceasing from all
labors and pains-taking, any thing contrary to our Laws. The strict Laws of
the Jews.
Yet it is no wonder that we for our Law do dye with

Let now Lysimachus or Molonus pass, and all such as they be, wicked lying
Writers, and Sophisters, deceivers of young men, and detracters of our Nation,
as though we were the wickedest People living. As for me, I will not examine
the Laws of other Nations: Moses forbideth to deride and blaspheme false gods,
only for the name of God imputed unto them.
for it is our Custom to keep and observe our own, not to detract others; yea,
and our Lawmakers openly prohibited us from blaspheming such, as other Nations
The number of gods amongst the Gentiles (...).
affirming the number of them to be as many as they thought good, and that they
were born at diverse times, allotting to every one his proper place, as unto
other living Creatures: some to be under the Earth, others in the Sea, and the
ancientest amongst them in Hell, fettered and bound: and those whom they place
in Heaven, in words they do term him a Father, but in deeds they show him to be
a Tyrant; and for this cause they The Fable of Jupiter and ^allas.
Against these vanities all excellent and wise men do worthily inveigh, who
beside this already rehearsed in derision add, how some of the gods are young,
some are old, some infants, others are gods of Arts and Sciences, and one is a
Smith, another a Weaver, another a Pilgrim, and at variance with mortal men,
others delight in Music, others in Shooting: Moreover that they are at
variance one with another amongst themselves, and that they fall out one with
another in men's behalf, and that not only one of them lays violent hands upon
the other, but that also they are wounded by mortal men, and sorrow, and grive
for the wounds; and that which Jupiter.
whom they call Father, contemned and drowned certain women, whom he himself
had deceived and gotten with Child, and that he could not deliver the Children
born of these Women from calamity, for that destiny had obliged him, nor see
their deaths without tears.

This is all good stuff, as also is that which follows, to wit, Adulteries
committed in Heaven so openly and impudently among the gods, that some profess
themselves to envy their fellow gods and goddesses tied together in such
filthiness. And what should the rest of them do, when as their King, the most
ancient amongst them, could not refrain

What is the cause of this shameful ignorance, What is the cause of such error
concerning God.
and erroneous iniquity concerning God? Truly I am persuaded, For that their
first Lawmakers were themselves herein to seek, and ignorant of the nature of
God, or else that they did not faithfully deliver unto their Commonwealth, so
much as themselves knew concerning this point; but as though it had been a
thing of least moment, did wilfully let it pass, giving license to Poets, and
permitting them to deifie and make gods whom they pleased, and that the Orators
should write of the Commonwealths affairs, and tell what them liked of strange
gods.

Moreover, the Painters and Image-makers amongst the Greeks had a great hand in
Poets and Painters cause the multitude of gods.
it being lawful for them every one to frame what shape he list; and how he
list, some of Earth, others of Colors; and the chiefest god-makers amongst
them used Ivory and Gold to make their god of; a true argument of their mutable
novelty.

And then the ancient gods, whom at first they honored and reverenced, as much
as they could possibly devise, being now withered with Age, are out of credit,
and other youngsters possess their places and honors: their Temples also, some
are desolate, others newly erected, as men please. Whereas contrariwise, they
ought most constantly to keep their opinion of God, and his Religion.

Apollonius Molon was one of these proud Fools; but those Grecians that
followed the Plato well seeing, Plato decreed that no Poet should be permitted
in a Commonwealth.
affirms that Poets are not to be permitted in a Commonwealth, and sends
Homer away very honorably crowned and anointed, lest that he with his Fables
should destroy or deprave the true opinion of God. For Plato of all others
especially imitated our Lawmakers, as he did herein also, commanding his
Citizens, that all of them should perfectly learn his Laws, and that for no
casualty any strange foreign Custom should be admitted into their City, but
that their Commonwealth should be pure, and they persist in the observation of
their Laws. But Apollonius Molon not respecting this, inveigheth against us,
for not receiving into our society

The Lacedaemonians expelled all strangers, The Lacedaemonians did expel all
strangers.
and did not permit their Citizens to travel into other Countries, fearing that
both ways their Laws might be corrupted. They therefore are to be spoken
against rather than we, seeing they neither admit strangers to converse with
them, nor to inhabit amongst them, nor impart their Religion unto them; but we,
though not desirous to learn the Religion of other Nations, yet do we not deny
to impart ours to strangers, who desire to embrace it: which, if I be not
deceived, is a token of magnanimity, and clemency in us: but this shall suffice
concerning the Lacedaemonians.

Apollonius was ignorant how matters stood with the Athenians, The Athenians
manners.
who boast that their City was free to all Nations: But they did most severely
and without all mercy punish those that did but speak any word against their
God. For what was the cause of Socrates his death? he neither betrayed the City
to Enemies, nor destroyed their Temples, but only swore by a strange Oath,
which as he said (whether in jest or in earnest) a Devil taught him, and for
this offense he was put to death by drinking Hemlock: his Accusers alleging,
that he corrupted young men, and contemned the Laws and Religion of his
Country. Socrates a Citizen of Athens Anaxagoras.
And this Socrates sustained being a Citizen of Athens.

Anaxagoras was of Clazomenia: and for that he affirmed the Sun, which the
Athenians worshipped for God, to be a fiery stone, he was by the sentence of
some few condemned Diagoras of Melus, should be rewarded with a talent for his
labor, A talent is 600 Crowns.
only for that this Diagoras was said to deride their mysteries: Protagoras
also had been by them taken and put to death, had he not escaped, only for that
they supposed him to have written certain doubts of the Athenian gods. And what
wonder is it that they used their men at this rate, when they practiced the
same cruelty upon their Women, one of their she Priests being put to death for
worshipping a strange God; their Laws appointing that who ever brought a strange
God into their City should be punished with death? It is therefore evident,
that they who enacted such strait Laws, believed not the gods of other Nations;
for had they believed in them, they would not have deprived themselves of the
benefit of many

The very Scythians (who delighted in man slaughter so much, The Scythians.
that they very little differed from bruit Beasts) yet did they think
themselves bound to maintain their own Laws, as best, so that they slew
Anacharsis a famous Greek, that came unto them, only for that he seemed to
attribute too much unto the Grecian gods; yea, thou may find many among the
Persians, who for this cause have been tortured. And it is evident that
Apollonius approved the Persian Laws: The Persians manners.
for when the Greeks admired their fortitude and concord of opinions concerning
God, I mean the fortitude they showed at the burning of their Temples; this
Apollonius in all things imitated the Persians, violating other men's Wives, and
putting out their Childrens Eyes; whereas our Laws adjudg him or abandon these
Laws: The Jews constancy in their Laws.
neither do we exercise fortitude, to deprive other men of their Lacedaemonians
avoid reproach for their inhospitality, and neglecting marriage? Against the
Lawmakers of the Gentiles
Or the Elians and Thebans for accompanying with men contrary to the Law of
Nature, which fact most shameful they deemed good and necessary? Yea not
content to do so themselves, they also ascribed the like unto their gods to be
done by them (which the Greeks also now of late have done) and for this cause
they The injustice of Lawmakers
But I will speak no more of punishment, neither how great malefactors those
first Lawmakers freed from punishment, being bribed with money, and how unjust
they were in the Laws appertaining to Wedlock. It is long to examine what great
occasions of Impiety they gave. For many have already long ago forsaken their
Laws: The Jews strict observation of the Law.
which cannot be said of us, who for our Laws have suffered loss of our Cities,
Fortunes, and Lives, we keeping and persisting in our Laws even unto death; and
if any Jew be in a strange Country, where there is a Tyrant King, yet does not
he so fear him, that he would for his command in any jot transgress our Laws.
If therefore we do valorously endure thus much for our Laws, all men must needs
The Jews Laws are of great Antiquity.
But seeing the Antiquity of Laws is the greatest Argument to prove their
goodness, I will set down of what Antiquity our Laws are, together with our
Lawmakers opinion of the Deity; if therefore any one compare our Laws with the
Laws of all Nations, he shall find that ours are of more Antiquity than theirs
by many Ages. The Laws of the Gentiles.
For our Laws established amongst us have been imitated of all other Nations:
For though the first Greeks did pretendedly observe their own Laws, yet all
their Philosophers did imitate ours, and our Opinions of God, and taught others
Greek or Barbarian, who have not after some manner observed a Sabbath as we do,
and fasting days, and Lamps, all which they learned of us; yea many do also
observe our Customs concerning their meats, and our unity and concord, wherein
we excel all other Nations, our community also and industry in Arts and
Labors, and sufferance for our Laws. And which is most to be admired, our Law,
The Epilogue of this Book.
not having any to force us to observe it, has so obliged our hearts, that as
God is of all the world honored without compulsion, so are our Laws amongst us
without any violence or force: And whosoever does diligently consider his own
Nation and Family, shall find that which I have reported to be true. I will now
generally The cause why ^^seph writ these Books against Appion.
and believe that whatsoever he prophesied, proceeded from God: yea, although
our selves did not know the goodness of our Laws, yet the multitude of them
that imitate them were a sufficient motive to induce us thereunto. A brief
rehearsal of all that is abovesaid.
But I have at large, and with all sincerity discoursed of our Laws and
Commonwealth in my Books of our Antiquity. And now again I have made mention
of them neither in contumely of other Nations, nor in praise of our own, but
The intention of the Jews Laws.
which I have proved by the testimony of many ancient Writers, who in their
Works have mentioned us.

Our Adversaries affirm us to have come of Egyptians: I have showed that our
forefathers came into Egypt out of some other place. They allege that we were
expelled Egypt, for that we were infected with diseases; I have proved that our
Predecessors came from thence to their own Country by means of their own
prowess and force of their own accord. Others labor to defame our Lawmakers as
a wicked



I therefore confidently affirm, The Origin of the Jews Laws.
that we do teach more pious and virtuous manners, than Appion and Molon
perish, and all others that with them are convicted of lying and slandering us.
This Book is written to thee Epaphroditus who love the truth, and to others
who by thee will, or are desirous to know the same.

DESIDERIUS ERASMUS
I Have not grudged, virtuous Father, to Dedicate unto thee a days labor;
wherein I have perused, and what in me lies, amended the Book which Joseph
writ of the seven Maccabees brethren: and would it had lien in my power more
abundantly to have answered your expectation: I have now (for that I counted
the Greek Copy) by the Latin conjectured the Greek, and altered some things,
yet but very few. Joseph does not falsely Jerome for this cause entituleth this
Book, Great Eloquence; Suidas (...). out of them both we amend the corrupted
Style, and call it (...), that is, The Rule of Reason: For the scope of this
Book tends all to prove, that Reason is of no force in man, except it bear
Soverignty over all inordinate appetites. This is most evidently proved by the
Books of the Maccabees in the Scripture: which Books the Jews did not receive
as Canonical, yet do they account it among their sacred Writ. I cannot but
congratulate this worthy College (which though famous for many other things,
yet is more happy) Colonia Agrippina, that happy and fortunate City: yet in
nothing more happy, than for that it alone does in her bosom shrine so many, so
sacred, and excellent Pledges of Piety: yet should it be more happy, if it
could express their Virtues, whose sacred Relics it so Religiously keeps,
and imitate their Manners whose Bodies it possesses; to wit, if in sincerity
of Religion, it imitated the Piety of three Kings, and the sacred purity of the
eleven Virgins, if it resembled the most Valiant young Men, the Maccabees, and
the invincible Courage of that Woman, whose valorous Constancy no misery could
conquer. And this best portion and part of her felicity, this worthy City might
bestow upon her self, yea and double the same. Do thou go forward in that which
thou have in hand, to wit, in spreading the praise of those Martyrs, making
that

Farewell.

I Am at the instant request of Polibius of Megalopolis to put in writing the
constant Sufferings of the Maccabees worthy all admiration, not in a Rhetorical
and pleasing style, but rather after our own country fashion, thereby to exhort
our Nation to patience in their Calamities. Reason has dominion over our
passions.
But first of all, it is necessary to speak something of Reason, and assign
unto it the power and virtue to deliberate. For he who has once fully
determined to suffer all misery for

Whosoever therefore will renounce the World, and aspire only to Celestial things,
must exercise Sobriety, banish Gluttony, Lasciviousness, and all other such
Vices as may possess and captivate the mind: He must likewise mount up to the
top of Virtues Tower, that from thence he may resist and impugn the Vices of
his Body, Grief and Fear.



And first I will speak of Eleazar and seven Brethren, The death of the seven
brethren, and their mother.
and relate what Tortures and Torments their Mother endured: yet cannot man,
but only God determine, who amongst them was first, and who last in this noble
agony. They therefore, being all of one opinion, resembling one another more in
mind than in body, duly considered the frailty of this Life, and neither
delighted in the flatteries of the World, nor the alluring enchantments
thereof. They valued not torments, fetters, nor any other sort of tortures
imposed upon them: To return, they resolved upon patience, and to endure
whatsoever

But before I begin to declare the death of these brave men, I will a little
treat of Reason, The description of Reason and Wisdom.
which, as I have affirmed, is no small motive to Martyrdom. Reason it is that
makes us observe Fasts, and Abstinence; Reason makes us despise Money, by it
we are taught not to account of Dignities and Honors, which all men generally
aim at, yea Reasons gift it is, that we do resist the heat of lustful desires.
Hence comes it, that having once overcome such things as the flesh delights
in, we find our selves a little able to resist, we also learn to despise pains
and torments, and by degrees resolve to suffer

Which that it may more plainly appear, let us search out the cause of this
order, and we shall find wisdom to be the cause hereof. For no man can
determine and distinguish

Besides these, Grief and pain cause or hinder passion.
there are two things that either do cause or hinder passion, to wit pain and
pleasure; one of which we do always refuse, and the other we do always desire;
yet where pleasure arises, and is presently by reasons rule put away, the mind
is there strengthened; and pain compared with glory, is through hope of a
greater reward contemned before it come; and being come, our mind is ashamed
not to suffer that which before it was resolved to do.

Reason therefore is the guide of all our actions, Reason resembles a skilful
Gardener.
and by it we despise torments, and

Thus reason corrects our passion, encourages us to suffer, and supports us in
our sufferings. Who is not desirous to eat the flesh of wild Beasts and Fishes?
And who lusts not to eat of feathered Fouls? nay, do not the dainty dishes
either from Sea or Land invite us to eat them? What then causes us to abstain
from them? what makes us all desire them, and yet none of us eat them? even
reason, by which the mind is taught to overcome it self in delightful objects
and pleasure, that when occasion of Martyrdom is offered, setting aside all
vanities we will not for a little pleasure

By reason it was that Joseph (to his great praise) mastered his concupiscence,
An instance of Joseph's chastity.
and suffered not himself to be overcome by his lust, which was but too
incident to his age: Reason so works with sound advice and mature counsel,
that it again recovereth lost friendship, gains new, and suffers no cruelty
to be committed. Of this we have also the example of Moses, who had he not had
just occasion to be angry against Dathan and Abiram, reason (no doubt) would
have caused him to have smothered his passion. Did not our father Jacob with
great vehemence reprove his Sons Simeon and Levi, who without reason had used
such cruelty, saying, Cursed be your anger? Which anger had it been bridled
with reason, neither had they been cursed, nor the other

But some will ask me, why we commit wickedness, seeing that reason rules our
passion? But it is ridiculous to think that reason has so perfect a dominion:
for reasons rule cannot hinder the appetite from desire, but only correct it so
far, that it suffer with patience the loss or abstinence from such things as it
desired. For example sake, Reason cannot hinder thee from being angry, but it
can so work, that thou commit no impiety when thou art angry: in like manner,
it cannot hinder thee from desiring filthy

Reason therefore cannot eradicate vice, An instance of David's thirst.
but only bridle it. Witness in this the example of holy David, who fighting
against Strangers with great success, and being at Evening weary and faint,
retiring into his Tent, that was guarded by Soldiers, he found them all at
meat: yet himself being thirsty would not drink, notwithstanding Water was hard
by, 2 Samuel 2. 18.
because his Religion dissuaded him, for he had vowed not to drink but from a
Fountain in the Camp of the Enemy.

Whilst thus his thirst increased, three lusty young men armed themselves, and
taking with them a vessel, they went unto their Enemies Camp, and assaulted the
David in his thirst refused to drink the Water he so desired.
But holy David so bridled his appetite, that his reason quenched his desire,
and showed an excellent token of patience, teaching how the fear of God was to
be preferred before all things. For taking the Water he had so much wished for,
and which had been gotten with such danger, he presently poured it on the
ground, as a sacrifice to God, choosing rather to die for thirst, than to offend
the divine Majesty: yet reason is not so forcible, that it is able without due
consideration to repress the inordinate motions of the mind, and mitigate the
grief of the body. But it is now time to come to our History, yet is not this
former discourse to be thought impertinent, for Seleucus King of Asia enriched
our Priests, and being a man of another Religion, ascribed all his actions and
worthy deeds to the Religion and Faith of our Ancestors. Seleucus and Nicanor.
But wicked men's madness could not herewith be satisfied. For one Simon, hating
the High Priest Onias, and finding no ways or means to be revenged of him in
his own Country, Simon a Traitor to his Country.
went unto Apollonius, Governor of Syria, Phoenicia, and Cilicia, and before
him in a public assemby declared, that he could help the King to an infinite
treasure, for (says he) there is hidden in Jerusalem an infinite deal of Gold
and Silver, which by right belongs unto King Seleucus.

Apollonius hearing this, praised and commended Simon, and confiscated the Gold
and Silver to the Treasure-house of Seleuchus; Apollonius Captain of Syria,
came with an Army to Jerusalem
and having authority from the King Simon, came unto our Country, purposing if
any violence were offered, to use the defense of his Soldiers.

When the Treasure-house of our Temple was now a sacking, Onias wept bitterly,
and said, that it was a heavy sight to them, to whom this treasure was
committed, to see it, or any part of it taken away. But Appollonius, neither
respecting the Tears and entreaties of the old Men, Women, nor Children,
pressed into the Temple, they all praying God to punish him, Angels upon Horses
shining with fiery brightness.
and to defend their Temple. Being now with a great guard of armed men entered
into the holy Temple, there appeared certain Angels on Horseback with weapons
in their hands, and shining with a fiery flame about them, Apollonius, who
presently fell down flat upon his face, and lying so a great while, at last he
came a little to himself: and rising up, he leaned upon his shoulder who kept
the Temple, not being able to stand alone, he was so terrified with the vision
he had seen. When by degrees he recollected and found some little hope of
recovery, he stretched both his hands toward Heaven, and despairing to obtain
pardon by his own prayers for his offense committed, he besought the Hebrews
(whose Temple he came to spoil) to make intercession for him, himself with
Tears craving pardon for his offense, and not only acknowledging his fault; but
confessing himself to have deserved death, Onias by prayer obtains
Apollonius's life.
and all punishment possible. Holy Onias seeing this, and fearing also, that if
Apollonius should then dye, the Hebrews would Apollonius presently hasted to
Seleucus to let him understand what had happened: but when he came he found
Seleucus dead, and Antiochus reigning in his stead, a man of Tyrannous nature,
who bare an ancient grudge to Onias the high Priest: Antiochus his rage against
the Jews.
and therefore made Jason his Brother High Priest in his stead, Jason promising
Antiochus in recompense to pay him 3660 Talents of Silver every year.

Jason being made High Priest, and chief amongst all the Nation of the Jews,
presently forced all the people to impiety, and to forsake their Religion; so
that to build baths, he hindered the defense and completing of the Temple, and
many of our Nation conspired with him in this iniquity. But hereat God was
presently wroth: and being Antiochus himself was incited against them, who
warring against Ptolomeus King of Egypt, had heard it reported, that the Jews
esteemed him to be dead, yet was he very nobly entertained by the inhabitants
of Jerusalem: and presently after the fight, he made an edict, that who so
among the Jews refused to offer Sacrifice to the Gods, should presently die upon
the wheel. But the godly-minded of our Nation did little esteem this edict; yea
the Women circumcising their infants (as our Law requires) did afterward cast
themselves down headlong, to the end that they might so obtain a present death
without longer delay.

Antiochus perceiving that the severity of his edict could not compel the
Hebrews to

Amongst this whole multitude assembled from all places was one Eleazar a
Priest, well instructed in learning and the fear of GOD, Eleazar is brought
unto Antichus.
a man aged in respect of his years, of a very reverend countenance, one that
was known to all men, and famous for his virtue. To this man Antiochus said
thus:

Be advised by me, 2 Macc. 6.
holy old man, Antiochus's exhortation to Eleazar.
eschew those torments prepared for such as are obstinate, preserve thy
reverend age, and cast not away your life, take the Sacrifice, and eat of the
Swines for Gods benefits, when we contemn his graces, and make difference where
Nature has

Eleazar was permitted to speak, Eleazar's answer to Antiochus.
and replied to Antiochus, who exhorted and pressed him to the breach of his
Laws. We, Antiochus, do not follow vain report, but observe the verity of
Religion which our Fathers kept, and fear of torments cannot make us embrace
another Religion, and forsake our own: yea, suppose our Religion delivered to
us by our

We are taught to embrace sobriety, to subdue our inordinate appetites, to keep
our bodies chaste, to suffer with patience whatsoever for Gods sake is inflicted
upon us, and not to deny the Truth, Justice, Piety, or God, who alone is true:
and therefore I refuse this profane meat, well knowing what I ought to eat, as
warranted therein by the precept of the Almighty God, whose Laws I have learned
to obey, and eschew all meats sacrificed to Idols, and embrace with all vigor
that which is expedient for the Soul: and it is no less than Tyranny to compel
a

Do what thou will, despise us as you please, it shall be returned upon your
own head, and you shall be as despicable your self, as others are to you. I
will persist in the holy steps of my forefathers; though with Tyrannous hands
you pluck out mine Eyes, and rip up my bowels with a knife, thou shall never
conquer me. I will dye secure and patient in the love of God; neither flatter
thy self for that I am aged, and that my body is now feeble: If need be, that I
must be sacrificed for Gods sake, thou shall find me in the vigor and
resolution of a young man. Prepare then your fire, and get ready your racks:
thou shall find me more constant in my torments, than before I come to them.

O sacred Religion! I will never violate thee, the foundation of my salvation,
the defense of Eleazar's constancy.
the grounds of faith; never will I lift up my hands contrary to thy precepts;
never will I believe any thing to be just, which is repugnant to that which
thou have taught me: I will not lose the merit of so many years, nor relinquish
the faith I have hitherto embraced. The chaste, pure, and devout Company of
Fathers shall receive me into their number, where I shall not fear (O impious
King) thy threats. But thou have changed the name of King to Tyrant, yet thou
shall never allege against me my deed, my consent, my word.

Whilst Eleazar, Eleazar cruelly whipped
full of constancy and liberty, spoke thus, the Soldiers that stood thereabout
haled him to be tortured; and stripping him naked, they hanged him up, and
whipped him, and whilst on either side he was beaten, a Crier with an impious
voice still cried unto him, Obey the Kings pleasure and command. But worthy
Eleazar was Eleazar, strong in body and mind, like a right Champion of the true
GOD, never shrunk at those pains, but the good old man by patience overcame the
cruelty of his torturers, and put his very

How long, Eleazar, will thou neglect the Kings commands, and refuse to free
thy self from torments? eat Swines flesh, and thou redeemest thy self from all
thou endurest. Eleazar, although in the height of his tortures he had been
silent, could not without answering endure to hear so profane counsel, but as
tormented with this speech, he cried out; We Sons of the Hebrews are not so
effeminate as to forsake the way of our Salvation, wherein we have walked even
until our old Age, neither are we taught for the avoiding of torment, which
will not long continue, to give others example and occasion to sin. It is but a
while that this life can last: so that we lose but a small moment for that
which is eternal. For then be it from me to prolong Abraham's bosom.

The Soldiers seeing his constancy, by the Kings command cast him into the
fire, and poured stinking and loathsome liquors into his nostrils. Which the
reverend old man most patiently suffered till at length he was consumed with
the slame: when he found himself departing and giving up the Ghost, he spoke
after this manner, lifting up his dazzled Eyes to Heaven:

Thou art He (O God) from whom life and Salvation proceeds: behold, Eleazar's
last words in the fire.
I dye for observing thy Laws, be merciful to this thy Nation, and do not
forsake them whom thou have hitherto

It is most true therefore, which we at first affirmed, that Reason regulates
our passions, and disposes us to suffer cheerfully: which once we having
determined and resolved the anguish of our suffering is abated, and our
resolution and constancy confirmed.

If therefore reason and the inferior powers be at variance, Reasons victory.
we must subject them to Reason, if we will make a perfect Victory. With this
guide our Father Eleazar was most safely directed neither to yield or sink
under his pains, nor give place to unlawful A similitude taken from the Rock.
and flames was still the same man. For as the top of a high Rock stands
safe, and resists the Wave without any damage unto it self; even so did the
Rock of Reason in this man beat back the rage of those tempestuous Waves that
dashed against his body, nor permitting them to break in, and pierce the
Celestial and Divine

O happy old man, Eleazar's praise.
more blessed than all of thy Age! O Priest more sacred than all other Priests!
who did not pollute thy sacred lips with profane meats; impiety found no
entrance that way, from whence so many prayers to God had proceeded. The
Tyrants cruelty could not prevail against thee; Thou therefore art made an
example for all Priests of God to imitate. Such a one behoved it a Priest to
be, more strong than torments, more able to suffer than the torturers to
inflict punishment, more forcible than Princes commands, yea, and more potent
than the fire, wherein thou did perish: and finally, thou wast ordained to be
crowned with the Laurel of Martyrdom for thy sufferance. Thou have surpassed
all Antiquity, thou shall be an example to all posterity.

He therefore that is wise is resolute and able to conquer his passions,
Antiochus causes seven noble young men of the Hebrews and their Mother to be
brought to Antioch.
for that he does well deliberate, and when he comes to trial, can put his
determination in execution. Neither is the wisdom of this old man so much to be
admired, seeing Children, and as it were Infants, have deserved the same
commendations, and wrought astonishment in their tormentors; for the
indignation and cruelty of Antiochus (though overcome by the wisdom of this old
man) was but the more increased, 2 Mac. 7
and therefore Antioch out of their Castle Sosandrum, who being tender in
years, and as he though weak and unable to suffer torments, his hope was that
either by persuasions, Salomana, who now grew ancient, to be brought before
him: so they according to his command were brought being very graceful in their
persons and every way worthy of so virtuous a Mother; yea, they resembled
Angels, their Faces shining like the clear light of the Sun; their Eyes
sparkled in most comely and decent manner, as testifying, that they surpassed
in virtue all other of humane race and condition. The Mother was descended of
most virtuous and noble parentage, and so she her self had continued and lived;
but that excellent feature of body and nobility of blood was much dignified by
her virtue and fortitude, in which she passed all that could be said in her
commendation.

I wish your good (O admirable young men: The Kings exhortation to the seven
brethren.
for so both your beauty of body and noble Parentage persuade me): do not
therefore like mad men resist my command: avoid not only torments but death
also. For I desire not only to exalt you unto honor, but also to increase your
riches and possessions; contemn the superstitious and superfluous belief of
your own Countrymen, and embrace our Religion: Which if you refuse to do (as I
hope you will not) I will devise such torments, as that I may by a lingering and
painful death be able to consume you.

And to terrify them the more, he commanded the instruments of their torments
to Antiochus said:

Consent unto me, O prudent young men: for if that I command you to commit a
sin; yet do not you offend in doing it, The young men's constancy.
seeing you commit it only upon compulsion. But the young Youths inflamed with
a divine Spirit and Sense, contemned so many kinds of torments,

By this it is evident, how much Reason is master over Passion: for if any
slothful man not before trained up to it should of a sudden come to such a
push, at the very sight of such torments his mind would be troubled, and his
countenance appalled, his Legs under him would have trembled, and he with fear
have been confounded: so that he would presently have retracted, and professed
himself unable to bear up against so many and so grievous torments, saying:

My self being unwise, what should I have made choice of? Whether to endure
these torments, or accept of their promised benefits? Whether I should have
been moved to pity mine

But where Reason and advice takes place, and has well trained the mind to
perfection, the other consequently follows: As by the example of these
brethren I will declare, who as it were all with one voice denied to eat the
sacrificed Swines flesh, as they were commanded. Wherefore (said they) O Tyrant
do thou persecute us that are innocent? The seven brethren reply to Antiochus.
We both desire and wish to die, and will, until such time as death expels
life, firmly keep that which God commanded, and Moses taught us. And thou,
Tyrant, do not seek to seduce us by pretending love toward us: thou lover of
injustice, master of cruelty, deviser of iniquity, the Eleazar taught to
despise them. Why then do thou suppose such pusillanimity to be in us young
men, seeing of late thou foundest such courage in an old man? We follow him:
thou can not try and know our minds, except by tearing our bodies thou search
them out: We will safely and securely suffer for our God any thing, and leaving
this Earth, we shall be entertained into Heaven: and thou for so Tyrannizing
most cruelly upon innocent Souls, shall be reserved to eternal fire.

The Tyrant enraged, Antiochus commanded Maccab^us to be racked.
that he could neither prevail by fair promises, nor by threatenings, caused
them to be beaten with Bulls pizzles: and first of all he commanded Maccabeus,
the eldest of the seven brethren, to be stripped, and stretched out upon a

Bloody Tyrant, who persecutest the Majesty of God; I whom thou thus
tormentest, am no Witch, nor one who have murdered and killed another man, but
one who dies for justice, observing

Then when the torturers (overcome with compassion) persuaded him to submit to
the Kings pleasure, he answered:

O ye wicked ministers of Tyranny! your wheels are not so sharp and cruel, that
I thereby will be forced to forsake Heaven, whereon my mind is fixed: tear my
flesh; yea, if you so please, roast it at the fire: torture and torment each
parcel of my body with several cruelty; you shall for all this find your selves
unable to force us young men to impiety. The death of the eldest brother.


As he thus spoke, a fire was kindled, and he, as he was upon the Wheel racked,
was so thrown into the fire: and thus he was by flames and torments so burned,
that O beloved brethren, learn of me an example of virtue: consider the
strength of an invincible courage: contemn and despise the alluring baits of
this world, and rather obey God than this Tyrant, who can if be please humble
the proud and mighty, and exalt the lowly and dejected.

As thus he spoke, he was taken out of the flame, and flaid alive: his tongue
was pulled out of his mouth, and he put into a frying pan; and so he departed
out of this life, to the great admiration of all that beheld him, and the joy
of his brethren and mother; and went before them to Heaven, there to prepare a
Kingdom for himself and them. The second brother brought.


Aber, was haled by the Soldiers: and before the Tyrant asked him whether he
would relent, he caused all those torments to be showed him, thereby to
terrify him: but he nothing thereat moved, and denying to eat of that foresaid
Sacrifice, his hands were bound with Iron chains, and he being hanged up by
them, the skin of his body was flain off from the Crown of his head unto his
knees: so that the entrails in his breast appeared naked; yet in such manner as
he might abide greater torments. For he was cast before a cruel Libard,
thirsting most extremely after blood, to the intent that he might devour with
his teeth the rest of his body; but the beast smelling of him (no doubt by the
great handy work of Almighty God) forgot his cruelty, and turning away his
face, did no hurt to the

But hereat the Tyrants rage increased; and the Martyr by suffering
such-torments, was made more constant, crying aloud:

O how pleasant is that death unto me, which is caused by all sorts of torments
for Gods sake! yea, so much the more pleasant, for that I assuredly hope to
find reward for it in heaven. Let these torments inflicted upon me (O Tyrant)
satisfy thy cruelty; for my pa^n is not by thy tortures increased, but rather
my pleasure, as thou shall find by my patience in this Agony, More willing am I
to suffer than thou to punish; yet my pain in suffering is less than thine by
inflicting the same upon me. I am tormented for virtue and observing the Law;
and the justice of God shall banish thee from thy Regal seat: Thou by
tormenting art tormented, and

Then Machir, Machir the third brother is brought
the third son, was brought, whom all men now pitied for the death of his two
brethren, and many exhorted him by his Brothers examples to desist from his
Opinion, and so avoid punishment: but he being angry hereat, replied; One
Father begot us, one Mother bare us, one Master instructed us, we are all of
one mind, and all like affected; do therefore no longer prolong the time in
vain. I came hither to suffer, and not to

The Tyrant hereat moved to see this third nothing relent by his brothers
death, devised We, O Tyrant, endure this Torment for the love of God, and thou
the Author of such unjust cruelty shall suffer everlasting pain.

Then his tongue being cut out of his mouth, he was put into a frying pan, and
so

Next after followed Judas, the fourth brother, whom all the people persuaded
and entreated to obey the King: Judas the 4. brother is brought.
but he contemning their prayers and exhortations, said thus with all
constancy: Your fire shall neither separate nor sever me from the Law of God,
nor from my brethern, who instead of this mortal life, enjoy life everlasting.
I denounce unto thee, O Tyrant, destruction and overthrow; but to such as
believe, salvation: make trial of me therefore, thou cruel wretch, and see if
God will forsake me, who has with open and stretched out Arms received my
three brethren which are gone before me, and whom the womb of so holy a Mother
at several times brought forth unto glory.

The cruel Tyrant hearing this, was much moved, and from his Chair leapt down
to Antiochus:

This cruelty will nothing avail thee, neither shall thou hereby, Tyrant, as
thou supposest conquer me. Our Gods needs not by voice to be awakned, but
rather by secret cogitation to be prayed unto to help his servants: be
provideth for them that hold their peace, and hears the prayers of such as do
call upon him, if they deserve to be heard, and only requires purity of Soul.
For our God knows all things before we ask, and before we our selves enter
into cogitation thereof, he understands our necessity: cut out my tongue,
thou can not cut out my mind while my life remains. Those prayers, which by
it I have uttered to Almighty God, have taught it to suffer: would God thou
would so sanctify all parts of my body by punishing them;

When he had thus spoken, his tongue was cut out of his mouth, and he bound to
a stake, and there he was beaten with ropes ends, and he did patiently endure
this, notwithstanding the color of his face became dead and wan. Being loosed
from thence, he was put upon the wheel: The death of the 4. brother Achas the
5. brother presents himself to torments before he was called.
and then praying for his Countrymen, he by death went unto the rest of his
brethren.

Then Achas, the fifth brother, before he was haled to torments, spoke in this
manner; Behold (thou Tyrant) I come to be punished before thou command me, hope
not therefore any jot to alter his mind, who as thou see desires to be
tormented. The blood of my

Whilst thus he spoke, his executioners by the Kings command took him, and
cast him into a brazen pot, and he was pressed down in it, his head to his feet:
and afterward he suffered all other torments, which his brethren had endured;
yet not amazed hereat, he suddenly started up, and thus bitterly inveighed
against the Tyrant: Cruel Tyrant, how great benefits do thou against thy will
bestow upon us! yea, the more thou art incensed against us, the more acceptable
to God shall thou make us: yea, I should be sorry if thou shewdest mercy upon
me. This short affliction gains us life everlasting; if this temporal death
should not betide me, everlasting life could not befall me. And thus he finished
his Agony, and dyed.

Then the tormenters laid hands upon the sixth brother, who was called Areth,
to whom the Tyrant made offer either of honor or punishment: but he disdaining
his offer, said: Although (Tyrant) I be younger in years than my martyred
brethren, yet my constancy

Antiochus hereat confounded commanded him to be bound to a Pillar with his
head hanging down, The valor of the sixth brother.
in such wise as the defluxion of humors might cause ach: and this done, he
caused a fire to be made so far off him, that it could not burn him, but roast
him. He also commanded him, as he hung, to be pricked with awls, that so the
heat might pierce into the holes they made in his flesh. Whilst thus he was
tormented, much blood like froth gathered about his head and face, and he then
spoke in this manner. O noble fight! O valiant War! O strife between piety and
impiety! These men have past their Agonies, whose Crown of Martyrdom is the
punishment of their persecutors: I do most willingly The sixth brother sharply
reproves Antiochus.
and the Kings weapons are bended and blunted in our bodies; our God gives us
more courage to suffer, than thou have to punish: and so the precept of God
remains firm in us.

And as he thus spoke, one took hold of his tongue with a hot pair of tongs,
and so with the same torments, that his brethren had suffered, being fried in a
pan he gave up the Ghost.

Jacob, younger in year (but not in constancy of mind) than the rest of his
brethren. He presenting himself before the Tyrant, moved him to compassion,
both for that he was left alone, and the last of his brethren, and also that he
was to perish: wherefore he called the child unto him, and into a place where
no instruments of torments were, Jacob the seventh brother brought to torments.
and taking him by the hand, he said thus unto him, hoping to win him by fair
speeches: By thy brethrens calamity thou now well have learned, what is
prepared for thee, if thou disobey me: deliver thy self therefore from these
torments, and I will give thee what honor my kingdom can afford: thou shall be
a Magistrate, and General of my Army, and one of my Counselors.

But perceiving himself not to prevail, he caused the young man's Mother to be
called unto him: who coming and standing near her Son, the Tyrant said thus
unto her; Where are now, O worthy woman, all thy Children? Behold of such a
number, if thou please, the destiny affords thee one: advise therefore thy
Child, and mollify his obstinate mind by wholesome counsel.

The Mother having heard what the King said, made her reverence to the King:
which done, that the King might not understand her, she spoke in Hebrew to her
Child as follows:

Pity thy Mother, O son, and comfort thy sorrowful Mother, who bare thee nine
months in my

As his mother thus admonished him, he in the Hebrew tongue requested to be
unbound, for that he had a secret to disclose to the King: who being unfettered
he presently ran to the torments prepared: for there was a Drying Pan red hot,
that was prepared for such as were to suffer: unto the which the Child coming,
remembering his brethren, and beholding also the King, he said unto him; Cruel
tyrant, I now know thee not only to have been cruel against my brethren, but
even cruelty it self. Wretch that thou Think not that I expect any favor at
thy hands; I will follow my brethren, and remain constant The Tyrant hearing
this was wroth, and caused him to be tormented: but his Mother in his torment
comforted him, and with her kind hands held his head, when with violence of the
tortures blood issued out of his mouth, nose and privy parts, the tormentors
not ceasing till life in him was almost spent: but they (by Gods appointment)
gave over, and so he took strength again to endure more, than any of his
brethren had done; at last, his Hands and Arms being cut off, he lifted up his
Eyes to Heaven, and cried, O Adonai, O Sabaor, be merciful unto me, and
receive me into the company of my brethren, The death of the youngest brother.
let thy wrath now cease, and grant them mercy, who by us do make intercession
to thee:

Having said thus, his tongue being pulled out, he of his own accord went into
the fiery Antiochus died.

Behold how evident it is, that reason can rule our affections, seeing that
Children hereby showed more constancy, Reason, Mistress of our affection.
than the Tyrant could show cruelty. For it was reason's force, that wrought in
them that determination to suffer all torments, rather than to forsake the way
of Salvation.

These constant young men do fitly resemble inexpugnable Towers, and them, who
after a great tempest and shipwrak do safely enter the harbor of Salvation, A
similitude of the waves.
who guiding their course amidst the boys^etous waves, at last obtain the
wished shore. For every one of them strengthened the other by advice and good
counsel, The seven brethren exhort one another to suffer death manfully.
and none of them was so effeminate as to decline his Martyrdom. None used
delay herein, but

Whilst thus one of them exhorted the other, it came to pass, that none of them
offended, but each one resolute in his Religion, took example of the virtue,
courage and constancy of their fore-father Isaac, who understanding that it was
God's will, that he should be Sacrificed, refused not to submit his body to his
Fathers Sword. Let us (said they) yield our Souls to him, of whom we receied
both Soul and Body: It is a small matter for us to suffer loss of these
members, seeing that we shall in lieu of them receive everlasting bliss.
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob do joyfully expect us, as True brotherhood.
we that were all begotten of one Father, and sucked of one milk, must in all
things resemble one another: we had one teacher, and one law inviolate. And in
this golden bond of concord were these brethren linked together, and none of
them mourned to see the other tormented, but all rejoiced at the others death.
O Children, whose dignity surpasses the Royalty of Kings and Princes, whose
glory and virtue is unspeakable! None of you were terrified with fear, but you
so hastened to your deaths, as though you had been to go to bliss and felicity:
you were truly brethren, who even by death were linked together. A pledge and
sign of brotherly amity.
God has greatly in you magnified our Nation, and in you

For the Mother seeing her Children dead, was with a kind and godly zeal
inflamed also to suffer: The mothers grief.
and no marvel, seeing that the very brute beasts, if they perceive violence
offered to their young, do expose themselves to perils in their defense, and
protect them with their wings, teeth, and tallons; yea* and every one, that is
any way able to

When all her family had suffered, she as the last and glory of them all came
to execution despising the Tyrants threats, offering her motherly breast to
those torments, which her Children had suffered. O blessed stock, and blessed
increase of the self same womb! Why should I not affirm, that in all lineaments
and feature of The mother suffers seven torments before she was tormented.
and feared in every one of them lest she should be overcome. But O thou
example of all women, I cannot tell, whether thou barest these Children in thy
womb, or createdst them, who could with dry Eyes look upon them, whilst they
were torn in pieces: yea, I say little, affirming that thou

And you, blessed offspring, were not overcome by that Syren's enchantments, but
to honor God scrupled not to leave your Mother without Children: And she being
as pious and brave on her side, chose rather to want you for a time, than to
incur eternal damnation, wishing rather that the bodies of her Children should
be tormented, than their Souls. Well she knew, that nothing was more frail and
infirm than our bodies; which, though persecution be wanting, are often killed
with Agues, and other Maladies: Who is A similitude from the Deluge.
whereby we lose goods of this World and gain life everlasting? O thou most
reverend of all women, the credit of thy Nation, and honor of our Religion,
who, like the Ark of Noe, did persist inviolate amongst such stormy Waves!
for as the Arc withstood the force of the deluge, and being built strongly
with firm boards, did not suffer any thing within it to perish: so thou
sufferedst not the Tyrant to overcome the holy Ghost, which thou had received
in thy heart.

Behold of what force and efficacy Reason is! which oftentimes makes men
inferior Daniel so tortured at the sight of the Lions, nor the three Children
with the fiery Furnace, as this woman was afflicted at the death of all her
Children, before she came to her own Agony. What would another woman and Mother
have done in this Case, but wept, and with pitiful lamentations have cried? Ah
wretch thas I am! most unhappy and miserable of all that breath! who therefore
bare so many Children into this World, that their several deaths might be so
many several occasions of my grief and sorrow: she would have commemorated her
frequent labors and the pains she endured in her ten Months bearing them, she
would have bewailed her ill fortune, who brought forth her sons to so many
deaths and dangers, she would have recounted the milk wherewith she fed them,
and their meat she had prepared for them, the Eleazar's Martyrdom, did thus
exhort them in the Hebrew

O my most dear and loving Children, The mothers speech exhorting her seven
Sons to suffer.
let us hasten to that Martyrdom which may make us a Eleazar's aged body
endured; calling to mind our Father Abraham of worthy memory, who, having but
one only Son, did sacrifice him, being willed by God so to do, and seared not
to bring him to the Altar, though he was the fruit and only comfort of his age.
Isaac also was willing to be sacrificed by his father, knowing that God was to
be obeyed in all things: the like may be said of Daniel and the three Children:
believe me, we are rather tried than tormented. For whatsoever this World
affords is mortal and transient.

Thus did this mother arm her Childrens minds with fortitude, A Golden saying
of the mother of her seven Children.
and though a woman infused courage and constancy into men. And when her
Children were all dead, she The mother followed her Sons in torments.
but only for her Childrens sake, and that now she had seen them all seven
triumphing. Whereupon the rage of Antiochus grew hot, and he commanded this
noble person to be tormented, and accordingly (as the Tyrant willed) she was
striped naked, and hanged up by the hands, and most cruelly whipped: her dugs
and paps were pulled off, and she put into the red-hot Drying Pan, being most
willing to follow her Childrens steps in torment; and lifting up her Eyes and
hands to Heaven, she prayed for all women with Child, and so yielded her chaste
Soul to God. But Antiochus was stricken with fire from Heaven. O thou! mistress
of justice who followed'st The light of the just.
but of all other people. Thy light obscureth the bright shining Moon: 1. Cor.
15.
and though she fill the World with her brightness, yet is she not comparable
to thy shining light. Seven lights inviron thee about, dazzling the brightness
of the seven Planets. Could any Painter express, or any hand in writing declare
the torments which you suffered? none could with dry eyes read or behold them.
All people would flock about to see it. All people would praise, and esteem him
to have offered a great gift, who to God's glory had painted so incomparable a
picture. Eleazar, the Mother and her seven Sons are for their Nobility graced
with a Sepulcher, and a great reverence is done unto them of all men, yea, even
by men that are not of our Religion; and there is a constellation of eight
stars ordained as an argument of their justice; and Angels did execute their
Funerals. The Tyrant himself was astonished to see the constancy of such godly
minds. And thus have they found such favor in the sight of God, that they have
obtained remission of the sins of our Nation: For presently after the Tyrant
was destroyed, and Israel was freed from his Tyranny.

But Antiochus, Antiochus leavied an Army of Footmen from amongst the Hebrews.
seeing the greatness of their Faith, and their contempt of death, gathered an
Army of Foot out of the Hebrews, by whose help he terrified his Enemies, and
got great Renown. O blessed seed of Abraham! behold what benefit the Sufferings
of the Mother and her seven Sons brought to us their Countrymen* let us
persist in this piety, that so we may be like our Forefathers: behold! the
death of a few did end all the miseries and sins of our whole Nation, and you
by your Country-mens hands vanquished their persecutors Enemies, Antiochus died
stinking exceedingly
and after that victory our sins were remited; and last of all, Antiochus being
mad, and his entrails devoured with Worms, he smelling like Carrion, gave up
the Ghost, 2. Mac. 9.
and was ever after death punished for his offense. For when he could not make
the Citizens of Jerusalem to forsake their Law, he made War against

It now remains, An Epitome of the life of the seven Sons and their mother.
that we briefly repeat all that is before said. For in her Agony, this sacred
mother said thus unto the standers by; Whilst it was lawful for me, I kept my
self a Virgin; and then I married and lived a Chaste Wife, and forsook not my
own house. I brought forth such Sons, as I need not be ashamed of; and though
dounted with my Husbands death, yet I did not forsake my Faith. This, and many
things else she recounted. And what more? She set before her Childrens Eyes the
examples of the Prophets; how Abel by his brother was slain, Isaac to be
offered in stead of a sacrifice; how Jacob was banished, Joseph kept in prison,
Daniel cast before the Lions, the three Children into the Isaiah, where it is
said: Although David, The just shall have much tribulation; and Solomon, who
proposes the tree of life to such as do the will of God; The joy of the
blessed in everlasting Life.
not omitting that of Ezeckiel, These dry and withered bones shall live again:
Also that of Moses Canticle, I will kill and restore to life, and the length of
your days is in my hand. Unhappy Tyrant, what did thy Cauldrons red hot, and
thy torments profit thee? what availed thee to cut away their Eyelids, and to
pull out their tongues? thou thy self for so doing do now endure far worse
than all these. And they whom thou killedst (believe me) enjoy Everlasting
comfort, and are now secure of bliss and revenge. For they, who suffer for Gods
sake, shall have happy success, when God the Father of all things shall reward
them with life everlasting that follow Maccabees; to the reading of all men,
who shall live in any age hereafter.

The end of all Josephus Works.
FINIS.
PHILO'S RELATION
The PREFACE of Philo, upon the blindness of man, and the incomprehensible
HOW long shall we confound old Age and Infancy, and be as imprudent at sixty,
as at sixteen? For what greater imprudence can there be, than to look upon
Fortune as a settled and certain thing, when there is nothing more inconstant,
and to consider this Nature (which is immutable) as subject to continual
changes? Is it not to invert the order of things, and shuffle them together
like Counters? to fix our Eyes upon uncertain things, as if they were more firm
and durable than those which were certain? The reason of this Error

So many extraordinary events happening in our Age inforces a belief that there
is a providence, and that God Almighty takes particular care of virtuous Men,
who have recourse to him in their necessityes, and more especially of those who
are consecrated to his service. Chaldeans gave the name of Israelits, which is
as much as to say, Seers of God, and certainly it is an happiness preferrable
to all the Treasures of the Earth: For if the presence of those, whose age
renders them venerable to us (as our Masters, Superiors, and Parents) imprints
so great a respect in us, that it many times corrects our Enormities, and
disposes us to virtue; How great an advantage, and incouragment is it to us to
elevate our minds above all Created things, and accustom our selves to the
contemplation of God, who is not only uncreated, but infinitely good,
infinitely beautiful, infinitely happy, or (to speak more properly) whose
goodness surpasses all goodness, whose beauty surpasses all beauty, and whose
happiness surpasses all happiness, and yet this is but a weak and imperfect
explication


The incredible Felicity of the first seven Months of the Reign of the Emperor
Caius Caligula.
The Emperor Caius Caligula is an Eminent example of what I have said: Never
was there seen a greater tranquillity, than that which was injoyd by all the
Provinces both by Sea and Land, when he was advanced to the Empire after the
death of Tiberius: Rhine, and the Euphrates; the first separating it from
Germany and other wild Nations, and the other bounding it from the Parthians,
Sarmatians, Scythians and other people no less Germans. So that it might be
said, from the rising to the setting of the Sun, not only upon the continent,
but in the Isles, and even in the parts on the other side of the Sea, all was
in peace and felicity: The people of Rome, all Italy, and all the Provinces
both in Europe and Asia lived in a perpetual feast: For it was never seen
before under the Reign of any of their Emperors, that every man by the
blessing of God enjoyed his estate in that quietness, and bare so great a share
in the public felicity, that there was nothing wanting to his desires. In all
the Towns there was nothing to be seen but Altars, and Victims, and Sacrifices,
and Priests in their white Robes, with Garlands of flowers upon their head. All
places were full of Cheerfulness, Feasting, Playing, Music, Running of Horses,
Banqueting, Dancing to the Flute, Saturn. And in this manner they passed seven
complete Months.

CHAP. II.

The next Month this happy Emperor fell into a great fit of sickness; for
having left his old way of living soberly and temperately, which preserves
people in health, and was the way he took, whilst Tiberius was alive, he
plunged himself into Intemperance and Luxury: He drank much Wine, eat to
excess, bathed unseasonably, crammed himself, till he could not keep what he had
taken down, and when he had disgorged, crammed himself again: He gave himself
up wholly to Women, and to pleasures

It was then about the beginning of Autumn, which is the last Season in the
year that is proper for Navigation, and the time in which those, who traffic
in foreign parts, return home. By this means the news of his sickness was in a
moment carried all over the World, and changed their joy into sadness. The
Towns, and the houses were generally full of mourning and affliction; and the
Emperors sickness became the distemper of all the Provinces; and theirs was
the greatest, because his infirmity was only in the death of their Emperors
attended commonly with Famine and other calamities, that

His sickness beginning to abate, the news was immediately spread abroad, and
carried joy to the very ends of the Earth; For nothing is more nimble than
fame; and every body expected the news of his recovery with incredible
patience; and when it arrived every body believed himself recovered with him,
and restored to his former felicity. It is not remembered, that any joy was ever
so general, all people seeming to have passed, as it were in a Moment, from a
savage and rustic, to a soft and a sociable life; from Deserts to Towns; from
Disorder to Order; and all by their happiness in being under the conduct of a
bountiful and legitimate Prince.

CHAP. III.
The Emperor Caius abandons himself to all sorts of Debauchery, and with horrid
ingratitude* and terrible cruelty obliges young Tiberius, the Emperor's
Grandson, to kill himself.
BUT it was quickly discernable, that the Spirit of man is blind in its
imaginations; that he is ignorant of what is most for his advantage, and that
he takes the Europe and Asia, became a Monster for cruelty, or to speak more
properly, he discovered that humor, which though born with him, he had
dissembled till that time. The Emperor Tiberius had by his Son ^rusus (who
dyed before him) this young Tiberius: and by his Nephew Germanicus he had Caius
Caligula, whom he preferred to Tiberius in the Succession of the Empire upon
condition, that he should acknowledge the greatness of the benefit by the manner
of his comportment with his Grandchild: But Caius, instead of being concernd
for having received that by Adoption, which belonged to young Tiberius by
Succession, proved ingratfull, and carried it to that excess of Inhumanity,
that Tiberius had had some few years more over his head, his Grandfather would
doubtless have made him his Successor, and laid aside Caius, of whom he began
already to be jealous.

And this was the way which Caius took to execute his detestable Resolution
upon a Person, with whom in justice he ought to have parted the Sovereignty. He
caused the young Tiberius to appear before him, assembled his friends, and told
them, I love Tiberius, not only as my Kinsman, but as my Brother, and I wish
with all my heart, it was in my power to take him presently as a partner into
the Government, that I might

When Caius by this Artifice had deluded all that were present, and by his
counterfeit Adoption rather robbed, than conferred upon the poor Prince that part
of the Empire, Drusus was dead, the Emperor took him into his tuition, and
used him rather like his Son than his Grandchild.

Caius commanded him to kill himself in the presence of several Tribunes and
Captains, forbidding them strictly to give him any assistance, because
(forsooth) it was not decent, that the descendents of an Emperor should die by
any inferior hands: For he would needs pass for a strict observer of the Laws,
at the very time when he broke them, and a Bigot in Religion, when he was
committing so great a Crime, without the least compunction or remose for making
a Stalking-Horse of the truth by so strange an hypocrisy.

The poor Prince, who had never seen any murders before, nor been accustomed to
those counterfeit Combats, in which young Princes are usually exercised in time
of Peace, presented his Throat to the person who stood next him; but he and all
the rest

CHAP. IIII.
Caius puts to death Macro Colonel of his Pretorian bands, to whom he was
obliged
WHEN Caius had finished that business, which of all his affairs was of the
greatest importance, there being no body left that could pretend to the Empire,
or to whom any turbulent persons could in prudence apply, he turned his
indignation upon Macro, resolving, that he also should feel the effects of his
Cruelty and Ingratitude.

This Macro had not only served him faithfully since his advancement to the
Throne, (which would have been no extraordinary thing, because Princes who are
fort^nate shall never want flatterers) but he had been a great means, that
Tiberius had chosen him Tiberius, the experience, which his years had given
him, gave him so large an insight into the secretest Cogitations of Man, that
he began to be jealous of Caius: he suspected him an Enemy in his heart to the
whole family of the Claudii; and that if he had any natural affection at all,
it was only for his Relations by the Mothers side, so that Tiberius began to be
apprehensive for his Grandchild, if he should leave him a Minor. Again he
looked upon Caius as incapable of the Government of so great an Empire, by
reason of the weakness and levity of his parts, which seemed rather inclining
to folly than otherwise: so little Solidity was there to be observed either in
his word or his actions: But there was no Stone that Macro left unturned to
Caius had an extreme respect for him, and so great an affection for his Cousin,
that he would willingly leave the Empire to him, and that it was nothing but
his retention and modesty, that made people think him weak in his
intellectuals. When Macro found these Reasons would not work, he feared not to
offer himself in Caution: and the Emperor had no reason to suspect his
Sincerity after the Testimony, which he had given of it not only in
discovering, but defeating the Conspiracy of Sejanus. In short, he was always
commending Caius, (if it may be called commending to undertake his
justification against all uncertain surmises, and underermined accusations) and
carried himself so toward him, that, if Caius had been his Brother or Caius
always showed to Macro, but more to the good offices of his Wife, who for some
private Reasons was always crying him up, and magnifying him to her Husband,
and every one knows the influence of Women, especially if they be immodest, for
then no Art nor Flattery can escape them, that may conceal their transgressions
from their Husband. Macro, being ignorant of some passages in his house,
interpreted these artifices for affection, and the greatest of his Enemies
passed in his thoughts for the truest of his friends. That he had preserved
Caius in so many dangers, and could not imagine, that he would ever be
ungrateful, gave him the confidence to admonish him with great liberty upon an
apprehension, that he would either ruin himself, Caius falling asleep one day
at the Table, Macro was bold to wake and admonish him, that it was neither
decent nor Caius was looking upon his Dancers or Mimicks with such
extraordinary pleasure and attention, that he could not contain from imitating
their Gestures; when not contenting himself to smile, or be pleased, he brake
out into a loud Laughter among the Comedians or Buffoons; or when he sung or
played among the Musicians, he jog'd him Gently, if he was with in reach, to
the end he might give over, and told him in his Ear, what no body else durst
have ventured to have said.

You are not, SIR, to abandon your self to the pleasures of your sense like
other men, but are rather to surpass them in gravity and prudence, as much as
you transcend them in dignity and

Thus it was, that this unfortunate Counselor advised Caius with design to
have made him better; But his wicked nature turned his remedies into poison,
made a mock of his counsel, and became much worse; in so much as, when Macro
came toward him one time, he said to those who were then about him; Do you see
that impertinent Schoolmaster, that ridiculous Pedagogue? he would take upon
him to give instructions, not only to a Child, but to a person wiser than
himself. He prates, as if a subject was to command an Emperor, and an
Emperor, that is not ignorant in the art of Governing, and he

In this manner Caius conceived every day more and more aversion to Macro,
endeavoring to charge him with false crimes, but such as might at least carry
in them some appearance of truth; and of this sort he believed he had found one
by these words, which fell from Macro upon a time.

The Emperor is of my making, and has no less obligation to me, than to those
who brought him into the World. Three times by my prayers and contrivances have
I rescued him from the Tiberius, who would have put him to death; and when
Tiberius, who would have Tiberius dyed, I caused him to be declared Emperor by
the Guards, which were under my Command, remonstrating and inculcating to them,
that the only way to keep the Empire entire was to pay obedience but to one
person.

Many people approved this discourse in Macro, as knowing it was true, and not
yet understanding the inconstancy and dissimulation of Caius: But not many days
after the unfortunate Macro and his wife were put to death; which was all the
recompense that the ingratitude of Caius afforded to the fidelity of his
servant, for having secured him against death, and advanced him to the Empire.
Some say, Macro was compelled to kill himself, and that his wife did the same,
though it was more than suspected Caius Caius, that he put to death the whole
family of Macro, leaving not so much as one of his Servants alive

CHAP. V.
Caius caused his Father in Law Marcus Syllanus to be slain for giving him wise
Counsel: and the Murder of him was followed by the Execution
WHEN this perfideous Prince had in this manner quitted himself of his
Competitor in the Empire, and of a person to whom he ought both his authority
and life, there was a third design that remained to be executed, to the
perpetration of which he employed his utmost address. His Father in Law Marcus
Syllanus (who was a person of great Generosity, and of illustrious extraction)
after the death of his Daughter who died very young) continued to Caius the
affection of an own Father rather than of a Father in Law, believing that;
though the Caius, being so vain an Opiniaster, that instead of owning or
mending his faults, he flattered himself with a Fancy, that he was excellent in
all kinds of virtues, and looked upon those as his Enemies, who gave him good
counsel, he perverted the good Counsel of Syllanus, reputed it an insolence,
grew insupportable toward him, and could not endure any longer to have him an
impediment to the irregularity of his passions. After this he banished as well
out of his thoughts as his heart the remembrance of his wife, and by more than
barbarous Cruelty caused him to be put to death for Treason, from whom she had
received life, and who ought to have been respected by him as an own Father.
The noise of That, as to the death of the young Tiberius, the Sovereign power
could not admit of a Partner: That he was only prevented by Caius; for if his
age would have permitted, he would have treated him in the same manner: That it
was perhaps by the Providence of God, and for the benefit of the whole World,
that Tiberius lost his life, to secure the Empire from Civil and Foreign Wars,
which would have divided into factions by the several great persons, who would
have espoused the interest both of the one and the other: That nothing is more
disirable than peace: That Peace cannot subsist but by good conduct in the
Provinces; and that a Province cannot be well governed, unless the Government be
in a single person, whose authority maintains all things in quiet and repose:
That, as to Macro, he was grown so saucy and proud, that in appearance he had
quite forgot that excellent direction of the Oracle at Delphos, Nosce teipsum,
which is a thing so necessary, that with the knowledge of ones self one cannot
fail to be happy, nor avoid being unhappy, when it is not attained: That it was
insupportable for Macro to set himself up above the Emperor, as if it was not
his office to command, and the subjects to obey: In this manner it was that the
ignorant either out of flattery or folly interpreted the wholesome counsels of
Macro: and, as for it was said, that it was ridicuculous in him to pretend to
as much power over his Son in Law, as a Father has over his own Son, seeing
those Fathers, who are but Citizens, do submit without trouble to their own
Children, when they are advanced to any dignity or office, and

This was the discourse, which was used in some of their assemblys to excuse
the Emperor's cruelty; for there having been none of his predecessors, of
whose meekness and bounty they had conceived a better opinion, they could not
(as I have said) imagine he should be so changed in a Moment.

CHAP. VI.
Cains requires the veneration of one of the Gods.
THese horrid and criminal actions passed in the mind of Caius for so many
victories obtained against the most considerable person of his Empire; For his
fury had extinguished the luster of the Imperial Family in the blood of his
Cousin young Tiberius, whom he ought in justice to have taken into the
partnership of the Government. His Syllanus his Father in Law, who was one of
their greatest ornaments: and his horrible ingratitude had taken away the life
of Macro a person of the first Rank in his Court, and to whom he was obliged
particularly for the Grandeur, to which he was advanced.

Having perpetrated these great things, he believed, that, there being no body
left, who durst oppose himself against his pleasure, he ought not to be
satisfied with the greatest honors, that could be conferred upon man; but that
he might expect and challeng what was given to the Gods; and it is reported,
that to persuade himself to so strange an extravagance his argument was thus:

As those, who conduct and have the care of Herds of Cattle whether Oxen, or
Sheep, or

Having admitted this ridiculous fancy into his head, and taken the boldness to
publish it, he came by degrees to the effects: He began first to desire to be
reverenced as one of the demy-Gods, such as Bacchus, Hercules, Castor and
Pollux, Tryphon, Amphiarus, Amphilocus, and others; but he laughed at their
Oracles and Ceremonies, and ravished them from them, that they might be
attributed to himself.

He changed his habit and dress like a player. Sometimes to personat Hercules
he wore Castor and Pollux; and sometimes in imitation of Bacchus he wore the
skin of a young Hind. But in this point he differed from those pretended
deities, that, whereas they were contented with their respective and particular
Ceremonies without envying what was conferred upon the rest, he required them
all, that he might be accounted above them.

Nevertheless that, which contracted the great throng of spectators, was not
that he had three bodies like Gerion, but because he transformed himself into
as many different shapes as Proteus; who, as Homer describes, changed himself
into several Elements, Animals, and Plants.

But, Caius, this vain resembance with these Demy-Gods was not the thing, you
ought to have affected; you were rather to have imitated their actions and
virtue. Hercules by his glorious labors delivered both Land and Sea from such
Monsters, as troubled the repose of mankind: Bacchus, who was the first that
planted the Vine, brought a liquor into the World so pleasant and comfortable
both to the body and mind of man, that it made them forget their sorrows,
exhilarated and fortified their hearts in such manner, that the effects of it
are still seen in the dances and festivities, not only of the most civilized,
but of the most barbarous Nations. As to Castor and Pollux, the two Sons of
Jupiter, is it not said, that one of them being immortal and the other mortal,
he, who had the advantage of immortality, not being able to think that his
brother should Heroes then, who were the admiration of their own ages, and are
still the wonder of ours, were not adored and reverenced as Gods, but for their
benefits and good actions to man. But, Caius, what have you done in imitation,
that may in courage you to such an exaction? To begin with Castor and Pollux
have you imitated the perfect friendship, that was between those two Brothers,
and made them so glorious? you without compassion to the youth and tenderness
of him, who ought to have been to you as a Brother, and with whom you were in
justice obliged to have shared the whole Empire, you (I say) have cruelly
embrued your hands in his blood, and sent his sisters Bacchus, and diffused an
universal joy and cheerfulness over the whole Earth by any admirable invention?
you, who being to be considered no otherwise but as a public Plague, have
found out nothing but new inventions to turn that joy into sorrow, that
cheerfulness into sadness, and make peoples lives a burden: You, who in
recompense of the infinite wealth and advantages, which flow in to you daily
from all parts of the World, do with your insatiable avarice crush and depress
your people with the weight of so many new Tributes and Impositions, that you
enforce them to abominate your horrible inhumanity. Do you imitate Hercules in
the nobleness of his actions, and in the difficulty of his Labors to introduce
and establish peace, to distribute justice and restore Castor and Pollux, who
were so much Celebrated for their Brotherly love, after you have been so cruel
as to have murdered your own Brother; and do not petend to the honors, Hercules
and Bacchus, who signalized themselves by their good deeds, whilst your crimes
and iniquities are sufficient to render them useless.

CHAP. VII.
The folly increasing every day, he exacted the honor of a God, and imitated
Mercury, Apollo, and Mars.
Caius rested not there: he thought it beneath him to be honored as a Demi
God, and therefore pretended to be equal with the Gods. At first he would pass
for Mercury, and habited himself like him, wearing a Caduceus in his hand, and
winged Buskins upon his Legs. To represent Apollo he appeared another time with
a Crown upon his head glistering with Rays, a quiver at his back, with Arrows
in his left hand, and with his right hand distributing Largesses among the
people, to show that his bounty was greater than his exaction.

After that he instituted sacred dances, in which songs were sung in praise of
this new God who before, whilst he personated Bacchus, contented himself with
the names of Evius, Liaeus, and Liber. Many times also, when he represented
Mars, he armed himself Bravo's and Hectors ready for any murders that he should
command them, and all to imitate the fury of that deity, who breathed nothing
but slaughter and blood. So extraordinary a spectacle filled with astonishment
the minds of his people, who could not sufficiently admire, that he should
pretend to any resemblance with those, having nothing of their virtue or good
qualities to recommend him, and that he should affect to take upon him the
marks of that good, which they had procured to mankind. For what else is
signified by the Winged Buskins of Mercury, but that he was an Ambassador of
the Gods, and an Interpreter of their wills, the Greek name implying no
otherwise, but that he was the messenger of Caduceus What did it import, but
that he was the Stickler, and Mediator in Treaties, and all matters Caius put
on his winged Brodequins upon his Ankles, was it to publish and spread abroad
through all the Provinces the noise of his Crimes, which ought rather to have
been buried in perpetual Oblivion? And why should he give himself so much
trouble, when without stiring from his place, he committed such an infinite
number of impieties, which streaming incessantly from that detestable source,
overflowed the whole world, and was a more pernicious Deluge than the former?
And why should he carry a Caduce, when there was nothing to be found either in
his words or actions, that had the least appearance or tendency to Peace; But
on the contrary, there was not a Province or Town in all Greece Barbary, in
which he was not the occasion of division and troubles? Let our pretended
Mercury then quit that Name, which is so unsuitable for him.

And as to Apollo, In what was it that he could pretend to resemble him? Was it
in the glittering of his Crown, as if the Sun and the Day were more proper for
the commission of Evil, than Darkness and Night? There are none but actions
that are virtuous, and worthy of praise, that are fit for the Day, whilst
actions that are wicked and scandalous ought to look out the thickest and most
private obscurities in Dens and Caves.

This counterfeit Apollo has no less overturned and perverted the Order of
Physic; For, whereas the true Apollo invented wholesome and salutiferous
Remedies for the Cure Italy, because among them there was more Gold and Silver
to be found, than in all the rest of the World; and had not God Almighty
delivered it, there had not been a place in the whole Empire, that his avarice
would not have pillaged, ruined, and destroyed.

Apollo was celebrated likewise not only for his excellency in Physic, but for
his Predictions, which by his Oracles he communicated for the good of Mankind,
that they might not sink under those Calamities which hung over their heads.
But the Oracles of Caius extended no further, than to the foretelling to the
most Illustrious, and best qualified Apollo's? And what shame was it, that
Songs should be sung equally in commendation of them both, as if it were a less
crime to attribute to a vicious man the honors, which were due only to a God,
than to counterfeit Money, which carries but the Image of a Prince?

But nothing was more strange, than to see a man, whose Mind and Body were so
notoriously effeminate, arrogate to himself the force and courage of Mars, and
delude the Spectators by changing his Habit as frequently as a Player upon a
Stage. For in what was it that he might be said to resemble not only the
fabulous Mars, which is but a fiction, Greek word signifes) a Courage, that by
just and lawful Wars was still followed with a happy and an honorable Peace.
For Mars has two Names, One implying and representing him a lover of such
Peace, as conduces to the tranquillity of the Public; and the other describing
him, as a lover of War, which cannot be accompanied but with Calamity and
Confusion.


Caius takes a prejudice against the Jews, because they would not, like other
People, Reverence him as a God.
I Suppose I have clearly demonstrated, that Caius had but little resemblance
with the Demigods, and less with the Gods themselves. Never Prince had more
wicked

The Jews (formerly happy enough) felt the deplorable effects of it: for he
looked upon them as the only persons capable of opposing his Designs, in
respect that from their Infancy they had learned from their Parents by a
constant Tradition (and it had been inculcated and confirmed to them by their
sacred Laws) not to acknowledge any but the true God, the Creator of Heaven and
Earth; For all other Nations, though groaning under the burden of his
tyrannical domination, in flattery complied with his

Several Romans were not ashamed likewise to prostitute and dishonor the
Liberty of their City by introducing into Italy the same base conformity and
submission, which the Barbarians used in their pusillanimous Adorations. But he
knew that the Jews, on the contrary, rather than consent to the least violence
or intrenchment upon their Laws, ran to death as to immortality. For as a Stone
cannot be taken out of a Building, but by little and little the whole Fabric
will run to ruin; it is the same in matter of Religion, to the destruction of
which nothing could contribute more, than such an impious and audacious
enterprise, as the pretending to change a mortal Man into an immortal God,
which is far more difficult, than that God should be changed into a Man;
besides

This was the occasion of that cruel war made upon our Nation: and what greater
misfortune can befall any Servants than to have their Master their enemy? But
the Subjects of Emperors are Servants; and whereas the moderation of the
Princes, which governed before Caius, made their Dominion gentle and pleasing
to all People, his Government was insupportable. Mercy was a Virtue unknown to
him; and so far was he from any remorse, that he made it his boast, when he
trampled upon the Laws and abolished them, to make room for his own Violence
and Tyranny. But the principal Object of his Fury were the Jews; It did not
satisfy him to use them as Servants, but he treated them as Slaves, That they
had in him, in stead of a kind and indulgent Master, a cruel and unmerciful
Tyrant.

CHAP. IX.
The ancient Inhabitants of Alexandria take occasion of Caius his animosity to
the Jews, to do them all imaginable mischief: They demolish most of their
Oratories, and erect Statues
WHEN the Pique, which this Emperor had against the Jews, came first to the
knowledge of the Inhabitants of Alexandria, who had had always a mortal and
inveterate quarrel against them, they thought they could never have a fairer
opportunity to revenge themselves; and therefore, as if they had received
Orders to that purpose from the Emperor, or, having overcome the Jews in
Battle, the right of War had exposed them to their fury, They fell upon them
with irresistible violence, forced they met, as if they had been their own, and
bought with their money; some of them,

But what is it to have brought such People to indigence as were rich and
splendid before; to have forced them from their Houses, and exposed them like
Vagabonds to all the injuries of the Air? These inhumane Alexandrians drove the
Jews with their Wives and Children from all parts of the Town to coop them up
like Beasts in so close a place, that not having given them liberty to bring
any thing with them, they doubted not but that they would dye either with
hunger, or the infection of the Air; Free respiration

In this extremity these poor People, at least to take Breath, dispersed
themselves, some into the Deserts, some along the Seacoast, and others into
the Sepulchers; and if in any place of the said Town any of the Jews appeared,
as not knowing what had passed, the Alexandrians knocked them down, or lamed
them with stones or with Cudgels, and handled them in the same manner as they
did those who had escaped out of that little place, where they had thronged so
great a multitude.

These cruel Persecutors upon the Banks of the River waylaid the Jewish
Merchants, Alexandria, they robbed them of their goods, and burnt the Merchants
alive; some in fires made of the wood of their own Vessels; others in the
middle of the City, and that in a way more cruel than the other; because their
fire, being made of a greener and more moist wood, choked them with the smoke,
as well as tormented them with its flames; others they drew with Cords through
the Streets and Marketplaces with such fury and indignation, that, their death
being unable to satisfy their rage, they trod their dead bodies under their
feet, and tore them into so many pieces, that had any body been so well
disposed as to have buried them, he would not have found any thing remaining
that might have exercised his Charity.

When they perceived the Governor of the Province (who in a moment might have
Jews, (which were many in all the quarters of the Town) cut down the Trees that
were about them, demolished some of them utterly, burned others, and the flames
of them consumed several of the neighboring Houses; by which also the guilt
Bucklers, Statues and Inscriptions, which the Roman Emperors had set up in
honor of the Courage or Virtue of several of the Jews, which ought to have
been reverenced, were burned and consumed.

In short, Nothing was able to restrain their madness; For in stead of
apprehending punishment or Correction, they understood the hatred which Caius
had conceived Jews, and that nothing would please him better, than to have them
treated with that terrible Cruelty.

Again, to cajole the Spirit of this Prince by their new flatteries, to oppress
and destroy us with more security, and invade and subvert our Laws without
fear, they set up his Statues in such Oratories, as they were not able to
demolish by reason of the great number of Jews which gave them opposition; and
that, which they erected in the principal of all the Oratories, was placed in a
Chariot drawn with four Horses in Brass, in which they were so ardently
zealous, that having no Horses lately cast, they took them out of the place
appropriated to their public Exercises, lame and crippled as they were, and as
was reported, made anciently for Queen Cleopatra, the last of that Name: Which
Caius than otherwise; For seeing he affected such extraordinary honors, though
the Horses had been new, yet having been made for a Woman, they were unworthy
of him; and though they were set up in favor of him, yet they were too much
spoiled and imperfect to give him satisfaction. Besides they thought they
should merit very much by changing these Oratories into Temples, to augment the
number of those which were dedicated to him; which nevertheless they did not so
much in honor of him, as in hatred to our Nation. And of this there needs no
better proof, than that for three hundred years together, during the reign of
ten of their Kings, they never consecrated a Statue to any of them in their
Chapels, though they placed their Kings in the rank of their Gods, and gave
that Title to some of them. And Egypt is full of Temples, Altars and Groves
consecrated to their honor.

But as they were the greatest flatterers in the World, and considered the
Fortune more than the person of any Prince, they will answer perhaps, That the
Roman Emperors being more puissant and prosperous than their own Kings, it was
but justice to give them more honor. What answer can be more ridiculous? For
why then did they not give the same honor to Tiberius, to whom Caius was
obliged for his Empire, since that Prince reigned three and twenty years with
such prudence and felicity, that he preserved to his dying day, not only the
Greek Provinces, but the Barbarous in profound Peace, and the enjoyment Caius?
He excelled him on both sides, both by the Father and Mother. Was it that his
Education or Learning was less? What person in his time was wiser or more
eloquent? Was it that his years were not so many, and by consequence his
Experience not so great? What Emperor ever ended his days in a happier old Age?
And even in his Youth was not his capacity and judgment wonderful; which is
not commonly acquired but but by number of years? yet you never thought him
worthy of such extraordinary honor.

What shall I say likewise of that inestimable Prince, who seemed by the
Eminence of his Virtues, to be raised above the condition of men; and by the
multitude of his good deeds, and the felicity of his Reign, was the first who
merited the glorious name Augustus, and having received it himself from no
body, transmitted it to his posterity? The Sea was in opposition against the
Land, and the Land against the Sea. Europe was in Arms against Asia, and Asia
against Europe. All the Grandees of the Empire divided to determine who should
remain Master, and it may be said, that the whole race of mankind was ready to
perish by this bloody and cruel war kindled at the same time in all parts of
the world; when in so horrible a Tempest this great Prince took the Rudder into
his own hand, restored Peace to the whole World, renewed Plenty and Trade,
civilized the Manners of the most barbarous Nations, overwhelmed as it were all
the great Towns with so much happiness, that they might have passed for Free
States, maintained Peace, encouraged Justice, and forbore not uncessantly to
pour out his Favors

This incomparable Emperor had Egypt under his Dominion for three and forty
years together; yet you never paid him that honor, which you have done to
Caius; you set not up his Statues in the Oratories of the Jews, though never
Prince deserved so much reverence as he, not only as he was the Foundation of
the August Imperial Family; But as he was the Uniter of that Sovereign Power,
which was divided before, and used it with such moderation, that thereby he
procured the public Felicity, there being nothing more certain than that
saying of the Ancients, The Government by many is most dangerous in respect of
the mischiefs which do follow their diversity of Judgment. The Example
likewise of other People ought to have obliged you: for in all other places
they paid him Alexandria: For what other is comparable to that, which upon his
account bears the name of Sebastian, built near the Port, and in such esteem
with Mariners and Seamen? It is so spacious and lofty, it is visible a far
off. It is full of excellent Pictures, admirable Statues, and other rich
Presents both of Silver and Gold, that have been offered by great Persons;
nothing is more Magnificent than its Portico's, its Quire, its Galleries, its
Library, and its Grove. In so general a Concuorse of People, could any man of
sense say, That this was not to pay Augustus all the honor that was due to
him, except putting up his Statues in the Oratories of the Jews? No without
doubt: But that which hindered it Roman Laws put in execution; and if he
received any honors extraordinary from the blindness of his adorers, it was
not that he approved it himself, but that he thought it might conduce to
elevate and enhance the Grandeur and Majesty of the Empire. For what can be a
greater instance of his Moderation, and that he would not suffer himself to be
puffed up or dazzled by the vanity or extravagance of their respects, than that
he would never admit the Tittle either of a God or a Master? and indeed not
only rejected that flattery, but expressed great approbation of the horror and
detestation of those which declare for such things? Otherwise how could he have
permitted that the Jews (the greatest part of whom have been Enfranchised by
such Masters as had taken them Prisoners in the Wars) should be allowed to
possess in Rome so great a part of the City as lies beyond the Tyber? He was
not ignorant that they had their Oratories, where Jerusalem, and that they
offered their Sacrifices there also. Yet he did not Banish them from Rome; and
he was so far from abolishing their Religion, or subverting their Laws and
their Customs, that he gave rich Presents to our Temple, and ordained, that
every day Sacrifice should be made to God Almighty, which is observed to this
day, and will be observed for ever, and remain an eternal Mark of the virtue of
that incomparable Emperor.

He ordered likewise that the Jews should be comprised in the public
distributions of Money and Corn, which were made among the People in certain
Months; and if it happened those Distributions were made upon their
Sabbath Day, at which time it is not permitted Jews so considerable among other
Nations, that, though naturally they had no kindness for them, yet they durst
not molest them in the exercise of their Religion.

And Tiberius treated them in the same sort, though Sejanus did what he could
by his Calumnies to ruin those who inhabited at Rome, because he knew they
could not be brought to join in his abominable Conspiracy against his Master.
And this Prince sent afterward to all the Governors of Provinces, that, except
some few who had been meddling in that Plot, all the rest of the Jews should be
well treated, and not obliged to

CHAP. X.
Caius being already enraged against the Jews of Alexandria, was much
exasperated by an Egyptian called Helico, who had been formerly a Slave, but
was then
Caius having passed to that degree of Vanity, as not only to pronounce, but to
believe himself a God, he found no People either among the Greeks or Barbarians
more ready than the Alexandrians to humor him in his extravagant imagination:
For there are no People more subtle, more hypocritical, more flattering, nor
greater lovers of Confusion and trouble, than the Inhabitants of that Town. And
so little is their respect for the Name of God, that they make no difficulty to
attribute it to Ibis, and several other Creatures. And as they are very
prodigal of that honor, they do easily delude such, as are not acquainted with
that impiety in the Egyptians, whereas it is impossible to do so

Caius being ignorant of their cunning, supposed it was real and not pretended,
that they thought him a God, because they proclaimed it publicly, and with all
the formality and acclamations, wherewith they were accustomed to declare their
respects toward their Gods; besides he considered the sacriledges they had
committed upon our Oratories, as a great testimony of their Zeal; and there
were no Poems or Histories that he could read with so much delight and
pleasure, as the Relations that were sent him upon that Subject.

Those who made it their business to applaud or decry what ever liked or
displeased him, contributed much to that humor, for most of them were
Egyptians, and unfortunate slaves, brought up from their infancy in that
abominable error, which prompted them to pay divine Worship to Serpents and
Crocodiles. The chief of this abominable Band was a wicked fellow called
Helico, who by his ill practices had wrought himself into the Court. He had
some smattering of Letters, and he, whose slave he was first, and had taught
him his knowledge, presented him to Tiberius: But that Prince had never any
great esteem for him, by reason that the manner, in whch he had been educated
in his youth, had rendered him grave and severe, and made him despise every
thing that was not serious. When after his death Caius succeeded to the Empire,
this dangerous creature observing that there was nothing dissolute or
voluptuous, to which Caius was not inclined, said thus to himself: Now is the
time, Helico, that must needs be favorable Jews will abundantly supply you,
you have no more to do but to declaim against their Laws and their Customs,
and that you have learned from your Infancy, not only from particular
Alexandria. Let us see then what you can do.

These things running in Helico's head, he stirred not from Caius either night
or day; and in the times of his private relaxations and divertisements, he left
no opportunity of incensing him against the Jews by his forgeries and
suggestions; which were the more effectual by being slyly and wittily
delivered; for he would not profess himself their Enemy, but acted cunningly
and subtly; by which means he did them more mischief, than if he had openly
declared himself.

When the Ambassadors of the Inhabitants of Alexandria, who had acted so
cruelly against us, understood how much this wretched man was serviceable to
them, they gave him not only money, but hopes of procuring him great honors,
as soon as the Emperor Alexandria, where they did not question, but he would
suddenly be; and on the other side there was nothing but he promised them, so
much did he hugg himself in the hopes of receiving those great honors in the
presence of the Ambassadors, who would not fail to repair to so famous a City,
from all parts of the World, to pay their Complements to so great a Prince.

Having no knowledge that we had an Enemy so dangerous and considerable as
Helico, we aimed only to defend our selves against such as were professed; But
when we found it we applied all our Interest and industry to sweeten and take
him off: No man did, or could do us more mischief than he; for he was one at
all Games, at all Recreations, Feasts and Debaucheries with Caius; His Office
of first Gentleman of the Caius, rather than malice to us, that he made such an
impression against us in the Emperors mind, as we could never extinguish.


The Jews of Alexandria appoint an Embassy to Caius to represent their
Sufferings; in which Embassy Philo is chief. Caius receives them kindly in
appearance, but Philo found he was not to be trusted.
AFter we had tried all our skill to make Helico our Friend, finding it was but
labor in vain, because he was so insolent and proud no body durst come near
him, and not knowing besides whether it was from any personal or particular
spleen against us, that he provoked and exasperated the Emperor to our
Destruction, we concluded to Agrippa, when he was at Alexandria, in his passage
to Syria, to take possession of that Kingdom, which had been conferred upon him
by Caius: Hereupon we departed for Rome, secure, as we thought, of finding the
Emperor an equitable Judge, whereas we could not have had a mortaller Enemy.
He received us in the field of Mars, as he was coming out of his Mothers
Gardens; his Countenance was pleasant and cheerful, his Words obliging, he made
a sign with his hand that he would be our Friend, and sent us word afterward by
the Master of the Ceremonies called Homus, that he would hear our business at
leisure: In so much as there was not one of those who were present, nor indeed
one of But my age and experience in Mundane affairs giving me a further
prospect

How comes it to pass that, Ambassadors being here from all quarters of the
World, we should be the only persons, to whom the Emperor should vouchsafe to
send word, that he would give us Audience? For, does not he know, that being
Jews we should think our selves happy to be treated like other People? Can we
without folly expect favor extraordinary from a young Prince of another
Nation, or believe that he has not greater inclination for the Alexandrians
than for us, and makes such haste to determine our business in obligation to
them? I wish to God that, in stead of being an equal Arbitrator, his sentence
be not Arbitrary, and that he does not prove himself our Enemy and their
Protector.

CHAP. XII.
Philo and his Colleagues discover, that Caius had commanded Petronius the
Governor of Syria to set up his Statue in the Temple of Jerusalem.
WHilst these thoughts were in my head, and gave me no quiet either night or
day, another misfortune that could not be foreseen, and portended not only
Jews, fell out to accomplish my trouble. We waited upon the Emperor to
Puteoli; to which place being retired along the River for diversion, he
entertained himself in the Houses of Pleasure, which are numerous, and very
Magnificent, not thinking in the least of our Affair, though he had ordered us
to follow the Court, and we were ready, expecting every hour, when he should
have decided our Controversy; when on a sudden a certain Person came to us,
with his Eyes staring, his Breath spent, and an universal discomposure in his
Looks; he took some of us aside, and said, Have ye not heard the terrible News?
He would have proceeded, but his Tears came so fast upon him, that they stifled
his Words so strangely, that, do what he could, it was not possible for him to
go We conjured him to tell us the cause of his affliction, seeing it was
nothing in appearance but for weeping before us; and if the occasion was worthy
of so many tears, it was but just (being accustomed to sorrows as we had been)
that we should consent, and add our Compassion to his. He made a new effort,
and told us with more sighs than words, The Ruin of our Temple is decreed; for
the Emperor has ordered his Statue to be set up in the Sanctuary, and to give
the Name of Jupiter to it as an Inscription. The unexpectedness of the news
made us almost immovable, and it was quickly confirmed to us by other People.
We immediately retired, and shut our selves up in our Lodgings, to lament the
general destruction of our Nation, and sorrow being Eloquent, what was it that
it did not prompt us to say?

Having in this manner exposed our selves in the midst of Winter to the perils
of a dangerous Voyage in hopes to have foun^d some redress for our Sufferings,
we met upon the Land with a Tempest much more cruel, than those which happen at
Sea, because they are natural, and by consequence supportable; whereas this was
caused by a man, who had nothing humane but his shape, by a young Prince, who
loved nothing but change and trouble, and who seeing his Will and Pleasure
sustained by the whole Power of the Empire, he suffered himself to be carried
away without any restraint to all Licentiousness and Tyranny; which was an Evil
the more great and deplorable, because not capable of any visible remedy. For
who durst be so bold as to represent to him, that it was not consistent with
his duty to violate the sanctity of the most August Temple in the World? Or
could one indeed without the loss of his Life have remonstrated against so
great an impiety?

Let us dye then (said we among our selves) seeing nothing can be more
honorable, than to lay down our Lives in defense of our Laws. But our Death
not being able to produce any good effect, and being Ambassadors as we are, may
it not be to augment the affliction of those who sent us, and give advantage to
such of our own Nation, as have no friendship for us, to say, that to deliver
our selves from some present inconvenience, we deserted the Interest of the
Public? though the lesser Interests are always to give place to the greater,
and Private to Public. For in the subversion of Government, all the Laws, by
which its Grandeur and Consistance was maintained, do for the most part suffer
the same

Jews in Alexandria, by abandoning an affair in which their Safety or Ruin is
involved, and the Safety or Ruin of our whole Nation, and leave them in fear,
that a Prince of his Violence and Cruelty will entirely destroy them?

If it be Objected, That seeing, which way so ever we resolve, no Success is to
be expected; why should not we think of retiring in safety? I Answer,

That to do so, we must have either no hearts, or no knowledge in our divine
Laws. God perhaps will make use of this opportunity as a trial of our Virtues,
and to see how we are disposed to comport under affliction: Rather, in stead of
placing our safety in the uncertain succors of

When we had remained silent for a time, we said to him who brought us the
first ill News, Why do you content your self, by having thrown an unhappy word
among us, to have kindled an universal trouble in our minds, which as a single
Spark will grow to a Flame, and do not tell us, what it is that has
transported the Emperor to so extravagant a resolution?

Every body knows (replied the person) that he would be reverenced as a God:
and because he is persuaded, that the Jews are the only persons, who will not
acknowledge him for such,

Capito, a Commissioner for the receipt of the Tributes in Judea, has irritated
him likewise against us by Letters which he has writ. This Capito having little
or no fortune before he was sent into this Province, and having feathered his
Nest well by his exaction since he came, he has a mind to prevent by his
Calumnies the just Complaints, which he apprehended the Jews would make against
him, and he has made use of the occasion aforesaid.

Jamnia is one of the most populous Towns in Judea, and all its Inhabitants are
Jews, except some few Strangers, who (unhappily for us) are come thither to
acquaint themselves with Caius was inslamed with an idle passion to be
worshipped as a God, and that on that account he had conceived a mortal hatred
against us, they thought they could never hope for a fairer opportunity to
destroy us. Wherefore they erected an Altar of Brick upon no other design, but
because they were sure we would never suffer the Laws of our Ancestors to be
violated in that manner; and their malice and cunning has had the effect which
was intended. For the Jews having pulled down their Altar, they who set it up
made complaint immediately to Capito, who was the contriver of the plot, on
purpose to ruin their fellow Citizens. This wicked man, transported as it were
to have succeeded so far, failed not to write to Caius, exaggerating every
thing, and Colossus, which was to be Guilt over with Gold, and placed in the
Temple of Jerusalem: in which resolution he had two principal Counselors,
Helico that notorious Buffoon, and Apelles the famous Comedian, who (as is
reported) having prostituted himself, and exposed his beauty for money when he
was young, was now got upon the Theater in his old age, and the modesty of that
profession every man knows. By these excellent qualities these two excellent
persons were got to be of Caius his Counsel. With the one he consulted in
matters of Railery and Wit; and with the other how such a speech was to be
pronounced upon the Stage, not so much as concerning himself with the Peace and
Tranquillity of the Empire. Helico, being an Egyptian, bit us like an Asp; and
Apelles being of Ascalon was no kinder than he.

Every word, that this person spoke, was like a dagger at our hearts: but these
two wicked Counselors were not long without their Reward; For Caius caused
Apelles to be clapped in irons for other Crimes, and tortured him upon the Wheel,
but with several intervals, to increase and spin out his punishment; and
Claudius succeeding Caius in the Empire, he put Helico to death for other
considerable Reasons,

CHAP. XIII.
Petronius his great trouble about executing the Order which he had received
from Caius, to set up his Statue in the Temple of Jerusalem, because he was
sensible of the injustice of it, and foresaw the ill Consequences.
Caius wrote then that his Statue should be consecrated, and set up in our
Temple, and omitted nothing, that might enjoin the Execution of that Order. He
Petronius Governor of Syria, to take half the Army, which was disposed along
the Euphrates to defend those Countries against the Kings and People of the
East, and to cause them to attend the Statue; not that they were to add to the
Solemnity of its Consecration, but to cut those Jews in pieces, who should have
the boldness to oppose him. Is it so then, most cruel Prince, that, foreseeing
these poor people will sooner expose themselves to death, than suffer the
violation of their Laws, and the profanation of their Temple, you declare War
against them, and send a formidable army to consecrate your Statue by the blood
of so many innocent Victims, without sparing either Women or Men?

This Order gave Petronius much trouble, by reason that on the one side he knew
Caius could not endure the least delay in his obedience, and on the other side
he saw the execution of his Commands very difficult, because the Jews would
suffer a thousand deaths rather, than suffer any violation of their Religion;
For, though all other people are tender of their Laws, yet it comes far short
of the bigottry of the Jews, who look upon theirs as Oracles given by God
himself; They were brought up in it from their youth; They have it engraven in
their hearts; They forbear not to admire it; They receive into the number of
their Citizens such Strangers as embrace it; Look upon those as Enemies who
despise it; And have so great a horror for every thing that contradicts it,
that there is neither grandeur, nor fortune, nor any temporal felicity able to
tempt them to violate it; Nor is there any greater evidence of their Respect
and Veneration for their

Petronius revolving these things in his mind, found the Enterprise so
dificult, that he made no have to put it in execution; and the more he
considered this affair, the more he was persuaded not to touch upon our
Religion, as well because Justice and Piety obliged him to alter nothing
therein, as because of the danger he was like to encounter, not only from the
Judgment of God, but from the Resistance of the Jews, who by that action would
be driven to despair. He considered likewise the numerousness of that Nation,
which is not like the rest crowded up in one Province, but dispersed in so
great numbers almost quite over the World both upon the Continent and in the
Islands, that Judea, no less Politic than Valiant, and ready to die with their
Swords in their hands with invincibe Courage, rather than abandon the Laws of
their Fathers so excellently Just, though their Enemies would needs have them
to be Barbarous.

This wise Governor was apprehensive likewise of such of that Nation as
inhabited beyond the Euphrates, in Babylon and those Provinces: for he knew for
certain, as having seen it with his Eyes, that they sent every year to the
Temple, under the Title of First Fruits, the money which they called Holy;
without considering the danger of the ways,

These thoughts detained him for some time; but it put his mind into great
agitation and trouble, when he considered he had for his Master a young Prince,
who knew no other Justice than his Will; who could not endure to be disobeyed,
let his Commands be never so unequal, and whose pride and presumption
transported him to that excess of folly, that causing him to forget his
Humanity, he would needs pass for a God: So that he could neither execute nor
decline the execution of his Orders without manifest danger

CHAP. XIV.
Petronius gave Order for this Statue, but it went on but slowly. He
endeavored in vain to persuade the Jews to receive it. The Jews forsake the
Towns and the Country to wait upon him, and beg of him not to execute an
Order, that would
THE Roman Officers, who with Petronius had the greatest charge in the affairs
of Syria, were all for a War; because, knowing the fury of Caius, they doubted
not, but, if they declined it, he would discharge his indignation upon them, in
confidence that they must needs be accessory in this disobedience. But by good
fortune it happened, that they had time to deliberate, whilst the Satue was
making: for there was none sent out of Italy, which, I suppose, God in his
mercy so ordered for the safety of his People, as also that there was no
direction to take the hansomest and best wrought that could be found Syria, for
without that the War had broke out so suddenly, that no remedy could have been
found for so great a mischief.

Petronius, having concluded to have a Statue made, caused the ablest
Statuaries in Phenicia to be sent for, furnished them with materials, and
appointed Sydon to be the place, as the most proper for such a business. Having
done so, he sent for the Chief Priests and Magistrates of the Jews, declared to
them the Emperor's Command, and exhorted them to submit, and not run themselves
into Calamity and Troubles which would be otherwise unavoidable; for the
greatest part of the Army in Syria had Orders to proceed with fire and sword in
case of disobedience; And Petronius did not doub^, but if he could have
prevailed with them, they could have persuaded the rest of the People, but he
Have we then lived to this hour, to see what our Ancestors never beheld? But
how can we possibly see it, who will choose rather to lose our Eyes and our
Life, than be spectators of so horrible an impiety?

This report being spread abroad in Jerusalem and in all Judea, the Jews left
their Houses and Fields, as it had been by consent, and repaired to Phenicia to
wait upon Petronius. Their innumerable multitude made those People believe, who
were ignorant, how populous a Country Judea was; that it was a great Army
marching against Petronius, of which they gave him immediate advice; but they
had no other Arms then their sighs and their

When they were brought in to Petronius (who was placed higher than the rest)
they threw themselves before him upon the ground, beating their Breasts, and
sobbing out so many sighs, that nothing could be more pitiful; and though
Petronius commanded them to rise and come nearer, they were scarce to be
persuaded: At length they approached with ashes upon their Heads, their Eyes
swimming with tears, and their Hands behind their Backs, as if they had been
going to Execution; and he, who was Spokesman for them all, delivered himself
to Petronius in these Terms. SIR, To remove all pretense of accusing us of any
evil design, we are come not only without arms, but without any intention of
making use of our hands, which are the Arms, that Nature has given to all
mankind, and do therefore present our selves before you to be treated as you
please. We have left our Houses destitute, and brought our Wives and our
Children along with us, to the end we may join their instances with our own,
and by your mediation supplicate the Emperor either to preserve or extinguish
us all together. We are naturally lovers of Peace, and are the more impetuously
inclined to it, because, our greatest pleasure being to bring up our Children
in our own way, there is nothing that conduces more to it. When Caius was
advanced to the Empire, and Vitellius (who was then Governor in Jerusalem, and
in whose place you have succeeded) we gave him a testimony of our joy, and
signified it by publishing the good news through the rest of the Cities. Our
Temple was the first place, where sacrifice Augustus and Tiberius his
Predecessors, who were so far from condemning our Conduct, or reprehending our
manners, that they entirely

CHAP. XV.
Petronius affected with the Condition and Humility of the Jews, and believing
it unsafe to run them into despair, writes to Caius in such a manner as might
gain time. Caius resents it highly, but dissembles it in his answer to
Petronius.
THIS Discourse was accompanied with so many sighs and tears, that it wrought
compassion in all that heard it, and particularly in Petronius, who was
naturally

Petronius proposed and debated the business with his Council, and was much
pleased to find those persons, who were most bitter and inveterate against them
before, come about and grow more gentle and mild, and others not afraid to
declare, how much they were concerned for the Extreme affliction of that
People; so that though he was not ignorant of the Cruelty of Caius, and that he
never forgave any man, yet he seemed to act by the motion of that Spirit, which
the Piety of our Religion infuses: Whether it was that, being a learned Man, he
had had some smattering of it before; whether he had Asia and Syria (in which
Countries there are great numbers of Jews) whether it was his own natural
propensity, that inclined him to what was reasonable and just; Or whether it
was because God does give usually good inclinations to great Men, both for
their own benefit and the advantage of the Public; which of these it was, I
cannot determine, but so it was at that time. The result was, that the
Statuaries should not be pressed; but that Orders should be given them to
employ the utmost of their skill, and make the Statue so accurately, that it
might pass for a Masterpiece.

Pieces, which are a short time in doing, are a short time in decaying; whereas
such, as are made with more deliberation, last longer by far, and are esteemed
through several

Petronius did not encourage the Jews to send their Deputies toward the
Emperor, because he thought it not for their advantage to depend wholly upon
the Capricio of a young Prince; yet he did not absolutely forbid them, because
he saw there was danger both on the the one side and the other. However, he
wrote a Letter to Caius (without mentioning the Application which the Jews had
made to him) imputing the Cause of the Delay on the Consecration of the Statue
to the Artists, who being to make it excellent had required more time, that it
might be done more suitable to the dignity of the person it was designed to
represent. He thought by this trick to gain time, and it was likely Caius might
comply, because Harvest was at hand, and he might very well apprehend that the
Jews (being made desperate, and not valuing their Lives, after the violation
Caius was upon a Voyage to Alexandria; for it was not likely that he would
expose himself wholly to the dangers of the Sea with so great a Train, but
rather steer his Course along the Shore of Asia and Syria, where he might
imbark and disimbarke as he pleased, and have the benefit of his Long-boats (of
which he had 200 in his fleet) to supply it with provisions and forage, which
was requisite to be prepared in great quantities in all the Towns in Syria, but
especially the Ports, by reason of the vast numbers which attended him as well
from Italy as from all other parts of the world.

It was not doubted but this Letter would have been kindly received by Caius,
and Jews, but for the convenience of making such provision of Victuals, and
therefore it was written and dispatched. But the Choler of this Prince was so
inflamed at the reading of it, that his Eyes sparkled with fury, and clapping
his hands together in a great transport, he said.

How Petronius! Have not you yet learned to obey your Emperor? Your great
employments have puffed you up with pride, and it seems you know nothing of
Caius but his Name; but you shall know him better hereafter by your proper
experience. You have more consideration of the Laws of the Jews (who are my
mortal Enemies) than for my Commands who am your Prince. You apprehend their
great numbers, as if you had not an Army as great, and terrible Parthia, and
the whole East; yet your compassion for that pitiful Nation is stronger than
your desire to please and obey me. You pretend (forsooth) the necessity of
making provision for my passage to Alexandria; as if I could not be
accommodated from the neighboring Provinces, and as if the plenty of other
Countries were not able to supply the sterility of Judea.

But why do I protract and spend time in unprofitable words? It Is by the death
of this impudent fellow that I must convince him of the greatness of his fault,
and that mine anger never ceases, though my threatenings may.

This furious Prince returned an Answer to Petronius; but being fearful of
provoking such of his Governors as were capable of raising Rebellion, and
particularly those Euphrates, and who had the command of such Armies as that
which was then in Syria, he dssembled his Choler; applauded the descretion and
prudence of Petronius; only advised him by the by not to protract the
Consecration of his Statue any longer, for seeing Harvest was over, there could
be no considerable reason to defer it.

CHAP. XVI.
King Agrippa comes to Rome, and being told by Caius that he would have his
Statue erected in the Temple of Jerusalem, he falls into a swond; having
recollected himself, he writes a Letter to Caius.
NOT long after King Agrippa arrived at the Emperors Court, knowing nothing of
the Letter from Petronius, nor of the Answer which Caius had returned: when
Agrippa came to pay his duty to the Emperor, he easily discovered by the
manner

No man seeing farther into Peoples thoughts then Caius, he quickly perceived
that Agrippa was disturbed, and told him; I will tell you what you are so
desirous to understand. You know me too well to be ignorant, that I speak no
less with my Eyes than with my Tongue: Jupiter in their Temple. They have met
together from all the Cities and Countries to present a Petition, which in
effect is nothing but to testify their contempt and disrespect to my Commands.

He would have proceeded, but Agrippa was surprised with so violent a sorrow,
that he fainted before him, and had fallen down, had he not been sustained by
those who were about him. He was carried off to his Lodgings, where he
continued insensible for a considerable time.

The concernment of this poor Prince augmented the hatred that Caius had
conceived against our Nation. If Agrippa (said he) who has always had an
affection for me, and has been obliged to me by so many favors, has so great a
Passion for the Laws of his Country, that he is not able to endure that I
should cross them, or so much as mention it to him, without hatred to his Life,
what am I to expect from the rest of the Jews, who are not obliged by any
Consideration of me to abandon their sentiments?

All that day, and a good part of the next, Agrippa remained in such
astonishment, that he could not recollect himself, at length about evening he
began to lift up his head; and opening his eyes with much trouble, he cast them
upon the People who were about him, but knew no body, and having done so he
fainted again, but with something more freedom of breath. Not long after he
opened his eyes again, and coming a little to himself, Where am I (said he)
with the Emperor? and is he present?

Take courage Sir, (said some about him) You are in your own Lodgings, and the
Emperor is not present. You have slept enough, awake now if you please, and
try if you know us. Here are none but your Friends and your Servants, whom you
love, and I am sure they love you beyond their own Lives.

Then the Prince opened his Eyes, recollected himself, and found by their
countenances what an impression his malady had made in their hearts. The
Physicians caused the greatest part of those who were present to withdraw, that
they might apply their remedy, and give him to eat with more convenience. Upon
their presenting him something to eat, he told them,

Trouble me not with your Delicates; in the affliction I am in, it is
sufficient to keep me from starving; and indeed I should not persuade myself to
eat at all, had I not some hopes of being able to assist my Countrymen in so
unfortunate an extremity.

These words he delivered with Tears, and then took what was barely necessary,
for the sustenance of his Life, and would not suffer them to mingle one drop of
Wine with the Water which he drank. After which he told them, I have now
received what I could not have refused without destruction to my body. There
remains nothing, but that I employ the utmost of my endeavors with the
Emperor to divert the storm that impends: and thereupon calling for materials,
he writ this Letter to the Emperor,


MY Respects and awe for your Majesty deters me from presenting my self before
you. Your Luster amazes me, and your Comminations affright me: A Letter will
better express my humble request, than I could do it by word of mouth. You know
(great Sir) that Nature has engraven in every man's heart an ardent affection
for his Country, and a singular veneration for the Laws which have been derived
to him from his Ancestors, as you have sufficiently testified by your Affection
to the one, and by the great care your Majesty takes to have the other
observed.

You are not ignorant Sir, that I am by Nation a Jew, and born in Jerusalem,
where that blessed Temple is placed that is decicated more particularly to the
honor of Almighty God. My Predecessors have been Kings of that happy Country:
Some of them have been Chief Priests, and exulted more in that dignity, than
the Crown; being persuaded, that as God was above Men, so the Priesthood was
above the Throne; Divine things being the Object of the one, and but Humane
things of the

Finding my self (Great Sir) obliged by so many Ligaments to this Nation, this
Interest, and this Temple, I could not refuse them my Intercession to your
Majesty; Let me therefore with all humility beg, that you would not permit my
poor Countrymen to lessen their Zeal and Allegiance to you, of which no People
in Europe or Asia have always given greater testimony for your August Imperial
Family, in what ever their Religion and Laws would dispense with. They have not
only made Vows and Sacrifices for the prosperity of your Empire upon public
Feasts and Solemnities, but every day. Which shows that it was not only by bare
words and false ostentations, but by real effects proceeding from the sincerity
of their hearts, that they signified

As to that sacred City in which I had the happiness to be born, I may say it
is not to be considered only as the Metropolis of Judea, but it is the Capital
City of several other Provinces, by reason of the many Colonies with which it
has peopled Egypt, Phenicia, the upper and lower Syria, Pamphilia, Cilicia,
several other parts of Asia, as far as Bithynia, and a great way on the other
side of the Sea.

In Europe, it has furnished with Colonies, Thessalie, Beotia, Macedonia,
Etolia, Athens, Argos, Corinth, with the greatest part of Peloponnesus, besides
the most celebrated Isles, as Eubea, Cyprus and Candia.

What shall I say likewise of the Countries beyond the Euphrates, in which
(unless Babylon, and some other Governments) most of the Cities that are seated
in fruitful Countries are inhabited by the Jews? So that if the Country, in
which I had the honor to be born, may find favor in your Eyes, you will not
(great Sir) oblig^ one single Town, but a vast number of Cities in all places
of the World; and it would be a thing suitable to your Grandeur and Fortune to
have all people participate of your favors to them; for there is no part of
the Earth in which your glory will not be proclaimed, nor any person living
that will refuse you those praises and acknowledgments that will be due to you.

At the request of some of your private friends you have given whole Cities the
freedom of Rome, and thereby advanced them before others, to whom they were
formerly

I can say without vanity, that among all the Princes, who pay obedience to
your Majesty, there are very few who precede me in dignity, but none who
surpasses (I may say equals me) in point of affection to your Majecty, both as
I am born your Subject, and obliged by many express and particular favors. I
dare not be so confident as to beg the freedom of Rome for my Countrymen, to
exempt them from Tributes, or give them Infranchisment: I request, Sir, only a
favor that will be no charge or inconvenience to your Majesty, but a great
benefit to them; and there is none so great a benefit to the Subject, as the
favor of their Prince.

Jerusalem had the first news of your happy succession to the Empire, and
published it immediately through all the neighboring Provinces. Since the
Jerusalem was the first City in the East, that proclaimed you Emperor, may not
she with reason

Having spoken for my Nation and Countrymen, it remains that I do now with all
humility supplicate you for our Temple, being consecrated to God Almighty, and
his Majesty inhabiting it. We have never admitted any Image or Statue there,
because Painters and Sculptors represent only such Deities as are visible, and
the God which we worship being invisible, our Ancestors have thought, that they
could not without impiety undertake any such representation.

Agrippa your Grandfather had a respect for this Temple: Augustus ordered by
Letters express that the First Fruits should be brought thither from all parts,
and that not a

The Emperess your great Grandmother had it in the same Veneration. There was
neither Greek nor Barbarian, nor Prince (how great soever his pique was to us)
nor Sedition, nor War, no Captivity, nor other of the greatest desolations that
could happen to any People, that could ever prevail with us to admit an Image
into our Temple; for even our greatest Enemies have born a reverence for this
place, because it was consecrated to the Creator of the Universe, for fear of
those dreadful Judgments, which they knew had befallen those persons, who had
had the boldness to violate it; of which, without instancing in Foreign
Examples, I shall recount such as are domestic to your Majesty.

When Marcus Agrippa your Grandfather in favor to King Herod my Grandfather
condescended to visit Judea, and coast along the Shore to Jerusalem, he was so
taken with the Magnificence of the Temple, with its Ornaments, the diversity of
the Orders of the Priests, with their Vestments, and particularly with the
habit of the Chief-Priest, with the formality of their Sacrifices, and the
Devotion of those who assisted; That he could not forbear testifying his
admiration. He took so much pleasure in the contemplation of these things, that
there was not a day past, whilst he remained at Jerusalem, but he visited them
all, offered magnificent Presents, and granted to the Inhabitants of that great
City all that they could desire but exemption from Taxes.

Herod paid him all the honor he could devise, and having received much
greater

Is it not, Sir, a thing known all the World over, that the Emperor Tiberius
your great Uncle during the 23 years of his reign had the same respect for our
Temple, not suffering any body to make the least alteration in the Orders
observed there? Upon which account (though otherwise I was a great sufferer by
him) I cannot contein from recounting an action that redounded much to his
honor, and I know you take delight in hearing the Truth. Pilate the then
Governor of Judea consecrated to him in the Palace of Herod at Jerusalem
certain guilt Bucklers not so much in honor to Pilate to cause the Buckers to
be removed, by reason it was contrary to the Customs of their Ancestors, which
Customs neither Kings nor Emperors had ever infringed before; and seeing
Pilate (who was of a violent and obstinate nature) did seem to refuse them,
they cried out, Have a care of troubling the Peace which we enjoy: Have a care
how you provoke us to Revolt, and to War: It Is not by the violation of our Laws
that he Emperor is to be honored; you must find another pretense to color so
unjust an Enterprise, and so insupportable to us; for this magnanimous Prince
is far from intrenching upon our Customs: If you have any Commission to that
purpose, any Letter or other Order to authorize you in what you do, let us see
it, and we will depute persons to wait upon him with our humble Remonstrances.
These words exasperated Pilate, yet gave him much trouble; for he feared, that,
if they sent their Deputies, they would inform the Emperor of his Exactions,
Injustices, and horrible Cruelties, by which he had afflicted many innocent
persons, and put as many to death.

In so great an anxiety Pilate, notwithstanding his Passion and Severity, knew
not what way to steer. He durst not take away the Bucklers, because they had
been consecrated; and if he durst have ventured upon that, he could not frame
himself to comply Tiberius.

Those who interceded for the Jews perceiving, that though he dissembled it
what he could, yet he repented of what he had done; writ a Letter to Tiberius
with great instance and respect; and there needs no further proof of its
effects, than that after he had signified his displeasure to Pilate in his
immediate Answer, he sent to him his Commands to remove the Bucklers to the
Temple at Cesaria, which was built in honor to Augustus, and it was done
accordingly; by which invention all due respect was paid to the Emperor,
without any invasion of our Laws. Those Bucklers had no image upon them, and
yet now our Controversy is about a Statue: Those Bucklers were placed only in
the Palace of the Governor; and this Statue must be set up in the Sanctuary, a
place so holy, that there is only the high Priest permitted

Thus it was that Tiberius acted upon this occasion; and as to that Prince (the
happiest that ever governed the Empire) your most excellent Predecessor (who,
having given Peace to the whole World, deserved for his virtue and great
exploits the glorious name of Augustus) when he understood, that we admitted
not into our Temple any visible Image, as being improper to represent an
invisible God, he admired the Piety and Knowledge of our Nation, being learned
himself, and accustomed to pass the greatest part of his time at meals in
discourse of Philosophical points, that be had been taught by the greatest
Masters, and in the Conversation of learned Men, which he kept constantly about
him, that his Mind might receive its repast as well as his

I could instance in several other things evincing his kindness to our Nation,
but I shall content my self with two.

Being informed that there was a neglect in bringing in our First Fruits, he
sent to the Governors of the Provinces in Asia, to permit only the Jews to
assemble together, because their meetings were not like the Bacchanals, to
drink and debauch, and contrive against the Peace of the Public; but Academies
of Virtue, where People were instructed to love Justice and Temperance; and as
to their First Fruits, which were sent annually to Jerusalem, they were
employed only to offer Sacrifices to God in the Temple. Wherefore this great
Prince expressly forbad every body for molesting Jews in what related to their
Meetings and First Fruits. If these were not the very words, I am sure it was
the sense, as your Majesty may know by one of the Letters of C. Norbanus
Flaccus, of which I have brought you a Copy.

C. Norbanus Flaccus to the Magistrates of Ephesus, Greeting. The Emperor has
writ to me, that in all places under my Government, where there are any Jews, I
should permit them to assemble according to their ancient Customs, and to raise
money to be sent to Jerusalem: I do advise and require, that you give them no
interruption.

Does not the favor and affection of Augustus to the Jews appear clearly
hereby, seeing he permits the Jews to assemble publicly to collect their
First Fruits, and perform other actions of Piety and Devotion?

I will give you another proof, and that no less considerable. He commanded
that a Bull and a Ram should be offered every day at his charge in honor to
our God, which is observed to this day without any discontinuance; yet he knew
that there was no Image permitted either within the Temple or without: and no
person surpassing him in knowledge, he thought it but reasonable, that there
should be a Temple peculiarly dedicated to the invisible God, in which there
should be no Image, and where men might utter their Prayers and Devotions with
confidence of relief.

The Emperess Julia, your Majesty's great Grandmother, imitating the Piety of
her incomparable Husband, adorned our Temple with several inestimable Vessels
of Gold, without any Image ingraved upon them, because, though Women do not
intellectual things as well as sensible; and she was persuaded that the later

Since then you have so many pregnant Examples at home of the great affection
of your Predecessors to us; Continue, I beseech you, what they, from whom your
person and succession is derived, have so carefully preserved.

They are Emperors, who intercede in the behalf of our Laws to an Emperor;
They are great Princes, to a great Prince; They are Grandfathers and
Grandmothers, to a Grandchild; Several to one single Person; all of them
admonishing as it were in these terms; Do not you abolish what we have
established, and what has been always observed; but consider, that though the
subversion of this Order may possibly produce no ill effects immediately, yet
the uncertainty of future Events ought to make

Should I go about to recount all my Obligations to your Majesty, the day would
fail me before I had finished; and yet it troubles me to pass them over too
soon; But so great benefits will publish themselves. You have beat off my
Irons, but those Irons encumbered but part of my Body, and the pain, that I now
suffer, oppresses my Soul. You have delivered me from the apprehension of
Death, and afterward revived me, when a greater apprehension had put me into
such a state, that I was looked upon as dead. Preserve then, I beseech you, that
Life, that you have restored, and would not doubtless have restored to have
prolonged my misfortunes.

Your Majesty has advanced me to the greatest honor, that can be aspired; you
have Trachonitis and Galilee. After such extraordinary Favors, do not, I
beseech you, refuse me another so necessary, that the not granting of that will
make the other unprofitable; and when you have raised me to so glorious, so
illustrious a condition, do not humble me down again into darkness and sorrow.

I do not beg of you to continue me in that high sphere, where your favor has
placed me. All that I beg is, That you would not interfere with the Laws of my
Country; and if you deny me that, what will my Countrymen, what will the whole
World think of my Interest with you? Will not they have reason to believe, that
I have either

If I be so unfortunate as to be pleasing to you no longer, do not cast me into
Bonds as Tiberius did, but put me immediately to death; For why should I desire
to live having lost you Majesty's favor, in which only I reposed my greatest
confidence and



Caius was wrought upon by Agrippa's Letter, and sent to Petronius to do
nothing in the Temple at Jerusalem. But he repented presently, and caused a
Statue to be made in Rome, which he ordered to be sent privately to Jerusalem
at the same time, when he should go to Alexandria, where he likewise resolved
to be acknowledged for a God. The
WHEN King Agrippa had sealed and dispatched this Letter to Caius, he expected
the success with all imaginable impatience, as judging, that not only the
Conservation or Ruin of Judea was at Stake, but the Interest of the whole
Nation of the Jews spread abroad over the whole Earth.

This Letter produced great agitation in the mind of Caius. He could not with
patience behold his Pleasure disputed, and yet he could not but be touched with
the Reasons and importunity of Agrippa. He blamed his affection for them, who
were the only People, that durst withstand the Consecration of his Statue; and
yet he could not but approve Agrippa prevailed against his Choler; he was
mollified by degrees, returned him a favorable answer, and granted him the
highest of all favors, that he would desist from the aforesaid Consecration.
After which he writ to Petronius to make no farther alteration in the Temple;
but he blended his grace with such severe Conditions, as gave them always
occasion to tremble; for he added this Clause to his Letter, But if in any
other Town beside Jerusalem any body thinks fit to erect any Statue or Altar to
me or mine, and any one be found so audacious as to oppose it, it is our
pleasure, that he be punished upon the place, or sent Prisoner to us.

Was not this to revoke or cancel his favor at the same time when he granted
it, seeing Jews, would fill their Provinces with sacrilege, and such marks of
honor, as are due only to God (and that rather to destroy our Nation, than to
oblige Caius) and then the Jews not being able to suffer such an outrage upon
their Laws, Caius, to punish their resistance, would de novo command the Statue
to be set up and consecrated in the Temple? Nevertheless, by the manifest
protection of God, none of the People adjacent to Judea gave them this occasion
of trouble, though there was so much cause to apprehend it. But some will say,
What advantage had they by it? for though others sat still, Caius himself did
not: For he immediately repented of the favor which he had granted, reassumed
his old resolution, and taking Sidon (le^t it should beget a revolt) he gave
order for a new one to be made of gilt Brass in Rome, with directions that it
should be sent privately by Sea, and without notice set up in the Temple of
Jerusalem, when he went himself into Egypt.

He omitted no Order in the preparation for his Voyage to Alexandria, so great
was his desire to see it; and so firm his resolution to continue therein some
time, because no other place seemed to him so convenient for the execution of
his ridiculous design of being owned for a God, out of an opinion he had, that
the example of that great City (by reason of its situation, and the resort
thither from all parts of the world) might induce other Towns less considerable
to give him the same divine honor, as he was assured Alexandria. Besides, he
was of so light and inconstant a nature, he never did any good thing, but he
repented of it immedately, and found out some way to revoke it, and make things
very much worse than before; and of this I shall give you some proof,

Having set certain Prisoners at liberty one day, he caused them about an hour
after to be clapped up again without any hopes of ever being discharged any more,
though they had committed nothing in the interim, that might move his
displeasure.

Another time he sent others into Exile, who had committed nothing at all, and
he looked upon that sentence as a favor, because they, knowing his horrible
inhumanity, expected, and had prepared themselves for death. Accordingly they
were sent into the Islands, where they were put to plough and cultivate the
Earth, and they took their misfortune Rome.

If he gave money at any time to any body, he would be sure to have it again,
not

Those, who thought themselves highest in his favor, he ruined under pretense
of affection; obliging them to such excessive expenses in vain Feasting and
Entertainments, that sometimes one single Treat was so magnificent and
sumptuous, that it was sufficient to undo a man utterly, and forced him to
borrow, what he was never able to pay; upon which score some persons were
afraid of his friendship, because it was not only useless, but dangerous; and
to be esteemed rather a snare, than an advantage.

This was the humor of Caius, who hating no nation like the Jews, no Nation
felt so much the effects of his hatred. He began in Alexandria to sequester
their Oratories, and fill them with Statues, and no man durst oppose so great a
Violence. There was now only the Temple at Jerusalem unviolated; and to
complete his Impiety, he would needs ravish that from God, and impropriate it
to himself, with this Title, THE TEMPLE OF THE NEW JUPITER, THE ILLUSTRIOUS
CAIUS.

What do you intend, most presumptuous and infatuated Prince? You are but a
Man,

Are these the great hopes which the World conceived of your Reign? Or do you
not know, that this course is no less, than to draw upon your self and your
whole Empire a deluge of all imaginable mischiefs?

CHAP. XVIII.
With what austerity Caius treated Philo, and the other Ambassadors from
Alexandria, and how he would not be persuaded to hear what they could say.
BUT we must come now to the Passages in our Embassy. The day appointed Mine
and his Gesture, that Caius was rather become a Party than a Judge. For if he
would have acted like a Judge, he should have advised with his Counsel in an
affair of that importance, wherein all the Privileges were in question, that
for four hundred years together had been enjoyed by so great a multitude of
Jews, as lived in Alexandria, without the least intrenchment or molestation. He
ought to have heard both sides, debated the whole matter with his Counsel, and
afterward pronounced a just and equitable arrest. But, instead of proceeding
by those methods of Justice, the pitiless Tyrant, bending his brows upon us
with a furious Brutality, caused the two Intendants of Mecenas and Lamia (which
are near both the town and his Palace) to be called to him (for he had been
retired thither for his recreation three or four days) He commanded them to
open the doors of the several Appartments, which opened into those Gardens, for
he was disposed to walk, and gave Order that we should follow.

We threw our selves down at his feet, and saluted him with the Titles of
Emperor and August. The manner in which he received our Salutation was such,
that we quickly found, that we were to despair not only of success in our
Embassy, but the safety of our Lives. For he told us frowning, and with an
angry kind of smile; Are not you the declared Enemies of the gods? Are not you
they, who, when others acknowledge my Divinity, do refuse and despise me?

And saying so, he lifted up his hands toward Heaven uttering such
expressions, that



There was a person named Isidorus, a great and dangerous Calumniator, who,
perceiving Caius to be infinitely well pleased with his Flatteries and
Cajolments; said to him, Sir, You would abhor these people much more, and those
who sent them, did you know their malice against you. They are the only People,
who refuse to offer Sacrifice for your safety; and generally the whole Nation
is guilty of the same stubbornness. At which words we were not able to contein,
but cried out, that it was false, for we sacrificed Hecatombs to that purpose;
and having washed our Altars with the blood of our Victims, we did not devour
the flesh Germany.

It Is true (the furious Emperor replied) you offered Sacrifices, but it was to
another, not to me: and therefore, What honor did I receive by it?

We could perceive at those horrid words our blood to freeze in our veins. In
the mean time Caius passed from one appartment to another, finding fault where
any thing was amiss, and giving order how it should be mended. We followed him,
jostled

When he had given direction about his buildings, he demanded seriously and
with great gravity of us, Why we were so scrupulous in eating of Hogs-flesh?
Upon which our Adversaries (to Cajole him with their flatteries) fell out into
so immoderate and undecent Privado's and Intimates, that could without danger
take the liberty upon them of but smiling in his presence.

We replied most humbly to the Emperor, That the Customs of People were
different, and that as among us there were some things forbidden, so there were
others prohibited to other Nations. And one of our Company instancing in those
who eat no Lamb, the Emperor laughed and replied, They have no reason, for the
flesh is not good. These raileries augmented our trouble very much; but at
length, in some kind of heat he asked us, upon what grounds we founded our
freedom? We began to lay before him our grounds, and he foreseeing Caius, who
commanded us to withdraw, and went away himself, only saying to those who were
next him, These People are not so bad, as unfortunate and besotted not to
believe me to be of Divine nature.

In this manner we departed not only from his Judgment, but from his Theater,
and Prison, for what was it but a Theater, where we were laughed at and
derided? And the rigors of a Prison are they comparable to the torments we
endured from so many Blasphemies against God, and so many Menaces from an
enraged Tyrant against us? Because ours (forsooth) was the only Nation, that
obstructed his being owned for a God.

it with joy, as conducting us to a happy Eternity. But because besides this it
would Caius should declare in favor of the Alexandrians, what other Town would
let the Jews live in quiet? What other Town would forbear them? What other
would not destroy their Oratories? What other would not refuse them the
Exercise of their Religion?

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
The TABLE of the CHAPTERS IN THE Embassy of PHILO TO THE Emperor CAIUS
CALIGULA.
THE Preface of Philo upon the blindness of Man, and the incomprehensible
grandeur of God. Page 828 CHAP. I. In what Incredible felicity the People lived
the first seven months in the Reign of Caius Caligula. page 829 CHAP. II. The
Emperor Caius having Reigned but seven Months, falls into a desperate fit of
sickness: The marvelous affliction that all the Provinces expressed for it; and
their inexpressible joy for his recovery. page 829 CHAP. III. Caius abandons
himself to all kind of Debauchery, and with horrible ingratitude and dreadful
cruelty constrains Tiberius, Grandson to the Emperor Tiberius, to kill
himself. page 830 CHAP. IV. Caius puts to death Macro Colonel of the Pretorian
Guards, to whom he was obliged both for his Empire and Life. page 831 CHAP. V.
Caius puts to death Marcus Syllanus his Father in Law, because he gave him wise
Counsel: And that Murder is followed by many others. page 833 CHAP. VI. Caius
requires to be reverenced as a Demi-God. page 834 CHAP. VII. The folly of Caius
increasing, he requires to be worshipped as a God; and imitates Mercury, Apollo,
and Mars. page 835 CHAP. VIII. Caius enraged against the Jews, because they
would not reverence him as a Demi-god like other People. page 837 CHAP. IX. The
Inhabitants of Alexandria take advantage of the displeasure of Caius to commit
great cruelty and outrage upon the Jews. They destroy most part of their
Oratories, and set up the Emperors Statues; though no such thing had ever been
attempted in the Reigns of Augustus or Tiberius. The Praises of Augustus. ibid.
CHAP. X. Caius being already incensed against the Jews of Alexandria, is much
exasperated by the Calumnies of Helico formerly an Egyptian Slave, but now in
great favor with the Emperor. page 840 CHAP. XI. The Jews of Alexandria send
Ambassadors to Caius, to represent their grievances, of which number Philo was
chief. Caius receives them kindly in appearance, but Philo judged very well
that he was not to be trusted. page 841 CHAP. XII. Philo and his Colleagues are
informed that Caius had sent Orders to Petronius, Governor of Syria, to cause
his Statue to be set up in the Temple of Jerusalem. p. 842 CHAP. XIII.
Petronius being sensible of the Injustice and ill Consequences of it, is much
troubled about the execution of that Order. page 844 CHAP. XIV. Petronius
Orders a Statue to be made, but very slowly: he endeavors to persuade the Jews
to admit it, but in vain. The Jews assemble from all places, unanimously
conjuring him against the Execution of that Order, and to give them leave to
send Ambassadors to the Emperor. page 845 CHAP. XV. Petronius affected with
their Reasons, and thinking it unsafe to run them into despair writes to Caius
on purpose to gain time. Caius is enraged, but dissembles it in his Answer to
Petronius. page 846 CHAP. XVI. King Agrippa comes to Rome, and finding from
Caius his own mouth his design of Erecting his Statue in the Temple of
Jerusalem, He falls into fainting fits; being recollected, be writes to the
Emperor, page 848 CHAP. XVII. Caius relents upon Agrippa's Letter, writes to
Petronius to alter nothing in the Temple, but repents immediately. He causes a
Statue to be made privately in Rome, and sent as privately to Jerusalem, when
he was to go to Alexandria; he continues his resolution to be owned there as a
God. His Injustice and Cruelty. page 851 CHAP. XVIII. The Passion wherewith
Caius treated Philo and the rest of the Ambassadors. page 852
A TABLE of the Chiefest and most Memorable Things, which are handled in This
WORK.
A.
AAron, Moses brother, 67. G. comes to meet him, ibid. 1. holds up Moses
hands, 77. A. elected High Priest, 88. M. his sons, 89. A. High Priesthood
confirmed to him, 102. K. gives his Priestly Ornaments to Eleazar, 104. I. his
death, ibid. K. Aarons Rod fructifieth, 103. A. Abdon, Judge of Israel, 139. E.
renowned for his issue, ibid. F. Abel second son of Adam, 29. B. is commended,
ibid. C. is slain by his brother, and why, ibid. C. Abias levieth an Army, 223.
I. overcomes Jeroboam, ibid. N. dies, ibid. O. his issue, ibid. Abiathar
escapes Saul's hands, 166. L. tells David of his Families slaughter, ibid.
asks counsel of God, 173. B. dispossessed of the Priesthood, 104. I. helps
Adonias, 199. D. Abigail pacifieth David, 169. B. C. after married to David,
ibid. E. Abibu, Aarons son, burned, 89. G. and why, ibid. G. Abimelech, King of
Geraer, enamoured of Sara, 39. E. plagued for taking her, ibid. E. made a
covenant with Abraham, ibid. G. expels Isaac his Country, 43. F. after makes
a league with him, 44. I. Abimelech, Gideons bastard son, 137. B. kills 69 of
his brethren, and usurpeth, ibid. B. practices against the Sichemites, ibid.
E. slays him, and sacketh their City, ibid. G. burned the Sichemites fled to
the rock, 138. H. takes Tabez, ibid. K. is wounded and slain, ibid. K. Abiram
rebellious, 101. C. he, and those that were with him, swallowed up, 102. H.
Abisai overcomes the Idumaeans, 182. L. sent against the Ammonites, 183. E.
Abisaei's valor, 197. A. Abisag nourishes David, 199. C. Abner, Saul's Uncle,
151. B. questioneth with Saul, ibid. B. General of his Army, 164. M. makes
Isboseth King, 176. H. revolteth from Isboseth, ibid. O. Kills Azael, ibid.
K. persuades the Governors to create David King, 177. B. is slain, 177. D. E.
Abraham son of Thares, 35. C. tenth from Noe, ibid. C. taught the Egyptians
Religion and Arts, 36. M. first Preacher of the word, 35. F. his wisdom, ibid.
an Astronomer, 36. M. and an Arithmetician, ibid. M. his house, 36. I.
oppressed by Famine, ibid. K. divided the Land with Lot, 36. K. rescueth Lot
from the Sodomites. 37. E. son promised him, ibid. F. foretold his progeny to
be evil entreated, 38. H. circumcised himself and Ismael, 38. L. entertaineth
Angels, and entreats for the Sodomites, ibid. N. intended to offer his son,
41. B. C. marries Chetura, ibid. G. provideth a wife for his son, 42. K.
dies, 43. D. is commended, ibid. Absence of David excused, 164. L. Absalon
kills Amnon, 186. O. fled to Gessur, 187. C. revoked from banishment, and
how, ibid. F. affects the Kingdom, 188. K. proclaimed King, ibid. L. passes
over Jordan, 191. B. his overthrow, 191. E. slain by Joab, ibid. F. Abundance
foretold, 61. G. Abundance of Silver, 216. M. Abundance of victuals foreshewed,
239. M. affected, 240. E. Abundance of victuals showed, 736. I. Acclamation of
the people, 463. A. Accusation of Laban against Jacob, 47. D. of Jacob against
him, ibid. F. of Putifars wife against Joseph, 54. H. of Doeg against
Achimelech, 166. I. of Aristobulus and Hircanus, 362. E. F. of Antipater
against his brethren, 592. M. of Nicolaus 601. B. of Antipater against
Archelaus, 606. M. of the Jews, 610. K. Achab. son of Amri, King of Israel,
225. N. follows impieties, ibid. took to wife Jezabel, 226. B. seeks Elias,
227. H. covets Naboths vineyard, 228. F. his repentance, 229. K. twice
overcomes the Syrians, 213. C. D. reproved for dismissing Adad, 231. K.
imprisoneth Michaias, and why, 233. H. rejected his advice, ibid. I. wounded,
dies, ibid. K. Achabs seventy sons, 243. K. Achar stole the spoils dedicated
to God, 123. E. hid them in his tent, ibid. found guilty, and put to death,
124. I. Achaz, King of Judah, sacrifices his son, 251. I. serves Idols, ibid.
overthrown in battle, ibid. O. hireth Theglaphalasar, ibid. shuts the
Temple-Gates, 252. B. dies, ibid. Achias reproved Solomon, 217. I. foretold
Jeroboam to be King over ten Tribes, ibid. 217. O. Achis a King of the
Philistines, 165. C. leads out David against the Hebrews, 172. N. dismisseth
him, and why, ibid. O. Achitophels counsel against David, 189. O. hangs
himself, 190. O. Acmes letter to Antipater, 456. N. executed, 461. E.
Acquaintance of Rebecca with Abraham's servant, 42. N. Act of Saul most
malicious, 166. I. An Action how said to be good, 157. E. Action of Saul and
his people, 157. B. Acts of the Israelites, 129. B. C. D. Acts of Simon against
the Zealous, 706. I. K. Act most cruel, 736. L. M. Actian war, 580. O. Adad,
King of Damascus, overcome, 181. G. Adad, King of Syria, proposes conditions
to Achab, 229. L. M. overthrown, 230. C. his second expedition, ibid. E. taken
prisoner, is dismissed, 731. I. discomfiteth and slays Achab, 233. K. asks
counsel of Elizaus, 240. F. his death foretold, ibid. I. Adam created, and how,
28. H. placed in Paradise, ibid. forbidden the tree of knowledge, ibid.
transgresses, ibid. L. cast out of Paradise, 29. A. begot Cain and Abel, ibid.
O. and other children also, 30. G. his age and death, ibid. K. and 7. B.
prophesied of a twosold destruction, ibid. L. Adar, a Month of the Hebrews,
120. K. Adar enemy to Solomon, 217. M. spoiled the Lands of the Israelites,
ibid. Adonibezec taken 129. B. punished, confesses Gods justice, ibid. C.
Adonias affects the Kingdom, 199. C. flies to the Altar, 187. D. requires
Abisaah, 200. L. slain, ibid. M. Adversities befell the Israelites, 132. N. and
why, ibid. C. Advice of Raguel allowed, 78. L. of the Elders rejected. 218. F.
of young men accepted, ibid. G. Adulteress, her policy, 54. H. Adultery, 94. H.
punished, 115. A. Adultery of Elies sons, 143. F. Adultery of David, 184. K.
Affairs of Joseph, 637. D. Affection of Joseph toward his brethren, 60. I. of
Jonathan to David, 165. B. Affinity of Jacob with Rachel, 45. F. of Saul and
Jonathan with David, 162. I. of Demetrius with Ptolomy, 336. B. Affliction of
the Hebrews, with the causes thereof, 62. M. N. O. 68. L. Africa from whence it
took its name, 42. I. Agag, King of the Amalechites, taken, 157. B. spared, and
why, ibid. K. put to death, 159. I. and why, ibid. K. Agar, Sarahs handmaid,
38. I. contemned her mistress, and why, ibid. fled, commanded to return, ibid.
K. and promised happiness, ibid. K. brought forth Ismael, ibid. A. cast out
with her son, ibid. K. comforted, ibid. L. Age of Isaac at his offering, 41. A.
when he died, 49. F. Age of the Fathers before the Flood, 31. B. Age of
Abraham, 43. D. of Jacob, 62. I. Aggeus the Prophet encourages the Jews, 280.
D. Agreement of the seditious, 712. O. 724. I. Agrippa offers 100 f^t Oxen,
423. B. reconciled to the Ileensians, ibid. F. confirms the Jews privileges,
425. D. writes to the Ephesians, 432. K. Agrippa becomes poor, 486. M.
borrows money, 487. D. admitted to Caesar's presence, D. accused by Eutychus,
487. M. 488. I. imprisoned, 489. E. hates Tiberius, 615. G. gets Caius
friendship, ibid. his happy fortune foretold, 490. E. certified of Tiberius
death, 492. L. departs to his Kingdom, ibid. M. his request of Caius, 496. M.
his speech to the Senate, 417. B. hangs up his Golden Chain, 520. M. his
acts, 522. K. L. etc. 523. D. 524. F. saluted for a god, 524. I. his death,
ibid. K. his children, ibid. O. Agrippa's request to the Empress, 535. D.
obtains Philips Tetrarchy, ibid. E. gets a portion of Galilee, 536. M.
deposes Joseph, 539. B. inlargeth the City of Caesarea, ibid. G. his kindness
to the Berytians, ibid. G. his Epistles to Joseph, 21. D. Agrippa excuses
Caesar, etc. 626. K. his Oration, 625. G. 627. 628. driven out of the City,
629. B. Aid that came to the Romans, 681. D. Aid of the Idumaeans, 690. O.
Ainon or Ai taken and burnt, 124. K. Ainites discomfit 3000 Israelites, and
slew 36, 123. F. after put to flight and slain by Joshuah, 124. K. Air
temperate, 702. I. Albinus Governor of Judaea, 539. C. full of wickedness,
621. D. pacifieth the Country, 539. F. executes malefactors, 540. K. Alcimus
High Priest, 323. accuses Judas and his brethren, N. his popularity, 324. B.
kills all of Judas faction, ibid. C. dies suddenly, 325. I. Alexander King
of Macedonia, 293. M. overthrows Darius army, ibid. subdues Darius, 294. C.
marches toward Jerusalem, 295. I. honorably received by the High Priest and
the rest, ibid. his sacrifice* in the Temple, ibid. I. adoreth the High Priest,
ibid. M. his death and successors, 297. M. Alexander warreth against Demetrius,
330. B. labors to win Jonathan, ibid. I. slays Demetrius, 332. B. marries
Ptolomies daughter, 33. M. sends presents to Jonathan, 335. I. discomfited
and slain, 336. B. Alexander Zebina obtains the Kingdom, 847. K. slain, ibid.
Alexander King of the Jews, 350. N. 562 H. besieges Ptolomais, ibid. H. his
overthrow, 352. C. besieges Gaza, 353. I. sedition raised against him. 562. K.
353. D. overcome, ibid. L. 562. F. Citrons cast at him, 354. A. crucifieth 800
Jews, 354. F. 562. O. his sickness and advice to his wife, 356. C. 563. K. his
death and funeral, 356. E. F. Alexander son of Aristobulus, 366. C. overcome,
ibid. E. beheaded, 369. O. Alexander Herod's son, 422. O. marries Glaphira,
ibid. his defense, 428. L. 419. A. B. reconciled to his father, 429. E. 437. G.
bribeth the Eunuchs, 589. G. imprisoned, 437. A. 590. K. accused of treason,
ibid. 437. B. C. etc. writes Books, 590. L. condemned, 444. M. strangled, 594.
K. false Alexander, etc. 472. H. 611. B. condemned to tug at an Oar, 472. O.
611. E. Alexanders cruelty, 354. F. Alexandra governs the Kingdom, 357. M.
imprisoneth Aristobulus wife and children, 564. K. commits charge to the Jews,
357. M. her embassage to Tigranes, 357. N. her death, 358. L. Alexandra
solliciteth Antonius, and why, 394. B. excuses her self, ibid. suspected by
Herod, etc. 395. K. pretending to fly, is betrayed, ibid. M. certifieth
Cleopatra of Herod's treachery, 397. B. striveth to acquit her self, 408. M.
seeks to get Herod's Castles, 409. L. put to death, 409. N. Alexas marries
Salome, 449. A. dismisseth the Nobles, 462. M. Alliance of Abraham with his
wife, 39. F. of Jacob with Laban, 45. F. of Saul and Jonathan with David, 162.
M. of Juda with the Israelites, 251. M. Allowance of Micheus, 233. H. Allusion
of Jonathan, 165. B. Alacrity of the Romans, 714. N. Allegiance renounced, 764.
I. Altar of Incense, 85. D. Altars of Idolaters to be destroyed, 111. B. One
Altar to be erected, etc. and why, 111. E. Altar builded by Joshuah, 122. N.
Altar erected by the two Tribes and half, 127. E. and why, 128. I. Altar of
Gold and of Brass where placed, 211. I. Altar in Bethel clave in twain, 220. B.
Altar erected by David, 198. K. Amalechites war against the Israelites, 76. I.
K. overcome by the Israelites, 77. C. spoiled, and their utter ruin foretold,
ibid. and 118. N. overcome the Israelites, 135* B. are destroyed, 156. O. burnt
Siceleg, 173. A. Amarames Moses Father. See Amram. Amasias K. of Juda, 246. E.
revengeth his fathers death, 247. M. overcomes the Amalechites, ibid. O.
reproved, and why, 248. A. commands Joas to yield him homage, ibid. D. his
army flies, and he taken prisoner, ibid. E. is slain, ibid. F. Amasa slain,
194. O. Amazement of the seditious, 775. G. Ambition, 177. E. of Adonias, 199.
D. of John, 698. M. of Eleazar, 711. F. An Ambush laid for the Ainites, 124. I.
Ambushes of Saul for David, 167. E. etc. of Adad for Joram, 238. A. Amnon
deflowreth Thamar, 186. L. M. Ammonites oppress the Israelites, 138. M. and are
overcome, 139. A. injure David's Ambassadors, 183. C. revenge wrought on them,
ibid. F. War against Josaphat, 234. G. kill one another, 235. K. Amorites
overcome, 104. M. their Country possessed by the Hebrews, 105. B. Amos a wicked
King, 258. D. is slain, ibid. Amphitheater built by Herod, 410. G. 415. L.
Amram Moses father, 63. B. prays to God, 63. B. casts Moses into the river,
and why, 63. G. Amri King of Israel, 225. M. slew Thaman, ibid. his impiety and
death, ibid. N. Ananias death, 631. C. Ananus High Priest, 539. B. Ananias High
Priest slain, 736. N. Ananus stoneth James, 539. C. Ananus Governor of
Jerusalem, 637. F. his invective against the zealous, 689. A. disposes his
soldiers, ibid. slain, 694. K. Ananus a cruel soldier, 636. K. Achimelech
entertaineth David, 165. B. delivers him Goliabs sword, ibid. C. accused to
Saul, 166. I. and slain, 166. K. Ancestors conceal not honest things, 25. G.
Angels guarded Elizaeus, 238. C. Angels (i. sons) of God; 30. L. Angel
resists Balaam, 105. F. Angels promise Abraham a son, 39. A. enter Lots
house, ibid. foretell the destruction of Sodom, ibid. Angel appeared to Agar,
38. I. 40. K. to Jacob, 45. B. 48. M. to Manaach his wife, 139. F. foretells
her Sam^o^s birth, ibid. F. works a miracle, 140. K. 238. C. Anger. See
Wrath. Anilaeus receives charge from Artabanus, 499. E. kills a noble man,
500. I. reproved and accused, ibid. M. takes Mithridates prisoner, 500. O.
Anna, wife of Elcana, prayed to God for a son, 143. G. bare Samuel, and
consecrated him to God, 144. I. Annius takes Gerasa, 702. N. Answer of Simon
to Jesus Oration, 691. A. Answer of Isaac, 41. C. of Balaam to Balac, 106. M.
of God to Joshuah, 124. H. of Achab to the Syrians, 229. O. of Caesar to Herod,
582. H. of Antipater to Herod, 600. L. of John, 684. M. of Eleazar to
Antiochus, 818. I. of Alexander, 295. K. Antaeus against whom Hercules made
war, 42. I. Antigonus copartner in the Kingdom, 349. D. his death complotted,
ibid. F. effected, 350. H. 561. C. Antigonus accuses Hircanus and Antipater,
370. D. 568. H. promises the Parthians money, and why, 380. F. restored to the
Kingdom, 383. H. cutteth off Hircanus ears, ibid. H. declared an enemy to the
Romans, 384. C. 577. E. upbraideth Herod, 385. N. gets Massada, 575. A.
repulseth Herod's power, ibid. surpriseth Herod's victuallers, 386. B. cruelly
handles Joseph's carcass, 577. O. submits himself to Sosius, 391. H. put to
death, ibid. L. Antiochus the Great vexes the Jews, 305. E. recovers Cities of
Coelosyria, ibid. F. his Epistle to Ptolomy, 306. his Edict in honor of the
Temple, 306. his Epistle to Zeuxis, 307. I. Antiochus Epiphanes departs
Egypt, 313. L. spoileth the Temple of Jerusalem, ibid. N. abrogates Gods Laws,
214. G. inforceth the Jews to Idolatry, ibid. tortureth Eleazar, 818. M.
slays him, 819. H. forbids the Jews to use their Laws, 314. G. etc.
invades Judaea again, 317. I. departs into Persia, ibid. besieges Elymas,
321. I. falls sick and dies, ibid. K. Antiochus Eupater created King, 321.
N. marches into Judaea, 312. B. fights with Judas Macchabeus, ibid. C.
marches against Philip, ibid. E. enters a league with Judas, 323. I. slays
Philip, ibid. K. displaceth Onias, ibid. is slain, ibid. M. Antiochus son of
Alexander, 337. I. crowned King, ibid. discomfited Demetrius, 338. A. favors
Jonathan, ibid. Antiochus marries Cleopatra, 343. K. puts Triphon to
flight, ibid. L. warreth against Hircanus, 345. I. permits a truce, ibid. K.
slain, 346. A. Antiochus Gryphus overcomes Alexander, 347. I. his War against
his brother, ibid. slain, 353. M. Antiochus Cyzicenus warreth against his
brother, 347. K. 351. B. put to flight, 347. N. slain, 353. M. Antiochus
Eusebius puts Seleucus to flight, 353. N. slays Seleucus brother, ibid.
dies, ibid. O. Antiochus Seleucus slays his Uncle, 353. M. burned, ibid. N.
Antiochus Dionysius King, 355. K. thrust out of his Kingdom, ibid. slain, 345.
M. Antiochus perfidious to his Citizens, 762. M. N. Antiochus King of Comagena
accused, 77. O. his choice, etc. ibid. M. reconciled to Caesar, ibid. N.
Antipas, Herod's son, 606. K. claims the Kingdom, ibid. accuses Archelaus,
606. L. has part of the Kingdom with Archelaus, 471. D. Antipater the
Idumaean, 360. K. incenseth the Princes against Aristobulus, 360. M. relieveth
Gabinius, 367. M. his wife and children, 369. A. etc. gathers soldiers for
Caesar's service, ibid. E. made a citizen of Rome, and Governor over Judaea,
370. C. D. E. 567. F. makes his sons Governors, 372. B. persuades Hircanus to
fly, 564. N. his exploits, 567. C. poisoned, 377. H. 570. K. Antipater
banished, 585. G. advanced, 426. M. inciteth his father against his brothers,
426. N. his congratulation, 429. F. plotteth against his brethren, 433. E. 588.
L. cause of mischief, 436. M. governs the Kingdom, etc. 448. L. practices
his fathers death, ibid. M. 598. M. could not deceive his Aunt, 448. N. hates
his brothers children, 449. C. his treasons, 599. F. accuses Syllaeus, 598. L.
452. K. studieth to win favor, 594. M. conspireth against his father, 594. L.
accused by Herod, 455. E. 599. F. answers his fathers objections, 456. H.
hated of all, 599. B. 457. G. has liberty to justify himself, ibid. D. put to
death. 461. G. 603. A. Antipater accuses Antipater, 453. E. Antipater accuses
Archelaus, 465. E. 606. L. M. Antipatris built, 430. N. burned, 635. C.
Antiphilus letter to Antipater. 456. M. blamed, 459. B. Antiquity of the Jews
proved, 784. M. See Arguments. Antiquities when written, 543. B. Antonia
described, 722. A. not unlike a City, ibid. C. Antonius writes to Hircanus,
378. G. writes in the Jews behalf, 379. K. makes Tetrarchs, 380. C. loves
Herod, 384. B. makes Herod King, ibid. C. requires Aristobulus, 394. B.
gives Cleopatra a portion of Judaea and Arabia, 399. H. conquereth Armenia,
ibid. M. Aphrica, once called Lybia, 42. I. Apollonius accuses the Jews, 806.
M. Apollonius sent to rob the Temple, 417. B. acknowledged his offense, ibid.
C. General of Antiochus army, 316. E. discomfited and slain, ibid. E.
Apollonius Davus put to flight, 334. E. Apology of Achimelech, 166. K. of
Aristobulus, 363. H. Apostasy of the Priests, 294. A. Apostates from the Jewish
Religion, 213. I. Apparel, 612. O. Appion wrote coldly, 798. L. of Moses and
the Jews, ibid. his fiction refuted, 799. F. etc. denies his Country, 800. H.
raileth against the Jews, ibid. I. his objection of the Asses head answered,
803. A. upbraideth the Jews, 805. D. praises himself, ibid. accuses the Jews,
494. I. Apples of Mandragora, 47. A. Apprehension of John and Simon, 759. E.
Arabians Ismaels posterity, 40. I. slay Herod's soldiers, 290. M. kill the Jews
Ambassadors, 401. I. overcome, 402. G. receive thieves, 439. A. brake the
league made, 574. H. defeat Herod's Army, 580. O. are overcome, 582. K. An
Arbiter betwixt the Senate and Claudius, 617. E. Archelaus accused, 454. K.
promises his subjects favor, 605. C. appointed, 603. D. lamenteth, 605. B.
suppresseth the sedition, 464. K. L. repairs to Rome, ibid. O. approved, etc.
466. N. accused, 470. L. excused, 471. B. accused and banished, 473. D. his
dream, 612. Archelaus King of Cappadocia, 437. F. his ingenious speech, 590. M.
conferreth with Herod, 590. L. reconcileth Alexander to his father, 437. G.
made Herod and Pheroras friends, 438. I. excuses himself, 442. L. Aretas King
of Arabia, 564. N. overthrows Alexander, 355. M. puts Aristobulus to flight,
361. I. furnishes Hircanus with 50000 soldiers, 564. N. Aretas accuses
Syllaeus, 452. K. discomfiteth Herod's army, 484. N. Arguments for the Jews
antiquity, 784. M. 785. A. etc. 786. G. etc. 787. A. etc. 788. N. etc. 789. F.
etc. 791. D. Arioch a Captain of the Assyrians, 37. B. Aristaeus obtains the
Jews liberty, 299. K. Aristobulus first King, etc. 349. D. imprisoneth his
brethren, famisheth his mother, ibid. 560. N. his punishment, 350. I. K. 561.
F. compels the Iturians to be circumcised, 350. M. slays Antigonus, 350.
H. his miserable end, 350. L. 561. G. Aristobulus accuses the Pharisees, 357.
I. his attempt, 358. I. seizes the Castles, ibid. K. striveth for the Kingdom
with Hircanus, 360. I. agreed, ibid. K. his war against Aretas and Hircanus,
362. C. his presents to Pompey, 362. D. promises Pompey money, 364. I. led to
Rome, 365. M. poisoned, 369. C. Aristobulus, why not sent to Antonius, 394. D.
his death contrived, 395. L. drowned, 396. C. Aristobulus, Herod's son, 422. O.
accused, 426. K. etc. reconciled, 429. E. objected to his wife her birth, 589.
B. condemned, 444. L. strangled, 445. F. Aristobulus hates Agrippa, 487. B.
entreats Petronius, 495. C. Aristobulus governs Armenia, 536. M. his
subtilty, 546. H. Aristocracy the best kind of Government, 113. A. Arithmetic,
36. M. Arius King of Lacedaemon, 311. G. sends letters to Onias, 312. H. Ark
of Noab, 30. N. the length and breadth thereof, ibid. L. M. where it resled,
31. D. Ark of God surprised, 144. N. carried into the Temple of Dagon, 146. L.
carried to Bethsama, 147. O. brought to Jerusalem, 180. M. N. Ark transferred
into Ceriathiarim, 147. F. Ark carried into the Temple, 210. F. placed in the
Sanctuary, and in it the Tables of Stone, 211. H. 100000 Armed men against
Joseph, 639. F. Arms of the Egyptians, etc. 72. N. Armor of Goliath, 159. C.
Armor of Saul, 160. I. Armor of the Roman footmen, 661. C. The Armies order
when the Tabernacle removed, 95. B. An Army sent against the Midianites, 108.
L. Army of Senacherib destroyed, 256. F. An huge Army of the Canaanites, 125.
D. Army of Susac, 221. H. of Josaphat, 231. N. of Ozias, 247. N. Army of the
Romans, 660. L. Army of Herod overthrown, and why, 484. N. M. Arnon a river,
104. L. Arrival of the Israelites at Raphidim, 75. E. of Raguel in Sinai, 77.
F. of the Ark at Bethsama, 147. D. Arrogance of Amasias, 248. O. of Ozias, 250.
B. of the Jews, 756. K. Arsaces King of Parthia, 340. D. takes Demetrius,
ibid. slays Antiochus, 346. A. Asprenas Gown defiled, 509. A. he is cut in
pieces, 511. B. Art of forging, who first invented, 29. G. Artabanus King of
Media, 479. D. obtains Parthia, ibid. restored to his Kingdom, 483. E.
Artabanus requires Izates assistance, 530. M. recovereth his Kingdom, 531. B.
Artaxerxes King of Persia, 286. B. no man to approach his Throne, unless he
were called, 297. I. honored Mardoche, 290. D. hangs Aman, 291. I. sends
letters for the Jews safety, ibid. L. Artorius says himself, 748. I. his
promise to Lucius, ibid. Aruntius signifies the Emperors death, 512. M. Asa
King of Juda, 224. K. his piety, ibid. K. his victory, ibid, M. inciteth the
King of Damascus against Basa, 229. I. dies, 226. B. Ascalonites punished, and
why, 309. L. Aser the son of Jacob, 46. O. what it signifies, ibid. O. his
sons, 61. C. Asinaeus beset by the Governor of Babylon, 598. L. his friendship
sought, 10. O. received charge from Artabanus, 499. E. poisoned, 500. M.
Asphaltite lake, 702. K. admirable property thereof, ibid. Assault of
Jerusalem, 740. K. of Antonia, 742. M. Assar for how much sold, 97. D. Asses
head sold, 238. F. Ass speaks to Balaam, 105. G. Asses how many taken at one
booty, 109. A. Asses of Cis lost, 150. L. found, ibid. N. Asses head objected,
803. A. Assembly of the Hebrews thrice in the year, 111. F. Assembly of
Samaritans on Mount Gerazim, 670. B. Assurance of Joseph, etc. 671. L.
Assistance of God promised, 110. L. of Saul to the men of Jabes, 152. L.
Assyrians Lords over Asia, 37. A. overthrew the Sodomites, ibid. B. of whom
took their name, 42. H. overcame the Israelites, 250. E. 253. N. transported
them, 252. A. 253. N. vanquished the Syrians and them of Damascus, 250. F. and
252. G. their destruction foretold, 250. D. effected, 257. L. Astrological
predictions, 491. B. Astronomy invented, 36. N. Athalia rooteth out the royal
blood, 244. D. and put to death, 245. H. Athniel a Judge of Israel, 133 C.
overcomes Schisar, ibid. C. recovereth the Israelites liberty, ibid. C.
Athronges usurpeth the Kingdom, 468. O. taken, 469. C. Attendance on Saul, 151.
F. Attire of Vespasian and Titus, 766. I. Avarice, 177. E. of Antiochus, 343.
N. of Sabinus, 467. C. not terrified with punishment, 738. H. Authority how
purchased, 61. F. Authority of Moses, 97. C. Authority of Mordocheus, 292. F.
of the Pharisees, 356. C. Authors of the sedition punished, 102. M. Authors of
injuries punished, 672. N. Azarias the Prophet exhorts to virtue, 224. M.
Azarias the High Priest, 250. B. Azael King of the Assyrians, 228. D. Azaels
tyranny foretold, 240. C. invades Judaea, 246. D. hired to depart, ibid.
invades the Israelites, 245. M. destroys their Country, ibid. M. Azotians
plagued, and why, 146. L.
B.
BAal god of the Tyrians, 244. B. his Priests slain, ibid. Baaras a root, 768.
I. his property, ibid. Baasa King of Israel, 214. I. roots out Jeroboams race,
ibid. his impiety, 224. N. a Prophecy against him, ibid. surprizeth Ramah, 225.
I. dies, ibid. K. Babas sons preserved, 410. D. accused, 410. F. slain, ibid.
Babylon, the place where tongues were confounded, 33. C. what it signifies,
ibid. D. besieged and taken, 271. O. Babylonians require Anilaeus, 501. F. slay
the Jews, 502. K. Babylonian veil, 721. A. Bacchides sent against Judas, 323.
N. uses tyranny and treachery, 324. B. fights with Judas, 326. B. is slain,
ibid. murthereth those of Judas faction, 328. B. practices against Jonathan,
ib. C. revengeth himself on the fugitives, 329. K. makes peace with Jonathan,
ibid. M. Bagoses General of Artaxerxes army, 293. H. offers outrage to the
Jews, ibid. Bakers dream expounded, 54. O. hanged, 55. A. Bala, Rachels
handmaid, 46. O. bare Napthalim and Dan, ibid. P. Balaam a Diviner or Prophet,
105. E. denies to go with Balacs Ambassadors, ibid. F. comes to Balac, 106.
I. prophesies good to befall the Israelites, 106. K. his counsel to Balac and
the Midianites, ibid O. Balac sends an Embassage to the Midianites, 105. E.
also to (...) Balaam, ibid. E. reproves him, and why, 106. L. follows Balaams
counsel, 107. B. Balin a King of Syria, 37. A. Ballas a King of Assyria, 37. A.
Balm, 215. F. 235. A. Balthazar his pride, 271. H. his vision of the hand,
ibid. slain, 271. N. Banaia slays an Egyptian, 197. B. kills a Lion, 197. B.
substituted in Joabs place, 204. L. Banishment of Cain, 29. E. of the diviners,
171. B. of Absalon, 187. C. of Antipater, 585. G. of Doris, 453. D. of
Pheroras, 596. L. Banquet of Laban and Jacob, 48. I. of Samuel to Saul, 150 N.
and of him to David, 158. M. of Saul, 165. B. of David to the people, 181. A.
of Artaxerxes, 286. D. of Ptolomy, 303. N. of Archelaus, 463. A. of Herod, 483.
F. Barak appointed General, 134. L. Puts Sisera to flight, ibid. N. slew Jabin,
and governed Israel forty years, 135. A. Bareas one of the five Kings of
Assyria, 37. A. Baruch, Jeremies Secretary, 261. L. dismissed, 266. B.
Barzapharnes seizes upon Syria, 572. I. instateth Antigonus, ibid. Barzillais
excuse to David, 194. I. Battle between Joshuah and the Canaanites, 125. D.
between the Benjamites and Israelites, 131. C. between Saul and the
Philistines, 173. E. between Joab and Absalon, 191. D. Battle of Herod, 400. D.
Battle between the Romans and the Jews, 467. E. Battery of Jotapata, 666. K. of
Jerusalem, 723. B. 724. L. Baths, 768. K. Baths of Calliroes, 460. M. 602. L.
Bathuel son of Nachor, 35. E. father of Rebecca and Labas, ibid. G. Beam of
Gold, 368. B. Bearing of arms inhibited* 154. I. Beasts venomous, a plague of
Egypt, 69. D. Beauty of superior bodies, 30. I. Beauty of body not to be
respected, 158. I. Beauty of Sara, 36. K. of Rachel, 45. F. of Joseph, 53. A.
of David and his brethren, 158. L. M. of Bethsa^e, 184. K. Bed of Iron, 105. B.
Beginning of the War of the Jews, 622. I. Behavior of Rachel toward Jacob, 45.
F. Bellies of the Jews ripped for Gold, 737. F. Beneficence of Xerxes, 282. B.
C. Benefits of God recited, 74. L. M. Benefits of Herod, 585. A. B. Benjamin,
Jacobs son by Rachel, 44. D. goes into Egypt, 57. F. what happened to him
there, 58. I. attached and imprisoned, 58. N. Benjamites expert in shooting,
131. C. overthrew the other tribes twice, ibid. C. D. twenty five thousand
slain, and why, 131. F. only six hundred escape, ibid. F. take them wives by
force, 132. H. I. Bernice her request to Florus, 623. F. Berosus a Chaldaean
Writer, 787. D. Berosus, 36. H. his testimony of Abraham, ibid. of Senacherib,
256. E. of Nabuchodonosor, 270. B. Bethsabe the pit of swearing, 40. A.
Beseleel a Work-master of the Tabernacle, 80. L. 89. C. Bethel what it
signifies, 45. D. Bethsabe defiled by David, 184. I. bare him a son, 185. B.
brought forth Solomon, 185. C. certifieth David of Adonias, etc. 199. E.
Birthday of Vespasian celebrated, 762. I. of Pharaoh, 55. A. Birthright of
Esau sold, 50. L. Birth of Moses, 63. E. Birth of Samson, 140. K. Bitterness of
the waters, 73. D. E. changed, 74. H. Blasphemy against God, 111. E. Blasphemer
of God to be stoned, 111. E. Blaspheming of Goliab, 159. C. D. E. Blessing of
God upon the Israelites, 74. L. M. Blessing of Isaac and Jacob, 44. M. of Jacob
on his sons, 62. I* Blessing of Moses to the Israelites, 118. M. Blindness of
the enemy, and how, 237. I. 238. D. Blindness of the Jews, 736. K. 753. B.
Blood royal destroyed, 240. D. Bodies celestial, their beauty and order, 30. I.
Body of Jacob translated into Hebron, 62. K. of his sons brought thither also,
ibid. Bodies of Saul and his sons hung up, 174. I. Boldness of the Jews, 715.
E. Bondage of the Israelites, See servitude. Bones of Joseph translated, 62. L.
71. A. Book of Moses Law, 111. B. C. when to be read, 112. H. holy Book, 118.
M. found and read, 259. I. K. Books of holy Writ, how many, 782. N. Book of
Jeremy, 261. L. burnt, ibid. L. Boos friend to Naomi and Ruth, 142. D. eshorts
his kinsman to marry Ruth, 143. D. espouseth Ruth, 143. D. begets Obed,
ibid. E. Booty of Oxen and Camel, 100. O. of Sheep, etc. 687. O. Borders of
Galilee, 659. C. D. of Judaea, 659. E. of the possession of the nine Tribes and
an half, 126. K. Borrowed things must be repaid, 116. I. Botches, a plague of
Egypt, 69. D. Bounds of Land are not to be removed, 113. B. Bounds of the nine
Tribes and halfs possession, 126. L. etc. Bounds of Egypt, 708. L. Bowls or
Ewers, 210. C. Bounty requited, 215. F. Bounty of Ezechias, 253. H. I. Bounty
of Alexander to the Jews, 295. L. Bounty of Herod to all men, 585. A. B. of
Caesar to Archelaus, 607 C. of Titus, 728. M. Brazen Altar, 211. I. vessels
pertaining to the same, 211. I. Brazen Gate of the Temple opens of it self,
753. B. Breach of Gods law, loss of his favor, 704. H. I. Breach of oath, 255.
M. 368. C. of faith, 361. N. Breadth of the Ark of Noab, 30. N. Bread of
proposition, or shewbread, 92. N. Brethren, Cain and Abel, 29. B. Brethren of
Joseph hate him, and complot his death, 51. D. sell him, 52. K. persuade their
father that he was devoured of beasts, ibid. N. repent of the evil they did to
Joseph, 57. B. return out of Egypt, ibid. D go thither again, ibid. D. stayed
in their journey, and accused of theft, 58. I. K. died, 62. K. L. Seven
Brethren tormented and put to death, 821. A. B. 822. H. I. 823. A. B. Bribery
of Elies sons, 143. F. of Antonius, 391. L. of Ventidius. 384. F. 575. C. of
Silo, ibid. 575. C. of Antipater, 594. M. N. Brothers of Abraham, 35. D. of
Joseph, 50. M. of Antipater, 588. L. M. Brothers bewail their mother, 589. C.
excuse themselves, ibid. D. Broil at Caesarea, 537. E. at Jerusalem, 638. H.
Building of the Temple, 208. M. inhibited, 277. N. permitted, 278. C. D. E.
Bulwarks builded by the Romans, 733. D. Burial of Sara, 42. F. of Abraham, 43.
D. of Isaac, 49. F. of Jacob, 62. L. M. of Samuel, 168. L. of Jadon, 220. E. of
Herod, 462. N. O. Burning of the Temple, 265. I. 476. M. 750. M. Burden
required to be eased, 218. D. Bush of fire about Moses, 66. O. Bushel of Corn
sold for a Talent, 738. M. Business of Moses, 77. G. Butlers dream expounded,
54. M. Butchery of the thieves, 537. B. C.
C.
CAecinna persuaded the soldiers to revolt, 309. E. F. apprehended, 710. H.
freed and honored, ibid. I. Caerealis conquered the Samaritans, 670. B. C.
Caesar confirms Hircanus in the Priesthood, 370. D. departs out of Syria,
371. L. his testimony of the Jews, 373. N. slain, 569. D. 376. C. delivers
Aristobulus, 567. A. Caesar slays Cassius, 368. G. Herod's friend, 384. B.
overcomes Antonius, 403. M. confirms Herod in the Kingdom, 405. N. gives
him 800 talents, 406. G. Lord of Egypt, 407. I. enlarges Herod's dominions,
ibid. 415. M. 583. B. made Pheroras Tetrarch, 416. G. gave Herod revenues, 416.
F. offended with Herod, 439. G. allows Herod to punish Malefactors, 443. F.
makes Archelaus King, 466. N. confirms Herod's testament, 471. D. calls a
Council, 606. M. makes Archelaus an Ethnarch, 471. D. Caesarea built by Herod,
414. G. was called Stratous Tower, ibid. G. a great City, 584. M. 674. H. Caiu,
Adams first son, 29. B. slew his brother, ibid. C. not bettered by Gods
chastisement, ibid. E. builded a City, ibid. F. invented the use of the plough,
29. B. father of hypocrites, 30. H. Caius succeeds Tiberius, 485. C.
certifieth the Senate of Tiberius death, 492. L. makes Agrippa King, ibid.
616. H. banisheth Herod, 493. E. usurpeth divine honor, 493. G. 616. K. his
Statue. etc. ibid. K. writes letters to Petronius, 493. C. calls himself
Jupiters brother, etc. 504. H. etc. causes many to be murdered, 509. B.
sacrifieth, 509. A. builded a haven, 516. L. slain, 520. E. Caleb and Joshuah
appease the people, 96. M. Calimander slain, 347. O. Calling of Moses, 67. A.
of Eliza^, 228. E. Calamity of the Israelites, 62. O. 73. D. E. F. 74. I. 129.
B. 130. L. M. 133. B. foretold, 261. L. and 262. E. Calamity of Herod, 580. A.
of Syria, 632. L. M. Calamity in Jerusalem, 738. K. L. M. etc. Calamity of the
Romans, 747. E. of the Jews recounted to the Romans, 749. B. Calamity of the
Jews at Antioch, 762. N. O. Calamity of the Jews taken by the Romans, 775. D.
Calumniation, 435. B. Calves of Jeroboam, 219. K. L. Ca^byses inhibiteth the
building of the Temple, 275. N. O. 276. B. Camp of the enemies spoiled, 240. D.
Camp of the Romans how ordered, 660. N. Three Camps of the Jews, 607. F.
Candlestick of Gold, 84. O. 211. I. Capharis submits to Caerealis, 705. F.
Captain over a thousand, 160. O. Captains of Solomon, 206. H. Two Captains of
Ochozias destroyed, and why, 236. B. the third preserved, 236. C. Captain
trodden to death, 240. E. Captivity of Babylon fore-prophecied, 257. I. 260. D.
effected, 265. L. 729. F. Carcasses hinder the passages, 578. N. Carcasses
innumerable, 108. N. Carcasses cast out of the City, how many, 738. M. Care of
God for the Israelites safety, 67. F. for his servants, 228. C. D. Carthage
built, 787. C. Carelessness of Abner touching Saul's safety, 169. G. Carpenters
how employed, 207. D. Cassius resists the Parthians, 368. G. exacteth of the
Jews 700 talents of silver, 376. D. Cassius Long^^^^ Governor of Syria, 527.
C. Castle fortified, 328. F. 362. L. razed, ibid. F. Castle of David, 717. F.
Castor a subtle Jew, 726. K. Catalogue of Jacobs sons and nephews, 61. B. C. D.
Catalogue of Gods benefits on Israel, 74. I. K. Catalogue of the Commandments,
79. F. G. Cattle gotten in War, 124. L. 127. A. Catallus slays three thousand
Jews, 778. M. Cause of error concerning God, 812. N. Causes of discord, 781.
E. 782. H. Causes of malice between Egyptians and Jews, 792. I. Causes of the
Israelites ruin, 62. M. Causes of the Wars of the Jews, 622. K. Causes of
Vespasians election, 707. F. Causes of writing the Antiquities, 25. D. E. 780.
M. Caves of the thieves described, 576. O. Ceasing of Manna, 122. N.
Celebration of the Passover, 260. A. 281. K. Cells about the Temple, 208. N.
Candebaeus put to flight, 343. N. 559. D. Cenizus delivers the Israelites,
133. C. vanquisheth Schisar, ibid. G. judged Israel forty years, ibid. O.
Censors affixed to the brazen Altar, 102. L. and why, ibid. Censors of Gold,
210. C. Centurion of Florm, 623. A. Cese^^ius President of Syria, 77. O.
accused Antiochus, ibid. H. I. Cestern dug to be enclosed, 117. C. Cesti^^
G. appeaseth the people, etc. 622. I. burnt Zabulon and Joppe, 634. N.
consulteth with the Princes, etc. 625. B. his siege against Jerusalem, 635. G.
Ch^^^us and his compli^^^ conspire Caius death, 504. O. why incited against
Caius, 505. C. conferreth with Clement, etc. 506. I. intends to kill Caius,
ibid. expects occasion to assail Caius, 508. I. slays Caius, 510. L.
honored, 515. A. sends Lupus to kill Caius wife, ibid. E. executed, 518. O.
Challenge of a single combat, 159. C. Chaldeans mutiny against Abraham, 36. H.
Cham, Noah's son, 31. O. his proge^y, 34. K. discovers his fathers nakedness,
34. O. Chambers of pleasure, 213. C. Champions of David, 196. D. Canaan Jacobs
inheritance, 50. K. Canaanites put the Israelites to flight, 98. N. wholly to
be extinguished, 118. M. 129. E. ten thousand slain, 129. B. made Tributaries,
215. B. Charges of the Temple to be supplied, 281. N. Chariots of Jabin, 134.
K. of Solomon, 206. K. Chariots armed seen in the air, 753. D. Chastisement
bettered not Cain, 29. E. Chastity of Joseph, 53. A. B. C. 816. K.
Chance-medley, 109. D. Change of the Jews Government, 567. G. Change of names
whence, 34. I. Cherubin, 84. H. in the Temple, 209. I. Chetura, Abraham's second
wife, 41. G. bare to Abraham six children, ibid. O. Chieftains of Achis, 172.
N. cause David to be dismissed, ibid. O. of Solomon, 206. H. I. Children are to
learn the Law, 112. K. Seventy children of Achab slain, 243. L. Children of
Herod, 595. B. C. Children not to be punished for the fathers offense, 117. E.
Children male put to death, 62. O. Children of Canaan, 34. N. Children of
Abraham, 40. I. M. of Jacob, 47. N. O. Children of Roboam, 221. B. Children
unlike their fathers, 149. B. 257. O. 241. I. K. Chodollogomor an Assyrian
Captain, 37. B. overthrew the Sodomites, ibid. Choice of the Esseans in
compassion and helping, 613. C. Chorab mutineth against Moses, 99. D. E.
affects the Office of High Priest, ibid. F. he and his company consumed with
fire, 102. L. Cosby a daughter of Midian, 107. F. enticed Zambrias to Idolatry,
ibid. O. slain, with him, 108. K. Christ crucified, 480. M. Chronicles of the
Tyrians, 254. A. Churlishness of Nabal, 168. N. Chusais opposition to
Achitophel, 188. O. his counsel accepted, 190. L. certified David of the
victory, 192. I. Chuthites removed unto Samaria, 254. A. plagued, and why, 254.
B. claim kindred of the Jews, ibid. G. Circumcision commanded and instituted,
38. K. One sacred City in Canaan, 111. E. and why, ibid. Cities of Refuge, 109.
D. 126. O. City of David, 179. E. Cities of the Benjamites burnt, 131. F. City
of the Priests burnt, 166. K. Cities builded of Solomon, 214. K. Cities under
Archelaus subjection, 610. N. Cities taken from the Jews, 355. N. Chief Cities
of Galilee, 20. K. Cities in arms against the Jews, 633. C. Four Cities of
Galilee revolt from Joseph, 641. D. Citizens of Jabes bury Saul and his sons
bodies, 174. K. Citizens taken prisoners, 262. B. Citizens of Giseala entertain
Titus, 685. C. Citizens resort to Vespatian, 692. G. Civil Wars of the
Israelites, 131. B. Civil Wars of the Romans, 705. D. E. Claudius chosen
Emperor, 513. F. unwillingly accepted it, 515. E. carried on men's shoulders,
513. G. denies to give over the dignity, 516. N. confirmed by Agrippa, 517. A.
persuaded to use the Senators mildly, 517. N. gives Agrippa Judaea, etc. 519.
D. his Edict in favor of the Jews, ibid. 519. E. commands Agrippa to desist
from building, 522. O. grants the Jews custody of the High Priests vestment.
228. I. finds the Samaritanes guilty, 619. C. his wives, 619. H. his death,
620. G. Clemency becomes a King, 169. C. Clemency of Joseph, 35. F. G. of
Archelaus, 605. D. of Varus, 609. F. Cleopatra Demetrius wife, 343. K. obtains
Tryphons army, ibid. rebelleth against Ptolomy, 348. C. prepares an army
against her son, 352. E. takes Ptolomai^, 353. G. comes to Antonius, 380. B.
murthereth her brother and sister, 398. E. her corrupt dealing, ibid. M.
beggeth Judaea and Arabia, 399. H. I. her Chieftain overthrows Herod, 400. E.
her treason against Herod, 580. M. Cloud on the Tabernacle, 95. B. in the
Sanctuary, 211. I. A Clown made High Priest, 687. C. Clytus author of sedition,
642. I. cutteth off his own hand, ibid. D. Colony of Nimrod, 34. M. Colonies
established by Abraham, 42. H. Combat betwixt David and Goliab, 160. M. N.
Combat of Saul against the Ammonites, 152. N. Combat challenged, 159. D. 747.
B. Comet like a sword, 753. B. Comfort of Jonathan to David, 187. B. Command of
Saul for War, 152. M. Commandment of God transgressed, 28. L. 220. D. E.
Commandment for the Ark, etc. 199. B. Ten Commandments, 79. F. Commendation of
Abraham, 43. D. of Jacob, 62. I. of Joseph, 62. K. of Josaphat, 231. M.
Commination against the Israelites, 212. F. against Jezebel. Commiseration of
the Galaadites, 152. I. Commotion of the Jews, 497. F. Companies of the Romans,
634. M. Companions of Daniel cast into the furnace, 269. M. preserved, ibid.
Companions of Jonathan slain, 778. L. Comparison of Moses with other
Lawmakers, 808. H. Comparison of the Roman forces with the Jews, 626. N.
Comparison of the Romans and Jews, etc. 683. K. of Jews and Grecians, 783. B.
Computation of time different, 899. C. Compassion of Joseph, 60. K. of
Thermuthis, 64. I. of the people, 152. I. of the three Kings, 237. M. of
Elizeus, 237. N. 240. G. of Caesar, etc. 428. K. of the people, 9. B. of
Antonius, 574. L. of Tyroes son, 594. I. of Titus, 684. L. 747. F. Complaint of
David to Jonathan, 163. G. Complotting of Joseph's death, 51. D. Concord in
wickedness, 732. K. 619. D. Concord of the Jews in Religion, 808. N. Concubine
of Gideon, 137. B. of Saul, 176. N. of Solomon, 217. H. of Roboam, 221. C.
Conditions of peace unjust, 152. I. Conduct of Moses, 71. B. C. Conduit under
ground from Antonia, 420. F. Confederacy, 135. B. 161. G. 183. C. D. 234. G.
241. N. 307. K. Conference, 363. L. 577. D. Confession of Achar, 124. I. of the
women, 596. O. Confidence of Adad, 230. B. of Joram, 238. F. of Ochozias, 235.
N. Confirmation of Moses, 67. B. of Saul, 150. N. Conflict of the Jews with the
Ca^sarians, 622. M. of Placidus with the fugitives, 699. F. of the Jews with
the Romans, 725. D. 768. L. Confusion of tongues, 33. C. Confutation of
Manethon's words, 794. N. of Lysimachus, 797. A. B. of Appion, 799. F. of
Possidonius and of Apollonius, 802. O. Congratulation, 429. F. 463. C. D.
Conquest of Canaan made difficult, 96. L. effected, 125. E. etc. Consent of
parents, etc. asked in marriage, 43. B. and 46. K. Conspiracy of Corah and his
followers, 99. F. Conspiracy, 246. D. 248. E. 243. I. 258. D. 411. N. 504. M.
N. 594. I. Conspiracy in robbery, 619. D. Conspirators punished, 470. H.
Constancy of the Esseans, 612. M. of the Jews, 617. A. 741. C. 790. M. 814. H.
of Eleazar, 818. L. Consultation about the Ark, 147. A. Consultation against
Joseph, 14. L. of Herod with Archelaus, 590. M. of Cestius with the Princes,
625. B. of Titus, 734. N. of Vespasian, 707. D. of Judas, 736. O. Contempt of
Religion. See Piety contemned. Contempt of Saul, 151. G. Contempt of God
wherein it consists, 157. F. G. Contempt of death, 459. F. Contempt of God
loss of a Kingdom, 157. F. Contents of Jeremies Book, 260. C. D. Contents of
the Antiquities, 25. D. 26. M. N. Contention of the Samaritans and Jews, 333.
I. K. Contention between Abraham's and Lots shepherds, 36. N. Contention whence,
587. G. Continuance of the Laws amongst the Jews, 811. C. Core a certain
measure, 97. E. Corn of the Philistines spoiled, 141. A. Corn provided by
Herod, 413. L. Corn burnt in Jerusalem, 712. M. Corruption of Ventidius, 384.
F. of Scaurus, 565. B. 575. C. of Silo, 575. F. of Antipater, 588. M. of
Alexander, 589. G. Corruption among the Greeks, 781. A. Cost of Agrippa in
building the wall, 718. K. Costabarus usurpeth, 409. O. preserved by his wives
intercession, 410. B. Covenant of God with Noah, 32. K. Covenants of the
Esseans, 613. D. Covenant of Abraham with Abimelech, 39. G. of Laban with
Jacob, 48. H. of Joshua with the Gibeonites, 124. O. Covetousness of Cleopatra,
580. K. of John, 5. D. of Florus, 621. F. Council called, 593. D. 606. M.
Counsel held against Joseph, 18. M. Counsel to be sought at Gods hands, 43. E.
Counsel of Rebecca to Jacob, 44. L. of Joseph to King Pharaoh, 55. F. of Raguel
to Moses, 78. H. I. of Balaam to Balac, 106. O. of Achitophel, 189. G. of
Chusai, 190. K. of the Elders, 218. E. of the young men, ibid. F. of Salom,
593. B. Counterfeiting of Euricles, 591. E. Counterfeiters of Letters fee'd,
598. M. Country of the Amorites possessed by the Hebrews, 105. B. Country
beyond the Flood described, 659. D. Countries inhabited, 13. G. 14. H. I. etc.
Courage of the Jews, 727. D. 635. E. of Eleazar, 666. O. of John, etc. 685. G.
Courtesy of Rebecca to Abraham's servant, 42. K. L. of Rachel to Jacob, 45. G.
of Raguel to Moses, 78. H. I. of Abigail to David, 169. B. of the Witch to
Saul, 171. F. G. Court of the Tabernacle, 81. B. C. Court of Jeroboam, 219. K.
Courtiers of Saul sound David, 161. B. Cowardice of Vonones, 479. E. of the
Jews, 740. M. A Cow brings forth a Lamb, 753. B. Cow Dung the Jews food, 738.
N. Craft of a Boy, 754. L. Crassus warreth against the Parthians, 368. B. robs
the treasury in Jerusalem, ibid. B. slain, 368. G. Creation of the World, 27.
E. Creatures made, 27. F. and first named, 28. H. Cry of seditious Chore and
his accomplices, 99. F. Cries of women and children, 665. K. of the Jews, 752.
I. Crown of Gold, 378. E. Crows fed Elias, 226. C. Cruelty of Azael foretold,
240. G. effected, 245. M. of Athalia, 244. D. of Manahem, 250. D. of Manasses,
258. B. C. of Nabuchadnezzar, 261. M. of Bacchides, 558. K. of Alexander, 354.
F. of Antigonus, 577. G. of Cleopatra, 580. I. of Herod, 590. L. of the
Damascens, 637. F. G. of the thieves, 636. H. of the Idumaeans and Zealous,
695. E. of the seditious, 711. B. of the thieves, 736. H. of Simon, 736. L.
Cumanus spoileth villages, 533. G. fears the peoples rage, 618. O. corrupted,
534. M. banished, 535. B. Cunning of David in playing on the Harp, 159. A. Cups
of Gold, 210. B. 302. I. Curse against him that builds Jericho, 123. D. Custom
of the Country, 46. M. Custom observed in Sacrifices, 91. E. Custom of the War,
118. H. I. Custom in Samaria, 239. N. Custom laudable in a King, 289. N. Custom
to punish slayers of themselves, 672. N. Custom of the Romans, 725. F. Custom
of the Priests, 782. L. M. Cutthroats among the Jews, 538. L. Cyprus a Castle,
584. N. Cyrenaeus taxes Judaea, 474. I. Cyrus King of Persia, 271. O.
overthrows Baltazar, and takes Babylon, 271. O. dismisseth the Jews, 274. E.
etc. permits to build City and Temple, 274. G. his decree touching the
Temple, 280. F. G. Cyzicen^^ King of Syria. See Antioch^s.
D.
DAgon fell down, 146. L. Days of Creation six, 27. F. G. the seventh
sanctified, ibid. G. the day lengthened, 125. C. Dalila sounds Sampson, 141.
G. betrayeth him, 142. H. Damascens kill ten thousand Jews, 637. F. N.
Damascenus testimony of Abraham, 36. I. Damasco Country of Abraham, 36. I.
Damsels entice the Hebrews to Idolatry, 107. D. Dan the son of Jacob, 46. N.
what it signifies, ibid. N. his issue, 61. B. Daniels austere life, 268. A.
expounds Nabuchadonosors dream, 268. G. advanced to honor, ibid. 269. K. L.
his fellows cast into the furnace, 269. M. interprets the writing, 271. N.
cast into the Lions den, 272. D. his vision of the Ram and Goat, 273. K. L. his
predictions of the Roman Empire, 273. N. Darius King of the Medes, 270. G.
surprizeth Babylon, 271. O. causes Daniels enemies to be cast to the Lions,
272. E. Darius, son of Hystaspis, makes a vow, 276. E. performs it, 278. B.
propounds three questions, 276. E. his Letters for building the Temple, etc.
278. D. 281. I. he restores the vessels, etc. ibid. B. his Epistle to the
Prefects of Syria, 281. I. Darius, King of Persia, overthrown, 294. C. Darkness
separated, etc. 27. E. Darkness of Egypt, 69. G. Dart of Saul, 69. G. Darts
profit not the Jews, 723. E. Dathan rebellious, 102. H. he with his company
were swallowed up, ibid. Daughters of Salpades inheritance, 109. F. Daughters
of the Midianites, 107. B. allure the Hebrews to Idolatry, 107. D. David
anointed King, 158. N. seized with Gods Spirit, ibid. causes Saul's vexation,
ibid O. kills a Lion and a Bear, 160. H. overcomes Goliab, 160. M. kills
six hundred Philistines, and marries Michol, 161, D. vanquisheth the
Palestines, 163. B. discovers Saul's affection toward him, 163. E.
complains to Jonathan, ibid. G. receives Goliahs sword. 165. C.
counterfeiteth madness, and why. 165. D. his care of his parents, ibid. E.
defends Cilla, 167. B. flies to the Ziphians, ibid. C. escapes Saul's hands,
and how, ibid. E. twice saves Saul's life, 167. G. and 169. G. testifies his
innocence, 170. B. spares Nabals flock, 169. G. incensed against Nabal, and
why, 168. N. is appeased, 169. G. upbraids Abner, 170. H. dwells at Siceleg,
and spoileth the Sarrites, etc. ibid. M. recovers his wives, and slays the
Amalechites, 173. B. C. lamenteth Saul and Jonathan, etc. 175. E. F. chosen
King by one Tribe, ibid. F. requires Michol, 176. N. purges himself of Abners
death, 177. G. H. surprizeth Jerusalem, 179. D. vanquisheth the Philistines,
160. L. transporteth the Ark, and how, ibid. O. intended to build a Temple,
181. H. gave God thanks, ibid. D. revengeth his Ambassadors, 183. F. marries
Bethsabe, 185. B. repents his sin, ibid. D mourns for his son, ibid. E.
expels his Kingdom, 188. M. his entertainment at Mahanaim, 177. C.
commands to spare his son, 191. B. bewaileth Absalons death, 192. K. grants
Amasa pardon, 193. B. his concubines sequestered, 194. L. distributeth offices,
195. L. delivered out of peril, ibid. N. persuaded to abstain from war, 196. A.
his Champions, ibid. D. etc. sends Joab to muster the people, 197. C. of three
punishments offered, chooses the plague, ibid. E. prays for the innocent
people, ibid. G. commanded to build an Altar, 198. I. gathers store of Iron,
etc. ibid. M. counsels Solomon to honor God, ibid. O. grows old and numb,
199. C. numbereth the Levites, 200. N. confirms the Kingdom to Solomon, ibid.
I. commends Solomon to the Tribes, 201. I. his counsel to Solomon, 202. C.
wills Solomon to punish Joab, ibid. D. commends Berzillais sons to Solomon,
ibid. his age, reign and virtues, ibid. E. Dancing of the Maidens of Israel,
160. N. of David's before the Ark, 180. O. Danger of the Israelites, 710. E.
721. K. of David, 162. K. 163. B. 167. C. D. E. 167. F. of the Sephorites, 3.
A. of Jacims Son, 3. G. of Joseph, 9. D. 188. K. 639. F. G. of Herod, 603. B.
of Titus, 712. Dead lie unburied, 735. F. Dead body raised, 247. K. Dealing of
Laban with Jacob, 47. F. G. Dealing of Saul with David, colorable, 161. A. B.
C. Death of the Fathers, 30. L. 31. A. Death of the seven brethren, 815. D,
820. L. 821. C. D. Death of Abraham, 43. D. of Isaac, 49. F. of Racbel, ibid.
D. of Jacob, 62. I. of Joseph 62. K. of Moses, 120. I. K, of Samuel, 168. L. of
Solomon, 218. C. Death of the first begotten, 70. K. Death of the Leader,
discomfort to the Soldier, 233. K. Dearth of Victuals prophesied, 226. B.
Debate compromitted, 173. D. Debate of the Jews and Samaritans, 333. I. Debate
of Herod with his Sons, 587. A. Debate betwixt the Ladies, 595. D. Debora a
Prophetess, 134 L. encouraged Barach. ibid. M. Decease of Herod, 603. A. B.
Declamation of Sentius, 514. H. I. Deceit of Florus, 622. K. of John, 689. F.
of the Jews, 714. N. O. Deciding of hard controversies referred to Moses, 78.
H. Decree of the Romans, 225. L. of Cyrus, 280. F. G. Decree of Destiny, 728.
K. Dedication of the Tabernacle and Priests, 89. D. E. Defense of Moses, etc.
806. L. Defense of Nicholaus, 607. B. 610. M. 471. B. Defy of the Enemy, 159.
D. 162. L. Deflouring of Dina, 49. B. of Thamar. 186. K. L. Deflouring of a
Virgin, 115. B. Deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt, 70. K. from danger,
72. K. Deluge, or Flood, 30. O. the cause thereof, ib. when it happened 31. A. B.
destroyed all, save those in the Ark, 30. N. decreased, 31. D. Demetrius
exhortatory Letter, 300. A. Demetrius Seleucus slays Lysias and Antiochus,
323. M. makes himself King, ibid. M. sends Nicanor against Judas, 324. D.
sends Bacchides against Jonathan, 328. G. makes peace with Jonathan, 329. M.
fights with Alexander, and is slain, 332. B. Demetrius Nicanor, overcomes
Alexander, 336. C. obtains the Kingdom, ibid. B. incurred the hatred of his
Soldiers, ibid. F. discomfited 339. B. taken prisoner, 340. D. put to flight,
refused by his Wife, dies, 347. H. I. Demetrius Eucarius, King of Damascus,
353. O. overcomes Alexander, 354. D. besieges his Brother Philip, 355. I.
Departure of Israel from Egypt, 70. K. and 71. B. of Cestius etc. 636. M.
Depulsion of the Jews liberty, etc. 626. L. Description of the Thieves Caves,
576. O. of Ptolemai^, 616. L. of Galilee, 659. ^, of the country beyond the
Flood, 659. D. of Samaria, ib. E. of Jury, 659. D. of the lake of Genezar, 678.
C. of Jerusalem, 717. D. F. of Jericho, 781. D. E. of Antonia, 722. K. of the
Temple and Porches, 804. K. L. good Deserts of David, 162. L. M. not to be
forgotten, ib. M. 574. H. I. Desire of Gold, 433. B. Desolation through
Jerusalem, 699. B. C. Desolation lamented, 765. D. Destiny, 728. E. Destruction
of Sodom, 39. B. of Senacheribs Host, 156, B. Destruction of all things
foretold, 30. I. Destruction of Judea, 255. L. Destruction of the Jews, 772. M.
Destruction of Jerusalem, 730. I. See Jerusalem. Determination of God, 744. L.
Detraction of Writers, concerning the Jews, 77. F. etc. 792. H. I. etc. 793. D.
795. D. E. F. Device of Joseph against the Ram, 666. M. of Artorius, 748* I.
Devotion of the Israelites, 141. G. A Dew descended from Heaven, 78. B. called
Manna, ibid. B. Diadem of Asia, refused 335. N. Difficulties of the Hebrews.
See Dangers. Dignity Royal, concealed, 151. C. Diligence of the Romans, 660, N.
Dina the Daughter of Jacob, 47. B. ravished by Sichem, 498. desired in marriage
by him, but denied, ib. M. and 49. C. Diophantus counterfeiteth Letters, 592.
N. Discipline of the Romans, 660. N. etc. Discomfiture of Saul's Army, 173. E.
F. Discontents renewed, 624. I. Discord in Jury, 586. I. Discord domestical,
183. B. C. D. E. 426. H. I. 433. E. Discord whence arises, 587. F. Discord
between the Idumaeans and Zealous, 706. L. Discord of the Jews and
Alexandrians, 802. K. Discourtesie showed, 151. E. Discretion of Gideon, 136.
L. of the Roman Soldiers, 682. K. Disease called by the Egyptians, Sabbatosis,
799. D. Diseases of Herod, 602. L. Dismission of the Israelites. 247. M. N.
Disobedience of Saul, 157. B. C. of the Israelites, ibid. C. D. E. of Jadon,
220. E. of Jonas, 249. I. Disobedience, 115, E. cause of calamity, 129. F. etc.
130. M. etc. 133. B. ibid. 143. B. 144. L. etc. Displeasure of God against
Balaam, 105. F. G. against Saul and his people, 157. F. against the Chuthites,
254. B. against Senacherib, 256. C, D. Displeasure of Titus, 733. F. G. of
Balac against Balaam, 105. F. G. of Saul, against David, 162. K. pacified, 162.
N. of Florus against the Jews, 623. F. of the Israelites, 149. D. Disposition
of the Army, 45. A. Disproof of the zealous faction, 691. C. of Appions, 799.
A. 802* L. A Dissembler, 639. A. Dissension at Tarichea, 679. C. between John
and Simon, 732. K. Distinction of the Hebrews Government, 153. B. Distribution
of the Jews, 758. O. Distribution of the spoils and prey, 77. B. C. 109. A.
124. L. 127. A. Distribution of Herod's Kingdom, 610. N. Distress of the
Israelites, 73. D. Division of the Land of Canaan, 126, I. Division of the Land
between Abraham and Lot, 36. N. Division of the Tabernacle, 83. C. of the
Temple, 209. H. of Judea, 659. F. of the Priests, 200. O. Diviners banished,
171. B. Devil seeks to abolish the Bible, 314. B. Doctrine of Elias
confirmed, 227. N. Doctrine of the Esseans, 612. N. Doeg, Master of the Kings
Mules, 165. C. accuses Achimelech, and why* 166. I. slays the Priests, ibid.
K. Dogs lick Achabs blood, 233. E. devour Jezabels Carcass, 243. I. Domitian
subdueth the Germans, 764. L. Doris, Herod's Wife, 378. C. thrust out of the
Palace, 453. D. spoiled of her Jewels, 597. D. Dorites place Caesar's statue in
the Synagogue, 521. B. Dortus crucified, 535. B. Dowry of Salpades Daughter,
109. F. Dream of Joseph, 51. A. B. of the Butler, 54. L. of the Baker, 54. M.
of Pharaoh, 55. B. C* of a Midianite. 135. G. Nabuchodonozor, 268. D. of Herod,
578, H. of Archelaus, 473. E. of Glaphyra, ibid. G. Drowsiness of Abner and his
Soldiers, 170. I. Duty of a King, 158. N.
E.
EAgle of Gold, 459. F. pulled down, 460. H. Eagle the Ensign of the Romans,
662. M. a sign of victory, ibid* Seven full Ears of Corn, Seven thin or
withered, what 550. E. Earth created, 29. E. richly endowed, ibid. covered with
darkness, 29. D. cursed for man's sake, 28. N. called a virgin, and why. 28. H.
swallowed up Dat^an and Abiram, 102. H. Earthquake, 250. B. 148. M. Earthquake
kills ten thousand Men, 584. I. Easter, or the Paschal solemnized, 122. N.
Ebutius against Joseph, 7. E. Eclipse, 460. M. Edict in behalf of the Jews,
375. O. Edict of King Pharaoh, 62. O. of Cyrus, 274. E. Edict of restraint, 80.
M. Edict of Saul broken, 155. E. of Nebuchodonosor, 269. M. Edom, a name given
to Esau, 50. K. his Country, ibid. K. Education of Jacob and Esau, 43. E. of
Moses, 64. E. Effect of Gods Spirit, 158. O. Effects of the evil spirit, 158.
O. Egypt described, 708. I. K. length and breadth thereof, ibid. of whom so
called, 786. I. An Egyptian Prophet gathers 30000, 620. M. Egyptian Priests
circumcised, 806. K. L. Egyptians pay the fifth part of their profits, 62. H.
sold their possessions, 60. F. G. to what things addicted. 62. M. war against
the Ethiopians, 65. A. require Moses for their Captain, 11. C. afflicted with
plagues, 69. and 70. weep at the departure of the Hebrews, 70. K. pursue them,
71. B. drowned in the Red Sea, 72. K. worship beasts, 802. I. Eglon subdueth
the Israelites, 133. D. killed by Ehud, ibid. F. Ehud kills Eglon, 134. H. puts
the Moahites to flight, ibid. I. K. Eye of God discovers sin, 561. G. Eyes
pulled out. 142. I. 265. H. Ela son of Basa, 225. K. slain by Zamri, ibid.
Elcana father of Samuel, 144. I. loved Anna, 143. G. Elders resolved to make
David King, 177. C. Elders counsel rejected, 218. F. Seventy Elders rule
Galilee, 638. I. K. Eleazar High Priest praised, 2. H. Eleazar, Moses son, 67.
G. Eleazar, Aarons son, 102. L. affixed his Censor to the Altar, and why, ibid.
L. succeeds his Father, 104. I. dies, 128. O. Eleazar kills an Elephant, 322.
D. slain, 558. N. Eleazar upbraideth Hircanus, 348. E. Eleazar an arch thief
surprised, 620. K. Eleazar exercises cruelty, 619. C. Eleazar one of the
Zealous, 690. L. causes the Idumaeans to be sent for, ibid. L. Eleazar kills
himself, 704. K. Eleazar taken, 768. M. whipped, ibid. exhorts the Jews to
submit, 768. O. Eleazar, Captain of the Sicarians, 771. C. besieged in Massada,
772. A. shows the Romans tyranny, 776. H. Eleazar brought to Antiochus, 817. F.
whipped, 818. M. his answer to Antiochus, 818. I. his death, 819. A. B. Election
of a King. 113. B. C. Eli High Priest, 142. L. had wicked sons, 143. E. his and
their end foretold, 144. L. hearing of the Ark lost, died, 145. B. Genealogy.
145. C. Eliab a Workman of the Tabernacle, 80. L. 89. C. Elias fed by Crows,
226. C. entertained by the widow of Sareptha, ibid. D. restores the widows son,
ibid. G. prophesies rain to Achab, 228. B. reproves the superstition of the
people, 227. L. confirms his doctrine, and slays Baals Priests, 228. A. B.
flees from Jezabel, ibid. B. prophesies revenge to Achab and Jezabel, 229. B.
reproves Ochozias messengers, 335. O. prays, that fire consume his Captains,
236. B. and foreshows his death, ibid. B. is taken from men, ibid. D. Elimelech
goes to Moab, and why, 142. M. his and his sons death, ibid. M. his heritage
seized, 143. D. E. Elizaeus calling, 228. E. foretells of water and of
victory, 235. I. relieveth a poor widow, and how, 237. O. advises Joram to
beware of Adad, 238. A. B. discovers his ambush, ibid. B. leads the Syrians
into Samaria, 238. E. foretells plenty of victuals, 239. L. also Adads death,
and Azaels cruelty, 240. G. visited by Joas, 247. H. foresheweth his treble
victory, ibid. I. his death, and event thereof, 247. I. K. Eloquence of Moses,
67. B. 74. K. Ambassadors of David abused, 183. C. of Ezechi^s ill entreated,
252. F. G. of Jonathan to Demetrius, 337. K. of Herod, 602. N. Ambassadors to
Pompey, 363. E. Ambassadors send to Joseph, 12. K. 14. I. hope to get
Tiberias, 16. L. their false accusations, 17. B. Embassage of Moses to the
Idumaeans, 103. E. to Sebon, 104. L. Balacks to the Midianites, 105. E. his and
their first and second to Balaam, ibid. E. Embassage of the nine Tribes to the
other two, 127. I. of the Galaadites to Saul, 152. K. of the Syrians to Achab,
229. L. Embassage of Balad, 257. L. of the Jews, 281. M. of the Jews to Rome,
470. K. Emmor King of the Sichemites slain, 49. C. Emperors of Rome, why
called Caesar's, 214. M. Emperors strife to be at peace with the Jews, 729. C.
729. C. D. Empire of Rome in an uproar, 705. D. Empire of the Persians, 788. O.
End of captivity, 274. E. End of Antiochus Epiphan. miserable, 321. K. End of
the Jews answerable to their lives, 771. F. Engines, 666. N. fired, 666. N.
734. H. 740. M. Enemies of the Israelites to be destroyed, 111. A. and why,
ibid. Enemies how to be used, 810. O. Enemies to be buried, 116. I. Endeavor
of Agrippa, etc. 626. H. Enlargement of the Kingdom of Israel, 248. G. Enneus
Abraham's friend, 37. F. Enoch son of Jared, 31. C. taken up to God, ibid. D.
236. D. Enos, Cains first son, 29. F. Enosa the first City builded, 29. F.
Enquiry for Jonathans kindred, 182. N. Ensign of the Romans, 662. M. N.
Entertainment given to Antipater, 599. D. to Vespasian at Rome, 763. C.
Enumeration of the Countries subjected to the Romans, 626: N. 627. B. 628. I.
Envy of the Serpent, 28. L. of Abimelech, 43. F. of Leas to Rachel, 46. M. of
her to Leas, ibid* N. of Joseph's brethren, 50. O. of the Egyptians toward the
Israelites, 62. M. of Saul against David, 160. N. of Herodias, 492. O. of John,
640. M. Ephod. 87. B. Ephraim son of Joseph, 56. 1. Ephramites get Bethel, 129.
E. displeased with Jeptha, are appeased, 139. B. slain by Jeptha, ibid. D.
Epicrates sells Scythopolis, etc. 348. A. Epilogue of the Antiquities, 542. N.
Epitaphs, 135. F. and 178. H. 260. D. Erection of the Tabernacle, 81. B. Error
of Epicures confuted, 273. O. Esaias the Prophet, 256. B. comforts Ezechias, 256.
B. foretold Senacheribs overthrow and death, ibid. B. assures Ezechias of
life, 257. I. K. foreshews the captivity, ibid. M. Esau son of Isaac, 43. E.
called Seir, and why, ibid. E. foretold to be author of a Nation, 43. E. his
wives, 44. I. went a hunting, ibid. K. denied the blessing, and why, 44. N.
foretold to be mighty, yet his brothers vassal, ibid. N. wept for loss of the
blessing, ibid. D. sells his birthright, 50. L. Eschol Abraham's friend, 37.
F. Esdras the Lawyer, 282. B. assembled the Jews in Babylon, 283. E. repairs to
Jerusalem, etc. 283. H. his prayers for the Levites, 283. K. reads the Law,
284. B. Esseans a sect, 239. M. 477. E. 612. L. swear not, 613. C. have their
goods common, 612. M. their religion and labor, 613. A. in compassion and
helping their choice, 613. C. observe the Sabbath, 616. H. live long, ibid. I.
they prophecy, 610. M. their opinion of the soul, 614. K. believe not the
resurrection, ibid. marriage, 612. L. apparel, 612. N. obey Governors, 613. C.
just, 613. E. Essen, what it is, 87. C. D. Esther made Queen, 287. H. resorteth
to the King, and why, 289. I. accuses Aman, and why, 290. F. Estate of Solomon
declined, and why, 217. I. K. Ethnarch a Governor, 610. I. Ethnicks punished,
and why, 304. D. E. Eve created, 28. I. tempted, transgresses, ibid. L. her
punishment, 28. N. cast out of Paradise, 29. A. her children, ibid. B. Evening
what, 27. E. Event of the battle foretold, 171. E. Event of battle changes,
746. I. Evilmerodach releaseth Jechonias, 270. F. dies, ibid. F. Evidence
against Antipater, 598. L. M. Eunuchs of what gift deprived, 117. E. Euphrates
a River of Paradise, 28. K. called also Phora, ibid. Euricles wins Herod's
favor, 440. M. relates Alexanders words to Herod, 441. B. 592. I. K. gets
money by craft, 441. B. 592. H. plays the Ambodexter, 591. F. G. 592. H. I. Of
Exactions a mitigation craved, 405. B. C. denied, ibid. Example to do evil,
157. A. 221. C. Example of the Athenians, etc. 626. M. Excursions. See
Incursions. Excuse of David's absence, 164. O. of Malch^s* 574. H. of the two
brethren, 589. D. of Antipater, 600. L. M. Execration of Saul, 155. D. E.
Exercise of the Romans, 660. M. N. Exhortation of Moses to the people, 71. F.
74. M. Exhortation to maintain liberty, 511. N. to contemn death, 775. B.
Exhortation to be obedient to Gods will, 110. K. Exhortation of Saul to War,
152. M. Exhortation of Solomon to the people, 212. C. of Azarias, 214. M. of
Josaphat to his Subjects, 234. E. of Ezechias to the Priests, 252. F. G. of
Matthias to his Sons, 316. A. of the Princes to the people, 624. K. of Samuel
to the people, 148. I. of Titus, 741. C. of Antiochus, 817. G. 818. B. 825. I.
Expedition of the Philistines against the Hebrews, 154. E. 159. C. of Josaphat
against the Syrians, 232. B. of the Arabians against Joram, 241. N. of Amazias
against Joas, 248. D. of Ozias, 249. M. Expenses of Solomon, 206. I.
Explication of names of Jacobs Sons, 46. N. O. Exploits of Titus, 677. D. E. of
Domitian, 764. H. Exposition of Dreams. See interpretation. Expostulation of
Samuel with the People, 153. D. E. Expostulation against Joseph, 672. H.
Extremity of the Jews, 97. E. Ezechias King of Juda praised, and why, 252. F.
his Ambassadors to the Israelites, 252. G. offers a solemn sacrifice, 253. H.
I. reforms Gods service, ibid. subdues the Philistines, 253. K. has his
recourse to God, 256. B, prays, and is heard, 256. B. fell sick, 257. I. his
life prolonged, 257. K. entertaineth Balaads Ambassadors, ibid. L. his death,
257. N. Ezekiel prophesies of Captivity, 260. D. fore-prophesieth the
destruction of the Temple, etc. 262, E.
F.
FAble devised by Apion, 804. N. O. Fable of Jupiter and Pallas, 812. K. Fact
of Herod devised, 602. N. Faction in Tiberias, 3. B. Faction of Chore, 99. F.
of the people, 225. M. Faculty of persuasion, 67. B. Factious flee from John
698. N. Fadus, Governor of Judaea, 525. B. slew Ptolomaeus, 527. D. kills
Pheudas, 532. D. Fall of Adam and Eve, 28. L. Fall of the Walls of Jericho,
123. B. Fall of Oc^ozias, 235. N. Fall of a Tower, 725. A. B. False Prophets,
262. G. 263. H. suborned, 752. N, Fame of Solomon's Virtues, 213, E. F. of
Josaphats. 235. M. Fame of Herod, 585. B. C. Family of the Priests destroyed,
166. K. Famine of Canaan, 36. K. and 43. F. 56. K. and 57. D. of Egypt, 56. K.
increased, and why, 61. F. of the Jews, 97. D. E. in the days of Eli. 142. I.
inflicted on the Israelites, and why, 195. M, of Samaria, 239. I. 263. K. in
Judaea, 496. M. in Jerusalam, 721. D. 738. M. 748. K. Fasting of the
Israelites, 148. K. of the Jews, 288. E. F. Father of Josephus taken, 736. N.
Fathers before the ^loud, 31, A. B. C. trained up their Sons in virtue, 30. I.
and 31. A. B. C. their age before the flood, 31. A. B. C. their death, ib. why
lived longer than we now, 32. M. Fathers after the Flood, 35. C. D. Favor of
God to Isaac, 43. F. of the Keeper to Joseph, 54. K, of Pharaoh to Joseph, 55.
G. of God to Jacob, 61. A. of God to Moses, 64. I. of the Israelites, 71. F.
and 71. G. and 106. K. to David, 158. G. 162. I. of Xerxes to the Jews, 242. C.
of Antiochus to Jonathan, 318. G. of Caesar to Joseph, 24. N. Fear surprising
the Midianites, 135. F. 118. H. 155. B. 235. L. M. Fear of Saul touching David,
162. I. 165. F. Fear of the Jews, 616. K. 757. G. Fear gives Confidence, 581.
D. Feast of Pascha instituted and celebrated, 700. L. 93. I. 533. D. Feast of
Azyms, 70. L. 253. H. 605. E. Feast of Tabernacles, 92. I. 212. D 279. K. 345.
K. Feast of Pentecost, 92. M. 467. C. Feast of David to the people. 181. A. of
Ezechias 243. H. Feast of Lots, 292. F. Feature of David, 159. A. Felicity of
Solomon, 215. C. D. Foelix, Governor of Judaea, 535. D. punishes Thieves,
etc. 536. O. surprizeth Eleazar, 620. K. overthrowns the Egytians, ibid. M.
accused, 538. K. Fellows of Joseph, 673. C. cast Lots, ibid. Fertility of
Galilee, 649. C. of Genezar, 678. C. Festival solemnized,, and why, 318. G.
Festus discomfiteth a Deceiver, 538. M. Fiction of the Zealous disproved, 691.
C. Fiction of Apion refuted, 799. A. 802. L. Field of God, 48. K. The great
Field, 701. C. Fight by the Sea, 678. F. Fight of the Hebrews with the
Canaanites, 98. N. of the Syrians with the Jews, 621. A. betwixt the Romans and
Jews, 664. B. 671. H. of Vespatian with the Jews, 681. E. of the Citizens with
the Zealous, 689. A. between Simon and the Zealous, 704. H. between John and
Eleazar, 712. I. at the Feast of unleavened Bread, 714. I, etc. in the Temple,
742. N. of the Jews and Romans 746. M. Finishing of the Temple, 281. I. Fire
from Heaven kindles the Sacrifice, 66. M. consumes Solomon's Sacrifice, 212. B.
and Elias. 227, O. also the two Captains, and their own Soldiers, 236. B. C.
First begotten amongst the Egyptians slain, 70. K. First Fruits, 92. M. 114. K.
First-begotten, his right 114. O. Five Kings of Sodom. 37. B. Flaccus
disfavoureth Agrippa, 487. B. Flight of the Hebrews, 98. N. 173. E. of the
Philistines, 180. L. of the Syrians, 248. B. of the Philistines, 148. M. Flocks
of Nabal spared, 168. M. Florus, occasion of the Jews revolt, 477. F. 622. K.
succeeds Albinus, 542. K. worse than Albinus, ibid. L. cause the wars, 742. M.
622. K. imprisoneth 12 of the chiefest Jews, 622. N. his deceit, ibid. scorns
the Jews gratulation, 623. A. requires his obtractors to be yielded, Ibid. B.
his Subtilty and Treason, 624. I. takes the spoil, etc. 624. N. derided, 623.
B. Flood. See Deluge. Floods of Paradise, 28. K. Food of Manna, 75. B. C.
descended from Heaven, ibid, A. ceased, and when, 122. N. Footmen of the
Romans, 661. C. Force of the Romans Darts, 667. D. Forces of the Romans to the
Jews, 626. N, Force of Envy, 272. O. of Slander, 350. H. Forces weakened and
restored, 246. F. Forces against the Midianites, 108. M. Forces of Susac, 221.
E. Forgetting of Religion, cause of calamity, 129. B. C. D. G. 130. L. M. etc.
131.. C. D. etc. 132. M. 133. B. Form of the Jews Commonwealth, 281. L.
Fortitude of David, 162. I. K. of Vespasian, 681. E. of Julian, 743. C*
Fortress of the City, 688. A. Fortune favors the Romans, 728. O. Fountain of
the Temple. 207. E. Foundation of Covenant, 61. A. Fountainhead of Jordan,
583. G. 678. B. 680. L. Fountain near Jericho, 701. E. Fountain of Siloa, 718,
H. Fountains flowed to Titus, 730. N. Fraud of the false Prophet, 220. D. Fraud
paid with Fraud, 682. N. Freemen not to marry Servants, 114. M. Feined
Friendship of Eurecles, 591. F. G. Friendship between Isaac and Abimelech, 44.
H. Friendship betwixt Jonathan and David, 163. G. confirmed. with an oath, 164.
K. L. of Antiochus with Ptolomy, 307. K. of the Romans with Judas, 325. L. of
Hiram with Solomon, 786. N* 799. D. Frogs, a plague of Egypt, 60. B. Fruit
forbidden, tasted, 28. K. L. Fruit of the Egyptians spoiled, 69. F. Fruits of
Trees under four years growth. 113. C. Fruits fall into ashes, 702. M. Fruit
kept incorrupt 100 years, 772. F. Fugitive Jews flee to Antiochus, 322. B. A
Fugitive discloseth the state of Jotapata, 670. E. Fugitives request to
Vespatian, 699. D. Fulvia, Saturninas Wife, deceived, 482. I. Funeral of Jacob,
62. K. of Samuel, 168. L. of Abner, 177. G. of Herod, 462. N. 603. D. Funerals
of the dead, 810, K. Furniture of the Roman Horsemen, 661. D. Fury of Florus
Soldier, 623. F.
G.
GAbaens lust and villainy, 130. L. would not deliver the authors thereof, 131.
B. destroyed, and their City burned, 331. F. Gibeonites send Ambassadors to
Joshuah, 124. M. persuade Joshuah to make a league with them, ibid. M.
appointed to public Ministeries, 125. A. Gabinus overcomes Alexander, 266. D.
569. D. repaireth Cities in Jury* ibid. takes Aristobulus, 367. K. overcomes
the Nabathaeans, 568. L. Gad the son of Jacob, 46. O. what it signifies, ibid.
O. his children, 61. B. Gadara besieged and taken, 353. H. 663. B. Gadareans
accuse Herod, 416. B. entertain Vespasian, 699. G. Gaal assisted the Sichemites
to gather their fruits, 137. D. E. banished out of Sichem, ibid. F. Galaad a
pillar, 48. I. Galaadites besieged by Naas, 152. N. and succored by Saul,
ibid. M. Galba foretold to the Emperor, 491. C. slain, 703. B. A Galilean
slain, 619. C. his death cause of a tumult, ibid. E. Galileans murdered, 534.
L. revenge themselves, ibid. their faith and love toward Joseph, 6. H. desire
to invade Tiberias, 6. N. entreat Joseph to stay, 12. O. their testimony of
Joseph, 15. E. flock to Joseph, 641. A. Galilee described, 659. B. the length
and breadth thereof, ibid. C. Galley built by Herod, 577. C. Gamala faithful to
Rome, 623. G. how situated, 680. M. inexpugnable, ibid. N. taken, 683. E.
Games Circensian, 505. I. Ganges called also Phison, 28. K. Gardens, etc. about
Jericho, 701. F. Garden of pleasure, 28. I. Adam placed there, ibid. I. Garment
of Joseph, 53. E. Garment of linen and woollen, 112. H. Garment of the Priest,
210. C. Garment of the High Priests, 721. F. Garrison of the Philistines won,
154. I. Garrison placed in Syria, 182. I. in Idumaea, ibid. L. Gedeon called
and encouraged, 435. D. his men and means, ibid. E. obtains the victory, and
how, 136. H. kills Oreb and Zeb, and pacifies Ephraim, ibid. L. M. Gehon a
River of Paradise, 28. K. called also Nilus, ibid. K. Germans Caesar's Guard,
410. O. resort to the Theater, 512. K. their fury pacified, ibid. Germanicus
poisoned, 479. F. Genealogy of Noe, 30. O. of Abraham, 35. C. of Ely, 145. C.
of Shadoc, 204. I. of Alexander and Aristobulus, 618. M. Generals of Armies,
121. E. 164. M. 176. H. 204. L. 255. M. 265. I. 283. F. 293. H. Genezar the
lake described, 678. C. the length and breadth thereof, ibid. D. E. Gerson
Moses son, 67. G. Ghost of Samuel, 171. C. certifies Saul of his end, ibid. E.
Giants engendered, 30. M. horrible to look on, 129. C. Giants extinguished. 37.
B. Gifts of the Princes of the Tribes, 90. M. of the Kings to Solomon, 216. K.
L. Gifts of Herod, 585. B. 591. F. of Antipater, 574. I. 598. L. Gimon a
Prophet, 224. O. foretells the miseries of Basa and his race, ibid. O. Giscala
burned. 3. F. Gladness of Anna, 144. I. Glaphira wife of Alexander, 422. O.
Archelaus daughter, ibid. increases suspicion, 589. B. examined, 441. I. sent
back to her father, 449. B. 594. E. her dream, 473. G. Gleanings to be left for
the poor, 113. E. Gluttony of Vitellius, 710. K. God created the world, 27. F.
rests the seventh day, ibid. G. speaks to Adam, 28. M. punishes him, Evah
and the Serpent, 28. N. O. sends the Deluge, 30. O. wills the Earth to be
inhabited, 32. O. appears to Jacob, 60. A. his Providence in saving Moses, 64.
H. and 64. N. appears to Moses, 66. O. feeds the Israelites, etc. 75. B. C.
comfort Samuel, 149. E. certifieth him whom to create King, 150. M. sends
him to Bethlem, 158. K. appears twice to Solomon, 205. B. 212. E. speaks to
Elias, 228. D. Gods favor to the Romans, 628. K. 728. O. knows when to
revenge, 730. M. Godliness of Ancestors remembered, 63. B. Gods of Laban dug
up, 49. D. Gods of other Countries, 112. H. Godoli^s Captain of the fugitives,
265. O. slain, 266. E. Gold in great quantity, 77. C. 108. O. 123. B. 124. K.
L. sold for half the price, 754. K. Golden Statue erected, 269. M. Golden
Eagle, 459. F. Golden Chain, 520. M. Goliath the Philistine, 159. C. challenges
a single combat, ibid. C. encountered and slain, 160. M. Gomar, Japhers son, 33.
G. his Progeny, ibid G. Gonorrhoea, a Running of the Reins, 93. C. Good deserts
not to be forgotten, 162. L. Goodliness of personage not respected, 158. N.
Goods that are found, 115. M. Goods of Arche^aus confiscate, 611. G. common,
614. G. of Aman, 291. I. Gorions death, etc. 697. A. Government of the Romans
how far, etc. 661. G. Government of the Tribe of Juda, 129. A. Of Governments
the best kind, 113. A. Governments of the Hebrews distinct, 153. B. Government
of the Jews changed, 567. G. What Governor to be chosen, 78. I. 112. L. The
Governor Moses commended, 120. K. Governors of Solomon, 206. H. I. Governor
of both Galilees, who, 638. I. Grapes not to be forbidden the gatherers, 113.
G. Grasshoppers one of the plagues of Egypt, 69. F. Gratuity of Solomon, 213. F.
Gratulation of the Jews scorned, 623. A. Gratulation of the Bethsamites, 147.
E. of Herod, 586. I. of the people, 463. A. B. Gratus conflict, 463. M. See
Fight. Graves of concupiscence, 95. G. Grief causes or hinders passion, 816.
H. Ground about Jericho fruitful, 702. I.
H.
HAbit or form of Elias, 236. B. Habitations of Isaacs sons, 50. K. L. Hail,
one of the plagues of Egypt, 69. E. Haman honored by all, but the Jews, 287.
L. his petition for the Jews ruin, ibid. his hatred against Mardoche, 289. M.
his treachery discovered, 291. H. judged to the Gallows, ibid. his goods
bestowed on Mardoche, ibid. I. Hand of Moses, 67. C. Hand of Jeroboam withered,
220. B. restored, ibid. B. Handmaids of Jacobs wives, 46. M. N. Harbors, 415.
I. Ill Harvest of the Egyptians destroyed, 69. F. Hatred of Joseph's brethren,
50. O. of the Egyptians to the Hebrews, 62. M. of Saul against David, 160. N.
of Absalon against Amnon, 180. M. of the Soldiers against Demetrius, 336. G.
of sons to the father, 435. F. Haven of Caius, 516. L. Haven described, 517. D.
Heaven created, 28. E. and how placed, ibid. Hebrew Slave when to be freed,
116. M. Hebrews Original, 35. B. of whom so called, ibid. C. their
insupportable servitude, 62. N. O. and ibid. G. chiefest of them meet Moses,
68. H. persuaded to obey, ibid. H. celebrated their Passover, 70. I. departed
out of Egypt, ibid. K. and go through the Red Sea, 71. K. sing songs of praise,
72. N. fight with the Canaanites, 98. N. overthrow the Amorites, 104. N.
possess their land, 105. B. revolt from the Laws of their Fathers, 187. E.
overcome the Midianites* 108. O. bound by oath to keep the Law, 119. B.
overthrow the Canaanites, 125. E. bring the Ark into battle, 144. M. feed on
bloody flesh, 155. E. Hebron a place of burial, 41. F. 43. D. 49. F. 62. K.
Hebron the City taken, 120. C. David's royal seat, 179. E. Hecataeus, 36. H.
writ a Volume of Abraham, ibid. K. Height of the Mountain Itaburium, 682. M.
Temple, 208. M. Heirs of David, 181. D. Helen, Queen of Adiabena, 928. L.
repaireth to Jerusalem, 530. K. Heliopolis appointed for Jacob, 61. D. Help of
God, when most ready, 71. O. Help of God, to be sought for, 74. O. Heralds,
118. H. Hercules his War, 42. I. Herod made Governor of Galilee, 372. B.
executes Ezechias, 372. C. called in question, ibid. F. 578. O. saves himself
by flight, 373. K. kills Malichus, 370. O. 570. O. expels Antigonus out of
Jewry, 378. B. 571. C. marries Mariamme, ibid. accused, made Tetrarch, 380. B.
C. 571. F. assailed by the Parthians, 382. A. flees to Malch^^, 383. K. made
King, 384. C. leads his Army against Antigonus, 385. M. 571. C. his
Proclamation, 385. M. 575. E. overcomes the Galileans, 386. D. 388. D.
subdueth the Thieves, 387. I. K. 576. M. repaireth to Antonius, 391. K.
wounded, 388. G. besieges Jerusalem, 389. K. hinders the spoil of the City,
391. I. bribeth Antonius, ibid. L. prefers his favorites, 392. honors
Hirca^^^, 393. N. makes Annuel High Priest, 393. O. takes the Priesthood from
Ananel, 395. I. contriveth Aristobulus's death, 393. N. his counterfeit sorrow,
396. E. goes, to Antony, 39. C. commits his Wife to Joseph, etc. ibid. C.
D. E. instateth Cleopatra, etc. 399. C. levieth an Army, 400. B. overcomes the
Arabians, 402. G. 582. K. dismayed at Antonies overthrow, 403. M. practices
Hircanus death, 404. D. banisheth Antipater, 585. F. repaireth to Caesar, 405.
K. his speech to Caesar, ibid. entertaineth Caesar and his Army, 406. B.
incensed against Mariamme, 407. I. against Pheroras, 590. N. comes to Jericho,
576. I. takes Sephoris, 576. L. his Buildings and works, as Theaters, 410. G.
Castles 412. B. 414. G. 415. I. 415. L. 416. F. 417. H. H. 584. M. 585. A.
distributeth Corn among the People. 413. L. remits the third part of Tribute,
417. H. swears the people, 417. K. re-edifieth the Temple, 418. A. B. etc.
saileth into Italy, 422. L. gives Wives to his Sons, 422. O. his liberality,
423. B. 424. G* opens David's Sepulcher, 433. B. crediteth all tales, 436. I.
weary of his life, and why, 437. D. fortunate abroad, and unfortunate at home,
426. M. beheadeth Pappus, 578. O. accuses his Sons before Caesar, 427. E. 428.
I. K. 578. B. gives ear to Accusers, 441. A. B. accuses his Sons, 444. K.
593. D. strangleth them, 594. K. accuses Pheroras Wife, 451. D. sends
Antipater to Caesar, 452. I. tortureth the Bond-Women, 453. B. puts away his
Wife, 454. K. calls Antipater from Rome, 454. M. 998. N. brings him in
question, 455. D. imprisoneth Antipater, 458. ^. makes his Will, 459. D. E.
467. I. certified of his Brothers death, 578. H. commands the Nobles to be
slain, 460. N. his liberality, 460. O. 579. G. bemoaneth his Sons, 594. N.
betrotheth his Nephews, ibid. G. 595. I. loved Antipater above the rest, 600.
I. blotteth him out of his Testament, 601. E. puts him to death, 603. A. his
own death and burial, 462. K. etc. 603. D. Herod fortifieth Cities, 478. I.
builds Tiberias, 478. N. Herod dismisseth Aretas Daughter, 484. M. marries
Herodias, ibid. N. repaireth to Rome, 493. C. accused and banished, ibid. D. E.
Herod created King of Chalcis, 519. E. kills Silas, 524. F. his authority to
create the High Priest, 528. K. Herodias envieth Agrippa, 492. O. banished,
493. E. Herodian, a Castle, 573. D. 585. A. High Priests Ornaments, 871. B.
etc. garment, 721. High Priest since Sadoc, 265. M. Hill of witness, 48. I.
Hira^ his League, 179. D. his Ambassadors to Solomon, 206. N. promises him
Wood, 207. B. receives great quantity of Wheat, 117. D. ibid. proposes hard
questions, 213. F. Hircanus High Priest, 334. G. besieges Ptolomy, ibid.
makes peace with Antiochus, 345. M. takes Money out of David's Mounument,
ibid. N. surprizeth Cities of Syria. 346. C. conquereth the Idumeans, ibid, O.
besieges Samaria, 347. M. takes it, 348. B. discontented with the Pharisees,
348. B. follows the Sadduces, 110. G. his death, ibid. Hircanus, Joseph's Son,
309. M. Treason intended against him, 310. K. accused, and why, 310. F. his
Apology, ib. his jests, 311. B. C. assailed by his brethren, 311. E. afflicts
the Arabians, 31^. K. his buildings, ibid. K. kills himself, ibid. C. Hircanus,
High Priest, 566. N. 357. H. content to live a private life. 360. I. his
Embassage to Scaurus, 362. B. repaireth the walls of Jerusalem, 376. F.
honored by the Athenia^s, 371. I. foretold of his death, 373 H. his
Ambassadors brought into the Senate, 375. M. taken prisoner, 381. N. highly
hououred, 393. N. his death, 404. C. Hire of a Harlot, 111. G. Hire not to be
detained, 117. D. History of Dina* 49. B. Histories recited, 729. C. Histories
of Antiquities, 780. K. Historiographers refuted, 792. K. L. 793. F. 794. K. N.
795. F. 796. F. 797. A. B. hide Antiochus perjury, 803. D. Holy ointment, 89.
C. Holocaust, or burnt Sacrifice, 91. B. Homer, antientest Greek Writer, 781.
B. Homicide committed, 112. O. Honorable drawn before Tyrants, 732. I.
Honoring of strange gods, look Idolatry. Honors of Joseph, 55. G. and 60. M.
Honor of the Magistrate, 112. L. 626. K. Honor change manners, 166. M. Honor
of Mordocheus, 289. C. D. Honor due to Parents, 810. L. Horses taken, 127. A.
Horsemen of Solomon, 206. K. Horsemen brought Letters to Joseph, 13. D.
Horsemen of the Romans, 661. D. Hospitality of the Esseans, 612. N. Host, look
Army. Household Stuff, 127. A. Houses full of dead Men, 735. F. 758. K. Humanity
becomes a King, 169. C. Humanity of Balaam, 105. D. E. of the three Kings,
237. L. of Caesar, 607. D. of Titus, 744. N. Humanity of Titus counted
cowardice, 727. B. Humanity of the Romans, inciteth the Jews against them, 754.
O. Hunger kills many, 727. D. Hurt of the General dismaieth the Soldiers,
233. K. Hymns sung to God, 253. H.
J.
JAbisites besieged, 152. H. promised assistance, ibid. L. bury the bodies of
Saul and his Sons, 174. K. praised, 175. Jabin, a King of Canaan, 134. K.
subdueth the Israelites, ibid. L. his Army put to flight, 135. A. Jacob the Son
of Isaac, 43. E. his greatness foretold, ibid. held his brothers heel, 43. E.
steals the Blessing, 44 M. fleeing to Laban, sees a Vision, 45. B. voweth a
Sacrifice to God, ibid. D. arriveth at Charran, ibid. A. talks with Rachel and
Laban, ibid, F. etc. requires Rachel, etc. 46. ^. deceived, 46. L. departs
privily from Laban, 47. ^. accuses Laban of ill dealing, 47. F. makes a
Covenant with him, 48. H. sends messengers to his brother Esa^, 48. K. is
reconciled to him, and how, ibid. M. wrestleth with an Angel, ibid. N.
sacrifices, 42. D. bewaileth Joseph, 52. M. sends his Sons into Egypt, etc.
56. K. would not part without Benjamin, 57. D. rejoices at Joseph's prosperity,
60. M. his journey into Egypt, 61. B. meets Joseph, and talks with Pharaoh,
61. D. blesses his Sons, and dies, 62. I. Jaddus High Priest, 293. K. meets
Alexander, 295. H. and in what manner, ibid. shows him Daniels prophecy, 295.
L. Jadon prophesies against the Altar at Bethel, 220. B. restores Jeroboams
hand, ibid. B. breaks Gods Commandment, 220. E. slain of a Lion, ibid. E. his
prophecy detracted, 220. F. Jael kills Sisera, 134. O. Jair governs Israel,
138. L. was rich, and had thirty Sons, ibid. B. James accused and stoned, 539.
D. Jamse, etc. betrays his Country, 704. K. Japha taken, 669. C. Japhet, Noah's
eldest Son, 23. B. his issue, 22. G. covered his Fathers shame, 34. O. Jason
warreth against Onias, 313. I. K. Javan and his Progeny, 10. I. Javelin of
Saul, 163. B. Jaziel a Prophet, 235. I assures Josaphat of the victory, ib. I.
Ibes, enemies unto Serpents, 65. D. Ichabod, when born, 145. G. and why so
called, ibid. Idolaters plag^ed* 108. L. M. Idolatry of the Israelites, 107. D.
219. M. of Solomon, 216. O. Of Joram, 211. I. of Jezabel and Achab, 216. B. of
Amasias, 248. A. and 248. B. of Achaz, 251. I. of Jeroboam, 219. L. M. of the
Egyptians. 792. I. Idols to be destroyed, 111. A. Idumaea the Country of Esau,
50. L. Idumaeans revolt, 241. K. admit circumcision, 346. D. pardoned by Varus,
609. F. 20000 come to Jerusalem, 690. O. shut out of the City, 692. M. object
reproaches against the Citizens. ibid. pitch their tents near the walls, ibid.
N. enter the City by night, 693. F. depart out of Jerusalem, 696. N. consult of
their submission, 757. B. Jealousy, 93. F. Jealousy of Herod, 586. N.
Jebusites expelled, 179. E. Jechonias made king of Juda, 261. N. revolteth,
262. B. taken prisoner, ibid. released, 270. F. Jehu King of Israel, 228. D.
242. B. slays Joram and Ochozias, 242. F. G. despises Gods Laws, 245. M.
dies, ibid. Jehu the Prophet, 234. E. reproves Josaphat, and why, ibid. E.
Jeptha, Judge of Israel, made a vow, 138. O. overcomes the Ammonites, 139. A.
sacrifices his daughter, 139. B. kills 40000 of the Ephramites, ibid. C. D.
dies, ibid. Jeremy foretells the Captivity, 260. D. keeps at Jerusalem,
ibid. B. prophecieth the destruction thereof, 261. L. admonishes Joachim,
ibid. I. persuades the Jews to yield, 263. K. imprisoned in a pit, ibid. his
counsel to the King, 264. B. set at liberty. 266. B. Jericho the City surveyed,
121. E. the walls thereof fell down. 123. B. destroyed, ibid. C. never to be
re-edified, ibid. D. Jeroboam rebelleth, 217. N. fore-shewed to reign over ten
Tribes, ibid. O. fled into Egypt, 218. B. recalled, ibid. C. proclaimed King,
219. I. persuaded the people to Idolatry, ibid. L. his hand withered and was
restored, 220. B. his impiety, 222. C. his punishment fore-prophecied, ibid. E.
his expedition against Abias, 223. I. dies, 224. H. Jeroboam the son of Joas,
248. F. warred against the Syrians, and enlarged his Kingdom, 248. G. dies,
249. L. Jerusalem taken, 179. D. David's royal City, ibid. E. surprised, 221. E.
besieged, 235. M. 263. K. 264. D. 579. A. taken and burned, 265. K. surprised,
297. N. tributary to Rome, 365. L. taken by Sosius, 390. F. described, 713. E.
F. 758. G. etc. second time burned, 755. F. six times spoiled, 760. H. Jesse
begat David, 143. E. Jesus High Priest, 279. H. Jesus High Priest, 213. H.
deposed, 213. I. Jesus Christ Crucified, 480. M. Jesus Captain of Thieves, 7.
B. Jesus conspireth against Joseph, 8. N. his talk with him, 17. F. Jesus
exhortation to the Idumaeans, 691. A. 691. F. Jesus his exclamation against
Jerusalem, etc. 753. E. his death, ibid. G. Jewels of great price, 42. N. Jews
more ancient than the Greeks, 784. M. arguments thereof, ibid. came not of the
Egyptians, 795. B. C. when got Judaea and built Jerusalem, 796. O. trusty to
their Princes, 802. I. why eat not swines flesh, 806. I. Jews impiety reproved,
221. F. their captivity, 265. L. 267. K. depart from Babylon, 278. F. in danger
to be exterminated, 286. B. lament, 288. C. fast and pray, ibid. E. F. revenge
them on their enemies, 292. C. led away captive, 297. N. set at liberty, 289.
K. tormented, 314. C. slain on the Sabbath, 315. N. brought out of Galaad, 320.
C. discharged of tribute, 343. L. terrified, 251. M. Lords of Syria, etc. 343.
E. shut their gates against the Romans, 364. L. honored by Kings of Europe and
Asia, 373. N. slain, 381. I. favor Herod for his bounty, 413. N. complain to
Agrippa, 423. G. Jews Embassage to Caesar, 431. F. 50000 slain, 582* K. cause
of the wars, 527. D. Jews slain about the Temple, 533. E. plagued, 2. N.
constrained to make war, ibid. M. revolt from the Romans, 11. E. valiantly
defend themselves, 279. B. 3000 slain, 606. H. call Archelaus in question, 610.
I. will not consent to Pilate to alter their Laws, 615. D. their fight with the
Samaritanes, 623. A. sedition and slaughter among them, 621. B. their request
to Agrippa, 625. E. refuse Caesar's sacrifices, 629. F. take Antonia, 630. M.
spoil the Villages and Cities of Syria, 632. K. Jews against Jews, ibid. M.
slain, 632. 633. 634. H. etc. overcome the Romans, 635. D. besiege Askalon,
658. I. 10000 slain, 658. L. 8000 slain, 658. M. repulsed, 666. I. pour
scalding oil upon the Romans, 668. M. 12000 slain, 669. D. 40000 perished at
Jotapata, 671. E. fly into the City* 677. C. 9000 slain, 683 F. turn their
weapons against themselves, 686. I. drive the Romans from their camp, 713. B.
showed the tortures of the fugitives, 732. O. curse Caesar, 733. B. embowelled
for Gold, 737. F. upbraid God, 736. H. afraid, ibid. K. surprise the Romans
Horses, 746. L. burn the porch of the Temple, ibid. O. eat their girdles,
shoes, etc. 748. L. overcome the Romans, 747. F. arrogant in calamity, 756. K.
refuse to submit themselves* ibid. L. 40000 saved, an infinite number sold,
757. D. slain in Syria and Egypt, 775. D. burn their goods, 775. L. the number
of captives and slain, 759. B. Jezabel builded a Temple to Bell, 226. B.
ordained Priests and Prophets, ibid. B. killed the true Prophets, 227. K.
complotted Naboths death, 218. F. G. persecuted Elias, 228. B. her death
fore-shewed, 228. I. devoured by dogs, 243. I. Image of a godly Prince, 259. M.
N. Image of Gold, 269. M. Imitation in sin, 159. B. 219. M. 221. d. 250. E. 258
D. Immanity of the Idumaeans and Zealous, 694. I. of Simon, 704. M. Immunity
granted to the Jews, 335. B. Impiety of Elies sons, 143. F. of Basa, 224. O. of
Achab and Jezabel, 226. B. 228. B. of Amri and his Predecessors, 225. M. of
Achaz, 251. I. 252. B. of Ochozias, 246. B. of Ozi^s, 259. A. of Phac^ias, 250.
E. of Ozeas, 255. C. of Manasses, 258. B. of Joas, 260. L. of Joachim, ibid. F.
Impiety cause of calamity, 129. B. 130. L. M. 131. C. D. 132. M. 221. D. 222.
E. 224. I. 225. M. N. 229. I. 242. A. 248. A. 251. K. 252. B. 258. B. 260. E.
261. M. N. 262. D. E. 263. H. L. etc. 264. D. E. etc. 265. H. I. Imprecation
for building Jericho, 123. D. Imprecation of Saul, 155. D. Incest, 94. H. of
Lot, 39. D. of Ammon, 183. C. Inchanters banished, 171. B. Enclosure before the
Temple, 210. D. Inconstancy of fortune, 682. I. Inconveniences under a King,
149. F. G. Encouragement of Moses, 67. C. of Joshuah, 119. D. Incredulity
punished, 240. E. Incursions of the Amalechites, 135. B. of the Philistines, H.
of Adar, 217. M. Indebted acts and devices, 763. B. Indulgence cause of sin,
157. D. Industry of the Romans, 660. N. Ingratitude of the Sichemites, 137. B.
of the Israelites, 153. D. of Nabal, 168. N. of Demetri^^, 336. B. of Malch^^,
574. H. Inhabitants of Nob slain* 166. K. Inhabitants of Countries, 33. F. 34.
L. Inheritance of Jacob and Esau, 50. L. M. of Salpades dauthters, 113. E.
Inhibition of Cambyses, 276. B. Iniquity, 577. B. of the Jews, 740. H. Injuries
of Florus, 477. F. Injury to David's Ambassadors, 183. C. to Thamar, 186. L.
Injustice of Lawmakers, 814. I. Innocence of David, 168. I. 170. L. Insolence,
248, A. B. 250. B. 250. D. 733. D. Institution of Circumcision, 38. L. 70. L.
of the Passover. Instruments of Music, 210. C. Interpretation of Joseph's
dream, 51. C. of the Butlers, 24. M. of the Bakers, 24. O. of Pharao^s, ibid.
E. F. of Nebuc^odonosors, 269. O. of the handwriting, 271. N. Interpreters
royally entertained, 302. O. Intent of Florus manifested, 624 M. Intention of
Saul against David, 160. I. M. 163. B. 164. M. Intestine discord, 686. I.
Invective against murderers, 178. M. against the Zealous, 687. F. of Joseph
against the Jews, 730. K. Inventor of Music, who, 29. G. Inventor of the Art
of Forging* ibid. First Inventors of Letters, 781. A. Invocation of God in
trouble, 74. O. Joab General of David's Army, 176. H. discomfiteth Ab^er, ibid.
I. slays Ab^er, 177. D. discomfiteth the Syrians, 189. F. reconcileth Absalon
to his father, 188. H. ^. Joab and the Army enter the City mournfully, 192. M.
his Oration unto David, etc. ibid. C. sent out against Siba, 194. M. kills
Amaza, ibid. N. rebuked, proposes conditions of peace, 194. L. one of Ado^i^^
coadjutors, 199. D. slain, 204. L. Joachas King of Israel subdued, 246. F. G.
and why, ibid. his repentance and prayer, ibid. Joachim King of Juda, 260. E.
paid tribute, ibid. 261. I. revolteth and is slain, 261. I. not buried, 261. M.
Joachin King of Juda, 261. N. See Jechonias. Joas King of Israel, 247. H.
called Elizaeus his father, ibid. H. his treble victory, ibid. K. Joas saved,
and how, 244. D. created King of Juda, 244. E. his piety during Joiadas time,
245. L. repaireth the Temple, ibid. N. his impiety after Joiadas decease, 246.
E. stoneth Zacharias, ibid. G. bought his peace, 246. D. dies, ibid. Joatham
his works about the Temple, 250. F. acts of War, ibid. K. 251. I. Joaz King of
Juda taken prisoner, 260. E. his impiety and death, ibid. F. Jobel a Maker of
Tents, 29. F. Jochabel, Moses Mother, 63. E. secretly hid him three months,
ibid. F. appointed to be his Nurse by Pharaohs daughter, 64. K. Jodes kills
Eglon, 133. F. subdueth the Moabites, and rules Israel, ibid. 134. I. K. Joel
and Abia govern the Commonweal, 149. B. Joiada High Priest, 240. C. creates
Joas King, 240. D. swears King and people to serve God, ibid. L. deceaseth,
246. B. John releaseth Ismaels captives, 267. R. refuses counsel, ibid. I.
John High Priest slays his brother, 293. I. punished, 293. K. John, Jonathans
brother, slain, 328. D. John Baptist slain, 485. B. John's acts in Gischalis, 5.
M. his treason, 6. I. seeks to murder Joseph, 5. M. he and the Ambassadors
resort to Jesus, 15. A his followers forsake him, 21. F. a trecher and
murderer, 639. B. flies into Gischala, 641 A. persuades the Tyberians to
revolt, 641. N. moves to rebellion, 684. I. reserved to be at the siege of
Jerusalem, 685. A. swears to the people, etc. 689. E. breaks his oath,
ibid. G. assaulted on both sides, 712. M. puts the Zealous to flight, 714.
I. seizes the Temple, ibid. raileth upon Joseph, 744. I. apprehended, 759. E.
is condemned to perpetual prison, ibid. F. John, Captain of the Idumaeans, 724.
M. slain, ibid. M. Jonas cause of a tempest, and why, 249. I. devoured of a
whale, and cast out, 249. K. preaches to the Ninevites, ibid. K. Jonathan,
Saul's son, 154. I. entered the enemies camp, and slew them, 155. B. C. breaks
the Edict, ibid. D. counsels David to fly, 162. I. pacifieth Saul's
displeasure, and certifieth David thereof, 162. L. M. discovers Saul's hatred
to David, and how, 164. L. renews his covenant, 167. C. Jonathan Governor of
the Jews, 328. B. revengeth his brothers death, 328. K. assaileth Bacchides by
night, 329. I. puts Apollonius to flight, 334. E. appeaseth Demetrius, 336.
C. puts Demetrius to flight, 339. H. renews friendship with the Romans,
ibid. I. etc. fights with Demetrius, 340. A. repaireth Jerusalem, etc. ibid.
G. taken by Triphon, 340. F. 559. B. slain, 342. C. 559. C. Jonathans letters
to Joseph, 13. C. Jonathan challenges a combat, 747. B. slays Pudens, 747.
C. Joppe a retreat for thieves, 674. K. taken, ibid. N. Joram King of Juda,
237. N. served Idols, 241. I. murdereth his brethren, ibid. I. dies miserably,
241. M. Joram King of Israel, an impious man, 236. D. asks aid, ibid. E. in
distress with two other Kings, ibid. E. F. relieved, and how, 237. H. overcame
the Moabites, ibid. L. besieged, 238. F. threatens Elizaeus, 239. K. certified
of the enemies flight, 239. O. his expedition to recover Ramath, 241. O. Jordan
yields the Israelites passage, 190. N. his fountain, 680. L. Jehosophat, King
of Juda, his piety, 311. M. his expedition with Achab, 232. B. M. reproved,
234. E. renews the true service of God, ibid. E. prays, and why, 235. I.
obtains victory, and how, 235. K. L. his ships cast away, ibid. M. aideth
Joram, 236. E. dies, 237. M. Joseph son of Jacob, 47. A. envied of his
brethren, 50. O. dreamed a dream, 51. O. sold by his brethren, 52. L. resisted
his mistress twofold temptation, 53. A. E. accused and cast into prison, 54. H.
K. expounded dreams, 54. M. O. counseled the King how to prevent famine, 55.
F. advanced to honor, and married a wife, ibid. G. sounded his brethren, and
why, 56. M. sent them away, but detained Simeon, 57. B. C. banqueteth them and
Benjamin, 58. H. slays their journey, and accuses them, ibid. I. K. I*
attacheth Benjamin, ibid. N. makes himself known to his brethren, 60. I. K.
resorteth to Pharaoh with his brethren, etc. 60. burieth his father, 62. I.
gives charge concerning his bones, ibid. dies, ibid. I. Joseph preventeth
calamity, and how, 308. I. etc. Ambassador to Ptolomy, ibid. N. tributes of
Coelosyria committed to him, 399. I. his wealth and children, ibid. N. sends
his son Hircanus to Ptolomy, 310. C. his death, 311. F. Joseph, Herod's brother,
slain, 388. C. D. Joseph, Herod's Uncle, 397. C. slain, and why, 388. I. K. L.
Josephus of the Priestly line, 433. D. 543. A. studious from his infancy, 1. E.
expert in the Greek and Hebrew tongues, 542. O. a Pharisee, 1. F. his
shipwreck, 2. H. dehorteth the Jews from sedition, ibid. K. remains in
Galilee, 4. N. procures the safety of the Kings goods, 5. C. would not be
bribed, 5. F. surprizeth Jesus, 7. D. his care of Religion, 7. D. transporteth
Corn into Galilee, 8. H. labors to restore Pto^omies goods, 8. M. moves the
people to compassion, 9. B. his Oration, ibid. C. escapes from danger, 9. D.
dismisseth the Tarichaeans, 9. G. politickly takes Tiberi^, 10. L. dismisseth
the Tiberians, 11. B. his dream, 12. N. his answer to Jonathan, 13. F.
besetteth the ways of Galilee, 14. M. objecteth treachery to the Ambassadors,
15. C. pacifieth sedition, 16. I. sends 100 Ambassadors to Jerusalem, ibid. B.
certifieth the Galilaeans of Jonathans treachery, 18. K. takes Simon, 19. C.
surprizeth Tiberias, ibid. D. prosecuteth his History, 21. D. assaileth the
walls of Sephoris, 22. O. puts the Kings soldiers to flight, 23. C. his
accident, 23. D. discharges captives, 24. I. entertained by Vespasian, 24. K.
envied, etc. ibid. makes seventy Elders Rulers in Galilee, 638. I. fortifieth
the City with walls, 638. K. instructs the Galilaeans in War, ibid. comes to
Jotapata, 663. E. defends Jotapata, 663. G. 664. E. F. 665. C. burns the
engines, 666. M. leapt into a trench, 671. L. consents to Nicanor, ibid. m.
his speech to his fellows, 672. H. resorteth to Vespasian, 673. D. foretells
Vespasian of his future honors, 673. F. rewarded by Vespasian, 674. H.
imprisoned, ibid. delivered, 109. C. wounded in the head, 737. B. his speech to
the people, 744. I. present at the Wars of the Jews, 783. D. sold his books to
many, 738. E. Josias restored Gods Service, 258. E. rooteth out Idolatry, ibid.
F. causes the book of the Law to be read, 259. L. burns false Prophets
bones, ibid. M. celebrateth the Passover, 260. A. is slain, ibid. B. Joshuah
Captain over the Israelites, 76. N. with Caleb appeaseth the people, 96. M.
appointed the successor of Moses, 109. B. passes over Jordan, 122. L.
builds an Altar, 122. M. compasses about the City of Jericho, 122. O.
burns the City, 123. C. pronounced them accursed that re-edifie it, ibid. D.
prays unto God, 123. F. takes and burns Ainan, 124. K. makes a covenant
with the Gibeonites, 124. O. slays five Kings, 125. C. slays the Kings of
Canaan and their Army, 125. D. sends men to measure the Land, 126. K.
divides it by lots, 126. K. etc. his Oration to the two tribes and half, 127.
D. exhorts the people to keep the Law, 128. M. dies, ibid. N. Jotapata
besieged, 663. E. 664. G. valiantly defended, 665. B. C. 666. H. etc. 667. A.
etc. 668. O. 669. A. B. etc taken, 670. F. 671. H. Jotham, son of Gedeon, 137.
B. upbraideth the Sichemites, ibid. B. advises them to reject Abimelech, 137.
C. Journey of the Hebrews, 70. L. 71. B. 72. K. N. 73. B. Joy of Jacob, 61. D.
of the Egyptians, 62. H. of Anna, 144. I. of the Jews, 278. C. D. etc. Ipsan
governed Israel, 139. D. his children, ibid. E. Iron bed of Og, 105. B. Iron
work forbidden, 136. I. Isaac promised, 38. L. and ibid. O. is born, 39. G. why
he was called Isaac, ibid. G. legitimate son of Abraham, 40. I. makes a
covenant with Abimelech, 44. I. should have been offered, 41. B. marries
Rebecca, 43. C. dies. 49. F. Isachar son of Jacob, 47. A. what it signifies,
ibid. A. his sons, 61. C. Isboseth, Saul's Son, proclaimed King, 176. H. his
army discomfited, ibid. I. reproved Abner, and why, 176. N. traitorously slain,
138. L. M. Isha, what it signifies, 28. I. Isis Priests hanged, 481. C. D.
Islands, etc. called Cethim, 34. I. Ismael slew Godolias, 266. E. takes many
prisoners, 266. F. Ismael Abraham's son, 34. K. circumcised, ibid. L. his state
and progeny foretold, ibid. L. his name, what, 36. K. banished, and why, 40. K.
his sons, 40. L. Israel, a name given to Jacob, and why, 48. M. Israelites
servitude, 62. M. their male children put to death, 62. O. grievously
afflicted, 67. E. and 68. L. celebrated the Passover, 70. I. K. departed out of
Egypt, 72. O. are exhorted to put their trust in God, 71. F. gothorow the Red
Sea, ibid. sing songs of praise to God, 72. M. distressed in the desert, 78. A.
murmur, and why, ibid. E. fed with Manna forty years, 75. D. incensed against
Moses, and why, ibid. E. F. wander in the wilderness forty years, 97. A. assail
their enemies, 98. L. war against the Amalachites, 76. I. and get great spoils,
77. C. come to Sinai, ibid. D. hear God speaking to them, 79. E. builded the
Tabernacle, 80. L. assail their enemies, and are overcome, 98. M. N. put the
Amorites to flight, 103. B. slay Se^on and Og, 103. A. B. C. serve strange
gods, 107. D. commanded to destroy their enemies, 111. A. B. H. bound to keep
the Law, 119. B. enjoyed the fruits of the earth, 122. N. took Jericho, 123. B.
also Ainan, 124. K. overcame the Chanaanites, 125. E. divided their land
amongst them, 126. K. etc. reproved for sparing the Chanaanites, 129. G. twice
overthrown, 131. D. slay all the Benjamites save six hundred, 131. F. give them
four hundred virgins for wives, 132. I. their punishment, prayers, and fast,
148. I. K. L. their report to Samuel of his sons, 149. D. desire a King, ibid.
rescue Jonathan, 156. I. spare the cattle of the Amalechites, 157. B. revolt
from Roboam, 219. I. the godly return to him, 221. B. their translation, 250.
E. 253. N. dispossessed of their Country, and why, 253. N. Issue of Isaac
foretold, 38. L. what should effect, ibid. L. of Abraham by Chetura, 41. G. of
Jacob, 46. N. O. Issue of the war, 608. O. Ittam a place of recreation, 216. M.
Jubal, Inventer of Music, 29. G. Juda the son of Jacob, 46. N. his counsel to
sell Joseph, 52. L. urges his father to send Benjamin, 57. D. makes a speech
before Joseph, 59. B. his children, 61. B. Judaea made tributary, 260. E.
described, 659. F. length and breadth thereof, ibid. G. desolated, 740. I.
Judas Maccabaeus, 316. C. slays Apollonius, and discomfiteth the Syrians,
ibid. E. F. his Oration to his Soldiers, 317. M. twice discomfiteth Lys^^s,
318. B. C. D. purged the Temple, 318. E. 319. H. warreth with the neighboring
nations, 319. I. K. succoureth the Jews in Galaad, 319. C. 320. D. his
admirable victory, ibid. D. besieges the Castle in Jerusalem, 321. N. and why,
ibid. his league with Antiochus, 323. I. slays Alchimus partakers, 325. K.
puts Nicanor to flight, 325. H. covenanteth peace with the Romans, 325. K.
abandoned of his men, ibid. N. is slain, 326. C. 559. B. Judas the Essean a
Prophet, 350. H. 561. D. Judas the Arch-thief, 468. L. Judas Galilaeus sect,
476. M. Judge corrupted with money, 278. E. F. Judges qualities, 112. L. their
office, 234. E. placed in every City of Juda, ibid. E. Judgment seat in several
Cities, 149. A. Julian his valor and death, 743. D. E. Julius Ant. for the
Jews, 432. L. Jupiter E^yelius relics, 33. D. Justice is Gods power, 112. K.
Justice of God, 254. C. leaves nothing unpunished, 598. H. Justice oppressed,
149. D. Justice neglected, 565. A. B. Justice of the Esseans, 613. E.
Justification of Samuel, 153. C. Justus inciteth the people to rebellion, 3. D.
reproved, 19. F. his Country Tyberius, 20. K. accused, 23. E. condemned to
death, 20. N. his book when published, 21. B. desires to command Galilee, 22.
M. Izates King of Adiabena, 529. A. learneth the service of God, ibid.
dissuaded from circumcision, 529. B. writes to the Parthians, etc. 531. A.
calls upon God, 532. L. delivers the Kingdom to his brother, 532. M. dies.
ibid.
K.
KEeper of the prisons entreaty of Joseph* 54. K. Kind of living most
miserable, 731. E. F. Kindness of Agripp^, 11. C. Kinds of sacrifice, two, 91.
A. Kindness pretended, 598. N. Kindness of Herod, 599. F. Fat Kine and lean,
what they signify, 55. D. King desired, 150. I. Kings field, 37. E. Five Kings
of the Midianites slain, 108. O. Of a King to be elected, what things are
required, 113. B. The Kings of Canaan war against the Hebrews, 125. D. they and
their whole Army put to the sword, ibid. B. 31 Kings overcome by the Hebrews,
126. H. Kings of Egypt, why called Pharao^s, 214. M. N. Kings of Alexandria
called Ptolomies, 214. M. King of Moab sacrifices his son, 237. L. King
enjoined by oath to serve God, 245. I. Kingdom of Solomon rent, 217. O. 219. H.
A Kingdom how continued, 158. N. Kingdom promised to Je^ues posterity, 240. B.
Kingdom of Herod divided, 471. D. B. Kingdom not given, but the honors
thereof, 587. G. Kingdom of Agrippa, 618. L. Kindred, 43. B. 45. F. Kinsman,
47. E. Knowledge of celestial bodies, 30. K. Knowledge of good and evil, 28. L.
L.
LAban, Bethuels son, 45. E. con^enteth to Rebecca^^ marriage, 43. C.
entertaineth Jacob, 45. E. appoints him master of his shepherds, 4^. I.
deceives him. ibid. L. pursues after him, 47 C. makes a covenant with him,
48. H. his goods, 47. B. Labor of the Esseans, 613. A. of the Roman Soldiers,
660. N. ceas^ess, 735. C. Ladder of Jacob, 45. B. Ladies at variance, 595. E.
Lake Asphaltites, 37. C. described, 702. K. the property thereof, 702. K. Lake
of Genezar, 679. H. Lakes Asphaltites and Tiberias, 701. D. Lamech his wives
and issue, 29. F. Lamech, Methusala^s son, 30. O. Lamentation of Esau, and why,
44. N. Lamentation of Jacob, 52. M. of the Hebrews, 119. F. Lamentation of
thirty days, 115. E. Lamentation for Abner, 177. F. for Aristobulus, 381. L.
Land of the Ammorites possessed, 105. B. Landmarks not to be removed, 113. B.
Land of Canaan divided by Lots, 126. K. Land of Sodom where, 702. M. Lap of
Saul's Garment cut, 167. G. Largess of Titus to his Soldiers, 761. B. Largeness
of Jewry, 790. N. Laver how sustained, 209. M. round lavers, ibid. N. A Law
most cruel, 62. O. Laws made by Moses, 111. B. C. Laws of adultery and
jealousy, 93. F. of the seventh year, 94. L. of the fathers forsaken, 107. E.
of the plough, 113. D. of like for like, 117. B. of violence, 116. M. of war,
118. H. I. against wall-breakers, 422. I. against forsakers of their places,
734. K. of poison, 117. A. Laws of the Jews of great Antiquity, 814. K.
Lawmakers of the Gentiles, 814. I. Laws of the Gentiles, 814. L. Lea, Labans
daughter, 46. L. sustituted in Rackels place, ibid. L. bare to Jacob four sons*
ibid. N. League of Isaac with Abimelech, 44. I. of David with Hiram, 179. E. of
him with Solomon, 207. D. Hirc^^^^ with the Romans, 336. I. K. 346. D. E.
Learning of Daniel, 267. O. of Joseph, 1. E. Lagacies of Herod, 462. K. Legions
of the Romans, 660. K. 711. C. Lending upon usury unlawful, 116. I. Length of
the Ark of Noab, 30. N. Length of the Temple, 208. M. Lenity of Saul, 153. A.
Lenity of Magistrates, 157. D. Lepers driven out of the City, 93. G^ 39. N.
(...). and 250. ^. C. Leprosy of Ozi^s, 250. B. Letters of David, 184. L. of
Senacherib, 256. C. of Artaxerxes for the security of the Jews, 291. L. of
Ptolomy, 390. E. of Eleazar, 301. B. of Demetrius, 336. E. Levi son of Jacob,
46. N. slew the Sichemites, 49. C. his sons, 61. B. Levites wife, 130. H. I.
abused, dies, etc. 130. M. N. Tribe of Levi sacred to God, 93. A. Levites sing
hymns, 235. K. numbered, 200. N. Liberality of the Enchantress, 171. G. of
Herod, 585. B. of Helena, 530. K. of Izates, ibid. Liberty of the Israelites,
73. D. restored, 133. C. Liberty of speech, 231. L. 582. M. Liberty a precious
thing, 514. I. Liberties granted to the Jews, 800. L. M. Library of Ptol.
Philadelphus, 298. D. Lice a plague of Egypt, 69. C. Lie of Posidonius
confuted, 802. O. Lie of Apion concerning our oath, 805. B. C. Life of Moses,
807. B. Life of subjects like to their Princes, 221. C. Light created, 27. E.
called day, ibid. E. Lightnings horrible, when, 78. O. Lightnings on the
enemies, 148. M. Limits of the nine Tribes and halfs possession, 126. K. etc.
Limits of a Kingdom enlarged, 248. G. Line of Achab rooted out, 243. M. Line of
Joseph, 1. B. Linen and woollen garment, 112. H. Logion or rational of the
High Priest, 87. C. Longinus breaks into the Jews army, 726. H. Loss of the
Ark, 144. N. and why, ibid. Loss of Saul's Kingdom foretold, 157. F. and why,
ibid. of the Empire of Asia, 249. K. Loss of the General, dismays the
Soldiers, 233. K. Lot son of Aram, 35. D. had choice of the Land, 36. O. led
away captive, 37. C. rescued, 11. E. receives Angels, 39. A. fled to Zoar, 39.
C. committed incest, ibid. D. Lots wife, 39. C. Lots cast, 124. I. 126. K. etc.
151. E. 155. G. Lots cast to kill one another, 776. L. 673. C. Love of women
blinds, 107. E. and causes to serve strange gods, ibid. E. F. 216. G. 217.
H. Love of Jonathan toward David, 162. I. 164. H. 164. K. of Joseph to his
Country, 731. C. Lovers of Order, etc. 806. O. Lust of Putiphars wife, 53. A.
F. of the Gabeans, 130. L. M. of Caius, 516. L. of the Egyptians, 36. L. Lusty
Jews reserved, 758. N. Lybia of whom called Africa, 42. H. Lycurgus among the
Lacedaemonians, 811. E. Lysius General of Antiochus army, 317. I. invadeth
Judaea, 318. G. is overcome, 318. C. once again invadeth Judaea, ibid.
Lysimachus kills Apollodotus, 353. L. betrayeth Gaza, ibid.
M.
MAch^ras kills many Jews, 387. M. fortifieth Geth, 388. D. his iniquity,
577. D. Madness counterfeited, 165. D. Midianites Embassage to Balaam, 105. E.
their daughters seduce the Hebrews, 107. D. put to flight and slain, 108. L.
subdue the Israelites, 135. C. kill one another, 136. K. Madus and his Progeny,
33. G. Magicians could not expound the dream, 268. E. F. 269. N. Magicians
deceive many, 537. C. work much mischief, 620. N. Magistrates to be obeyed,
110. L. M. to be honored and reverenced, 112. L. M. 626. K. 882. N. their
duty, 234. E. Magog another of the Scythians, 33. G. Magnanimity of Herod, 430.
N. of the Romans, 802. M. Magnificence of Solomon, 215. D. 216. M. of Ezechias,
253. H. I. of Herod, 585. C. of Vespasians triumph, 766. I. Maidens of Israel
sing and dance, 160. N. Malchus King of Arabia, 574. H. repelled Herod, ibid.
A. repented him of that dealing, 575. B. Male children put to death, and why,
62. O. Maledictions of Moses, 118. M. N. Malefactors executed, 540. I. Malice
of Pharaoh, 62. O. of Daeg and Saul, 166. K. L. of the Ziphians, 169. D. of the
Egyptians to the Jews, 792. I. Malichus lays wait for Antipater, 376. F.
poysoneth him, 377. H. slain, ibid. N Mambres Abraham's Friend, 37. F. Man
created, 27. G. called Adam, and why, 28. H. imposed names on the creatures,
28. I. placed in Paradise, 28. I. transgresses, ibid. H. cast out of Paradise,
29. A. author of his own death, 32. K. Manahem foretells Herod's reign, 417. N.
Manahem King of Isreal's acts, 250. D. bought his peace, ibid. E. dies, 250. E.
Manahemus chief of the rebels, 631. A. slain, 631. E. Manasses marries
Senaballats daughter, 293. K. retains his wife, ibid. K. L. enjoys his
desire, 294. F. Manasses Joseph's son, 56. I. King Manasses impiety, 258. B. led
away prisoner, 258. C. repenting, is restored, ibid. C. his acts, 258. D.
dies, ibid. Mandate of Cyrus, 275. K. Manethon an Egyptian Writer, 784. N.
shows the coming and departure of the Jews, etc. 786. K. his fabulous
reports, 792. L. his lies confuted, 793. E. his words repeated, 798. K. Manna,
what, 75. B. food of the Israelites, 75. C. how much to be gathered, ibid. C.
when it ceased, 122. O. Manner of Purification, 103. G. Manners of the
Egyptians, 62. N. of the Esseans, 612. M. 613. C. of the Idumaeans, 690. M. of
the Athenians, 813. D. of the Persians, 813. G. Manoachs wife saw an Angel,
139. F. foretold of a son, and instructed, ibid. F. is seen of both, 140. H. I.
Manslaughter, 109. E. Mara, what, 73. E. March of the Romans, 662. L. M.
Mariam Moses sister, 63. G. watch him, ibid. G. fetched his mother, 64. K. her
death, 103. G. Mardochaeus Esthers Uncle, 286. G. discovered the traitors, 287.
I. K. his lamenting, and why, 288. A. B. honored, 290. D. Marriage, when to be
contracted, 114. M. Marriage with an harlot forbidden, ibid. M. Marriage with a
bondwoman, 115. D. Marriages made, 594. N. broken, 595. C. Mariamne wife of
Herod, 378. C. committed to Joseph, 397. C. accused, excused her self, 398. D.
E. displeased with Herod, 496. E. coldly entertained Herod, 407. I. upbraided
Herod, 586. K. accused, and put to death, 408. M. 586. N. Marphad sacked Syria,
37. B. killed Giants, ibid. B. Marsus Governor of Syria, 522. H. displeased,
ibid. Martial Discipline, 638. L. M. 660. M. N. Masons, how employed, 207. D.
E. Massacre of the Jews, 632. I. etc. 633. C. etc. 634. K. etc. 736. M. N. etc.
Massada, a strong Castle, 771. C. for what occasion builded, 773. A. battered
with the Ram, 773. C. Matter for the building of the Tabernacle, 80. L. M.
Matter committed in trust, 117. C. Matthias refuses to commit Idolatry, 315.
K. ^layeth an Apostate, ibid. rooteth out Idolatry, 313. N. his death, 316. D.
makes war against Antiochus, 558. K. Matthias raises sedition, 460. I.
burned, ibid. L. Matthias cruelly handled, 736. M. Measures found out, and by
whom, 29. F. Medimnus, a certain measure, 97. E. Meeting of the Hebrews thrice
a year, 111. F. Melancholy of Herod, 602. M. Melchisedech King of Solyma, 47.
E. entertaineth Abraham, etc. ibid. praises God, and receives the tenths, 47.
E. Men thronged to death, 618. O. Menelaus High Priest, 313. I. warreth against
Jason, ibid. Mephiboseth obtains the possession of Saul, 182. O. purges
himself of Sibas slanders, 193. E. restored to the half of his possessions,
194. I. Merchandise brought to Solomon, 216. K. Merchants of Arabia buy Joseph,
52. K. sold him to Putiphar, ibid. N. of Tharsis, 235. M. Mercy hurtful in War,
726. N. Mercy of Varus, 609. F. of Titus toward Joseph, 673. E. to his
enemies, 685. E. Meroe a strong City of Aethiopia, 65. F. Messengers sent to
David, 163. C. to Nabal, 168. N. Mesopotamia troublesome to travelers, 42. K.
Mesopotamians submit themselves, 184 i. Method of morality and discipline* 808
i. Methusala, Enoch's son, 30. how long he lived, 31 c. Mice devour the fruit,
etc. 146 m. Michea^ reproves Achab and why, 231 i. how rewarded, ib. i.
foretells Achab's death and Sedechiah's punishment, 232 d e. his allowance,
233 h. Michol daughter of Saul, 162 i. given to David in marriage, ib. i.
conveyeth David away, 163 c. deceives Readiness messengers, 163 0. restored to
David, 175 o. mocked at him, 181* a. Midwives of Egypt, 62 o. Mildness of
David, 168 i. Military Discipline, 638 l m. 660 m n. A Mind furnished with
virtues, 158 l. Ministeries of the Gabeonites, 125 a. Miracles, 681 k l. 220 b.
227 n. 226 d. 226 n. 237 o. Miracle of the Sun's going back, 257 l. Miracle of
Elias, 701 e. Misa King a Moab, 237 l. put to flight, ibid. l. sacrifices his
son, ibid. m. Misdemeanour of the wicked, 30 n. of Samuel's sons, 149 d. of a
soldier, 618 n. 619 h. Misery of the Israelites, 62 m. 63 e. 68 h. 74 o.
fore-prophesied, 222 e. of the Jews foretold, 259 k. of Judea, 476 m. of the
Jews prophesied, 628 n. of the people, 732 m. 739 g. Three Miseries assail
Jerusalem, 698 o. Mithridates King of Parthia, 35^ i. Mithridates King of
Pont^s slain, 363 m. Mithridates warreth with the Egyptians, 370 b. commends
Antipater to Caesar, ibid. b. Moabites put to flight, 134 i. war against
Josaphat, 234 g. kill one another, 235 l. Module of the Temple, 201 m. Module
of the Tabernacle proposed to Moses, 80 m. Moderation of Saul, 151 e. of David,
170 i. Moderation in abundance hardly kept, 248 b. Monarchy of the Assyrians
destroyed, 257 l. Money taken out of David's tomb, 345 n. distributed, 728 i.
Monobazus King of Adiabena, 528 l. Moon made, 27 f. her end and motion, ibid f.
Monument of the Priesthood confirmed, 102 l. Monument of Jonathan, 343 d. of
David, 345 n. of John the high Priest, 723 c. Morning, wha^, 27 e. Moses the
son of Amrem, 63 b. foretold to afflict the Egyptians estate, and advances the
Israelites, 62 n. cast into the flood, 63 g. taken out thereof, ibid. h. called
Moses, 64 k. adopted by Pharaoh's daughter, spurned the Crown, ib. m. conducted
the Egyptians against the Aethiopians, 65 c. his victory, ib. the Jews
lawmakers, 26 n. more ancient than other lawmakers, 791 a. flees to Raguel,
and why, 66 k. marries his daughter, ib. sent to deliver the Israelites, 67 d.
confirmed in his calling, ibid. a b* persuades Pharaoh to dismiss the
Israelites, 68 i. works miracles, ibid. k l m. instituteth the Passover, 70 i
k. conducteth the Israelites, 71 b c. exhorts them, ib. f. prays to God, 72
i. leads them through the red sea, ib. k. praises God, ib. n. sacrificed to
God, in Sinai, ib. o beseeches God to sweeten the waters, 73 g. puts the
people in mind of God's benefits ^4 m. imploreth God's help, ibid. o. strikes
the Rock, brings out water, 75 f. encourages the Israelites, 76 l. lifting
up his hands, etc. 77 a. ascends Sinai* 78 m. how long remains there, 80 h.
fasted, ib. asks counsel of God, etc. 90 o. numbreth the people, 94 o.
sends spies to search the land, 96 i. retires the people into the desert* 99
a. sends forces against the Madianites, 108 m. appoints to Joshuah his
successor, 109 b. exhorts the people to obedience, 110 l. swears them to
keep the law, 119 b. exhorts Josuah, ibid. d. dies, 119 f g. Mother eats
her child, 239 i. 748 o. Mother of the seven brethren, 824 n. 825 b. 826 h i,
etc. Mourning of Ruben for Joseph, 52 l. of the Romans, 637 b. of them in
Jerusalem, 711 a. Mourning for thirty days, 115 e. Mourning for Moses's death,
119 g. for Saul and his sons 174 f. for Abner's, 177 g. for Herod's, 462 n o.
Mountain of Sinai, 66 n. 77 e. Mounts builded, lost, 734 h. Mounts raised near
the Temple, 746 k. Multiplication of Jacob's posterity, 63 d. Multitude of
business, 77 g. of dead carcasses, 740 h. Mundus de^ileth Paulina, 481 d, etc.
banished, ibid. Murmr of the Israelites, 74 i. 96 m. Murder of Simeon and
Levi 49 c. Murder of Azael 176 k. of Abner, 177 e. of Joram's brethren, 241 l.
of infants foretold, 240 g. Murder of Saul punished, 175 e. of Isboseth, 178
l. Music by whom invented, 29 g. Mutability of fortune, 682 h i. Mutiny in
Chore and his accomplices, 99 d e, etc. Mutiny about the golden Eagle 460 h.
Mutiny against Archelaus, 463 f g, etc.
N.
Nahas King of the Ammonites, 152 i. his outrages offered the Israelites, ib.
1. proposed hard conditions of peace, 151 i k grants to the Inhabitants of
Jabes a truce, ib. k. is slain, 152 o. Nabal's flock spared, 168 m. his currish
answer to David's men, ibid. n. died for grief, 169 ^. Nabathaea the country
of Ismael's posterity, 40 l. Nabathaeans spoiled, 3^0 b. Naboth falsely accused,
228 f. stoned to death, ibid* g. Nabuchadonosor King of Babylon, 260 g.
vanquisheth Nechao, ib. 261 h. exacteth tribute and slays Joachim 261 h.
establishes Joachin King, ib. n. besieges and destroys Jerusalem, 264 d.
265 h. dreameth a dream, 268 d. erecteth an Idol. 269 m. conversed with beasts,
ib. o. conquereth the rebels. 78^ e. builded a palace, 788 i. besieges Tire,
ibid. n. his death, 270 a. Nadab, Aaron's son, burned, and why 90 i. Nadab,
Jeroboam's son, 224 h. his impiety and death, ibid. i. Name of Saul famous, 152
o. Naming of the creatures, 28 h. Names of Regions and Nations, 33 f. Naomi her
sorrow, 142 n. returns into her country, 143 n. her counsel to Ruth, 143 b.
Norbanus for the Jews, 432 l. Narration of the Arabian wars, 443 a. Nathan the
Prophet, 18^ b. forbids David to build the Temple, ibid. c. reproved David,
185 ^. Nativity of Jacob and Esau, 43 i. two Nations proceed of them, ibid. ^.
Nation of the Jews mixed with all people, 747 b. Nations whence descended 33 g
etc. Nature forbids a man to kill himself, 672 l. Nature of the Idumaeans, 690
m. Navy of Solomon, 215 b. Naum the Prophet, 250 g. foretells the overthrow
of the Assyrians, ibid. g. Nazarites 103 e. Nechao his exploits, 260 c. is
overcome, ibid. g. 261 h. 262 f. Necessity a sharp weapon, 663 f. Neglect of
God's service cause of all evil, 219 n. Negligence of Readiness guard, 169 f g.
Nehemiah his sadness, and why, 284 e. inciteth the people to build the walls,
285 i. his ardent care in building them, 285 k. his death, ibid n. Nemrod, 33 a
b. son of Chus, 34 m. Nephanes and Sabach, David's Captains, 196 b c. Nephews
of Jacob 61 b. of Herod, 594 m. Nephthalim the son of Jacob, 46 n. his sons, 61
b. Nero proclaimed Emperor, 536 k. his murders, ibid. l. 620 h. amazed at the
acts of the Jews, 657 ^. sends Vespasian to govern Syria, 657 f. Nicanor
labors to surprise Judas, 324 ^. slain, 325 i. Nicanor known to Joseph, 671
m. Nicanor wounded, 723 c. Nicaule Queen of Aethiopia, 215 c. resorteth to
Solomon, ibid. d. wondereth and praises Solomon's wisdom, 215 d e. gives him
presents, ibid. f. Nicholaus's Oration, 424 i. Nicholaus the Historiographer
reproved, 433 c* Nicholaus accuses Syllaeus excuses Herod, 442 n. prosecuteth
the King's accusation, 456 m. excuses Archelaus, 466 k. 607 b. defends Herod
and Archelaus, 459 b. 607 b. Nicon, the Romans great Ram, 725 c. Nigar slain,
etc. ^97 b. Nil^s, 28 k. makes Egypt fertile, 61 f. how far navigable, 694 k.
Nineveh admonished, 249 k. her destruction prophesied, 250 f. effected, 251 h.
Nisan a month with the Hebrews, 70 i. Noah the son of Lamech 30 o. admonishes
the wicked, ibid. l. builds the Ark, n. saved with all his household ibid. o.
sends out a Crow and a Dove, 31 e. the tenth from Adam, 30 o. sacrifices to
God, 31 e. prays to God, 32 i. is heard, ib. k. God's covenant with him, ib.
k. his age, 31 l. his three sons, 32 o. his kind of life, 34 o. was drunken and
derided, 34 o. Nob a City of the Priests burnt. 169 c d* Nobility slain by the
thieves, 686 m. 12000 slain, 695 f. Nobility of the Jews fly to the Romans, 744
n. Nobles repair to David 178 o. Nobles shut up by Herod, 460 n. 602 n.
released, 462 m. 603 b. Nothing attempted by the Romans rashly, 661 d* 682 k.
Number of the children of Israel, 70 l. from twenty to fifty years of age, 89
b. of David's soldiers. 179 a. of workmen, 207 d e. of Jews that returned from
captivity, 275 f l. of high Priests, 540 n. of the captives and slain in
Jerusalem, 759 b c. Nuptial feast* 46 l.
O
Obed-Edom's felicity, 180 n. Obed begat Jesse, 143 e^ Obed a King of Arabia,
354 b. discomfits Alexander, ibid. Obediah hides the Prophets, 227 i.
Obedience of Abraham, 40 o. Obedience to Magistrates, 110 l m. Obedience of the
Roman soldier, 661 a b. Obimes, Jeroboams son, 222 d. falls sick and dies,
ibid. g. Obodas King of Arabia, 435 b. given to idleness, ibid. ^. 438 o.
Obsequies of Herod, 462 n* Observers of God's Laws rewarded, 26 i. Occasion of
the Jews war, 623 a. Occasion of victory, what, 661 f. Occasion of violences,
687 e f. Occurrences of Kingdoms, and Commonweals, 25 f. and 106 m. Occurrences
of Jeremy, 260 d e. Ochozias King of Israel, reproved, and why, 235 n o. his
soldiers consumed, ibid. m. 236 b. his death foretold, 236 c. Ochozias King of
Judah, 241 n. visits Joram, 242 c. slain, ibid. g. Office of Judges, 112 l m.
of an Historiographer, 359 g. of the Priests, 70^ a. Offspring of Noah,
Abraham, etc. look progeny. Og King of Galadine 105 b. is slain with his army,
ib. b. his high stature and great strength, ibid. b. Oil in the pot multiplied,
226 d. 237 o. Scalding Oil thrown on the Romans, 668 m. Olda the Prophetess,
259 l. Old man kills his wife, etc. 387 k. Old and weak Jews slain, 758 n.
One sacred City, one Temple, and one Altar, 111 b. Onias high Priest, 296 b
Onias high Priest, 307 l. paid not his tribute, ibid. Onias high Priest's son,
323 i. wins the favor of Ptolomy, 332 g. builds a Temple in Egypt, 333 h.
777 n. Onias stoned to death, 361 b. Ophni son of Eli, 143 e. his impiety and
wickedness, ib. e. is slain, 144 n. Opinion of the Esseans and Grecians of the
soul, 614 k l. Opinion of the Pharisees and Sadduces, 477 b c. Opinion of the
wisest Greeks, etc. 807 f. Oppression of the Israelites, 133 a o. ibid. m. 135
b. 1, 8 m. 139 f. of the Jews, 631 e f. 622 h, etc. 623 a b. etc. Oracle of God
to Joshuah, 124 h. Oracles of the Prophets to be reverenced, 233 l. Oration of
Abraham, 41 b. of Ruben, 56 m, and 59 o. of Juda, 59 b. etc. of Joseph, 60 i k.
of Moses to the people, 79 b. to the seditious, 100 i, etc. of Zambrias, 110 h.
of Moses before his death, 107 g. of the Gabeonites, 124 n. of Josuah, etc. 127
b. of Phinees, 127 g. of Samuel, 148 i. 151 b. of Saul, 165 f. of Abias, 223 k.
of Herod, 401 b. 402 a, etc. 581 b. 582 l. of Nicholaus, 424 i. 425 k. 456 m.
587 f. of Agrippa, 626 g. of Joseph, 640 i. 672 k, etc. of Titus, 676 m. 684 l.
of Ananus, 687 e, etc. of Jesus, 691 a. of Caesar, etc. 717 b. of Joseph to the
Jews, 728 n. 729 a. of Titus to the Jews, 754 n. etc. of Eleazar* 773 f.
Orchards, 701 f. Order of the Romans, 660 n. Order of the superior bodies, 30
i. Order of the Army, etc. 95 a b. Order of the Carpenters, Masons, etc. 207 d
e. Order of the Cities of Galilee, 638 m n. Order of Titus's Army, 711 d e.
Ordinance of Artaxerxes, 287 n o. 291 l m. Ordinance of the Fathers
transgressed, 107 ^. Oreb slain, 136 l. Original of the Hebrews, 35 b. Original
of the Troglodytes, 42 h. Original of the Israelites mischiefs, 253 n. Original
of the Grecian laws, 807 e. Original of the Jews laws, 815 b. Ornaments of the
high Priest, 87 a b c, etc. Ornaments of Solomon's Palace. 213 c. Oronna or
Orphana a Jebusite spared, 179 g. gives David his floor, 198 i k. Oseas King
of Israel, overcome, 252 o. made tributary, ibid. c. taken prisoner, 253 m. his
subjects transported, and why, ibid. n o. Oath how in time past taken, 42 k.
Oath taken to observe the law, 119 b. 259 m. Oath how and when to be kept, 132
i. Oath of Jonathan to David, 164 k l. Oath of S^nacharib falsified, 255 m.
Oath observed, 452 m. Otho Emperor, 705 f. slain, ibid. Overthrow of the
Sodomites, 33 a b. of the Amorites, 104 m. of the Hebrews, 98 n. and 173 f. of
Antony, 403 m. Outrages of Elies sons, 143 f. of Naas offered the Israelites,
152 h. of Azael, 245 m. 246 f g. of Florus Soldiers, 623 c. Outward Court of
the Temple, etc. 721 d. Oxen seven, what do signify, 55 e. how many taken at
once, 109 a. not to be muzled, 113 f. Ox that strikes, 117 b Oza suddenly
stricken dead, 180 n. and why, ibid. Ozias King of Juda's warlike exploits, 249
l m. acts and studies, ib. n o. stricken with a leprosy, and why, 250 b.
enjoined to depart the City, ib. and 250 b. his death and burial, 250 c.
P.
Pacorus sends horsemen to Antigonus, 380 f. 572 i. his persuasion to
Phaselus, 381 i. his treason and subtilty, ib. k l. 572 m. Pageants built, 766
l. Painters cause multitude of gods, 813 ^. Palestine whence took his name, 34
m. Philistines overcome the Israelites, 139 f. 144 m. invade the Israelites,
144 i. are overcome, 155 c d. 160 m. 180 i k. Palace in Tiberias burned, 943 a.
Palace built in Jerusalem, 414 b. Palace of Solomon, 212 g. Palace of the King,
719 d. burned, ibid. e. Palm Trees, 701 d f. Pamphilian Sea divided it self, 72
n. Pappus beheaded, 389 k. 5780. Paradise 28 i. where situate, ibid. k. adorned
with all sorts of plants, ibid. l. Parents compelled to murder their children,
63 a. Paricide a public injury, 457 d. Paricides, 256 f. Parthians restore
Antigonus, 380 f. 373 f. compl^t treachery against Phasaelus, 381 k l. surprise
him and Hircanus, ibid. n. lay a plot for Herod, 382 a. lose Armenia, 483 d.
Parts of the Temple* 209 i. Pascha or Passover of the Hebrews, 70 i k.
celebrated, 253 h. 269 a. 281 k. Passage of the Isralites over Jordan, 122 l m.
Passages stopped up from the Hebrews, 71 d. Patience of Joseph, 54 k. Pauli^^
deceived and defiled, 481 c d. Peace bought 245 n. 250 e. Peace of the
Israelites, 206 i. of the Jews, 231 n. Peace better than War, 691 d. A Penalty
most cruel, 61o, etc. Penalty of a woman married for a Virgin, etc. 114 m.
Penalty published, 15^ d. what it wrought, ibid. Pensioner to Saul, David, 159
b. Penitent obtain mercy, 731 a. Penury of water, 582 ^. see want. People of
Israel afflicted, 62 m. 63 a b. 67 a. 68 i k. departed out of Egypt* 71 b.
exhorted to put their trust in God, ibid. f g. and to obey the will of God 110
i k. etc. drive away the Cattle of the Amalechites, 157 b. require mitigation
of their burden, 218 d. revolt from Roboam, 219 i. are transported, and why,
253 n. fly with their money, 731 c. People enjoined by oath to serve God, 245
k. 259 m. People of Judah bless God, 235 k l. and why, ibid. l. Peoples love to
Joseph, 18 h. People permit not Pilate to alter their laws 615 d. People
exclaim against Florus, 624 h. die for want, etc. 727 ^. Perfection of mind
respected, 158 l. Perjury of Florus, 622 k. Peroration of Herod, 581 e. of
Joseph, 672 o. Perplexity of the Israelites, 71 d. Persuasion of Jeroboam to
Idolatry, 219 m. Persuasion of false Prophets dangerous, 233 l m. Persuasion of
Rapsaces, 255 o. Pestilence one of the Plagues of Egypt, 69 e. Pestilence
destroys Senacherib's Army, 256 f. Pestilence a great affliction, 253 k.
Petra a City of Arabia, 573 d Petronius's charge for placing Caius's statue,
494 l. etc. executes it not and why, 494 m n. certifieth the Jews of Caesar's
threats, 616 n. writes to Caius, 496 i. receives Letters of Caius's death,
497 ^. 617 d. his Letter to the Dor^res, 521 c. Phaceias King of Israel 250 ^.
his impiety and wickedness, ibid. e. slew 120000 Jews, 251 l. took Achaz's son
Prisoner, ib. m. was slain, 252 c. Pharao enamoured of Sara, 36 l. plag^ed. ib.
m. Pharao his dreams, 55 b c. delivers Joseph from bonds, ib. c. advances
him to great honor, 55 g. rejoices at the arrival of Joseph's brethren, 60 m.
enquireth Jacob's age, 61 e. restored the profits of his subject's lands, 62 h.
Pharao kills the male children, 62 o. would have killed Moses, 64 n. and 66
k. his death, 67 f. Pharao counseled to dismiss the Hebrews, 68 i. not moved
with miracles, lays heavier tasks on them, ib. l. advised once more, ibid. ^.
drives away Moses, 70 h. dismisseth the Israelites, ib. k. his host drowned,
72 k. Pharisees a sect, 339 m. 477 a. greedy of revenge, 357 i. exempt from
swearing, 417 l. would not swear obedience, 451 c. 463 d. their opinion, 614 n.
Pharos a tower, 708 m. Phasaelus his government, 372 c. vanquisheth Foelix, 377
o. 571 b. made Tetrarch, 380 c. 571 e. taken prisoner, 371 n. dasheth out his
brains, 383 i. Phasaelus Tower and City, 530 n. 584 n. Pheroras made Tetrarch,
416 g. accuses Alexander and Aristobulus, 426 l. refuses the Kings daughter,
433 g. blamed for Alexanders offense, 438 l. pardoned, ibid. deceived, 450 m.
refuses to put away his wife, 451 f. banished, 596 m. falls sick and dies,
452 m. 596 n. his wise accused, 452 o. she confesses the poison* 453 f. Philip
rebelleth against Antiochus, 322 f. is slain, 323 k. Philip King of Syria, 355
i. besieges Demetrius, 355 h. Philip Herod's son, 471 d. has part of the
Kingdom, 471 d. repaireth Cities, 478 ^. Philo Judaeus's defense, etc. 494 i.
Philistines overcame the Israelites, 139 f. exacted tribute of them, 139 f. put
to flight, 1^8 m. invade the Israel^ites, 154 k. are overcome, 155 b c. and 160
m. discomfit Saul's army, 173 f. overcome by David, 180 i. k. by Ozias, 249 l.
by Ezechias, 253 k. Phineas the son of Eleazar, 108 k. slays Zambrias and
Chosbi ib. l. overthrew the Madianites* 108 l m. his Oration to the two tribes
and half, 127 g. succeeded Eleazar, 128 o. foretold the Israelites their
victory, etc. 131 d. Phineas Elies son, 143 e his wickedness and impiety, ib.
e. is slain, 144 n. his wife then bare Ichabod, 145 c. Phison a flood of
Paradise, 28 k. called also Ganges, ib. k. Phora, 28 k. Phraates King of
Parthia slain, 478 o. Phul King of the Syrians, 250 d. for money made a peace,
ibid. d. Piety profitable, 224 n o. Piety of Ancestors remembered, 63 b. Piety
contemned, cause of calamities, 132 n. 133 d. 144 k, etc. 168 i. 252 c d. Piety
of Asa, 224 i. of Josaphat, 231 m. of Jotham, 250 f. of Ezechias, 252 d. of
Josias, 258 (...). and 259 h i. etc. of Matthias, etc. 315 i. Pigeons dung
sold, 23^ g. Pilate succeeds Gratus 480 i. brings Caesar's statues to
Jerusalem, 480 i. not admitted, 480 k. crucifieth Christ, 480 m. puts
Samaritans to flight, 482 l. accused, ib. sends the statues from Jerusalem,
480 k. beats the seditious, 615 f. Pillage taken, 255 l. Pillars raised, 30
k. A Pillar called Galaad, 48 i. Pitcher of water, 169 g. Pit to be senced, 117
c. Pit of swearing, 40 h. Pits bituminous 37 b. Pity of Joseph toward his
brethren, 60 i. Placidus repulsed at Jotapata, 692 i. his victory, 682 o.
burns Bethenabris, ^00 i. Placing of the vessels, etc. in the Temple, 250 b
c. and 21^ d. 211 h l. Plagues of Egypt, 68 o. 69 a b c d e f g. 70 k. Plague
in David's time, 19^ f. Plague invadeth Judea, 409 k. 412 g. Plat-forms
erected, 669 a. Plants sprang at first out of the earth, 27 f. Plants not of
four years growth, 113 c. Plato admired, 811 d. permits not Poets, etc. 813
b. Pledge to be restored to the poor, 116 k. Plenty fore-signified, 55 e f.
Plotting of Antipater, 433 e. The Plough found out, and by whom 29 b. Poem of
Homer 781 b. Poets cause multitudes of gods, 813 a. Poison tried, etc. 458 k l.
601 b. Policy of Rebecca, etc. for her son, 44 l. of Jacob to pacify his
brother, 48 m. of the Gabeonites, 124 m. of Joseph, 9 e. ^0 k. 1^ e. of
Jonathan, 16 m. of Joseph, 642 h. 665 c. 668 h. 10 l m. Politianus meets with
Agrippa, etc. 625 c. inciteth the people to peace, ib. e. Pompey Governor of
Syria, 362 d. marches against Aristobulus, 363 l. 36^ h. besieges Jerusalem,
36^ l. commits Aristobulus to prison, ib. 565 g. takes the Temple, 365 k.
bestows the Priesthood on Hircanus, ib. 366 o. spoileth not the Temple, ib.
d. 566 m. carries Aristobulus to Rome, 567 a. beheadeth conspirators* 56^ n o.
Popedius accused, 5^5 f. Popularity of Alcimus, 324 b c. Porch of the Temple,
208 m. ^ired, 747 a. Port of Caesarea, 415 i. Port made by Herod, 584 i k.
Portion of Salpades daughters, 109 f. Portion of Judea 659 f. Possession of
Canaan prophec^ed of, 62 i. Posterity of Ismael, 40 l. Posterity of Giants
extinguished, 37 b. Posterity of Jethro possessed of Land, 129 d. Posterity of
Noah replenished the world, 32 o. Posterity of Esau 50 l. of Jacob, 61 b.
Poison not to be used, 1^7 a. Power given to save, 59 f. Power of God every
where, 230 f. Power of Kings, Wine and Women, 277 i k l. Power of the soul, ^74
l. Power of David and Solomon, 805 f. Practice of Simeon and Levi, 49 c. Prey
that the Israelites got in war, 77 b c. 109 a. 123 ^. 124 l. Prayer of Noah, 32
^. of Amram, 63 b. of Moses* 72 i. 101 d, etc. of Joshuah, 123 f. of Samson,
142 k of Solomon, 211 k. of Samuel and the Israelites, 148 k l. Praise of
Abraham, 43 d. of Jacob, 62 i. of Joseph, 62 k. of Joshua, 77 c. and 128 n of
Moses, 120 k. of Samuel, 16^ l. of Saul, 172 k. of David, 202 e. of Solomon,
218 c. of Josaphat, 235 m. of Nehemias, 285 k. of Ananus, 694 n. of Eleazar,
819 d. Praise given to God, 70 k l. Prediction of things to come, ^18 m.
Preparations for war burned, 322 b. Presents of Abraham, 42 k. of Jacob, 57 e.
of the Egyptians, 70 k. of Abigail, 169 b. of the Mesopotamians, 184 i. of the
Queen of Aethiopia, and of Kings, 215 f. 216 l. of Ptolomy to the Interpreters,
392 o. of Herod, 591 d. Preservation of Moses, 63 g. 64 n. of Daniel and his
companions, 269 n. Preservation from bloodshed, 169 b. Presidents in every
City, 112 k. and what manner of men they ought to be, ibid. k. Pride of
Amasias, 248 a. of Ozias, 249 o. of Senacherib, 255 n. of Nebuchodonosor, 269
n. of Balthazar, 271 h. of John, 698 m. Priest's vestures, 86 m. Priests
registered, 782 m. Priests abstain from wine, 721 f. 790 o. Priests executed,
and why, 754 m, High Priests number and succession, 540 n. Priesthood confirmed
to Aaron and his sons, 102 k. Priesthood to be transported, fore-shewed, 144 k.
Princes of Syria, 280 a. Principality affected by Adonias, 199 d. by
Costabarus, 409 o. 698 m. 705 d. 711 f. Priscus slays Jonathan, 747 c.
Prisoners dismissed, 251 n. Privileges granted to the Jews, 305 b. 373 o, etc.
374 b c d. 375 h i k. Problems of Hiram, etc. 786 m. Prodigies preceding
Jerusalem's destruction 753 a b c. Professors of wisdom burn themselves, 774 n.
Prog^ny of Japheth 33 g. of Canaan, 34 n. of the Sons of Sem, 35 a. of Cham's
sons, 34 k. of Jacob, 61 b. of Aaron, (...) n. of Herod, 485 d. 480 h i.
Prohibition of arms and iron-work, 154 i. Profit how great redounded to King
Pharaoh, 61 f. Promise of God's assistance, 110 k l. Promotion of Joseph, 55 g.
Prophecy of Jacob touching his posterity, 62 i k. of the sacred Secretary, 62
n. of Balaam, 106 k. of Samuel, 144 l 157 f. of Achias, 217 k. 218 o. of Jadon,
220 a. of Olda 259 k. Prophecy of the Captivity and delivery, 263 h i. Prophet
Moses a good Governor, 1^0 k. Prophet Nathan, 181 c. 185 c. Achias, 217 k.
Jadon, 217 o. Samaeus, 221 f. Azarias, 224 m. Elias, 227 h. Gimon, 224 m.
Elizaeus, 236 g. Esaias, 256 b. Jeremy, 260 e. Ezechiel, 261 n. Jonas, 248 g.
Naum, 250 g. Aggaeus and Zacharias, 280 d. Micheas, 232 d. False Prophet
discrediteth the true, 220 f. 232 ^. False Prophet deceives the people, 537 d.
Prosperity of Joseph, 55 d. of Solomon, 215 d e f g, etc. of Jeroboam 249 l.
Prosperity makes proud, 247 a. 249 o. Prospect stopped up, 538 n. Providence of
God in saving Moses, 63 f g. 64 n. of the Israelites, 119 e. Provision of
victuals, 179 c. 576 h i. Provision for the Priests 285 m. Provision of things
necessary for war, 660 m n. Proves against Antipater, 457 b c. 601 b c.
Prudence of Joseph 55 c. 56 i. of Solomon, 206 k. of Josephus, 665 a b.
Ptolemais described, 616 l. besieged, 351 b, taken, 352 d. Ptolomy Lagus
obtains Egypt, 297 m. seizes Jerusalem by a stratagem, ibid. 298 n. led the
Jews away captive, ib. n o. Ptolomy Philadelphus caused the Jews to be
translated, etc. 297 n. his library, 298 d. his Proclamation, 299 k. his
liberality, 300 c. his Epistle to Eleazar, etc. 300 e. his gifts given to the
Temple, 301 d e. 302 i, etc. 303 h. etc. his banque^, 303 n. Ptolomy Euergetes
King of Egypt, 307 l. incensed against Onias, ibid. Ptolomy Philopater warreth
against Antiochus, 305 e. his death, ibid. f. Ptolomy Epiphanes King of Egypt,
312 g. his children, ib. Ptolomy Philometor circumvented, 313 h. succoureth
Alexander, 335 i. his death complotted, ib. k. refuses the Diadem of Asia, ib.
n. his fight and death, 336 b. Ptolomy slays Simon, 344 b. imprisoneth
Hircanus's mother and brethren, ib. his cruelty against them, 344 d. murthereth
them, 344 e. Ptolomy Physcon, 347 h. the Syrians request to him ib. Ptolomy
Lathyrus, 347 n. aideth Antiochus, ib. comes to aid ^he Ptolemaidans, 351 c.
besieges Ptolemais, and why, 351 f. overthrows Alexander, 352 c. driven out
of Egypt, 352 f. Ptolomy Mennaeus fined, 362 f. adopteth Antigonus, 378 b.
Ptolomy's wife robbed, 538 k. is slain, 577 b. Punishment of Adam and Eve, 28
n. of the Serpent, ib. m. of Sodom 39 b c. a false witness, 112 n. of Homicide
committed, ibid. n. of Saul, 157 e. of Jadon, 220 e. of Senacherib, 256 f. of
Nebuchadnezzar, 260 g, Punishment for honoring false Gods, 217 i. 251 k l.
Punishment of Aristobulus, 350 i. Punishment of ravishers of Virgins, 810 i.
Purgations of women, 48 i. Of Purifications the manner, 123 g. 124 h.
Purification used in the sacrifices, 809 f. Purification of the body, 810 i.
Pursuit of Laban after Jacob, 47 c. of the Egyptians after the Hebrews, 71 b.
Potephar an Egyptian Lord bought Joseph, 52 n o. Public Records burnt, 763 b.
Q
Quadratus Governor of Syria, 619 e. decideth the Jews and Samaritans debate,
ib. f. Quails fell amidst the Hebrews camp, 75 b. 95 g. Qualities of the
Egyptians described, 62 m. Quantity of gold, 216 i. Queen's house or palace,
213 c. Queen of Aethiopia, look Nicaule. Queen Vasti refuses to come to the
banquet, 286 d. deposed, ibid. d e. Hard Questions dissolved, 213 f g.
Questions of Artaxerxes, 277 i k l. Quintilius Varus Governor of Syria, 445 b.
pacifieth the seditious, 467 b. delivers the legion, 469 f. assisteth the
Romans, 609 b. takes Cities and Castles, ibid. c. crucifieth the seditious,
609 ^.
R.
Rachel daughter of Laban, 45 f. brings Jacob to her Father, 46 h. steals
away her Father's gods, 47 b. how she hid them, 47 b. taught by Jacob to
contemn them, ib. dies in childbed, 49 d. Race of the Chanaanites to be rooted
out, 126 n. Race of Giants remained, 129 d. Race of Achimelech murdered, 166
k. Rage of Antiochus, 817 d. Raguel a Priest of Madian, 66 l. Father in law to
Moses, ib. m. comes to Moses in Sinai, 77 f. Rahab hid the spies, 122 h.
requires of them an oath, and why, ibid. i. her and all hers saved, 123 c.
Reign of David, 202 ^ f. of Solomon, 216 c. of Josaphat, 237 m. of Herod, 462
k. of Tiberius, 615 g* of Caius, 617 ^. of Agrippa, 618 l. of Claudius, 619 g.
Railing of Goliath 159 d e. Rainbow a sign of atonement, 32 l. Rain fore
prophesied, 227 h. Raising of a dead man, 247 i. A Ram offered in Isaac's
stead, 41 e f. Ram, an Engine* 660 k. described, ib. shakes the tower, 714 l.
Rampires builded by the Romans, 733 e. Rapines committed by day, 686 l.
Rapsaces Chieftain of the Assyrian Army, 255 n. persuades Ezechias to submit,
ib. o. Rasis warreth against Achas, 251 k. seizes Elath, ib. k. slain, 252 a.
Rational, 87 d. Ravishment of Dinah revenged, 49 b. punished, ib. c. Raiment of
Joseph, 53 f. a proof against him, 54 i. Raiment taken in war, 127 a. Reading
of the law, 284. Reason described, 815 d. has dominion over passions, ibid. d.
Rebecca daughter of Bathuel, 35 e. sister to Laban, ib. ^. shows courtesy to
Abraham's servant, 42 n. 43 ^. procures his entertainment, ib. b. married to
Isaac, 43 c. brought forth two twins, ib. e. her devise for her son, 44 l.
Rebellion of Chore, 101 c. of Siba, 194 l m of the Antiochians, 337 l m. of the
Jews against the Romans, 629 b* Rebellion of Scythians and Sarmates, 764 m.
Rebellio^s punished, 102 l. Rebels kill an Ambassador, 635 g. Rebels
conquered, 429 g. Reconciliation of Absalom, 188 i. of Herod and his sons, 587
d. of Pheroras with Herod, 438 i. Records of the Greeks for the Jews antiquity,
784 m. 785 a, etc. Reformation of God's Service, 253 i k. Religion contemned,
cause of calamity, 132 n. 133 d. 144 k. see piety contemned. Religion renewed,
224 n. Religion of the Esseans, 613 a. Relics of Jupiter taken away, 33 d.
Remisness in punishing, cause of sin, 157 d. Renown of Solomon's virtues, 213 e
f g. Repairing of the Temple, 245 n. 259 h. Repairing of the City Jerusalem,
249 m. Repentance of the people, 97 b. of Achab, 229 k. of David, 185 c. of
Joachas, 246 ^. of Manasses, 258 c. Report of Joseph's death, 675 a. Report of
the behavior of Samuel's sons, 149 d. Repose, 27 g. Request of Jonathan, 337
k. of the Jews, 610 l m. of the Romans to Caesar, 717 c. Requital of courtesy,
42 m. 66 m. required, 122 i. performed, 123 c. Resolution of Joseph's brethren,
51 e. Restitution of things borrowed, 116 i. Restoring ^ God's service, 245 i
k. 258 d. Returns of Jacob's sons, 57 c. of the Spies, 96 k. 122 k. of
Vespasian, 761 c. Revenues of Priests, 103 c. of Mephibosheth's lands, 183 b
Revenues of Agrippa, 524 l. of A^chelaus, 610 n. of Pheroras, 589 d. Reverence
of the Sabbath, 614 h. Reverence of the Roman soldier, 661 b c. Revolt from
the laws of the Fathers, 107 e. Revolt of the ten Tribes, 219 i. Revolt of the
Germans, 764 i. Reward of learned Preachers, 231 l. 263 m. Reward of valiant
men, 741 g. Reward of such as keep the Law, 811 b. Rewards oppress Justice, 149
b. Riches of the Madianites, 109 a b. of the Ainites, 124 l. of David, 202 f.
of Solomon, 215 c d e. of Ozias 249 n. Riddle of Samson propounded to the
Thamnites, 140 m. dissolved ibid. n. Ripping of women's wombs foretold, 240 g.
River of Arnon, 104 k. River Sabbaticus, 765 b. Robbers punished, 372 c. 416 b.
Robberies in Trachona, 416 a. winked at, 621 d. Roboam entreated to ease the
people's burden, 218 d. denied their petition, ib. f. abandoned of ten Tribes,
219 i. forbidden to make war, ib. i. builded strong Cities 221 b. his wives and
children ibid. b. impiety, ibid. makes brazen shields* 222 c. dies, ibid.
Rock yields forth water. 75 f. Road of the Philistines, 167 a. Rod of Moses
turned into a serpent, 68 k. devoureth the Egyptians rods, 68 l. Rod of Aaron
fructifieth, 103 a. The Romans government how far it extended 661 b. Romans
overcome the Jews, 568 i k. sack Jericho, 576 i. get a great prey, ib. k.
skirmish with the Jews, 618 i. fire the porches, ib. i. have subdued the
Athenians, etc. 626 n. yea the whole world, ib. m. and 627 a, etc. flee into
the King's forts, 631 b. are slain, ibid. e. burn Joppa, etc. 634 n. burn the
Temple gates, 636 k. overcome the Jews, 658 e. retire without their purpose,
668 o. enter Jotapata, 670 e f. moved with no compassion, 670 g. their warlike
discipline, 661 b. attempt nothing rashly, 661 d. drive the Jews to their
ships, 676 k. assault Gamala, 680 l. 683 b c. many slain, ib. f. win Gamala,
ib. f. fight with the Jews, 713 c. their fear and trouble, ib. f. overcome the
seditious, 725 b. get the first wall, 725 o. driven out by the Jews, ^23 b.
hindered by the Jews* 728 l. plant their courts of guard, 735 d. fear the
desperateness of the Jews, 740 k. undermine the wall 741 a. invade Antonia, 742
m. set Jerusalem on fire, 755 f. enter Jerusalem, 758 k. finds treasure in the
vaults, 759 e. ruinate City and Temple, 760 k. Dining Room fell down, 578 k.
Ruben the son of Jacob, 46 n. why so called, ib. his sons, 61 b. his
disswasion, 51 e. and his persuasion, 52 k. intended to save Joseph, 52 l.
pleads before Joseph, 56 m. Rue of admirable greatness, 767 g. Ruin of the
Israelites sought, 62 n o. Ruin of the Amalechites foretold, 77 d. Rulers of
Jerusalem, 637 f. Rumor of Herod's death, 397 f. Rumor of the Emperor, 492
^. 511 g. Ruth her love to Naomi, 142 m. married to Booz, 143 d.
S.
Saba chief City of Aethiopia, 65 f. called Mero^, and why, ibid. f. Sabach and
Naphanus, David's Captains, 196 b c. Sabbath, 27 g. called a day of rest, and
why, ibid. o. Sabinus repaireth to Jerusalem, 465 b. and why, ib. 606 i. 607 e
f. Sabinus pursues those that slew Caius, 511 h. allows not of Claudius, 518
l. kills himself, 519 b. Sabinus took the Capitol, 710 e. slain, ibid. k.
Sabinus valiant, 742 h. slain, ibid. l. Sacks of chaff, 666 m. Sacred
sanctuary, 720 n. Sacrifice acceptable to God, 157 e. Sacrifice of Cain and
Abel, 29 c. Sacrifice of Noah, 31 e. of Jacob, 49 d. Sacrifices of the Princes
of the Tribes, 90 m. Sacrifice of thanksgiving, 91 c. Sacrifice for sin, 91 d.
Sacrifice of Pentecost, 92 m. Sacrifice of Solomon at the dedication of the
Temple, 212 d Sacrifice of Samuel, 148 l. Sacrifice of Ezechias, 253 h i.
Sacrifice of Herod, 581 g. Sacrifice of the old Testament, 89 g. 809 e.
Sacrifice consumed of it self, 89 f. Sacrilege of Achar, 123 e. punished with
death, 124 i. of Crassus, 368 c. 568 m. of John, 738 k. Sadoc sent to David,
190 l. being pursued* is hidden, 190 m* Sadoc established high Priest, 204 l.
ibid. m. Sadduces, a sect, 339 m. 476 m. their opinion, 477 c d. Safety of
David respected, 162 k. Sale of the Jews, 679 m. Salmanasar King of Assyria,
2520. overcomes Oseas, and why, ibid d. takes Oseas prisoner and transporteth
the Israelites, 253 m. spoiled Syria and Phoenicia, 253 o. Salome accuses
Mariamne, 497 k. accuses Alexander, etc, 426 l. enticeth her daughter, etc 434
k. denied to Syllaeus in marriage, 435 c d. excuses her self. 434 o. marries
Alexis, 449 b. discovers conspiracies, 450 o. releaseth the Nobles, 450 m.
603 b. Princes of Jamnia, 618 o. dies, 454 l. Solomon's Coronation, 202 a.
King of Israel, 203 d. requires wisdom of God 205 b. marries a wife, 204 n.
decideth the two women's debate, 205 a b. builds the Temple, 207 f. prays to
God, 211 k m. exhorts the people to praise God, 212 c. builds a Palace, ib.
g. dissolveth hard questions, 213 f. repaireth the walls of Jerusalem, 214 k
builds Cities, ibid. k. makes the Chanaanites tributary, 215 b. builds a
Navy, ib. b. remunerateth Nicaule the Queen, ibid. f. marries strange wives,
216 o. commits idolatry ibid o. his punishment denounced, 217 i. had enemies
raised against him, ibid. k. dies, 218 b. Saltis subdued the Egyptians, 785 a.
Samaria besieged, 238 g. of whom so called, 225 n. taken, 347 m. described* 659
d. Samaritans hinder the building of the Temple, 275 n o. 279 o. their offer
rejected, ib. n. Jews enemies, 281 l. kinsmen to the Jews when, 295 n. disdain
the Jews, 3^4 d. send letters to Antiochus, ib. e. contend with the Jews 333 i
k. accuse the Jews, 534 n. their strife with the Jews, 619 e. 11000 slain, 670
c. Samaeus reproves the Jews impiety, 221 f. comfort the people, ibid.
Samaeus his admonition* 373 h. honored, ibid. i. Samson kills a Lion, 140 l.
marries a wife, ib. m. propounds a riddle, ib. m. his acts against the
Philistines, 141 d e f. prays, and why, 141 d. betrayed by Dalila, 142 h. the
slaughter of the Philistines, and of himself, ibid. k. Samuel his parents, 144
i. consecrated to God, ibid. i God called him thrice, ibid. k. fore-shewed the
death of Eli, and his sons, 144 l. offers sacrifice, 148 l. comfort the
people, ibid. his victory and recovery of lands, 148 n. commits the Common
weal to his sons, 149 b. troubled and why, 149 e. bidden to create a King, ib.
f. shows the people's estate under a King* ibid. anointeth Saul King, 150 o.
justifies himself, and why, 153 b. striveth to reconcile Saul to God, 157 c.
kills Agag, 158 i. tells Saul of God's displeasure. 157 f. anointeth David
King, 158 n. his death, burial and praise, 168 l. Sanballat Governor of the
Samaritans, 293 k. follows Alexander, 294 b. builds a Temple, ibid. f.
Sanctuary, 93 b. 209 h. 211 i. Sanctuaries or places of refuge for whom, 109 ^.
Sand like glass, 616 m. Sara daughter of Aram, 35 o. Abraham's wife, ibid. d.
her beauty, 36 l. King of Egypt enamoured on her, ibid b. brings Agar to
Abraham, 38 i her age when she conceived Isaac, 38 o preserved from Abimelech,
and how, 39 e. brought forth Isaac. ib. caused Ismael to be expelled, etc. 40 k
l. affects Isaac, ib. m. her death. 41 f. Saraeus high Priest took Prisoner,
265 l. Saturninus President of Syria, 438 o. 4^9 a. permits Herod to enter
Arabia, ib. b. his indifferent sentence. 444 m* Saul seeks the lost Asses,
150 k anointed King by God's commandment, ib. o. confirmed therein, 15 b.
hides himself, ibid. f. saluted by the people for their King. ib. f. promises
the Jabesites assistance, 152 l. kills King Naas, ib. n. sacrifices, and is
reproved, 154 l. overcomes the Philistines, 155 e. would have slain Jonathan
156 h. always a conqueror, ib. k. takes and spares Agag 157 b. slays the
Amalekites, and razeth their Cities, 156 o. offends God, 157 b. loses his
Kingdom. and why, ib. f. denied pardon, renteth Samuel's garment, ib. g. slew
the Philistines 160 m. resolves to kill David, 162 i. darteth his Javelin at
David. 163 b. prophesies, 163 f. questioneth about David's absence, etc. 164
n. makes an Oration to his Captains, 165 f. pursues David, 167 e. condemns
himself, and justifies David, 168 k. pursues David again, and his life saved,
169 f. banisheth diviners, 171 a. by a sorceress is foretold the event of the
battle, ib. c d. praised, 172 k. is slain, 173 f g. Scarcity fore-signified, 55
e. how to be prevented, 55 f. among the Israelites, 95 e. very great in
Claudius his time, 97 d e. in Samaria, 238 g h. Scarcity of corn, 413 i k.
Scaurus makes peace with Aristobulus, 362 b. Presiden^ of Coelosyria, 363 n.
his war against Aretas, 364 h. 5^5 a. bribed, ibid. Science of the celestial
bodies, 30 k. Schisar King of the Assyrians, 133 b. oppressed the Israelites,
ibid. b. Scopas General of Ptolomy's Army, 306 a. discomfited, ib. overcomes
the Jews 306 a b. Scythopolitans kill 3000 Jews, 634 l. Sea of Pamphilia
divided it self, 72 n. Red Sea divided at the stroke of Moses's rod, 72 k.
returning to his course, drowneth the Egyptians, ibid. l. Brazen Sea, 209 l.
Sebas, 196 e. Sebaste a haven, 455 a. Secretary or Priest fore-telleth Moses's
greatness, 62 n. wills him to be killed. 64 n. Security promised to Rahab and
hers, 122 i. Sects of the Jews, 339 m. 477 a. 612 l. Secrets of Syllaeus
disclosed, 599 d. Sedechias a false Prophet, 231 e. contradicts Micheas, ib.
e f. Sedechias King of Juda, 262 d. revolteth ib. seduced, ib. 263 h etc.
neglects the Prophet's counsel, ib. o. surprised, 264 f* his eyes put out,
265 h. his death, ib. n. Sedition against Moses, 95 e. 99 b. and 100 i. of
Chore for the Priesthood, 99 d. Sedition against Roboam, 219 h. of the
Samaritans against the Jews, 298 b. among the people, 312 k. of the Jews, 494
h. betwixt Senate and people, 516 h. Sedition at the Passover, 464 l. between
the Jews and Samaritans, 534 l. for the golden Eagle, 605 d. in Jerusalem, 607
e. 621 d. between Greeks and Jews, 634 h. threefold sedition, 711 f. took the
City, 723 b. Seditious more impious than the Sodomites, 724 h. Seditious, 620 k
l. beaten, 615 f. bribe Albinus, 621 d. fly to the Temple and why, 624 n. gave
not ear to those in authority, 629 f put the Romans to flight, 675 e. agree
among themselves, 712 o. 724 i. challenge the sodden child, 749 a. summon Titus
to parley, 754 m. take away the King's Treasure, 756 i. their utmost hope, 756
m. kept in Acra, and in Vaults, 757 f. Seed of the Woman, 28 n. shall bruise
the Serpent's head, ib Seeds at first grew out of the earth, 27 f. Seeds not to
be mixed together, 113 d. Sehon King of the Amorites denies passage to the
Hebrews, 104 m. overthrown by them, ib. o. is slain, ib. Seir what it
signifies, 43 e. Seir Esau's dwelling place. 49 a. Seleucus Nicanor privilegeth
the Jews, 305 b. Seleucus So^er reigns in Asia, 31^ f. Sem Noah's third son,
32 o. covers his father's shame, 35 a. his progeny, ib. b, Semochonitis a
lake, 680 m. Semiramis built not Babylon, 788 k. Senaar a plain, 32 o.
Senabarus one of the five Kings of Assyria, 37 a. Senacherib surpriseth the
Cities of Judah, 255 l besieges Jerusalem, ib. m. his Army stricken with the
Pestilence, 256 f. himself slain, ib Senate persuades Claudius to resign, 516
i. Senate's decree, etc. 378 f. Senate's answer to Agrippa, 617 f. their repair
to Claudius.ddd 618 i. Senselesness of Achaz. 252 b. Sentence against Herod's
sons, 593 e. Sephora Moses's wife, 66 n. Sephoris walled, 478 i. spoiled, 22 h.
entertaineth the Romans, 635 b. Sep^lchre of David, 202 o. of Memnon, 618 l.
Serpents tempting of Eve, 28 l. his subtilty, ib. l. his punishment, ib. o.
enemy to man, ib. o. wherein his strength lies, and how easily killed, 29 a.
Serpents very hurtful destroyed, 65 d e. Servant of Elizeus, 238 c. Servants of
Solomon happy, and why, 215 e. Servant of Abraham takes his oath, 42 k. his
prayer, and care in discharge of his message, ib. k. and 43 a b. Service of God
neglected, 252 b. Service of foreign gods, 216 o. 248 b. 252 b. Service of
Antipater, 574 m. Services of the Gabeonites, 125 a. Servitude of the Egyptians
great, 61 o. of the Hebrews insupportable, 62 n. 67 a. and 68 i. Servitude of
the Israelites, 133 b. and why, ibid. 134 k. 729 e. etc. Seth son of Adam, 30
i. a virtuous man, ib. i. left a godly issue, ib. k. his age and death, 31 b.
Sethosis King of Egypt, 786 h. Seven men of Readiness kindred punished, 195 n.
Seventy Jews with John and Simon sent into Italy, 765 f Seventy Interpreters,
302 o. 801 a. Severity of Herod, 416 e* Sextus Caesar Governor of Syria, 372
c. writes in Herod's behalf, ib. f. sells the President's place, 373 l.
slain, 376 b. Sheep-shearing of Nabal, 168 n. of Absolon, 180 o. Shows at
Caesarea, 761 e. Ships of Solomon, 216 k. of Jos^phat, etc. 235 m. Shipwreck of
Josephus, 2 h. Siba manureth Mephiboseth's lands, 183 b. accuses him and
gets his goods, 189 b. Siba, son of Bochri, incenseth the people to
Rebellion, 194 l. by Joab, 195 k. his punishment, ib. l. Sybils Prophecy of
Babel, 33 d. Sicarians, 771 c. besieged, 772 a. authors of new calamity, 777 i.
taken ibid. k. Sichima Josuah's habitation, 128 m. Sichem defloureth Dina, 49
b. desires to marry her, ib. m. is slain, ib. Sichemites slain. 49 c.
Sichemites constitute Abimeleck their ruler, 137 b. banish him, ib. d. are
slain, and their City sacked, ib. g h. Sickness of Jeroboam's son, 222 d.
Sickness of Ochozias, 235 n. Sickness of Joram, 241 l m. Sickness of Adad, 240
f. Sickness of Ezechias, 257 i. Sickness of Herod, 409 k l. Sicle, 89 a. Siege
of Jerusalem, 179 c. 255 m. deferred, 703 c. Signs of the law, 112 k. Sign of
Ezechias's recovery 257 k l. Signs before the destruction of Jerusalem, 753 b c
d e. Sign of a true history, 782 h i. Signification of the golden-head, 269 k.
Silas, Captain of the King's guard, 522 a. Silas grows into hatred, 522 k.
Silon corrupted with money, 386 a. Silva besieges Massada, 772 a. Simei
pardoned, 193 c. punished, 204 m. Simeon the son of Jacob, 46 n. why so called,
ib. m. he and Levi slew the Sichemites, 49 c. left as a pledge with Joseph, 57
c. his sons, 61 b. Similitude, 137 b. 672 l. Simon succoureth the Galileans,
319 n. takes Bethsura, 338 e. declared high Priest, 342 d. animateth the
people against Tryphon, ibid. e. his authority, 342 e. razeth the Castle of
Jerusalem, 3^2 f. makes war against Antiochus, 343 f. traitorously slain, 344
b. 559 d. Simon degraded, 454 i. Simon affects the Crown, 468 m. 608 m.
Simon's counsel against Joseph, 640 n o, etc. Simon kills many of his
contrymen, 632 o. his parents and wife, etc 633 a b. Simon the son of Giora
commits rapines and murders, 642 m. Simon of Garasa, 703 e. assembleth the
thieves, ibid. spoileth Idumaea, 705 a b. assaulteth the Temple, 70^ o. his
camp, 722 o. apprehended, 759 e. 761 f. kept for the triumph, ibid. drawn
thorough Rome with an halter, 767 b. Singing, look song. Single Combat, 159 d.
Sin escapes not unpunished, 169 d. Sins of the Jews against the law, 730 l. Sin
cannot escape God's justice, 169 e. 761 g. Sisara Captain of Jabin's host, 134
k. put to flight and slain, ibid. n. Situation of the land of the Amorites,
105 b. Situation of the higher Galilee, 659 b. Situation of Jotapata, 6^4 b.
Situation of Gamala, 680 m. Situation of Massada, 772 b. Six thousand Jews
consumed with fire, 752 m. Skirmish of the Romans with the Jews, 608 i.
Skirmish between the Galileans and the Romans, 669 f. Skirmish of Simon and
John, 712 i. Slaughter one of another, 136 i. 155 b. 235 l. Slaughter on the
Sabbath day, 632 h. Slavery of the Hebrews, see servitude. Slaughter of
Achimelech and his Family, 166 k. Slaughter of Ochozias's servants, 243 m.
Slaughter of Baal's Priests, 244 a. Slaughter of Azarias, 420 g. Slaughter of
the Tapsians, 250 e. of the Army of Juda, 251 l. Slaughter of the Moabites, 181
e. of Antigonus's faction, 382. of the Jews, 624 m. in the Temple, 712 k. 751
c. in the vaults, 756 n. Slanders touching the Jewish nation answered, 791 f g
etc Sleep of Abner and his soldiers reproved, 169 g. Sodom once a goodly City,
36 o. her destruction foretold, 38 o. burnt, 39 b. Sodomites overcome by the
Syrians, 33 a b. taken and rescued, ibid. d. their sins, 39 a b. stricken with
blindness, ib. c. destroyed, ib. b. Sohemus discovers the King's secrets, 406
f. advanced, 407 m. put to death, 408 l. Soil of Peraea, 659 d. Soldiers ought
to obey their Captains, 677 b. Soldiers take meat out of the Citizens mouths,
730 f. Soldiers rewarded, 460 n. 761 b. Soldier shows his privy members,
533 e. Soldiers require a Monarch, 517 f. repair to Claudius, 518 k. Soldiers
dismissed, and why, 247 n. Soldiers of the Romans obey their Captains, 661 a
b. Soldiers that came unto David numbered, 179 a b. Soldiers with their
Captains consumed, 236 b c. A Soldier's filthy fact, 618 n. A Soldier burns
the book of the Scripture, 534 h. is punished, 619 a. Solemnity of the
Passover, 70 k. 92 k. Solemnity of the new Moon, 164 m. Solemnity of
transporting the Ark, 180 m n o. Solyma the place where Melchisedech was King,
37 e. after called Jerusalem, ib. and 179 e. Song of praise, and thanksgiving
of the Israelites, 72 n. Song of Moses, 72 n. Song of the women and maidens of
Israel, 160 n. Son of Vision, 46 n. Sons of Noah, 32 o. Sons of Abraham, 40 h
i. and 43 d. Sons of Isaac, 50 k. Sons of Esau, 50 l. Sons of Jesse, 158 m.
Sons of Saul slain, 173 f. Sons of David, 179 g. Sons of Jacob hate their
brother Joseph, 50 o. go in^^ Egypt for to buy corn, 56 k l. 57 f. imprisoned
and accused of theft, 56 o. and 58 k l. carry Presents with them, 57 f. depart
into Egypt with their Father, 61 b. Sorceress of E^dor, 171 c. raised Samuel's
ghost, ib. c. Three Sorts of sedition, 711 f. Sosius has charge of the Army,
388 c. leads an Army against Jerusalem, 390 b. takes Antigonus, 579 e.
Sovereignty to be given, 158 m. Soul immortal, 672 m. 784 m. tied to a mortal
body, ibid. n. Spear of Goliath the Philistine, 159 c. Spectacle of compassion,
731 e. Spies sent into Canaan, 96 i. sent to Jericho, 121 d. survey the City,
ib. f. promised Rahab to save her and all that was hers, 122 h. Spirit of God
forsakes Saul, 258 o. and an evil spirit troubles him, ib. o. Spirit of God
entered into David, 158 o. Spoils gotten in war, 77 c. Spoils dedicated to God,
123 d. 225 m. Spoil of the Temple, 246 d. Spoils committed in the day, 686 l.
Spoils etc. carried in triumph, 772 e f. Sports of Olympus, 431 b. Stars made,
27 e. their end, courses and motions, ib. State of Jerusalem troubled, 642 l m.
Statue of gold erected, 269 m. commanded to be worshipped, ibid. m. Statue of
Caius, 494 l. Statue of diverse metals, 269 m. beaten to powder, ib. Statues of
Caesar, 480 i k. Jews refuse to admit them, ib. Stature of Og, 105 b. Stature
of Saul, 151 f. Stature of Goliath, 159 c. Sterility fore-shewed, 55 e f. Stock
of Basa destroyed, 225 m. Stone taken out of the mountain, 269 i. Store of the
Priest, where kept, 419 l. Store of provision, 772 f. Store of all sorts of
movables, 124 l. Store of Corn gotten, 240 d e. Store of victuals, 576 h i.
Store of engines and arrows, 767 f. Storm, 693 b. Stratagem of Moses, 65 d. of
the Ephraimites, 129 e. of Joab, 183 e. of Ptolomy, 297 n. of Joseph, 9 d. of
Cestius, 637 b. of Joseph, 640 l. 641 e. 665 b. of the Jews, 747 e. Straton's
tower, or Caesarea, 412 c. 414 g. Streights of Engaddi, 167 f. Strength of
Sampson, 141 e. and 142 k. Strength of Eleazar, 666 o. of Netiras, etc. ib.
Strife among the Priests, 538 h. Stripes thirty nine, 114 i. Stuff to build the
Tabernacle of, 80 l m. Subjection of the Israelites to the Moabites, 133 d. to
the Canaanites 134 k. to the Palestines, 139 f. to the Assyrians, 252 a.
Subtilty of the Serpent, 28 l. Subtilty of Jacob, 44 k. of Lea and Rachel, 46
o. of Laban 46 l. of Phara, 62 o. of King Naas, 151 g. of Michol, 163 c. of
Saul, 168 i. of a woman, 187 c. of the false Prophet, 220 d. of Silo, 578 l m.
of Florus, 624 i. Succession of the high Priests, 540 n. Successor of Moses,
who, 109 b. Successors of Alexander, 297 m n. Successors of David, 181 d.
Successors of Nabuchodonosor, 220 f. Sum of the Israelites taken, 197 c. Sum of
gold, silver, etc. toward the building of the Temple, 199 b. Sun made, 23 e.
the end, course and motion thereof, ib. e. Sun stood still, 225 c. goes back,
157 l. Superstition of the people reproved, 223 k l. Supplication of Moses to
God, 74 o. Supplication of Joachas, 246 f. Supplication of the Jews sent to
Caius, 617 c d. Supplication of the Israelites, 148 k l. Supplies sent to
Titus, 677 c. Surprisal of the Ark, 144 n. of Rabatha, 180 i. Susac invadeth
Judea, 221 e. spoileth Jerusalem and the Temple, ibid g. Sustenance fails the
Israelites, 74 i. Swearing amongst the ancient Jews, 42 k. and the manner
thereof, ibid. imposed, and why, 259 l. Sword of Goliath, 160 m. 165 c.
Sycophants of Agrippa, 524 h. Syllaeus governs the King's affairs, 435 b.
desires Salome to wife, 435 c d. accuses Herod to Caesar, 439 e. deferreth
the payment of Herod's money, ib. condemned to die, 443 d. Symoborus one of the
five Kings of Assyria, 37 a. Syrians war against Achab, 229 l. discomfitted,
239 c. ib. f. led away captive, 252 a. Syrians against David, 181 g.
T.
Tabernacle builded, 81 b. erected in the desert, ib. d, etc. dedicated, 89 d.
and when, ib. d. placed in Siloe, 125 e. Table set in the Tabernacle, 84 m.
Tables of the ten Commandments, 79f. 80k. placed in the Ark, 84 h. Table of
gold, 211 i. 301 ^. Talents, 565 a. 568 l m. Talents of Gold, 216 i. Talent how
much, 813 e. Tales credited, 436 i. Talions law, or law of like for like, 117
b. Talk betwixt God and Cain, 29 c. Talk of Jacob with Rachel, 45 f. Talk of
Laban with Jacob, 46 h. Talk of David with Goliath, 160 l. Tapsians put to the
sword, 250 e. and why, ib. e. Tarichea besieged, 676 k. taken, 677 e f.
Taricheans vanquished by Sea, 679 h i. Task of the workmen of Solomon, 207 d e.
Task more grievous imposed, etc. 68 l. Taxation of the Jews, 476 k. Tears of
Esau, 44 n. Tediousness of the Hebrews Journey, 73 d e f. Teglaphalassar King
of Assyria, 251 o. led away the Israelites captive, 252 a. slays Rasis, and
takes the Syrians prisoners, 252 a. gold and silver given him, ibid. b.
Temperance of Saul, 151 f. Tempest after Samuel's prayer, 153 f. Tempest caused
by Jonas, 249 i. Tempest drowned those of Joppe, 674 m. Tempest of miseries
assails Jerusalem, 698 o. Temple when builded, 207 f. height, length and
breadth thereof, 208 m. with all the other things belonging thereunto, 209.
when consecrated, 210 g. spoiled, 221 g cleansed, 252 e. repaired, 249 h.
burned, 265 i k. began to be builded, 279 k. finished, 281 i. dedicated, ib. g.
desolate three years, 318 f. repurged, ib. burned, 476 m the strongest fortress
of the City, 688 h. builded on a strong hill, 719 f. consumed with fire, 750 m.
One Temple to be builded, and why, 111 e. Temples of Idolaters to be destroyed,
111 a. Temple on mount Garizim, 296 a. laid desolate, 346 c. Temples builded by
Herod, 417 h. Temple of Apollo, 431 a. Temple of Isis pulled down, and why, 481
f. Temple builded by Vespasian, 767 c. Temple of Onias shut up, 778 k. Tempting
of the Serpent 24 i. of Joseph's mistress, 53 ab, etc. Ten Commandments, 79 e.
Tenths of the fruits, 111 g. Tenths for the poor Levites and Festivals, 114 k.
Term of man's life, 35 e. Term of exile for chance medley, 109 d. Terror among
the enemies, 235 l. 239 o. Testament of Herod, 459 d. altered, 601 e.
Testimonies of the Jews antiquity, 786 o. 787 d. 788 n. 789 b c d. 791 c.
Thanksgiving of the Israelites for their deliverance, 72 n Tharbis the King's
daughter of Aethiopia, 65 g. enamoured of Moses, ibid. g. yields the City of
Saba, and is Married to Moses, ibid. i. Thares Abraham's Father, 35 c. went out
of Chaldea to Charran, ibid. d. his age and death, ibid. Thargal a Captain of
the Assyrians, 37 b. sacked Syria, and extinguished the Giants, 37 b. Theater
built by Herod, 410 g. Theft committed, how punished, 116 l. Thermuthis
Pharaoh's daughter 64 i. takes Moses out of the water, ib. i. adopteth him for
her son, and preserves him from death, 64 m. Theudas the Magician, 532 o. his
persuasion to the people, ibid. Thieves confident, 636 m. Thieves apprehend
Ananias's kindred, 539 f. Thieves taken by Herod, 438 n. Thieves murder in the
day, 620 l. work much mischief; ib. n. Thieves spoil the Country, 686 k. make a
high Priest, 686 n. Thievery punished, 416 b. 438 m n. Things unclean, 93 b.
Thirst oppressed the Israelites, 75 e. Thirst of the Arabians, 403 k. Thirst of
Sampson, 141 d. of David, 816 m. Thobel a warrier, 29 c. invented the Art of
Forging, ibid. g. Thola a Judge of Israel. 138 i. Tholomaeus the Arch-Thief, 527
d. Ten thousand thronged to death, 618 o. Thraldom of the Canaanites, 215 b.
Three admirable works, 721 b. Three valiant Jews, 733 g. Threefold sedition
divided into two parts, 714 k. Thrice in the year the Hebrews ought to meet,
111 f. Throne of Solomon, 213 d. Thucidides History, 781 e. Tiberians meet
Joseph, 6 k. their Letters to Agrippa, 10 i. intend war against Joseph, 18 o.
submit themselves to Vespasian, 675 f. 676 b. Tiberias builded, 478 n. in
danger of ruiue, 22 i. recovered, 641 e. Tiberius Emperor, 478 m. rejects
Venones suit, 479 e. punished Isis Priests, 481 f. thrusts the Jews out of
Rome, 482 k. his league with Artabanus, 483 f. his death, 485 c. why he
deferred to give audience to Ambassadors and Prisoners, 488 n. etc. why changed
not Governors, ibid. k. addicted to the Mathematics. 491 l. recommendeth the
Empire to Caius, ibid. d. his Funeral, 492 l. Tiberius a Governor of Judaea,
533 b. crucifieth the Sons of Judas, ibid. c. Tiberius a Governor of Egypt,
708 n. Tidings of Nero's death, 703 a. Tigranes invadeth Syria, 357 n. Tigris a
River of Paradise, 28 k. called Diglat, ibid, k. Tillage practiced by Noah, 34
o. Timber precious, 215 g. Time of the Israelites deliverance, 71 b. Time of
the building of the Temple, 207 f. Time of the Jews return, 275 l. and 278 f g.
Time of the Israelites transportation, 253 n. Time of the Kings reign of David's
line, 265 i. Time when Jeremiah lived, 260 d. Time of the destruction of
Jerusalem and Temple, 265 k. 751 b. 752 i. 757 e. etc. 758 h i 760 h. Timotheus
twice overcome, 320 a b. Titus his mighty Army, 660 k. wins Japha, 669 c.
takes Tarichea, 677 e f. enters Gamala, 683. c. repaireth to Jerusalem, and
why, 710 m. puts his enemies to flight, 712 l. in what places besieged
Jerusalem, 717 e. circuiteth the walls, 723 b. commands them to be battered,
724 h. puts the Jews to flight, ib. m. takes the second wall, 726 o. 727 f.
surceaseth the siege, and distributeth money, 726 i. crucifieth many Jews, 732
n. accuses the soldiers, 734 l. calls God to witness, 736 i. dares John to
fight, 744 h. striveth to save the Temple, 745 c. beholds the soldiers,
ibid. f. restrains his wrath, 750 h. grants the Jews life upon condition,
755 e. promises recompense to the soldiers, 760 n. celebrateth pastimes, 765
b. lamenteth Jerusalem, 76^ c. Torment of Eleazar, 818 m. and 819 b. Torment of
the Mother and seven Brethren, 820 h, etc. 821 a, etc. 121 d. 822 i. 822 m. 823
b. 824 i. Tortures laid upon many, 436 m. Touch of conscience, 350 k. Tower of
Babel, 33 d. Tower of white Marble, 312 k. Towers erected, 214 k. 249 m. 718 o.
Tower of Antonia, 419 o. Towers of Herod, 718 o. 719 a b. Trachonites compelled
to civility, 438 l. Rob again, ib. m. subdued by Herod, 439 c. Trajan takes
Japha, 669 c. Training up of Soldiers, 638 l. 660 l m n. Traitor apprehended,
452 k. Transgression of vocation punished, 250 b. Transgression of Saul, 157 c
d. Transgressors of Gods law threatened to be punished, 2 i k. 157 e f g.
Translation of the Bible, 303 n o. Translation of the Priesthood fore-shewed,
144 k. Translation of the Israelites, 250 e. 252 a. 253 n. and when, ibid.
Transportation of the Kingdom, 157 f. Transportation of the Ark, 180 m n.
Traveller to be directed in his way, 116 n. Travelers not to be forbidden ripe
fruit, 113 g. Treason intended and discovered, 287 i k. 335 k l. Treason
practiced, 225 k. 136 g. 248 c. 250 d. ibid. 580 m. 591 e f. 598 k. 624 i. 640
m. Treasury of the Temple emptied, 246 d. 252 a. 255 l. Treasure taken away,
368 b. 468 h. Treble Wall, 717 f. Tree of Life, 28 k. Tree of Knowledge, ibid.
Trees fruitful not to be cut down, 118 l. Trembling of the Earth, 250 b. Tribe
of Reuben, Gad, and the half tribe of Manasses require the land of the
Amorites, 109 b. promise to help their brethren, ib. c d. required to perform
it, 121 e. are dismissed, 126 i. builded an Altar, 127 e. their answer to
Phinees, 128 f. Tribe of Dan oppressed, 132 i. seek a place to inhabit, ib. n.
Tribe of Levi sacred to God, 93 a. Tribe of Judahs accusation and excuse, etc.
194 k l. Ten Tribes revolt, and why, 219 i k. transported, and why, 253 n.
Tribunal of Solomon, 213 b. Tribune a Captain over a thousand, 160 o. Tribute
exacted of the Israelites, 139 f. of the Canaanites, 215 b. Tribute imposed,
181 f. 182 i. 235 n. 250 f. 252 c. 350 k. 261 i. 769 e. Triple Golden Crown, 87
f. Triumph of Titus and Vespasian, 766 h i. Troglodytes of whom descended, 41
g. Trophies of Herod, 411 l. Trouble of mind, 158 o. 165 e. Trouble of the
Sorceress, 171 d. of Saul, ib. e f. Troubles in France, 700 n. Truce-breaker,
255 m. 262 b. Truce granted the Inhabitants of Jabes, 152 i. Two Trumpets of
Silver, 95 c. Truth of Joseph's History, 237 d. 21 c. Truth of God's Promise,
211 d. Truth of God's Oracles, 240 e. 259 n. Truth of Eliahs Prophecy, 242 f.
Truth prevails, 277 o. 278 a. Tryphon requires Antiochus, 337 i k.
overcomes Demetrius, ib. o. breaks covenant, 342 b. plotteth Jonathans
death, 34 o f. his demands of Simon, 342 a. obtains the Kingdom, 343 i k.
slain, ibid. l. Tumults in Jury, 468 l. 615 d. in the Army, 725 b. for a
Galilean slain, 618 n o. Turpentine-Tree that, etc. 704 o. Twins brought forth
at once, 43 e. Tyranny of Antiochus, 314 b c. of Herod foretold, 392 e.
effected, 416 d. of Caius, 503 f. of Varus 532 h i l. 609 e. Tyrannies breed
mischief, 514 k. Tyrants enfeeble themselves, 443 c. Tyro imprisoned, and why,
445 d. accused of Treason, 445 e. 594 i. he and 300 Captains were slain, 445 f.
V.
Valerianus his speech, 675 e. Valley of benediction, 235 l. Valor of Sampson,
130 l. and 140 l. of David, 161 a. of David's soldiers, 179 d. of Herod, 577 e.
of Netyras and Philip, 667 a. of Vespasian, 681 e. Titus 713 e. of the Jews,
decreased, 740 m. Vardanes persuades Izates, 531 c. slain, ibid. d. Variance
of Women, 433 f. Varus tyranny, 4 i k. assisteth the Romans, 609 b. see
Quintilius. Vengeance to be taken on the Amalechites, 118 m n. Ventidius
fisheth for money, 384 f. 575 c. sends for Silon, 386 f. overcomes the
Parthians, 387 m. Virtue of the mind respected of God, 158 l. Virtue of
Abraham, 43 d. Virtue of David, 202 e. Virtue of Solomon, 206 k. 214 n. 215 a b
c. Vespasian arriveth at Tire, 23 e. gati ereth forces against the Jews, 658 n.
comes to Ptolemais, 658 o. helps the Sephorites, 659 a. fills Galilee with
sword, and fire, ibid. c d. directs the Romans march, 660 h. invadeth
Galilee, 662 c. besieges Jotapata, 663 e. wounded in the sole of the foot, 669
b. leads his Army to Jo^apata, 669 b. takes it, 610 f. takes Joppe, 674 n.
comes to Agrippa, 675 c. overcomes the Taricheans, 679 h. consulteth with his
Chieftains about the Jews, 679 h i. besieges Gamala, 680 o. comfort his
Soldiers, 682 h f. expects Victory, etc. 697 e. visits Judaea, 701 a. has
tidings of Nero's death, 703 a. invadeth Judaea, 705 e. elected Emperor, 708
h. 709 h. his virtues, etc. 707 d e f. discharges Joseph, 709 c. proclaimed
Emperor, 710 l. Vessels of Gold and Silver given to Solomon, 216 i. Vessels of
Gold and Silver taken, 109 a. Vessels pertaining to the Temple, 209 l m. 210.
b. Vessels of the Temple carried away, 265 k. sent back, 275 h i. Vestments of
the high Priests in Antonia, 482 o. Vestures of the Priests, 86 m n. 210 g.
Vexation of Saul by an evil spirit, 158 n. Victory wherein it consists, 676
o. Victory makes proud, 248 a. Victory of Placidus, 700 l. of the Jews, 717 a.
Victory of Moses and the Egyptians, 65 e. Victory of Josuah over the
Canaanites, 125 c d. Victory of the Israelites over the Benjamites, 13 m.
Victory of Saul over the Ammonites, 152 n. over the Amalechites, 156 m n.
Victory of David over Goliath, 160 m. of him against the Philistines, 163 a. 180
k l. Victory of Joab, 183 f 191 d. Victory of Achab against the Syrians, 230 c.
Victory of Amasias, 247 o. of Joas, ibid. k. 248 d. of Vespasian, 679 h. of the
Romans, 680 l. 683 e. Victuals failed the Israelites, 95 e f. 239 i. Victuals
very plenty, 240 d e. 576 h i. Villainy most horrible, 130 l m. A Village called
Abraham's House, 36 i. Villages burned, 469 f g. Vine of Gold, 362 d e. Vineyard
planted by Noah, 34 n. Vineyard of Naboth, 228 f. Vines to be planted, 113 d.
Violence not to be used, 116 m. Virgins of the Medianites taken, 109 a b.
Vision of Jacob, 45 b. 48 k. Vision of Joseph, 91 a b. Vision of Pharaoh, 55 b
c. Vision of Amram, 63 d e. Vision of Nabuchodonosor, 268 d e. Vision of the
Goat and Ram, 272 k l. Vision of Archelaus, 473 e f. Vision of the hand, 271 h.
Vitellius comes to Jerusalem, 482 n. remitteth the tribute, ibid. makes
Jonathan high Priest, 483 c. warreth against Aretas, 485 b. Vitellius Emperor,
703 b. encampeth his Army in Rome, 707 c. forsaken of his soldiers, 709 f
slain, 710 k. Ulcer one of the Plagues of Egypt, 69 e. Uncle of Saul, 151 b.
Unconstancy of Man's love, 151 c. Unjustice death, 436 i k. Unjust, 166 k. 227 m
n. 436 i k. Voice in the inner Temple, 753 d. Vologesus King of Parthia, 531 d.
incited to kill Izates, 532 h. compelled to return, 532 l. Voluminous President
of Syria, 439 a. arbiter between Syllaeus and Herod* ibid. his sentence, etc.
444 m. Voluptuousness of the Israelites, 107 b c. Vonones discomfited, 479 e.
submits himself to Syllanus 479 f. Vow of Jeptha, 138 o Vow of Anna, 143 g.
Vows of the Esseans, 615 f. Voyage of Vespasian by Sea, 761 d. Urias Bersabes
Husband, 184 i. refuses to repair to his Wife, and why, ibid. k. is slain, 184
n. Uron, Miriams husband, 77 a. holds up Moses hands, ib. a. Use of the
plough by whom found out, 29 b. Use of the Sea and the ten Lavers, 210 a. Usury
and Theft, 810 a.
W.
Ways paved, 216 m. Weight of Gold brought, 213 e. Weights found out, and by
whom, 29 f. Wall built about Jerusalem, 735 b. First Wall taken, 725 d. Second
Wall taken, 726 o. Walls of Jerusalem finished, 285 m. Walls of Jericho fall
down, 123 b. Walls of Babylon, 788 l. Walls of the Temple beautified with Gold,
208 o. Want of water, 678 c. Want of water and victuals, 73 d. 236 f. 238 g.
etc. 412 g. Warrantize of security promised to Rahab, 122 i. War how to be
undertaken, 118 h. War intended for Liberty, 688 k. War between Antonius and
Augustus, 581 b. War between the seditious and peaceable, 630 h. War of the
Egyptians with the Aethiopians, 65 b c. War of the Amalechites against the
Israelites, 76 i. War of the Philistines against the Israelites, 159 c. 171 b.
War of David, 180 i. 181 e. War of Adad against Achab, 229 l. Civil War of the
Israelites, 131 b c. ib. f. 135 d e. 219 i. 223 i. Wars of the Jews written at
Rome, 783 e. Water poured on the Earth, etc. 67 d. Water turned into Blood, 67
d. Water failed the Israelites, 73 d. changed, ibid. g. Water of Bethleems
well, etc. 196 g. Water delivered by measure, 652 i. Weariness of the Hebrews,
73 d. Whale devoureth Jonah, 249 k. Witch of Endor, 171 c. VVitch of Arabia,
596 n. Wicked Man punished, 169 b. 240 e f. Wickedness most horrible, 130 m
n. Wickedness cause of calamity, 129 b. 130 l m. 131 ^ d. 132 m. 133. b.
VVidow of Sareptha, 226 d. VVidow of Obadias, 273 n. Wife of Putiphar enticeth
Joseph to lie with her, 53 a b c. accuses him to her Husband, 54 h i. Wife of
the high Priest, 94 k. Wife of the dead brother, 154 c. Wife of the Levite
villanously abused, 130 m. Wife of Phinees, 145 c. Wife of Jeroboam, 222 d.
goes to ask counsel, and why ibid. d e. Will of God to be obeyed, 110 k l.
VVinding slairs, 209 h. Wisdom of the Lawmakers, 26 m n. of Joseph, 558 c d.
Wisdom of Solomon, 205 b c. 215 d e. Wisdom of Daniel, 267 o. A false
VVitness his punishment, 112 n. False VVitnesses suborned, 229 h. Wives of
Solomon numbered, 217 h. enticed him to commit Idolatry, 216 g. 217 h. Wives of
Herod, 449 e. Wives of Esau, 44 i. Wives of Jacob, 47 b. Wives of Lamech, 29
f. Women Created, 28 i. tempted and fell, ibid. l. punished, n. Women married
for a Virgin, etc. 114 m n. Two Women accuse one another, 205 d. Women seduce
Solomon, 216 o. Women at discord, 433 f. Women eat their own children, 239 h
i. 734 i k. Women sing Songs, 160 n, VVomens terms, 48 i. Word of God not
without Fruit, 252 g. VVork-Masters of the Tabernacle, 72 n. Workmen building
the Temple, 207 a b e f. Works of God, 809 d. World made in six days, 27 e f
g. Wrestling of Jacob, etc. 48 m. Wrath of God against the Egyptians, 72 k l
Wrath of Saul against David, 162 i. Wrath of David against Nabal, 168 m. Wrath
of God against the Jews, 741 d. Wrath of Florus, 623 a. Wrath of Herod, 586 n.
589 c. 675 b. Wrath of Vitellius, 710 i. Wrath pacified, 22 l. 562 n. Wrath
bridled, 750 h. Writers why they omit of speaking of the Jews, 791 e. Wrongs
done by the Amalechites, 118 m. Wrongs done by the Ammonites, 183 c.
X.
Xantique a month, 92 k. Xerxes King of Persia favors the Jews, 282 b. his
Letters to the Princes of Syria, ibid. c. grants Nehemiahs request, 284 e f.
Y.
Years of Adam, 30 i Years of Jubilee, 94 m. 7 Years plenty and searcity, 55 d
e f. Great Year, 32 m. Years between the building and destruction of the
Temple, 75 f. Years of the Captivity of Babylon, 274 e. Young Men pull down the
Eagle, 460 i. put to death, 602 k. Youthly course of Manasses, 257 o. Youthly
course of Amos, 258 d.
Z.
Zabulon burned, 635 n. Zabulon Jacobs son, 47 a. what it signifies, ib. his
sons, 61 b. Zacharias stoned to death, 246 c. and why, ibid. Zacharias son of
Achaz slain, 261 k. Zacharias King of Israel slain, 250 d. Zacharias
encourages the People, 280 d Zacharias condemned by the Zealots, 696 i.
acquitted, ibid. l. slain in the Temple, 696 k. Zacharias one of the chief of
the Zealous, 690 l. Zamaris the Babylonian Jew, 449 f. Zambrias marries
Chosby, 107 f. speaks against Moses, ibid. g. slain together with his Wife,
108 k. Zamri King of Israel, 225 m. rooteth out Basas posterity, ibid. burns
himself in the Palace, 225 m. Zaraeus King of Aethiopia, 224 k. overthrown,
ibid. ^. Zeal of Phinees, 108 k l. Zeal of the People, 259 h. Zeal of Elias,
228 a b e. Zeal of Matthias and his Sons, 315 i. The Zealous occasion of
violences, 687 ^. why so called, ibid. fight with the Citizens, 689 c. require
help of the Idumaeans. 690. m. their fiction disproved, 691 c. Tyrannize over
the living and dead, 698 i. take Simons wife, 705 a. fight with the Idumaeans,
706 l. Zeb killed by Gideon, 136 l. Zelpha Leas handmaid, 460. bears to Jacob
Gad, and Asar, ibid. Zenodorus lives by spoil, 415 n. accused by Herod, 416 b
c. his Country given to Herod, 438 l. Ziphians promise to deliver David, 167 d.
labor again to betray David, 169 f. Zoilus a Tyrant of Stration, 351 b.
Zorobabel Prince of the Jews, 279 h i. obtains praise and rewards, 278 a. and
why, ibid.
An Exact and orderly Collection of all the Scriptures which are handled by
Josephus in his History of the Antiquity of the Jews, set down in Chapter and
Verse as they lie in the Bible, whereby a Man may find on a sudden any thing
wherein the Author does either Expound, Enlarge* or Alter the words of
Scripture. And hereby the Reader may turn to every Verse as familiar as to the
Bible.

Genesis.
Chap. Verse. Fol. Let. 1 1. ad finem. 27 e 2 2 27 G 10. 11 28 i 13. 14 28 K 17
28 i 19 28 h 21 28 i 3 1 ad 9 28 K. l 12 ad 18 28 l m n 20 28 H 4 1 ad 12 29 a
b etc. 14 ad 24 29 d e f g 25 26 30 h i 5 3, 4, 5 30 i K 3 ad 24 30 l m n 24 ad
finem 31 a b 6 12 ad 13 30 m n 14 ad 15 30 n 7 2 30 n 4 31 d 7 8 30 n o 17 ad
20 31 e f g 8 1 31 d e 7, 8 31 d e 16 17 31 e f 20 21 32 i k 9 11 ad 15 31 l m
n 18 19 31 n o 19 ad 25 34 n o 10 8 9 33 a b 10 ad finem. 33 g etc. 11 2 ad 9
33 b c D 12 1 ad 4 35 e f g 7 36 k (...) ^^ (...) (...) ^^ l m 13 1 ad 10 36 n
o 14 1 ad 12 37 B c 13 ad 20 37 d e 20 ad 24 37 E f 15 1 ad 13 37 f g h 16 1 ad
7 38 i k 9 10 16 17 38 K 17 12 etc. 38 l 18 1 ad 16 38 n o etc. 17 ad 23 39 a
19 1 ad 8 39 B 11 ad 26 39 c 30 ad 38 39 c d 20 1 ad 6 39 d 11 ad 16 39 f g h
21 1 2 3 40 m 14 ad 21 40 i k 30 31 40 k l 22 1 ad 4 40 m n o 7 8 9 41 a b 10
11 41 d e 12 13 16 17 41 e f 23 per totum 41 g h i 24 1 ad 23 42 K l m 22 29 ad
60 42 N O a b 25 7 8 43 d 21 ad 23 43 ^ 24 25 43 e 26 1 2 6 43 f 13 ad 16 43 f
g 19 ad 21 44 h 26 ad 29 44 h i 30 ad 35 44 i k 27 1 ad 5 44 k 6 ad 30 44 l m
30 ad 42 44 n 42 ad finem. 44 n m 28 1 ad 10 45 a 10 ad 19 45 b c 20 45 c d 29
1 ad 9 45 d e 9 ad 12 45 f g 12 ad 23 46 h i 22 23 46 i 23 ad 27 46 k l 27 ad
35 46 l m 30 14 15 16 46 n o 18 24 47 a B 31 1 2 3 47 b 19 23 47 b c 24 26 47 c
d 31 ad 36 47 e f 46 47 48 i 32 1 ad 7 48 k l 13 ad 18 48 m 24 ad 30 48 n o 33
1 2, etc. 49 a 13 17 49 a b 34 2 3 4 49 b 21 25 49 c 35 12 49 c d 16 17 18 49 d
e 26 49 f 36 67 50 k l (...) 50 (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) 5 ad 9 51 a
b 9 ad 21 51 c d e 22 ad 34 52 h i k, etc. 39 7 9 10 52 o 11 12 53 e f 14 ad 23
54 h i k 40 5 9 ad 15 54 m n 16 18 54 o 41 1 ad 17 55 b c 18 ad 36 55 e 42 43
55 g 47 ad f, 55. etc 42 1 ad 10 56 k l 17 56 o 21 24 57 b c 36 57 c d 43 1 ad
14 57 d e 11 16 57 e f 16 29 57 f g h 44 2 ad 12 58 i k 12 58 n o 18 ad finem.
59 a b 45 1 ad 16 60 i k 16 60 l m 26 ad 28 60 m n 46 1 ad 5 61 a b 6 ad 26 61
b c 30 61 d 47 2 61 d 3 ad 10 61 e 16 ad 20 61 f g 49 33 62 i 50 13 14 62 k 22
ad 26 62 k l Exodus.
1 1 ad 11 62 m n 16 22 62 n o 2 1 2 3 63 a b c 1 2 3 to 10 63 d e 3 4 5 64 h i
9 10 11 64 l m n, etc. 11 ad 14 66 k l 16 ad 19 66 l m 21 66 n 3 1 2 3 66 o 4 2
ad 9 67 c d 10 ad 26 67 e f 20 67 g 5 1 2 68 h 5 ad 19 68 l m 6 6 68 m 7 10 68
o 19 69 a 8 16 69 C 24 69 D 9 3 69 e 6 69 e 10 23 69 e 10 14 69 f 22 69 f 28 70
h 12 2 70 h i (...) 16 70 i 29 33 70 k 14 2 7 9 71 a b 11 12 71 e 13 71 f 14 71
g 15 72 h i 21 22 27 72 k l 15 1 2 3 72 n o 1 ad 22 74 l m 72 h i 23 25 72 o 16
1 73 d 3 73 e 15 73 e 23 73 f 15 16 73 g 17 1 ad 5 74 i k, etc. 8 9 10 76 i k
13 16 77 c d 18 1 2 77 f g 13 ad 24 78 h i 24 78 k 19 1 2 3 4, etc. 78 m n 16
78 o 25 79 B 20 1 ad 17 79 e 21 2 ad 7 116 l 23 117 a 28 ad 32 96 i k 22 14 116
i 24 18 80 h 28 12 80 H 17 ad 21 88 K 29 1 ad 38 88 m 34 28 80 i k 35 23, etc.
80 k l 36 1 2 3 80 l 2 89 c 6 80 m 8 89 a 8 ad finem. 80 ab 37 1 ad 6 83 l 16
ad finem. 83 g 38 1 ad 8 85 e 39 1 ad 12 86 m 25 87 B 6 ad 14 87 K 10 11, etc.
87 d 30 87 e f 51 88 i 40 1 2 3 89 d Leviticus.
1 2 ad 10 91 a b 2 14 ad finem. 92 m 8 per totum. 89 f 9 24 89 f 10 1 2 3 4 90
i 14 1 ad 8 93 K 19 13 117 b c 21 7 8 9 94 K 23 5 6 92 k 24 20 93 m 25 2 ad 8
94 I 8 ad 14 94 m Numbers.
1 23 72 f 5 15 ad finem. 93 f 6 1 ad 12 103 d e 9 15 95 b 10 2 95 b 14 95 c d
11 1 2 95 e f 13 1 ad 24 96 h 24 96 l 14 1 2 6 96 l m 23 33 97 a 43 98 n 16 1
ad 4 99 d 8 ad 15 99 g h i 31 ad 35 101 b c d, etc. 102 f g 17 1 ad finem. 102
m n 18 8 ad 20 103 B c 19 per totum. 103 g 10 113 h 20 1 14 ad 15 1^3 E 21 ad
finem. 104 m 23 24 104 i 35 104 l 21 13 14 113 c d 22 1 ad 5 105 e 15 21 ad 28
105 f g 28 31 105 g 35 36 106 h 23 1 ad 10 106 k l 11 12 106 l 24 3 4 106 n 10
11 106 n o 25 1 2 3 107 c d 3 113 c 6 7 8 9 107 e g k l 16 17 108 l m 27 18 109
a 31 8 ad 18 109 a 32 1 2 ad 5 110 h 8 9 126 n 35 34, etc. 109 d 6 11 14 126 n
36 12 109 e f Deuteronomy.
2 31 92 l 3 21 109 b 4 1 ad 43 110 h 6 6 7 112 k 15 12 ad 19 116 l m 16 1 10
13 111 f 17 15 113 b 19 2 126 n o 14 113 b 20 15 ad 20 118 f 11 ad 21 94 per
tot. 22 10 113 d 11 112 i 23 24 25 115 b c 23 1 117 e f 24 113 B 24 12 13 116 K
21 22 113 e 25 3 4 113 c f 5 ad 9 115 c 19 118 m 26 1 2, etc. 113 c 29 1 ad 10
119 b 31 3 23 119 m 33 23 119 d 34 8 9 119 e f 10 120 K Joshua.
2 1 2 3 121 e 4 6 122 h 3 1 2 3 122 K 4 1 2 3 122 m 5 ad finem. 122 n 5 10 11
12 122 n 6 3 122 o 20 ad 26 123 a b c 7 1 123 d 5 ad 16 123 f g h 10 124 h ^^
17 18 124 i k 24 25 124 k 8 1 2 124 l 9 3 124 m 6 15 124 n o 21 23 125 a 10 1
125 B 9 ad 13 125 b c 11 1 ad 5 125 c d 7 ad finem. 125 e f 23 126 h 13 1 ad 12
126 i 24 29 126 n 14 15 16 per tot. 126 k l 20 per totum. 126 o 8 9 109 d 22 2
ad 6 127 a 10 ad 16 127 d e f 21 128 l 23 per totum. 128 m 24 19 33 128 n o
Judges.
1 1 ad 5 129 b c 6 7 129 c 16 129 e 22 ad 26 129 e 2 1 ad 11 129 g 3 1 ad 11
133 B c 12 ad 13 133 d e f, etc. 4 1 ad 21 134 k l m n 6 1 2 3, etc. 135 b c 11
12 13 135 d 7 2 ad 22 135 e f g, etc. 22 25 136 k l 8 7 10 136 l 22 33 136 m 9
1 ad 15 137 a b 23 ad 49 137 d e f, etc. 52 ad 55 138 i k 10 2 ad 8 138 l m 11
1 ad 11 138 n 30 ad 40 138 o 39 139 B 12 1 ad 13 139 B c 13 1 2 3, etc. 139 f g
9 ad 19 140 h i 24 140 i k 14 1 ad 6 140 l 12 13 14 140 m 18 19 20 140 n o 15 4
5 6 141 a 11 ad 15 141 c 18 141 d 16 3 141 d 6 ad 15 142 e f 16 17 18 142 h 25
ad finem. 142 i k 18 2, etc. 132 l 19 per totum. 130 h 22 ad 26 130 l 29 130 n
20 1 ad 25 131 a 25 131 c 29 ad 36 131 d e 35 131 f 41 ad finem. 131 g 21 12 ad
25 132 i 20 ad finem. 132 k 1 Samuel.
1 10 ad 13 143 g 20 ad finem. 144 i 2 12 ad 17 144 h 3 3 ad 10 144 k 11 ad 21
144 l 4 1 ad 21 144 m n o etc 5 1 ad 6 146 l 2 ad finem. 146 o 6 12 ad 18 146 d
e 19 21 147 f 7 3 ad 6 147 g 6 ad 12 147 f 10 14 148 k l 8 1 ad 6 149 b c 6 ad
19 149 e f, etc. 9 1 ad 3 150 k 6 ad 10 150 l 15 ad 19 150 m 22 24 150 n 10 1
ad 8 150 o, etc. 17 ad 27 151 c d e f etc. 11 1 ad 4 151 g* 3 ad 15 152 i k l
m, etc. 12 3 4 153 B 7 ad 18 153 c d e 20 ad finem. 153 f 13 2 ad 12 154 i k l,
etc. 22 23 154 m n 14 1 ad 4 154 n o 11 12 155 a 12 ad 15 155 B c 20 ad 26 155
c d 27 ad 30 155 d e 32 155 e 37 ad 47 155 f g, etc. 15 1 ad 9 156 m n o, etc.
10 ad 24 157 c d 17 ad 22 157 e f 23 ad 28 157 f g 32 158 i ^ 16 1 ad 11 158 k
l m 12 ad 21 158 n o 17 2 ad 15 159 c d ^6* 159 f 34 ad 37 160 i 38 ad 53 160 k
l 18 6 ad 9 160 n o 17 ad 27 161 a b 19 3 ad 10 162 per tot. 14 ad 21 163 d e f
20 1 ad 11 164 f g h 16 ad 30 164 l m 33 ad 43 165 a b 21 1 ad 13 165 c d 22 1
ad 19 165 d e f 9 ad 21 166 per tot. 23 1 ad 14 167 b c d 19 167 c d 26 27 28
167 e f 24 5, etc. 167 g 10 ad 17 168 k 25 1 ad 35 168 l m 36 ad finem. 169 b c
26 per totum. 169 f, etc. 27 1 2 170 l 8 ad finem. 170 l m 28 1 ad 5 171 b 6 7
8 9 171 b c 8 ad 14 171 c d 16 ad 22 171 e f 29 3 ad finem. 171 f 30 1 ad 25
171 f g 31 1 2 3 172 i k 4 ad 13 173 a b c 2 Samuel.
1 1 ad 15 175 e f 2 1 ad 15 175 f g, etc. 17 ad 30 176 l 30 ad finem. 176 l 3
1 2 ad 17 176 m n 20 ad 26 177 c d 27 177 d 31 177 f g 33 34 35 178 h i 4 1 ad
12 178 l m 5 per totum. 178 n o 179 b c 6 1 ad 16 180 m n, etc. 7 1 ad 3 181 b
5 ad finem. 181 d, etc. 8 1 ad 8 181 e f 9 1 ad 11 182 n o 10 1 ad 19 183 b c d
11 1 ad 8 184 i k ^ 14 ad 17 184 l 18 ad 27 184 n o, etc. 12 1 ad 6 185 b 7 ad
13 185 c d 13 ad 24 185 e f g 27 ad finem. 186 i 13 1 ad 29 186 k l, etc. 30 ad
34 187 b c 14 1 ad 25 187 d e 24 ad 33 187 f g 15 1 ad 6 188 k 10 ad 14 188 l m
24 ad 32 188 m n 16 1 ad 18 189 b c 20 21 22 189 e f 17 1 ad 16 189 g 17 ad
finem. 190 m n 18 1 ad 7 191 c d 8 ad 18 191 e f 21 ad 33 192 i k 19 1 ad 9 192
m n 13 14 15 193 b c 22 ad 37 193 d e f 41 42 43 194 k l 20 1 ad 10 194 n o 16
ad 22 195 k 23 ad finem. 195 l 21 1 ad 9 195 m n 16 ad 20 196 a b 22 per totum.
196 d, etc. 23 8 9 196 d e 13 ad 18 196 g h 20 197 a 24 1 ad 10 197 c d 12 ad
23 197 e f 1 Kings.
1 1 ad 5 189 c d 11 ad 29 189 e f 30 200 h 33 ad 51 200 k l 2 1 ad 4 202 b c d
17 ad 24 203 e f 25 ad 35 204 h i 38 ad finem. 204 m n 1 ad 15 204 o a b 16 ad
finem. 205 d 24 25 27 205 e f 4 1 ad 26 206 i k 5 1 ad 12 206 n o 6 ad 10 207 a
b 11 ad finem. 207 d e 6 1 ad 5 207 f g 22 ad 29 208 n o 7 1 8 9 209 l 27 37 38
209 m 8 1 ad 5 210 e f 22 ad 54 211 i k 55 56, etc. 211 m n 62 63 66 212 c 9 1
2 212 e 6 ad 9 212 f 11 12 213 f 16 ad 21 215 a b 10 10 ad 18 215 c d 4 ad 13
215 e f 14 ad finem. 215 g 27 28 29 216 m n 11 1 ad 23 216 o a b 26 ad 35 217 n
o 30 40 218 i 12 1 ad 11 218 c d 6 7 8 218 e 8 ad 11 218 f 18, etc. 219 h i 21
22 219 i 26 27 29 219 k l 13 1 ad 4 2^0 a b 7 ad 10 220 d 13 ad 32 220 e f 14 2
ad 18 222 c d 15 1 ad 14 223 o h 15 17 21 225 i 16 1 ad 15 224 o 28 30 31 226 a
b 17 1 ad 16 226 c d 17 ad finem. 226 f g 18 1 2 227 h 13 17 227 k l 21, etc.
227 l 34 ad 40 227 n o 45 ad finem. 228 b 19 4 ad 6 228 b c 16 17 19 228 d e 20
1 ad 21 229 l m 230 a b 23 ad 27 230 e f 31 ad finem. 231 h i 21 1 ad 28 228 f
g h 22 2 ad 8 232 b 6 232 c 14 ad 28 232 d 28 ad 38 233 i 2 Kings.
1 1 ad 10 235 m n 2 11 236 d 3 11 ad 17 236 e f 22 ad 27 237 i k l 4 1 ad 7
237 n o 6 9 ad 19 238 b c d 24 28 238 g 31 32 33 239 k l 7 1 ad 19 239 l m 17
18 19 239 m n 8 7 8 9 240 e f 11 ad 22 240 g h 25 ad finem. 241 o 9 1 ad 6 242
a 11 13 15 242 b c 17 ad 31 242 d e 242 f g 10 1 ad 14 243 k l 18 ad 30 244 a b
11 1 2 3 244 b c 17 18 245 k 12 1 ad 16 245 l 18 245 m 13 20 21 247 b c 14 1 2
247 l m 23 25 249 l 15 14 250 d 34 250 f 38 251 k 16 1 2 3 4 251 l 7 ad 20 252
b c 17 3 ad 6 252 c 24 253 m 18 9 255 l m 17 23 255 o 19 1 2 256 b 20 ad finem.
256 e 35 36 37 256 f 20 1 ad 11 257 i k 14 ad 21 257 l m 21 1 2, etc. 258 a 18
258 d 22 1 ad 8 258 d 4 24 258 f g 8 13 259 i 15 ad finem. 259 k 23 5 11 260 a
22 260 c 23 ad finem. 260 d 24 11 ad 20 261 h 17 20 262 d e 25 per totum. 260 g
1 ad 10 263 k 1 ad 7 264 d e 265 h 4 ad 12 262 f 9 ad 18 265 i 18 ad 22 265 l
27 262 a 1 Chronicles.
22 1 ad 6 198 m 6 ad 24 198 n 7 ad finem. 198 o 23 13 14 200 n 26 1 ad 12 201
l 28 11 ad 18 201 m 29 5 ad 9 201 n 2 Chronicles.
4 2 209 l 7 1 212 b 11 5 2^1 b 11 13 221 b 12 2 ad 13 221 e f 13 1 ad 13 223 k
l m 14 per totum. 224 i k 9 ad 14 224 l 12 224 m 15 3 4 224 m n 17 1 226 a b 1
2 226 b c 18 1 ad 8 232 b 5 232 c 13 ad finem. 232 d e 27 232 f 28 ad finem.
23^ h i 19 1 ad 17. 234 d e 20 1 2 234 g 22 24 235 k I 21 12 241 I 16 17 18 241
n 24 1 ad 14 245 n 17 ad 21 246 b c 25 11 ad 16 247 n 17 ad 28 248 d e 18 ad 25
247 k 26 1 ad 10 249 m n 16 ad 21 250 b c 28 9 ad 19 251 l m 29 1 2 252 d 20 21
253 h i 30 31 253 i 32 33 257 n 33 1 ad 10 258 b 10 ad 13 258 c 14 ad 20 258 d
34 8 ad 21 258 e 23 ad finem. 259 k 35 22 23 24 260 c ^6 6 ad 21 260 g 37 1 ad
21 260 k l m Ezra.
1 per totum. 274 e 3 274 g 7 ad 20 275 i k 2 p^r totum. 275 l 3 4 5 8 279 k l
^ ad finem. 278 d 4 1 ad 6 279 o 2 ad 11 275 n 11 ad 22 276 b 5 3 ad 6 278 g 6
ad finem. 279 i 7 ad finem. 280 e 6 1 ad 15 278 b 4 5 6 278 b 7 ad 16 278 d 22
278 e 17, etc. 281 i 15 16 281 k 7 11 12 281 n 9 per totum. 283 h i 10 5 10 11
283 n Nehemiah.
1 1 ad 5 284 d 5 ad 11 282 c 2 1 ad 11 285 i 4 1 ad 15 285 k 16 ad finem. 285
k l 8 1 ad 11. 284 b Ester.
1 1 286 b 10 ad finem. 286 c d 2 7 ad 10 287 h 21 22 287 i 3 1 2 3 4 287 l 4 1
2 288 c d 11 288 e 16 17 288 f 5 1 2, etc. 289 k 4 289 l 6 287 n 8 9 287 l 14
289 n 6 1 2 3 4 289 o 6 ad 13 290 c d e 7 1 ad 10 290 e f g 8 1 2 291 i 5 ad
finem. 291 l 9 1 ad 10 292 c d 10 per totum. 292 f 293 per tot. Isaiah.
44 5 ad 10 274 f 45 1 ad 9 274 f g Jeremiah.
22 24 261 l 25 1 ad 12 261 l 29 1 ad 10 261 l m 37 per totum. 267 k 39 1 ad 14
263 k 40 4 265 g 6 ad finem. 265 c 42 per totum. 265 k 52 10 11 265 n 31 ad
finem. 267 h Daniel.
1 1 ad 16 267 n o 6 17 268 b c 2 20 ad finem. 268 f 3 1 ad 19 269 m 4 1 ad 29
269 n o 5 5 ad 30 271 h i 24 ad 31 271 n o 6 4 ad 16 272 b 24 ad finem. 272 f 7
3 ad 27 273 k 9 per totum. 273 n o Jonah.
1 per totum. 249 h i 2 per totum. 249 k l Nahum.
2 8 ad finem. 250 g

FINIS.

