Culpepers Idea of Practical Physic,

THE Idea Of Practical Physic IN TWELVE BOOKS. VIZ.

1 The Art to preserve Health. 2 Of the Preternatural Disorders of Man's Body,
and their Signs. 3 Of Medicaments. 4 Of the Art of Healing. 5 Of the general
Cure of Diseases. 6 Of External Diseases. 7 Of Fevers. 8 Of Head Diseases. 9
Of Middle-belly Diseases. 10 Of Lower-belly Diseases. 11 Of Venomous Diseases.
12 Of Childrens Diseases.
These Twelve Books are of excellent Use for all young Students in Physic. They
contain the Marrow of all the Works of Daniel Sennertus, and Fernelius, and
twenty five Physicians more, mentioned in the Authors Epistle. They are of so
high esteem with many Learned Doctors of Physic, that they have been read by
them to their Scholars, as the best extant in their kind. Written in Latin by
John Johnston, Professor of Physic in the famous City of FRANCFORT.

And Englished By Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology. And W
R.

LONDON; Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller, at the Sign of the
Printing-Press in Chornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1657.

The Printer to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
FInding by Experience how hardly such Gentlemen as Study Physic in our Mother
tongue, are induced to read with patience and consideration, the Speculative
Rules of the said Art; both (as I conceive) because of the seeming difficulty
thereof, compared to books of mere Practice, and because of the undue have that
the foresaid Gentlemen are wont to make to practice upon the sick, moved by
Covetousness, Vainglory, or I know not what other evil spirit; not knowing, or
little considering, how much the Reading of some such good Book is necessary to
enable a Man to Practice: By which unhappy error, they prove rather Empyricks
and Quacksalvers, than rational Physicians, which nevertheless they would
willingly be thought to be; to remedy so great a mischief, I have diligently
sought (and at last by direction of my good Angel, found) such an Institution,
so coupled with practice, and such a practice so walking hand in hand with an
Institution, such a practical Institution and Institutional practice, and both
in so clear a Method, so witty and concise a style, and furnished with such
ample and delightful variety of al things any way concerning the contemplative
or practical part of Physic; that I have all the Reason in the World to hope,
the publication hereof will prove an effectual Remedy to the foresaid very
grievous malady; acquainting the mere English Physician with such skill in the
Theory of his Art, as he has hitherto nauseated to receive, from any thing yet
published in our Language.

I need not spend time to praise our Author: this learned, ingenious, polite
Piece of his, will sufficiently do that, which he, being chose Professor of
Physic in the far renowned City of Francfort, See the Authors own Epistle
following the Catalogue of Books by me Printed.
and not able to read his Lectures, because of some troubles there, did publish
to supply that defect, as the best manuduction to young students into that
noble Art. And it is become of so high esteem beyond the Seas, that the
learned Professor of Physic at Leipsich, Dr. John Micael did use to bring it
up into his Pulpit, as his Physical Bible (if I may so say) out of which he
daily read his text, and made Sermons of that Art to his admiring Disciples.

What remains (Courteous Reader) but that thou meet my Endeavors for thy good,
and the good of my Country, with a cheerful Countenance and a joyful Heart, and
to take heed thou be none of those Fools, Who have a price in their hand to
get wisdom, but have no Heart to it; Prove. 17.16. But I have better hopes of
thee (Friendly Reader) though many such there are in the World.

Farewell. Thy Friend to Serve thee, if thou please, Peter Cole,

The Names of Books printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller of London:
and are to be sold at his Shop, at the sign of the Printing-press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange.
Twelve new Boosk in one Volum of Nich. Culpeper, All called the Idea of
Practical Physic.
1 The art to preserve Health. 2 The preternatural disorder of man's body, and
their Signs. 3 Of Medicaments. 4 Of the art of Healing. 5 Of the general Cure
of Diseases. 6 Of External Diseases. 7 Of Fevers. 8 Of Head Diseases. 9 Of
mild Belly Diseases. 10 Of Lower belly Diseases. 11 Of Venomous Diseases. 12
Of Childrens Diseases.
Twenty seven Books of Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology,
formerly published.
The first seventeen Books. Are al called the Practice of Physic, Wherein is
plainly set forth, The Nature, Cause, Differences, and several sorts of Signs;
Together with the Cure of al Diseases in the Body of Man. Being a Translation
of the Works of that Learned and Renowned Doctor, Lazarus Riverius, now living;
Councellor and Physician to the present King of France. Above fifteen thousand
of the said Books in Latin have been sold in a very few Years, having been
eight times printed, though all the former Impressions wanted the Nature,
Causes, Signs, and Differences of the Diseases, and had only the Medicines for
the cure for them; as plainly appears by the Authors Epistle. 18. A Sure Guide
to Physic and Chyrurgery: That is to say, The Arts of Healing by Medicine, and
Manual Operation. Being an Anatomical Description of the whole body of Man, and
its parts, with their Respective diseases, demonstrated from the Fabric and
use of the said Parts. In Six Books of Riolanus, translated, and adorned with
an hundred eighty four Figures cut in Brass. 19 Veslingus Anatomy of the Body
of Man, Wherein is exactly described, the several Parts of the Body of Man,
illustrated with very many larger Brass Plates than ever was in English before.
20 A Translation of the New dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians of
London. Whereunto is added The Key to Galens Method of Physic, 21 The English
Physician enlarged. being an Astrologo-Physical Discourse of the vulgar Herbs
of this Nation; wherein is showed how to cure a man's self of most Diseases
incident to Man's Body, with such things as grow in England, and for three pence
charge. Also in the same Book is showed, 1 The time of gathering al Herbs, both
Vulgarly and Astrologically. 2 The way of drying, and keeping them and their
Juyces. 3 The way of making and keeping al manner of useful Compounds, made of
those Herbs.
The way of mixing the Medicines according to the Cause, and Mixture of the
Disease, and the part of the Body afflicted. 22 A Directory for Midwives, or a
Guide for Women. Newly enlarged by the Author in every sheet, and illustrated
with diverse new Plates. 23 Galens Art of Physic, with a large Comment. 24 A
New Method both of studying practicing and Physic. 25 A Treatise of the
Rickets, being a Disease common to Children wherein is showed, 1 The Essence, 2
The Causes, 3 The Signs, 4 The Remedies of the Disease: Published in Latin by
Dr. Glisson, Dr. Bates and Dr. Regemorter, translated into English, And
corrected by N. Culpeper.
26 Medicaments for the Poor, Or Physic for Common the People. 27 Health for
the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physic.
Mr. Hookers New Books in three Volums: One in Octavo, and two in Quarto.
These Eleven New Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker, made in New England Are atteste
in an Epistle by Mr. Thomas Goodwin, and Mr. Philip Nigh, To be written with the
Authors Own hand: None being written by himself before. One Volum being a
Comment upon Christ's last Prayer in the Seventeenth of John: wherein is
opened, The Union believers have with God and Christ, and the glorious
Privileges thereof. Besides many other Gospel Truths, there is also showed. 1
That the end why the Saints receive al glorious Grace, is, That they may be
one, as the Father and Christ are one. 2 That God the Father loves the
Faithful, as he loves Jesus Christ. 3 That our Savior desires to have the
Faithful in Heaven with himself. 4 That the happiness of our being in Heaven,
is to see Christ's Glory. 5 That there is much wanting in the knowledge of Gods
Love, in the most able Saints. 6 That the Lord Christ lends daily direction,
according to the daily need of his Servants. 7 That it is the desire, and
endeavor of our Savior, that the dearest of Gods Love, which was bestowed on
himself, should be given to his faithful Servants. 8 That our Union, and
Communion with God in Christ, is the top of our happiness in Heaven.
The first eight Books: of the Application of Redemption, By the effectual Work
of the Word, and Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost Sinners to
God. In which (besides many other seasonable, and Soulsearching Truths) there
is also largely showed. 1 Christ has purchased al spiritual good for HIS. 2
Christ puts al HIS into possession of all that good that he has purchased. 3
The Soul must be fitted for Christ before it can receive him: And a powerful
Ministry is the ordinary means to prepare the heart for Christ. 4 The work of
God is free: And the day of Salvation, is while this Life last, and the Gospel
continue. 5 God calls his Elect at any Age, but the most before old Age. 6 The
Soul is naturally settled in a sinful security. 7 The heart of a Natural man is
wholly unwilling to submit to the Word that would sever him from his sins. 8
God the Father by a holy kind of violence, plucks His out of their corruptions,
and draws them to believe in Christ.
The Ninth and Tenth Books of the Application of Redemption by the Effectual
Work of the Word, and spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost sinners
to God. Besides many other seasonable, and Soul-searching Truths, there is also
largely showed. 1 The heart must be humble and contrite before the Lord will
dwell in it. 2 Stubborn, and bloody sinners may be made brokenhearted. 3 There
must be true sight of sin, before the heart can be broken for it. 4 Application
of special sins by the Ministry, is a means to bring men to sight of, and
sorrow for them. 5 Meditation of sin, a special means to break the heart. 6 The
same word is profitable to some, not to another. 7 The Lord sometimes makes the
word prevail most, when its most opposed. 8 Sins unrepented of, makes way for
piercing Terrors. 9 The Truth terrible to a guilty conscience. 10 Gross and
scandalous sinners, God usually exercises with heavy breakings of heart,
before they be brought to Christ. 11 Sorrow for sin rightly set on, pierces
the heart of the sinner thoroughly. 12 They whose hearts are pierced by the
Word, are carried with love and respect to the Ministers of it: And are busy
to enquire, and ready to submit to the mind of God. 13 Sinners in distress of
conscience, are ignorant what they should do. 14 A contrite sinner sees a
necessity of coming out of his sinful condition. 15 There is a secret hope
wherewith the Lord supports the hearts of contrite sinners. 16 They who are
truly pierced for their sins, do prise and covet deliverance from their sins.
17 True contrition is accompanied with confession of sin, when God calls
thereunto. 18 The Soul that is pierced for sin, is carried with a restless
dislike against it
Six Books more of Mr. Hookers in two Volums in Quarto, are printing.
Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into two Volumns.
Viz.
1 Scripture Light the most sure Light: compared with, 1. Revelations and
Visions. 2. Natural and Supernatual Dreams. 3 Impressions with, and without
Word. 4. Light and Law within. 5. Divine Providence. 6. Christian Experience.
7. Humane Reason. 8. Judicial Astrology.
Delivered in Sermons, on 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Christ in Travel: Wherein, 1. The
Travel of his soul. 2. The first and after effects of his Death, 3. His
Assurance of Issue. 4. And his satisfaction therein.
Are opened and cleared in Sermons, on Isa. 53 11. 3 A Lifting up for the
Cast-down, in case of, 1. Great sin. 2. Weakness of Grace. 3. Miscarriage of
Duties. 4. Want of Assurance, 5. Affliction. 6 Temptation. 7. Dissertion. 8.
Unserviceableness. 9, Discouragements from the Condition it self.
Delivered in thirteen Sermons, on Psalm, 42.11. His Four Sermons concerning, 4
Sin against the Holy Ghost. 5 Sins of Infirmity. 6 The false Apostle tried and
discovered 7 The good and means of Establishment 8 The great things Faith can
do. 9 The great things Faith can suffer. 10 The Great Gospel Mystery of the
Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and applied from Christ's Priestly Office.
11 Satan's power to Tempt, and Christ's Love to, and Care of his People under
Temptaton 12 Thankfulness required in every Condition. 13 Grace for Grace. 14
The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural Impossibilities. 15 Evangelical
Repentance 16 The Spiritual Life, etc. 17 The Woman of Canaan. 18 The Saints
Hiding Place, etc. 19 Christ's Coming etc. 20 A Vindication of Gospel Ordinances
21 Grace and Love beyond Gifts

Twelve Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately published; also the Texts of
Scripture upon which they are grounded.
1 Gospel Reconciliation, Or Christ's Trumpet of Peace to the World. Wherein is
Opened Gods exceeding willingness to be Reconciled to Man; And Gods sending his
Ambassadors to that End. From. 2 Cor. 5 19, 20, 21. 2 The Rare Jewel of
Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4.11. Wherein is showed, 1 What Contentment is.
2 It is an Holy art and Mystery. 3 The Excellencies of it. 4 The Evil of the
contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of it.
3 Gospel Worship, on Levit. 10.3. Wherein is showed, 1 The right manner of the
Worship of God in General; And particularly, In hearing the Word, Receiving the
Lords supper, and prayer. 4 Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1 17 Wherein is
showed, 1 That the Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by
the Light of Nature. 2 Beyond those that lived under the Law. 3 And suitable to
what Truths the Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those Men
that have their Portion in this Life only, on Psalm. 17.14. 5 A Treatise of
Earthly-mindedness: Wherein is showed, 1 What Earthly-mindedness is, 2. The
great Evil thereof, on Phil. 3. part of the 19. verse. Also to the same Book is
joined, A Treatise of Heavenly-mindedness, and walking with God, on Genesis 5.24.
and on Phil. 3.20.
6 An Exposition on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of the
Prophecy of Hosea. 7 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and tenth Chapters of
Hosea. 8 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth Chapters of
Hosea, being now complete. 9 The Evil of Evils, or the exceeding sinfulness of
sin, on Job 16.21. 10 Precious Faith, on 2 Pet. 1.1. 11 Of Hope, on 1 John 3.3.
12 Of Walking by Faith, on 2 Cor. 5.7.
Mr. Buroughs his fifty nine Sermons on Matthew. 11.28, 29, 30. Are Printing
A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the word of God at Dedham in Essex. Mr Rogers on Naaman the
Syrian, his Disease and Cure: Discovering the Leprosy of Sin and Self-love;
with the Cure, viz. Self-denial and Faith. Mr. Rogers his Treatise of Marriage.
The Wonders of the Loadstone. By Samuel Ward of Ipswich. An Exposition on the
Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew. By Mr. Ward. The Discipline of the
Church in New England: By the Churches and Synod there. The London
Dispensatory, in Folio, of a large Character in Latin. The London Dispensatory
in twelves, a small Pocket Book in Latin. Pious Man's Practice in Parliamentime.
Barriffs Military Discipline. The Immortality of Man's Soul. The Anatomist
Anatomized. The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech on the Scaffold. The King's
Speech on the Scaffold. A Looking-Glass for the Anabaptists. Woodwards Sacred
Balance. Dr. Owen against Mr. Barter. King Charles his Case, or an Appeal to al
Rational men concerning his trial. Mr. Brightman on the Revelation. Clows
Chyrurgery. Marks of Salvation. Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John
Goodwin. Great Church Ordinance of Baptism Mr. Loves Case, containing his
Petitions, Narrative, and Speech. A Congregational Church is a Catholic
Visible Church. By Samuel Stone in New England. A Treatise of Politic Powers,
wherein seven Questions are answered, 1 Whereof Power is made, and for what
ordained. 2 Whether Kings and Governors have an Absolute Power over the People.
3 Whither Kings and Governors be subject to the Laws of God, or the Laws of
their Country. 4 How far the People are to obey their Governors. 5 Whether all the People have, be their Governors. 6 Whether it be Lawful to depose an evil
Governor. 7 What Confidence is to be given to Princes.
The Compassionate Samaritan. Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians. Vox Pacifica, or a
Persuasive to Peace. Dr. Prestons Saints submission, and Satan's Overthrow. A
Relation of the Barbados. A Relation of the Repentance and Conversion of the
Indians in New England: by Mr. Eliot, and Mr. Mayhew.
Six Sermons preached by Dr. Hill. Viz. 1 The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive
Branch of Peace, and Brotherly Accommodation budding. 2 Truth and Love happily
married in the Church of Christ. 3 The Spring of strengthening Grace in the
Rock of Ages Christ Jesus. 4 The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ
their strength. 5 The Best and Worst of Paul. 6 Gods Eternal preparation for
his Dying Saints.

A Commemoration of King Charles his Inauguration. In a Sermon, By William Laud,
then Bishop of Canterbury. Abraham's Offer, Gods Offering: Being a Sermon by Mr.
Herle, before the Lord Major of London. Mr. Spurstows Sermon, being a Pattern
of Repentance. Englands Deliverance from the Northern Presbitery, compared with
its Deliverance from the Roman Papicy. In a Sermon on the 5 of Nov. 1651.
before the Parliament. By Peter Sterry. The Way of God with his People in these
Nations. Opened in a Thanksgiving Sermon, preached on the 5 of November. 1656.
before the Right Honorable, the High Court of Parliament. By Peter Sterry. Mr.
Sympsons Sermon at Westminster Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major. The Best
and Worst Magistrate. By Obadiah Sedgwick. A Sermon. A Sacred Panegyric. By
Stephen Martial. A Sermon. The Craft and Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries.
By Matthew Newcomin. A Sermon. The Magistrates Support and Burden. By Mr. John
Cordel. A Sermon. Mr. Owens stedfastness of the Promises. A Sermon. Mr.
Phillips Treatise of Hell. -- of Christ's Genealogy. The Cause of our Divisions
discovered, and the Cure propounded.
THE Authors Preface to the Reader.
THree things there are (Studious Reader) which I am to inform thee of in this
Preface: viz. of the Cause of my writing this Book; of the Structure or manner
of its Fabric; and of its use. I took this pains long since, only for my own
private occasions; and now my being called to be public Professor of Physic
in the University of Francfort, is the Cause that it appears upon the public
Stage of the world. For, seeing the Injuriousness of the times would not suffer
unto me to make it appear how much I valewed my Call to that Profession, and
what ardent desire I had to advance the Studies of young Learners, by public
teaching; I have done both in this Book. Hereunto were added the earnest
desires of certain friends, who assured me great good would redound to young
students of Physic by the publication thereof; and that though Trincavellus,
Fernelius, Pernumia, Petraeus, Bruel, Zacutus, had done excellently well; yet
that some of them being over brief did not meddle with the method of Cureing;
others made little or no mention of the Prognostic signs; others were taken up
with disquisitions; and some of them did not meddle with many diseases.
Moreover, they warned me not to suffer my self to be terrified with any fear
of detractions or calumnies. That such as were void of all virtue themselves,
did render themselves infamously famous among such as themselves, by detracting
from others. That envious persons vo^^ of like good themselves, did prostitute
their own fame by gnawing upon the glory of others, etc. Touching the
Structure, understand in short, it was my desire to bring into a small compass,
the Brief delination of al diseases in a manner, with their signs, causes,
differences, and Cure; that the diligence of the forenamed Authors might be
joined hereunto. Among Diseases I thought fit to put external ones in the first
place, both because it is fit to begin with such things as are best known to
sense: and because it is thought the first practice of Physic that ever was, was
conversant about them Chiron is reckoned to have been the first Physician that
ever was, and had his name from the most excellent skill in Chyrurgery. I have
marshalled the Sign^ before the Causes, that I might assist the natural method
of humane Conception, in the finding out of things, when this or that symptom
is related, I enquire into other signs. The disease being known, I proceed to
the variety of Causes. I have endeavored to reduce al to the Differences, both
that the disease might be thereby more exactly known, and the diversity of the
Cure more accurately expressed. If you shall ask what Authors I follow? you may
please to take notice, that I did long since Collect this Introduction to the
Practice of Physic, out of the Volums of Daniel Sennertus, that most renowned
Physician; whose method and order I do now also, welneare in all things, follow.
With him I have compared, Fernelius, Joel, Capivaccius, Liddelius, Aquapendens,
Petraeus, Ferdinandus, Fabricius, Martinus, Collutius, Fracastorius, Fallopius,
Quercetanus, Zacutus Lusitanus, Crucius, Platerus, Septalius, Heurnius,
Ferrandus, Hochstetterus, Untzerus, Mynsichtus, Beckerus, Hart-mannus,
Stockerus, and others; al which you shall find cited in their places. As for
Medicaments, I have set down those which I have found most highly commended, by
the best Physicians. Nor have I concealed such as in my Travels I have obtained
from certain brave men, nor such as I found in the Study of Mattheus Vechnerus
of blessed memory, chief Physician to the King, and my Father in Law; such a
Physician, as this Country of ours has hardly afforded his equal, and (which
makes most of al to his praise) a man void of Dissimulation, Boasting, and
pompous haughtyness of mind. And many times I have only pointed at the
Medicaments by naming them and their Authors, that I might thereby provoke
young Students to read the said Authors; and least that if I should have set
them down at large, young persons would have abused them by a dangerous
presumption. Concerning the Use, what it is, and when the student is to employ
the same, I shall now speak. As to the former, you have here an Introduction
into those vast works of Saxonia, Mercatus, Massaria, Capivaccius, Radius,
Sennertus, touching the diseases of Man's body. This work will serve instead of a
book of common-places, into which all that a man reads, may be referred, as to
an Index; whether they be such things as I have not touched, or serving to
correct some error (for I believe I may easily have erred) enlargement, or
clearing up of what is said. As to the latter, the student of Physic is first
to be well read in the Speculative Rules of the Art before he Practice. Also he
is to have skill in the Nature of Plants, Minerals, Anatomy, and Chimistry. And
this is that which I thought fit to acquaint thee with, Studious Reader.

Farewell.
THE CONTENTS OF ALL THE TWELVE BOOKS OF THE Idea of Practical Physic.
PROLOGUE.
BOOK I. Of that part thereof which we call Hygieine.
TItle, I. Of things not Natural, in General. 1 Chap. I. Touching things not
Natural, that are assumed, or taken into the body. 2 Article, I. Of the Air.
ibid Article, II. Of Meat. 5 Point, 1. Of the differences of Meats. ibid Point,
2. Of the sorts, or kinds of Meats. 7 Point, 3. Of Sauces, bread, and the time
of Eating. 16
Article, III. Of Drink. 18
Chap. II. Of Non-natural things done by a Man. 20 Chap. III. Of Non-natural
things externally used. 23 Chap. IV. Of Non-natural things which are voided and
retained. 24
Title, II. Of the Method of preserving Health. ibid Chap. I. Of preservation
of Health in general. ibid Chap. II. Of preservation of Health, in special; and
first of the good Habit. 25 Article, I. Of preserving the Health of well habited
persons. ibid Point, 1. Of preserving the Health of Infants, Children and
youths. ibid Point, 2. Of preserving the Health of middle-aged persons. 89
Point, 3. Of preserving the healths of old People. ibid
Article, II. Of preserving the Health of Intemperate persons. 26


BOOK II. Treating of the Preternatural Affections, or Disorders of Man's Body
and their Respective Signs.
TItle, I. Of a Disease in general. 1 Chap. I. Of the Nature of a Disease. ibid
Chap. II. Of the Diagnostick signs of a Disease. 4 Chap. III. Of the Diseases
Event, or Issue. 6
Title, II. Of the Causes of Diseases. 11 Chap. I. Of the internal Causes in
general. ibid Chap. II. Of the internal Causes of diseases in special. 12
Article, I. Touching Humors. ibid Point, 1. Concerning Humors offending in
Quantity, or a Plethora so called ibid. Point, 2. Of Humors offending in
Quality, or Cacochymia so called. ibid. Point, 3. Of Humors offending, in their
Motion, Place, and whole Substance. 13
Article, II. Of Winds. 14 Article, III. Of things totally against Nature. ibid

Title, III. Of Symptoms. 15
BOOK III. Touching Medicaments.
TItle, I. Of Medicaments in general. 1 Title. II. Of the sorts of Medicaments
and their Differences. 3 Chap. I. Of simple Medicaments. ibid Article, I. Of
such Medicaments as are dug out of the Earth. ibid Article, II. Of Vegitable
Medicaments. 4 Article, III. Of animal Medicaments. 8 Article, IV. Of Medicines
taken from the Body of Man, or the little World. 9
Chap. II. Of Compound Natural Medicaments. 9 Article, I. Of the Medicinal
Wels. ibid Article, II. Of Baths. 10
Chap. III. Of Compound artificial Medicaments in general. 11 Chap. IV. Of
Compound artificial Medicines in special. 12 Article, I. Of Internal
Medicamedts. ibid Point, 1. Of internal fluid Medicaments. ibid Point, 2. Of
internal solid Medicaments. 14 Point, 3. Of internal Medicaments of a middle
Consistence. 15
Article, II. Of external Medicaments. 16 Point, 1. Of external fluid
medicaments. ibid Point, 2. Of external solid medicaments. 13 Point, 3. Of
external medicaments of a middle consistnce. 14 Point, 4. Of external
indifferent medicaments. 19

Chap. V. Of medicaments denominated from their faculties. ibid. Article, I. Of
altering Medicaments. ibid Point, 1. Of hot medicaments. ibid. Point, 2. Of
cold medicaments. 20 Point, 3. Of moist^^ing medicaments. 21 Point, 4. Of dry
medicaments. ibid. Point, 5. Of medicaments, digestive, Emollient, Hardening
and Losening. 22 Point, 6. Of medicaments which Rarifie, condense, stop, and
open the mouths of the Vessels. ibid. Point, 7. Of Attenuating, Aperient, and
incrassating medicaments. 23 Point, 8. Of Obstructive, and Deobstructive
medicaments. ibid. Point, 9. Of Anodines, and Narcoticks. 24
Article, II. Of medicaments which cause motion. ibid. Article, III. Of
medicines which generate somewhat. ibid. Point, 1. Of Ripeners,
Quittor-breeders, and Flesh restorers. ibid. Point, 2. Of Sodderers, and
Scar-bringers. 25 Point, 3. Of milk and Seed-breeders. ibid.
Article, IV. Of corrupting medicaments. ibid. Article, V. Of medicaments which
take somewhat away. 26 Point, 1. Of purging medicaments. ibid. Point, 2. Of
Vomitories and Diuretics. 28 Point, 3. Of Hydroticks and Diaphoreticks. ibid.
Point, 4. Of medicaments which purge the Brain. 29 Point, 5. Of Expectorators.
ibid.

Chap. VI. Of medicaments denominated from the parts of the body. ibid.
Article, I. Of Cephalic medicaments. ibid. Point, 1. Of Cephalic medicaments,
which are hot. ibid. Point, 2. Of cooling Cephalic medicaments. 30
Article, II. Of Ophthalmick medicaments. ibid. Article, III. Of Chest
medicaments. 31 Point, 1. Of Heating breast Medicaments ibid. Point, 2. Of
cooling Chest medicaments ibid.
Article, IV. Of Cardiac or Heart-Medicines ibid. Point, 1. Of Heating
Heart-Medicines ibid. Point, 2. Of cooling heart-medicaments 32
Article, V. Of Stomach Medicaments. ibid. Point, 1. Of hot Stomach Medicaments
ibid. Point, 2. Of stomach cooling Medicaments 33
Article, VI. Of Epatick Medicaments. ib. Point, 1. Of hot Liver Medicaments.
ibid.
Article, VII. Of Splenetick Medicaments ibid. Point, 1. Of hot Splenetick
Medicaments ibid. Point, 2. Of cooling stomach medicaments 34
Article, VI. Of Liver-medicaments ibid. Point, 1 Of Heating Liver-medicaments
ibid. Point, 2. Of Liver coolers ibid.
Article, VII. Of Splenetick Medicaments 35 Point, 1. Of warming spleen
medicaments ibid. Point, 3. Of cooling spleen Medicaments ibid.
Article, VIII. Of Nephritick Medicaments ibid. Point, 1. Of heating
Nephriticks, or Kidney-remedies ibid. Point, 2. Of cooling Nephriticks 36
Article, IX. Of Vterine Medicaments. ib. Point. 1. Of heating Vterine or
Womb-Medicaments. ibid. Point, 2. Of Womb-cooling Medicaments ibid.

Chap. VII. Of vegetable Medicaments, referred to the seven planets. 37

BOOK IV. Of the Method of healing in General, and in Special.
TItle, I. Of the Method of healing in general. 1 Title, II. Of the Method of
healing in special. 2 Chap. I. Of the Additional Method ibid. Chap. II. Of the
abstructive Method in general. 3 Chap. III. Of the abstractive Method in
special, and first of the taking away of Causes. 4 Article, I. Of the taking
away of Causes which offend in Quantity ibid. Article, II. Of the Removal of
Causes which offend in the Quality. 5 Point, 1. Of alteration ibid. Point, 2.
Of Purgation. 6 Point, 3. Of provocation of Urine, Vomiting, and sweating. 8
Article, III. Of the Removal of Causes offending in Motion 9 Point, 1. Of
Revulsion and Repulsion. ib. Point, 2. Of derivation and Interception 10
Article, IV. Of the Removal of causes offending in place. 11 Point, 1. Of
Softening and Discussing. ib. Point, 2 Of Suppuration and Atraction ibid.
Article, V. Of Expulsion of wind, called Carmination ibid.


BOOK V. Touching the Removal of Diseases.
TItle, I. Of the Diseases of Similar parts, and their Cure. 1 Chap. I. Of the
Method of knowing and curing distempers without matter ibid. Chap. II Of the
diseases of distemper with matter 2 Chap. III Of Diseases springing from Hidden
qualities 3
Title, II Of Organical Diseases 4 Chap. I Of Diseases of Conformation. ib.
Article, I. Of diseases of Figure ibid. Article, II. Of diseases of the
Cavities. 5 Point, 1. Of diseases of the Cavities consisting in Excess ibid.
Point, 2. Of diseases of the Cavities in defect 6
Article, III. Touching Diseases of the Surface ibid.
Chap. II. Of diseases of Number ibid. Chap. III. Of diseases of Magnitude. 7
Article, I. Of Tumors ibid. Point, 1. Of an Imposthume 8 Point, 2. Of the Hole
in an Imposthume. 9
Article, II. Of diseases consisting in magnitude, diminished ibid.
Chap. VI. Diseases in Situation. 10 Article, I. Of Luxation ibid.
Title, IV. Of Diseases of Unity dossolved 11 Chap. I. Of Ulcers ibid. Chap.
II. Of Wounds 13 Chap. III, Of Fractures 16
Title, II. Touching Symptoms and their Removal 17 A single Chapter, Of pain
in general ibid.


BOOK VI. Treating of External Diseases.
Title, I. Of the several sorts of Tumors. 1 Chap. I, Of Swellings or Tumors
Caused by Blood ibid. Article, I, Touching over great Corpulency ibid. Article,
II. Of an Inflammation 2 Article, III. Of the Bubo, or Inflammation so called 3
Article, IV, Of the Phygetlon, Phyma, Furunculus, or Felon Tumor so called
ibid. Article, V. Of the Tumor Parotis 3 Article, VI. Of Nail-sores, Kibes and
Chilblains 4 Article, VII. Of an Ecchymoma ibid. Article, VIII. Of a Carbuncle
ibid.
Chap. II. Of Tumors springing from Choler 5 Article, I. Of an Erysipelas or
Tumor so called. ibid. Article, II. Of Herpes, or the Shingles 6
Chap. III. Of Tumors springing from Phlegm ibid. Article, I. Of the Tumor called
Oedema ibid
Chap. IIII. Of Tumors proceeding from the Melancholic Humor 7 Article, I. Of
the Tumor called Scirhus. ib. Article, II. Of a Cancer. ibid.
Chap. V. Of sumors springing from Wheyish, Salt and Choleric Humors mingled
together 8 Article, I. Of Scabyness ibid Article, II. Of the Phlyctaenae,
Sudamina, Sirones, and Vari, Tumor so called 9 Article, III. Of the
Epinyctides, Alphus, and Leuce ibid Article, IIII. Of the Impetigo and Gutta
Rosacea 10
Chap. VI. Of Tumors wherein the Humor is included in a proper Membrane ibid
Chap. VII. Of Tumors arising from a solid Substance. 11 Chap. VIII. Of Tumors
caused by solid parts falling from their due Situation ibid. Article, I. Of
Aneurisma, Varix, and Elephantiasis by the Arabians so called ibid.
Chap. IX. Of Malignant Tumors 12 A single Article. Of the Elephantiasis ibid.
Title, II. Of Diseases of the Skin 13 Chap. I. Of Lentigines, Ephelides,
Naevimaterni, Infantum Maculae ibid Chap. II Of the Maculae Hepaticae, itch,
and bad smells ibid.
Title, III. Of the Diseases incident to the Hair 14 Chap. I, Of falling off of
the hair ibid. Chap. II, Of the Porriga, and Plica 15
Title, IV, Of Ulcers in Particular ibid. Chap. I, Of the Gangraena ibid. Chap.
II, Of the Sphacelus 16 Chap. III, Of Burnings 17
Title, V, Of Luxations in Particular 18 Chap. I, Of Luxations of the Jaw Bone,
the Clavicula, and the Vertebrae ibid. Chap. II, Of Luxation of the Humerus,
Cubitus, Radius, and the Fingers ibid. Chap. III, Of Luxations of the Thigh,
Knee, and Ankle 19
Title, VI, Of Fractures in Specie 20 Chap. I, Of the more usual fractures of
the bodies ibid. Chap. II, Of less frequent fractures ibid.



BOOK VII Touching Fevers.
TItle, I, Of Fevers in General 22 Title, II, Of Unputred Fevers 23 Chap. I,
Of the fever Ephemera ibid. Chap. II, Of the fever Sinocha Simplex, 24
Title, III, Of Putrid Fevers in General. ib. Chap. I, Of continent putrid
fevers 26 Article, I, Of the Synochus putrida ibid
Chap. II, Of a continual Periodick fever in General 27 Articke, I, Of a
Primary continual fever, ibid Point, 1, Of a continual Tertian fever. ib.
Point, 2, Of a continual quotidian, or every day fever 28 Point, 3, Of a
continual quartan fever 29
Article, II, Of a continual Symptomatick fever ibid.
Chap. III, Of an intermitting fever, or Ague in general 30. Article, I, Of a
tertian intermitting fever, or tertian Ague 31 Article, II, Of a Quotidian
intermittent. 32 Article, III, Of an intermitting fever, or quartan ague 33
Article, VI, Of compounded fevers, particularly the Semitertian 34

Title, IV, Of the Hectic Fever 35 Title, V, Of Malignant Fevers 36 Chap. I,
Of malignant fevers in general, ibid. Chap. II. Of the several sorts of
malignant fevers 37 Article, I. Of the small Pox ibid. Article, II, Of the
Measles, and such like breakings forth 38 Article, III. Of the spotted fever
ibid. Article, IV. Of the Hungarian disease 39 Article, V. Of the sweating
sickness, the malignant fever with Cramping, and that with the cough and
catarrh ibid.

Title, VI. Of Pestilential Fevers 40 A single Chapter. Of the Pestilence
ibid.

BOOK. VIII. Of the Diseases of the Head.
TItle, I. Of the Diseases of the Brain. 1 Chap. I. Of the Distemper of the
Brain without Matter. ibid Chap, II. Of the Distemper of the Brain with Matter.
3 Chap, III. Of the streightness or narrowness of the passages of the Brain. 6
Chap. IIII. Of the Commotion of the Brain. 7 Chap. V. Of the Inflammation of the
Brain. 8 Chap. VI. Of the Tumor Hydrocephalus in the head. 9 Chap. VII. Of the
contusion, or Bruising of the Head ibid. Chap. VIII. Of the Wounds of the Head.
10 Article. I. Of the Wound of the skin, and the Piricranium. ibid. Article.
II. Of the wound or fracture of the Cranium or skul. 11 Article, III. Of the
Fracture of the Skul, together with the hurting of the Meninges. 12

Title, II. Of the Symptoms of the Brain. ib. Chap. I. Of the Symptoms of the
external Senses ibid. A single Article. Of the distemper Cephalalgia, or the
pain of the Head so called ibid.
Chap. II. Touching the symptoms of the common sense 14 Article, I. Of over
great and extraordinary watchings ibid. Article, II. Of the sleepy and drowsy
Coma, or Cataphora 15
Chap. III. Of the Symptoms of the Imagination 16 A single Article, Of the
vertigo, or turning round of the Head ibid.
Chap. IV. Of the symptoms of the Imagination, and the Ratiocination, when
they are hurt 18 Article, I, Of the hurt of the Memory. ibid. Article, II.
Delirium, or dotage 19 Article, III. Of a Frenzy 20 Article, IV, Of
Melancholy ibid. Article, V. Of Madness 22 Article, VI. Of Rabies, or raging
Madness 24
Chap. V. Of the symptoms of more of the internal senses ibid. Article, I. Of
the Waking Coma ibid. Article, II. Of a Lethargy 25
Chap. VI. Of the symptoms of the animal Motion 26 Article, I. Of Lassitude,
or Litherness ibid. Article, II, Of Restlessness, or Unquietness 27 Article,
III. Of Rigor, or an extreamstifness 28 Article, IV. Of Tremor, or Trembling 29
Article, V. Of the Palsy 30 Article, VI. Of a Spasm, or convulsion. 31
Chap. VII. Of those Symptoms that hurt the Internal senses, the Reason and
motion, together with the External Senses 33 Article, I. Of Incubus, or the
Night-hag, and Catalepsis ibid. Article, II. Of the Epilepsie, or
Fallingsickness 34 Article, III Of Carus 37 Article, IV. Of the Apoplexy 38
Chap. VIII. Of the Symptoms of the Excrements of the Head 39 A single
Article, Of a Catarrh ibid.

Title, III. Of the Diseases of the Eyes. 41 Chap. I. Of the Affects of the
Eyelids. ibid. Chap. II. Of the affects, or things that are amiss, in the Eye
brows 43 Chap. III. Of the affects, and what is amiss, in the Flesh that is in
tha Corners of the Eyes ibid. Chap. IV. Of the Diseases of the Adnata Tunicle
44 Article, I. Of the Ophthalmy ibid Article, II. Of the Nail, or little wing,
the Web, and the Hyposphagm of the Eye. 45
Chap. V. Of the Diseases of the Tunicle Cornea 47 Article, I. Of Crassities,
Nebula, and Albugo ibid. Article, II. Of the Pustules and Ulcers of the Tunicle
Cornea ibid. Article, III. Of the wounds of the Cornea (Tunicle) and the pain
of the Eyes 48
Chap. VI. Of the diseases of the Wea. ibid. Article, I. Of the falling forth
of the Uvea, and the Dilatation, widness and Narrowness of the Pupilla, Viz.
The Bal or Apple of the Eye ibid. Article, II. Of a Suffusion. 49
Chap. VII. Of what is amiss in the Humors of the Eyes 50 Chap. VIII. Of those
diseases that infest and annoy the Globe of the Eye 51
Title, IV. Of the Diseases of the Ears. 52 Title, V. Of the Symptoms of the
Ears. 53 Chap. I. Of Pain, and deafness ibid. Chap. II. Of the Noise or Ringing
of the Ears, and thickness of Hearing 54
Title, VI. Of the Diseases and Symptoms of the Nostrils. 55 Chap. I. Of the
Ulcers of the Nostrils, as also of Ozena, and Polypus. ibid. Chap. II. Of the
Hemorrhage, or bleeding of the Nostrils 56 Chap. III. Of the Hindering and
Hunting of the smell, Gravedo, (or Stuffing) and Sternutition (Or Sneezing) 58
Title. VII. Of the Diseases of the Tongue, and the Symptoms thereof. 59
Title, VIII. Of the Diseases and Symptoms of the Lips. 60 Title, IX. Of the
Diseases and Symptoms of the Face. 61 Chap. I. Of the Opening of the Mouth,
Gaping, and Yawning ibid. Chap. II. Of the Writhing of the Mouth. 62 Chap. III.
Of the Ptyalisme. 63
Title, X. Of the Affects of the Mouth. 64 Chap. I. Of the Aphthae, or
Exulcerations of the Mouth ibid. Chap. II. Of the Stinking of the Mouth. ibid.
Title, XI. Of the Diseases and Symtomes of the Teeth. 65 Chap. I. Of the
Diseases of the Teeth. ibid. Article, I. Of the Corrosion of the Teeth. ibid.
Article, II. Of the Looseness, or Movableness of the Teeth. 66
Chap. II. Of the Symptoms of the Teeth. ibid. Article, I. Of the Odontalgia,
or pain of the Teeth. ibid. Article, II. Of Stupor, Stridor, and Nigredo, in
the Teeth 68

Title, XII. Of the Affects of the Gums. ib. Title, XIII. Of the Affects of the
Jawbone 69 Title, XIV. Of the Affects of the Windpipe or Wesand. 70 Title, XV.
Of the Affects of the Tonsils. ibid.
BOOK IX. Of the Diseases of the middle Belly, Venture, or Region.
TItle, I. Of the Diseases of the Jaws, or Angina, that is, Squinancy 1 Title,
II. Of the Diseases of the Throat. 4 A Single Chapter, Of those Kernels we call
Strumae, and of Bronchocele, a swelling in the Throat ibid.
Title, III. Of the Diseases of the Aspera Arteria, or the great rough Artery.
5 Title, IV. Of the Diseases of the Lungs. ibid. Chap. I. Of the Distemper of
the Lungs. ibid. Chap. II Of Peripneumonia 6 Chap. III Of the streightness or
narrowness of the Lungs. 8 Chap. IV. Of the wounds of the Lungs. 9 Chap. V. Of
the Ulcer of the Lungs, or Phthisis 10
Title, V. Of the Diseases of the Thorax or Breast. 12 Chap. I. Of the
Infiamation of the Mediastine, or the Transverse Muscle, and the Tumors of the
Diaphragm ibid. Chap. II. Of the Pluresie 13 Chap. III. Of Empyema 15 Chap. IV.
Of the Consumption or wasting, and the Worms of the Back. 16
Title, VI. Of the Symtomes of the Lungs, and the Thorax, or Breast. ibid.
Chap. I. Of the Vices, or things amiss, in the Breathing ibid. Chap. II. Of
Asthma. 17 Chap. III. Of the Cough 18 Chap. IV. Of Haemoptysis, or spitting of
Blood 20
Title, VII. Of the Affects of the Heart. ibid. Chap. I. Of the Palpitation of
the Heart. ibid. Chap. II. Of Fainting or Swouning. 22
Title, VIII. Of the Affects of the Paps, or breasts in Women ibid. Chap. I. Of
the Diseases of the Papps. ibid. Article, I. Of the Tumors or Swellings of the
Paps. ibid. Article, II. Of the Cancer, and Greatness of the Paps ibid.
Chap. II. Of the Symptoms of the Breasts. ibid. Article, I. Of the want of
Milk, too great abundance thereof, and it is Coagulation or Curdling. 26


BOOK X. Concerning the Diseases of the lower Belly.
TItle, I. Of the Affects of the Gullet. 1 Chap. I. Of the Diseases of the
Gullet. ib. Article, I. Of the Distemper and Tumor of the Gullet. ibid.
Article, II. Of the Straitness, wounds, and Ulcers of the Gullet. 2
Chap. II. Of the Symptoms of the Gullet. ibid.
Title, II. Of the affects of the Stomach. ibid. Chap. I. Of the diseases of
the stomach. ibid. Article, I. Of the distemper of the stomach in general. 3
Article, II. Of the distemper of the stomach without matter ibid. Article, III.
Of the distemper of the stomach with matter 4 Article, IV. Of the Tumors of the
stomach. ibid. Article, V. Of the Wounds and Ulcers of the stomach 5
Chap. II. Of the Symptoms of the Stomach. 6 Article, I. Of the Pain and heat
of the stomach. ibid. Article, II. Of the want of Appetite. 7 Article, III. Of
the too great Appetite. 8 Article, IV. Of a depraved Appetite, or Pica ibid.
Article, V. Of too great Thirst. 9 Article, VI. Of the hurt of Concoction or
Chylification. ibid. Article, VII. Of the Hickopps. 10 Article, VIII. Of
belching and rumbling. 11 Article, IX. Of na^seousness and Vomiting ibid.
Article, X. Of Choler 13

Title, III, Of the Affects of the Guts 14 Chap. I, Of the Diseases of the
Guts. ibid. Article, I, Of the Inflammation of the Guts. ib. Article, II,. Of
the Straitness of the Guts ibid. Article, III, Of Worms 15 Article, IV. Of the
Rupture of the Guts 18 Article, V, Of the falling down of the Fundament, and of
the wounds and Ulcers of the Guts 17
Chap. II, Of the Symptoms of the Guts ibid. Article, I, Of the Illiack
Passion ibid. Article, II, Of the Chollick 18 Article, III. Of Costiveness of
body 20 Article, IV, Of a Looseness 21 Point, 1. Of a Lientery, and Coeliaca.
ibid. Point, 2. Of the Diarrhy. 22 Point,, III. Of a disentery 24 Point, IIII.
Of the Bloody and Hepatick flux 26


Title, IV. Of the affects of the right guts 27 Chap. I. Of the diseases of the
right gut ib. Chap. II. Of the symptoms of the right Gut 28 Article, I. Of
Itching and the Tenesmus ibid Article, II. Of the Flux and stopageof the
Hemorrhoide. ibid

Title, V. Of the affects of the mesentery. 29 Chap. I. Of the distemper and
obstruction of the Mesentery ibid. Chap. II. Of the inflammation and
impostumations of the mesentery. 30 Chap. III. Of the Pain of the Mesentery,
and the affects of the Caul, and pancreas 31
Title, VI. Of the affects of the Liver. 32 Chap. I. Of the diseases of the
Liver. ibid Article, I. Of the Distemper of the Liver ibid. Article, II. Of the
obstruction of the Liver 33 Article, III. Of an inflammation of the Liver 34
Article, IV. Of a Shcirrus of the Liver. 36 Article, V. Of the Wounds and
ulcers of the Liver. ibid.
Chap. IIII. Of the Symtomes of the Liver 37 Title, I. Of the weakness of the
Liver. ibid. Article, II. Of a Cachexy. 38 Article, III. Of the dropsy in
general. ibid. Article, IIII. Of an Ascites. 39 Article, V. Of a Tympanny, and
Anasarca. 40 Article, VI. Of the Jaundice. 41 Article, VII. Of an Atrophy 42

Title, V. Of the Affectes of the spleen. 43 Chap. I. Of the diseases of the
spleen. ibid. Artcle, I. Of the obstructions of the spleen. ib. Article, II. Of
an inflammation of the spleen and schirrus. 44 Article, III. Of an Ulcer and
wound of the spleen. 45
Chap. II. Of the Symptoms of the spleen ib. Article, I. Of the pain of the
spleen, and black Jaundice. ibid Article, II. Of the Hypochondriacal affection
ib. Article, III. Of the Scurvy. 47

Title, VIII. Of the affects of the kidneys. 51 Chap. I. Of the diseases of the
kidneys. ibid. Article, I. Of the straightness of the Kidneys. ibid. Article,
II. Of an inflammation of the Kidneys 52 Article, III. Of the stone of the
Kidneys. 53 Article, IV. Of an Ulcer and Wound of the Kidneis 54
Chap. II. Of the Symptoms of the Kidneys ibid.
Title, IX. Of the affectes of the bladder 55 Chap. I. Of the Diseases of the
Bladder ibid. Article, I. Of the stone of the bladder. ibid. Article, II. Of an
inflammation, scab, ulcer and fistula of the bladder. 56 Article, III. Of the
straitness of the Vrinary Passage. ibid.
Chap. II. Of the symptoms of the bladder. 57 Article, I. Of the incontinency
of the urine ibid. Article, II. Diabites. ibid. Article, III. Of an Ischury. 58
Article, IV. Of a strangury. 59 Article, V. Of a disury 60 Article, VI. Of
Pissing of blood, matter, and Hairs. ibid.

Title, X. Of the affects of the Genital Parts in Men 61 Chap. I. Of their
diseases ibid. Article, I. Of the diseases of the stones. ibid. Article, II. Of
the diseases of the cod. 62 Article, III. Of the diseases of the yard. 63
Chap. II. Of the symptoms of the Genital parts in men ibid. Article, I. Of
the generation of seed hurt, and the erection of the yard. ibid. Article, II.
Of Lechery, a Priapisme, and Satyriasis. 64 Article, III. Of a running of the
Reins. ib.

Title, XI. Of the diseases of the genital parts in Women. 69 Chap. I. Of the
diseases of the Neck of the womb. ib. Article, I. Of a Tentigo and Canda ibid.
Article, II. Of the straightness of the Neck of the womb 66 Article, III. Of
the pustles, Condilomata, and Hemorrhoids of the womb ibid. Article, IV. Of the
ulcers of the neck of the Womb 70
Chap. II. Of the diseases of the womb. 68 Article, I. Of the distemper of the
womb. ibid. Article, II. Of the straitness of the Vessels of the womb. 69
Article, III. Of an inflation of the Womb. 67 Article, IV. Of an inflammation of
the womb. 68 Article, V. Of a scirrbus of the womb. ibid. Article, VI. Of a
Dropsy of the womb. 72 Article, VII. Of the falling down of the womb. ibid.
Article, VIII. Of the ascent of the womb, its wounds and Ulcers. 73

Title, XII. Of the Symtomes of the Womb. 74 Chap. I. Of the common Symptoms.
ibid. Article, I. Of the weakness of the womb. ib. Article, II. Of the pain of
the womb. ibid. Article, III. Of the suppression of the Courses. 75 Article,
IV. Of a dropping, and difficulty of the Courses. 76 Article, V. Of the
discoloring of the courses. 77 Article, VI. Of an inordinate flux of the
Courses. 78 Article, VII. Of too much flowing of the Courses. ibid. Article,
VIII. Of the woman's flux and Gonorrbaea. 79
Chap. II. Of the Symptoms more familiar to those that live out of Wed-lock.
80 Article, I. Of the Virgins Disease. ibid. Article, II. Of the Suffocation of
the womb. 81
Chap. III. Of the Symptoms proper to married women. 83 Article, I. Of the
Symptoms about Conception ibid. Point, 1. Of Barrenness. ibid. Point, 2. Of a
Mola. 84
Article. II. Of the Symptoms of women with Child. ibid. Article, III. Of the
Symptoms about the dilivery. 85

Title, XIII. Of the Affect of the Belly. 87 A single Chapter, Of the Rupture
of the Navel, and Inflammation of the Muscles of the Belly. ibid. An Appendix,
Concerning the Gout. 88

BOOK XI. Concerning Poisonous Diseases.
TItle, I. Concerning the French Pox. 1 Title, II. Of Poisons. 4 Chap. I. Of
Poisons dug out of the Earth. ibid. Chap. II. Of Vegetable Poisons 5 Chap.
III. Of Poisons from live Creatures ibid.

BOOK XII. Of the Diseases of Children.
TItle, I. Of the Diseases of the Head. 1 Title, II. Of the Diseases of the
middle Belly. 8 Title, III. Of the Diseases of the lower Belly. 9
Mris. Culpepers Information, Vindication, and Testimony, concerning her
Husbands Books to be Published after his Death.
SO great are the Afflictions wherewith our Heavenly Father has been pleased
to exercise me his poor Handmaid, that I have not only l^ved to see my dear
Husband, (the Stay and Solace of my Life) taken from me: but a has been my
hard hap also to see his Reputation, and Memory (which will be dear to al
Posterity, for the Works he has written for the Common Good of this Nation)
blemished, and Eclipsed, by the covetous and unjust Forgeries of one, who,
though he calls himself Nathaniel, is far from being an Israelite in whom there
is no guile; who was not content to publish a H^dgpodg of undigested
Collections, and Observations of my de^r Husband de^^ased, under the Title of
Culp^per's last Legacy; but to make the Deceit more taking, be st^^led his
Forehead so far, and brased it so hard, as not to be ashamed to forge two
Epistles, one in mine, and the other in my Husbands Name; of the penning of
which, he nor I, never so much as dreamed: And yet he impudently affirms in
my Name, that my Husband Laid a severe Injunction on me to publish them for the
general good, after his decease; and that they are his last Expe^ences in
Physic and Chyrurgery. And in the Title of his Book, he said, They are the
choycest, and most profitable secrets, resolved never to be published til after
his Death. Al which Expressions in the Title and Epistles, are as falls as the
Father of Lies; and every word in them, forged and feigned. And he know well
enough, that no discreet, honest man, that was a friend to my Husband, or me,
would ever have agreed to such (...) and dishonest practices; and therefore I
desire all Courteous Readers of the Writings of my Husband, to take notice of
this Deceit, and to assure themselves that it never entered into his head, to
publish such an undigested Gallimoffery, under the promising and solemn Name of
his Last Legacy, and that whereby he gained his Reputation in the World, as the
Imposter makes him speak in his forged Epistle. And I desire any in different
Reader, that has observed my Husbands lofty, and Masculine manner of
expressing himself in his Prefaces, and Epistles Dedicatory, whether in case he
had been minded or disposed to take so solemn a farewell of the world, as the
Forger makes him to do; whether, I say, he would have done it in such a whining
fashion, and so in the Style of a Balade-maker, as to say, And now, if it
please Heaven to put a period to my Life, and Studies, that I must bid al
things under the Sun farewell: Farewell to my dear Wife and Child, farewell Arts
and Sciences, farewell a^ worldly Glories, adieu Readers. Certainly my Husband
would have been far more serious, and material, in such a case, as any discreet
man will Judge. Neither can it be thought, that in such a solemn Valediction, he
could possibly forget his wonted respects to the College of Doctors, to whom he
did so frequently address himself, in diverse of his writings.

Courteous Reader, I shall say no more touching the abuse of the Bookseller,
only to prevent (as much as concerns me) thy being abused for the future, know,
That my Husband left seventy-nine Books of his own making, or Translating, in
my hand, and I have deposit^^ them into the hands of his, and my much hono^ed
Friend, Mr. Peter Cole, Bookseller, at the Printing-Press, near the Royal
Exchange (for the good of my Child) from whom thou may expect to receive in
print, such of them as shall be thought fit to serve thee in due season, without
any Disguises or Forgerigs, unto which I do hereby give my attestation. Also my
Husband left seventeen Books completely perfected, in the hands of the said Mr.
Cole, for which he paid my Husband in his lifetime: And Mr. Cole is ready and
willing (on any good occasion) to show any of the said seventy-nine Books, or
the seventeen, to such as doubt thereof.

And if any Person shall question the Truth of any part of this Vindication, or
Epistle; if they will take pains to come to ^e, I will face to face, justify the
truth of every word thereof, as I have subscribed my Hand, ^hereunto in the
presence of many witnesses.

I profess in t^^ presence of the great God, the searcher of al hearts, before
whom Mr. Brooks and I must one day give an account of al our Actions: That I
have not published this Epistle or Vindication, out of any disrespect to Mr.
Brooks (for I much respect the man, and would be glad to serve him to my power)
but only to clear my Husband from the folly and weakness cast upon him by the
means above expressed. And out of tenderness to Mr. Brooks, I first ^^^ed other
means of keeping, and afterward of repairing my Husbands Credit, and then
stayed long to see if he would repair (in any measure) the wrong done to my
Husband, and my self. I desire to be.

From my House, next door to the Red Lion in Spittle-fields, October, 18. 1655.
Your Servant (in, and for the Truth) Alice Culpeper.

Mris. Culpeper did the 18. of October, subscribe this Epistle in Vindication
of her Husband's Reputation, before Ten Witnesses, as she had done another
Epistle on the ninth of October, almost in the same words with this, except
near the Conclusion.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE IDEA OF PRACTICAL PHYSIC.
Of that part thereof which we call Hygieine.
Title I. Of things not Natural, in General.
HYgieine is a part of practical Physic prescribing the means and way of
preserving and maintaining the Health, by the use of things not Natural. Things
not Natural we call those, which albeit they are to be accounted and reckoned in
the number of things Natural; yea, and moreover as such that are necessarily
required both to defend and preserve the health while it is enjoyed, and
likewise to restore and recover it when absent and lost; yet notwithstanding
they do not any way constitute either the Essence; or the Nature of the body
whilst it lives; but on the other side often affect and disturb the Body of
Man, and impair the health thereof. From whence it is that some have
distinguished and reduced them under these two Heads, viz. of things healthful,
and unhealthful.

The Prescription is spoken to, and completed in two parts. The former whereof
enumerates and recounts those things that are not Natural; and declares in
what manner they affect Man's body. They commonly call this part, Dietetical, in
reference unto the diet that is observed. The other opens the Method of
preserving the health, by showing us the way and means how we may so use these
things not natural, that they may not, in the least hurt or offend our bodies.

Of Things not natural there are four ranks or Classes. The first contains
those things that are taken and received into the Body. The second, those
things in and about which the body is exercised. The third, such things as
happen unto the body from without. The fourth and last comprehends those things
that are voided forth of the body, to wit, the Excrements.

Chap. I. Touching things not Natural, that are assumed, or taken into the Body.
Article, I. Of the Air.
THings not Natural that are received into the body, are Air, Meat, and drink.

Air is a thing not natural, surrounding or encompassing the body of Man, and
insinuating it self into it by certain pores and passages.

Touching this Air there are four things observable. First, that it is
necessary to the very being of Health. Secondly, That it affects man's body.
Thirdly, That there are many differences thereof. Fourthly, That it is subject
and Liable unto diverse changes and alterations.


And first of al, That it is necessary and requisite unto the very being and
preservation of health, (yea indeed so far forth necessary, that if any one
intercept the said passages of the Air into the body, it unavoidably perishes
in a moment or very short time) appears even from hence, to wit, that unless
the heart should be cooled, and unless that the Internal fire or heat should be
ventilated and excited, and lastly, unless the spirits should continually be
refreshed and revived, a man could not possibly put forth, or exercise his
Actions. Now the Air is therefore attracted by the Lungs, that it may qualify
and temper the overgreat heat of the Heart. The same Air likewise by its motion
(as it were with a Fan) ventilates and cooles the internal heat, so that it not
only becomes more moderate, but is also thereby excited and stirred up. And
lastly, the same aforesaid Air being from without attracted inwardly by the
rough Arteries (usually termed asperae) and first of al prepared and wrought
upon in the very flesh of the Lunges, and next of al in the Heart and Arteries
(those of them more especially that are in the Netlike folding (we commonly call
it plexus retiformis) and last of al (most perfectly and exquisitely) in the
ventricles of the Brain, by its substance, generateth and produces spirits.
Secondly, It Affects the Body of Man after a twofold manner. First, as it
surrounds it either naked or clothed. Secondly, As it insinuates it self into
the same, whether it be by inspiration, which is done either by the Mouth
according to the taking in and putting forth of the breath; or by the Arteries,
according to their dilatation and compression: or otherwise by Transpiration,
which is performed all the skin throughout, and in each part thereof by those
exceeding small passages (not unlike unto those of a very fine five) which the
Greeks call Porous, the Latins, poros; we in English pores.
Thirdly, It derives its differences from the quantity, quallity, and substance
thereof. I. In respect of its Quantity, it is copious, scant, full, which last
Hippocrates (in his tract of breathings or blasts) calls athrooteron, that is to
say, al at once and speedily breaking in upon us. II. In regard of its Quality,
1. Hot, and this augments the cholor, melts away the humors, weakens and
hinders Concoction; and consequently by dissipating the Native heat it very
much shortens the life. 2. Cold, which by shutting the pores or passages of the
skin, and so hindering perspiration, excites putrid Fevers, or else by
compression causes destillations, forces the Blood oftentimes out of the
Veins, from whence proceed inflammations; and then it extremely hardneth
whatsoever is in the belly. 3. More than ordinarily moist, which heapeth up
together phlegm and store of Crudities. 4. Over dry, which (its true) wastes and
consumes the superfluous humors; but again it breeds acute fevers through the
abundant increase of sharp humors; and it likewise exceedingly dries the skin.
5. Corrupt, whether overmuch exceeds in the first qualities, or else is
rendered impure by reason of vapors arising from Lakes, standing waters, fenny
and Moorish places; or else such as cannot be cleansed and purified by the
through blasts of the wind. 6. That which is the best, which is temperate in
the first qualities, pure, subject to no infection or polution, seren, clear,
sweetly and gently stirred to and fro by frequent blasts and gentle gales of
winds, and which is often times moystened with wholesome and healthful showers of
rain.
III. In relation to its substance, it is, 1. Thick, which for the most part
intercepts the very sight, and hinders the prospect, so that either we cannot
at al discern the stars, or if we do, they appear unto us much less than at
other times, or at least as much darkened and overcast. 2. Troubled or
tempestuous, which has diverse of its thicker parts, (as it were made up of
their moisture) violently hurried amidst the serene and clear, by turbulent and
tempestuous winds. 3. Thin, which is contrary to the former, transparent,
serene, free from vapors, and thoroughly cleansed by the thorough blasts of
Winds. 4. Putrid and rotten, whether it be that it putrefie of its own accord,
as wanting ventilation, (as for instance) that which is on every side shut up,
and as it were imprisoned by high Mountains, or else that it becomes corrupted
from some other cause, as suppose, from the Heavens, the Stars, the Winds
blowing from infected places, or from some noisome pestilent vapor, etc. 5.
Healthful and wholesome, which has its original and its whole constitution from
and under benign and healthy Climats, is stirred and driven to and fro by
wholesome Winds, and is not in the least vitiated or corrupted by the vapors that
proceed from any putrid and impure, whether things or places.

Fourthly, The Air takes its mutations or Changes (which Galen calls Alteration
according to the Constitution) from these ten things more especially. First,
From the Stars and Constellations; for both the Planets, and likewise the fixed
Stars have in them much of power and influence upon these inferior Bodies.
Concerning the influences of the former, we may at large read in Porphyrius, in
the fourth Chap. of his paraphrase upon the Books of Ptolomy, as touching the
effects of the stars. And Hippocrates writes that most Women conceive at the
full of the Moon. Touching the latter, to wit, the fixed stars, it is easily to
be seen, and manifestly perceived even in the lesser Dog Star alone, the
Pleiades and Arcturus. For upon the rising of the Dog Star the Seas grow
tempestuous and fluctuating, Wines work afresh and fluctuate in the Cellers,
Dogs run mad, and the like. At the Settling of Pleiades, great Tempests and
North-east Winds arise; and upon the Settling of Arcturus, storms and Hail.
Secondly, From the different times of the year, as well the greater, which by
the Physicians (in regard that they have in them the reason of the greatest
changes and alterations proceeding from the rising and setting of the Stars of
the first magnitude) are comprehended under a septenary or seven fold number;
and are commonly reduced unto the Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter; as the
lesser, to wit, Months, Weeks, and Days. For the Spring is hot and moist. The
Summer hot and dry. The Autumn cold and dry. The Winter cold and moist. The
Qualities of the Months ought to be taken from the sign of the Zodiac that
rules, and has as it were a sovereign power in them. The qualities of the
Weeks are derived from the Quarters of the Moon; of which the first is moist,
the second hot, the third dry, the fourth cold. The qualities of the days from
the parts thereof; of which the Morning part is in a manner springlike, the
Noon part like unto the Summer, the Evening thereof resembling the Autumn, and
the night not unlike unto the Winter: howbeit there is in this but little of
weight or moment, and therefore not much regard to be had thereunto. Thirdly,
From the Winds, and those as well common, (of the which some are Anniversary, as
keeping their course at one certain time every year; as for instance, those we
call Chelidoniae, Etesiae, and Prodromi, which two latter are Winds blowing out
of the East yearly, at one certain ^^me, and rising out of ground eight days
before the rising of the Dog Star) others that appertain, and are more usual in
some Regions than in other (whether they be from the Earth, or from the Sea:)
as proper; such as is that Wind which they call Chenerona, unto those that live
near unto the river Phasis in Cholchis, Attabulus unto the Apulians, Garbas (a
south east Wind) unto the Sicilians, Japix unto the Calabrians, etc. And there
take notice, 1. That al Winds whatever do in their own Nature Moisten and
refrigerate. 2. That they assume a different temperament (this or that)
according to the situation and condition of those places through which they
blow. 3. That of the Septentrinal or Northerly Winds, (when they blow strong)
that which we call Boreas (being a full North Wind) is the most vehement: those
that blow at the half point are next unto it; of those that are Collateral, it
is to be observed that Boreas is more warm and moist than the Easterly wind
Subsolanus: and likewise that Boreas is more cloudy than the West Wind
Favonius. 4. Of the Oriental Winds, which moderatly heat and dry, when they
blow from the Earth even these (when they rise from the Sea) do moisten. That
called Eurus, which blows from the East in the Winter season, receivs somewhat
of the nature of Auster or the South Wind; and Caeceas, that blows from the
East in the Summer season, retains something of the Boreal or Northern Winds,
and is styled the Gatherer and driver together of the Clouds. Unto the Easterly
Wind Subsolanus (that blows from the East at the Equinoctial, that agrees (and
may be said thereof) which has been said of the Winds in general. 5. The
Occidental or Westerly Winds are moderatly cold and moist. But in Vasconia they
are so hurtful and dangerous, that they seldom or never bluster there, without
causing dread and terror unto the Inhabitants thereof. 6. The Meridional or
Southerly Winds are Watrish, Cloudy, and such as cause al sorts of Diseases:
yet notwithstanding, that which we call Phoenix, is less baneful than the
Libonotus, in regard of its near approach unto the Subsolanus. See (at large
and accurately discoursing of these) Berulam, and Frederick Bonaventure.
Fourthly, From the other Meteors. For these Meteors, if they be pure, such as
are the burning and flaming torches, the Arrows, Flying Dragons, they produce
and cause Fire, and immediate Heat and Dryness of the Air, that I may sp^^k
nothing of their pestilent corrupting Quality. If they be impure, such as are
the Comets, Thunders, Lightenings, they cause droughts, Pestilences,
Barrennesses, Floods, excessive Heats, etc. What power there is in the Aereal
Meteors, and what they can do, has been declared before in their proper place:
Let it suffice therefore to have added this one only thing, to wit, that
Plagues and Pestilences are wont to arise, and follow upon great Earthquakes:
concerning which, see Seneca, in his sixth B. 11. quest. Chap. 27 and 28. Of
the Watery Meteors, Rains if they be of long continuance, they most commonly
bring in and cause the putrefaction of the Air. The Dew if it be more frequent
than ordinary, generats hurtful and destructive small Worms. Frost discoloreth
the buds of Vines, and the Ears of Corn, and makes them to look black. Snow
makes the Air thick and gross. Touching these, Consult Fromondus, Keckerman,
and above al, Cabeus. Fifthly, From the Zones, of the which therefore one is
called the Torrid, another the Frigid, and a third the Temperate Zone. As for
Regions of the Torrid Zone, by reason of their excessive heat, the Ancients
thought them to be uninhabitable: but we have known the Contrary; and have
found them (in regard of equaltty of the Nights with the Days, the frequent
falling of showers, the situation of the several parts and places therein
distinguished by Vales and Mountains, the neerness of the Ocean unto them, and
lastly the gales of Wind that sweetly and gently blow as well at some cetrain
and constant seasons, as at other times extraordinary) to be very Commodious
and fit for habitation. The Hollanders have discovered and learned the state
and condition of the Frigid Zone, when as they sought out a passage into
Cathaia through the Icie Ocean. Sixthly, From the Climates, which are nothing
else but the spaces of the Earthly Globe between two Paralels toward one and
the same Pole, distinguishing Regions one from the other (in reference to their
distance from the Equator) by the space of half an hour in a day, albeit that
this difference is not perceptible, or at least not easily discerned, in those
Climates that lie and approach more nigh unto the Pole: of al which Climats,
the seventh, that runs through Venice and Millain between the twelfth and
fourteenth Parallel, is held to be the most temperate: yet not because it is not
subject and liable unto any excess or mutation; but in regard that it admits
not of such exceeding great Vicissitudes and changes, if we compare them with
the Tempests of the extreme Regions. And yet notwithstanding a due respect and
special regard is to be had unto the proper situation of each particular
Region, because of the general sight and position of the places. Seventhly,
From those Regions of the World that are called the Cardinal Regions. For the
Oriental Regions are indifferently temperate; and they have clear and pure
waters, of a sweet smell; and the inhabitants thereof are well favored, sound,
and their Women very fruitful. On the contrary, the Occidental Regions are
extreme sickly and unhealthful; they have thick and muddy waters, and the
people thereof are of an il color. The Meridional or Southerly Regions abound
with store of waters somewhat salt, sublime, and they that inhabit in them are
evermore subject to moist heads, and obnoxious to a flux or looseness of the
Belly. The Setentrional or Northern Regions have their waters harsh and cold;
the people thereof are dry, long-lived, and of a tall stature. The Oriental
Regions are more healthy than the Occidental, as well because the Sun it its
vigor dissolveth those moist vapors that it drew up at the rising thereof; as
also in regard that it does not only not dissolve those which all the day it
hurrieth along with it self toward the West, but likewise that it excites and
stirs up many more vapors in the West, and so leaves them; as also because that
there many more vapors drawn up in the occidental, than there are in the
Oriental part of the World, in regard that there are in the West far more and
(those) far greater Seas, than in the East. Eighthly, From the parts of the
World, Kingdoms and Provinces. For it often comes to pass, even from the very
situation of several places, that those which are accounted wholesome and
healthful unto one certain place, are found to be baneful unto another part. So
the cold north-east wind is unto the Europeans most serene and clear, but in
Libian region it is exceeding cloudy; and again the south wind is unto those
Lybians very hurtful, and so is the so^th west wind unto the Bascomians very
pernicious, but on the other side very gratful and welcome unto the Gretians and
Italians. Ninthly, From Cities and houses. And hence it was that the Caunians
(a people in Cavia) through the default of the Air there, became so wan and
pale, that there was one heard to say, that dead men walked in that country.
Again, the Sun in the summer getting up to a greater height enters not at al
those houses that stand to the South; but then (in the winter season)
approaching nearer it altogether and wholly shines through their windows. And
therefore dwelling houses ought in a different manner to be erected, according
to the diversity of the inclinations of the several regions in the world.
Tenthly, From the particular constitution of places. Where observe, 1. That
places standing high, enjoy a pure Air, as being cleansed and purified by the
winds that blow throw it; and therefore those places produce and nourish
strong, lusty, and long lived inhabitants, by reason of the want and absence of
moist excrements. 2. That steep down hill places depressed and (as it were) pend
up between other mountains, are in the summer time even suffocated with the
reflexed sunbeams; and in the winter (by reason of the suns absence) are
annoyed with overmuch moisture, and thick, clouded vapors. 3. Places that are
plain, if so be they have on al sides every thing fit about them, they have
then no other property, but that which is taken from the observation of the
Climates. 4. Those places that are rocky and open, in the summer have the Air
hot, but in the winter cold, and so thin and subtle, that almost no vapors can
be elevated and drawn up out of rocks. 5. Places Mountaineous and high are
snowy, and therefore healthful by reason of their snows; but when these melt
away, those places become very much clowded. Now if those Mountains are situate
to the North east, then those places will be hot by reason of the reflected
sunbeams; but if to the south, and that the winds blow from the North, then
those places by means of the snows and winds, are cold, dry, and sound, unless
something else hinder. If to the East, then they are cold, because they ruled
and swayed by the East. Their Air is thick both in regard they are nigh unto
Mountains, as also because they lie open unto the Western Winds. If they be
situate to the West they are therefore healthy in regard that they are then
exposed unto the oriential or Eastern winds. 6. Those places that are woody are
infested with a thick, suffocated, cloudy and turbid Air: among the trees, the
Nut tree and Oak are more especially hurtful. 7. Those places that are near
adjoining unto rivers do moisten overmuch. 8. Such places as are fenny, and
abound with lakes by reason of their filthy noysom vapors are very apt to
generate diseases. 9. Those places that are nigh unto the sea are thought to be
healthful in regard that saltness resists corruption and the winds do evermore
thoroughly purge the Air, and because likewise that the Sea in the Winter and in
a cold Region renders the Air warmer than ordinary; but on the other side (in
the summer time, and in a hot Country) it makes the Air exceeding temperate.
10. Cardamus has left it for a Truth unto us, that those that are full of hot
Baths do viciate and corrupt the Air of the place, howbeit not so far forth
that they hurt those bodies that are strong and able (which are not hot) by
reason that they are altogether free from putrefaction. But of these see (I
pray) and read (next after Hippocrates) Renatus Morean learnedly and
excellently discoursing of them in his Tract upon Schola Salernitana.


Article, 2. Of Meat.
Point. 1. Of the differences of Meats.
Meat is a thing not Natural, restoring and augmenting the substance of Man's
body.

Concerning it there are these five things to be explained. 1. The various
differences thereof. 2. The kinds of it. 3. The Seasonings or sauces thereof.
4. Bread it self. 5. The time of repast, or taking of this meat.


The differences of Meats are various. I. In regard of its substance it is, 1.
Hard which is not concocted without much difficulty, but it is easily
corrupted. 2. Soft, which easily and soon receives a taint. 3. Heavy, thick,
and gross; and this heaps up a juice, that is thick, fibrous, and earthy. 4.
Viscid, and clammy, which is very difficulty distributed into the veins. 5.
Firm, which truly makes a supply of much aliment or nourishent, but then it
stands in need of great store of heat and strength of Nature for Concoction. 6.
Infirm, which indeed is easily and soon concocted, but then it breeds and
supplies either very small nutriment, or at the best, such as is transient and
of short continuance. 7. Hard, or easy of digestion, which accordingly is
hardly, or with little difficulty overmastered by the heat of the stomach. 8.
Hardly or easily to be corrupted, which accordingly (either through its own
default, or else by reason of some weakness in the stomach, or lastly by means
of some distemper proceeding from things therewithal mingled) is either easily
or difficulty corrupted.
II. In respect of its Quantity, it is, I. Overmuch, Either as it refers unto
the capacity of the vessels, as it is al of it converted into blood, but then
by reason of the too great abundance of humors it threatens the danger of
suffocation or choking, etc. or otherwise as it respects the strength of
Nature governing and ordering us; which kind of excess breeds very many
Crudities of al sorts. 2. Too little, to wit, when either we use but little
food, or those meats of little nourishment; or else when we take them not often
enough; and this evermore diminishes the natural strength and powers of the
body. 3. Moderate, which preserves the substance of the body, defends the
Native heat and maintains the lymmetry of the humors; it likewise sets bounds
unto the Excrements, in receiveing of which we are said to use a mean, and
moderation, when we eat not to satisfy.
III. In regard of its qualities, it is, 1. Hot, which attenuates and makes
thin those humors that are thick, cuts and divides in sunder those humors that
are temperate. 2. Cold, which indeed tempereth the boiling heat of the blood
and of the stomach, but suggests matter of windiness. 3. Moist, by the which
the dryness of the parts is amended, and the belly loosened. 4. Dry, which
though it be not so easily concocted, yet it affords a fast and firm
nourishment, and brings a supply of Melancholy Juice. 5. Sweet, which indeed
(at least, if it be well compacted) nourishes, but withal causes obstructions
of the Liver and spleen. 6. Salt, which preserves from putrefaction; but if it
excessively taken, it burns the blood, and excites a kind of itching. 7.
Bitter, which cleanses, and cuteth. 8. Sharp, which freeth those parts that are
obstructed, increases choler, and excites salt and sharp fumes. 9. Acid,
which cuts, and if it be simply such draws the thick Juice downward; if it
incline toward a sweetness it mollifieth and loosneth the Belly; if it tend
toward a sharpness, then it is astringent and binding. 10. Sour and Austere,
which if it be taken in before other meats, binds; but looseneth if eaten
after food. 11. Meats that afford a good or ill issue, 12. That which is simple
or Physical; which besides the virtue it has to nourish, has likewise the
power of altering. 13. Unwholesome, from the which there is an ill Juice
generated, and such as easily putrifieth. 14. The Best which is concocted,
affords much nourishment, and that nutriment that it yields is of the best; and
is not easily corrupted, or depraved with any hurtful quality; and then again
it leaves behind it but very few Excrements.
IIII. In respect of its preparing, it is, 1. Crude or raw, which to this very
day the Abyssines, Scythians, and diverse other of the Barbarians take great
delight in. 2. Roast, the which alone the Peers of Troy are said to have fed
upon during the time of the Trojain War; which yields a dry aliment and
oftentimes hinders the passing forth of the excrements: and this if it be
extracted forth of the veins, and so shut up on every side that it can by no
possible means exhale, it is then in this case very prejudicial and hurtful
unto the Body. 3. Toasted or broyled, which is over adust, or two much burnt.
4. Fried, which with some other kind of external Moisture is dressed in the
frying pan; and very sweet (in good truth) it is, by reason of the fat Moisture
that attends it: but then again in regard that it does not so conveniently send
forth, the internal superfluous Moisture, but rather attracts and sucks in more
of that that is External and superabundant, it is therefore hard of concoction,
sending up a favor from the stomach to the Mouth, and burning up the blood. 5.
Boiled, which indeed (as to the inner part) is dryer than the former, and yet
notwithstanding by reason of its external humidity it moisteneth. 6. That which
is Strangled and suffocated, if it be fitly and equally boiled, it then
generates a laudable, temperate Juice, and such as easily finds a passage
whether it ought to go. 7. It is either sauced or not sauced. But as touching
Condiments or sauces, we will treat further of them in the ensuing discourse.



Point, 2. Of the sorts or kinds of Meats.
The species or kinds of meats are taken, 1. From plants. 2. From birds. 3.
From four footed Beasts. 4. From Fishes. 5. From bloodless creatures.


I. Plants are, Bread corn, al sort of pulse potherbs, and fruits.

I. Unto bread corn there appertain, 1. Wheat, Which is hot and moist, yielding
very much, firm, and most wholesome nutriment. The Claminess thereof, if any such
there be in it, is quite taken away in the due preparing of it. 2. A grain very
like unto the former, commonly called Spelt, which in its nature and property
is next unto Wheat; and nourishes more than Barley, but less then Wheat; of it
is made that we call Barley broth; but others call it frumenty. 3. Rye, (which by
others is termed Ragga) out of which in very many places there is a certain
kind of bread made; it is hotter than Barley and nourishes more than it, but it
is harder to be concocted then Wheat. 4. Barley, out of which is made that
spoon-meat which we commonly call Ptisan, an excellent wholesome kind of food,
opening and cleansing the passages, and easily transients; but yet nevertheless
being somewhat thin of substance, it is therefore held to be the less fit for
the preservation and lengthning of the life. 5. Oats; which heat, afford good
and commendable aliment, and stop the lask or flux, of the Belly. In some
places there is a spoon-meat prepared and made hereof (a kind of gruel) with
cows milk, Goats Milk, or else with the juice of sweet Almonds, (commonly
called Almond milk) and sugar. We use to bruise this oatmeal, and so to eat it
in flesh pottage. 6. Rice, which by the Eastern people is for the most part
made into bread. It is temperate and with milk nourishes very much; but is
more difficultly concocted, and yields a thicker kind of juice (which is
therefore the more apt to obstruct) and increases the seed. 7. That which we
call Saracen breadcorn, which indeed sufficiently and fitly nourishith such as
live by their labor, but withal is hardly digested, begets windiness, and is
hurtful to the eyes, 8. Millot or hirse, which is cold and dry, binds the
belly, and is not digested without some difficulty. 9. That which we call
Panick, like unto the former; but yet of nothing so wholesome a nature and
property as the Millet; notwithstanding being beaten and bruised in a Mortar
(or otherwise;) and thoroughly purged and cleansed from its branniness, it then
affords a kind of pottage not much to be contemned, or loathed.


II. Of the Pulse, there are, 1. The Beans, which are Cold, Dry, and Flatulent
or windy. They are of a crude and raw Nutriment, but withal such as is very
abstersive, and hard of Concoction, and rendering the sense dull and stupid,
and the sleeps turbulent; and therefore an utter enemy to such as are studious,
and live sedentary lives. Those of Leyden break them with a Mil, boil them
througly, and being hulled they then make them up into a certain thick white
substance for their use, and spending. 2. Pease, which are cold, dry, and
windy, especially those that are green: they are Experimentally found to hurt
the Nerves; the Broth or Pottage made of them is better than their substance.
3. Lentils, which generates an Aliment that is both cold and thick, of hard
digeston, filling the Head with gross Vapors very hurtful to the Eyes, and the
breeder of much thick blood; especially if they be Eaten with Salt flesh. 4. A
small Pulse called Cicers, which by Reason of their abstersive faculty, are most
commonly sought out, and made of for Physical purposes. Dioscorides writes
that those that use them, thereby gain a fair and fresh color. 5. A sort of
Pulse yet smaller than the former, called Chichlings, which obtain a mean, and
stand (as it were) in the middle place between those kind of meats that are of
good or ill Juice, and easily or with much ado concocted, and converted into
nutriments. 6. Vetches, which suggest a grofs and thick Juice, and such as is
only fit, (and good for nothing else) to generate black choler or Melancholy,
and to render the Body costive, through overmuch binding the Belly.


III. Under Potherbs, and in the Number of Garden Plants fit for Food, Herbs or
Leaves, Stems or Branches, Roots, and Fruits, are Comprehended; For as touching
Seeds, I shall here speak nothing of them. I. Among Leaves and branches, are, 1.
Lettuce, which of al Pot Herbs is absolutely the best, and yields more matter
for the generating of Blood, than other Pot Herbs; by its coolness it
excellently qualifieth and allayeth the boiling heat of the stomach, procures
sleep, and tempereth the heat of the Kidneys: But if a man feed too much
thereon, it then extinguisheth the seed. Two ounces of the Juice hereof taken
at once, or for one Dose, Kills unavoidably. It is Eaten raw, with Oil, Salt,
and Vinegar. 2. Endive, which (according to the Opinion of Galen) has its
qualities like unto those of the Lettice aforesaid. In other places, it is far
fetched, and stored up until the winter months. For in those places their
custom is, with a small thread, to bind together round like a Globe the Leaves
hereof so soon as they are come to perfection, and so to preserve them covered
in earthen Vessels. 3. The Colewort and Cabbage, which is cold and dry, hard of
concoction, which affords an Aliment that is thick and gross, that exhales up
into the Head Fuliginous Vapors, disturbeth the sleeps of those that eat it,
and extremely weakeneth and Dulls their sight. Its hurtful quality may be
corrected, if we take it Boiled in flesh Pottage. The Juice thereof has in it
a tart Acrimonious quality, and such as excites and provoks the Belly to void
its Excrements. That which has its Leaves spread al abroad, is far wholsomer
and better than that which grows al of a Head, which for distinction sake we
call the Cabbage. It is allowed to be eaten by working and laborious people, but
then for a corrective, Pepper must be added and eaten therewith. 4. Spinach, or
Spinach, which cools and moistens, generateth serous or wheyie humors, and is
somewhat offensive by its treasuring up windiness unless you mingle therewithal
(for a corrective) Pepper, Salt, and Butter. 5. Mallows, which yeildeth little
nourishment, causes a flux and looseness of the Belly, and borrows a grateful
and acceptable taste from butter and other Condiments. 6. The like may be said
of the herb Arach, or Orach, and Blite, which latter is likewise a kind of
Spinach. 7. Beets are cold and dry, and of different parts; the Juice thereof
cleanses, the substance of it binds the Body; howbeit it removes the
obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. The Ancients were wont to add thereto
Wines and Pepper. 8. Asparagus or Sperage, unto which the tender young branches
of the Hops are very near of kin, as being of a temperate Nature; they afford
but little aliment, and that likewise none of the best; this Asparagus is very
grateful to the palate, excites and provokes the appetite, it cleanses,
expels Urine, and purifieth the Kidnys. 9. Watercresses, which by reason of
their heat, are commonly used instead of a condiment or Sauce. Aequineta has
added this further of it, to wit, that it is an enemy unto the Stomach, and
that it breeds an il Juice. In time past, the use of it was wont to be very
frequent and familier with the Persians in their ordinary diet. 10. Mustard,
which is of a tart and sharp taste, and is withal most apparently hot and dry.
And thereupon it is placed and recounted among those Condiments or Sauces which
attenuate thick and gross meats. It is in the Vintage time mingled and
thoroughly moystned with new Wine or Must, from whence it has the name of
Mustard.
II. Of Roots there are, 1. The Onyons, that afford but very little
nourislment; but they are of a hot nature, they cut, attenuate, heat and
inflame the Blood, and the thinner parts of them being discussed and
scatterred, they leave behind them a gross and thick Juice, they incite and
provoke unto Venery, cause distracted and turbulent dreams; and are very
offensive unto the Head, Eyes, Teeth and Gums, especially in those that are
choleric. 2. Garlic, which in the Month of May is by many of the French eaten
with fresh butter; and of which beaten together with Wal-Nuts in a Mortar, they
prepare and make that Garlic sauce that we term Alliatum. In Garlic crude and
raw there is not Aliment at al, and in that which is boiled there is very
little, and that also none of the best. By its extraordinary great heat and
dryness it attenuates and cuts asunder the thick Humors; and moreover it is a
most exquisite Remedy for the correcting of the pravity, of waters that are
gotten together in the Abdomen or Belly, and a special help and means for the
enduring of cold. 3. The Leek, which has almost the same properties and
qualities with the Forementioned. It is chollerick, and greatly hurtful to such
as are of weak Brains; it duls the sight of the eyes; and being often eaten it
begets choler of a Greenish color much like unto the Leek it self. If it be in
the beginning of the meal Eaten raw with Salt, it then freeth the stomach and
Belly from gross and thick Juyces. 4. The Reddish, which together with Salt we
use to eat raw. But it is fitter to be used instead of a sauce or sallad, in
regard it is extraordinary hot, and withal sharp and tart, tiring and wearing
out the Teeth. It collecteth together the scattered spirits, breaks the
windiness of the stomach by causing ructures or belchings, provokes Urine, and
expels the gravel out of the Kidneyes. That Garden Raddish is accounted the
best which is brittle and easily broken. Unto the former may be added the wild
or horse Raddish which has in a manner the like virtues and properties with
the Garden Raddish, and is more frequently made use of for a sauce than for
food, affording little or no Aliment. 5. The Rape Root, which yields
nourishment enough, to wit, Hot, and moist; but then it is more slowly
concocted (more especially that which is raw) and puffs up the Belly. It is
sometimes kept until it be withered, and then made use of. 6. The Navew or
Turnep, which affords more Nutriment than the former, and has in it less of
the thick and flarulent Juice than the Rape Root, provokes lust, and excites
unto Venery. 7. The Garden Parsnips; which yields but little Aliment, and
that likewise thick; and its Juice is none of the best. It furthereth the
Expulsion of Urine, stirs up Venery, and expels forth the Causes. 8. The Red
Beet, which being boiled or pickled up with Vinegar, Caraway Seed, and Horse
Raddish Root, is presented and set upon the table in the place of a grand
sallad, rather than as a meat, since that it very little, or nothing at al
nourishes.
III. Of Fruits, there are, 1. The Artichoke, which heateth and dries in the
second degree, is hard of Concoction, and the Juice thereof none of the best.
It is by some Eaten raw with Salt alone; but by others they are Boiled, and
then they add thereto Pepper small beaten, and Butter; if it be Eaten with
Vinegar and Oil it expels and drives forth abundance of Urine of a stinking
Savor. There are some of Opinion, that it excites the appetite, and restores
it when weakened and well nigh lost. 2. The Gourd, which affords an Aliment
more than ordinary cold and moist, and therefore such as is transient and
stays not long in the body, but soon passes throw. When it is corrupted in
the stomach it is then converted into a very Malignant Juice. Yet some there
are that conceive these Gourds to be less dangerous and hurtful than Cucumbers.
They are oftentimes sent to the table either roasted or fried. The longer and
lesser of them are the more grateful, and indeed the more wholesome; such as
grow and increase after their hanging up, have in them but little or no Seed.
3. Cucumbers; which are cold and dry. Galen was of Opinion that these were
never to be allowed of, or admitted by men in their common Course of Diet; but
that they were evermore to be banished from their Meals, as most dangerous and
baneful. For they abide unconcocted in the Stomach until the day following. Yet
notwithstanding they may not unfitly be Eaten (but they are rather thought to
be very commodious and proper) if while they be yet green, and before they be
ripe, you take them in salads, after they been a while kept in a Pickle made of
Vinegar and Pepper, and they are then least hurtful unto those that have their
stomach over hot. The Venetian Physicians prescribe them against Pestilential
Diseases by them to cut and divide the Humors. 4. Melons, of al sorts (but
principally the Musk-Melon) which are both grateful to the Palate, and withal
send forth an Aromatical or sweet smell; but in regard that they abound with
water from their Humidity, they are thereupon easily corrupted; and being once
corrupted they degenerate into a Poisonous Nature, and thereby excite store of
Choler. And therefore they ought to be taken in the first beginning of Meals
that so they may the more easily pass through; and then we must be very careful
to put nothing upon them but meats of a good Juice, and then after al to drink
one draught or two of the best Wine. 5. Straw-berries, which are moist and
cold, of a thin Juice, and such as is soon and easily corrupted in the stomach.
They cool the stomach and Liver when they are overhot and choleric; they
restrain and qualify the heat of the Blood and Humors, allay the vehement
thirst, drives forth the Urine, and cleanse the Reins. The best and fittest
time to Eat them is in the beginning of the Meal. They are now and then Eaten
with Cream and Sugar; but most usually (as the better way of taking them) they
are Eaten out of Wine. 6. Capers, which if they be fresh and new, do the more
effectually nourish, and loosen the belly. If they be eaten with vinegar and
oil they excite and Whet on the appetite unto a desire after meat, they remove
the obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and carry forth that Phlegm that is
contained within the Cavity of the Belly.
IV. The fruits of Trees, are, 1. Apples, of which such as are sweet tasted,
and withal sweet smelling, yield an indifferent quantity of Aliment, and are a
good remedy against al sorts of Melancholy Distempers. Such of them as are
sharp and sour are cold, and extremely windy. Those of them that are rough,
harsh, and not Mellow, are of a thicker Juice, and therefore defcend over
slowly into, and through the belly, albeit the Force and strength thereof was
qualified and corrected by the first Concoon. Such of them as are waterish are
of a most corrupt Juice, and have no taste at al in them. 2. Quinces, which are
cold and dry, of small nourishment, and of hard digestion; if they be eaten raw
they are very hurtful to the sinews; if they be taken in the beginning of the
meal they render the belly Costive, if after meat, then they loosen the belly,
and shut the mouth of the stomach. 3. Oranges, which if sour they are usually
put into sauces, and being therewith mingled they are of singular use, both for
the stirring up of the appetite, and for the removal of the stomachs
nauseousness and loathing: but if sweet they are not then to be squeezed into
sauces and so eaten with other meats; but how ever we use them they are of
singular bennefit in helping Coughs, and easing the jaws when exasperated and
inflamed. 4. Pears, which if sweet, they are then of a more moist and cold
nature (the muscatel or muscle pears only excepted, which are hot, and more
obnoxious to corruption) if they be harsh and sour, they bind and cool the
Belly, and are hurtful to the stomach and the Intestines: they are the better
if eaten boiled. 5. Medlers, which are cold and dry; those therefore alone of
them that are mild and mellow are to be eaten; and these afforde but very
little nourishment, and that likewise hard of concoction; they are good to stop
a vomiting, when there is occasion; and they are also very fit and convenient
for a hot chollerick stomach, 6. Figs, which are hot and moist; these nourish
more then other fruits, and easily descend from the stomach, and pass out of
the Belly; and if they be eaten into great abundance, they excite and generate
windiness. Those of them that have been kept a while til they be dry (we
usually call them Caricae) have in them such an abstersive and clensing
quallity, that oftentimes they cause that flux that we call the Lientery, drive
forth the humors unto the exterior parts, provoke unto sweats; and if much
eaten they produce a small sort of lice. 7. Peaches (or Persian aples) which are
al of them cold, and moist; they nourish but little, and are soon corrupted;
such of them as are new and fresh to be eaten before meat; those of them that
are dried or boiled do in some sort lose and lay aside all the il quallity that
is in them. 8. Abrecotes, or Apricocks, (the Ancients caled them Arminian
Apples) which are reputed better than Peaches, and more acceptable to the
stomach. 9. Prunes, the which al of them are cold and moist: The sweeter of
them mitigate choler, are easily concocted, and descend through the belly:
such of them as are white, and in cholor like unto wax are the worst and vilest
sort of them al; those of damascus (we call them damask plunes) and Hungaria,
are the best sort of them. While they be new they have in them an
excrementitious moisture; and if they be eaten raw; they yield a worse kind of
Juice, and (to speak truth) they over much loosen the retentive faculty of the
stomach; but being dried they are much the fitter for nutrition or nourishment.
10. Cherries, which if they be sweet, by reason of their abundant humidity,
they are soon corrupted; and so come to generate a sort of small long worms, and
putrid fevers; if they be sharp and sour, they cool, qualify the heat of the
Liver and stomach, are easily concocted, and pass through the belly, stir up
the Appetite, neither do they afford any il Juice. 2. Mulberies, which moisten,
cool, nourish but little, descend easily through the belly; and therefore in
regard that if they be long retained in the stomach, they soon corrupt and
putrefie, they must only be taken in upon an empty stomach, that is free from
choleric humors. 12. Grapes, which if sweet, they are then the hoter, and
excite thirst; if they be tart and sour, they are then (by so much) the colder;
if full of a winy Juice and substance, they are then of a mean quallity and
temperament betwixt the two tormer. If they be new, they afford but little
nourishment, lift and swel up the spleen, beget the chollick, and if they be
detayned in the body beyond the due and convenient time, they fi^ the liver and
stomach with Crude humors. If they be dried (we call them raisons of the sun)
those of them that are only sharp and sour bind the belly; such of them as are
sweet afford greater store of nourishment; but those of them that are both
sweet and austere or somewhat sharp, are the more excellent of them al, as
agreeing with the Liver in their whole substance, and exceeding benificial unto
the Breast. Corans, which being without stones ad more strength to the body.
13. Olives, which being pickled are of excelent use to provoke the appetite,
and are more easily digested in the stomach. Those which are most astringent,
are used after meals, that the mouth of the stomach being thereby strengthened,
the meat may be the sooner passed down into the belly. 14. Almonds which if
they are bitter, they exceedingly provoke urine, and by their bitterness breed
a loathing of meat; if they are sweet, they are hot and moist, yield plenty of
good nourishment, and are therefore good for those that are in consumptions,
and very lean. They are not good in chollerick fevers, nor in an ^o stomach.
15. Chestnuts, which are hot and dry, hard to digeft, yield good nourishment if
well digested, but it is hardly distributed; if they are eaten in too great a
Quantity they engender wind. 16. Walnuts are hot and dry. Such as are new,
because of their moistness are best eaten with salt. The dry are eaten after
fish, the moisture whereof, they do with their dryness temper. They breed
choler, and make rough the mouth of the stomach, the gullet and the wind pipe.
17. Haselnuts and Filberds, are colder than walnuts, and afford more
nourishment, are hardly digested and breed an earthy juice. To these may be
added, Mushromes and Toad-stooles, which are for the most part cold, tastless,
of a thick and watery nourishment. Eaten not without danger, both because they
are of bad juice, and because they are sometimes venomous.



II. Birds which are mans-meat, are either Land or water fowl: they afford us
their flesh, other of their parts, and Eggs.

I. In respect of Flesh, among water-fowles, the chief that afford us meat
are, 1 The Duck both tame and wild, which breed a thick and melancholy juice,
stop the veins of the mesentery and spleen, and are apt to breed Quartan Agues:
especially such of them as are continually in the dirt and mud. 2. The Goose,
which if it be tame, is of Excrementitious juice, and apt to putrify, but the
tame more than the wild. The best of those which live and feed always on Land,
are, 1. Poultery, because they have temperate flesh, of good juice, and little
excrement. Where note, 1. That the flesh, of their bodies, is the best of al
other, and comprehends the praise of all birds, as to feed. 2. That Henns are
dryer, than the rest. 3. That the flesh of Cocks is harder and dryer,
especially that of old Cocks, whose broth purges the belly. 4. That the
Turkey-cock is not inferior to a Capon, either in taste, or goodness of juice;
being good for such as are recovering out of sickness, the sweetest parts of
them are the breast and the belly.
They are variously crammed fatned and dressed with Oisters, spiced, with
gelly, with white-broath, boiled, roasted, fried, pressed, distilled. 2. The
Partrich, whose flesh is temperate, enclineing a little to dryness, of easy
digestion, of excellent juice, much nourishment, little excrement, and which is
well given to such as are upon recovery, and as are troubled with the
whoremasters Pox. 3. The Pheasant, which equals a Capon in goodness of flesh
and juice. It Is commended in Autumn and Winter, being better in the wings than
legs. A pheasant Chick is sweetest, when it is six or eight weeks old. 4. The
Heath-cock, whose flesh is of the same nature with the former. And is very sit
meat for such as are recovering after sickness. 5. Pigeons whose flesh is of a
thick, melancholic and excrementitious juice, nor easily digested, nor good in
putrid Fevers. The Mountain and woodpigeons are best. The Turtle dove affords
little and thin juice, the older of them, breed Melancholy blood. 7. The Lark,
which engenders excellent juice, and is easily digested, it is thought by a
peculiar faculty to preserve from the Cholick and to cure the same. 8. The
Blackbird, whose flesh is little inferior to that of kids, in sweetness,
easiness of digestion, and goodness of juice, 9. The Quail, which is hot and
moist, hard to digest, of evil nourishment, much juice, much excrement,
affording matter for fevers. 10. The Thrush, which Galen allows such to feed
on, as are of a lean and thin habit of body. Apicius terms their flesh
diabolical, because it smells strong of Hemlock. They are taken very fat, when
Grapes begin to be ripe. 11. The Sparrow, which some are delighted with at all
times, but in winter especially; because they are in the summer by reason of
their Letchery, leaner, dryer, and hotter than at other times.



II. The Parts of Birds are, 1. The Combs, which are proper to poultrey alone.
Galen reckons them among such meats as no man will commend or dispraise. They
are thought to incite such as are slow, to generation. 2. The Wings, which
because the superfluous and crude moisture is wasted away by exercise, are of
good juice and easy to be digested. 3. The Rumpe, which in such as have short
legs, is more fleshy and fat than ordinary, but sometimes it makes the stomach
sick by its over fatness. 4. The Brain, which in birds than in four footed
beasts is dryer and harder; in such as feed on mountains, it is more delicate,
than in such as lie in the fields and marshes. The sweetest is that of Cocks,
Partriches, and Pheasants. That of Sparrows and Pigeons provokes fleshly lust.
5. The Neck, which is thought to hurt the Eyesight, by reason of blood therein
in coagulated. 6. The Tongue, which the more musculous it is, the better it is.
Bruyerinus writes that the tongue of Geese provokes lust. 7. The Heart, which
is of a fiberous and hard substance, is hardly digested, and hardly passes.
Often eaten it breeds melancholy blood. 8. The Lungs, which because of their
thin substance are easily digested and nourish little. 9. The Stomach, which is
for the most part fleshy and hard, that of a Goose is the sweetest. That of fed
Henns is rather fleshy than hard: We call it the Gizzard. 10. The Gutts, which
in some kind of birds is couuted a dainty. The Gutts of a lark, which are hard
and bitter, are by some swallowed like pills, to loosen the belly, but in vain.
11. The Liver, which by reason of its hot and moist temper, is of kin to our
natural Heat. That of a Goose is most short and tender, and most highly prized.
Anciently they moistened their Goose-meat with milk, to make it nourish the
more. 12. The Spleen, because in most birds it is very little, is of no
account. 13. The^ Stones, are best in cocks if they are nourished with wheyish
nourishment. They are sought for by delicate and wanton people as incentives to
Lust. 13. The Feet, which because they have little flesh upon them, nourish
little, and because they are nervous and tendinous they are hard to digest. 14.
The Skin, which is sweet in such as are fed up and fatted, but of small
nourishment, and hard to digest; that is the sweetest which covers the Loins of
Hens. The rugged and fat skin of the Neck, is better boiled, than roasted. 14.
The Marrow, which if it be of the back, it is of the same Virtue with the
Brains, save that is a little harder; if that of the bones, it is more fat and
pleasant; but eaten too plentifully it causes stomach sickness. 15. Fat, which
being moderately eaten, with salt, gives little and bad, yet delightful
nourishment. It takes away the Appetite, if wine be drunk down after it,
because the stomach is smoothed, the wrinkles are taken away, and the sense of
pain by reason of the sucking of the stomach is taken away.


III. The Eggs of Birds consist of the yolk and the white. The former by
propriety of substance is easily inflamed and turned to sumes. The Latter is
cold and glewish, breeds bad blood, and is hardly digested. They vary in
respect of Substance figure and concoction. They are, 1. Those of Henns,
Partriges, Pheasants, such as are young and fat, which excel al others. 2.
Ducks, Geese, and Peacocks Eggs, which are counted worse. 3. Such as are Small,
long and white; which are thought to excel others in goodness of juice. 4. Such
as are Pale, as those of Ducks and Geese, which partake more of a watery
substance. 5. Trembling Soft, which are so far thickened by boiling, as that
they seem to tremble in the shell in the hand of the holder, do give much
nourishment and excellent juice to the body; are easily digested and
distributed, and breed blood which is most agreeable to the nature of the
Heart. 6. Supping Eggs, which nourish less than the quivering or trembling, but
they pass more easily and mitigate the roughness of the Jaws. 7 Perfectly
boiled being thickened, which are hardly digested, pass slowly down, and afford
a more thick nourishment. 9. Roasted, are of thicker substance than boiled,
because the Heat of the fire consumes their moisture; and if they are quite
covered with ashes, because the fumes are thereby kept in, they are the more
unwholsom; it they are laid open upon the embers because they breath out their
fumes, they are better. 10. Boiled they are better than roasted, because the
moisture of the water, hinders them from being dried by the fire. 11. Fried,
which while they are digested in the stomach, do evaporate into nidorous fumes,
and corrupt other meats, and breed thick juice. 12. Poached Eggs, which Galen
teaches how to dress, are better than boiled or roasted, if they are done
neither too soft nor too hard.


III. The third kind of Meats are four-footed beasts. Which afford for man's
food. 1. Their Musculous flesh 2. Their Head. 3. Their Breast. 4. Their Belly
and panch. 5. Their Legs and feet. And 6. Such things as are taken from, but
are not parts of them.


I. The Musculous flesh, is frequently used for meat, and is hotter with
quickening heat than that of fowls, and therefore they grow thrice as big. 1. It
is Oxe-flesh, which if of young beasts, not broken with Labor, it is so much the
better, but seldom used: if of old beasts, it is thick, hard of digestion, and
passes not easily through the veins, yet is it free from roaping and
clammyness. It breeds a loose nourishment, hard to digest, and produces thick
blood. Hippocrates has written that it causes cholera sicca 2. Cow-beefe, which
is of a thick and melancholy juice. 3. Calves-flesh, or Veale, which is
temperate, of good juice, easy to digest. Yet it affords somewhat a thicker
juice than Kids flesh, Lambs or Weathers flesh. 4. Swines-flesh, which differs
according to the Age, that of Sucking pigs is moist, of no good juice, and
which easily putrifies, and therefore wine must be drunk upon it. That of young
shotterels is better, and gives good nourishment. That of young Hogs,
especially those of May, is best of al, nourishes most powerfully, and affords
firm aliment, to Men flourishing in years, very convenient, and for such as
are exercised with hard labors. That of Old decrepit Swine, is hard, tastless,
causes melancholy diseases, must be moistened with wine drunk after. The flesh
of the Wild boar or Swine is better than that of the tame, both because it is
not so excrementitious; nor breeds clammy juice. Out of no other Beast so much
fuel is afforded to luxury, for no less than 50. several tastes are thereout
produced, whereas others have each one single taste. 5. Sheeps, which is of too
unsavory a taste, and fit for Country people; it smells strong, if it be boiled
after the solstice; worse, if it be roast. 6. Lambs flesh, which before a year
complete is moist, slimie, after a year, it is full of good juice, of a midling
consistency, and is easily digested in such perions as take pains, and is soon
discussed. 7. Weathers Flesh, which is easily digested, and breeds good blood,
if it be of such as are young. 8. Roes Flesh, which is of good nourishment, and
excells the flesh of other wild beasts, in easy digesture, and little
excrement, yet is it somewhat of a dry nature. 9. Rids Flesh, which being
temperate is easily digested, and breeds good humors, but more clammy than
those arising from veal. It Is flashy and void of taste unless it be roasted. 10.
Deeres Flesh, which is dry and hard to digest, breeds melancholy blood, if it
be of an old Dear, and is apt to obstruct the bowels. 11. Hearts Flesh, which
affords melancholic juice: but if it be well digested, it is not of ill juice:
and is thought to such as eat it to have a fresh color.


II. The Heads of four-footed beasts which serve for food are the Oxe-head,
Calves-head, Hogs-head, Wild Boares-head, Kids-head, Hares-head etc. Of which,
thus much may be said in general, that they are hard of digestion, of a thick
and clammy juice, and very nourishing. Their principal and most esteemed parts
are. 1. The Tongue, which consists of a flesh by it self, loose, spungy, moist
and clammy: and therefore it affords a nourishment not solid, thick, or
long-lasting; yet in some creatures it is exceeding sweet, soft, of good juice,
easy to digest, and affording no bad nourishment. That end which the beasts are
wont to thrust out of their mother is harder than the rest. 2. The Eyes, which
are of no account, saving those of a Calves-head, which are compassed with much
fat and soft flesh, and are involved in thin membranes. 3. The Ears, which
because gristley, nourish little, unless they be eaten with the bordering
parts. 4. The Cheeks, which, if they are of young beasts fat and fleshy, they
are not void of good juice. Those of Calves are most tender. 5. The Brain,
which is phlegmatic, of thick juice, passes slowly, and is hard to digest. It
makes the stomach thick, and provokes vomiting. Varignana says it is good
against poison, perhaps because of its clammyness wherewith the sides of the
stomach are daubed. 6 The Palate, which is commended in an Ox. It is covered
over with a certain membranous flesh, and is a frequent Ingredient into minst
pies, Haggests, and Puddings. 7. The Snowt, which Galen counts inferior to the
feet in Hogs, and better than the Ears.


III. In the Breast the Heart and Lungs are seated. 1. The Heart is hard to
digest, as I said before. The Salernitans are of Opinion, that an Hogs Heart
increases pensiveness, namely in such as are already troubled with Melancholy.
2. The Lunges are of a cold and moist temperament, of a phlegmatic juice,
easily digested and distributed, by reason of their rarity or thinness of
substance, and their Lightness: some say they pusse up the belly.


IV. The parts of the Belly are, the Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, Stones, Matrix,
Stomach, Gutts, Mesentery, the Flanks, Duggs or Vdders. 1. The Liver of al
beasts, is of thick juice, hard to digest, and which passes slowly. That of a
Sow is best, especially if she have been fed with figgs. That of Lambs and
kids, does more easily pass, and is not so thick juiced. The Roes Liver is said
to bring epileptical convulsions as well as the goats. The wild swines liver
covered with the Call, is commended. 2. The Spleen because it draws thick,
dreggy and melancholic blood, affords suitable nourishment. Those of young
swine, because they are not infected with so bad blood, are not of so ill
juice. 3. The Ridnies are of bad juice, ill taste, hard to digest: those of kids
and Calves are commended, because they are neither hard, nor rank. 4. The
Testicles, because they have a rank taste, especially in such creatures as have
engendered, are hard and ill to digest. But Hogs-stones are counted the best,
and lambs stones are not il thought of. 5. The Matrix was by the ancients
esteemed a very dainty dish, and was reckoned of two sorts, viz. that of a sow
or other beast with young, and that of Virgin female; Because it ingenders a
cold and crude juice, therefore it is hardly digested. 6. The Stomach, what
nourishment it gives may easily be conjectured by its constitution. 7. The Small
gutts which the greeks termed chordas, the Latins Lactes, were anciently a
dainty dish, witness the Poet Epicharmus in Megaride: the thick guts which they
called Phuscat, were no less esteemed of. 8. The Mesentery, especially that of
a fat sucking calf, is a most dainty dish with a little Vinegar. 9. Touching
the flanks or groins I have nothing to say. 10. The Vdder was counted for a
dainty dish, as may be collected from the Psendolus of Plautus.


V. The Extremities or feet are by Aristotle accounted to be of a clammy
nourishment. Mnesitheus the Athenian, writes, that they and the Head have
little nourishing and pure Juice in them. Some have termed them the Sacrifice
of Venus. Hereunto I refer the Sweet bread and Brawne, the sweet bread is a
Kernelly, Soft, Spongy and white substance. Plautus commends it in his
Curculio. That of a Calfe is the sweetest. Brawn is swines flesh hardened, and
was highly esteemed by the ancients.

VI. Food taken from Animals being no part of them, is Milk; which also affords
the parts whereof it consists, Whey, Butter, and Cheese. I. Milk is manyfold.
1. Raw, which must be taken new milked, least it cause Wind. That of Cows or
other Creatures which have newly brought forth their young, is not approved.
It Is corrected with a little Salt or Sugar. 2. Boiled, which is indeed less
windy, but because the whey is consumed by boiling, it becomes thicker, and apt
to stop the Veins. 3. Cheesie, which has much Cheesie substance in it,
Nourishes much, but is not so wholesome. 4. Buttery, which is more clammy, is
hardly distributed* and causes wind. 5. Wheyish, which nourishes least of al,
and quickly passes through the Belly. 6. Of lean Cattle, which nourishes
little. 7. Of Fat beasts, which is said to be apt to breed convulsion fits. 8.
Of black beasts, which is better than that of such as are white. 9. Milkt after
the bringing forth of young, which is most liquid and thin, and grows thick in
time. 10. The best, is luke warm, of equal substance, put upon the Nail, it
does not soon run off, light rather than heavy, not clammy but sweet, without
smell, white, and in some sort shining, finally which proceeds from an healthy
Creature, being made in well constituted Udders. 11. Women's milk, which is very
near the best of al other. 12. Cowes milk, which is thicker than that of
Women, fatter, and more nourishing. It easily obstructs, and is in the Stomach
hardly digested. 13. Sheeps milk, which is inferior to that of Cowes, and
obstructs more. 14. Goats milk, which is a little hotter than the foresaid, of
thinner substance, and less nourishment, and more apt to loose the Belly. 15.
Mares milk, which by the thinness and heat of the wheyish substance, wherewith
it abounds, is exceeding detersive and clensing. 16. Asses milk, which is
colder, thinner and more wheyish than the rest, less nourishing and less
obstructing, it exceedingly clenses and loosens the Belly, without any acrimony
or biting.
II. Whey, in regard of its watery and Phlegmatic substance, cooles and
moistens; in respect of its sharp, Salt and Phlegmatic parts, it clenses. III.
Butter, helps the breast and Lungs, brings up phlegm, and is good for cold and
dry Coughs: taken in great Quantity, it loosens the Belly, and is endued with a
strong faculty to digest, discuss, concoct, and lightly bring up. When it is
old, it attains an Acrimonious Quality. IV. There are some Differences of
Cheese. 1. Some is new and soft which is preferred before that which is hard
and old: because it nourishes more, and passes sooner through the belly. 2.
Some is of a thin and loose substance, which is more wholesome than that which
is compact. 3. Another sort is Clammy and dry which is accounted bad. 4. Sheeps
Cheese, which is concocted more easily than other sorts, and affords better
nourishment. 5. Cowes milk cheese, which is next in goodness to sheeps Cheese.
6. Goats milk cheese, which is worse than either of the former, as being
doubtless more hot and thin. 7. The best cheese, is void of Eyes and holes, not
over salted, nor foul with hairs, nor wheyish, nor old, nor hard, nor Rank.
See Gesner of milk, and things made of milk; and Nardius in his Physical
Analysis of milk,
IV. The fourth kind of meats, but worse than those of four footed beasts, are
Fishes, whose qualities will be best explained by their Differences and parts,
Viz. Their flesh and other Members.


I. The Differences are taken. I. From the Place, in respect whereof, some
breed and live in lakes and ponds, others in Rivers; some are Seafish, both
such as hant the stony places near the shore, and such as live in the Maine
Sea; others live partly on land, partly in the Water; others are digd out of
the Earth; touching al which observe these following Rules, 1. Pond-fish,
because they are muddy and little exercised, are full of Excrements. 2.
Lake-fish, that live in great lakes, which are watered with Fountains and
Rivers, are better than the former. 3. River-fish, which swim in troubled
Waters, that receive the filth of great Cities, are offensive to the stomach,
are of thick substance, and difficultly voided forth; such as live always in
clear Waters, are better than pond or lake fish. Seafish that live in an
Northern Sea open to the winds, by reason of their exercise, and the purity of
the winds, have excellent flesh. 5. Maine Sea fish which live in the bottom of
the Ocean, are of hard flesh, are hardly digested, but they afford plenty of
nourishment to the Body. 6. Shore fish because they live upon the scum and
purgings of the Sea, may be disliked: and because they haunt in such places as
are enlightened with the Sun beams, and by continual exercise such Excrements
as are collected from their food, are dissipated, they are to be preferred
before such as live in the Maine Sea. 7. Stoney place hanting fish, which keep
always one place and food, are easy to digest, of good juice, abstersive,
light and little nourishing: such as roame up and down, by reason of their
continual motion and the cuffs they receive from the billows, are of an hard
flesh. 8. Fish Dug out of the Earth have hard and unpleasant flesh, and Seneca
records they were found so bad and destructive, that al died that did eat of
them. 9. Such as live on Land and Water, by reason of the variety of their diet
and motion, are hardly allowed as good to preserve strength. 10. Fish of the
same kind and sort, differ in goodness and badness, according to the
healthyness and unhealthyness of the place wherein they live. Some are better in
the Ocean than in the Mediterranean seas and contrary wise.
II. From their Substance, in respect of which, fishes are. 1. Of an Hard
flesh, which are disallowed, especially if they be clammy withal. 2. Soft of
Flesh, which are best of al, if their Flesh be also tender and short. 3. Of a
middle Nature, which have short but not soft flesh: such as are mullets.
III. In regard of Age, in which respect note. 1. That little fish, if hard of
flesh, are disliked, as also the softer, because they have a slimy substance.
2. That old Fish, do by their Age lose much of their flesh. 3. That those of
middle Age are most approved, because they are neither slimy nor dry,
IV. In regard of their food. 1. Some Eat flesh and are of an hard and dry
substance. 2. Others live upon slime and mud, which are of Clammy substance. 3.
Such as feed upon Roots and Herbs have soft and short flesh, etc. But of these
see my Books of Fishes.



II. Among the Parts of Fishes used in Diet, in the Chief is their Flesh. In
respect of it therefore. 1. The Stock fish though being new, it is short, tender,
of good Juice, and easily digested; yet being dried, it affords a thick
nourishment, hard to digest, and which cannot be overcome, save by a strong
Stomach. 2. The Sole, Flounder, and Place, being fresh and new, have white and
good flesh, and such as affords plenty of good nourishment, and which is not
easily corrupted. When they are dried, they are harder. 3. The flesh of a
Salmon is tender, most grateful to the Palate, easily digested, affords good
Juice, Viz. While it is young. 4. Trouts are the best of al fish that breed in
the fresh waters, easily digested, of much good and thin Juice: the biggest are
not the best in regard of their fatness and clammyness. Those are most esteemed
of, which are sprinkled with red spots and have red flesh. 5. Gudgeons, afford
wholesome nourishment, are of good taste, easy to digest, and abide not long in
the stomach. 6. Millers Thumbes are like to Gudgeons. 7. A small Pike or
Pickerel has a very short flesh, not hard to digest, and easily distributed;
some count it to have an hard flesh. The River Pike, is better than that of the
Pond. 8. The Sea-Perch, is according to Diphilus, tender, not rank, easily
digested; the River Perch has flesh that is not indeed, so short, yet is it
not hard to digest, nor is it of bad Juice; others say it affords a weak
nourishment which is easily dissipated. 9. The Carpe has moist flesh, full of a
watery rathe^ ^han a Clammy Humor, and has much Excrem^^titious Juice. That is
most commended, which breeds in swift streams and pure waters. It must not be
eaten with variety of other meats, but by it self. 10. The Barble has exceeding
white flesh, easily digested and distributed, and has no ill nourishment or
Juice. 11. The Lamprey is clammy: but if it be well sauced and dressed, it
affords a pleasing and well tasted Nutriment. Some would have it to be strangled
in wine. 12. An Eele has soft and sweet flesh, but clammy, full of Fat and
moisture: some say there is something in an Eele, which not taken out is
destructive to the bowels of the Eater. Howbeit the Ancients so highly esteemed
this fish, as to account it the Helena or prime dish at their feasts. 13. The
Tench is by Ausonius called the poor man's comfort. It is thought to be of so bad
Juice that the feeding thereon should cause Fevers. 14. The Herring has a
white and short flesh, of good taste, not hard to digest, of good Juice. Being
salted or hardened in the Smoke, it degenerates from it self. 15. The Sturgeon
has hard flesh, Fat and glewish. It affords no bad Juice, only it is hard to
digest: the younger are most pleasant, and afford much nourishment.


III. The other Members of Fishes are. 1. The Head which is man's meat, in some
fish. The Mullet was anciently bought, only for his Head and Liver. At this day
the Head of a Salmon, of an Umber or Hallibut, and of a Carp, are accounted
dainties. 2. The Tongue which in a dolphin is Fat and tender; in a carpe if it
be roasted, it is very fat, and provokes lust. 3. The Eyes which in a Salmon are
tender and Fat. 4. The Beards, which Heliogabalus had served up by whole
platters full, instead of smalladge and Watercresses and Fenu-Greek. 5. The
Throats or parts between the breast and Neck, being salted, are pleasing to the
Palate, and according to Xenocrates are hardly corrupted. 6. The Liver which in
stock fishes or Cods, is counted better than in other Fishes. In the Silurus,
it is so sweet as to overcome the Stomach. That of the Wolf fish roasted and
sauced with Juice of Orenges, is not inferior to a Gooses Liver. Upon the
Livers of River Lampreyes, the revenues of Princedomes have been anciently laid
out. 7. The Sides of the sturgeon and Lamprey are commended. 8. The Bowels
without which the Gilthead has no taste, and in the Dolphin their s^^l is
delightful, as also their taste resembling W^^lets. 9. The belly, which in the
fish they call Huso, tastes like Porke. A dish has been invented of the Navils of
the thin Fishes, cut out of their bellies, and barrelled up with Salt, Vinegar,
and Fennel. 10. The Roes which in the Pike, Huson, Scarlet fish and others, are
commended. 11. The belly which is fattest in the Tuny-fishes as Hicesius
informs us. 12. The Guts, which are commended in the Salmon, Pike, Cod, and
Conger. 13. The Flanks and Groins which Horace commends in a Turbot. 14. The
Loins which Antiphanes relates to have been among the dainty dishes of Old. 15.
The Tail, which is desired in the Pike or Thym. The Proverb is, The Head of a
Carpe, the middle of a Scordil, the Tail of a Pike, are the Gluttons delight.
16. The Skin, which in a Tench, is by French Women, preferred before any flesh.
17. The Eggs or hard roes of Perches roasted on a Gridiron; of Carpes boiled
and fried; of the Wolfe-fish, Salmon, Huson, and Marde, Pickled, were a dish of
esteem among the Ancients. Those of the Barble, Gripe the Belly intollerably,
those of the Pike make it swel. And so much for Fishes.


IV. Among bloodless Creatures, I shall only reckon Oisters, Snailes and Crabs.
I Oisters by the Salt Juice they have in them, do provoke the Belly to stool,
they stir up appetite, and incite Lust, nourish little, and make some trouble
in the stomach. II. Snails are of an hard flesh and difficult to digest: but if
digested they nourish plentifully, if often Eaten. They breed thick and black
blood. That which is said to be good in Consumptions is in the broth of their
Flesh, especially their hinder parts. In which there is a clammy substance like
hardened cheese, easily melted, and soon chewed, tender, soon digested and very
nourishing. Those are best, which are least white, and which are found in
Vineyards and Orchards. III. Crabs which have no Tails; and Lobsters that have
Tails, do not much differ. They are hard to digest; being digested; they
nourish much, but breed thick Juice. Touching Creeping Creatures and other
things, used for food in other Nations, I shall not speak.


Point, 3. Of Sauces, Bread, and the time of Eating.
The third thing to be explained touching Diet, is Sawces, whose Differences,
and matters or kinds, I shall now reckon up. I. As to the Differences of Sawces,
they are, either, 1. Simple, which are made of the mixture of one only thing
with our Meat; or Compound, which consist of two or more. The former are
heating, cooling Temperate, Sharp, Aromatic, Bitter, Salt, Harsh, Acid,
Sweet, Fat. The latter are well nigh more in Number, viz. Dipping-Sawces,
Licking-sawces, Sugard-sawces, Sage-sawces, Garlick-Sawces, Onion-sawces, Tart
Sawces, Vinegars, Sallads, not to speak of your black broaths, Sawcages,
Pap-Sawces, Bononia Sawcages, Westphalia Gammons, of which see Apicius and
Athenaeus.

II. The Matter of condiments, are things dug out of the ground, Plants
themselves, their Juyces and Honey. Of things dug up is Salt, which attenuates
clammy meats, gives taste to those that are tastlss, dries such as are moist,
takes away the strong smell of such as stink. The best is white, transparent
like cristal, thick, void of smell, which has an even acrimony joined with a
certain sweetness. If we believe the Mauritanian Physicians, it dims the eyes,
wastes the seed, and raises the scab. II. From plants, there is, 1. Peper,
especially the black. Which excellently helps concoction, and is exceeding
good for phlegmatic natures. That is best which is most heavy, full, black,
without wrinkles. 2. Ginger, whose Heat is thought to last longer than that of
peper, corects the Crudities of the stomach, and provokes Lust. 3. Cloves with
which neats tongues, Cowes-udders, etc. are pricked and stuck. They heat with a
kind of Astriction, and help the stinking of the Breath. 5. Cardamoms, which
are sharp and bitter in taste. 6. Nutmegs, which are used to the same intents
as the former. 7. Saffron, which helps the concoction of meat, breeds a fresh
color, opens the stoppage of the liver, and has a narcotick or stupefactive
Quallity in it. 8. Elder, whose first buds pickled in vinegar are kept as a
sallet, and move the belly to stool. 9. Capars, which being pickled with salt,
oil or oximel, provoke appetite, void the phlegm which is contained in the
Belly, and ease the obstructions of the spleen. Touching Water-Creases, Onions,
Garlic, etc. see what has been said before.
III. From the juices of plants there are, 1. Sugar, which senifies sharp
things, blunts the fervor of things biting, makes salt things more delicious,
overcomes harshness, gives taste to things insiped, but withal produces choler
in such as are of an hot Nature; and makes black, Furrs, and soosens the teeth.
2. Oil, which if pressed from full ripe olives, it affords nourishment suitable
to our Natures: and is fit to correct the bad quallities of other meats, and of
herbs. Also it molifies and loosens the Belly, it takes away al Asperity, it
helps such as are bruised, and mitigates pain. 3. Juice of unripe grapes,
Citterns, Lemmons, and of Crabs, which the French and Itallians much use, do
cool, bind, and help the extravagant longings of women. Hereunto belongs
Vinegar, which is extreme cold and pierceing. The eagerness thereof is blunted,
with a piece of toasted bread, wine, raisons, elder flowers, roses, sugar, and
such like things. It Is hurtful for mellancholly persons, and women that are
subject to mother fits.
IV. Honey is of an hot nature, saving that which is white, and seems convenint
for healthy people. It easily turns to choler, and therefore it is neither fit
for hot natures, nor hot parts, otherwise it has a power to cleanse and resist
putrefaction. Mead is made hereof.


IV. In the Fourth place we reckoned BREAD, of which in respect of the Matter
and ways of making, there are sundry differences.

I. In Respect of Matter. I. Such as is necessary. 1. It is made of fine
flower, and which is most nourishing to the Body. 2. That which is made of
bolted meal, and finest flower being taken away, and is next in goodness to the
former. 3. Household bread which is made of the finer sort of bran, and
nourishers less than the former, but descends better through the belly because
of the branniness. 4. Of Courser bran which nourishes least of al, but goes
soonest through the belly. 5. Bread of altogether, which nourishes very well,
and soon passes through the belly. 6. Barley bread, which if it be made of the
most excellent barley, is the less inferior to wheaten bread; if of loose and
light barley, it is like the wheaten bran bread. 7. Rye bread, which if it be
black and heavy it burdens the eater, is of sad and thick juice, and breeds
stones in the kidneys.
II. In respect of the matter prepared and quallified, it is. 1. Leavened
bread, which is lighter and sooner distributed, than the unleavened. 2.
Unleavened bread, which is of a contrary Nature. 3. Sour leavened, which is
also hard to digest, and lies heavy upon the stomach. 4. Salted bread, which is
lighter than the unsalted. 5. Unsalted bread, which is apt to breed
obstructions.
I shall not speak of Saffron-bread, Eye-bread, Butterd-bread, Cheese-bread,
Sugard-bread. Hereto belong the parts of bread. 1. The Crum, of which that which
has been here said of bread is to be understood, 2. The upper crust, which
drinks up moisture in the body, and sharpens the Heat thereof; but if it be
scorched and burnt, it breeds adust humors and black choler. 3. The Lower
Crust, which is of like nature with the former.



II. In Respect of the preparation, bread is. 1. Savory, in which the leaven
and salt are well mingled. 2. Unsavory or tastless which is contrary wise
ordered. 3. Well Kneaded, which is neither too littl not too much, but
moderately wrought. 4. Ill kneaded, which obstructs, pufs up, burdens the
stomach. 5. Baked in an Oven, which Because its thoroughly baked is the best of
al others. 6. That which is baked on tiles, or in a portable oven; which
because it is not so well baked in the bottom, is worse than the former. 7. That
which is backed on a gridiron, or on the hearth, is bad, because the outer
parts are scorched and the inner parts are dough-bak'd. 8. Baked under the
ashes or embers, from which it receives a bad quallity. 9. Biscoct or Biscuit,
which is drying, and if made of fine flower, it affords very little excrement.
10. New Bread, which if hot, causes thirst, and breeds winds and suffocations;
if cold, it is wholesome to feel on; if it be two or three days old, it is hard of
digestion, because of its dryness. 11. Old bread which is hard and moldy,
breeds a melancholy humor; and binds the belly. 12. A Great Loaf, because the
fire has not sufficiently digested the moisture thereof, lies heavy upon the
stomach, and raises wind. 13. A Little Loaf, because it is more than
ordinarily crusty round about, produces adust blood as the material cause; and
makes the Body dry. 14. A Loaf of a middling size, which is most commended.
15. Light and spungy, which nourishes lightly, and makes no obstructions in the
bowels. 16. solid and heavy, which is worse than the former. 17. The best bread
therefore is that which is made of fine white wheat meal, the wheat being ripe,
not very new, grown in a fat soil, not infected with moaths, dust, cockel,
darnel, or frost, not wet with rain, or musty with keeping; being well kneaded,
leavened and salted.


V. In the first place we are to consider of the TIME OF EATING, which varies
according to the several Customs of natures. The Hebrews seem to have eaten
twice a day. Among the Greeks even so long as since Homers days, their times
of eating were distinguished into dinner and supper. The latter Grecians did
eat oftener: The Romans had their Breakfast, dinner, after noones bever, their
Supper, and Rere-supper. Our Age follows the Custom of the Romans, yet
thousands there are, that content themselves, with a dinner and supper only.
And so much may suffice to have spoken of meats. They that would know more,
besides Galen of the faculties of meats, let them consult Morellus upon Schola
Salerni, Bruyerinus of Meats, Julius Alexandrinus of wholesome diet, and
Ulysses Aldrovandus de Animalibus.

Article. 3. Of Drink.
Drink is a thing non-natural, restoring the moist substance of Man's Body, and
quenching his thirst.

Touching which two things are observable. The Necessity thereof to preserve
Health, and its kinds.

I. That Drink is necessary for Health, is hereby manifest, in that it restores
the moist substance of our Bodies, which daily wastes away, it quenches natural
thirst, it carries the fat and thick moisture through the narrow passages, it
causes the mixture, digestion, and liquefaction of meats in the stomach, and
prohibits the inflammation of that same fat juice which is ordained to nourish
the Body. II. The kinds of drink are, 1. Water, 2. Wine. 3. Beer and Ale. 4.
Mead. 5. Liquors made of Apples, Pears and such like fruits.

I. Touching water, two things are considerable, viz, 'its differences, and
Correction. I. In respect of the Differences, water is either, 1. Rain water,
which it stormy and cloudy is condemned: if it come down with thunder, it is
exceeding light and thin, because the Sun drinks up and draws out the most
subtle parts; yet is it impure and subject to putrefaction, because diverse
vapors drawn up by the heat, are mixed with the Rain. 2. Snow and Icewater,
which because the most subtle and light parts are dissipated, is thick, and
hurts the stomach, and breeds grievous diseases, of the joints, nerves and
bowels. 3. Water gathered in Cisterns, which has much setlings, is slow in
passage, oftentimes has a strong taste and smell of chalk, and sometimes breeds
little animals. Pit-water, which because it mounts not above the Earth, it is
thick, and sticks long in the bowels. Observe that sweet water springs out of
marley grounds, cold water out of stoney, and thin muddy water out of gravelly
places. The best and most hopeful comes from ground that has red stones, well
tasted water comes from sandy ground, cold water proceeds from the bottom of
mountains and from stony and flinty places. That water is best which is hot in
the winter, cold in the Summer. 4. Fountain water, which if it come out of a
Rock, and runs toward the North, and is not illustrated by the Sun, it is
unhealthful: if it issue directly against the Summer-Sun-rise, it is wholesome: if
it run in a flat and plain ground, because the Sun exhales the most subtle
parts, and leaves the earthy behind, it is not so wholesome: if it run through
leaden pipes, it is hurtful: if through Sand and pibbies, and draws no dirt with
it, it is commendable. 5. River water, which for the most part is mixed, as
rising from many springs meeting together, and from snow dissolved in the
mountains, and rain water to boot. Its crudity is corrected by the beams of
the Sun, which play upon it while it runs such a long tract of ground. It
varies according to the variety of Rivers which flow into it, and the Sundery
lands it runs through. 6. Lake and Pool water, which is the worst of al others,
for it is thick and crude, and many times pestilential. It offends the Stomach,
obstructs the bowels, corrupts the Humors, and many time is the Cause of
putrid Fevers. 7. The best Water, is that which is transparent, void of all
strange taste or smell, is soon cooled, soon heated, is light, and in which flesh
and fruits are soonest boiled.
II. The Correction of waters is performed by boiling, by which not only the
Crudity and Coldness is amended, but also the earthy and bad parts are
separated, which when the water cooles, settle to the bottom. See of this
subject, Pamphilus Herilacus, touching the qualities of water and wine.


II. There are certain differences of wines, I. In respect to the place where
they grow, there is 1. Vinum Falernum, which is of an excellent juice. 2. Wine
of Crete or Malmsey, which eases a cold stomach and cures the Colic. 3. French
wines. 4. Rhenish wines, which are thin, most fit to strengthen the Heart, and
restore the forces of the Body. 5. Hungarian wine. 6. Spanish wine etc.
II. In respect of its substance, wine is, 1. Thin, which easily penetrates,
suddenly, restores strength, opens the passages, provokes sweat and urine, but
nourishes little. 2. Thick wine, such as is the black, red, sweet and harsh,
which nourishes most; but it sticks long in the body, heates the same, and
dries it, and sometimes breeds obstructions.
II. In respect of color, wine is, 1. White, which heates less then the yellow
and Gold-coloured, if besides the color, it be withal thin of Substance. 2. The
Gold-colored which is next to white, and if it be thin withal, is excellent. 3.
Red, which moderately heates, breeds good blood, and troubles not the head: if
it be thick withal it bastens obstructions of the spleen and liver. 4. Pallet
wine, is much of the same nature. 5. Black wine, which is of a thicker
substance for the most part sweet, very nourishing, and breeds thick blood.
While it sticks long in the bowels, it obstructs them, and fills the head.
III. In respect of Taste, 1. There is Sweet wine, which nourishes well, is
pleasing to the palate, bowels, lungs and joints, not disturbs the Head, but
because it is thick, it breeds obstructions, and is easily turned into cholor.
2. Harsh wine, which has a weaker heat, stays longer in the belly, and pierces
to the passages of urine, is good for fluxions; but because it hinders spittle
it is not good for diseases of the Chest. 3. The midling sort, which is best of
al.
IV. In respect of smell it is. 1. Fragrant, which restores strength by its very
smell, increases the spirit, strengthens all the faculties. It Is good for old
people, save that it fills the head, and weakens the nerves. 2. That which has
no smell, which is neither so greedily drawn by the stomach, or affords matter
so fit to engender spirits. 3. That which has a strange smell, which is hurtful.
V. In respect of Age, it is, 1. Must, which by its windyness breeds the
cholick, and hinders the voidancie of Urine, 2. New wine, which yet retains
the sweetness of must, is excrementitious, not easily distributed into the
body, and breeds fluctuations therein. 3. Old wine, which works upon the nerves
and troubles the brain. 4. Middle-ag'd, which is best for all Intents and
purposes. In which nevertheless there is great variety. Some bear their Age,
others soon loose their strength.

III. Beer is in use among the Northern Nations where little or no wine grows.
It Is made of wheat, barley, rye, oats, either simple or mixed together; and is
preserved with Hops. It has also sundry differences. I. From the matter. 1.
Some is made of wheat which nourishes, heats and moistens more than that of
Barley; but it breeds a more clammy juice, causes obstructions, provokes urine,
and moves the belly to stool. 2. Barly-malt beer, which heats less, by reason
of the barley; but because it has much hops, it becomes not a little heating,
affords more thin juice, and is more diuretic. 3. Oaten-drink which is of the
same quality with oats. 4. Rie-beer, which nourishes very much; but breeds
obstructions and stops the Urine. Hereunto belong the differences of beer, from
the waters it is made of, viz. poole, river, pit water etc. which also vary
the faculties and strength of beer.
II. From the Age, it is, 1. New, which is unwholesome, especially if it be
troubled: for it stops the passages, and is bad for such as have the stone. 2.
Welpurged and ripened, which is more wholesome.
III. In respect of the place where it is made, we have, 1. Poland b^er, which
is made for the most part of wheat, nourishes well, and Heates moderately. 2.
Dantzick beer, which is like a syrup, nourishes such as are used to it very
well, in others, it causes thirst. 3. Hambrough beer, which is commonly made of
wheat, is of good taste, makes a man have a fresh color, expels the urine; if
it be taken too largely, it makes a man have a red face. 4. Lubicks Beer, which
is too strong, makes the Head heavy, and hurts a man's health. 5. Goslar beer,
which at the first tasting seems sweet, and soon after imprints a winy taste
upon the tongue. It is healthful. 6. Embden beer, which is subtle, clear, and
piercing, at first bitterish, afterward sharp, it drives forth urine and
choler: and therefore it is commended in the Jaundice, and in Fevers. 7.
Brunswick beer, called Mum, differs not much from the former, save that it is
thick and more windy. 8. Rostock beer, which quenches thirst, expells the
Urine, nourishes little, and is good in the summer time. 9. Servestan beer,
which hangs long in the hypochondria, and sometimes causes sharpness of Urine.
10. Newburg beer in Thuringia, which is well boiled, and nourishes; if it be
taken too plentifully, it causes dimness of sight: some have grown blind by too
much use thereof. 11. Erfurt beer, which conduces very much to health. 12.
Torgave beer, which breeds good blood, and by its aromatical taste strengthens
the principle members. 13. Wittenberg beer, which is like the Rheue beer, being
ill-boyled. 14. Rauschenburge beer, which is commended against the stone. 15.
Paderborn beer, which breeds thick blood. 16. Beer of Brabant, Gelder, and
Zutphen, which breeds the scurvy. 17. Flanders-beer, which is very commendable,
especially their double beer. 18. English beer, which makes the drinkers fat.
19. The Rhemsh beer, which is for the most part base and hurtful. 20. Colen
beer, which is better than that of Brabant.
I pass over the differences taken from the vessels, which also change the
faculties. They are kept, sometimes in pitched, sometimes in unpitched
vessels. Mead and Metheglin, do for the most part Heat more than wine,
especially if spices be added thereunto. But it easily turns to choler, because
of the Honey.


Chap. 2. Of non-natural things done by a Man.
NOn-natural things which are done, are passions of the Mind, Motion and rest
of the Body, sleep and waking, which are of great moment toward the
preservation or violation of Health. Touching affections of the Mind, and their
Action upon the Body, these things are chiefly to be observed. 1. That Moderate
affections preserve health, and make no change in the Body. 2. Such as pass
their bounds, often times disorder the body, and sometimes bring sudden Death. 3.
If you consider the good Affections or passions, 1. Love if it exceed, because
it vehemently inflames the spirits in the Heart, endeavoring to draw the thing
beloved to it self, and therefore sending the spirits forth to meet it, does
often times cause palpitation of the Heart, sometimes madness, fainting, etc.
2. Cheerfulness, if it be moderate, recreates the Heart and vital spirits; if
it be sudden, and in too great a quantity, it so dissipates the spirits, which
the Heart therein sends into the outward members because of its over great
dilatation, that it oftentimes brings death. 3. In Evil Affections or Passions.
1. Sadness by little and little, dissolves the spirits, cooles and dries the
body, spoils digestion, causes watching, and breeds melancholy diseases. 2.
Fear, dissolves the strength of the Body, by reason of the sudden recourse of
the Heat, Blood, and spirits, into the outward parts, causes a small pulse with
refrigeration of the external parts, and is sometimes the cause of sudden gray
hairs, even in young Men. 3. Anger, in which the Spirits and Blood do as it
were boil in the Heart, and are violently moved, from the inner to the outward
parts: it agitates the spirits and Humors, Heats the whole body, and breeds
Fevers. Tremblings of the joints, and Palpitations of the Heart, do often
invade angery persons. Also women are thereby brought into danger of Abortion.
Anger hardly ever killed any body, because the Spirits are therein freely and
forcibly moved; if any died upon occasion of anger, of necessity there was some
other natural disorder in the body.




II. That Motion is necessary for Health, is hence apparent, in that by
increasing natural Heat, it furthers Nutrition; by moving and agitateing the
Spirits, it discusses vapors and excrements; it makes the body after a sort
hardy, by adding solidity to the parts, by their mutual Attrition. Now
according to its Differences, it works diversely upon the Body of Man. The best
is that which exercises al parts of the body alike. The next to that, is
whereby al parts are moved, but not equally; the lightest of al, is that which
exercises one only part. I. Two much Motion, exhausts the spirits and solid
parts, cooles the whole body, dissolves the strength of the Muscles, Nerves,
and Ligaments, and hurts the Eyesight. II. Swift motion renders the body thin
and compacted. III. Slow motion, rarifies and increases the Flesh. IV. Vehement
motion, makes the body hard, lively, but lean withal. V. Continued and equable
Motion, because the members are weakened thereby, as being much, it wearies the
more. VI. Unequal motion, because it is parted with spaces of rest, wearies
less. VII. Distinguished and ordinate motion, brings less wearyness, since
Interruption brings rest, and the rest is cause of less wearyness. VIII. In hot
places it burns more, in moist places it moistens, because the bodies being
rarefied by exercise, are most readily disposed to receive all the quality of
the Air and Places. IX. Among motions caused by a man's self, I. Leaping without
Intermission, stirs up natural heat, but hurts the Head by concussion and the
Breast by compression, while the back is bowed. Leaping on high, is good for
the Hips, but bad for the breast; Downwards to leap, clenses the Head from
superfluities, and strengthens the things. With Springing, it is good for old
Diseases of the Head, and brings matter which tends upwards, down into the
lower parts. 2. Running, if it be Vehement, is good for Fat and moist bodies,
but it is bad for such as are troubled with any kind of Headache. If Running be
moderate, it excellently warms the Body, excites appetite, and though at first
it move defluxions, yet it afterward in tract of time stops them. A long
course fore right by little and little performed, diffuses the flesh; but
renders the bodies thicker. Backward, if it be gentle, it is good for the Head,
Eyes, stomach, Loins. A Circular motion distends the flesh and belly, and very
much offends the Head, uphil, it is bad for the Breast and thighs. Downhil it
very much affects the head, it shakes the bowels, troubles weak hips: upon
plain ground, it does all that has been said. The body being covered, by moving
sweat, it moystens and heats the flesh, but it makes the bodies il colored,
because the pure air does not come at them, to cleanse the same. The body being
naked, it draws out great plenty of sweat, it brings away the humors in
invisible exhalations and does more burn the body. 3. To exercise ungirt by
hurling a weight, by reason of the vehement straining to throw the same, the
vehemence of the motion and bending of the muscles, does make limbs to grow
firm, and purges them from excrements, but this exercise must not be used by
such as have weak Breasts and Kidneys. 4. Darting is useful to get a good
habit of Body; and therefore Aesculapius and Apollo were thought to be the
first Masters of darting. 5. Moderate walking abroad, continued without
resting, makes the body pure, it helps defluxions and suppression of the
courses. Swift walking, does heat much, and abates the greatness of the flesh.
Slow walking, is convenient for ancient and weak people: because it softens
bodies exhaust with immoderate Labors, and purges them, by opening the Pores.
Too much walking, takes away the trembling of the body, dispels wind, and very
much disorders weak heads. Much walking does help such as are troubled with
Infirmities of the Head and Chest, and whose lower parts are not nourished.
Little walking, is fit for such as must walk after meat and who feel an
heaviness in their bodies. Long walking righ out, is good for the head, but it
does too much drink up the humidities. Long and Quick is good for the Hickup.
A short walk compounded of motion and rest, by reason of the frequent turning
and returning, is laboursome, and weakens the head by frequent turnings. With
labor of the thighs and going upon the heels, it is good for a moist Chest and
a convulsioned womb. To go on tiptoe is good for such as are blear eyed, and
costive in their belly. To go uphil, does more weary the body, because it is
as it were loaded in that motion, it moves sweat and hinders the breath, and it
is exceeding bad for weak Knees. To walk downhil, draws from the Head to the
inferior parts, but it weakens the Thighs. To walk through even Plains, affects
the body by the Universality of the Motion, such motion is sooner finished by
reason of its affinity with Nature. To walk upon uneven grounds, is good for
such as are soon weary with walking. walking over rough grounds, fills the Head.
Walking over deep Sands, makes most of al to stablish and strengthen all the
parts of the body. To walk in a close place, subjects a man to intemperate,
vicious and thick air, which fills the whole Body. To walk in the open Air, if
by the Seaside, it dries, and attenuates thick Humors; if by Lakes and Ri^ers,
it moistens, but is bad for Epileptick persons; if in the maine Land, it is not
so good as by the Sea; if in the dew, it moistens, not without damage; if in
places not subject to the wind, Causes Humors to exhale, and digests
Excrements, and is commended in Collicks proceeding from a cold Cause; if in
the North wind, it Causes coughing, but it quickens the senses; if in the South
wind, it fills the Head, and loosens the Belly; if in the West wind, it is the
wholsomest of al other; if in the South-East wind, it smites the Body; if in
the Sun, it hurts a man's Head, it melts what is hot, and makes that which is
dry, yet dryer. Touching walking in the shadow observe. I. That we must avoid
trees full of dew; because the surface of the trees being melted by the dew, an
harmful liquor drops upon the bodies of such as walk under them, which bites
and Chops the outward parts. 2. That walking is most wholesome, which is
performed, under the Myrtle, laurel, or bay, and among sweet smelling Herbs.
When the Sky is clear, it lightens a man, exhales Vapors through the pores,
makes a man breath well. When the Sky is Cloudy, it causes heavyness, fills the
Head. In the Morning, loosens the Belly, expels sluggishness caused by sleep,
procures appetite, and is good for moist constitutions, for it dries up the
Humors out of the passages. An Evening walk prepares a Man to sleep, disperses
inflations, and hurts a weak head. After Meat, a little walk, is good for those
that are accustomed thereto, and whose meat does hardly descend. 6. Standing
upright, universally considered, is bad for such as have a weak Back, or are
troubled with Inflammation and Ulcers of the Kidneys: Considered particularly,
before meat, it is good to void the Excrements of the Belly, for persons
asthmatical, and to provoke Urin, and strengthens the Legs; but it is not fit for
such as are subject to swimmings in their Head, because in that posture the
Vapors mount into the Head. After meat, if it be Moderate, it assists the
descent of Meat into the bottom of the Stomach; if it last long, it sends
plenty of Vapors into the upper Region of the Body; it throws down a multitude
of Humors, into the nether parts, weakens the Chest, and vitiates the Bladder,
and the whole Action of making Water. To stand in the shade has the same effect
as walking therein, the difference is only in more or less. To stand in the
Sun, does burn a man more in the Summer time, then to walk therein, and in a
body impure, it very much hurts the Head, etc.
X. Of motions caused by another, there is. 1 Riding on horseback, which if it
be quiet and slow, breeds great wearyness, and makes men unfruitful as to
generation; if the pace be Swift, and not very frequent, it makes those that
ride, inclined to bodily lust, by continual motion and rubbing of the genital
parts, and shakes the body in a weary some manner, and is very bad for the
Chest: if it be upon a Trotting horse, it offends the head, the Neck, the back,
and Buttocks; but it brings gravel from the Kidneys: to Ride full Speed, or on
Galiup is too heating, duls the senses, and offends the Eyes. 2. Gestation or
being carried, in general, in persons sound and sickly, increases Natural heat,
and discusses the multitude of the matter: but in persons that cannot sleep, it
brings rest, by digesting those excrements, which slip from the Head into the
Stomach, etc.
Particularly. Riding in a Coatch, if it be not violent, is good in diseases of
the Head and fluxions of the Bowels, but it is hurtful to Epileptick persons,
because the motion of the wheels makes then* giddy: if a man ride with his
Face to the hind Wheels, it is good for a weak sight, and helps much the
Obfuscation thereof. If it be very fast, Celius commends it to make a man lean
that is over Fat. In an Horse-litter it is convenient for healthy people, that
are to follow their business after dinner, and it was anciently the manner to
carry sick people on that fashion in an horse-litter. Lethargick, and
Nephritick persons lay along, etc. For so the Morbifick matter was made fit for
Expulsion; those that were troubled with some light and long lasting Diseases,
and were in the perfect declination of Fevers did sit. To be carried in a
Chair or Sedan is good for cold Natures and which evidently decline. But of al
these Exercises, consult the learned treatise of Mercurialis de Art
Gymnastica, which I shall peradventure overlook, and cause to be again
published with some notes of mine. IV. I shall not need to speak of Rest; all that can be said, may be collected by any one, from what we have spoke of
Motion.


III. Sleep is also necessary for preservation of Health, and likewise to
refresh the wearied Members of our bodies, and to restore the spirits, which
are the Souls Instrument, in the performance of her Actions. If it be
moderate, not only the wearyed forces of the body are thereby refreshed, and
the spirits washed with daily labors, repaired; but also the heat is drawn
inwards, by which means the Aliments and crude Humors are happily digested in
the whole body; the whole body and especially the Bowels are sweetly moistened,
and the body is made generally stronger; cards are removed, anger appeased, and
the mind made more peaceful; immoderate Evacuations, saving sweat, are
suppressed; and especially, sleep is good for Old people. Contrarily,
Immoderate Sleep obscures the spirits and makes them sluggish, and stupefies
the mind and Memory, and blunts the Edge of Natural heat, by augmenting crude
humors, and stopping the Issue of such as are superfluous. Also sleep which is
taken after the body is any ways Emptied, does dry and extenuate the same.

IV. Also Watchings are either moderate or Immoderate. The former excite the
spirits and render them more lively, distribute the spirits and heat into al
parts of the Body, help the distribution of Aliment, and further the Expulsion
of Excrements. But Immoderate watchings consume and dissipate the spirits,
especially the Animal, and dry the whole body, especially the brain, increase
Choler, sharpen and inflame the same; and in conclusion, the heat being
dissipated, they cause cold Diseases.

Chap: 3. Of Non-Natural things Externally used.
NOn-Natural things Externally used, are, Bathes, Ointments, Frictions, and
Garments.

I. Touching Bathes, observe. I. That they alter as much as the Air it self,
but diversely according to the difference of Temperatures, and there is in them
more Artifice than in the Air. II. That they frequently and very much hurt,
Chiefly persons not used to them, Plethorick persons, such as are Cacochymical,
have Catarrhs, are subject to Inflammations and Erycipelas. III. That they are
made, either of Liquors, as fresh water, Medicinal Fountains, Decoctions of
Herbs, Oil, milk, Wine, etc. Or of Vapors, or of some solid substance, which is
hot, as sand, Salt, Pressings of Grapes. IV. The Vapors of fresh water, Heats,
first moistens; relaxes; afterward Melt congealed liquors, and procures sweat;
finally, by long use, it dries. V. Fresh Water hot, of it self Moistens but at
the first it heates; afterward the hot Vapors breathing forth, it cools,
attenuates, and dries: Lukewarm, or such as is moderately warm, Cools such as
are over hot, heates those that are overcold, and withal Relaxes, and used an
indifferent time it fattens, and digests the Excrements beneath the Skin, and
by long tarriance therein, it resolves and discusses them, wherefore to hot
lean Natures and to such whose heat is biting, it is good, being tarried in an
indifferent while; also for Melancholic persons, Hectical persons, such as
have dry Fevers and are thirsty: also it chases away wearyness, Mitigates
pains, is good for Diseases of the Skin. Cold Water cooles, but withal stops
the passages, makes the Skin hard and compact, strengthens the whole Body,
recalls heat into the lower parts of the Body, by which means it helps
Concoction, and is a good Remedy against hurts springing from external Causes,
if we use it moderately and rightly. It is bad for such as grow, and use not
good diet, nor exercise, or are inclined to crud^ties and stoppages, and breed
sharp vapors, VIII. Artificial Baths are to be judged of by their Ingredients.
IX. Waters of Medicinal Wels, do alter the parts, according to their Quality,
so that the Sulphurous do dry, heat and resolve: the Nitrous do dry and
cleanse, etc. See of them Fallopius, Mercurialis, and Baccius.


II. As for what concerns Anointings, they were anciently used before and after
bathing, as is every where apparent in Galen. But because they are now grown
out of use, I shall therefore say nothing of them. See Galen in the second Book
of the Faculties of simple Medicaments, Chap. 2. and 4. Also in the seventh
Book of his Method of Curing, Chap. 6. and Mercurialis, in the first Book and
8. Chapter, of his Gymnasticks.

III. The effects of Friction or Rubbing are various according to the
Differences thereof. 1. Hard friction hardens the Body, contracts the flesh and
makes it compact. 2. Soft, Softens, Loosens, and dissolves the same. 3. A
middle Sort, has an effect between both. 4. Much Rubbing, lessens the Flesh,
dissolves the same, and Causes leanness. 5. Little, leaves it in the same
Quantity it was in. 6. Indifferent, increases the flesh. 7. Morning friction is
best used after the voidance of the common superfluities of the Body, being
useful for such as are dried, and find a wearysomness upon them. Evening
Friction is good for wearyed, dried persons, and such as nourish not.


IV. Hippocrates treats of Garments, where he speaks of the ambient Air, in
the sixth Book of his Epidemicks; I conceive best to place the consideration
thereof among things externally applied to the body. Al Garments in general, do
in some measure heat the body, both by keeping off the cold Air; and keeping in
the steams of the body, and introducing a true and genuine Heat. The effect of
Clothes varies according to their Differences. 1. Silk-Taffaties and Grogarans,
do heat, and because they are soft and tender, they soften. 2. Plush and Velvet
by how much they are deeper and richer, so much the more they heat. 3. A woolly
garment heates and dries much. 4. A Garment of Skin, if full of hairs, is
warmest of al other. 5. A Scarlet garment, calls forth the spirits and Humors,
with which it has Analogy from the Center to the Circumference, and therefore
is accounted hot. 6. A Perfumed Garment hurts an hot brain, and breeds the
Headache. 7. A Linen Garment whitened with Lime, does bite the Skin, and
Causes an Itch. 8. An Hempen Garment, is more dry than one of Linen.


Chap. 4. Of Non-Natural things which are voided and retained.
NOn-Natural things which are voided and retained are, both those which in the
nourishment of the Body Nature retains to restore the decayed substance
thereof, as also those parts which she separates and voids forth as
unprofitable.

Touching them, observe in general. I. That Excrements do vary according to the
Concoctions. Some are simply such, as Urin, internal Vapors, fumes, Dandrifs,
Sweat, Moisture, Ichor, Tears, Phlegm in the Eyes, Menstrual blood,
Hemorrhoid-blood, spittle, Snivel, Pose, Droppings of the Nose, Eare-Wax, Dung:
some are for the sake of Children, as Miske, Seed, Mothers-blood. II. That they
are necessary in point of health, which continues in good case, if they be
conveniently voided; but is prejudiced, if they be either retained, or
unseasonably voided forth.


Particularly, three of them are most confiderable, Viz. Excrements of the
Belly, Vrin, and Venereal. I. The Excrements of the belly, if they are often
voided and carry with them the Vicious Humors, and so lighten the Body, they
confirm health: if too frequently and too long, the body is defrauded of
necessary Aliment, and begins to pine away, the forces of the body are
weakened, and many times the guts are as it were shaved. If not in due time,
they hinder digestion by putrid vapors, hurt a weak head, and breed molestation
to other parts of the Body. II. The Urine, if too long kept in, does not only
burden the bladder and neighboring parts, but oftentimes does so stretch the
same, that it cannot afterward contract it self. And in case the Reins do not
draw unto themselves the Wheyish moisture, remains mixed with the bood, and
being spread al over the Body, it affords matter for the Dropsy and Cachexy.
III. Seed unseasonably retained, causes heavyness of the whole body: and if it
be corrupted, it Causes most grievous accidents: being voided in too great a
Quantity, it dissipates the natural heat, weekens the whole Body, heaps up
crudities, hurts the Nerves, brings the Palsy, and weakness of the mind.


Title, II. Of the Method of preserving Health.
Chap. I. Of preservation of Health in general.
THe Method of preserving Health, is a Doctrine which prescribes rules how to
use the Non-Natural things in such manner as to preserve the body in health.

The End thereof is therefore, the Conservation of Health, which consists in
Preservation of the temper of the whole body, and a I its parts, and of their
specifical proprieties and occult qualities, and of the due shape of the
Organick parts, and of that unity which is common to hoth.

Those Precepts, are either most General, General, or Special.

I. The most General, are as it were common principles, by which convenient
diet is governed, and they are these following. I. That whatever is according
to Nature must be preserved. II. That we must always aim at a Mediocrity. For
too much of any thing is an Enemy to nature, which Phocylides excellently
expressed, Eat and drink and discourse with moderation. Moderation is the best
thing in the world, and Excess is destructive. III. That sudden changes are to
be avoided. For much at once, or suddenly, to empty or fill, to heat or cool, or
any other ways to alter the body, is dangerous, as Hippocrates has it in his
second book, Aphorism 51. IV. We must not lightly alter Custom. For Custom is
a new nature, and things to which we have been long time accustomed, though
bad, are not so troublesome as those to which we have not been used, as
Hippocrates in his 50. Aphorism of the second Book, instructs us. Now after
what manner Custom is a new Nature, and what power it has over our actions
natural, vital, and animal, and over the parts of our bodies, see in Renatus
Moreau upon the 15. Chapter of Schola Salerni, p. 215. and Senertus in his
Paralipomena, page 48. V. Bodies perfectly in health, must be cherished with
things like; such as recede from the exact state of Health, ought by little and
little, and modrately to be reduced to a contrary condition. VI. We must so far
be careful to preserve occult proprieties, as that the temper of the body may
not be hurt. VII. The inbred Heat of all the parts, must be preserved with
things moderately hot, and moderately astringent.


II. The General precepts concerning the nonnatural things, will be delivered
best according to their order in which we reckoned them, in the foregoing
Title. I. The Air therefore, 1. Must be chosen temperate, pure, not stinking,
free, as being most healthful; and that air must be avoided which is full of
corrupt exhalations. 2. We must by all means avoid^^ ^hopping out of an hot air
into a cold, or (...) ^f a cold into an hot. 3. A cold air must be altered, by
a fire, by hangings, by a stove; an hot, with cold water powered out of one
vessel into another, or sprinkled upon the floor, by strewing of roses, water
lillyes, boughs of willow and Agnus Castus. A moist, with a bright fire, and
perfumes; a dry, by sprinkling of water, and with moistning herbs; a
pestilential, with burning aromatic woods, and franckincense. 4. Those that
have leisure must walk out into the fields to enjoy the open air. 5. In the
the morning it is good to walk about the mountains, in the evening about the
fountains and rivers; both because the Air is in those parts more pure and
bright, and about the fountains and rivers, it is lightened and clarified by
the fetting Sun; also because in the morning, we are not very hot, by reason of
the foregoing night; in the Evening in regard of the heat of the Midday sun, we
may be delighted with the cool air of the waters.
II. Touching meat, we must observe some things in general, and some in special.


I. In general observe, 1. That we must choose such meats as are most temperate
and familiar to our Natures, such as well baked bread, flesh of beasts, and such
things as they afford for food, fishes, etc. Of bread the best is, that which
is well leavened full of eyes, well kneaded, and well baked in an oven not too hot,
seasned indifferently with salt, and made of the best wheat. 2. Also we must
use a most simple diet, and of several sorts, to avoid satiety, provided that
it be not at the same meal of different substances, and different qualities,
but of the same nature, that it may be digested with the same heat, in one and
the same space of time; and that we eat not over much. 3. We must have a
special Eye to custom, by the power whereof, some have fed on poison without
hurt. 4. The worser, but more pleasing meat and drink, is to be preferred
before that which is better, and not so delightful. For the Stomach greedily
artracts, straightly embraces, and happily digests such kind of meats.


II. Particularly we must have an Eye to the Quantity, Choice, Sawces, Time,
and Order: of which I shall treat, when I handle the diet of persons of a middle
Age.

III. Of the rest, there is nothing to be said in general: only this may be
added, that we must according to the advice of Celsus, take heed lest in health
we consume, that which should assist us in sickness. It is better, daily to use
moderate exercise, to prevent the collection of superfluours excrements, than
to use purgations or other medicaments.

[Read more of this subject in the Guide to Physic and Chyrurgery, Riverius
Practice of Physic, and his Observations; and the London Dispensatory. Al of
the last Editions, Englished by me.]

Chap. 2. Of preservation of Health, in Special; and first of the good Habit.
Article, 1. Of preserving the Health of well habited persons.
Point, 1. Of preserving the Health of Infants, Children and youths.
SO much shall suffice to have said of preservation of Health in general: let us
now see how health is to be preserved in several sorts of people. And this
preservation is either of well constituted, or Intemperate persons.

Well habited or well constituted persons, are either Infants, both such as are
in the womb, and such as are born; or Children, or Youth, or Men of Middle Age,
or Old Men.

I. Children in the Womb, will fare well, if the woman with child, shall do some
things and avoid other some. Among things to be avoided are, 1. Air which is
moist and southern, the stink of candles put out, and which arises from
Castoreum, brimstone, and such like things. 2. Also the smell of strong herbs,
as rue, penneroial, Mint, and of sweet smelling things, if the woman be subject
to mother fits. 3. The sight of things horrible and fearful. 4. Sharp, bitter
and salt meats, which open the mouths of the veins, such as are, Garlic,
Onions, Mustard, Parsley, etc. as also such as cause wind; to which ad strange
things, and hardly to be obtained. 5. Motion which is violent either of body or
mind, especially in the first months; also vacancy of motion, which collects
humors in the body. 6. The use of venery, at the beginning of conception, least
the child prove abortive. 7. The use of Bathes, least the ligaments of the womb
should be loosned. 8. Too much laughter, or imagination. 9. Costiveness of the
belly, which may be cured by the use of broaths, and of Manna. Among things to
be used and done are, 1. Temperate Air, dry rather than moist, 2. Meat of
good juice and plentyful in the last months; Apples, Quinces, which are thought
to strengthen the child; also the eating of toasted Figs every day before
meals is commended, when a woman's time draws nigh, because it is thought, that
the secondine is hereby more easily separated and brought forth. Also saffron
and Cinnamon are commended after meals. 3. Moderate use of good wine or clear
beer. 4. Motion somewhat strong in the last month, to dilate the parts. 5.
Moderate use of venery about the same time. 6. A Bath of luke warm water,
which opens the Genital parts, and prepares them to the birth. 7. More sleep
than watching. 8. The use of such things as comfort the child; among which are
Balsamus Embryones, and sweet almonds with Malmesey, as most excellent.



II. Infants newborn for the first septenarie are thus to be ordered. 1. As
soon as they are borne, the dung must be avoided by giving them sugar penids
with oil of sweet almonds or honey, to prevent the Falling Sickness. They must
not be put to a nurse, unless the mother be weak, subject to sickness, or bad
manners. 3. For two years or eighteen months it must be nourished with milk, as
that it be in the mean while inured to other meats. Pap made of wheat meal
and milk, usual amongst us; which because it breeds gripings and obstructions,
either the wheat flower must be dried in an Oven; or white bread crumbs
moistened with Hens broth, must be used in stead thereof. 4. Its diet for the
first three years, must incline to moisture. 5. Being newborn, it must be
washed every day; after the third month to the seventh, every other day; from
the seventh month til it is weined, twice every week. 6. About the End of the
first seven years it must be seldom bathed; and not soon after meat or drink,
least crude juice be drawn into the body. 7. Wine must be avoided til the one
and twenteth year, according to Plato's precept. 8. The more it grows, the more
it must be exercised, but so as care be taken, that no member be distorted, or
untimely dried. 9. As it increases in growth, it must by lit^^ ^^d little abate
of its sleep.


III. Ch^^^^ require, 1. More solid meats, but moderately dry, lest their
moisture be suddenly diminished. 2. Stronger exercise, yet somewhat less than
their strength can well bear.


IV. To such as are ripe, must be given, 1. In general such kind of diet to
begin with, as they are to hold al their life, that they may inure themselves
thereto. 2. Meats, which in little Quantity do nourish much. 3. Stronger
Labors, that their bodies may be fitted for all kind of exercises, and al sorts
of weathers. 4. They must avoid Venery, which does too soon dissipate natural
Heat, and cooles the body.
Particularly, Studients ought to have a Care of their animal spirits, that
they may plentiful, neat and pure. Such are bred by subtle and pure air; Thin
diet, and of good juice, due evacuation of excrements; avoidance of
unseasonable studying, by which crudities are multiplied, and the body made
sickly.

Point, 2. Of preserving the Health of middle-aged persons.
We call that Middle-Age, which taking its beginning from the third septenary,
runs through the four sextenaries following, and is finished in the fifteenth
year, so as to comprehend Adolescence, Youth, Virility, and ripe Age.

We shall preserve the Health of this Age, if we shall observe some things,
touching Meat, Drink, Affections, Motions, Sleep, Bathes and Excretions: and if
any error be committed, we must mend that the following day.

I. In Meat respect is to be had, 1. Of Quantity, touching which observe. 1.
That it must be so much, as is requisite to restore the strength of the body,
and not to burden the same, which may be gathered, by the sense of hunger six
or ^even hours after eating; by belching, absence of Heaviness and smell, quiet
sleep, absence of watchings, and bad taste in the Mouth, and if the Head be not
heavy at Sun rise, and a man be fit for any business. 2. We must chiefly have
respect to three things, 1. The nature of the Aliment, in which respect, Meats
hardly digested taken in overgreat Quantity, are more hurtful than those easily
digested, so taken. Plenty is pernicious when it has a bad quality joined with
it, unless it be some ways diminished by the sweetness thereof. Those who have
a cold stomach, ought to eat less; because such a stomach desires more than it
can digest; the hot stomach may have more, because it digests more; those whose
stomach is temperate, may make their appetite the measure of their eating, not
eating before they feel themselves hungry. It Is better that the Heat of the
stomach exceed the meat, than that the meats should exceed the Heat of the
Stomach. 2. The kind of Body and course of life, and the Labors of a man; in
respect to which those that are idle must eat less, because they digest less;
paines-takers must eat more, because their Heat is augmented by exercise. 3.
The time of year, and Constitution of the Heavens; in respect of which we must
eat more in the winter and spring, because then our stomaches and Inwards are
naturally hottest. And the contrary must take place in Summer.
3. We must by Fasting, spare diet, sleep, quiet and Vomiting correct any error
committed, either through bad custom, or allurement of eating. Often times
nature being by the taking of some good food, invited to digestion, has set
upon some Crudity which before she could not master.
II. Of Choice, where note first that the flesh of beasts, is more familiar to
our Nature than any other food. 2. Of Fouls, we commend a duck of a year old,
in the winter, and therein the Pulp of the breast, the Liver, and the
after-parts; of a wild foul the wing, from September to Januarie. A Goose of a
year old, in the winter, and therein the breast, Liver, and after parts;
Goslings of a month old, in the spring and summer. A Capon, of a year old,
from October to April, and therein, the wings, the rumpe, and the flesh along
the breast bone. A Quail in Agust, September, and the whole winter. Young
pigeons of three or six weeks old, of which the thighs, and belly are the
principal parts. An Hen of a year old, in January, February and March, and
chickens of six or seven weeks age. A Turkey-Hen in the winter, her breast and
belly, whose chick is best in the spring, of two or three months old. A
Partrich from October to the spring, in all its parts, but chiefly in the wings.
Whose chick, of six or eight weeks old, in July, August and September, is meat
for a Prince. A Phesant in Autumn, and winter, in its wings rather than Legs,
whose chick of six or eight weeks old, in the Summer, is most sweet meat. A
Thrush of a month old, in Autumn and winter. III. Among four footed beasts are
approved the Ox, from September to March, especially if he be five years old;
his chief parts are the Breast, Loins, and Muscles of the Hips. A Rabbit in
winter and summer, its back parts, hips and wings. An Hare in cold winter. A
Leverit or young hare of two or three months old, at al times. A Kid in the
spring, of a month or two old, it is better to eat of its hinder parts, ribs,
belly, head and feet, than other parts of the Body. An Hogg of two years, in
the winter, the flesh on its backbone, Loins, Ribbs, Ears and Feet. A Pigg
at any time. A Calfe from December to May, its Loins, breast, Belly, Head,
Liver, Kidneyes. I forbear to speak of Fishes, that I may not outgoe the
bounds of a compendium. III. Of Sawces, touching which observe, 1. That strong
and healthy persons, must use very little sauce. 2. We must abstain from such
as differ much from our constitution. 3. We must use such as come nearest the
temper of the meats we eat. 4. In the Summer, and such as are of a chollerick
Constitution cold sawces must be used, in the winter and in phlegmatic
Constitutions hotter may be allowed. 5. We must so use sauce, as never to eat
more than the heat of our stomach can digest.
IV. We must have regard to the time, that is to say, how often and when we
must take food. Touching both which points observe in general. 1. That we must
not eat much and often, as the champions of old were wont to do; because that
is good neither for the body nor the mind. 2. It is better to eat often and a
little, than much at once: for so neither shall the stomach be oppressed, nor
the body Pined. 3. So often at our pleasure, as we feel our selves hungry. Now
this varies, according to age, Temperament, kind of Life, custom; yet the most
healthy course for such as are exercised with moderate labors is to eat twice
a day; hard labors may eat four times a day. Nor must we eat, as soon as ever
we feel our selves hungry, nor must we defer too long after Hunger summons us.
For the former breeds crudities, the orifice of the stomach being provoked by
reason of its exquisite sense of feeling; the latter fills the stomach with bad
humors. 5. Choleric persons, lean people, such as use much exercise, must feed
often. For the former do easily faint away through fasting; especially if
choler be shed out into their stomach. The latter have their bodies apt to
transpire and spend. The over exercised do dissipate much. 6. To cold and
moist persons, to fat and corpulent, such as are busyed with little or
indifferent labors, less meat is to be given, for the contrary reasons. A
Temperate man may eat twice a day. 8. Because all the meat is not digested in
the stomach at one and the same time; but one part descends into the guts
before another, there needs no such subtle enquiry about the space of time
which must go between dinner and supper; Provided there be no manifest signs
of Crudity and repletion, the supper may be four, five, or six hours after
dinner. 9. We must so keep to an hour of eating, that we sometime transgress
the same, least exact custom may occasion some danger, when we are forced to
miss our time. 10. We must always have great regard to custom. For those that
are accustomed to eat twice a day, if they miss their dinner, are troubled with
heart-burning, sharpeness of urine, etc. 11. Although it is Scarce determinable,
whether a man that is in health, well tempered, and at his own dispose, should
eat more largely at dinner or at supper; seeing there are strong reasons on
both sides, and concoction in the stomach, seems to be better by day than by
night, as we find by experience, that it is better, in the night than in the
day; yet is it certain, that some kind of meats are better at dinner than at
Supper, as onions and other vaporous meats; and that not only old persons, but
those also which deflect from a good state of health, and are troubled with
Catarrhs, weakeness and swimming of the Head, ought to sup more sparingly than
dine.
V. Of order, in respect whereof note. 1. Because al meats are changed into
chyle, and those that are foonest digested, are drawn by the Liver, spleen, and
guts; it matters not with reference to Coction and generation of Chile, in such
as are in Health, what meats are eaten first and what last; yet it is best to
take liquid meats before those that are sollid, because they are sooner reduced
into act, and by their fermentation do help the Coction of the other meats;
also to take laxative meats before such as are binding, if the mouth of the
stomach be not loose beneath, lest being retained long in the stomach they bind
the belly; such meats as are apt to corrupt must be taken before others, that
the orifice of the stomach being loosened, they may the more easily pass away:
astringents before Laxatives, if the retentive faculty of the stomach be weak.
2. Corruptible meats are most conveniently eaten alone, an hour or two before
any other; lest being of a diverse Nature, they defile and corrupt the Chylus.



II. Touching Drink, take these Rules. 1. We must drink so much, that our meat
do not swim in our stomachs. Moderate drink moistens the body, cherishes the
spirits, helps the distribution of meat, etc. Overmuch drownes the heat of the
body, breeds cruditie, disturbs the mind. 2. We must drink between whiles at
our meals, and we may drink after meat, if our meat pass not easily out of the
stomach; but not til digestion is over. If you drink during your digestion,
Coction is troubled, and the meat is drawn crude unto the Liver. 3. We must
not drink fasting: because it weakens the nerves. 4. It is most convenient to
drink a little and often at meals, than to fetch al off at a draught or two:
the former manner quenches thirst, the latter breeds fluctuation in the
stomach. But see touching dinners and suppers Bernhardus Paternus, and Stuckius
in his first book of the Feasts of the ancients, Chap. 14.


III. The Affections ought to be moderate; and therefore we must be obedient to
reason, whose part it is to bridle them.

IV. The motion of the Body ought to vary, according to the Nature of several
Bodies, the time, place and manner. And therefore. 1. Lean persons must be
moderarly moved, strong persons strongly, respect being had to custom;
touching which Hippocrates. Persons used to daily labors, although they are
weak and old, do more easily undergo their daily labors, than persons
unaccustomed, though strong and young. 2. While a man is hungry, or meat
remains undigested upon his stomach, he must not labor, for if he do, the
nourishment will be drawn undigested into diverse parts of the body: but he must
not continue too long fasting neither, for then, the natural heat will be
dessipated, and bad humors will be brought into the stomach. 3. Motion must go
before and follow after eating, but such as is light. The former removes such
excrements as stick in the narrow passages; the latter, brings down the meat,
into the bottom of the stomach. 4. Those whose head is weak or full, must not
walk in the Sun. 5. Motion and Rest must follow one another interchangably. 6.
Men must leave off exercising, when their face begins to be colored, and sweat
begins to break forth. 7. A man must not study presently after meat, least the
heat be called forth of the stomach, and the brain be filled with vapors.


V. Sleep, as to the time, ought so long to continue, til the meat is digested,
and the spirit restored. It must not therefore be continued beyond nine hours,
nor must it be less than six. Nor is sleep in the day time commendable, unless
a man have passed the greatest part of the night without sleep, otherwise the
Head will be filled with vapors. Also that sleep is not allowable which is
after Sunrise, which by its beams opens the passages of the body, and calls
forth the humors and spirits from the Center to the Circumference: as for the
manner of lying in bed, it ought to be upon one side, beginning on the right,
that the stomaches digestion may be assisted by the Liver, the thighs and arms
being moderatly contracted, the head a little high, the rest of the body as
softly reposed as may be. As for the place, the moon-beames must be avoided:
Let the bed be soft, fit to keep off the injuries of the air. Whether the
Head should be covered or no, I leave as a thing doubtful.

VI. Touching Baths, observe these following rules. 1. They ought to be neither
frequent nor long; for they dissipate natural heat, and cause a redundancy of
il humors. 2. We must not go into the bath, before our meat be digested, least
crudities be drawn into the body. 3. We must not eat nor drink in a bath. 4. We
must come out of the bath before we we be weary, nor must we eat or drink,
before the heat be expired.
Concerning washing of the head and feet, I shall only ad, what follows. The
former is not good in Headache, or Catarhs; in other cases, it opens the pores,
and lets out fumes: the latter draws humors from the Head.

VII. Excrements, because they are daily accumulated, ought also daily to be
voided forth. And therefore, 1. A man should go to stool as soon as he rises.
2. If he cannot do that, his belly must be moved with the broth of an hen,
and other lenitive. 3. The Excrements of the third Digestion, must be expelled
by exercises.


Point. 3. Of Preserving the healths of old People.
By old people, I Understand such as have attained to fifty years age. But
their Age is divided into green old age, which reaches from the beginning of the
eight septinary to some part of the ninth, and old age it self precisely so
called. The part of Physic which takes care hereof, is termed, the Regulation
of old age.

Now we shall provide well for the health of Aged persons, if we shall observe
some things in General, other things in special.

I. In General, we must endeavor, because in old age the body daily dries away,
that the said dryness may be prevented, and that a diet hot and moist may be
used.

II. In Particular. I. Let the Air be hot and moist, and let the cold winter
air, be conquered and driven away by Art. II. Let their Nourishment be of good
juice, and easy to digest (some commend honey to wast away phlegm) and let
them take a less quantity than formerly, lest too much over whelm their natural
heat. Let them eat thrice a day rather than twice; nor let them ever (if
possible) offend in the Quantity of their meat. Sometimes let them change their
Diet. III. Let their drink be* either thin Wine, fragrant, of middle Age, fle^m
colored or yellow, or mead, or beer. IV. Let them avoid passions of the mind,
least their weak Natural heat be dissipated, or suffocated, and a consumption
be caused. V. Their accustomed exercises, are not wholly to be omitted; but let
them use light exercise before meat. Moderate frictions are commended that heat
being excited after sleep, the distribution of their meat, may be more happily
accomplished. VI. Let their Sleep be long: and let want of sleep be removed, by
washing their feet near bed time, and other sleep procuring Remedies. VII. Let
their Excrements be conveniently and seasonably voided forth; and because aged
persons are commonly costive, because of the dryness of their remper, let them
use emollient and abstersive things, as honey, Figs, Raisons, terpentine, etc.
See Sebizius of the Diet of aged people.


Article, II. Of Preserving the Health of Intemperate Persons.
By intemperately Complexioned Persons, we understand three kinds of men, which
deflect from the best temper, Viz. Such as are simply Intemperate, which indeed
want their most exact health, yet can sufficiently perform the actions of life,
nor are inclining to any Diseases. Declining Persons, which are turning from a
temperate state toward some Disease, which is known by the threefold kind of
Symptom, and if they be not helped, they fall into the said Disease: and
Persons recovering, who recollect themselves from some Disease. For the first,
for Hygieine, particularly so called; for the middle sort Prophylactice; for
the last, Analeptice takes care.

I. Touching Intemperate Persons, note. 1. In General. If they are not to be
reduced into a better condition, they must be preserved with things alike in
general and in special, or as they are wont to speak, in quantity and degree:
if they may be reduced, they are by little and little to be used to contraries.
2. That an not and moist temper, because convenient to our Nature, must in no
wise be Changed. 3. It Dry Distemper, must be kept off, as much as may be.
II. In Particular. 1. Hot and dry persons, lest they over inflame a fretting
heat, or heap up sharp Excrements, must avoid hot soultry air, hot meats,
anger, over great Meditations; they must drink plentifully, but the drink must
not be strong. They must use frequent Baths of fresh water, long sleep, and
shun the use of hot and dry things. 2. Persons hot and moist, if moderately
such, preserve their Temperament, and follow al things moderately, lest
contracting plenty of Excrements, they sal into putrid Diseases. 3. Cold
persons require, both hot meats, which stir up heat and consume it not, and
seasonable Evacuation of Phlegmatic Excrements. 4. Dry Constitutions, must have
moist meats, and baths of fresh Water. 5. Such as are Cold and Dry have an
unhappy constitution, which must be helped with long sleep, frictions which
strengthen the Natural heat, and discuss it not, and with a bath of fresh
Water. 6. In Cold and moist persons, coldness must be corrected, and the
moisture preserved as much as may be. Temperate exercises do stir up the
Natural heat, whereby it is enabled to conquer the moisture.


II. Persons Declining, because in regard of a Plethorick and Cacochymical
disposition, incline to sickness, must in the first place use rest and
abstinence; and in case these suffice not, they require Blood-letting and
purging. Therefore, at the beginning of the spring Phlegmatic and Melancholy
Humors, about the end thereof Choler, and about Autumn, black Choleric Humors
are to be purged. A pil of Aloes Rosata, taken an hour before supper, but not
too often lest it hurt the Liver, may suffice to Empty the matter which sticks
in the stomach, and first passages.

III. Touching persons, neither sick nor well, but recovering, two things are to
be observed. 1. That they fall not back again into their sicknesses. 2. That
they may soon recover their perfect health.
And therefore. 1. Because such relics as are left in Diseases after the
Crisis, wont to cause relapses: if there be as yet any superfluous matter
remaining, it must be drawn away by little and little, and the parts are to be
Roborated. 2. If there be no matter over, the Body must be carfully nourished,
with moist Diet easy of digestion, and of good nourishment. 3. Bodies that
have been long extenuated, must be repaired by little and little; such as have
been suddenly decayed must be quickly repaired. 4. These things are chiefly to
be used, which respect the Causes of the weakness, and may resist the Morbifick
Dispositions. And so much for the Method of preservation of Health.


THE SECOND BOOK OF THE IDEA OF PRACTICAL PHYSIC.
Treating of the Preternatural Affections, or Disorders of Man's Body and their
Respective Signs.
The INTRODUCTION.

SO much may suffice to have spoken touching Hygieine or the Art of Preserving
Health: The Second Part of Physic follows, termed Therapeutice, which teaches
the way to know all Infirmities which impair the Health of Man's body, and being
known, by certain convenient Remedies to remove the same, if possible.

Its End therefore is to remove (if possible) the preternatural Dispositions of
the body, and to restore health lost.

Its Parts are likewise two: 1. General, which treats of the Nature, Signs,
Causes, Differences and Cure of the praeternatural Affections of the Body, both
in General, in particular, and in Conjunction. 2, Special, which treates of
such preternatural affections as refer to the particular parts of the Body. The
former is again subdivided into four parts. In the First we shall treat of the
Nature and signs of praeternatural affections. The Second declares the
Medicaments. The Third lays open the general method of curing. The Fourth
treates of the first differences of Diseases, and delivers their Cure,
considered in gross.

Title, I. Of a Disease in general.
Chap. 1. Of the Nature of a Disease.
THose Affections or disorders which praeternaturally infest the Body of Man,
are three: A Disease, its Cause, and its Symptom.

A Disease is the Inability of the living parts of Man's body to perform their
natural Actions, ariseing from their praeternatural Constitution.

Concerning which we are to consider, 1. The Subject. 2, The Times. 3 The
cause. 4, The Differences, 5. The Signs. 6. The Issue or event.
Of the first four we shall treat in this Chapter, assigneing peculiar Chapters
to the two last.

I. The Subject is the liveing parts of man's body both spermatick and sanguine:
both in reference to their matter, to which Temperament and occult qualities
belong; as also to their structure, to which conformation and unity do
appertain. Sometimes, altogether, sometimes many, sometimes only one of these
is affected.

II. The times are four. 1. The Beginning in which the disease i^ crude, nor
are there any signs of coction or corruption contrary thereto, present;
althings are remiss, unless the matter being agitated does infest some one part
more than the rest, til it is either dissipated, or thrust out into the
Circumference of the Body, and healthily disposed diseases, their causes being
removed, do sometimes vanish. 2. The Augment or Increase, wherein the Symptoms
grow more burdensome, and the signs either of Coction or contrary Corruption,
begin to appear. 3. The State, in which there is the greatest combat betwixt
Nature and the Disease; the signs of Life and Death do manifestly show
themselves, and all things are vehement: and if any Remission appear, the
reason is, because nature being weakened gives over, and is no longer able to
oppose her against the morbifick Causes. 4. And lastly this Declination or
Decrease, in which the disease being overcome by nature, grows gentle, and no
man dies at this time, unless through the fault of himself, or the Physician,
or the disease changing into a worse. Touching all these times note in general,
1. That each of these, being not of equal length in all diseases, is subdivided
after the same manner, so that the beginning has its beginning, Augment and
Declination and so the rest, 2. That Intermitting Diseases have their
particular times in each fit, 3, That Diseases which receive nourishment in
winter, are finnished in Summer, and contrariwise; unless they are terminated
within the circuit of certain days.



III. When we speak of Causes we do not consider any material cause. For a
disease has no such cause, its subject being instead thereof; nor do we intend
the formal cause, for that is explained in the definition: nor of the final,
because those things have final causes which consist in perfection, whereas a
disease consists in defect thereof, also it is bred and receives growth by
accident; but we speak of the Efficient Causes, which are considered either in
respect to the disease, or absolutely, or according as the things themselves
are. The former are sundry, I. Remote, which either works as procatarctick
causes, which 1, Are either in the Body, or without, and therefore have not
recourse with externals, 2. They are called external, because they belong not
to the Constitution of the body, 3, When manifest causes, as a sword etc. may
be the immediate cause of a disease, they are reckoned with the former, 4. They
stir up and put in motion such causes as lie hidden in our Bodies, so that they
sensibly affect our bodies, as Watchings. 5. Of their own nature and force,
they cannot cause a great disease: or they act after the manner of antecedent
causes, which continue hidden dispositions in the body, which a disease may
follow upon, which nevertheless are not conjoined therewith, only are defined
by power of acting, and are only found in diseases joined with matter: finally,
because the internal, as related to the disease, may be both antecedent and
conjunct causes, they have not recourse with them.
II. Next, which adhere to the diseases themselves in the body of man, so that
suppose the causes, you must supose the diseases, take away the causes, you
remove the diseases. Hence they are termed continent and conjunct causes, III.
Per se, of or by themselves, by whose power the disease does exist; and by
accident which cause the same by the Interposition of some other thing. IIII.
Privative, which act by absence; and Positive, which work by their presence. V.
Common and Proper. VI. Finally, external and internal, of which we shall treat
hereafter.


IIII. The differences of diseases are either Essential and primary, of which
and their cure we shall treat in the fifth book; or Acidental, which are taken
from the Number, Magnitude, Duration, Manner, Event, Order, Subject, Causes,
Seasons of the year, and Place. For I. In respect of Number, a disease is
either 1. One, which possesses but one part, or many parts but without any
Interruption: which is either simple, which is joined with no other disease,
and has the simple nature of one only sort; or compounded, which consists of
many diseases concurring in the same part, whether they be of the same kind or
not; and in Case it be joined with the Cause, or some grievous symptom, it is
termed Comitatus; as that Solitary, which has neither the cause, nor any
grievous symptom joined with it. 2. Many, one of which is not in the same part
which is possessed by another, and these either hurt a common action, and are
called Complicati, or Impliciti: or one contributes somewhat to the generation
of another, and they are termed Connexi. 3. By Sympathy, which falls out, when
either a part receives some humor or vapor from another place, or when it is
forced to receive a matter of which it ought to be free; or when the spirit, a
necessary Instrument to the souls actions, is hindered of its influxe, or when
matter necessary to the action is denied: and this happens, either by reason of
the sympathy of the parts, which is either of the kind, or of continuity by the
nerves and membranes, of which Senertus treats elegantly in the 39. page of his
Paralipomena; or of one work, or of neighborhood, or by reason of their
strength and weakness: hence comes either a Diadosis of the Humor passing from
a noble to an ignoble part, or a Metastasis from an ignoble to a noble. 4.
Disjoned, which being fixed in disjoined parts, do neither hurt the same action
nor confer any thing to the mutual generation one of another.
II. In respect of Magnitude, Diseases are, 1. Small, which hurt the Action less
than those sort of diseases are commonly wont to do, or stick in the more
Ignoble parts 2. Great, which either hurt a Constitution and part very
necessary to life, or Go very far from the natural state, or have some bad
quality annexed, or they deject some faculty, by hurt of which the life is
endangered, or they take up a large place.
III. In respect of Duration, diseases, are 1. Long, which move slowly. 2.
Short, which moves quick, 3. Continentes, which are always moved with one and
the same motion, til they are quite ended. 4. Continui, which continually
afflict, but are heightened and abated at certain intervals of time. 5.
Intermittentes, which have periods and Fits, and therein their several Modes
and figures. 6. Acute, which are terminated on the fourteenth day; peracuti, on
the seventh day; Perperacuti, on the fourth day; Acuti ex decidentia, which are
terminated on the forryeth day. 7. Critical, which are finished by some great
mutation, by evacuation or translation. 8. Not critical, which are ended by
diminishing piece meal.
IIII. In respect of the Manners or Conditions, they are, 1. Benigni, gentle,
well affacted, having no grievous symptom besides nature. 2. Maligni, malignant,
which have somewhat of an occult pravity. 3. Pestilential, which come by
Intection.
V. In respect of the event, they are. 1. Healthy, which end to health. 2.
Doubtful, of which many are saved, and many die. 3. Deadly, which kill always,
or for the most part, either because they destroy that action by which life
consists, or proceed from matter which will not admit Coction, or because their
Focus is so far of, that medicaments cannot reach so far without loosening
their strength.
VI. In respect of their order, they are, 1. Ordinate, which keep their Mode,
or Figure. 2. Erratick, which neglect the same. 3. Relapsative, which when they
are thought to be quite finished, return again.
VII. In respect of their subject, they are, 1. Universal, which afflict the
whole Body. 2 Particular; which molest one or more parts, 3. Cognati, which are
suitable to the temperament, constitution of Body, Age, Season of year etc. 4.
Minus cogniti, less of kin, which are contrary thereunto, they are of Men,
Women, Infants, Boys, Young Men, Old men.
VIII. In respect of the Causes, they are 1. Exquisite or legitimate, which
spring from one simple Cause. 2. Spurious or bastard, which proceed from mixed
humors. 3. Haereditory, which spring from fault of the seed or mothers blood.
4, Conjenit, which happen from the first original, through fault of right
shaping, though the Parents had not the same disease. 5, Adventitious, which
come by some accident. 6, Fientes, which though produced, cannot exist without
the matter continue. 7, Facti, which abide, the causes being removed.
IX. In respect of the time of the year, they are Spring sickness, Summer
sickness, Autumn sickness, and Winter sickness. X. In respect of place, they
are, 1. Sporadick, which being of different sorts do assault sundry persons at
the same time, and in the same place. 2. Common, or Pandemial, which either are
never but in one Country only, or which sometimes in one, sometimes in many
places, afflicts many together. 3. Epidemii, Epidemick, or vulgar, which at
some certain time, now in some one Country, other whiles in many, do infest
many folks at the same time, and they are for the most part pestilential.



Chap. 2. Of the Diagnostick Signs of a Disease.
THe Diagnostick Signs of a Disease, do respect, 1. The Disease in it self. 2.
Its times. 3. The Parts affected. 4. The Differences of the Disease. 5. And
lastly, all these together: And they are either common to many and diverse
persons; or proper to one Disease; which are either inseparable, or proper and
inseparable together, or Pathognomonick, and Essential to the Disease, and
recurrent therewith; or Assident, and supervenient.


I. A Disease in it self is known, 1. From things Essentially inherent; in
External Diseases most easily without help of any other signs; in internals, by
the mediation of other Signs. 2. From the Causes, which are either present, or
have preceded. 3. From the Bodies Disposition, which depends upon
Hereditariness, Age, Sex, Kind of Life, Dyer, and Evacuations omitted. 4. From
Actions Natural, Vital, Animal, which are hurt, abolished, diminished,
depraved; and that suddenly or slowly. 5. From things voided forth, viz. Urine,
Dung, Swear, Spittle, etc. 6. From the Qualities of the Body changed, color,
smell, etc. which yet, do signify rather the Cause, than the Disease.


II. The Times of the Disease, (whose knowledge is necessary, were it but in
respect of the state, when, if ever, the signs of perfect Coction appear, and
good Crises do happen) are known, 1. By the Idea of the Disease, be it long or
short. 2. From the time of Year, Dyer, Country, Temperament, Strength, etc.
Hot things are the Causes of hot and acute Diseases. Patients strength in a
disease not deadly, signifies a short disease, it shows 'twill last long. 3.
From the Mutations of the fits, in which their Anticipation, coming later,
duration, and vehemence, are to be observed: of which also see Authors. 4. From
the Symptoms of Diseases, which are light at the beginning, strong and
fiercest in the state. 5. By Coction and Crudity, which is either proper to one
kind of diseases, as spittle in the Pleurisy; or common to many.


III. The Parts affected are known, 1. From the Causis, Things taken in, done,
Retained, Excluded, and incident from without: Some are more apt to one part
than another; also at some season, the Lungs are chiefly insested, other whiles
the Stomach, etc. 2 From things Essentially inherent, or by propriety of the
Part, and the diseases inherent in the parts. 3. From the Actions hurt, unless
they be hurt by some external accident, especially by pain; of which we shall
treat hereafter in a peculiar Chapter. 4. From things voided forth, in which
substance, quantity, quality, and Mixture, are to be observed. 5. From
qualities changed.


IV. The Signs of the first and Essential Differences of Diseases, shall be
explained in the fifth Book; in respect of the accidental, which we have above
propounded, Observe, I. Touching Diseases by Sympathy, 1 That they increase or
decrease, with the Primary Disease, and are deserted by the Primary. 2. That
they infest not continually by certain fits, unless matter be continually
supplied. 3. By things helping or hurting applied to the other, they are helped
or hurt.
II. Touching acute Diseases, that they from the very beginning, and the first
three days, are extremely burdensome to the sick, and have grievous symptoms,
because they proceed from hot, sharp, thin, and movable Humors, which
vehemently provoke Nature. III. Concerning malignant diseases, 1. That they
arise from Causes both external and internal, which are offensive by their whole
substance. 2. That in them, the Patient is frequently unquiet, though he cannot
tell of any vehement or dangerous symptom; that in the beginning the Patient is
often held with a deep sleep, is not eased by sweats, or other Evacuations,
shivers, grows hot, bleeds at Nose, without any appearing Cause; but in other
respects they seem troubled with a slow Fever, with signs as it were of
Recovery, and upon a light occasion faint away. They talk continually, and
their Tongue is black and rough. 3. That the same diseases, after a light
Remission, the malignity having spread it self through the Humors, are most
suddenly, and vehemently exasperated. 4. That in them, the pains which were,
do remit and abate, without either Excretion or Riseing; the pulse in respect
of the feverish Heat, having an unwonted parvity with Inequality and
Frequency.



V. All those promiscuously regarding signs are afforded by the differences of
Urines and Pulses.

I. The differences of Vrines, are taken from their Consistence, Quantity,
Quality, things mixed with and contained therein. 1. As for what concerns the
Consistence, Thin urine argues too much drinking, a strong obstruction of the
Kidneys and Uriters, and want of natural heat proceeding only from distemper.
Defect of that salt, which is wont to be resolved out of the meat. Thick,
argues oppression of the heat by abundance of Humors indifferent, shows
vigorous Heat, an exquisite digestion, of the stomach, Liver, and veins. Clear
and transparent, perfect concoction, goodness of Humors, whence afterward it
makes a sediment. Troubled, proceeding from the cold of the air, and admitting
amendment by the fires Heat, in continual Fevers, argues a rudiment of Coction.
Troubled which is made so, shows diseases of the Kidneyes or bladder, plenty
of crude, thick and clammy humors, out of which many thick flatulencies being
produced, they are mixed with the Urine, and hinder the matter from descending,
sudden obstruction of the Liver, Spleen, Reins, etc. Solution, if it happen
suddenly. Confused, which is in all parts alike, and has no Hypostasis, shows
diseases in the veins, and properly confusion, corruption and putrefaction of
the Blood and Humors, which are in the greater veins; and therefore it is only
observed in fevers, and those continual and malignant. Fatty defilement of the
alimentary Humor, which flows into the parts, so that it cannot be converted
into their substance, whereupon dissolution follows. II. As for the Quantity,
much, signifies immodreate drink, diuretic Medicaments, cold distemper, and
cold pressing and squeezing forth, moist diet. Heat of the Kidneyes attracting
water shut up in some place, resolving of the Body into liquor, either of its
own accord, or by force of Heat, to which fatness is joined. Little, shows
little or hard drink, overgreat sweates, plentyful stools, obstruction of the
Kidnyes, Ureters, Bladders, Neck, and Bladder, vehemence of feverish heat, the
drinks turning to the bodies nutriment, which sometimes happens to such as are
in away of recovery from some disease. III. In respect of the smell, fragrant
Urine intimates the use of Terpentine, Musk, Benzoin etc. For from internal
causes such Urines can hardly proceed; Stinking Urine argues eateing of rotten
cheese, garlic, an Ulcer of the Kidneys, Privities, neck of the bladder,
putrefaction of humors if it be fresh, of the Substance, if an old stench.
IIII. In respect of color, white urine if thin and transparent, argues plenty
and thinness of drink, strong obstruction of the Mesentery, Liver, or kidneys,
great imbecility of digestion; defect of color, and sometimes the ascent
thereof, to the belly, Head, or some part in the Habit of the body; if thick,
obscure, or like milk, it argues abundance of thick phlegm. Red, and withal
transparent, argues Heat of the Liver, or a fever; if thick and yellowish, it
argues the mixture of yellow or vitelline choler, a phlegmon of the Liver, or
an exquisite scirrhus. Safron-color'd, argues the use of Rhubarb, Safron, or
Fenel, obstruction of the Gallbladder, and then Linen clothes dipped therein
receive a tincture. Bloody, shows the weakness and slapness of the Liver, an
ulcer and contusion of the Kidneys and Loins. Wine and grape colored, shows
adustion of blood, and the change thereof into black choler. Green, argues
verdigreise colored choler. Lead-colored argues stripes, melancholy, and
extinction of the natural Heat. Black, if compounded of green and black, argues
extreme Heat, and permission of black choler; if of Blew and lead-color,
extinction of Heat, unless it come away in manner of Crisis. V. In respect of
things mixed, the Crown which circles about the surface thereof, shows what
kind of blood is in the greater vessels, by its whiteness, redness, and
Lead-coloredness. 2. The Froth if it come without shaking, argues wind. 3.
Bubbles great and lasting, argue gross and clammy humors, as also wind. Such as
easily break, thin and small, in the crown of the urine, argue pain of the whole
Head, if they be al over the Crown, of half the head, if they possess only half
thereof; sharp pain, if Gold-colored; mild pain, if white; long pain, if
they continue long; being like small seeds seated in the Crown, and moveing to
and fro, they argue distillations descending from the Head, into the lower
parts. 4. Fat, like Cobwebs, shows the melting of the fat of the Kidneyes or
whole Body. 5. Branny contents, if they settle, argue scabyness of the Bladder;
if they swim they argue the wasting of the solid sustance of the Body, by
reason of a burning Heat. 6. Little scales, with strong smell, argue either
exulceration of the Bladder, or melting of the tunicles in the vessels, and of
the solid parts, by fervent heat. 7. Contents like meal signify the same. 8.
Caruncles or little bits of flesh proceed from wounds of the Kidneys. 9.
Strings come from the seminary vessels in women that have the whites, or some
filthy Issue of the womb. 10. Blood, from a new ulcer of the Kidneys, or of
some Bowel. 11. Quittor from an old and foul Ulcer, either in the Kidneys, if
it be without any sense of pain, and well mixed with the urine; or from the
neck of the Bladder, if it be with pain, a^^ not well mixed: but however, it
always settles to the bottom. 12. Gravel, if yellow and red, comes from the
Kidneys; if white from the Bladder; if clammed with quittor, from (...) sordid
ulcer of the Bladder; if they swim on the top, and stick to the sides, from the
Livers heat, and Adustion of the Blood. 13. Seed argues an hurt of the
spermatick vessels, and swims on the top.
VI. In respect of the Contents, which in sound persons ought to be white,
smoothe, equal, and pyramidal, 1. Little comes from weakness of the Alterative
faculty, distemper, multitude or Crassitude of humors, and dissipation of the
Bodies substance by external Causes. 2. Much, from suppression of some
customary Evacuation, if it be at the same time both thick and undigested; from
strength of the aliments and faculty, if it be indifferent in substance and
color. 3. Thick; from plenty of crude matter, or the Crisis of some old
diseases. 4. Thin, from Crudity or digestion but newly begun. 5. Straw-colored,
Gold-colored, red, from redundancy of choler in the veins, and from
inflammation of the blood. 6. Bluish, Lead-colored, black, from extinction of
natural heat, corruption of blood and melancholy.



II. There are many differences of Pulses that savor of vain curiosity and
idle subtilty: discreet Physicians are content to observe only these three
following. Equal, and unequal; Swift and Slow, strong and weak. The Equal,
pulse argues strength of Nature. The unequal, signifies either obstructions and
compressions of the vessels, or abundance of Humors: The Swift, use increased,
strength of the Faculty as yet; or at least that it is not much weakened. Slow,
argues the contrary. The Strong shows a strong faculty, and sometimes great
Provocation. The weak, either dissipation of spirits, or expression of strength.

Chap. 3. Of the Diseases Event, Or Issue.
THE Issue of a disease intimates four things. 1. The Termination hereof. 2.
The Time of the Termination. 3. The manner of the Termination. 4. The Knowledge
of al these.


I. A Disease is terminated either by Health or Death. Whence the Event is
healthful or deadly.

II. In respect of Time it is ended soon or late.

III. The manner of termination is threefold. For a disease is terminated,
either by solution, when health returns by little, and leave by means of
Coction and alteration: or by Marasmus or pineing, when it turns by little and
little to death; or by Crisis, when either the disease is suddenly and
perfectly finished; or there is a sudden change to the better, which is
followed with health; or the sick patient suddenly dies, or the disease is
suddenly changed to the worse, which mutation is followed by death. But
touching the nature of the Crisis, or the Definition, Causes, Differences,
Manners and Days, observe. I. That it is nothing else but a sudden mutation,
which happens in diseases, with conturbation and evacuation, by excretion or
translation, upon certain days, tending to Recovery, or Death. II. That it
arises in respect of the Conturbation, or that plenty of critical symptoms,
from the agitation of Humors, and the trouble they bring to the Body, which
proceeds from the influence of stars; and from an internal cause, which
provokes both nature and the matter: in respect of the evacuation, from the
strength of the expulsive faculty, which provoked by the plenty or quality of
the matter, expels that which is of seizure critically, by help of the fibers
and especially of the spirits and innate Heat. III. That it has sundry
Differences. For it is good when tending to health; evil when to death.
Faithful, when no danger of a relapse. Faithless, when it threatens the same.
Safe when without dangerous symptoms. Dangerous which springs from a principal
part. Perfect which takes away the whole disease. Imperfect which leaves some
of it behind. Wel-foretold which has tokens preceding and declareing the same
some days next before. Unforetold, which comes unlooked for. IV. That it
happens by Excretion, by bleeding at Nose, Vomit, sweat, stool, Urine,
Hemorrhoides, Courses, many places: or by Translation of the matter; or by
coction of the matter, which happens in children who digest crude humors while
they sleep. V. That it has certain days, which are. 1. Either simply critical
as every seventh day, viz. 7.14.20.27.34.40. For whole days are not reckoned
but somewhat shorter. 2. Or Indicators, by which the future Crisis is
foreshewed, and they are the middle days of each week, as the 4.11.17.24. 3.
Or Intercalares, or Leapdaies, in which the Crisis happens accidentally, and
against Nature, and they are the 3.5.9.13.19. 4. Or Vacui, called Medicinales,
in which either there is no Crisis, or an imperfect and bad one; as are the
sixth, which is a Tyrant, the eight and tenth less dangerous than it.
Now that such mutations happen on these days, the Cause is, 1. The progress
of the Moon, both to Quadrate and opposite signs, as also to the sextile and
Triangular ones. 2. The Motion and disposition of the humors, which is the
Cause, that the Crisis happens, sometimes slower, sometimes earlier. 3. The
Nature of the Body, which being assisted by the Moons motions, and provoked by
the Humors agitated by the Moon, begins to assail the morbifick matter, expels
the same, and so works the Crisis.



IIII. The knowledge of the event of a disease respects four things. 1. The
Event it self in general. 2. The Termination. 3. The time of Termination, or
the duration. 4. The Manner.
The signs which show the same are termed Prognostics, and among them the
chief are those that declare Crudity or Coction. 1. The knowledge of the event
of a disease in general, depends upon a comparision of the strength of Nature
with the strength of the disease, to which the foreseeing the state of the
disease, confers much. The strength of Nature is judged, both by its natural
Causes, as well immediate, viz. the natural Constitution of the parts, in
Temper, Conformation, and unity: as mediate, or remote, viz. the six
non-natural things so called: as also by its effects, viz. the Actions,
evacuations, and qualities changed. The strength of the disease is gathered,
from things essentially inherent, causes external and internal, helpers, and
effects, or consequences thereof. Here note. 1. Oft-times from many small ones,
the greatest sign drawn. 2. Many times one strong sign is prevails more in
signification than many weak ones. 3. Because some signs are better or worse,
as they are joined with strength or weakness of nature, therefore the signs
must be compared, both one with another, and with the strength of the sick
patient. 4. Those are the worthyest signs which declare the strength or
weakness of the vital faculty. 5. Often times when some signs of Coction appear,
the patient may nevertheless perish, by reason or some malignity which betrays
it self, in a weak pulse, a parched tongue etc. 6. By how much the symptoms
are less and fewer, the disease is so much the weaker; and contrarily. 7. That
they are less dangerously sick, whose disease is suitable to their Nature, Age,
or custom, or season of the year; than they whose disease is like none of
these. 8. That there is greater danger, when turgent humors offend, than when
such as are quiet, provided they be not fixed in some part: when the disease
comes from some large and frequent Error in point of Diet or the other things
non-natural so called: when the Humors are mixed, than when they are simple.
When a solid matter offends, than when a liquid etc.


II. The Termination of the Disease; and whether it will tend to Health or
Death, is gathered from the actions natural, vital, and Animal; From things
voided, and qualities changed; not that those things do presently declare Life
or Death, but because they promise hope of Recovery, or terrify by suggesting
a fear of Death. And therefore, 1. In respect of the natural Actions. 1. It
gives good Hope. 1. If the patient do easily take and retain what is given
because it signifies the good condition of the natural faculty. 2. If the
Patient eat such things as he or she was delighted with in time of health.
II. Those following breed an ill event. 1, If the patient desire meat when his
strength is wasted, for that is the custom of those that are at deaths door,
and happens either by reason of a sour juice slipped into the stomach; or by
reason of the great wasting of the body, by the disease. 2. If the patient have
a most exact sense, because that proceeds from a great Inflammation in the
bowels. 3. If he loath meat in accute diseases, and other pernicious signs
are present. 4. If in burning Fevers, his tongue being dry, he thirst not;
because it signifies either Raveing, or great decay in the Appetitive faculty,
unless the stomach be moistened with an humor falling from the Head. 5. If in
an acute disease, the thirst which was, is suddenly taken away and gone,
without any cause, the tongue remaining dry and the urines crude, because it is
a sign the patients senses languish.



II. In respect of the vital Actions. I. It is a good sign. 1. If the pulse
depart not much from its natural symmetrie or due proportion, and there be
other good signs. 2. If when there is some change to the worse, it happen from
some discernable cause. 3. If there be no fainting felt, nor panting of the
Heart; or in case there be, they proceed from consent. 4. If respiration be
according to nature, and other good signs are present; because from hence we
gather that neither the chest, nor the Lungs, nor the midriff are affected. 5.
If the same be great or swift; for though it should signify great abundance of
fuliginous excrements; yet it argues withal the readiness of the organs, and
the faculties strength.
II. It Is a bad sign. 1. When the pulse is either very languishing, very slow,
and very seldom, which is worst of al; or very little and very soft, and very
hard; or exceeding frequent, but not very swift, nor very great. 2. When
Respiration is great and swift, because it is usual only to such as are
distracted: great and frequent, because it signifies Inflammation or Pain of
some of the Instruments of Respiration; great very seldom, because it is a sign
of distraction. 3. Respiration small and swift, because it proceeds from plenty
of fuliginous vapors, with pain or inflammation of some of the instrucments of
Respiration; small and slow because it shows a weak faculty. Small and obscure,
so that the Patient is hardly discerned to breath, because it intimats the
Virtue decayed; little, obscure, and frequent, because it proceeds from pain or
inflammation of some part necessary to respiration; Small and seldom, because it
signifies extreme debility, and therefore the breath of the Patients does then
come forth cold. 4. Sublime Respiration, in which the Chest is exceedingly
dilated, and that which is inspired is little, but withal in regard of the
urgent Necessity, most dense and frequent because Hippocrates makes such nigh
unto death. 5. Respiration with Rattling, especially if it be joined with other
pernicious Signs, because such is that of dying persons.



III. In respect of Animal Actions. I. These are good signs. 1. Not to be
distracted, which though it be no certain sign of recovery, seeing many die in
their right wits; yet in diseases, wherein the Brain is affected, either by it
self, or by accident, it is no bad sign. 2. For the Patient to lie in his bed
as himself has formenly been accustomed, and as sound persons are wont to do,
that is to say in such a posture and gesture, viz. if he lie on one side, with
his Neck, Arms, and Legs bending somewhat inwards, with his body straight up,
not falling down toward the Feet. 3. For a Trembling to follow a Palsy,
because it is a token of nature overcoming or abating the disease.
II. Bad signs are. 1. Raving, which though never safe, yet it is then less
dangerous, when it is accompnnied with laughter and good signs, is light and not
continual; when continual and vehement, it is more dangerous; bold and rash, is
worst of al: but withal other signs must be observed, viz. Pulse, Respiration
etc. 2. sleep and watching, if they exceed measure. 3. Coma, if it happen in
the beginning or vigor of a disease. 4. Hearing Hurt, if it spring from evil
evacuations, or decay of strength. 5. Stupiditie, because it is a sign either of
a vicious humor carried to the Brain, or of natural Heat extinguished. 6. Pains
which are bad, if at first, the matter being as yet crude, they afflict the
principal parts; if the disease be not diminished by them; if they soon vanish
away, or pass from the ignoble to the nobler pars; if in some part they are not
felt, for then the Patient is distracted. The same holds good of weariness
which has been said of Pains. 7. Convulsion, which is dangerous, if therein the
Contraction be more vehement and lasting, if it occupy many parts, and those
near the brain, if it arise from any flux of blood, or over vehement purgation;
if in acute Fevers it follow the Phrenzie, Iliac passion, or watchings: less
dangerous, if it happen to Children, if by reason of the overgreat motion of
the matter to the Head or Nervous parts, if from the stomachs being fretted by
a sharp humor, or medicament, or from straining in vomiting, and last not long.
8. Hiccupping, which is dangerous if it happen in diseases after much
evacuation, if inflammations and Fevers, especially in old Men, and most of al,
if other pernicious signs are present. 9. Trembling, which is bad if it happen
without evident Cause in the beginning of diseases, especially long ones, and
is joynd with other more grievous symptoms. 10. Shivering and shaking if they
arise at the beginning of a disease, when the matter is but yet crude. 11.
Sluggish dullness, which is always bad, and without a Fever foretells an
appoplexie; in Fevers it portends extreme danger, by reason of the extinction
of natural heat. 12. The Voice, which if much changed, harsh, unequal, obscure,
is dangerous; if quite taken away, it is a deadly token, unless some critical
evacuation follow.



IV. In respect of things voided and retained. I. These following are good
signs. 1. Vrines, thin with good color; thick, if they were first thin, and are
made after the beginning of the disease, reddish, pale saffron-color'd,
yellow-clayish, with a reddish sediment. 2. Vomitings, which answer the nature
of the disease, because they either take away or lessen the disease. 3.
Sweatings, if they happen after Coction is made, if they are hot and
plentiftul, if they slow out of the whole body and diminish the disease.
II. These are bad signs, 1. Vrines thin and red, because they signify a crude
disease: troubled and not settling, because in a weak person they signify
death, in a stronger, the length of the disease. White, it they continue.
Black, if in acute diseases. Oily, green, the reason of which have been already
rendered. Wanting sediment, Swim, and Cloud; unless the sick have fasted much,
or watched, or is of choleric Complexion. Thick without sediment with a mealy,
branny, scaly sediment etc. 2. The stools dry, because proceeding from a fiery
heat, and if withal black, they argue a burnning disposition about the middle
of the body. Watery, because they arise from great Crudity, and are in choleric
diseases, with bad urines deadly; in milder cases they foreshew a long disease.
Small and frequent, because they argue the weakness of the retentive faculty.
Fatty because they show the bodies being melted. Froathy, because they argue a
defluxion from the Head, and worms in the Guts. White, because they argue
either a stoppage of the way by which choler descends to the Guts, or the
motion thereof, to the upper parts. Red, are of themselves deadly, unless they
follow natures conquest. Black, if from black choler; because they are deadly,
unless tempered by the mixture of others; if they come from clotted blood or
melancholy, they are not always bad. Green and Verdigrease-color'd, whether
they proceed from Verdigrease-color'd choler changing to black, or from an
Erysipelas in some principla part, or bowel. Lead-color'd, because they argue a
vehement coldness of the lower parts. Finally, such as are stinking, because
they argue putruefaction, and foretell putrid fevers. 3. Vomittings, if they
happen at the beginning of a disease before the matter be digested, and are
joined with other bad signs; whether they be sincere, pale, lead-color'd,
black, or stinking, ^oy reason of the Iliac passion, or small, etc. 4. Sweats,
if they happen too plentiful, or sparing, or cold; and proceed not from the
whole body. See the Aphorisms of Hippocrates.



V. In respest of Qualities changed. I. These are hopeful signs. 1. If the whole
Habit of the body be not much unlike that of healthy persons. 2. The
Hypochondria, when they are without pain, and soft, on both sides equal, and
not extenuated.
II. These signs following are bad. 1, when the whole Habit of the Body is not
at al changed by the disease, for that argues that it will prove long; if
extenuated, it is not nourished by meat in the declination of the disease, for
that threatens a Relapse; if in acute diseases it swel, because it argues the
Livers heat to be weakened, unless the humors be critically thrust into some
part. 2. The Face when it is such as Hyppocrates describes, viz. with a sharp
Nose, hollow Eyes, straightened Temples, cold Ears, contracted, their fibers
inverted, the skin about the forehead stretched and dry, and the color of the
whole visage green or black, especially at the beginning of the disease, unless
it were such from some evident cause, and amend in a day and night. Colored
high, because it argues a very hot distemper in the Brain, unless it be a sign
of bleeding at the Nose, or a token of a rising that will appear behind the
Ears. Green, Lead-color'd, Black, because it signifies extinction of the
natural Heat, especially if it soon appear, without any evident Cause. 3. The
Eyes, when they shun the light, because they signify the brain hurt through
dissipation of spirits, and weakness of the Head. Swelling and sticking out,
because they argue either resolution of the muscles, or abundance of humors,
vapors, spirits flowing thither. Hollow, because want of Heat makes them so,
which is wont to fill the circuit of the Eye with substance. Fierce and horrid,
because proper to distracted and frantic persons, and are sings for the most
part of Convulsions, or also of death joined with other signs. Fixed and
stable, or set in the Head, because they proceed from Convulsion, and with bad
signs threaten death. Distorted, because they betoken Convulsion. One less than
another, because it argues the faculty governing the same to be extinguished.
Having Lead-colored and Black veins, because they argue plenty of bad humors
ascending to the Brain, and that the native heat is extinguished. With the
White turned Red, because they signify plenty of fervent blood in the
membranes, or their being inflamed. Shedding unvoluntary tears, because they
argue undoubted weakness of the retentive faculty. Which do not shut close,
because it happens either through Convulsion of the eyes Muscles, or because
the faculty is so weak, that it cannot not perfectly manage the Eye lids. 3.
The Teeth, if they grind, not being accustomed so to do, because they signify
Madness, or death, if they are clammed with a glutinous Humor. 4. The Nose, if
distorted, for it argues convulsion. Sharp, because it argues great weakness of
nature. Itching unacustomarily, unless it foretell bleeding to follow, because
it portends the patient will rue, by reason of store of humors and vapors
ascending to the Head. 4. Ears lead colored, black, contracted, cold, because
they are tokens of the native heat extinguished. 5. The Tongue dry, hard,
black, if it appear so with other signs, and the patient thirst not, because
it argues, either distraction, or extinction of the Faculty, and consequently
death. 6. The Hypochondria inflamed or pained, stretched, unequal, extenuated,
because they signify, either exceeding dryness, or wind, or Inflammation of
some part there seated. Pulsing, which signify either the head inflamed, or
much wind riseing, from a boiling humor into the head; foreshow perturbation,
and with unstable Eyes, Distraction; unless this pulsing presage the Crisis. 7.
Nails lead-coloured and black, if the Body be withal heavy for it is a deadly
sign. But if the Patient be lightsom, and there be some other good sign, the
disease tends to an Impostume or Riseing.



III. The knowledge of the Manner how a disease will terminate, respects what
ever we have already said, touching the crisis, and involves many questions.
For the queries will be, 1. Whether the disease shall end in a Marasmus or utter
consumption. 2. Or by solution? 3. Or by crisis? and if so. 4. Whether the
Crisis will be by excretion? and if so, by what and what manner of excretion? 5.
Or by Translation? 6. Whether the Crisis be very good? indifferent? or bad? 7.
When the Crisis shall happen?


I. Touching the knowledge of a Diseases Termination by Marasmus or solution, I
need not say much. For if the disease out last the critical days, and those of
acute diseases per decidentiam, it will terminate either by solution or Marasmus.

II. By Crisis a disease will terminate, 1. If it be great and accute, or seem
small, malignity lurking therein. 2. If it arise from matter hot, thin and
sharp, which is apt to provoke nature; howbeit in a long disease some critical
evacuation may likewise happen, if the disease for some fits preceding have
been more vehement than ordinary. 3. If the strength of Nature be so rigorous
as to overcome the disease. 4. If perturbations happen in the body, in
reference to the animal, vital and natural actions.


III. A disease will terminate by excretion. 1. If it be acute, from a thin and
sharp matter, and the Crisis be expected at the beginning. 2. If Nature be
strong, the pulse high, the ways open, and nature accustomed to swear or other
evacuation. 3. If it be summer.
II. If it ought to terminate by bleeding at the Nose. 1. The Hypochondria are
distended without pain, which is followed by shortness of breath not
long-lasting, 2. There will soon follow pain of the Head and Neck, redness of
the face and eyes, shineing and darkness before the eyes, apparitions are seen,
There is raveing, pulseing of the Arteries in the temples, also the pu^e in the
wrists is vehement. 3. Lastly, when the Nose-bleeding is at hand, the patient
begins to rub and scratch his nose: all which signs are more certain, if the
Age and Nature of the patient, and the present constitution of the aile be
suitable.
III. If by vomiting, the humors will move toward the stomach; whence will
follow, pains therein, with headache, dizziness and darkness of the sight, the
upper lip will be full of motion, they spit much and thin, there will be stomach
sickness, shakings, coldness of the Hypochondria, hardness of the pulse, and an
unequal difficutty in breathing. IV. If by sweat which is most usual, there
goes before, suppression of urine, shaking, and the absence of the signs of
other evacuations, when the sweat breaks forth, the pulse will be soft and
waveing, the skin soft, the external parts will wax hot, and an hot vapor will
break forth. V. If by stool, there will be no proper sign, but the signs of
other excretions will be absent; there will be belchings and Inflation of the
Belly, pain of the Loins, Heavyness of the knees, sometimes the belly being
loose, the urine is suppressed. VI. If by urine, the signs of other excretions
will be absent, the patient will not be very unquiet. About the Bladder there will
be sense of inflation, and heavyness of the Hypochondria. The urines will begin
to be increased. The Belly will be bound, with a kind of heat. VII. If by
Hemorrhoides, then the Patient has been accustomed to them, the signs of other
Excretions will be absent; there will be heat or pain about the Backbone, with
tension of the Loins; Crises are seldom made by them. VIII. If by the Courses,
the signs of other excretions will be absent, the time of their flux, will be
near. There will be heat of the Loins, with pain and stretching of the
Hypochondrias, and other signs foregoing the flux of Courses. IX. If by many
places, We shall observe the signs of many excretions. X. The excretion will be
good, 1. If the peccant humor be voided, and that digsted. 2. If in just
quantity and on a critical day. 3. If in a right manner, altogether, and by
fitting places.



IV. A disease will be terminated by Translation or a Rising. 1. If it be acute,
and the matter thick. 2. If the virtue be weak, and the urines have been long
time thin and crude. 3. If Nature have a propensity to those places, the season
of the year be cold, the patient ancient, and the signs of a Crisis by
excretion be wanting.
II. The Riseing happens in the superior parts, if the matter be thin, in the
inferior, if it be not so thin, and nature strong. III. It will be good 1. If
the matter be digested. 2. If it have a laudable substance and rise
high-pointed. 3. If it ripen equally. 4. If it quickly suppurate, and be in an
outward and ignoble part.



V. The Crisis is then best, when the critical signs forementioned have
preceded. If signs of coction and crudity went before. If it were foreshowen in
an Indicatory day. If it happens upon a judicatory day. If such matter has been
voided as is suitable to the nature of the disease. If the patient after the
Crisis, be freed from the disease and its symptoms. It is indifferent, if
exquisite signs of coction have not preceded; if it happen in the augment or a
little before the state, or at least when coction begins to be celebrated; in
which case, bleeding at Nose, is the most convenient of al excretions, if it be
not foreshowen on the Indicatory day, if it happen in the leape-day, if the
evacuation suit not with the nature of the disease, if the patient bear it not
well. It is bad, if it happen before the state, nature being provoked, by
malignity or plenty of matter, if it were foreshewen to be such, in the
Indicatory day; howbeit, many times it comes suddenly, if other things are
present contrary to the best kind of Crisis. Where observe. 1. Often times in a
bad Crisis, the patient seems to be better, yet presently after he falls into a
bad condition, because the signs of amendment, were not well grounded. 2.
Sometimes in deadly sicknesses, the patient being strong, for one bad and simply
deadly Crisis, many evil imperfect ones happen, in which unstable rudiments of
Coction appear, before the patient come to die. 3. The Prognostications of the
Crisis, in reference to death are unstable.


VI. The times of the suture Crisis are known, 1. By the signs of Coction and
crudity, which must necessarily appear, upon some Indicatory or decretory day.
The crisis will happen upon the fourth day, If a sign thereof appear on the
first day; or on the seventh day, if the sign be on the fourth. 2. By such
signs as the idea, magnitude and manners of the disease afford: of which we
spoke before. 3 By the signs of the times of diseases, for a perfect Crisis
happens not before the state, but the imperfect Crisis does: the deadly crisis
happens also in the beginning, or augment. 4. By the critical signs, which you
had before.


Title, II. Of The Causes of Diseases.
Chap. 1. Of the internal Causes in general.
ANother preternatural disorder which afflicts the Body of man, is the cause of
a disease; and that is external or Internal. But seeing the latter is an effect
of the former, or rather does therewith much conduce to produce the disease, I
shall therefore only define the internal.

The internal Cause of a disease is that, which being bred and inherent in the
Body of Man, does preternaturally affect the same.

Touching which we are to consider its signs, Causes, and Differences.

I. The signs of causes are taken in general. 1 From their proper tokens, viz.
taste, color, and motion. 2. From a concourse of common signs, which are taken
from the Antecedents and Consequents, or evident causes, and from the
dispositions of the Body and Symptoms.


II. The Causes of the internal Cause are the things nonnatural, Air, Meat,
Drink, Motion and Rest, Sleep and watching, Things voided and retained, and
Passions of the mind, as far forth as they have power to disorder the Body. And
to that end, time is requisite, as also proportion between the agent and
patient, Fitness of the Body and Contact.

III. As for their differences, the internal Causes are reduced to the Humors,
Winds, and things totally besides nature.

Chap. 2. Of the Internal Causes of Diseases in special.
Article, I. Touching Humors.
Point, 1. Concerning Humor's offending in Quantity, or a Plethora so called.
THe first kind of internal Causes are the Humors: and they are wont to offend
in Quantity, Quality, Motion, Place, and in their whole substance: Humors
offending in Quantity are termed Plethora, which is nothing else but a
superabundance of Humors fit to nourish the Body, which arise from their
Causes. Humors nourishing the body of man are contained in the mass of blood,
viz. Blood, Cholor, Phlegm, and Melancholy. These being turned into the
substance called cambium, do nourish such parts as are of kin to themselves and
communicate to them as much health as themselves are Masters of. The signs of
Plethora are, wearyness; because the blood not being ventilated settles into
the lower parts. Thick breathing after very small Labor, the Muscles of the
Chest being laden with blood. Swelling of the veins, Distension of the Muscles,
carnosity of the Bodies habit, Deep sleeps, ruddyness of the face, etc.

The Causes are, good nourishment which affords good juice. The Liver hot and
moist which makes it. Idleness, evacuations stopped, cutting off of some member.
Use of unwonted bathings after meat.

The Differences are, I. One is Exquisite, when either all the Humors are
increased, keeping their due proportion and equality, viz, so that the blood be
in a double proportion to phlegm, and phlegm double to cholor; or only blood
alone; or two or three of the rest exceed, blood also not keeping its
proportion. It Is known by the signs forementioned. It arises also from the
causes aforesaid. Another is bastard when plenty of bad juices, is joined with
abundance of the natural humors. It Is known by the signs of a Plethora, joined
with those of a cacochimia, and it arises from the causes of both. II. One is
termed ad vasa, or in respect of the vessels; which does not oppress the
strength, because it increases equally with the flesh and blood; but it
distends the coats of the vessels by its plenty, to which the things aforesaid
agree. Another ad visis, when the Humors so increase, that they cannot be
governed nor digested by the feeble strength of the Patient. It Is known
hereby, that the blood is not very good, there is heaviness and Inequality of
the pulse, with signs of crudity, and putrefaction beginning.


Point, 2. Of Humors offending in Quality, or Cacochymia so called.
CAcochymia is the presence of il humors in the Body of Man, springing from
their Causes.

Its Subject is the Body of Man, 1 Both in respect of the Veins, Arteries and
Nerves; as also of things without, 2. Also in respect of the Region of the
Belly, which includes the stomach, mesaraick veins, hollow-part of the liver,
the spleen, and sweetbread. 3. And of the Venous region which contains the
unequal part of the Liver, with the vena cava, the greater Artery, and al their
branches between the Armpits and the Groines. Also the Habit of the body, which
includes the muscles, membranes Bones, in a word, the whole bulk of the body.


The signs are to be fetched from the differences, which follow. Hereunto
pertains, the motion of certain days, which is neither critic, nor
symptomatick, but natural, which is measured by certain days and hours, and is
so punctual, that it may contend with the Clocks.

The Causes, the six non natural things, of which we spoke before.

It Is variously dvided.

I. One sort is from Cholor, which is a preternatural humor hot and dry:
preternatural I say, because it is distinguished, both from the more hot part
of the Mass of Blood, which is bred of the hotter and thinner part of chyle; as
also from natural excrementitious cholor, which is collected in the
Gal-bladder, and colors the dung. It Is known by the amplitude of the veins,
by reason of Heat enwidening the same; by depravation of the concoction,
through superfluity of heat, defire of drink more then of meat, vehement
pulse, sleep little or none, lean habit, yellow color of the Body, by its
motion from third day to third day, and that about noon. It arises from an hot
and dry constitution of body, youths age, watchings, anger, overgreat exercise
of the Body; meats hot and dry, fat and sweet. It Is divided. 1. Into Vitelline
resembling the yolke of an Egg, which springs from yellow chollor adust, and is
thick by reason that the wheyish part is consumed by heat; is sometimes voided
by healthy persons, turns to black chollor, if it be burned, 2. Into that which
is termed porracea, or Leeke colored, which is bred for the most part in the
stomach, of herbs apt to corrupt, through crudity, and often times in the veins,
of vitelline choler. 3. Into Aeruginous or verdigreise color'd choler, which by
a most intense Heat is bred, in the Liver, Veins and stomach. 4. Isatidea, or
woad-colored choler, which resembles woad, being bred of the former, more adust.


II. Another from Phlegm, which is a preternatural Humor cold and moist. I call
it preternatural, to distinguish it, both from the colder part of the mass of
blood; as also from that phlegm wherewith the stomach, Guts, Lungs, Limbs and
Brain are plastered. It Is known by the softness and whitness of the body, and
by crudeness of the stools. By Urine, Crude, White, sometimes thin, and
sometimes thick, by appetite of more than can be digested, by its daily motion,
and that toward the Evening. It arises from meats Crude and cold, unseasonable
drinking, and cold distemper of the bowels. From retaining of Excrements, by
idleness, long sleep, etc. It Is divided. 1. Into Insipid or Tastless, which
follows crudity in the stomach, through want of digestion, and makes the body
of a leaden color. 2. Acid, which is of the same nature with the former. 3.
Salt, which arises from salt and wheyish moisture, consists of parts both hot
and cold; causes thirst, salt tastes in the mouth, and gnawings. 4. Vitrea, like
glass, in substance and color, it is extreme cold and very clammy, and raises
most cruel gripeings, when it is detained in the Body.


III. Another is from Melancholy, whi^^ is a preternatural Humor cold and dry.
I say, preternatural, to difference it, both from the colder and dryer part of
the blood, which is produced in the Spleen out of the colder and dryer part of
Chyle, drawn by the Ramus Splenicus of Vena porta, before it enters into the
Liver, to nourish the Spleen and grosser parts: as also from the natural
excrementious sort, which because it can by no means be turned into Aliment, it
is cast out of the Spleen, partly by the Hemorrhoid veins, partly by the
splenick Arteries; sometimes comes as far as the stomach etc. It Is known by the
Leaden color, and blacknes of the Urine, Suppression of the Hemorhoids,
flatulency and belching, overgreat appetite, sadness, silentness, troublesome
dreams, leanness of the Body, hardness and leaden color thereof, and its motion
from four to four about midnight. It arises from meats of thick juice, Beef,
Coleworts, Fish, upon which a drying, not burning beat does work. From Air cold
and dry, consuming the thinner parts, especially if an hot and dry Summer went
before, by suppression of the Hemorrhoides, or other melancholic evacuations,
etc. It Is divided into dilate, or thin, which is known by abundance of Urine,
and sweating anights. Thick, which is known by the obstructions of melancholic
people, and Blackcholer, which arises from heat burning the blood, choler, or
melancholy juice. And it is sometimes sharp, sometimes tastless, sometimes so
austeer and harsh, as to dissolve the flesh and being poured upon the ground,
to make the Earth ferment and work.

IV. Another from a serous Humor, which is nothing but a thin and salt watery
Humor, affecting the body by its plenty and quality. It Is known, by plenty of
Urine and swear, sometimes by a wandering pain, because in regard of its thinness
it is easily carried up and down, and it easily grows hot, by an extraneous
Heat. By the sudden going away and coming again of diseases, sometimes by
swelling of the Belly, etc. It arises from meats moist and watery, also from
good meats, and in persons recovering from sickness, by reason of the wasting
and languishing of the stomachs Heat. By detention of serositness, by reason of
the expuisive ^^^^ties weakness, through obstruction of the other bowels, or
constriction of the pores through external cold, fault of the spleen, etc. To
this Humor only of al others there is sometimes joined a Colliquation or melting
of the bodies substance, which happens either in Famine, through wasting of the
natural Heat, and turning the radical moisture and flesh into a vaporous
humidity: or in case of bad diet, when the aliment not being surable nor
familiar to the body, is not assimilated into the substance thereof, whence the
former Colliquation follows. It Is divided into that which is mild, which is
nothing but the thinner part of the blood: and sharp, which has attained its
saltness from adustion.

Point. 3. Of Humors offending, in their Motion, Place, and whole Substance.
I. Humors offending in Motion, are the very same, forasmuch as they flow into
the parts, either by means of Attraction or Transmission. Those parts are
either the weaker, and ordained for no remarkable action, either by Nature, as
the loose, soft and thin woven; or through some sickly constitution; or the
more liable, which have some connection with the part sending, and ways wide
and large by which they receive the Humors, or lie under the sending part. The
Cause of the Motion is. 1. Attraction, through heat caused from without, or
through pain. For the pained part, grows hot by plenty of spirits sent to it,
Nature endeavoring to drive away the Cause of the pain, fills the pained part
with blood and spirits; finally pain weakens the part, and makes it most fit to
receive the Humors. 2. Transmission, either from the whole body, or the venous
tribe, or from some parts, namely when their expulsive faculty is strong, the
ways open, and the matter plentiful. Yet it sometimes notwithstandind happens,
that the Humors being accumulated in their vessels, begin of their own accord
to be moved, and rush violently into some one part, according to the nature of
its situation and convenience of Vessels. Now those Humors are most of al
moved, which are most thin and sharp, as the cholerik.


II. Humors offending in place, are the Humors aforesaid, when they are where
they ought not to be. The Causes are. 1. Influx, either by attraction or
Transmission. 2. Congestion, which happens either by fault of the part,
inasmuch as its coctive or ^^^ulsive faculties do not their duties: or t^^^gh
fault of the Nutriment, when it is vicious; and such, as to cause such great
quantity of Excrements: or when gross matter is produced, which resists the
expulsive faculty.


III. Humors offending by their whole substance, are those, which having gained
within the body a peculiar corruption, they do after an hidden manner, and by
their whole substance affect the same. Understand both preternatural
excrementitious Humors, and natural excrementitious Humors retained, as seed,
clotters of blood, menstruous blood. The Signs are, the sudden invasion of
malignant symptoms, as Raving, Fainting away, etc. The Idea of Diseases
themselves, etc. The Cause is, both alimentary matter, which has in it the
seeds of that corruption, and while it is mixed with others, hurts not, but being
separated from them, and existing by it self, it becomes poison. We verily feed
upon many things, that are fed with poison. To which ad Heat, joined with the
principal Agent, and the Matter, to which may be joined a disposition of the
Body hereditary or acquired. Particular Influx of the Heavens, the Air
receiveing the Astral Influxes, and terrestrial Exhalations. Contagion, Poison.
Finally, the Imagination and Affections of Passions. Now the foresaid
determinate Corruption, is brought to this degree, ofttimes by long Digestion
and Fermentation: whence it is that the Plague does not range up and down every
year, although every year the Humors are many ways faulty, yea, and it often
plays its pranks without any putrefaction, as in plants and Animals, venoms
are bred without Putrefaction; and in the most dry Air, pestilential venom is
bred, in which there appear no signs of putrefaction.

Article. II. Of Winds.
Flatus or Wind, is a plentiful vaporous Spirit, raised in man's Body by a weak
Heat, out of meat and drink and a clammie humor.

The Subject is the body of Live-wights, but chiefly the stomach and Guts.

The Signs are, strecthing with heaviness, wandering pains, the foregoeing of
the Causes that breed wind. The disease caused thereby, rises on a sudden. The
Urines are full of bubles on the top.

The Causes are. 1. Meat, much and moist, which can of it self hardly be
digested; and sometimes it is in its own nature windy, as are fruits which will
not keep, windy roots, great Sea fishes, al sat things, and such as are sweet,
clammy, etc. 2. A crude Humor, and which is clan my. 3. Weak heat, not able to
digest the matter, whether it be weak of it self, or in comparision of the
matter on which it works.


It Is divided into phlegmatic wind, which is slowly moved and lasts long.
Choleric, which is biting, sharp, and quickly vanishes. Melancholic, which is
fixed, and causes sadness. And Sanguine, which is mild, and is offensive more
by its Quantity than Quality.

Article. III. Of things totally against Nature.
Things totally against Nature are Stones and Worms.

I. The Calculus or Stone is a solid and strong substance bred in the Body of
Man out of a slimy tartareous mucilage, impregnated with a putrefying faculty,
by the Assistance of Heat.

Its Subject is the Body of Man, and therein the Brain, Liver, Gallbladder,
Stomach, Kidneys, Piss-bladder, etc.

The Signs are suplied from the parts themselves. There is in a manner nothing
to be said of them in general.

The Cause is not phlegm. For many are troubled with phlegm that are not molested
with the stone; and many have the stone, who keep an accurate diet; but a
putrefying or stonemaking juice. Hence it is, that persons subject to the
stone, make water like snivel, which afterward turns to a stone. Now it
proceeds from the dreggyness of meats, which being retained, it glews to this
or that part, is daily increased by arival of new matter, when it lays hold of
a clammy, thick, and earthy matter, it coagulates the same, and the internal
salt of Man's body coming afterward, which the foresaid tartar by reason of its
natural clamminess easily receives, and hides within it self, at last is
congealed into a perfect stone.

II. Worms are little live creeping things, bred in the Body of man, of a
thick, clammy excrementitious humor, containing in it self a kind of vital
Principle; by a quickening heat, raised by putrefaction.

Their Subject is the body of man, and therein the Brain, Liver, Stomach, etc.
The Cause is. 1. An Humor furnished with a kind of vital principle, so that of
several Humors several sorts of worms are bred; and the humor is sometimes
thick and roaping, sometimes bitter, so that worms will be bred of wormwood and
sea salt. 2. Heat, not celestial but bred in the body; and that moist but not
alone. This by little and little (...) solves the humor, and stirs up the
spiritual ^^at, and principal of life which lay hid in the matter.


Title III. Of Symptoms.
A Symptom is an Affection besides Nature, in those things which belong not to
that Constitution which is necessary to the action of the Parts, and which
follows some other thing besides nature.

The SIGNS of the Symptoms are discovered by one or more of the senses; and
in case they are hid, they are drawn from the same fountains, with the signs of
Diseases and causes, that is to say, from the Effects and Causes.

The CAUSES from which they arise, are Diseases, Causes and their Symptoms.

It Is divided three manner of ways especially.

I. One is of the Disease, which immediately follows the disease, no affection
according to Nature, intervening. Another of the Cause when the Action is hurt,
by some morbifick Cause. A third of a Symptom, when one Symptom depends upon
another Symptom foregoing. II. One is an Action Hurt, whether it be abolished,
diminished, depraved or augmented. It happens either by fault of faculty, when
the instrument is immediately il affected; to which the absence of the spirits
and influent heat, is reserved; or by reason of some external Error, when those
things fail, with which the actions are, or without which they cannot be
performed. Another is of things voided and retained: Another of qualities
changed, which depend upon the Actions hurt and the Humors proceeding
therefrom. III. Another is of the Natural Faculty, viz. The nutritive,
augmentative and generative. Another of the vital faculty. Another of the
Animal faculty, to which appertain the Symptoms of the external senses, of the
internal senses, the motive faculty etc.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE IDEA OF PRACTICAL PHYSIC.
Touching Medicaments.
Title, I. Of Medicaments in General.
HAving already spoke of the preternatural disorders which afflict the Bo^^ of
Man, it follows that we should now speak somewhat of their Removal. Now
touching their removal, two things are considerable, 1. By what Means they may
be removed. 2. How and in what manner they ought to be removed.
The Means are termed Medicaments, which are considered either in general or
in special, and according to their differences. A Medicament in General, is
whatever being applied to a Sick Body, is of Ability, by its faculties, to
reduce the same from a Preternatural, to its natural state and condition.

Concerning which, five things are considerable. The Name, Faculties, Dose,
Adulteration, Substitution and Collection.

I. If we consider ^he Name, you must know that we understand not the word
Medicament in the most common acceptance, for so it comprehends poisons and
paintings or Fucuses; but in reference to man's body, and that either generally
considered, forasmuch as it neither nourishes nor destroys the same; or
specially, forasmuch, as it is troubled with sickness.

II. The faculties of Medicaments are, 1. Manifest and either the first,
Heating, Cooling, Drying, Moistening, which are sometimes compounded; or the
second, which arise from the first, and vary in diverse respects, so that they
are certain Modes thereof, as, Attenuateing, Abstersive, Deobstructive,
Rarefactive, Discussive, thickning, astringent, repelling, stupifying etc. 2.
Hidden, in respect of which, Medicaments do either by a peculiar faculty
evacuate some particular humor; or they have some peculiar affinity with some
member; or they resist poison.
Observe, I. Touching their faculties in General. 1. That they spring from
their forms, and the forms act by them as by Instruments, and therefore the
faculties as they are referred to the Actions, are termed certain effective
causes, by mediation of which the forms act upon a determinate Body. 2. That
they are either actually in the subject, so as presently to operate, as burning
is in fire. Or potentially, when the medicant needs the Heat of the body to
bring it into act, which is done sooner or later, either in respect of the
matter resisting, and the Heat acting, or in respect of impediments of the
matter, whereby its actions are bound up. 3. Or they operate by accident, some
other thing intervening, as cold water stirs up Heat in the Convulsion: or of
your selves, and immediately.
II. Concering the first faculties. 1. That sometimes they are equally in one
and the same subject, so that either they are al equal, or two equal, and one
unequal. 2. That the Inequalities which are, do more or less depart from
Temper. Those of the first degree, do alter a temperate body so, as the
alteration is hardly discerned. Those of the second degree make evident
alteration, but without hurt. Those of the third degree, alter vehemently and
not without some hurt. Those of the fourth, with evident Hurt. 3. That
moisture, which of al qualities is least active, cannot be of the fourth
degree. 4. Things vehemently hot, do never moisten. 5. Nothing dries in the
fourth degree, but it likewise burns; in the third degree many do, which are
cold and astringent.
III. Touching occult Qualities, that they depend upon hidden properties
springing from the former. Now the soul as being Architectrix of her own
House, produces this inferior Form, to be as it were her subject matter in a
well disposed body, which though it inform its who! matter, yet it chiefly
resides in the radical moisture, implanted spirit, and inbred Heat, which is
even in dead bodies, and it may therewith be separated from the rest of the
gross body, and may rightly be termed a fifth Essence. IV. Touching their
knowledge. The first are known by reason and experience, the former of which is
taken from the swiftness or slowness of the action, respect being had to the
patient, from smells, tastes, colors, tangible qualities, age, place of
production, operations and known virtues. The second qualities, the first
being known, cannot remain hid, as being their Handmaids. Hidden qualities are
chiefly conjectured from similitudes or signatures, of which see Porta in his
Phylognomonicks, and Crollius touching signatures.


III. The Dose is requisite in a medicament, for none works aright, unless
given in just quantity. This is determinated with regard to the quality, part
affected, and the sick Patient. Fit measured by us, with a grain, a scruple, a
dram, an ounce, a pound, a spooneful, etc. By the ancients with a mystrum, a
cyathus, an Acetable, a quartarie, anhemina, or cotyla, a sextorie, a congius,
an urna, amphora and culeus.

IV. Adulteration, has chiefly place in out landish drugs, as Champhire brought
from Borneum, is adulterated with fragments of stones or a certain gum called
chambderros, like crude ambar, or the dust of a certain wood. So Bezar-stone
is many ways counterfeted. Mosch is mixed with a certatine stuf made of Goats
blood, bread toasted and poudered, and the gum Ladanum. Amber-Grese is made up
of the powder of Lignum Aloes. Cinnamon is counterfeted, by barks of Tamariske
steeped in Cinnamon water and then dried. Benzoin or Benjamin, by a mixture of
Rosin, olibanum, and a little storax. Opobalsamum with Oil of Liquid ambar.
Opium with Meconium.

V. The occasion of substitution, or useing Quid pro quo, is the want of some
simples. So Calamus aromaticus is used in stead of acorus; Southernwood in
place of wormwood; origanum for Southernwood; Hypocists for Acacia; an apple
for Acanthus; Anise for Ammi; Acorus for Amomum; peach kernels for bitter
almonds; sublimate for Arsenik; Schenant for Calmus Aromaticus; Cyperus for
Cardamomes; Vulgar Canella for Cinnamon; Figs of Marsellus for Dates; Sage for
Dictamus; Elaterium for white Hellebore; Lapis Lazulie for black Hellebore;
Erysimum for Rocket; Poppine for Mandrake; Schenant for syrian Nard; Cloves for
Nutmegs; Lovage root for xylobalsamum etc. of which see Authors, especially
Renodeus in the fourth Book of his Pharmacopeia, Chap. 16

Title, II. Of the sorts of Medicaments and their Differences.
Chap. I. Of simple Medicaments.
Article, 1. Of such Medicaments as are dug out of the Earth.
MEdicaments considered in their sorts are variously divided: howbeit the chief
differences are those which are taken from their constitution, qualities, and
virtues, the parts of man's Body, the Planets and Signs of the Zodiac, to which
Magical medicaments may be added.

In respect of their Constitution, Medicaments are Simple or Compound. I call
those Simple, which are such as nature has produced, having received no
composition by art, but go into the composition of artificial medicaments: and
they are Fossilia, Vegetabilia, Animalia, or Microsmica. Fossilia, are such
medicaments as are fetched out of the Bowels of the Earth. Under this kind are
contained, I. Earths, which will dissolve when water is poured upon them, such
as. 1. Argilla, potters clay, of very little, though some use in physic. 2.
Chalk, useful in want of appetite. Terra Lemnia, of a red coler and fat, so
that held in the mouth it seems to be made of suec. 4. Bole Armeniack, or
oriental Bole, which is counted best, if it will presently rub in a mortar to
very fine powder, and has no grittyness or sandiness in it. Red bole is the
vulgar Bole of the Shops, 5. Cimolia, either the white or that enclineing to
purple; being fat, and cold to feel to, it is best. 6. Terra Silesiaca, or
strigensis, which Montanus found out.


II. Concrete or congealed juices, such as 1. Salt, whether it be Sal gem, or
Sea Salt; the former of which is dug out of Mines, and being thrown into the
fire, it does not crackle, but takes flame. 2. Nitre, as well that of
Dioscorides, of a rosy or white color, as the vulgar Sal Nitre or Salt peter
so called; the froath which by long boileing it sends forth, is termed
Aphronitrum. 3. Alum, especially roche or rock alum. For the Alumen scissile,
or leader alum, which is not sensible of the force of fire, and Catinum made of
the ashes of the plant Kali, are not in use. It Is called stipterion. 4. Vitriol
or Chalcantum, which is nothing else than a Coagulum of sulfurous, brazen or
iron saltness. Se thereof Verbezius and Billichius in the first book of
Chemical observations, Chap. 13. The white and native is counted best; when
burnt, it is termed Colcothar. 5. Sulfur, which if it be natural, it is shineing
and transparent like a Glowworme, of a light ash color without, and yellow
within: if made by Art, it is very fat and greenish.


III. The several sorts of Bitumen, such as 1. Haphtha, strainings of
Babylonian Bitumen, fluid, white, extremely apt to take fire. 2. Petroleum, as
if you should say, oil out of a rock, which is gathered in the country about
Modena in Lombardy. 3. Spermaceti, or a whiteish ambar, the Cream of the Sea.
It Is collected in the Sea, being a fa^ty and branny foam thereof. Choose that
which is white, fat, etc. 4 Ambar-greife, which is cast out of the Channels of
the Sea upon the shore, and grows hard by lying in the Air. The best is of
an Ash-color most fragrant, which being pricked with a pin, sweates out much fat
moisture. That which is made by Art is commonly black, and put in water, grows
quickly soft. 5. Succinum or amber, called citrine or yellow amber, Electrum,
Carabe, is found in shallow parts of the Sea, and on the shoares thereof. The
white is lighter, fragranter, and better; the yellow, is also good, if
transparent, and if being rubbed it smell like Rosemary. See thereof Libavius.
6. Gagates, jeat, is black, crustie, and full of Bitumen; if set on fire, it
flames, smells like bitumen, and so it is distinguished from pit coals.


IV. Stones, such as are. 1. Among the more precious sort. 1. The Smaragd, of
which the Scytian is best, being of one color, and that a light Green. 2. The
Sapphyr, which if it be of an azure color is best; if of a watrie color, it is
of small esteem. It Is found in Zeilan, Calcut and Pegu. 3. The Rubine; of which
there are four kinds. The true and best sort, is of the color of Indian Lac or
Scarlet, the slightest are the Balassius and Spinellus. 4. The granate, which
is best if it have the color of a march violet, mingled with the red. 5.
Sardius, which is commonly found at Sardis, and thence has its name; is most
approved, when reddest. 6. Hematites or Bloodstone, greenish, party color'd,
sprinkled over with bloody spots. 7. The Nephrithickstone, dark, party color'd,
mingled of green and other colors, its surface seems always fat. 8. The
Chrysolite, which is either Oriental, or Europaean. The former is soft, and has
a golden color, with more or less blackness. 9. Chrystallus, which is then best
when most transparent. 10. The Hyacinth, which is the better for being but one
only color, The worst is the Arabian.
II. Among the less precious sort are. 1. Lapis lazuli, which is of a dark
azure color, adorned with golden streaks, or specks. 2. Lapis Armenius, which
is variegated with many green and blew spots, and some blackish ones, the Sky
color'd is preferred before the deeper blew. 3. Lapis judaicus, roundish, with
equi-distant streaks al along, as if so turned by Art. 4. Lapis Lyncis, called
also Belemnites, is of a pyramidal shape, and is found of diverse colors. 5.
Magnes, or Heracleus, so much the better by how much more Sky color'd and
hoary. 6. Osteocolla, which is of the shape of a bone, and is also termed
Holosteus. 7. Silex, a flint, a well known stone. 8. Talcum, a stone like the
Lapis specularis, but more thin, scaly, greenish, resisting the fire, and
fixed: which also some relate of the Osteocolla. ^. Vnicornu fossile, or a
stone which in color and smoothness and frequently in the very shape resembles
an horn.
III. Among those taken out of Living Creatures. 1. Coral, especially the red.
That is counted the best which is of a flourishing color, smelling like Sea
weeds, branchy, brittle; not the rough scabby and hollow. 2. Lapis sponguis,
which grows in spunges, being porous, friable, and of a white or gray color. 3.
Alectorius, or Cock-stone, that is most esteemed, which has appearing therein as
it were a crum of meat congealed, pretty bright in appearance. 4. Chelidonius,
the swallow stone, which is Hemisphaerical, and always hollow within. 5. The
Carpie stone, which is triangular, and is found about the beginning of the
dorsal Marrow. 6. Crabs eyes, a thing well known. 7. Vnbilicus marinus, which is
found in the Orifice of a snail, when it shuts it self up in the winter. 8.
Lapis Caymanum, which is taken out of the Bellies of Crocodiles or mighty
lizards in America. 9. Lapis porcinus, Hogstone, which is found in the Gall of
Hogs near Mallacca. 10. Perch stone, found in the fish so called: now there are
two found in the said fish, white, oblong, plane, toothed on the one side. 11.
Bezoar stone, of which kind the Oriental are praised, the Persian, such as are
blackish green, whose under crust shines, when the uppermost is taken away. The
true b^zoar is known, in that being rubbed with chalk it becomes of a yellowish
green; or being steeped in water three hours, it becomes no heavier than it was
before. 12. Aetites, Eagle stone, which is said to be carried by the Eagle into
her Nest; of which see Laurembergius.



IV. Metals, which are either natural. 1. Gold, which the chemists call Sol, the
Sun. The best is that of Arabia, the next that of Hungaria, the next to that
the Rhenish. 2. Silver, which the Chemists term Luna and Cerebrum, the Moon and
Brain. 3. Tin, which the Chemists call Jupiter: The purest is found in England.
4. Brass, or Copper, which the Chemists term Venus, the best is in Cyprus. 5.
Iron, which the Chemists call Mars: the best is that of Damascus, and the
Spanish. 6. Lead, or Saturn. 7. Quicksilver, or Mercury, the Idol of Chemists,
which comes out in drops from the Clods of many Mines.
To these ad Stibium or Antimonium, the Cure and torment of the Hermeticks,
which was of old, sold as it was dug up, but now it is tried first. II. Or
Artificial, as are. 1. Scoria, or the dross which comes when the Oar is tried
in the furnace. 2. Cadmia fornacum, viz. That which cleaves to the roof of the
Furnaces when the oar of metals is tried. The best is, that which is afforded
by the furnaces of Cyprus. 3. Pomphodix Nihili, or Tutia; which is a volatile
spark which flows from melted Brass. The best is the white and smooth, that of
Cyprus is most commended. 4. Spodium, understand that of the Greeks, and not of
the Arabians; and it is nothing but a clot of sparkles or ashes which fly in
the melting of brass, and quickly fall to the ground. 5. Flos aeris, to which ad
verdigrease and the scales of b^^ss. 6. Cerus, which is drawn out of lead, with
the help of vinegar. The most esteemed is that of Rhodes and of Puteolum. 7.
Cinnabaris, which comes from the Shops of the Quicksilver Men. 8. Literidge, or
the thinner dross of silver purged from the plumbaginous matter, which is blown
out by blast of the Bellows.


Article, II. Of Vegitable Medicaments.
Vegitable Medicaments are, trees, shrubs, and herbs; inasmuch as they serve to
remove the disorders of the Body, either in whole or in part, viz. By their
roots, woods, barks, leaves, tops, flowers, fruits, and humors. I. Those Trees
are. I. Aple-bearers, as the Apple tree, the Quince tree, the Citron tree, the
Orange tree, the Peach tree, the pear tree, the Fig tree, the Sycomore tree,
the Mulbery tree, the Crab tree, the Medlar tree, the Service tree, the
Apricock tree, the Malacotone tree, the Damsin tree, Myrobalanplum tree, the
Sebesten tree, the Jujubee tree, the Cornel tree, the Lotus, the Cherry tree,
to which we may ad the Ebeny and the Guaiacum trees. II. The Nut-bearers, the
Almond tree, the Walnut tree, the Hasel tree, the Filberd tree, The Chestnut
tree, the Pistachio tree, Glans unguentaria tree, the Styrax tree, to which
many outlandish Nuts, must be referred. III. Date-bearers, such as the Palm,
IV. Mast-bearers, as the Beech, the Oak, The Cork, the Suber, the Ilex and
Smilax of the Arabians, whereunto also belong Misletoe, Galls and Oak apples.
V. Berrie-bearers, as the Sanders tree, The Mastick tree, the Frankincense
tree, the Terpentine tree, the Balsam tree, the Sumach tree, the Cocconilea,
the Ash tree, the Holme tree, the Linden tree, the Wild vine, the Ostrys tree,
the Cotton tree the Maple, the Plantane, the Sassafras, the Ricinus, the
Barbery tree, the Gooseberry tree, the Elder, the Laurel and bay tree, the
Chamelea, the Thymelea, the Cheoron, the Myrtle, the Butchers Broom, the
Rasberry tree, the Box tree, the Olive tree, the Agnus castus tree, the Privet;
the Primprint, the Philyra, the White bramble, Box thorn, the black berry
bush, the Capat tree, the Savine tree, the Cedar tree, the Cypress tree, the
Juniper tree, the Asparagus, the Eugh, and Dragon tree. VI. Spice-bearers, the
Nutmeg tree, the Mace tree, Macer tree, the Cassia lignea or Canella, the
Cinnamon tre^ the Folium tree, the Clove tree, the Peper tree, the Cubebes
tree, the Amomum tree, the Grains of paradise tree, and the Cardamom tree.
Hither also may Lignum Aloes tree be referred. VII. Cod bearers, as the
Cytisus, Anagyris, the Acacia the Aspalathus Genista or Brown, Spartium,
Scorpius, Cliothen, Sena, Euonymus Nerion. VIII. Cone bearers as the
conebearing Ceader, the Pine, the Larch tree, the Pitch tree, the Fir tree. IX.
Cotkin or cats tail bearers as the willow, the Alder, the Elm, which bears
also bladders, the Poplar tree. X. Rose bearers, the Rose tree, the Cistus and
Cistus Ledum. etc. XI. Brush trees, Tamariske, Heath etc.


II Also Herbs are variously divided. For they are. I. It we regard their
roots, Bulbous, as the Bulbous flower delize, the stock gilloflower, Safron,
Colchicum, the Onion, the Leek, the Squil, Garlik, Moly, Orchis or Cullions,
and Satyrium or Dogs-stones etc. II. If we consider their Leaves they are, I.
Long leaved and stalked, as Grass, Rushes, Nardus, Cyperus, Horstaile, the
Reed, Papyrus or Egptian paper, Xyris, Orice, Acorus, Galangal, Ginger,
Zedoary, Costus, etc. 2. Thick-leaved as Houseleek, Venus navel, Aloes, Rhodia,
Telephium, Purslane, Cepea Crithmum, Kali, Tragum. 3. Hairie leaved, Gromwel,
Cynoglossum, or Hounds tongue. 4. Nervy leaved as Gentian, Plantan, Flea wort,
Bistort, Pond weed, Water-lilly, Cucko-pintle, Heliebore etc. 5. Round leaved,
the two Birthworts, Colts foot, Broad dock, Bur dock, Asarum. 6. Hair like, as
Phyllitis, Hemionitis, Asplenium, Lunaria, Maiden hair, Polytrichum, Wall rue,
Ros-solis, Fern, Poly podie, and others. 7. Thorny or prickly, as the Thistle,
Scolymus of Theophrastus Venus basin, Eryngos, Euphorbium, Dragant etc. 8.
Three leaved, five leaved etc. 9. Soft leaved as Marsh mallows, Mercury,
Rhubarbe. etc.
III. If they bear flowers they are. 1. Turn crowned and helmet fashiond, as
Mints, Calamints, Origanum, Penyroyal, Hyssop, Time, Stechas of Arabia,
Lavendar, Vulgar spike, Ground pine, Oak of Jerusalem, Sage, Nettle, Betony,
Eye bright, Scrophularia, Prunella, Hedge hyssop, Dictamnus etc. 2. Star
fashioned, as Rubia, Gallion, Cruciata, Rue. 3. Spur fashiond or lark heeld,
Aquilegium, Roial Comfrey, Toad flax etc. 4. Button tufted, as Cumin, Fenel,
Dil, pellitory, Fennelgiant, Thapsia, Turpit, Hogs-fennel, Carot, Chervil,
Smallage, Angelica, Imperatoria, Laserpitium, Panax, Caraway, Coriander, Anise,
Pimpernel, Myrthis, Hemlock, Lovage, Filipendula. 5. Berry bunched Elecampane,
Pellitorie, Mugwort, Sneezwort, Wormwood etc. 6. Headed, Scabious, Jacea,
Cyanus, Scorzonera, Caltha, Succisa, Cardus, etc.
IV. If Fruit, they are 1. Apple-bearers, Mandrake, Cucumber, Melon, Pompion,
Anguria, Gourd, Coloquintida, wild or Ass cowcumber. 2, Codded, as are besides
the pulses, and the pot-herby sort, Hedysarum, Ornithopodium, Polygala,
Onobrychis, Galega, Glycyrthize, Fumitory, Cesondine, Aquilegia, Nigella. 3.
Case carriers, Garden Cresses, Shephards-pouch, Scurvy grass, wild radish etc.
4. Vessel-bearers, as Centorie, Mouse ear, Flax, St. John's wort, Anagallis,
Money wort, Rupture wort, Poppie etc.
V. If we regard their use, they are. 1. Corns, as Wheat, Spelt, Barley, Rye,
Oats, Blasted Corn, Rice, Milium, Panicum, Phalaris, Indian Corn. 2.
Kitching herbs, as Rapes, small turnips, Iberis, Taragan, Campanula, Rapistrum,
Rocket. Mustard, Alliaria, Cole wort, Docks, and Patientes, Betes, Blites,
Centaury the greater, Orach, Pellitorie, Mercury, Lettice, sowchistle, Cichory
etc. 3. Pulses which are gathered, as Beans, French Beans, Pease, Tares,
Fetches, Lentils, Orobus, Cicer, the Lupine, Fenugreek etc.
VI. If the manner of growing, there are convolvuli or Scandentes, such as
twist themselves about other plants or props and so rear themselves as are
besides apple bearers and the pulses, Scammony, Soldanella, Salsaparilla China,
Bryonie, Mechoacan, Hops, the Grape vine, Lilly Convally, Ivy, Indian,
Watercresses, Birthwort, Bindweed, Gramen parnassi, Saxifrage etc. VII. If
their juice, some are milkie plants, as Tithymallus, Esula, Peplus, Peplis,
Lathyries, and Chamasyce etc. VIII. If their place, in which they grow, they
are 1. Garden wood, Field, Mountain, Meadow and water plants, as are Moss,
Duck weed, Lungwort, Sea nettle, Sea weed, Arsmart, Anagallis, etc. IX. If we
regard the virtues, we shall find in a manner infinite differences of Herbs; of
which I shall speak hereafter, as much as will serve for our present purpose; and
more largely and exactly, elsewhere,


III. The Humors of plants are best distinguished into thickened juces, Gums,
Rosins, and Pitch.

I. Thicked juices are, 1, Ammoniacum, which is named from the Oracle of
Jupiter Hammon, it is bred in a tree called Metopion. That is most approved which
is sincere and unmixed and condensed into clotters like Frankinsense, smelling
somewhat like Castorium, Bitter in taste, yellow without, white within, growing
soft if it be wrought between the Fingers. 2. Galbanum, the juice of a Ferulous
plant which grows in Syria. The best is gristly, yellow, fat, not woody, of a
strong ungrateful smell, because it retains in it some of its seeds and sticks.
3. Opopanax, a juice flowing out of the root of Hercules his Allheale, That is
most esteemed, which is white within, yellow without, bitter, strong sented,
fat, milkie like Galbanum, and when it is melted resembling a milkie liquor. 4.
Sagapenum, or Sera-pinum, the liquor of an herb like fenelgiant growing in
Media. That's best which is sincere, transparent, red without, within when it is
broken, yellow, or compact of yellow or whiteish drops, growing soft between
the singers. 5. Opium, or a milkie liquor running from the stalk of a black
poppie lightly gashed. The best is that which is white, or yellowish like the
Hairs of a Lions-skin, congealed into a Mass as it were made up of little
grains of diverse colors, dirty and of a strong and virulent smell. 6. Aloes,
which is either Caballina, or Hepatica, or Socatrina you must choose that which
is far, void of Stones, friable in winter, soft in summer, compact like the
substance of the Liver. 7. Scammony, which is reserved of a milkie root being
cut, out of which it runs and is dried. That's best which is transparant, full of
holes like a spounge, and when it is rubbed against the tongue it shows a
white liquor on its surface, resembling milk. 8. Elaterium, or the juice of
the wild Cowcumber thickened, which is the most lasting of al medicaments; and
that is best which is oldest. 9. Euphorbium, or a most sharp biteing juice of a
tree, resembling the ferula. That must be chosen which is pure, transparent,
white or yellow, and biteing, and which being lightly touched with the tongue,
inflames the mouth a long time after. 10. Juice of Lycorize, which is drawn
out of the roots, and is condensed into Balls-or little cakes. 11. Succus
Acaciae, a juice pressed out of Acacia a plant in Egypt. Choose that which is
moderately yellow and odoriferous. 12. Acacia Germanica, or the juice of boiled
sloes, pressed out, set in the Sun, and dried. 13. Manna, which is gathered in
Calabria from the Ashen trees. Choose that which is white and not above a year
old. It Is counterfeted by sugar pemies wrapped up in leaves of herbs. 14. Gummi
Got, or Cambogia, Gummi Gamandra, Gummi de peru, which is extracted out of
the Indian Ricinus. See thereof Reudenius, Lotichius, and Bontius in his
Medicina Indorum.


II. Gumms are, 1. Gum Arabic; the best is transparent like Glass, unmixt, in
crinkled bits representing worms, and white. 2. Gum tragant, which drops out
of the root of thorny plants, which the Greeks call Tragacantha. It Is
transparent, white, sweetish, light and sincere. 3. Sarcocolla, the tear of a
tree growing in Persis, like fine franckincense, yellowish and bitterish. 4.
Gummi Hederoea, of a yellowish red color, strong smell, and biteing taste. 5.
Cancamum, or the tear of an Arabian tree, somewhat representing myrrh, of a
very strong taste. 6. Lacca officinarum. Gum lac of the shops, is made of the
juice of a certain tree, in Pegu and Malavar. It Is said to be made by the
winged Pismires. 7. Sanguis Draconis, Dragons blood, or the juice of a certain
tree which being congealed, resembles dried blood. It makes water of a milkie
color, but without mixture. 8. Assafetida, or the Tears of Silpheum growing in
Libia and other Countries. Choose that which is unmixt, resembling Garlic in
smell, and clammie. It Is adulterated by the mixture of meal, bran, and
Sagapenum. 9. Champhire of the shops, or the Resinous Tear of a certain high
tree. Choose that which is white, transparent as crystal, not spotted,
fragrant, apt to crumble between the fingers, and which being set on fire, can
hardly be quenched. 10. Juniper Gum, dry, hard, yellow, like mastich. Liquid
Varnish is made of it and Linseed oil. I forbear to speak of Cherrie tree
gum, Elm tree gum, etc.


III. Rosins are either moist or dry. The moist are. 1. Terpentine, or a
liquor which flows from the Trunk and boughs of the tree Terebinthus. The
best is white, transparent, enclining to sky color, fragrant and biteing. 2.
Rosin of the Larch tree, or Terpentine of the shops, which is many times sold
for the former. The best is the purest, most fragrant, somewhat transparent, and
which falls hastily and equally from the finger dipped into it. 3. Maistich which
flows from the Lentish tree, and seems referable to the Gum rosins. The best is
white, shineing, fragrant, crumbly, and which grows in Chios. It Is
counterfeited, with a mixiture of franckincense and Rosin. 4. Olibanum of the
shops, or the liquor of an Arabian tree. The chief is the male, that which
drops out, round, white; the next in value is the Orobium, which grows in
Amelum, which is smaller and yellower; the next to that is Amomites, which is
white, and yeildes to the fingers when it is softened, like mastich. 5. Myrrh,
or the Tear of a tree which grows in Arabia, like the Egyptian thorn, which
tree being cut it drops down upon mats spread beneath. The Troglodytick myrrh
is counted best, which is greenish, transparent and biteing; the second in
repute is thin and clammie like Bdellium; the third in value is that which is
termed Caucalis, black and parched; the worst is the factitious whith looks
like Gum. 6. Storox or the tear of a tree like a Malocotone growing in Syria.
The best is yellow and fat, rosinie, with whiteish drops; which being wrought
between the fingers, sends forth an honey-like moisture keeping the fragrancy
of the lump. It Is adulterated by the dust of a tree which the worms have made
by their gnawing. 7. Liquid Ambar, or an oily rosin, of a most sweet and strong
smell, flowing out of a certain tree in the west Indies, called Ocosotle. 8.
Bdellium, or the Tears of a tree in Bactria. That is most approved, which is
bitter, transparent, like Bulls-glue, fat within, and easily growing soft. 9.
Benjuinum or Benjamin a gum flowing from the wounded boughs of a certain tal
tree in the East-In-dia's. The best has white spots in it resembling almonds,
and grows in Zeilan. 10. Tacamahaca, or a Rosin which flows out of a wounded
Tree which grows in Nova Hispania. In color it is like Galbanum, it has white
nails, a strong smell and taste, and sticks fast to the skin. 11. Gummi Elemi,
or a transparent white tear, with yellow particles intermixed, reduced into a
Mass; and rendering a sweet smell when its burnt. It Is brought out of Ethiopia.
Dioscorides describes it yellow somewhat like Scammonie, and biteing. 12.
Colophonia of the shops is a dried rosin, of an oilie substance, yellowish,
dry, and friable, being the remainders of the fir and pitch tree, when they
are clarified by the fire, being thickened and hardened by cold. Choose that
which is transparent, fragrant, and resembles the smell of franckincense when
it is burnt.


III. It Is needless that I should ad any thing concerning pitch; Touching
Plants consult the Theatrum Botanicum of Baubin, which is now comeing forth: to
the more easy knowledge whereof my doctrine of Plants, and other Treatises,
which in dispight of envy, I have in hand, shall lead thee.

But the knowledge of the Virtues of Plants, depends upon the signatures also,
or similitudes, which they seem to have, with the Parts, Humors, and Diseases,
whether it happen in shape, which is in this case most considerable, or only in
sensible qualities, or in actions and manners etc. Howbeit, these notes are
either Fixed, which are seen in seeds, Roots and Flowers: or movable, which are
taken from Taft, Smell, Color, Shape, Hairyness, Smoothness, and.

1. As for the Parts of man's Body, 1. The Head is represented by the Poppie,
Wal-nut, Indian Nut, Peonie, Squil, Agarick, Lilly convallie. 2. The Eyes, by
the Grains of Herb Paris, flower of Eye bright, Anthenis, Mary Gold,
Hawkweed, Anemone, Scabious, etc. 3. The Teeth, by Henbane without cods, stones
of a pomegrannate, pine kernels, Toothwort, Leaves of Prick-Madam, foot of the
smaller Celandine. 4. The Ears, by Asarum and Garden Scurvigrass leaves. 5.
The Nose, by the leaves of Menastrum Aquaticum. 6. The throat or wezand by
Winter-green, Uvularia, Cervicariat and Cassia Fistularis. 7. The Lungs, by
stony lungwort, spotted Lungwort, lungwort of the Oak. 8. The Heart, by
pome-citrons, The roots of Anthora, The anacardine Beans. 9. The Liver, by
Liverwort, the toad-stoole that grows upon Birch and Oak, the. Herb Lichn.
10. The Spleen; by Scolopendrium, Hearts-tongue, Lupines. 11. The Stomach, by
Bindweed, leaves, Ginger, Galingal. 12. The gutts, by Bindweed, calamus
aromaticus, Cassia Fistularis. 13. The Navil, by Umbilicus Veneris. 14. The
bladder, by Alkekengi, Bladder wort, Colutea, nightshade. 15. The Privites, by
Cuckoes-pintle, Beans. 16. The Stones, by several sorts of Orchis, Satyrium,
Dracunculus, leekes, Stags pizzle. 17. The womb, by Aristolochia rotunda,
round birth wort, Mace, Sabine. 18. The Reins, by Purslane. 19. The joints, by
Hermodactyls, Sarsa pariglia. 20. The Hand by Palma Christi. 21. The Hair of
the Head, by the Moss of trees, and Maiden hair.


II. As for what concerns Humors. 1. Cholor yellow, is represented by such
plants as have flowers or juices of a yellow or Safroncolour, as Aloe, Senna,
Wormwood, Spurge Safron, Coloquintida, Rhubarbe etc. 2. Leek-colored Choler,
Blites, Orach. 3. Pale Choler by Bryonie. 4. Black-choler, by such whose
flowers, Leaves or juice, are blackish purple, or Skie-colored, as Beans,
Lentils, Vetches, Borrage, Bugloss etc. 5. Phlegm, by white-flowered plants, as
gourds, Lettice etc. 6. Blood by such as are of a red color, or staind with a
red color, as Red sanders China root, Fearne root, Sorrel root.


III. As for Diseases. 1. The Stone is represented by Gromwel, white-Saxifrage
root, nutshells and their kernels. 2. Small risings by Lentiles. 3. Excrescences
by Agaric, and Galls. 4. The Jaundice by Celondine, Saffron, Centaurie. 5. The
Polipus, by the roots of the smaller Celondine and polypodie. 6. Lentigines,
specks or spots, by the white and speckled bark of the Birch-tree, and the
Lichen which grows upon trees. 7. Morphewes etc. by Garlic, Cucko-pintle,
Arisarum, Arsmart, Lungwort etc. 8. Wounds by Through wax, Millefolium.


Article, 3 Of animal Medicaments.
Animal Medicaments, are such as are taken either from whole liveing Creatures,
or some parts of them.

All Livewights are considerable in a five fold difference, for they are either
birds or Four-footed Beasts, or Fishes, or Creeping things, or Bloodless-wights.

I. Of birds, among those that live on Land are. 1. Carnivorous, that live on
Flesh, The Eagle, the Vulture, the Hawk, the Kite, the Buzzard, the Cucko, the
Falcon, Parrot, Crow, Jackdaw, the Chough, the Magpie, the Owl, the Batt, the
Ostrich. II. Plant feeders, and they are either. 1. Scrapters in the dust, both
wild, as the Peacock, Pheasant, Heath-cock, Bustard, Partrich, Quail,
Turkey-cock; and also tame, as the Cock and Hen. 2. Or Scrapers and washers
both, as the Dove, Turtle, Pigeon, Sparrow. 3. Or singers, as the Linnet,
Gold-finch, Thistle-finch, Thrush, Lark. 4. Berry-feeders, as the Blackbird,
Feldefare, etc.
III. Insect-eaters. 1. That sing not, as the Pidanner, the Titmouse, the
Wood-pecker, the Wren, the swallow, the Lapwing, the Muskin, a dishwasher, a
Redstart, a Robin-redbrest. 2. That sing, as the Nightingal. Of those that live
in the water. I. Broad-footed, 1. Fisheaters, the Pelicane, the Cormorant, the
Sea-mew, the plungeon, the Seagul, the Swimmer. 2. Grass-eaters, The Swan, the
Goose, the Duck, the Moot-hen.
II. Cloven-footed 1. Flesh-eaters, the Storke, the Ibis, the Redwing, the
Heron, the Porphyrie, the Kings fisher, the Ispis. 2. Insect-eaters, The
Arquata, the Crex, the Tocanus, Dab-chick, Scolopax, Tringa, Junco, Cinclus,
vanellus, etc. 3. Corn-eaters, as the Crane.





II. Fishes are, I. Seafish, and they are 1. either such as keep in the deepes,
both scaled; as the stockfish, the Herring the Liparis: the Sea-bore, the
Glaucus, the Horsetail, and the Smooth, as the Tunie, the Pompilus, the Amia,
the Sword-fish, the Remora, the Conger, the Lamprey: also the gristly
long-shaped, as the Dogfish of Aristotle, the Galeus, the Catulus, the
Sea-Weazel, the Star-Fish, the Blew-fish, the Thorn-back, the Sea-Ape, the
Zigaena; and the plain flat sort, as the Torpedo, the Pastinaca, the Sea-Eagle,
the Ray, the Sea-frog, the Sole, the Maid. II. Or such as delight in stony
places, the scaled, as the Gilthead, the Thrush, the Peacock, the Lepras, the
Blackbird, the Phycis, the Sea-Perch, the Channe, the Liver-fish, the
Black-tail, the Crow-Fish, Adonis, Sciana, Glaucus, Anthias, Lumpfish,
Sphyraena, the Needle-fish, and the Smith-fish. Smooth, as the Sea-Lark, and
the Pholis. III. Such as hant the shore, and they scaly, not flat, as the
Mullet, the Swallow, the Cockoo, the Kite, the Harp-fish, the Phagrus, the
Red-fish, the Acarnan, Orphus, Dentex, Synagris, Chromis, Goldfish, Sargus,
Sparus, Mormyrus, Cantharus, Salpa, Scorpion, Blennus, Combefish, the Merlan,
Anchoves, Atherina; Sarda, Menow, Smaris, and Ox-Eye. Scaled and flat, the
Sole, the Place, the Flounder. Smooth, not plain, Sand Eels, Dragon, Little
Dragon, the Stargazer, the Roughtaile, the Makarel, the Lizard, the Saurus, the
Crow and the Kite. Smooth and plain, the Sparrow and the Rhombus.
II. Sea and River hanters, and they, 1. Scaly, as the Salmon, the Pike, the
Bream, the Alosa, Ziga of the River Albis, the Mullet, Goat fish, Sturgeon, and
Galeus of Rhodes. 2. Smooth, as the Huso, Sperlan, Lamprey, Eele and the Owl
fish.
III. River fish, and they are, 1. The Scaly sort, the Trout, Thymallus, Shade,
Barble, the Pollard, Dace, Gudgeon, Rough, Millerthumb, Phoxmu^, etc. Smooth,
Attilus of the River Poe, Antacaeus of Poristhenes, Ishthyocolla, Glanis,
P^ver-Wezel, the Dig-fish, Phoxinus and Salmon.
IV. River and other fresh water fish, as the great Perch, the Scrollus,
Pungitus of Albertus; Alburnus of Ausonius, Epelanus, Pike, Carp, Tench, etc.
V. Pondfish, the Umbla, Carp, Pond-Trout, the Lavaret, of Geneva, the Saractus,
etc.


III. Four footed Beasts, are, 1. Whol-Hooft as the Horse, the Ass, the Mule,
Elephant, Zebra and Unicorn. 2. Clovenfooted, as the Elk, al kind of Oxen, the
Camel, Panther-like Camel, Goat, Heart, Gulligut, Rangifer, Rhinoceros, and Hog.
III. Having diverse toes, which are either such as bring forth Live-wights, as
the Panther, Tigre, Bear, Wolf, River-Horse, Fox, Ax, Marmoset, Baboon, Badger,
Castor, Otter, Pole-Cat, Weazel, Mars, Genesha, Hare, Conny, Squirrel,
Dormouse, Mouse, Mole, Hede-Hog, Urchin, Cat and Dog: or, such as lay Eggs,
whether the Eggs be covered with a skin or a shel: as the Frog, Lizard, Eft,
Salamander, the sported Neur, the Scincus, Cordilus, Chamelaeon, Ciocodile, and
al kind Tortoises.


IV. Creeping things, or Serpents, both footless and footed, greater and
lesser, as the Viper, Ammodits, Cerastes, Hemorrhoiis. Aspe, Dipsas, Scytale,
Amphisbaena, Caecylia, Cenchius, Acontias, Dryinus, Elope, the snake of
Esculapius, Water-Serpent, Boa, Sea-Serpent, Sea-Scolopendra, the Dragon,
Basilisk, Dragon of Sythius, the Flying Dragon.

V. Bloodless wights, are distinguished in a five-fold manner. I. The Soft, as
Polypus Sepia, Loligo, Sea-Hare. II. Crustieas, the Locust, Lobster, Squil, al
kind of Crabs, and al crusty Shel-fish. III. Shelly, as Nautilus, Purpura,
Murex, Buccinum, Turbants, Tops al Oisters, Pearl-fish, Lobstars, al kind of
Snails, Sea-Combs, Mituli, Tellinae, Pinna, Bissus, etc. IV. Plant-animals, of
which see Authors. V. Insects, which are either 1. Land-Insects both footed, as
the Be, Wasp, Hornet, Butter-fly, al kinds of Flies, the Cricker, Grasshopper,
Beetle, Pismire, Louse, Flea, Spider, Sow, Wood-louse; and without feet, as a
worm, a Snaile. II. Or Water-Insects, as the Horse-Leech, Hippocampe, Sea-star,
etc.


The Parts of Animals which are used in Physic, are either such as are common
to al Sorts, or proper to every one. Of both which we shall treat elsewhere.

Article. IV. Of Medicines taken from the Body of Man, or the little World.
Microcosmick medicaments, are Medicines which are taken from the body of Man,
to cure the infirmities of Man's body.

These medicaments are taken our of a Live Man, or from a dead man. From a live
man, we have Hairs, Nails, Spittle, Ear-wax, Milk, Seed, Blood, Menstrual
Blood, Secondines, Urine, Dung, Lice, Worms, Stones of Bladder and Kidneyes,
etc. From a dead man, Skin, Fat, Scul, Bram, Teeth, Bones Mummy; of which see
Daniel Beckerus in his Medicus Microcosmus, and Hartman.

sacra-dropsied, Dysenteric, Asthmatick, menstruate or Rein-exulcerated
persons. 2. In respect of the time, if they are not durnk when they are
altered, if not in the winter Season, unless upon extraordinary occasion and al
things suitable; if they are given to drink when their signs argue them to be
at the best, if chiefly in the spring, morning and evening, if in their place
of springing, or not far off. 3. In respect of the use of things foregoing, if
the body be prepared with a Lenitive, blood-leting, opening of the passages,
driving away hurtful Humors. 4. In respect of the Use of things circomstantial,
if they be so drunk, as to rise by little and little to the highest dose, and
to stop there a while, and so to descend by little and little to the lowest
Dose; if the measure prescribed be divided into parts, if good diet be observed
etc. 5. In regard of things following their use; if the Body be duly stirred.
If diligent consideration be had, which way nature inclines; that is to say,
whether they are like to work by stool, Urin, or Transpiration, or by many
ways at once; if being retained, they may be brought away by convenient
Clysters; if such Symptoms as usually occur, be provided against.


IV. How there are many acid Fountains, and medicinal springs in Europe, the
chief of which are in Germany. 1. The Spaw-Waters, and they are four Wels in
number, Geronster, Rouhont, Savinire, and Tunnelet. 2. Those of Greisbach at
the Entrance of the Hercinian Forest, which are seasoned with Iron, Vitriol,
Christaline salt, Bitumen and Sulfur. 3. The Petrine Well in Alsatia, a quarter
of a mile distant from the former, and is qualified by some minerals. 4.
Antegast Water, situate at the Entrance of the Hircinian Wood, which is
impregnated with Alum, Sulphur, and a little Vitriol. 5. Ribelsave-water, by
the said Wood, in the County of Furstenberg, which has in it the spirituous
subtilties of Iron, Nitre, vitriol, Chalcit is, Bitumen. 6. Gebresveil Water in
the upper Alsatia, which is virtuared by Alom, Nitre, and Iron. 7.
Schwalback-Water. 8. Egran Well, in Bohemia. 9. Nideraven Spring near
Rottenburg. 10. Denachen Well in the Hercynian Forest. 11. The Federan Well in
Rhetia, which contains Alum and Coper, with a little Sulphur. 12. Wels of
Trevire, which are three, one of which runs through a yellowish earth and Iron.
I shall pass over the rest in silence. At this present while I am writing, many
things, and they truly, miraculous, begin to be reported of the Wels of
Horn-Hause, in lower Saxnny. Touching those acid waters see Sebize, Baccius,
and others whom ye shall find in Vande^ Linden de Scriptis Medicis.

Article. II. Of Bathes
Bathes are hot waters, which bubble perpetually out of the Earth, are heated
by the Subterranan fire, and having gained Virtue from diverse Minerals, they
cure Diseases, being fitly used.

I. They are hot either at their Head, or in their Channels; either more or less.

II. They leap and bubble out of the Earth, because they have their Rise in an
high Place, either in Mountains, or at the foot of a Mountain, as experience
shows. They bubble up perpetually, for the most part, because the Earth is
always moist, and the subterraneal Heat does always carry up vapors to the
Concavities of Mountains, which where they cannot exhale, they are condensed,
compressed, and turn into drops of water. Yet bathes are found, which rise and
fall with the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea. Nor do they always flow out at one
place: because the sectet passages are either destroyed or stopped up.

III. The Heat of Bathes comes from the subterraneal fire, which is kindled by
an indifferent hot exhalation, thin and enflamed, getting among the Sulphur and
Bitumen, by which it is fed. Either the waters run through those hot
subterranean places, or in the way they are joined to the flames and Heat; or
they run so long above or by the Channels, til they grow hot; or whiles the
Earth grows hot by underground fires, many vapors are from thence raised, which
being at last, in some wide place turned to water, they do in one place or
other seek an out-gate: or lastly, two or more metalline waters, being
naturally cold to the touch, do in their converse grow hot through repugnancy
of their Spirits; an example whereof we have in spirit of vitriol, and oil, or
salt of Tartar, also in Aquafortis and Tartar, in Butter of Antimony and spirit
of Nitre.

IV. Subterranean matters which virtuate the Bathes, are diverse: partly
minerals, partly metals; which may be gathered from the several Bathes. Now
how that comes to pass, and how the Materials in them may be known, I showed
before.

V. The Diseases that are cured by them, are also various, the Colic,
Mother-fits, Stone, Barrenness, Headache, etc. Some of which they cure
directly, others by accident.

VI. They are used to drink, for which intent, they are bad, which have some
hurtful metalline property in them; also to bathe, Foment, in stoves, and by
application of their clay: of al which see besides Fallopius, Horstius and
Rulandus in Balnearium restauratum.

VII. The principle Bathes in Italy are, the Bathes of Padua, out of which the
most famous bathes of Ebanus comes, made of a mixture of sulphur, Alum, Nitre,
Salt, and Chalk; the Porritan Baths, forty miles from Bononia; the Lucan, the
chief of which is that which is termed de Corseno; Sante Mariae in Bagno,
Situate in Romandiola, A queae in the County of Pisa, Petriolae, in the
Dukedom of Sena, full of alum; Grotinae, in the Earldome of Viterbium, which
consist of iron and brass; Perusinae, which participate of a little Sulphur and
A^phaltum; Montis Catim, which are all salt, etc. In Germany are commended the
Plumbariae, in Lorraigne, so called from the plentiful admixture of Lead;
Badenses in Switzerland, which consist of much sulfer and a little Alum;
Ferinae in the Duchy of Wittemberge; Cellenses, not far from the Martian wood;
Amenses, situate near Rotenburge; Embsenses, in the borders of the Lake of
Constance; the Carolinae in Bohemia; the Wisbadenses situate not far from Mentz
beyond the Rhene; Gastainences in Bawaria, which by vehement Astriction, do
facilitate Conception; Abudiacae above Reginoburgum, which smell like fried
Eggs, etc. See of all Rulandus and Weckerus. Of the Fountain of Bollen, very
useful both in drink and bathing, Johannes Bauhinus has written.

Chap. 3. Of Compound artificial Medicaments in General.
COmpound artifical medicaments are those which are by art made up of the
simple, into a certain form, being first prepared and qualified thereto.

There are touching them considerable. 1. The Necessity of the Composition. 2.
The structure. 3. Preparation. 4. Fermentation. 5. Division.


I. The necessity of compounding Medicaments appears from these reasons
following. 1. The preternatural Disorders of the body, being many times
compounded, cannot be cured by simple Medicaments. 2. The Parts affected in
regard of their situation, temperament, conformation, dignity of their action,
with the Constitution of the Patient, show the need of compounding. 3. The
Quality of the medicament, which is sometime necessary to the Intention, but
not proportioned to the disease; sometimes is too weak, other whiles too
strong, or infected with an adverse quality; al which requires composition.


II. Touching the structure, observe. 1. That the Manner thereof requires, that
we have a precognition of the sort of Disease, and its magnitude, the condition
of the sick, and of the part affected; also the natures, faculties, degrees,
and doses of the simples. 2. That the Medicament is then best accomodated, when
it is just equal to the disease, both in quality, the propriety whereof must be
determined by the particular Nature of the disease, and in degree which is
measured by the greatness of the disease and the Nature of the part affected.
3. That every compound Medicament consists of five things.
I. the Basis which if considered in general. 1. It is the measure of the
faculty, degree, and dose of the compound. 2. It varies, according to the times
of a disease, the urgent symptoms, nature of the part affected, constitution
of the sick, Quantity and quality of the other ingredients. 3. It takes its
determinate Quantity from its own strength, having also an Eye to the Nature of
the Patient, the Magnitude, sense and Dignity of the Part affected, the
Celerity and tardity of the Action: if specially considered, it is either simple
or compound; Simple, which either is for one use only, though consisting of
diverse ingredients of the same faculty; or it consists of one simple medicament
which is either sufficient, or remiss, or intense, or furnished with some
malignant or strange Quality, as odor, taste etc.
Compound, which either serves for diverse uses, or is compounded of many
simples, endued with a diverse and contrary faculty; touching which observe, 1.
That such is used, when we have not that degree in a simple, which we desire,
but either more remiss, or more intence. 2. That in its composition regard must
be had of the first, second, and third Qualities. 3. That either it consists of
diverse simples of the same faculty and degree: and then it is of the same
faculty and degree: or of the same faculty and a different degree; and then
that which is remiss abates that which is intense, and that which is intense
enhances that which is remiss, to the middle between both: or of contrary
faculties and of the same degree, and then it is temperate: or of contrary
faculties and different degrees, and then it is reduced to a medium ^^^ween
both: al which ought so to be understood, that both the equality of Quantity be
observed and fermentation excluded.
II. With correctives which either spur up and quicken a dull lazy basis; or
collect and augment the strength of a medicament, which is of thin substance;
or xcite by extenuation the force thereof, being lodged in a thick matter; or
restrain the viclence thereof; or temper its malignity; or give it a pleasant
taste or smell. They ought always to be of a lesser Quantitity in respect of the
Basis, and commonly the proportion of the Basis to the corrections, is judged
to be triple: yet certain it is, that the Nature of the Basis and the
Correctors, as also the Intent of the Physician, do vary the same. If the
malice of the basis is to be tempered, they are added in an equal Quantity.
III. With Directives which render the medicaments proper for the part affected,
open the ways and passages, prepare the humors, and concoct them, in respect
of which a weak basis should be exceeding in an eight fold or octuple
proportion, a strong one, should be equal or less. IV. With conserves, which
fasten the directors and correctors to the basis, and give a fitting form to
the whole compound; and which ought neither to dull the basis with their over
great Quantity, nor to pervert the same by any strange quality.


III. Preparation of Medicaments, is either common, as boileing, Infusion,
Roasting, burning, Calcination etc. Or chimical which, 1. Is either
diacritical, which dissolves the combination of the body, or by way of
purification, to which belong Drying and burning; or by Calcination, which is
performed by actual or potential fire, to which Sublimation belongs; or by way
of Resolution, whereby a body is dissolved into diverse and heterogeneous parts,
and which is performed by Extraction and Tincture; or by Putrefaction, or
finally by distillation. II. Or Syneritical, which conjoines things diverse and
separate into one body, whether it be done by Precipitation, or by Reduction,
or by Coagulation and Concretion, or by Digestion and Circulation, or finially
by Cohebatino or the repeated distilation of a liquor poured again and again
upon the matter from whence it has been distilled. III. Or Immutatory, which
induces a new mode of substance, or quality into a thing, whether it be done by
Deliquium, or by Fixation or Volatisation, or by Vitrification. Of these
consult Beguine, Sen^^^us about the end of his book of the Consent and dissent
of the Chemists and Galenists, and others.


IV. The Fermentation of Medicaments is nothing else but their union by mutual
Alteration, by which means the old virtues of each of them do no longer
remain entire. It is chiefly to be regarded in Treacle and Methridate.

V. As for the Division, compound artificial Medicaments, are Internal or
External. The former are fluid, Solid, or middle consistence. And the latter
are divided into as many sorts.

Chap. 4. Of Compound artificial Medicnies in Special.
Article, I. Of Internal Medicaments.
Point, I. Of internal fluid Medicaments.
WE call those internal Medicaments, which are received by the mouth into the
Body; and those we term fluid which will run like water, and they are. 1.
Decoctions. 2. Infusions. 3. Potions. 4. Medicinal Wines. 5. Medicinal Beer or
Ale. 6. Oxymel. 7. Barley water. 8. Medicinal Vinegar. 9. Distilled waters. 10.
Syrup. 11. Juleps. 12. Emulsions. 13. Essences. 14. Spirits. 15. Tinctures. 16
Oiles.


I. Decoctions, are made of vegetables, animals, and sometimes of mineralls, if
need be, cut, bruised or shaven, boiled in simple or prepared water, over a
slow or quick fire, in a vessel open or shut, to the consumption of a third or
fourth part of the liquor, the Decoction being afterward strained; aromatized
and clarified. The most noted decoctions are, The greater aperitive decoction
of the Physicians of Augsburg, with their Decoction of Rubarbe, Decoction of
Maiden hair Fumitory, Carminative, Gallinae consummatum of a Capon, and the
Vulnerary Decoction.

II. Infusions are made of Vegetables, or minnerals, purgers or vomitories,
steeped a certain time in some liquor, and afterward strained forth. The
proportion of the Ingredients to the liquor, is one and an half, or double.

III. Potions are made, when purgeing Electuaries, Extracts, pouders, roules
etc. are mixed with liquors, without boileing.

IV. Medicinal Wines, are prepared, when new or clarified Wine is impregnated
with the Virtues of simples, either suddenly by their oils, spirits, and
tinctures, or by long Infusion, either with or without sugar. The principal are
wine of Barberies, Quinces, Pomgranates red Corants.

V. Medicinal beers and Physic Ales are made after the same manner.

VI. Oxymel is made, when vinegar is mingled with Honey, and plants are
sometime steeped therein. The most famous are, the Simple, that of squils, the
Helleborate Oxymel of Gesnerus.

VII. Barley water is made, when barley is sufficiently boiled in water, alone,
or with raisons, anis-feed, cinnamon; strained, and made tart with a drop or
two of spirit of Vitriol, or of Sulphur.

VIII. Medicinal Vinegar is made, when simples or compounds are steeped in
vinegar, or it is made of their juices. It is made of Plants. 1. Of their
Flowers as vinegar of rosemary-flowers, of Marrygolds, of Gillyflowers, of
Lavendar, of Poppie, of Red-poppie, of Roses, of elder flowers. 2. Of their
Leaves, as of Mints, Rue, Scordium. 3. Of their Fruits, as of Citron peeles,
Strauberries, Rasberries. 4. Of their Roots as vinegar of Squils. There are
also compound vinegar, Antidotary, Preservatory, Bezoardick etc.


IX. Distilled waters, either by a Cucurbita in Balneo Mariae of plants for the
most part of cold Nature, whole, or beaten and juiced; or in Vesica, out of hot
plants and such whose force is not easily drawn forth, and which must first
ferment. They are made either with wine, as Wormwood water, Agrymony, Betonie,
Carduus, Cinnamon, Liverwort, Lavendar, Lilly-convally, Baume, Pennyroyal,
Garden sage Veronica, or without wine, as are those of Sorrel, Wood Sorrel,
etc. Or which see the Dispensatory of Augsburge. They are also made of Animals,
as of Capons, Singing birds, Kidneys, Man's blood, dung of Beasts etc.

X. Syrups, are made of decoctions, Infusions clarrified juices; they are
preserved with honey or sugar, and boiled to the consistence of honey almost,
and are used both to alter and purge; seldom alone, frequently mingled with a
double quantity of distilled waters. Those kept in the Shops, are, Syrup of
wormwood, of juice of Citrons, of Sorrel, Wood Sorrel, Vinegar simple, of
vinegar compound, of Maiden hair, of sour grapes, of Marshmallows, of Orenges,
of Mugwort, of Betony Simple, of Betony compound, of borrage, Byzantious, so
called, simple and compound, of Maidenhaire simple, of Cichory simple, of
Cinnamon, of Corals, of Citron peeles, of Quinces, of Endive simple, and
compound, Of Eupatoruim, of Colts foot, of Fumitory Simple and compound, of
Lycorize, of Pomgranates, of Jujubees, of Hyssop, of Lemons, of Hops, of Baum,
of Mints, the Simple and compound, of Myrtiles, of waterlillies, of Poppies, of
red poppies, of Cowslips, of Pionie, of Mouse-eare, of Apples Simple and
Compound, of Purslain, of Horehound, of the five opening roots, of Roses
Simple, of dried roses, of Rasberries, of Scabious, of stechados, of Comfrey,
of Violets.

XI. Juleps are made of distilled waters, juyces, conserves, and sugar, either,
without decoction or with decoction.

XII. Emulsions are made of seeds, nut kernels, perles, corals, hearts-horne,
certain fruits, being beaten with some liquor poured on, and then strained
forth.

XIII. Essences, are made of the juice of green herbs pressed out with spirit
of wine, and digested in Balneo Mariae, where they receive their color
separated by inclination, and with a little sugar reduced into the form of a
Syrup.

XIIII. Spirits descend in the distillation both of Simple and compound waters,
together with the waters themselves, and are afterward separated from them, by
a Cucurbita, vial, etc. But this must be understood of the more volatile sort.
The fixer sort, are drawn out by a Retort, and a stronger fire, viz. With
sand, or the bare fire. The chief drawn from Minerals are, of Alum, of coral,
Mercury, Sal ammoniack; Common Salt, Nitre, Lead, Ambar, Sulphur, Tartar,
Vitriol; of Vegetables, are, of Wormwood, Wine-vinegar, Angelica, Anisseed,
Carduus, Centorie, black-cherries, Scurvy Grass, Quinces, Elder-berries, Fenel,
Strawberries, Guaiacum, Juniper Berries, Lilly-convally, Baume, Rosemary,
Roses, Sage, Danewort, Linden-flowers, Fluellen, wine etc.

XV. Tinctures are made of dry Plants, for the most part hot beaten and steeped
in some liquor, which is called the Menstruum, as spirit of Wine, May-dew, or
some other, set in an hot place, and the vessel shut, so long as that the
liquor will receive no more color; and then they are filtred through a Paper,
or purified by digestion. The most renowned, are. 1. Of Minerals, Of the Sun,
Moon, Mars, Saturn, Antimony, Sulphur, Vitriol Smaragd. 2. Of Vigitables, and
chiefly of flowers, of Winter-cherries, Safron, Blackcherries, Strawberries,
St. John's wort, Peony, Red poppie, Roses, Violets, Elder-berries, Dwarf elder
etc.


XVI. Oils, are drawn out of gummie and rosiny substances, either descend
with waters in distillation, or are separated from them, either by a
separatory, or by thick linen threads, or by brown or otherwise sinking paper;
in some materials, they sink to the bottom, the more remarkable are, oil of
wormwood, Dil, Angelica. Of which see beneath in the first point of the third
article.

Point, 2. Of internal solid Medicaments.
INternal solid Medicaments are. 1 Pouders. 2. Salts. 3. Saffrons. 4. Flowers.
5. Precipitates. 6. Vitra, Glass. 7. Feculae dregs. 8. Confects. 9. Roules. 10.
Lozenges or bits. 11. Trochiscks. And 12. Pills.


I. Pouders consist of one or more medicaments beaten together. They are either
Subtle, which if they consist of mere spices, and sugar, their proper and
peculiar name is, Tragemata or Tragee, dredge pouders; to which Sales Sacer
dotales, or the Parsons Salts are to be referred, which are used with meat; or
grosser, and are termed Trageae grossae, and species incisae, and are made
either of simples, and they either confected over with sugar, or not sugared;
or of compounds, viz. the aromatic roules or Lozenges of the shops. We use
them both for Evacuation and Alteration. Among the Purging sort are, Pulvis
sena preparatae, Tartari Chrystalini solutivis, de Tribus, Cholagogus simplex,
Cholagogus insucoatus. Earl of Warwicks powder or Pulvis Cornachinus. Of the
Electuary of Benedicta Laxativa; Elescoph, Hiera picra, Diaphenicon, de Succe
Rosarum, Diaturbith cum Rhabarbaro. Among the Alterers are, the species or
powder of Ariomatica Caryophyllata, Dianthos, Diacalaminthes, Diacinnamomum,
Diagalanga, De Gemmis calida and frigida, de Hyacintho, Dtaireos, Latificans,
Liberans, Diamargaritum calidum, frigidum, Diamoschu dulcis, Diatrion pipereon,
Diarrhodon Abbatis, Rosata novella, Diatrion Santalon, Diatragacanthum
frigidum, Diaxylo-Aloes, etc. Hitherto appertain Alexipharmical powders or
Antidotes, such as Pulvis Saxonicus, Caesaris, Gasceignes powder, Viper Powder,
Countess of Kents Powder. Of these and other like Medicaments see the London
Dispensatory in English.

II. There is in all things, very near, a twofold salt, Volatile, by some called
Essential, which sustains not the force of fire, but flies away, and is
dissipated in calcination: and fixed, which is prepared of the ashes of plants
and woods, of which a lie is made, and that is boiled, til all the water exhale,
and then the salt remains. It Is purified, either by frequent solution and
filtration, and recoagulation: or if it be dssolved per Deliquium in a moist
place, let it be filtred, and again coagulated. The Principal are, Salt of
Wormwood, of Mugwort, of Crabs, of Carduus, Centaury, Chervil, Hartshorn
Volatile, of Man's scul Volatile, Eyebright, Bean-shels and Ham, of Strawberry
Leaves, Fumitory, Guajacum volatile, Ground Ivy, Juniper berries, Juniper wood,
Marjeram, Feaverfew, Bawm, Nitre, Onone or rest-harrow, Arsmart, Pimpernel,
Rue, Sage, Mans-blood, Scordium, of amber Volatile, of Tamarisk, of Tartar, of
vitriol vomitive, of Urine, Nettles, Zedoary, of Jove, Saturn, Corals, Pearls,
etc.

III. Saffrons are subtle pouders, or tinctures, reduced into the form of
powder, of a Saffron color, the principal are, Crocus Metallorum, which is
nothing else but Antimony calcined with Nitre, and reduced into a powder of a
saffron-color, of thin, to which is the Sulphur Auratum of Antimony, and of
Mars, which is diverse ways prepared, of which see the Chemists. Terra Vitrioli
is not unconveniently referred to the Head.

IV. Flowers are by Chemists so called, being for the most part the more subtle
particles of a body, separated from the grosser substance by Sublimation. The
most vulgar are, flower of Brimstone, Antimony, Benzoin, to which pertain al
other sublimates, the chief of which are Mercurius sublimatus simplex, and
Sublimatus dulcis, Arcanum Corrallinum, etc.

V. The name of Precipitate is chiefly attributed to Mercury; which having been
dissolved in Aquafortis is separated from the Solvent water and settles, and
receives the name of Mercurius Praecipitatus or Turbith Mineral; to which in
its praecipitation, if a little gold be added, it is called Aurum Vitae. Hereto
pertains Bezoardicum Minerale, Mercurius Vitae, and some other things.

VI. Glass is made of the Calces of things, if the Ashes or Calx be melted with
an exceeding strong fire, and Borax be sometimes added to hasten the Melting, or
other melting pouders; the matter being melted, is poured upon an hot basin, or
some plate. Thus is the Glass of Antimony (or stibium commonly called) and the
amber of Antimony made of those Cups, Rings, and purging moneys may be made.
Touching the Vitrum Auratum Antimonii, and the Regulus Antimonii see the
Chemists, especially Schroderus in his Pharmacopaea

VII. Fecula is a mealy powder like starch, and is made of the juice of certain
roots pressed forth, or extracted with liquor, which when placed in a cold
place, the fecula settles of its own accord, which, the water swimming on the
top being poured off, is dried in the shadow. The most usual are Fecula
Bryoniae, Ari, Paeoniae, Iridis, Serpentariae, white Lillies, Squils.

VIII. Confects are things preserved dry, invented for to gratify the taste;
and they are made both to alter and evacuate. The chief are, of sweet almonds,
of Aniseed laxative, of Calamus Aromaticus, Cardamoms, Carway, July-flowers,
Cichory, Cinnamon, Coriander, Musk Plums, Cubebs, Fennel, Lavender Flowers,
Pimpernel Roots, Pine Kernels, Zedoary, Ginger. Hitherto belong Candied things,
which are crusted with Sugarcandy, as Acorus, Orange peels, July-Flowers,
Cinnamon, Citron Peels, Nutmegs, Muscatel-Pears, etc.

IX. Rouls so called from their shape, for they are either altering or purging,
and are prepared with Sugar, whose vulgar proportion is octuple in alteratives,
quadruple in Purgatives, more in stillatitious oils. The principle are, Rotulae
de Berberis, Manus Christi simple and perled, pectoral rouls. Of Sulphur, etc.

X. Morsuli, morsels, are made almost in in the same manner. They are either
Alteratives as the Bezoardic, Cephalic, Cephalicostomachic, of the juice and
peles of Citrons, Pectoral Sugars, Rosatum Tabulatum, etc. Or Purging, as
Diacarthami, Diaphenicon, of Mechoacan, of Jalap, of Diaturbith cum rhabarbaro,
etc. or Nutritive, which are made of the pulp of Capons, Partridges,
Cockstones, Flesh of Crabs and Tortoises, etc. To morsels appertain. 1.
Pamdeleon so called, the Matter and end whereof agrees with Electuaries or
Lick-pots, and the form with Lozenges, save that the Pandaleon is shapeless. 2.
Turiones, as if you would say, torrones a torrendo from toasting, which are
made of sweet almonds, Nut Kernels, Pine Kernels, beaten or toasted, and made
up with honey. 3. Confections restorative, as Diamygdaltaum, Pineatum,
Testudinatum, Diet bread, Naples biscuit, etc.


XI. Trochisci, or Parstilli, are solid cohering medicaments, consisting of
convenient ingredients made up with Liquor, in the shape of Lupines, or little
flat bowls; invented to this end, that medicaments being poudred, might be in
this form the better preserved against the Injuries of the Air. They are
prepared of al kind of medicaments, not only pouders and Species, but with
addition of thickened juices, Conservs, Extracts, or the like Confections, the
dose to the Pouders in being a proportion somewhat less then quadruple, etc.
They are either alterative, and Wormwood, of Alipta, Moschata, with Amber of
Mosch, or without, Bechici albi, Nigri, Rubri, de Berberis, de Camphera, de
Capparibus, de Carabe, de Carallio, Cypheos of Democrates, de Lacca, de Myrrha,
de Spodio, de Terra sigilata, de Vipera, etc. or Purgers of Agaric, of
Coloquintida, etc.

XII. Pills, are medicaments reduced into the form of little bals, that they may
be swollowed whole, and the unsavoriness of the ingredients, not discerned by
the Taste. They are made of pouders extracted out of the mass of usual pills, the
simples being made up with some liquor. They are either Alterers of Bdellium,
Bechicae, or for the Cough, of Castoreum, of Cynoglossa, Narcotick pills of
platerus, etc. or Purgers, of Agarick, Agregative, Alephangine, of Aloes
rosata, of Amoniacum Arthriticae, Assajeret, Aureae, de Colocynthide, de
Hermodactilis, Mastichinae, Panchimagogae, etc. They are also distinguished
into Hypoglotudes and Narcoticae.

Point III. Of internal medicaments of a middle Consistence.
Internal Medicaments of a middle consistence between fluid and solid, contain
under them. 1. Extracts. 2. Rosins. 3. Conservs. 4. Conserves. 5. Quiddennies.
6. Electuaries. 7. Lick-pots. 8. So^pes. and 9. Boles.


An Extract is drawn as a tincture, and is reduced to the Consistence of Honey,
Pills, or powder. The most usual are, of wormwood, of Acorus, of Lignum aloes,
of Angelica roots, of round Birthwort, of Carduus, of Gilloflowers, of
Castoreum, of Centory, of Celondine, of Safron, of Cubebs, of Dictamus, of
Enula, of Galingal, of Gentian, of Guajacum, of Masterwort roots, of Baume, of
Mint, of Mace, Marjoram, of Broad dock, of Paeonie, of Rue, of Savine, of
Satyrium roots, of Scabious, of Scordium, of Comfrey, of Tormentil, of
Valerian, of Zedoary.

II. Rosm is drawn out of Gummy materials with Rosewater and spirit of wine,
separate from the feces by inclination, precipitated and dried with a gentle
heat.

III. Conserve is made of flowers, sometimes of herbs, and soft roots bruised,
and preserved with a double quantity of sugar. The most usual are, of the tops
of Roman-wormwood, Carduus, Eyebright, Fumitory, Marjorom, Penyroial,
Veronica. Of the Leaves, of Sorrel, Wood Sorrel, Scurvy Grass, Mints, Purslane;
of flowers of Acacia, Betonie, Borrage, Bugloss, Marygolds, Cichory, Broom,
White-lillies, Lavendar, Lilly-convally, Mallows, Baume, Mints, Water Lillies,
red Poppie, Peach-flowers, Primrose, Prunella, white and Red-roses, Sage,
Elder, Linden, Savory, Coltsfoot.

IV. Preserves are made of roots, barks, Fruits, or harder materials, steeped
in water or boiled; or of softer, preserved in sugar or honey, to last the
better and to be more grateful to the Palate. The more usual are these
following. Of the roots of Calamus aromaticus, Borrage, Cichory, Comfry,
Elecompane, Eryngoes, Pimpernel, Rhubarbe, Satyrium, Scorzonera, Zedoarie,
Ginger, both that of China, and the common sort. Of the flowers of Orenges,
Citrons; the fruits of Orenges, Barberies, Cherries, Citrons, either whole, cut
in slices, or dried; or of the pulpe of Quinces, bramble berries or Hips,
Apricocks, Medlars, Myrabolans bellirican, Chebulan, Citrine, and Emblican; of
Wallnuts, and Indian nuts, of Peaches, black-peper in the branch, Sloes,
Prunes, Damsins etc. Of Peeles of Aurenges, Citrons. And stalks of Spanish
Lettuce.

V. Rob or Quiddiny is the thickened juice of fruits, sometimes of flowers,
either with expression, or without expression, boiled and with a like quantity
or somewhat more of sugar added. The chief are, of Barberies, Cherries, Hips,
red-corants, Elder berries. Hitherto belong thickened juyces, of Wormwood,
Acacia, Agrimony, Aloes, Carduus, kermes berries, Elder berries, centaury,
Quinces, Elecampane, Fumitory, Lycorize, Hedge-Hyssop, St. John's wort, Henbane*
Hypocistis, our blew Orice, Licorize, Mercury, Myrtils of germany, Nicotiana
or Tobacco, Opium, Plantane, Red-Roses, scrophularia, and Solatrum. Ad hereunto
Mel Ebulinum, Sambucinum, Juniperinum, and Passulatum.

V. An Electuary is made of Conserves, Spices, Roules, Trochischs, a proportion
of juice or syrup being added. The Chief are, Venice Treacle, Mithridate,
Alkermes, Confectio Anacardina, Aurea Alexandrina, Electuary of Bay Berries, de
Scoria ferri, de Ovo, Philonium Mesuae, Persicum, Romanum, Dioscoridum,
Tryphera magna, so named because they give a good color to the whole body, and
make the breath sweet, and are made up of curious ingredients.

VI. Eclegma, or Lohoch, or Lick-pot, of pouders, species, conserves, juices,
mixed with some liquor or syrup, used against infirmities of the Lungs and
Chest. The most usual are, de Scilla compositum, de Caulibus, de Farfara, de
Papavere, Passulatum, of the Pine kernels, of Purslane, of Fox-lungs,
Lohoch-sanum and expertum, and succo Scillae etc.

VII. Saponea, is a Lick-pot made of almonds blanched and beaten, and with
sugar dissolved in a convenient water boiled to the consistence of Honey,
starch and rosewater being added toward the end.

VIII. Bolus, a morsel, is made of Electuaries, pulpes, conserves, spices,
pouders with a little syrup, made into the shape of a little bal; given to
purge, vomit, alter, or some other purpose.

Article, 2. Of external Medicaments.
Point, 1. Of external fluid Medicaments.
And so much for compound internal Medicaments; the external follow; which are
either fluid, or solid or of a middling nature, or indifferent. The fluid are.
1. Clysters. 2. Gargles. 3. Mouth-washers. 4. Oiles. 5. Epithemes. 6. Pumpings.
7. Lotions.


I. Clisters, are medicaments, which by a convenient Instrument, are cast
through the fundament into the Guts. They are made of Roots, Barks, Leaves,
Flowers, Fruits, boiled in water and strained, some other things being added,
which may serve the Intent of the Physician. Their use is to loosen the belly,
to cleanse, dispel wind, to bind, to sodder, to allay the pains, of the Guts
and kidneyes.

II. Diaclysmata or Mouthwashings, are medicaments, which are kept in the
mouth, and are by the tongue moved up and down without swallowing. They are
chiefly provided for pains of the Teeth and Diseases of the Jaws.

III. Gargarismes are medicaments, with which the throat is washed without
swallowing down, the humor being forced up and down by the breath. They are
made of distilled waters, or convenient decoctions, neither unpleasing in taste
nor smell, nor having any venemousness in them, in which some syrup or
Quiddinie is dissolved. We use them in repelling, discussing, ripening,
abstersion, consolidation.

IV. Oiles are made either by distillation, as aforesaid: or by expression of
the oleaginous juice, when the fruits and contused seeds grow warm with the
vapor of hot water, and being put in a bag are squeezed in a Press: or by
infusion, either when the simple medicaments with simple water, or distilled
water, wine or other convenient liquor, are boiled in common oil, til the
Humor be consumed: or when the same simples are macerated in a gentle Heat, or
in the Sunn; or when dried plants, are with oil digested in balneo Mariae, the
oil being afterward pressed out and clarified. The Oiles pressed out are
these; Oil of bitter Almonds and of sweet, of Hazel-nuts, of Hemp seed, of
Cherry kernels, of Citron seeds, of Rocket, of Henbane, of Walnuts, of Baies,
of Mace, of Nigella, of Nutmeg, of Ripe and unripe Olives, of Eggs, de palma,
of Poppie, of Peach kernels, of Pine kernels, Pistachios, Rape, Ricinus,
sesamus, Acorns. Oiles by infusion in the Sun, and simple are these, Oil of
Wormwood, Southernwood, Dil, Chamemel, Cheiri, Quinces, Elecampane, Euphorbium,
Pismires, Ground Ivy, Jasemine, Orice, Priver, of Lillies, Lilly convally,
worms, Mastich, Mint, Melilote, Myrtils, Nard, white lilly, Populeum, Frogs,
Roses, Rue, Elder, Scorpions, Storax, Mullen, Violets. Boiled Oiles, compound,
are these following: of Capers, Castoreum, Costus, St. John's wort, Lilies,
Marjorum, Mandrake, Nard, Poppy, Pepers, Foxes. The stillatitious oiles, most
in use are these. Of Wormwood, of dil, of Angelica, of Anis, Orenge-peeles,
May-butter, Benzoin, Calamus aromaticus, Camphire, Cardamoms, Caraway, Cloves,
Wax rectified, Chamaemel, Chervil, Cinnamon, Bark of Citron, Cumin, Cubebs,
Euphorbium, Fenel, Galbanum, Guajacum, Hyssop, Juniper berries, juniper wood,
of Tiles ph^losophick, of Mace, Marjerom, Mastich, Baum, Mints, Myrrh
rectified. Of Nutmeg, of Origanum, of Peper, of Peny-roial, Rosemary, of Roses,
of Sage, of Savine, Wildbettony, Spike, White amber, yellow Amber, Tartar,
Terpentine, Zedoarie.

V. Epithemata, Epithemes are applied to the external parts of the Body, and
are made of distilled waters, juices, infusions, suitable to the part and
disease. To them belong Oxyrrhodina Rose-vinegred Epithemes, which are
peculia^ly applied to the forhead, with frequent reiterations, to cool and
repel. They were anciently made of Oil of Roses and vinegar; now a days
distilled Oiles and waters, as also juices and pouders are sometimes added.

VI. Pumping or pouring, is when common water, bathe water, decoctions, Milk,
Oil etc. are pumped or poured down upon some part, or suffered to dril upon
the same out of a cock or spout of sisterne or Ewer. They are applied chiefly
to three places, viz. the suture of the Crown of the Head, the Beginning of the
spinal Marrow, and to warm the stomach.

VII. Lotions are either of the whole Body, and are called Baths, or of the
parts, Head, Hands, Feet, Belly etc. They are made of the same things as
fomentations are made of.

Point, 2. Of external solid Medicaments.
External solid Medicaments are: 1. Suppositories. 2. Pesseries. 3. Plasters.
4. Cerates. 5. Caustick^.


Suppositories, are sollid Medicaments, which are put up into the fundament,
being formed round like a wax candel, four or five fingers breadth long. They
are made of Honey boiled so thick, that it may be wrought and fashioned with a
man's fingers, into which other requisite materials are sprinkled. They are used
to loosen the Belly, the patient being weak; to cleanse and consolidate an ulcer
in the Rectum Intestinum, to stop pain, draw back humors flowing upwards, and
kill worms in the Guts.

II. Pessaries are made of towzed wool or cotton, wreathed into the form of a
man's finger, impregnated with some juice or Liquor, either alone or with
pouders commixed: or of beaten medicaments made up in a mortar with convenient
liquors, as Fat, Oil, wax, Ladanum, Galbanum, Honey, and wrought into the
form of a pessarie: or of green herbs a little bruised, and bound with a
string into the shape of a pessarie. Or of pouders, received in thin wool or
Cotton, and bound with a third into the form of a Pessarie. Or of pouders
received in thin wool or Cotton, and put into a round bag made of thin cloth,
which may be included in a round silver Instrument with holes on the sides,
made for that purpose.

III. Plasters properly so called, are Medicaments, which being spread upon
linen Clothes or leather, do stick fast to the Skin of the body, and are the
same with cerotes in respect of the matter, save that metals and mineralls, and
litteridge for the most part, are added, which give it solidity of substance.
Al which are boiled to a just consistence, and being cooled are made up into
rowles. Sometimes before the Mass is quite cold Cereclothes of old linen are
dipped in, and taken forth. Emplasters improperly so called, which are of a
middle consistence between a plaster and a Cataplasme, are made without wax,
pitch, and those glewish materials, or fire; with honey, mucilages, and a
certain clammy cream, or a little wax dissolved in Oil. The chief Plasters
are, Album coctum, Apostolicum, Arthriticum, Basilicum, and Lapide Calaminari,
Diachylon simplex, Magnum, Parbum, cum Gummi, Citrinum, de Crusta panis, de
Baccis Lauri, de Meliloto, de Minio, Mundificativum, Nervinum, Oxycroceum,
Diaphenicum calidum, frigidum; de ranis Vigonis, de Rhabardaro, Sparadrap,
Stichticum, Paracelsi, Tetrapharmacum, Vesicatorium.

IV. Cerotes which consist much of wax, and are not of so hard a consistence as
Plasters, are made either of wax, Oil, and Rosin only, or of the same pouders
being added besides, so that, the proportion of oiles to pouders is octuple, to
wax triple or sextuple, to rosin twelve times as much. Besides al these, fats
and gums are added, juices, roots, fruits, or seeds, which must first be
boiled, and the colature is afterward to be boiled with oil, til the watrish
liquor be consumed. The Principle are, Cerot of Betonie, Diacalciteos,
Diapalma, Infrigidans Galeni, Oesypi, Diapixer, pro Hermosis, Santalinum,
Sparadrappum, Vigonis Stomachale.

V. Cauteria, Cauteries, are medicaments which have a power to burn the Body,
and to raise a crust, and they are either Actual, which consist of red hot
metals, of which in our discourse of Chirurgerie; or potential, which are made
by burning medicaments, and composed of Lie which soap is made of, boiled into
a consistence of Salt, or of a stone almost, which is vulgarly called Lapis
corrosivus. An Ulcer made by a Caustic or Cautery, is commonly called a
fontanel or issue.

Point, 3. Of external medicaments of a middle consistence.
External medicaments of a middle Consistence are. 1. Balsams. 2. Liniments. 3.
Unguents. 4. Cataplasmes.


I. Balsams are made of oiles incorporated with white wax deparated, or oil of
Nutmegs by expression, or the marrow of a Calfe washed, or manna clarified.
Also the extracts of things whose balsom is desired, may be mingled with them.
The most usual are these; of Angelica, of Anise, An Apoplectick Balsom, with
musk and civet, of Orenges, of Cloves, of Cinnamon, of Citrons, Cubebes, of
Lavendar, of Mace, of Marjorom, of Mints, of Nutmegs, of Rose-mary, of Roses,
of Rue, of Amber, Zedoary. There are also distilled Balsomes which are nothing
else but distilled spirits (and a potion of oil) proceeding from rosins, gums,
spices, and such like drawn out with spirit of wine. The most usual are,
Balsamus vitae, Nervinus, Antiarthriticus, etc.

II. Liniments, are Medicaments of a middle consistency between an oil and an
unguent, and are made by adding to Oiles, Butter, Fat, Suet, Marrow, juices,
pouders, rosins, tears of trees; in this proportion for the most part, that to
one ounce of oiles, two drams or three of fats be added, one dram of spices;
sometimes though seldom, a dram of wax is added. Al are mixed either with fire,
or without fire, or boiling; sometimes they are set over the fire to melt the
gums and fats; and sometimes they are a little boiled to consume and wast away
the juices added.

III. Ointments, differ from Liniments by their thicker consistence, and are
made either without fire, or with fire, of fats, oiles, gums, pouders, usual
ointments of herbs, roots, seeds; macerated in water, wine, juices, oiles, and
boiled to the Consumption of the liquor. The most usual are of Agrippa,
Aegyptiacum, Alabastrinum, Album camphoratum, Altheae simplex compositum,
Apostolicum, Arthanitae, Aureum, Citrinum, Comitissae, Infrigidans Galeni,
Martiatum magnum, de Nicotiana, Tutiae, Pectorale, Pomatum, Populeon, Potabile,
Resumptivum, Rosatum, Rubeum Camphoratum; ad Scabiem, Enulatum cum, and sine
Mercurio, Apertivum. Of al which see the London Dispensatory in English.

IV. Cataplasmes or Pultesses, are Medicaments made up in the form of
watergrewel or hasty-pudding. They are made, either, without fire, which they
term crude, when green herbs bruised are reduced into a Pultis, or dried and
poudered. They are mixed with a double or triple Quantity of some convenient
Oil or Liquor: either over the fire or with boiling, when either the Plants
broken or bruised, boiled til they are soft, and drawn through a searse; to
which mucilages, meals, oiles, are added, or the Plants are soon after boiled
in Oil. Hitherto may be refered. 1. Dropax, or Pitching, which is made of
pitch melted with oil and other things, that it may stick more strongly to the
skin. 2. Sinapismus, or a Cataplasme, which is made of Mustard, and other
things of like biteing nature.
If it be of the milder sort, it is called Phaenigmus, because it makes the skin
look red, if strong, it is termed a Vesicatorie; and is made of vesicatories.

Point, 4. Of external Indifferent Medicaments.
I call those indifferent medicaments which are sometimes prepared liquid,
sometimes solid, sometimes of a middle cinfistence: and they are. 1.
Apophlegmatismes. 2. Dentifrices. 3. Nose-remedies. 4. Sneezers. 5. Perfumes or
pomanders. 6. Scapes, 7. Burning fumers. 8. Eye-salves.


I. Apophlegmatismes, are medicaments which being held in the mouth, draw phlegm
out of the Head and neighboring parts: They are prepared many times after the
same manner that Gargarismes are: sometimes medicaments are beaten, and with
some convenient liquor brought into the form of an electuary: sometimes whole
simples are only held in the mouth and chewed: sometimes being beaten they are
with honey or wax reduced into trochisks: and sometimes they are shaped into a
nodule.

II. Dentifrizes, Teeth-scrubbers, are prepared to cleanse, whiten, and fasten
the Teeth to contract the loosened gums; either fluid, or in form of a
Liniment, Powder, Trochischs.

III. Errhina, Nose-Medicines, are put into the Nostrils, either in a moist
form, which are either powered in, or anointed on; or in a dry form, and then
either they are figured our of convenient roots or stalks, into a pyramidal
form, and are steeped in water and so used; or the powder of simples are blown
into the nostrils; or tents of wool or cloth are wet with some juice or water,
and being sprinkled with pouders are thrust up into the Nostrils; or pouders
are with mucilage, Gum, Terpentine, Oil or Wax, formed into Pyramidal pencils.

IV. Ptarmica, sneezers, differ not much from the former, and procure sneezings.

V. Odours are made of such things as have a sweet smell, and are either fluid,
or are made up in the form of an Apple, Powder, Liniment.

VI. Soapes are made of Castle-soape shaven, and about a sixth or eight part of
some convenient pouders mixed therewith, and with some liquor made into a mass
of which washbass are framed.

VII. Suffitus, Perfumes to burn, belong to Odors, and are prepared in form of
Powder, Trochisks and Pyramides.

VIII. Eye-salves are used externally to the Eyes, and are prepared either
dry, being beaten very small in a mortar; or moist, which either are distilled
into the Eyes in form of a Liquor, or anointed upon them in form of a salve; or
Vaporous, which being boiled in water, the vapor exhaling from them is
received into the Eyes, the patients Head being to that end covered with a
cloth of Linen. But touching al these consult the Medico-chymical
Pharmacopeia of Dr. John Schroder, which I commend to students of Physic above
al others.

Chap. 5. Of Medicaments denominated from their Facultis.
Article, I. Of altering Medicaments.
Point, 1. Of bot Medicaments.
SO much may suffice to have spoken of Medicaments simple and compound.
Medicamenta denominated from their faculties, are either Alterres, or Causers
of Motion, or Producers of somewhat, or takers away of somewhat, or Resisters
of Poison.

Altering Medicaments are many ways differenced: for they are Temperate, Hot,
Cold, Moist, Dry, Digesting, Emollient, Hardening, Relaxing, Rarifieing,
Condensing, Shutting, Opening mouths of veins, Attenuaters, Openers,
Incrassaters, Emplasticks, Deobstructers, Abstersives, Painasswagers, and
Narcoticks.

I. Temperate are such as exceed not in the first Qualities, as are Maiden
hair, Asparagus, Lycorise, Pine kernels, Jujubes, figs, Sebestens, Raisons,
Dates, Gum Elemi, Gum dragant, Veale-suer, Goat-suer, Hogsgrease, sweet oil.

II. Things are hot, in the first, second, third, or fourth degree.

I. Things hot in the first degree are such as do scarce sensibly heat the
Body, as, The Roots of Marsh mallows, Beares-Breech, Betes, Bugloss, Lycorize,
Satyrium. The leaves of Wormwood, which some count hot in the second degree, of
Marshmallowes, Borrage, Bugloss, Betes, Beares-Breech, Colewort, Chamomel,
Dodder, Liverwort or Agrimony, Fumitory, Toad-flax, Melilote, Malabathrium,
Spicknard, Scolopendrium, Comfres, Coltsfoot. The Flowers of Borrage, or
Bugloss, of Betony, of Ox eye, Melilote, Chamomel, Black poplar, Staechados,
Groundsel. Seeds of Coriander, Faenigreeke, Line, Gromwel, Sesamus, Rice.
Fruits, Sweet almonds, Chastnuts, Jujubes, Cypress nuts, Green wallnuts, ripe
Grapes, ripe Mulberries, Sweet fragrant Apples. Barks, of Mace, Guajacum,
Tamarisk. Liquors, juices and Gums, Sugar, Bdellium, Ladanum, Gum Hedera. Suet
of a Kid, a Do, an heart, new fresh butter.

II. Those Medicines are hot in the second Degree, which manifestly heat, but
without Hurt. As the Roots, of Smallage, Cappars, Hogs-fennel, Pimpernel, Nape,
Zedoary, Rhodia. Leaves of; wormwood, Calves snout, Green dil, Angelica,
Smallage, Mugwort, Betonie, Calamus odoratus, Chamepitys, Faenum graecum,
Hypericum, Ivy, Hops, Baume, Hoar-hound, Feverfew, Basil, Chervil, Pimpernel,
Hogs-fenel, Polium, Rosemary, Savory, Sage, Scabious, Scordium, Stechados,
Tansey. Flowers of Amomum, Safron, Gilloflowers, Schaenanth, Lavendar, Hops,
Baume, Rosemary. Seeds. of Dil, Smallage, Orobus, Rocker, Basil, Nettle.
Fruits; of Cappars, Nutmegs, Pistachives, dry figs, dry nuts. Barks; of
cassia lignea, Cinnamon, Franckincense, of Cappar roots. Liquors, Gums Rofins;
Wine which is not old, Ladanum, Aloe, Galbanum, Myrrh, Mastich, Franckincense,
Storax. Fat, Lions-fat, Panthers, Bears and Foxes grease.

III. Hot in the third degree are such things, as do vehemently Heat, and with
trouble, but without Corruption: as the Roots of Acorus, Asarum, Squils,
Dictamus, Doronicum, Fennel, Galangal, both the Hellebors, Enula Campane,
Orice, persley, Radish. Leaves; Southernwood, Asarum, Agnus Castus, Arum,
Ammoum, Bishops-weed, Dry dil, Baccharis, Dictamus, Avens, Ground Oak, Cnicus,
Centaury, the greater and the less; Celondine, Calamint, Flea-bane,
Menthastrum, Fennel, Epithymum, Elecampane, Juniper, Hysop, Bays, Marjoram,
Cockow-Pintle, Mint, Nigella, Aenanthe, Bindweed, Persley, Sneez-wort,
Peny-Royal, Rest-harrow, Rue, Savine, Wild-Time, Water-mint, Time, Trefoil,
Vervain, Nettles. Flowers; Agnus Caftus, Epithymum, Leucoium, Aenanthe,
Periclymen. Seeds of Byshops-weed, Anise, Amomum, Carway, Cardamom,
Watercresses. Fennel, Carot, Cummin, Nigella, Navew, Persley, Seseli,
Staphes-acre, Agnus Castus. Fruits; Juniper Beries, Cloves, Carpobalsamum,
Anacardia, Pepper. 4. Barks, of Mace, Liqors, Tears, Gums; old Wine, Asa
dulcis, faetida, Ammoniacum, Cedrian, pitch, Opopanax, Mosch. Metaline, flower
of Brass, Burnt Brass, scales of Brass, Verdigreise, Diphryges, Alum, Salt,
Nitre, Sulphur, Vitriol.

IV. Hot in the fourth degree, are such as heat with the greatest damage to
the Humane Body: as, Roots, Garlic, Onion, Costus, Leeks, Pellitory. Leaves,
Pepper-wort, both the Watercresses, the Headed-Leek, Fullers Herb, Thapsia,
and Spurge. Seeds of Watercresses, Mustard. Fruits, Pepper; Gums, Euphotbium:
Metaline substances; Vitriol, Orpment, Sandarach, Chrysocolla, Misy, sorry,
Melantheria.

Point II. Of cold Medicaments
Cold Medicaments are, such as alter the Body of Man by cooling, and they are
such, in the first, second, third, and fourth degree.

I. Cold in the first degree are such as scarce sensibly cool the Boody of
Man, and they are Roots of Mallows; Leaves of Orach, sharppointed-dock,
apple tree, Myrrle, Pellitory. Flowers of, Mallows, Roses, Violets; Seeds of
Barley, Millet. Fruits, Citronpulp, Quinces, Pears, Prunes. Juices concrete,
Acacia, Dragons blood. Stones, hyacinth, Sapphire, Smaragd.

II. Cold in the second are such as manifestly cool, but without hurt, as the
Leaves of Blite, Dandelyon, Lettuce, Duck-weed, Hyacinth, Sorrel, Plantane,
Solomon's Seal, Flea-wort, Nightshade. Flowers, of yellow Anemone: Fruits of
Gourd, Cucumer, Galls, Auranges, Peaches, Damask prunes, Pompions,
Pomegranates. Wood, of Sanders.

III. Cold in the third degree are, which do indeed vehemently cool, but
without destroying or corrupting the Body: as Roots of Mandrake, Leaves of
Purslane, mandrake, Houseleek, Henbane. Flowers Balaustian. Seeds, of Hemlock,
Henbane, Poppie. Fruits, Golden Apples, Mad-Apples. Juice of Hypocistis.

IV. Cold in the fourth degree are such things as corrupt by cooling and
destroy the body; as Leaves of Hemlock, Poppie. Fruits of Thorn Apple. Juyces;
Meconium, Opium, according to the vulgar opinion. See thereof Doringuis,
Hartman, Frestagius.

Point, III. Of moistining Medicaments.
Moistening Medicaments, are such as by their moistening faculty alter the Body
of Man. And the most are such only in the first and second degree.

I. Moist in the first degree are Roots; of Satyrium, Bugloss, Lycorize,
Mallows, Rapes; The Herbs of Bugloss, Heixine, Mallows. Flowers of Bugloss
Mallows, Endive. Seeds of Mallows, Sesamus. Fruits, the pulpe of a Citron,
Jujubees, Sweet Almonds.

II. Moist in the second Degree are, Herbs, Violet leaves, water-lilly-leaves,
Orach, Blite, Lettuce, Duck-weed, Purslane. Flowers; of water lillies, violets.
Fruits; of the Gourd, Melons, Pepons, Peaches, Damask prunes, ripe Grapes,
Sugar.

Point, IV. Of dry Medicaments.
Dry Medicaments are such as alter the Body of Man by drying; and they are
so, in the first, second, third and fourth degree.

I. Dry in the first degree are Roots; Bryonie, Madder, Aenanthe, Tamarisk,
Marshmallowes, Cucko-pintle. Leaves; of Beat, Coleworts, Chamaemel, Fenel,
Hyacinth, Malabathrum, Myrtle, Mullein. Flowers, of Oxe-eye, Chamaemel, Safron,
Hyacinth, Melilote, Roses. Seeds of Beans, Faenugreek, Barley. Fruits of
Juniper Berties, Chastnuts. Gums, as Frankincense.

II. Dry in the second degree, are Roots; of Cappars, Cichory, Raddish. Herbs,
Pimpernel, Mugwort, green dil, Betonie, Dodder, Calamus aromaticus, Endive,
Sea-Colewort, Shepheards-pouch, Hors-taile, Tooth-pick, Mint, Wild mint,
Plantane, Rosemary, Spicknard, Comfery, fumitory, Pimpinel, Sorrel, Vervaine,
Shepherds-Rod. Flowers; Balaustians, Peony flowers, Anemoneyes, Ground Pine,
bind-weed and staechados. Seeds; of Fenel, Garden-cresses, lentils, Orobus,
Millet, Rice, Poppie, Nightshade. Fruits; Ballanus Myrepsica, Cappars, Quinces,
Cypress-nuts, Nutmegs, Pears, Pistachius. Wood, of Sanders, Tears, Gums,
Rosins; Galbanum, Opopanax, Stone-pitch, Mirth, Storax, Mastich, Honey.

III. Dry in the third degree are Roots, of Acorus, Asarum, Smalladge,
cinnamon, Doronicum, Galangal, Hellebore, Pentaphyllum, Hollow-root, Squil,
Three-leaved-sorrel, Trefoile. Leaves and Herbs; Fearne, Millefoile,
Cinquefoile, Polium, Trefoile, Southernwood, Wormwood, Burnt dil, Smalladge
Bishops-weed, Asarum, Calamint, Ground oak, Ground Pine, Epithymum, Hyssop,
Juniper, Matjorum, Hoare-hound, Origanum, Hogs-fennel, Perseley, Sneezewort,
Rue, Savine, Willow, Watermint, Time, Runing-betony. Flowers, of Balaustians,
of Epithimum, of Ground Pine of Bindweed. Seeds of Dil, Smalladge, Bushopweed,
Amomum, Anis-seed, carway, Cumin, Coriander, Nigella, perseley, Gromwel, Agnus
Castus, Grana tinctorum. Fruits; Cloves, Carpobalsamum, Galls, Peper, Juniper
Berries. Juices and Gums; Aloe Acetum, acacia, camphire, mosch. Metalline
matters, Flower of brass, burnt brass, Scales of brass, verdigreese, diphryges,
alume, Salt, Nitre, Sulphur, Chalcitis.

IV. Things dry in the fourth degree are of herbs; wild Rue, Garlic,
Watercresses, Mustard. Of the Metalline Medicaments, Vitriol, Orpment,
Sandarach, Chrysocolla, Misy, Sorry, Melantheria.

Point, V. Of Medicaments, digestive, Emollient, Hardening and Loosening.
Digestive Medicaments are such as assist Nature in concocting such humors as
are praeternaturally offensive.

They are also termed praeparatives. Now they prepare, either by removeing
impediments, or by changing the Qualities which resist the action of Natural
Heat, respect being nevertheless had to the part wherein the Humors reside.

They are dfferenced according to the difference of Humors which they prepare.
Yellow choler, requires things cooling and drying; and if it be thin, it
requires thickners. Phlegm stands in need of Heaters, Dryers and attenuaters.
Melancholy is corrected by things moderately heateing, moistening, and
attenuateing. Black choler by things cooling, very much moistening and
attenuateing.

A Catalogue of these Medicaments may be drawn from such as are attributed to
every part of the Body, of which we shall speak anon; and therefore to avoid
tautologie, we omit them for the present.

II. Emollients, are such medicaments as soften and dissolve such Humors as are
compacted together, either primarily, as a glewish excrement in the bands of
the Muscles; or secondarily, viz. when the thinner parts being either digested,
by the unseasonable use of Resolveing Medicaments, or being driven away by
overmuch use of Repellers, the remaining parts grow compacted.

The Greeks call them malactica: and they must be hot in the second degree, a
little dry, of a daubing faculty so as to hinder difflation; and they must be
mingled with moistners. They are either Indiffernt, or Strong.

I. Things indifferently emollient. 1. Of Simples, are the Roots of Lillies,
Marsh-mallowes, wild Cucumer, Bryonie. Leaves of Mallows, Pellitory, Violets,
Dwarfe-elder; Elder. Flowers of Chamemel. Seeds, of Fenugreek, Line, Sesamus,
Mallows. Fruits, fat Figs. Fats, fresh butter, fat of an Hen, Hog's Grease,
Calves-grease, Kids-suet, Weathers-suet, al marrowes. etc. Of Compoundes, oil
of Lin-seed, sweet-almonds, White-Lillies, Worms. Ointments, of Althea,
Unguentum resumptivum. Emplaster, de Mucilaginibus.

II. The stronger sort are Beares-grease, old oil, bdellium, liquid storax,
fat rosins, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Emplastrum Diachylon simple, and cum Gummi.

III. Hardners are opposed to Emollients; the Greeks call them Sclerotica, or
Sclerunonta, and they are cold and moist, as, Sempervivum, purslane, psyllium,
Duckweed, Nightshade.

IV. Relaxers are Medicaments which abate the distention caused by some matter,
vapor, or wind, filling and stretching the spaces of the parts. They are
moderately hot, very moistening, and of thin substance, for the more easy
penetration, as Lillies, seeds of Line, Fenugreek, Fats, Butter, Chamomel Oil.

Point V. Of Medicaments which Rarifie, condense, stop, and open the mouths of
the Vessels.
Rarifying Medicaments, are such as open the pores of the Skin, and make them
wider, that the Vapors may be better transpired. They are moderately hot, of
thin parts, and not drying; such as are, among Herbs, Marshmallows, Mercury.
Flowers of Chamomel, Melilot, Elder. Seeds of Fenugreek, Line, Oil which is
old, and Butter.

II. Condensers are, such things as contract and straighten the small pores of
the body, but are not able to compact the whole part, strongly, and every where.
They are of a watery Nature, as, cold water; of Herbs, Purslane, Housleek,
Flea-wort, Mous-ear, Duckweed, green Thistles, Prick-madam, the greater and the
lesser.

III. Stoppers, by their thickness, do so stick externally upon the pores of
the body, that by their coldness and dryness, they contract the part. There are
of this kind, Astringents so called. Such as are, among Simples, the Roots of
Tormentil, Plantane, greater Comfry, dry water Lillies, Sorrel, Curmallow,
Filipendula, peony, Avens, Strawberry, Bistort, Rhaponticum, Rhubarb tosted.
Leaves, of plantane, Knotgrass, Gnaphalium, Loof-strife, Solomon's Seal,
Horstail, Shepherds-pouch, Mous-ear, Oak. Flowers, of Roses, pomegranates, Ivy.
Seeds, of plantane, purslane, Sorrel, Roses. Fruits, Quinces, Medlars,
Barberries, Services, Cornel-berries, Galls, Raison-stones, Cypress nuts,
myrtle berries. Shells and Rinds, of pomegranates, Frankincense tree,
myrobalans, mulberries. Gums, of mastich, Dragons blood. Juyces, of Hypocistis,
sour Grapes, Acacia. Minerals, Terra sigillata, Bole armeniack, boodstone,
Alum, Coral, Iron. Of Animals, Hartshorn prepared, Stags pizzle, etc. Of
Compounds are, Water of Roses, purslane, plantane, privet. Syrup of red Roses,
Quinces, Barberries, marmalade of Quinces, Diacodium narcoticum, Crocus martis
astringens, powder of man's bones calcined, fresh made Treacle, Juice of
pomegranates, of Acacia, old conserve of Red Roses. The stronger sort of these
medicaments are, Balaustians, myrtles, Acacia, Hypocistis, Sumach, pomegranate,
medlar, etc.

IV. Anastomaticks, are medicaments which open the mouths of the Vessels, and
are therefore by the Greeks so named, because they ought to penetrate into the
inner parts of the body, and to attenuate gross humors; and therefore they ought
to be both hot in the second degree, and endued with a more thick substance
than ordinary, that they may retain heat the longer. Bitter things are most
convenient.

Point VII. Of Attenuating, Aperient, and incrassating Medicaments.
I. Attenuating medicaments, are such as dissolve and make thin, thick, clammy,
and glewish humors, so that either they vanish of their own accord, or are
easily dissipated by the operation of Drawers. They must be of a thin
substance, hot in the third degree; which is nevertheless, not always
necessary. For the juice of Lemmons, Vinegar, Oxymel, do attenuate, and cut,
though they are cold. See the Catalogue among Operatives.

II. Apperitive medicaments, do open inward Obstructions of the Body. They
ought to be of a thin substance; and therefore are reckoned among such things
as appear hot and biting to the smell and taste, which have a nitrous, salt,
bitter, and acid taste: but seeing there is variety both of the matter
obstructing, and the bodies obstructed, sometimes such as are of thin parts,
sometimes such as are not so qualified, are given. Now they are these; Among
Simples, of Roots, the five opening Roots, so called, viz. (of Smallage,
Fennel, Asparagus, parsley, and Holm) of Grass, Cicaory, Eryngos, Gentian, Fern,
madder, Rhaponticum, Asarum, Cappars, Tamarisk, Ash. Herbs, Fumitory, Wormwood,
Agrimony, maidenhair, Liver-wort, ceterach, chamepitys, chamedrys, Dodder,
Horehound, calamint, penyroyal, scurvygrass, Brooklime, Watercresses, Hops,
white Horehound, Wormwood. Seeds of Annis, Fennel, Ameos, Agnus castus,
Vetches, Lupines. Fruits, bitter Almonds, Cappars, Peach-kernels,
Apricock-kernels. Spices, Cinnamon, Cubebs. Gums and juyces, Ammoniacum,
Vinegar, Juice of Lemmons. Of compounds are, waters of the foresaid simples;
Oximel simple, Scyllitick, Syrup of opening roots, Trocbiscks of Rubarb,
Wormwood, Egrimony, Lacca-gum. Tartar Vitriolated, Cream thereof, Christals
and Tincture of Tartar. Tincture of steel, powder, aperient crocus and pills
thereof.

III. Incrassaters or thickners, do make the thin and liquid juices more thick.
They are cold or temperate without acrimonie, and of thick substance; such as,
Porslane, Sorrel, Poppy, Rice, Lentils, Quinces, Pears, Starch, Chalybeate
milk, and juice of Pomegranates.

Point, VIII. Of Obstructive, And Deobstructive Medicaments.
I. Emplastick or obstructive medicaments are such as by their substance, do
daub, stop and clam up the passages of the Body, and being smeared thereon,
stick fast thereto being of a Consistence, either dry and earthy, but without
any biting quality, or full of watery and aerie humor. They are. I. Among
simples. 1. Roots; Of Marshmallowes, White-Lillies; Seeds, Wheat, Starch,
Pine-kernels steeped in water, Fenugreek, al Mucilages. Fruits, Figs, Raisons.
Gums, Arabic, Tragant, Dragons blood. Earths; Terra sigillata, Bole-Armeniack.
Juyces; Alum. Stones, Lapis Calaminaris, Boodstone, Potters-clay. Minerals,
litteridge of Gold and Silver, Lead, Oar of brass, Pompholyx; Cerus. Animals,
Mumia, fresh fats, marrowes, fresh butter, Cheese, whites of Eggs, Wax. II.
Compounds of these; Unguentum Album, Nutritum.


II. Deobstructers, do scour away clammy glutinous humors, which stick unto
the body; they are hot or cold, salt, bitter, nitrous. Such are I. Of Simples.
1. Roots of birthwort, Orice, Gentian, Solomon's seal, Tamarisk. Leaves; of
Smallage, Wormwood, Centorie, Southernwood, Hysop, Watercresses, Horehound,
Agrimony, Ground-Oake, Tansey, Hart's-tongue, Pimpernel. Seeds; of Lime,
Fenugreek, barley, Orobus, Lupines, and their meals. Juyces; Aloes and Sugar.
Gums; myrrh. Rosins; Terpentine. Mineralls; verdigrise, Vitriol. Animals; whey,
beasts-Gal.

III. Extergents; differ only gradually. Of this kind are Oxymel, Alume water,
Unguentum Aegyptiacum, etc.

Point, VIII. Of Anodynes, and Narcoticks.
Anodyne Medicaments are those which by their moderate heat, and soft
substance, do assuage pain, by opening the pores of the body, and entering
thereinto by the tenuity of their substance; and discuss the cause thereof by
insensible transpration. Such are. I. Among Simples, the Roots; of
Marsh-mallowes, Lillies. Leaves; of Mallows, Elder. Flowers; of Chamemel,
Melilote, Safron. Seeds, of Lime, Fenugreek. Animals; Fats, of Hogs, Hens,
Geese, Calves, Man-fat. Marrow; of Oxen, Calves. Milk, butter. II. Of
Compounds, oiles; of white lillies, Chamomel, Violets, sweet almonds, linseed,
worms, and (which is most commended) sweet oil of Roses, of a middle age.


II. Narcoticks stupifie the part, so that it cannot feel that which pains.
This they do, partly by their coldness, partly by an hidden Quallity. Of this
kind are. I. Simples, the Roots of Mandrake; Leaves of Henbane, mandrake.
Seeds, of white-poppey. Juyces, Opium. II. Compounds: oiles, of Mandrake
Vnguentum popeleon, laudanum ossiatum, Fernelius his narcotick lozenges.
Spirit of Darnel, etc.

Article. 2. Of Medicaments which cause motion.
Medicines which cause motion are either Drawers, Repellers, or Astringents.

I. Drawers, are such as draw from the deep parts of the Body into the surface
thereof, not only thin and wheyish humors, but also such as are thick, and fast
rooted in the Parts of the Body. They are either hot in the second degree,
which draw moderately; or in the third degree, which draw strongly; or in the
fourth degree, which swel the skin. Such are. I. Of simple Roots, of the two
Birthworts, Anemony, bindweed, Tragon, Gentian, Pellitory, Crowfoot,
Daffodilly, Reeds, Cuckoo pintle, Thapsia, Garlic, onions. Leaves: of
Wild-Cresses, Calamint, Purple Anagallis, Nex, Thlaspi, Ivy. Seeds, of Nettle,
Navew, Watercresses. Gums, Euphorbium, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Sagapenum.
Rosins; Pitch, Vulgar Rosin. Annimals; Dung of Pigeons, Hens, Cantharides. II.
Of Compounds, Emplastrum Oxycroceum.


II. I call them repellers, which do either by their cold watryness prohibit the
influx of humors into any part; or drive back such as are already flowed in,
but are not fastened. They are. 1. Among simples; the Roots, of Plantane.
Barks; of Mandrake roots; Leaves; of Housleek, Purstane, Duck-weed, Endive,
Lettuce, Nightshade, Water-thistle, Venus navil, Lentisk, Sumach, Henbane.
Flowers; of red roses. Seeds; of Fleawort Plantane. Of compounds; Waters of
Roses, Nightshade, Plantane.

III. Astringents are such as consist of a thick and earthy substance, stop the
passages of the part, force out the the thinner particles of the humor, and
consequently do also repel. They are either Cold or Hot. Cold are, among
Simples, the Roots; of Sloes, Cinquefoile, bistort, tormentil, great Comfery.
Barks; of myrobalans, Pomegranates, Frankincense tree, Barbery-tree. Leaves; of
Horse-taile, small daisie, mouse-eare, Knot-grass, Shepards pouch. Flowers: of
Roses balaustians. Seeds of Sorrel, porslane, myrtils, White-popy. Fruits,
Services, Quinces, meddlers, myrtle berries, unripe mulberries. Gums, mastich,
Dragons-blood. Earths; Terra sigillata, bolus Armenia. Of compounds: are Waters
of Roses, of Plantane, of Privet flowers. Syrups; of red-roses, of Quinces.
Conserves, of dried-roses, Quinces, New made treacle. Juice of Pomegranates,
trefoile, Crabs, sower Grapes. Pouders: Diacorallium, Crocus martis, Burnt
hearts horn, mans-bones, Spodium, Ambar. Pills: de Cynoglossa. Hot astringents
are, Cyperus, Wormwood, Calamus Aromaticus, Schaenanth, aloe, Thus, Myrrh,
Spike, Barks of Frankincense-tree, Cypressnuts, Alum.

Article, 3. Of Medicaments which generate somewhat.
Point, 1. Of Ripeners, Quittor-breeders, and Flesh restorers.
Medicaments which breed somewhat are in a six-fold difference. 1. Ripeners or
Quittor-breeders. 2. Flesh-breeders. 3. Glewers. 4. Scarbringers. 5.
Milke-breeders, 6. Seed-encreasers.


I. Ripeners, and Quittor-breeders, are such by whose help, the Natural Heat
turns corrupt blood into Quittor. They are moderately hot and moist, and like
in temperament to the part whereunto they are applied. Also by shutting the
pores, they keep in the heat. They are in a twofold difference. Some are
merely of a temperate heat, and clammy which we use in hot tumors, such as
are, Mucilages of Lin-seed, Fenugreek, Mallows, Marshmallowes, Water and oil,
Wheate-meale, Milk, Crum of wheaten bread, Hog's Grease, fresh-butter,
Unguentum Dialthea. Others are hot, which we use in cold tumors and parts; such
as the Gums, Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum. Rosins; Terpentine, Pitch, Vulgar
rosins. Tears of Firr, Birch and Pine Tree. Oiles of Chamomel, White-Lillies.
Ointments; of Agrippa, Basilicon, Majus and minus. Emplasters; diachylon simple
and cum gummi. II. Sarcoticks or Flesh-breeders are such things as assist
nature to change blood into flesh, both by preserving the Heat of the Part,
and removeing such Excrements as hinder the work. They do moderately heat and
dry; also they cleanse away filth, without any biteing, or astriction. They are
of a Three fold Rank, In the first rank or degree, are placed meal of Barley,
of Fenugreek, of beans; Franckincense, Manna, thuris. In the Second,
Terpentiue rosin, Larch-rosin, Fir-rosin, Clarified Honey, honey of Roses.
Aloes, meal of Lupines, orobus, and Pompholyx. In the third degree, meal of
Orobus, raw honey, birthwort root, orice root, myrrh, Vitiol.

Point 2. Of Sodderers, and Scar-bringers.
I. Glewing, or soddering Medicaments, are such as bring together the gaping
lips of fresh wounds, and binder any thing from flowing into, or growing
between them. Of which kind are among Simples, the Roots of Tormentil,
Cinque-foile, Bistort. Leaves; of Mouse-eare, plantaine, Sr. John's Wort,
Bugula, Sanicle, Pyrola, Wal-Sage, Rupture-wort, Willow, Vervaine. Gumsz Myrch,
Frankincense, Saccocolla. Jucies thickened; Aloes, Hypocstis. Rosins; Pitch,
Terpenrine. Of compounds; Ointment of Lituridge, of Betony.

II. Scarbringers, are Medicaments which consume both that which flows to, and
that humor which is already in the flesh, that the flesh may be changed into
the similitude of Skin. Thick are of thick substance, vehemently drying,
astringent and contracting. The chief are, Roots, of tormentil, Cinquesoil.
Herbs; Comfry, Thorough-waxe, Horsetaile, Plantane. Flowers; balaustians.
Juyces concrete, Coral, Aloes, Juice of dragon. Earths; Alum, Ecle Armeniack.
Metelline substances, Lead, Cadmia, Litteridg, Brass-burnt, and washed,
Antimony.

III. Hitherto belong Vulnerary Medicaments, of which vulnerary potions are
made. And they are, the roots; of great Comfry, Bistort, Tormentil. Leaves; of
Ladymantile, Shephards-pouch, Golden-rod, Balsaminum, Vervaine, Fluellin, St.
Johnswort, Millefoil, Sanicle, Hors-taile, Elm, Plantaine, Betony, Cypress,
Mouse-eare. Flowers; of red-roses, St. John's wort, Balaustians. Fruits; Cypress
nuts. Gums, Tears; Frankincense, Aloe, Mastich, Tears of the firr,
Terpentine, pine and larch rosins, Stone-pitch, liquor of Elme-leaves, Gum
Elemi, Gum of Juniper, of Ivy, of Tragant, Tacamahaca, caranna, Sarcocolla,
Dragons-Blood etc.

Point, III. Of Milk and Seed-breeders.
1. Milk-breeding Medicaments in this place are such, as both help to make
good blood, and moderately attenuate the same and bring it to the Duggs, such
as are these following: green Fenel, the seed thereof, Green Dil, Smalladge,
powder of Crystal, Decoction of Colewort, Butter taken with milk and fenel,
Smyrnium, Polium, Rocket, etc.

II. Seed-breeding Medicaments, both those which carry matter to the
spermatick vessels, and they which provoke to the expulsion of seed whether
they fill it with wind, or ad a spir or provocation thereto. The chief are
these, Roots; of Eryngos, Satyrion, Ginger. Seeds; of Rocket, Mustard, Nettles,
Pepper. Fruits Pine-kernels, Pistachios, Hasel nuts, the Pap of the Indian nut.
Parts of Animals; Reins of the Scinci, Brains of Sparrowes, Stags-Pizzle,
Cocks-stones.

Article, IV. Of corrupting. Medicaments.
Corruptive Medicaments are. 1. Rubisiers. 2. Vesicatories. 3. Such as induce a
Grust. 4. Burners. 5. Corrosives. 6. Putrefiers. 7. Psilothra, hair-grubbers,
8. Milke-wasters. 9. Seed-confounders.


1. Rubifiers make the skin red, and draw Humors from the inner parts of the
Body into the skin, such as are the Roots of Thapsia, Seeds of Watercresses,
Nettles, Mustard.

II. Vesicatories raise bladders, and by their Ardency draw forth humors. The
chief are, Roots, of Bind-weed, Pellitoty, Squil, Garlic, Thapsia. Herbs;
Doves-foot, Flammula, Crow-foot. Seed; Of water cresses, Mustard. Also,
Euphorbium, Leaven, Soap, Pidgeons-dung, Cantharides.

III. Crust-Creators, do not only raise up the scarfe-skin, but also burn the
skin it self, howbeit their operation goes no further.

IV. Burners or Causticks, bring a thiker crust than the former, and often work
upon the flesh beneathe, the chief are: White Hellebore, ashes of vine-dregs,
ashes of the fig tree, Ash, and savine tree. Brass-burnt, flower of brass,
quicklime, Vitriol, orpment, Arfenick, mercury sublimate, Salt made of Lie of
which soap is made,

V. Corroders, take away proud flesh, and do by little and little, melt the
upper surface thereof. The milder are, Roots of white vine, black-hellebore.
Ashes of the Oak, fig tree, Conchylium. Aloe, Alum; burnt lead, Ancimony
calcined. The stronger are; Quicklime, Flower of Brass, Brassburnt, Vitriol
calcined, Quicksilver precipitate, Sublimate, Oil of vitriol, sulphur etc.

VI. Putrifiers, do melt hard flesh. Such are Arsenick, Orpment, Chrysocolla,
dryopteris, Pityocampe, aconitum, Sandarach.

VII. Hair-grubbers, are such medicines as pluck up by the Roots the Hairs of
the Body, so as to make the part where they are applied, bald and smooth; such
as are, strong lie, quicklime, ants-egs, sandarach arsenick, orpment etc.

VIII. Milke-wasters, do either incrassate and thicken the blood, by
overcooleing it, or they dry up and digest the same, or finally they do by
their whole substance destroy the Milk. Such are, Mints, Sage, Calamint,
Coriander, Henbane, Oil of unripe Olives, Vinigar, Camphire.

IX. Seed confounders, do either cool, thicken, or discuss the same, or
consume it by an hidden property. Such are: Mint, Rue, Agnus Castus, Dil, Seeds
of Hemp, Fleawort. Lettuce, Purslaine, Champhire etc.

Article. V. Of Medicaments which take somewhat away.
Point. 1. Of Purgeing Medicaments.
Medicaments which take something from the Body are: 1. Purgers. 2. Vomiters.
3. Diuretics. 4. Sweaters. 5. Transpirers. 6. Braine-purgers. 7.
Expectorators.


Purgers are such Medicaments, as drive out by stool, such humors as
preternaturally nestle themselves in man's body. And they are 1. Choler-purgers.
2. Phlegm-purgers. 3. Melancholly-purgers. 4. Water-purgers. 5. Purgers of all
humors together.


1. Choller-purgers, are medicaments which drive out preternatural choler. And
they are 1. Mild; as among simples, Cassia fistularis, which because it is
hurtful to a moist slippery belly and to the stomach, and is windy, it is
corrected with a grain or two of peper, aniseed or Cinnamon, and is given in a
bole, commonly from six drams to two ounces; to children two drams may be
given. Tamarins or Indian dates, convenient for hot Constitutions; which
because of their coldness, are corrected with Cinnamon and Mace, and by reason
of their lazyness, they are quickened with whey of Goates-milk. They are given
in Pulpe, from an ounce to two ounces or three, and in the Infusion to five
ounces. Manna Calabrina, which is safe in all cases, excepting burning fevers;
it is quickened, with syrup of Roses solutive. It is taken in Prune-broath, or the
Broth of a Cock or Hen, to the Quantity of three or four ounces. Aloe
Soccotrina, which taken in too great a Quantity inflames the Liver: because it
opens the orifices of the Veins it is not safe for women with child. Nor is it
good for hot and dry natures. It Is nourished or impredgnated with juice of
damask Roses. It Is corrected with mastich because of its Acrimonie. It is
given from half a dram to a dram and more: see thereof Solenander, sect. 3.
Counsel, 29. Rhubarb, the soul of the Liver, which must not be given alone,
because it is apt to fume, and easily exhales, but with endive water, or syrup
of Roses solutive; it must not be given to such as are troubled with the
strangury, nor those that are subject to the Hemorrhoides. It Is corrected with
Cinnamon, Spicknard, Schenanth. It Is given from one dram to two drams.
Damaskroses, musked, fragrant, bitter and detergent. Their Virtue is increased,
if two ounces of whey be mixed with an ounce of their juice, a little spike and
Cinnamon being added. Violets, which are of like virtue with roses, exceeding
good in diseases of the Breast and Headache. Terpentine, especially pistick,
which with powder of Lycoris and Sugar, is made into Boles, and given to cleanse
the kidneys. Lemnius commends it in a potion. Among compounds are, Syrup of
roses solutive, hurtful for women with child, because it opens the veins of
the womb, from two ounces to four. Rose-leaves must be gathered while the
morning dew is upon them. Their strength lasts hardly beyond six months. Syrup
of the flowers of Acacia, de Manna Laxativus, Horstius his syrup of tamarinds
with senna. Pilulae Angelicae, Benedicta Bejeri. Hiera mellita, from a dram to
four drams. II. The stronger are, among simples, Asarum, which being long
boiled loses its strength; very well beaten, it moves vomit. It is given with
whey, wine and honey sod together. Scammonie, which must never be given to such
as are inclined to vomit, feverish, weak persons, in the summer, in broaths,
alone, because its acrimonie disturbes the body, inflames the spirits, hurts
the principal parts. It Is corrected with juice of Quinces, mucilage of Gum
Tragant, spirit of sulphur or vitriol. Being corrected it is called Diagrydium.
It Is given from five grains to fifteen. Of compounds are Pilulae Rhudji to a
scruple; Aureae, which are most in use. Extract of Scamonie. The Magisterie
thereof, which see in Mynsichtus and Grulingius.

II. Phlegme-purging Medicaments are such as draw excrementitious phlegm out of
the Body. And they are. 1. More gentle among simples, Myrobalans, Chebulan, and
Emblican; which are to be avoided in obstructions of the Gutts or Bowels; they
are steeped in Chick-broath to an ounce, or boiled therein, with muscadine.
Cnicus or Carthamus seeds, which purge water, and crude phlegm, and raise wind;
because they provoke vomit, they are corrected with Anise, Ginger and Mastich.
Mechoacan, which is of subtle parts mingled with Earthy. Of exquisite tertian
Agues, it makes double ones. It works most happily in the form of a powder, or
if it be steeped a night, in wine, or broth, and drunk in the Morning. Among
compounds are, spices of Hiera picra simple. Lozenges of Mechoacan, described
by Horstius. II. Vehement Flegme-purgers are, among simples, Agarick, which by
a peculiar Faculty frees the Lungs from clammy thick and putrid humors. It Is
^afer in the Infusion, than in the substance. Jalop, which is most proper,
where choler is mixed with phlegm. The Dose is from a scruple to two scruples,
with cream of Tartar... It has in it somewhat of Acrimony. Turpetum gummie and
white, which because it hurts the Stomach and provokes Vomit, is corrected with
Ginger, Pepper and Cinnamon. By its dryness it brings the bodies of those that
over use it, into a Consumption. It works best in a decoction. Coliquintida,
which purges thick and clammy Humors from the remote parts; and because it
sticks to the fibers of the stomach, it provokes vomiting. It must not be
corrected by astringents, for they detain it, being a violent medicine, too
long in the Body. Hermodactyls, which purge thick humors from the Joints, and
are corrected by atenuaters. Euphorbium, which is hot and dry, in the fourth
degree: because it inflames the Jaws and Throat, vexes the Stomach and Liver,
raises cold sweat, it is corrected with cordials and Stomach strengtheners, but
best of al with Oil of Roses. It must not be used inwardy before it be a year
old. Sagapenum which brings out clammy and thick Humors. Of compounds are, Pills
of Sagapena of Horstius and Camillus. Syrup of Coloquintida, and Lozenges of
Jalap, etc.


III. Melancholy purgers, are such as drive excrementitious melancholy out of
the Body. And they are, 1. Gentle. Among simples, Indian Myrobalans, which are
principally given in quartan Agues, and purge adust choler. Epithymum, which by
a peculiar property above all other medicines, purges this Humor, howbeit but
weakly. It Is more safely used in the Winter than the Summer. That of Crete, is
the best. Polypodie of the Oak, which because it binds when it is old, must be
used fresh and new gathered. That which grows on over old Oaks, by its overmuch
Humidity, subverts the stomach. Sena, which is used to draw humors out of the
Mesentery, in the broth of Prunes, Reisons, and in Whey, etc. its cods, if
gathered when full of juice before they are fully ripe, will work as the leaves
do; but withering upon the stalk, they lose al their virtue. Among Comporunds
are, Syrup of polypody, and Epthymum. Pills of Fumitory. Powder of Sena of
Montagnana, etc. II. The stronger sort are, among simples, Lapis Armenius,
which must be so long washed in cordial waters, til no more foulness appear.
Lapis lazuli, which must be used after the same manner. Black Hellebore, which
is least dangerous, in the decoction. It Is best corrected with the phlegm of
Vitriol. An excellent way and Elegant to give it, is, to stick an apple with
cloves and black Hellebore Roots, and roast it in the Embers. Among Compounds
are, Extract of black Hellebore, and Syrup of the same, in Heurnius.


IV. Water-purgers are Medicaments which drive waters out of Man's body. 1. The
more gentle are, among simples, Soldanella or Sea-Colewort, which extremely
delights in the company of Rhubarb, and loses not its Virtue by boiling. 2.
Germane Orice, which provokes the Courses, and loses its force, by boiling. The
juice of the Root is put in an Egshel with the yolk of the Egg, and so they are
boiled together or roasted til the Egg be soft boiled, so as it may be supt.
Among Compounds are, Conserve of Peach Flowers, Powder of Soldanella of
Fowentinus, etc. II. The more vehement sort are, Elaterium, which slips even
without the Veins and draws water away. It may be given to strong persons to
the quantity of ten grains, if well corrected [understand in German Bodies and
tough english plough-men or Sadlors] it is corrected with Cinnamon, Spike, etc.
Cambogia, which because it makes the Stomach a little sick, it is corrected
with Spirit of Salt and Mace. The use thereof is hurtful to choleric natures.
See thereof Reudenius and Lotichius. Hedge-Hyssop, which works upwards and
downwards. It is dried and steeped in milk, and then dried again, so as that it
may be reduced to powder. Esula, whose Milk, Seed, Leaves are very strong, but
the Root more mild. It must not be used til a month after it has been gathered.
That is best, which is five or (...) months old. The Bark of the Root is
chiefly in use. It Is corrected by Infusing three dais in Vinegar. Among
Compounds are, the Magistery of Cambogia, Pilulae Freytagii, Oil of Elder-berry
Stones.


V. Purgers of al Humors together, which are called Catholica and Panchymagoga;
are these which follow: of simples, Sena, Hellebore, Antimony, etc. Of the
compounds, Panchymagogum Crollii, Vegitabtle, Paracelsi, Extractum Catholicum
majus and minus. Electuarium Diacatholicon, etc.

Point 2. Of Vomitories and Diuretics.
Vomitories are such Medicaments as cast forth bad humors, by the Mouth.

Which they do, either because they naturally tend upwards; or because they
swim upon the Stomach and burden the same; or because they loosen the upper
Orifice of the Stomach. Of this sort are, I. The more gentle, simple water,
Lukewarm water, Barley water, fat broaths, simple Oil with water, Butter,
Hydromel. Root of Orach, Garden Cowcomber, Melons, Daffodillies, Asarum.
Flowers of Peaches, of which conserve is made. Seeds of Rocket, Orach. The
middle Rind of a Walnut Tree, when it is fullest of juice, especially the
Cats-tailes thereof. Electuary of Asarum of Fernelius. II. The stronger sort
are, white Hellebore. The Vomitory of Cunradinus, which is given from three
drops to ten drops. Gilla of Paracelsus. White vitriol vomitory. Sala his salt
of vitriol. Flores Mercurii argentei. Mercurius Vitae, Mercurius dulcis, Manna
Mercurii, Aquila-Flowers of Antimony, Oil and Electuary of Antimony, and Crocus
Metallorum. Aqua benedicta of Quercetanus, Pismire water, Platerus his Wine,
Heurneus his Helleborate wine, Aqua Benedicta Rulandi.


II. Diuretics, are medicaments which provoke Urine, and by that means
evacuate withal the morbifick matter.

They are twofold: 1. Properly so called, which easily penetrate into the
Veins, and therein melt the Humors with their heat, and they are Roots of
Parsley, Smallage, Eringos, Ruscus, Asparagus, Pimpernel. Herbs, Asarum,
Liver-wort, Chervil, Scordium. Seeds, of Gromwel, Chervil, Saxifrage. Fruits,
bitter Almonds, Peach Kernels, etc. among chemical preparations, is spirit of
Salt, and whatever things are compounded of Tartar. II. Improperly so called,
and they either hot, as Maidenhair, Terpentine, Ambona Root, of which see
Zacutus. Or moist and which lenifie the passages, as Mallow-seeds, Marshmallow,
Lycorice. Or cold, as Strawberries, Barley, the four cool seeds, Bath-waters,
Whey of Milk, Juice of Lemons. Also Peach-Kernel water with Muscadine is
commended. The whitest slints heated red hot and quenched in rich Wine, Oil of
Wax from five drops to six. Salt of Amber, an half dram in weight. Water of
Hips, Oil of Juniper Berries, etc.


Point 3. Of Hydroticks and Diaphoreticks.
Hydroticks are, such medicaments as drive out the morbifick matter by the
habit of the body, in a sensible manner, viz. by sweat.

They are otherwise termed Sudorificks. The act by reason of their heat and
thinness or subtilty of parts, turning the peccant matter into a vapor; and
they which are cold, do act by a propriety of their Substance. Now they are, I.
Either Simples, as Angelica, Pimpinella, Fumitory, Tormentil, Zedoary, China,
Sarsaparilla, Sassafras, Lignum Guajacum, Cornu Cervi, Bezoar stone, oriental
and occidental.

2. Or Compounds, as, Orenge-Flower Water and Treacle water. Spirit of terra
sigilata, Tartar, Carduus, de tribus, Treacle, Mithridate. Salt of Scabious,
Carduus, Wormwood, Ash. Among chemical preparations, there is Aurum
Diaphoreticum, Flowers of Antimony fixed, Turpetum minerale diaphoreticum,
Sulfur Auratum, Bezoardicum joviale, etc.

II. Transpirers properly termed Diaphoreticks, are such medicaments as drive
the morbifickmater through the pores of the Skin, invisibly. They are al hot,
turn the Matter in a vaporous steam, and open the bodies pores. The chief are,
Melilote, Fenugreek, Rue, Marjerom. Of Kin to these, are Wind-discussers, such
as are the Roots of the smaller Galangal. Leaves of Bays, Dictamus Penyroial,
Origanum, Rue, Marjerom. Seeds of Annis, Fenel, Carway, Cumin, Carrot. Fruits,
Bay Berries, Juniper berries. Barks of Citrons, Orenges, etc.

Point 4. Of Medicaments which purge the Brain.
Brain-purgers are such as void the morbifick matter nestling in the Brain, by
the Nostrils or Palate. The former are called Errhina and Ptarmica; the latter
Apophlegmatizantia.

I. Errhina, do by their nitrous quality melt and dissolve the phlegm which
hangs about the Coats of the Brain, and draw it out into the Nostrils, without
any disturbance to the Brain it self. The chief are, the Roots of Orice,
Bindweed. Leaves of Beat, purple Anagallis, Marjerom, Sage, Betony, Ivy.
Juyces, Elaterium, which is the strongest, and Juice of Pulsatilla. Also they
may be made out of the foresaid roots and Leaves.

II. Ptarmica, or Sneezers, do by their Acrimony so provoke the Expulsive
Faculty of the Brain, as to cause it to cast them out, and with them such
excrements as stick in the Brain it self. The chief are, the Roots of Ginger,
Pellitory, Orice white Hellebore. Leaves, of sneezewort, Tobacco Seeds, Peper,
Mustard, Staphisacre, Nigella, Gums, Euphorbium, whose smell alone is sufficient.

III. Apophlegmatizers, Being either chewed, or gargled, or smeared upon the
Palate, bring down the Excrements from the Brain into the Palate and mouth.
They are made of roots, of Ginger, Pellitory of spain. Seeds, of peper,
watercresses, Mustard, Staphisacre; Gum; mastick.

Point, V. Of Expectorators.
Expectorateing Medicaments are those which evacuate humors contained in the
chest and Lungs.

They are made of Roots of Alecampane, Birthwort, Angelica, Orice,
Cuckow-pintle, Squills, Lycorice. Of the Leaves of Hyssop, Maiden-haire,
Scabious, Horehound, Colts foot. Seeds of Cotton, Watercresses, Erysimum,
Seseli, Nettles. Fruits, reisons, jujbes, sebestens, Almonds, Figs,
Pistachios. Hither also appertains Sperma, Ceti. See more of these in the
Chest-medicines.

Chap. 6. Of Medicaments denominated from the parts of the Body.
Article. 1. Of Cephalik Medicaments.
Point. 1. Of Cephalic Medicaments, which are hot.
ANd so we have done with our Muster of such Medicaments, as are denominated
from their faculties: those follow, which receive their denomination from the
parts of the Body, with which they have an Agreement, by reason of their whole
substance and specifical properties.

Now they are these, Caphalicks, Ophthalmicks, Thoracicks, Cardiacks,
Stomachicks, Hepaticks, Spleneticks, Nephriticks, and Vterine Medicaments. And
al these are either Hot or Cold, Internal or External.

I. Internal heating Cephalicks are, 1. Of Simples, Roots of Paeonie,
Caryophillata, Birthwort, Masterwort, Calamus Aromaticus. Leaves; of Primrose,
Betony, Rosemary, Marjerom, Centory, Sage. Flowers; of the Linden-tree,
Stachados of Arabia, Lilly-convally, Peony, Primrose, Betony. Seeds, of Amomum,
Peonie, Mountain withie, Coriander. Fruits; Kermes Berries, Anacardia, Bay and
Juniper berries. Spices, Cubebs, Nutmeg, Cardamom, Cloves. Woods, Miseltoe of
the Oak, and of the Hasel. Tears; Frankincense, Storax; Sea-commodities,
Amber, Ambergreise. From Animals; Mosk, Castoreum. II Of compounds: Water, of
black cherries, of Lilly-convally, Peony, Linden, Gilloflower, Primrose,
Orange-flowers, Treacle-water. Tinctures, Elixit proprietatis, of Peony, of
Sassafras wood. Distilled oiles. Of Rosemary, Marjerom, Sage, Rue, Ambar,
Spike, etc. Syrups, of stechados, Betony, Gilloflowers, Peony. Conserves, of
Betony, Sage, Rosemary flowers, Lilly-convally, Centorie, Stechados. Preserves;
Nutmegs preserved, Indian Nut preserved, Preserved wallnuts. Electuaries,
Confectio Alkermes, Treacle, Mithridate, Diacastoreum. Spices of Diambra,
Dianthos, Diamoschum dulce, Diacastoreum.

II. External heateing Cephalicks are. I. Among Simples, al those well nere,
before related. Leaves of Rue, Running betony, upright vervaine, are
exceedingly commended. II. Among compounds are, Oils, of Sassafras wood, Oil
of Rue, Nard Oil, Oil of Baies, of Castorem. Balsoms, of Roses, of Rosemary,
of Nutmeg, Marjerom, Sage, Ambar. Emplasters, de Betonica, de Mucilagnibus, de
Baccis Laury.


Point. 2. Of cooleing Cephalic Medicaments.
Cephalic cooling Medicaments are likewise internal, or external.

I. Internal are, 1. Of Simples, the Roots, of Mandrake, the Leaves of Lettuce,
Perslane, Plantane, Nightshade, Water Lillies, Henbane. Flowers, of Roses,
white popie, Red-poppie, purple violets, waterlillies. Seeds, four greater and
smaller cooleseeds. Fruits, of Gourd, Cucumbers. Woods, of Sanders. II. Of
Compounds. Waters of Roses, Violets, Lettuce, Waterlilly, Nightshade. Juices;
Opium, Vinegar of Roses. Syprups, of white poppie, red popie, Roses,
Water Lillies. Conserves, of Lettuce, and of the flowers aforesaid.
Electuaries, Diacodion simplex and compositum, Diaolibanum opiatum, Ladanum
opiatum. Speices, Diatrion santalon de gemis frigidum, Diacorallium.

II. External are, I. Of Simples; Leaves of Willow, Vine, Venus Navil,
Mandrake. The rest may be taken from the foregoing. II. Of compounds; Waters,
of Henbane, Lettice, Water Lillies, Plantaine, Nightshade, Elders, Roses.
Juyces; of the Birch-tree, House-leeke, etc. Oils, of Poppeyes, Violets,
Water Lillies, Lettice-seed, Mandrakes, Frogs. Ointments of Roses, Alablaster,
Album camphoratum, Refrigerans Galeni, Populeum.

Article, 2. Of Ophthalmick Medicaments.
Ophthamlick or Eye-medicaments, are either Heating or Cooleing; and they are
both external and internal.

I. Internal Heateing Eye-medicaments are. I. Of Simples, Roots of valerian,
Fenel, Celondine, Navew, Rapes. Leaves of the greater Celondine, Fumitory,
Eyebright, Pimpernel, Rosemary. Flowers; of Eybright, Celondine, Marygolds.
Seeds, of Anis, Rue, Siler montanus, Turnips. Spices, Safron, Lignum-aloes. II.
Of Compounds, Waters of Vervaine, Celondine the greater, Fenel, Vervaine, Rue,
Centaury the less. Syrups, of Betony, Eyebright. Electuaries, Treacle,
Mithridate; Conserves, of Eyebright, Rosemary-flowers, Betony, Sage,
Gillowflowers, Extract, of Lignum-Aloes.


II. External are, I. Of simples, the Roots of Vervaine, Valerian. The Leaves,
of which mention has been often-made. Flowers of Hypericon, Melilote, consolida
regalis. Seeds, of Clarie or Clear-Eie, Line, Fenugreek. II. Of compounds, Aqua
Saccarata, Calendule, Mellis, Mullein, Elder, Bread. Ointments, Pomatum
Dialthea.


III. Internal coolers are, I. Of Simples; Roots, of Cichory, Straberry, Rapes.
Leaves of Strawberry, Cichory, Plantane. Flowers of white-roses, Violets,
Water Lillies. Seeds, of Quinces, white-poppie. II. Of compounds, Waters, Of
Strawberry, Porslane, Syrups, Conserves, Species, etc. See among the Cephalicks.


IV. External coolers are. I. Among Simples, the Leaves of Dandelion, Oak, etc.
The Flowers, see above. Seeds, of Beans, Fleawort, Quinces. Fruits, Pulpe of
apples. A sweet apple with Sugar. Earths, Bole Armeniack, Terra Sigillata.
Metalline Substances, Ceruss, Litturidge of Silver, Lapis calaminaris,
Saccharum Saturni, Spodium. II. Of compounds, waters of Blewbottles, Beans,
Goose-grease, Strawberries. Mucilages, of fleawort seeds, Mallow and
Marsh-mallow seeds etc.


Article, 3. Of Chest Medicaments.
Point, 1. Of Heating Breast Medicaments.
Chest Medicaments are likewise, either Heaters or Coolers, internal or
external.

Internal Heaters are, I. Of simples, Roots of Enula campane, Squil, round
Birth-wort, Coltsfoot, Pimpinel, Scordium, Scabious, Dragon, Soap-wort.
Leaves, of the five capillary Herbs, Horehound, Clamint, Scabious, Fluellen,
Hedera terrestris, Coltsfoot, Botrys, spotted Lungwort. Hyssop, Scordium,
Two-penny grass. Flowers; of Scabious, spoted lungwort, Hysop, colts foot
spike, sea-grass. Seeds of wild rue, and Garden rue, of mountain siler, sesili
or Marselles, Chervil, Carduus, southern-wood. Fruits; fat-figgs, Dates,
Paisons of the Sun, Indian Nut. Spices, Saffron Cassia Lignea, Cinnamon. Woods,
of Sassafrass, Guajacum, Orange peels. Earths and Gums, Bole-armeniack, Gum
Ammoniac, Myrrh, Terpentine, Choice Frankincense. II. Of Compounds; Waters, of
Hysop, Horehound, Maidenhaire, Fluellen, Ground Ivy, Scabious, Carduus, Orice,
Calves-grass. Spirit, of Turpentine, Sulphur, Ground Ivy. Distilled Oiles, of
Anise, Fennel, Mace, Sage, Creeping betony. Tinctures, Elixit proprietatis,
Tinctura Sulfuris, Balsam of the same, or with oil of fenel, or of sweet
almonds. Extracts, of Saffron, Orice, Fluellen, Calamus Aromaticus, Ground Ivy.
Decoctions, Decoctum pectorale, of dried Rapes, of an old Cock, of Lignum
Guajacum. Syrups of Hyssop, of Horehound, of Maiden hair, of the Juice of Ivy,
of Fleuellen, of Scabious, of Tobacco, Oxymel simple, of Squils. Lohoch, of
Coltsfoot, of Fox-lungs, Lohoch sanum and Expertum, de Passulis, de althea.
Conserves, of Bortys; Veronica, Pulmonaria maculosa, Hedera terrestris.
Electuaries, Treacle, Mithridate. Speices diaireos simple, Diatragacanthum
frigidum, Diapenidium, Diathamarum. Fecular, Aronis. Flowers, of Brimstone, of
Benzoin. Trochiscks Bechic^albi and nigri, Diaireos.


II. External Heaters are, I Of the simples, al those in a manner, which we
formerly mustered. II. Of compounds; Oiles of Orice, Rue, Costus, Cheiri, Sweet
almonds and bitter, Lillies, Line: Fatts, Goose-fat, which most penetrates,
Deer-suer, Hens-grease. Mucilages, of Lin-seed, Fenigreek, marshmallowes, with
Safron. Ointments, of Marshmallowes, Pectoral ointment, and Unguentum
Resumptivum.

Point, 2. Of cooling Chest-medicaments.
Cooling Chest medicat^^^s, are internal or external.

I. The internal are. I. Of simples; Roots, of Garden Endive,
Lamb-tongueplantane, Polypody. Leaves, of porslane, Water-lillys, Colewort.
Flowers, of Violets, mallows, Water lillys, Bugloss, Cichory, red poppy,
roses. Seeds, the four great and small cool-seeds, seeds of poppy mallows,
quinces, barley. Fruits; Hungarian and spanish prunes, mulberries, Jujubes,
sebestens, of water thistle, of sweet briar dried. Woods; red sanders, yellow
sanders, white Sanders, Gum tragant, Arabic. Animals; River crabs, whey,
Goates-milk. II. Of compounds; Waters, of a capon simple and compound, of
veale, mallows, Violets, water lillies, red popie. Distilled oiles; of purple
violets, sweet almonds. Emulsions, of white poppie, porslane, cold seeds.
Decoctions, Decoctum pectorale in the London Dispensatory, of a Capon. Syrups;
of violets. Jujubees, Water Lillies, Gourds, red poppie, porslane, Dialth^ae
Fernelij. Lohoch, de Psyllio, of reisins, of Cole stalks, of po^slane of
marsh-mallowes. Electuaries, Diacodium of the Physicians of Augsburge, new
Treacle. Conserves, of roses, violets with boile-Armeniack, Spanish Lettuce.
Species, Diatragacanthi frigidi, Diapenidij. Roules, of diatragacanthum
frigidum, Diamargaritum frigidum, diapenidium, sugar of roses in Lozenges.

II. External are, I. Of simples; the Leaves, before aleadged. Animals, fresh
may butter not salted, barrowes grease. Mucilages of Fleawort seeds, of Quince
seeds, of Fenigreek, of marsh-mallowes. Oiles, of violets, white lillies.

Article, 4. Of Cardiac or Heart-Medicines.
Point. 1. Of Heating Heart-Medicines.
Cardiack-medicaments are such as are good for the Heart, whether given in, or
outwardly applied; and they are also hot or cold.

Internal are. I. Of simples; Roots of Scordium, Doronicum, Angelica,
Devils-bit, Master-wort, Vince-toxicum, Scorzonera, Dictamnus, Contrajerva,
Tormentil. Leaves; of Baum, scordium, sage, Tormentil, carduus, Scabious
Fluellen, Cardiaca, Goats, Rue, Garden and wild Cresses. Flowers, of the
Gilloflower, rosemary, scabious, Centaury, Baum, Tormentil, Borrage, Bugloss.
Seeds of Citrons. Aurenges, Carduus, Rue, Lovage, Navew. Spices, Nutmeg, Cassia
lignea, Safron, Cloves. Woods, Lignum Aloes. Gums; myrrh, Camphire, Benzoin,
Mastich. Sea-commodities, Amber, Ambar-greise. Earths and stones.
Bole-Armeniack, Terra sigillata Turcica and stringensis, Perles, Corals,
fragments of the five precious stones. Animals, Bezoar stone, Harts-horne,
Rhinocerots Horn, Bone out of the Heart of a Stag. II. Of compounds, spirits of
Elder and juniper berries, baume, Elixir of Citrons with spirit of muscadine.
Distilled waters, Of Carduus, baum, Citron-flowers, scabious, marigolds,
scordium, Carbuncles, Cinnamon with Cordial flowers, Bezoardica senerty.
Distilled oils, of Cinnamon, Citron, baum, Ambar, Cloves, Nutmegs. Tinctures,
of ambar, Elixir proprietatis. Extracts, of Angelica, Carduus, Citron peeles,
Lignum aloes, Vince toxicum, Zedoary, Safron. Essences, the magistery of
Cinnamon, Essence of Ambar, of Citrons, of Perles, of Vervaine. Juyces, of
Citrons with their barks, of Pomgranates, Gelly of Hearts horn, made with
Vinegar of Hearts horn and scordium. Syrups of Citron peeles, with and without
musk and Ambar, Scordium, Carduus, Orenges, baum, Gilloflowers, Pomgranates,
veronica, Borrage, Bugloss, Gallangal. Conserves, of Baum, Citron-flowers,
Orenges, Gillowflowers, Marygolds, Borrage, Bugloss. Preserves, of Citron
peeles, Orange peeles, Indian Nut, Scorzonera roots, elecampane roots
Electuaries, Treacle, Mithridate, Confectio Alkermes, Diascordium Fracastorij.
Species and pouders, of Diamargartium calidum, Diamoschi, Diambrae, Bezoardicus.

II. External are, I. Of simples, those which have been reckoned up before. 1.
The compounds likewise are the same, viz. waters, juices, distilled oiles. Of
these Epithemes, bags, Fomentations and Linements are made.

Point, 2. Of cooleing Heart-medicaments.
Cooleing Hart-medicaments are either Internal, or External.

I. The Internal are, I. Of simples; Roots, of Dandelyon, Sorrel. Leaves; of
Sorrel, wood sorrel, Water-lillyes. Flowers, of violets, Cichory,
Water Lillies. Seeds, the four cold seeds. Fruits, of Rasberry, red Corants,
Barberries, Citrons, Aurenges, Pomegranats, Sweet briar berries dried. Woods;
the three Sanders. Earths and medicines from Animals, are those before
mentioned. II. Of compounds; Waters, of Sorrel, Straw-berries, black Cherries,
Quinces, Hart-Stones. Juyces, of Citrons, Pomegranates, Rasberries, Vinegar of
Roses, Gelly of Hartshorn, made with Elder-flower Vinegar. Syrups of juice of
Citrons, of Pomegranates, of Wood sorrel, of juice of Red Corrants,
Strawberries, Lorrals, Violets. Conservs, of Citron flowers, of Aurenges, of
the pulp of Citrons, of Roses, of Acacia. Preservs, of Red and White Corants,
Barberies, Citron, Meats, Eglancine berries. Species and Powders, of
Diamargaritum frigidum; Diatrion santalon, Magistery of Perles, of Corals.


Article 5. Of Stomach Medicaments.
Point 1. Of hot Stomach Medicaments.
Stomach medicaments are such as heat the stomach, or cool it; and that either
taken inwardly, or outwardly applied.

Internal stomach-heaters are, 1. Of simples; Roots, of Pimpinel, Rhaponticum,
Galangal, Zedoary, Calamus Aromaticus, Caryophyllata. Leaves, of Roman and
common Wormwood, red and garden Mint, Cardiaca, Cichory, Agrimony, Marjerom.
Seeds; the four greater and lesser cool seeds, Coriander, prepared. Fruits,
Juniper berries, bay berries, Aurenges, Indian Nut. Spices, Nutmeg, Ginger,
Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon, Galangal, Cubebs, al sorts of Pepper, Cassia Lignea.
Woods, Lignum Aloes, Guajacum, Citron Peels, Orange Peels. Gums, of Mastich.
Sea-medicines, Ambar, Ambar-greise. Of Compounds; Spirits, of Muscadine, of
Rhenish Wine, of vitriol, of Mastich, of Wormwood, of Rosemary of Cinnamon, of
bread. Distilled Waters, of Mints of Betony, Sage, of Cinnamon, with and
without Wine, Elixir vitae, of Baum with Wine, of Zedoary with Wine. Distilled
Oils, of Peper, Calamus Aromaticus, Cloves Mace, Cinnamon, Caraway, Fennel,
Wormwood, Orange Peels, Tinctures, Elixir Proprietatis, of Amber, of Corals, of
Sassafras Wood. Extracts, of Lignum aloes, Wormwood, calamus aromaticus.
Essences; of Rosemary, Citrons, Wormwood, Aurenges; whereunto belong, Salt of
Wormwood, Juniper. Syrups of Cinnamon, Mints, Wormwood Betony, Mastich, Oximel
sciliticum, Syrup of St. John's Wort flowers. Conservs; of Wormwood, Mints,
Betony, Red Roses vitriolated. Preservs, of China Ginger, true Acorus,
Galangal, Citron Peels, Orange peels, Nutmegs, Indian Nut, Myrobalans. Species
and Pouders, Aromaticum Rosatum, Diatrion pipereon, Diaxyloaloes, Imperial
species, Stomach-pouder of Brickmannus.

II. External are, 1. Of simples, such as have been already reckoned up, and of
Gums, Ladanum, Tacamahaca, Styrax calamites. 2. Of Compounds, there are besides
the aforesaid, the Balsams of Peru, Camemel Roman. Ointments, Stomach
Ointment, Martiatum magnum. Emplasters and Cataplasmes, Emplastrum Stomachle,
de Crusta panis, de Baccis Lauri, de mastiche.

Point 2. Of Stomach Cooling Midicaments.
Cooling Stomach medicines, are also internal, and external.

I. Internal. I. Of Simples, Roots of Cichory, Sorrel, Asparagus,
Water Lillies. Leaves, Endive, Sorrel, porslane, myrtle. Flowers, of Roses,
Violets, balaustians. Seeds; the four cool seeds, barley, Sorrel seeds, Rose
seeds. Fruits, Citrons, Quinces, Orenges, Pomegranates, myrtle berries,
medlars, Tamarinds, Corants, melons, and cowcombers. Woods, Sanders. Stones,
Red corals. II. Of Compounds, waters, of Roses, Acacia, Strawberries, plantane,
porslane, Quinces. Juyces, such as are mentioned among cooling Heart-medicines.
Syrups, of corals, Juice of citrons, Juice of sour Grapes, of Quinces, of
Acacia, of pomegranates, Julep of Roses and of Violets. Conservs, of Roses
vitriolated, of Acacia Flowers, Oak-tops, citron-flowers. Confects of Cichory
Roots, Quinces, Spanish Lettuce. Diacidonium simplex. Species and Pouders,
Diatrion santalon, Diarhodon Abbatis, Diamargariti frigidi.


II. Externals are, I. Of simples, those we mentioned for inward medicaments.
II. Of compounds; Oil of Roses, Violers, Quinces, Water Lillies, unripe Olives.


Article, 6. Of Epatick Medicaments.
Point. 1. Of hot Liver Medicaments.
Liver medicaments are hot or cold: and they are internal or external.

I. The Internal are, 1. Of simples; Roots, the five opening, greater and
lesser; of Pimpinel, wild Radish, Squills, rhaponticum verum, Rhubarb. Leaves
of Agrimony, Eupatorium of Mesuae, Kunigund is her herb Mountain Chamaedrys,
Centaury, watercresses, Betony, Liver-wort, Ground Pine. Flowers, of Centauty,
Spike, Squinanes, Elder, Liverwort, Hops. Seeds of Orenges, Citrons, Brooklime,
Seseli. Fiuits, Aurenges, reisons, Juniper berries. Spices, Cinnamon, Saffron,
Acorus, Zedoary, Indian Spiknard, Cassia lignea. Woods, Legnum aloes, Guajacum,
Santalum citrinum. II. Of Compounds; Spirits, of Elder, Guajacum, Wormwood,
Centory. Waters, of the Herbs aforesaid. Oils, of Sage, Orenges, Wormwood,
Juniper berries, Mace, Nutmeges. Tinctures, Elixir proprietais, of Lignum
Sassafras. Extract, of Gentian, Carduus, Lignum aloes, Wormwood, Guaiacum,
Veronica, Calamus aromaticus. Syrups of Ground-Oak, Byzantinus Syrupus so
called, of Hops, of Wormwood. Conservs of Chamaedrys, Sage, Wormwood, Fumitory,
Rosemary Flowers. Preservs, of Acorus, Citron pee^s, Citrons, Pimpinel roots.
Species and Pouders, Diacurcumae, Dialaccae, Diaxyloasoes, Diamargariti calidi.

II. The external are, I. Of Simples; those formerly alleged. II. Of
Compounds; Oil of Roses, Quinces, Water lillies, unripe Olives.
Ointments, Unguentum Santalinum, Refringerans Galeni, Rosatum Mesues.
Plasters, Cerotum Santalinum, Diaphaenicon frigidum, Emplastrum de succo
Ciculae.

Article 7, Of Splenetick Medicaments
Point 1. Of hot Splenetick Medicaments.
Splenetick Medicaments are hot or cold: and both are internal and external.

I. Internal hot Medicaments are, 1. Of Simples; the Roots of Fern which is
counted an appropriate medicament, of Scorzonera, of Orice of Florence, of
Polipody of the Oak, of Caryophy llata, of wild Radish. Leaves, of
Scolopendrium, Hart's-tongue; Scurvy Grass, Tamarisk, Dodder, Hops, Fumitory,
Brook-^ime, Chervil, Galiopfis, Ground Oak. Flowers, of Hops, Broom, Elder,
Chamaemel, Fumitory, Liver-wort. Seeds, of Ash, Ammios, Watercresses, Chervil,
Mustard, Nettle, wild Parsenip, Scurvy Grass. Spices, Saffron, Epithymum.
Woods, of Sassafras, Lignum aloes. Barks, of Cappar Roots, middle rind of the
Ash Tree, of the Elder and Tamarisk Tree. Gums of Ammoniacum dissolved in
Vinegar of Squils. II. Of Compounds; Spirits, of Wine tartarized, of Centory,
of vitriol of Mars, of Tartar simple and compound, of Brook-Lime, of
Scurvy Grass, of Guajacum, of Juniper berries. Waters, of Dodder, Melissa
compound, Hops, Watercresses, Scurvy Grass, Fumitory. Tincture of Mars.
Extracts, of the Spleen of Jove, Scolopendrium, Hart's-tongue, Scordium,
Fumitory, polypody. Essences, of Scurvy Grass, of Epythymum, of Chamaedrys,
Fumitory, Dodder, Cappars. Syrups of Scolopendrium Fernelii, of Broom Flowers,
of Epithimum, of Scurvy Grass of Apples, Forestus his Syrup against the scurvy.
Conservs, of scurvy grass, scolopendria, broom-flowers, Fumitory, Veronica,
Ground-Oak, Pimpinel. Species, of Dialacca, Diacurcuma, Dicapparum of
Hollerius, Tartarus Vitriolatus.

II. External medicaments are, I. Of simples, those already reckoned, and of
Gums, Ladanum, Tacamahaca, styrax. II. Of compounds, besides the forementioned,
there are Balsams, of Peru, of Roman Chamaemel, of Mastich. Unguents,
Unguentum stomachale, Martiatum magnum.
Plasters and Cataplasmes, Emplastrum stomachale, de Crusta panis, de Baccis
Lauri, de Mastichae.

Point 2. Of cooling Stomach-medicaments.
Also cooling stomach medicaments, are either internal or external.

I. The Internal, are, I. Of Simples; the Roots of Cychory, sorrel, Asparagus,
water lillies. Leaves, al sorts of Endive, sorrel, porslane, myrtle. Flowers, of
Roses, Violets, Balaustians. Seeds, the four greater cool seeds, barley,
sorrel, and Rose seeds. Fruits, Citrons, Quinces, Orenges, Pomegranates,
myrtils, medlars, Tamarinds, red and white corants, melons, cucumbers. Woods,
sanders. Stones, red-coral. II. Of compounds, waters of Roses, Acacia,
strawberries, Plantane, porslane Quinces. Juyces, those which have been
mentioned among the cooling Heart Medicaments. Syrups, of corals, Juice of
citrons, sour Grapes, Quinces, Acacia, Pomegranates, Julep of Roses, and
Violets. Conservs of Roses Vitriolated, Flowers of Acacia, Tops of Oak, citron
flowers. Preservs, of Cichory roots, of Quinces, of Spanish Lettuce,
Diacydonium simplex. Species and pouders, Diatrion santalon, Diarrhodon
Abbatis, Diamargaritum frigidum.


II. External are, I. Of simples, those already reckoned among the internal
medicaments. II. Of compounds, oil of Roses, violets, Quinces, of unripe Olives.


Article, 6. Of Liver-medicaments.
Point, I. Of Heating Liver medicaments.
Liver medicaments are heating or cooling. And the former are internal or
external.

I. The Internal are, 1. Of simples; Roots, The five opening roots greater and
lesses, roots of pimpinel, wild-redish, squil, Rhapontick, Rhubarb. Leaves, of
Agrimony, of Eupatorium of Mesue, of true mountain ground oak, Centory the
less, Watercresses, Betony, Liver wort, ground pine, Flowers of Centory the
less, spicknard, Squinanth, Elder, Liver-wort, Hops* Seeds of orenges, Citrons,
Brooklime, Se^eli. Fruits, Orenges, Raysons, Juniper berries. Spices, Cinnamon,
Safron, Acorus, Zedoary, Indian spike, Cassialignia. Woods; Lignum Aloes,
Guajacum, Santalum citrinum. 2. Of compounds; the Spirit of Elder berries,
Guajacum, wormwood, Centory the less. Waters, distilled of the foresaid Herbs.
Oils of sage, Orenge-peels, wormwood, Juniper, Mace, Nutmegs. Tinctures,
Elixir proprietatis, of Lignum Sassafras. Extracts, of Gentian, Carduus,
Lignumaloes, Wormwood, Guajacum, Veronica, Calamus aromaticus. Syrups of Ground
oak, Byzantinus, Hops, wormwood. Conserves, of Ground-oake, Sage, Wormwood,
Fumitory,. Rosemary Flowers. Preserves, of Acorus, Orenge-peeles, Citron
peeles, Citron pap, pimpinel roots. Species and po^^ders, Diacurcuma,
Dialacca, Diaxuloaloes, Diamargaritum calidum.

II. The Eternal are, I. Of simples, those before specified, of which
decoctions, Bags, and fomentations, may be made. Ointments, are Unguentum
Nardinum, Martiatum. Plasters, Diaphaenicon calidum, de Baccis Lauri,
Oxycroceum.

Point, 2. Of Liver-coolers.
Liver coolers are either internal or external.

I. The internal are, I. Of Simples; Roots of Aspragus, Grass, Water lilies,
Strawberry, Sorrel, Cichory, Leaves, of Sorrel, Strawberry, Asparagus.
Sowthistle, Garden Endive, porslane, Lettice, Water lilly. Flowers; of Roses,
Cichory, Bugloss, Balaustians, Water Lillies, Acacia, red-poppy. Seeds, the
four great and small cool seeds, barley, white popy, violets. Fruits,
Pomegranates, etc. which we have reckoned among stomach-coolers. See Gums and
precious stones in the same place. From Animals, shavings of Hearts ho^ne and
Ivory, whey of Goates-milk. II. Of compounds, Spirit of Vitriol, a^^^ spirit of
Sulphur, of salt. Distilled waters, of Cichory, Sorrel, Water Lillies,
Strawberries. Syrups, of the juice of Cichory, Endive, Sorrel, wood sorrel,
juice of Citrons, and the rest reckoned among cooling stomach medicines.
Conserves, Preserves, and species, see in the same place.


II. External are, I. Of simples, the same forecited. II. Of compounds; Oiles
of Roses, Quinces, Water Lillies, unripe olive. Ointments, of Sanders, cooling
Ointment of Galen, Unguentum rosatum of Mesue. Emplasters, Cerotum santalinum,
Diaphenicon frig^^^ (...) pla^ster of the juice of Hemlock.

Article, 7. Of Splenetick Medicaments.
Point, 1. Of warming spleen medicaments.
Spleen medicaments are, either heating or cooling, each of them internal or
external.

I. The internal Heating are, I. Of simples; Roots, of Fern, which are
appropriate, of Scorzonera, of Florentine orice, of polypody of the Oak, of
Avens, of wild radish. Leaves, of true scolopendrium, Hart's-tongue,
Scurvygrass, Tamarisk, Dodder, Hops, Fumitory, Brooklime, Chervil, Galiposis,
ground oak. Flowers, of Hops, Broom, Elder, Fumitory, Liver-wort. Seeds, of
Ash, bishops-weed, Watercresses, Chervil, mustard, Nettle, wild parsnip, Scurvy
grass. Spices, Safron, Epithymum. Woods, Sassafrs, Xyloaloes. Barks, of capar
roots, middle rind of ash-roots, Elder roots, Tamarisk roots. Gum Amoniacum
dissolved in Vinegar of squils. II. Of compounds; Spirits of wine tartarized,
of Centaury, of vitriol, of Mars, of Tartar simple and compound, of
watercresses, of Scurvy grass, of Guajacum, of juniper berries. Waters, of
Dodder, of barm compound, of Hops, of Watercresses, of Scurvy Grass, of
Fumitory. Tinctures of Mars. Extracts, of Joves Spleen, Scolopendrium,
Hart's-tongue, Scordium, Fumitory, Polypody. Essences of Scurvy Grass,
Epithymun^ Ground-oake, Fumitory, Dodder, Capa^^^ Syrupps, of Ceterach or
Scolopendrium or Fernelus, of Epithymum, of Scurvy Grass, of Apples, the
Scotbutick Syrup of Forestus. Conserves, of Scurvy grass, of Ceterach, of
Broom-flowers, of Fumitory, of Fluellen, of Chamaedrys, Pimpinel. Species, of
Dialacca, Diacurcuma, Diacapparum of Hollerius, Tartarus Vitriolatus.


II. External are, I. Of simples, those before mentioned. II. Of compounds,
Oils, of Capars, Orice, Cheiri, Rue, Peach kernels, Almonds, Scorpions.
Ointments, of dialthea, Martiatum, de Arthanita, de Ammoniaco, Spleneticum.
Emplasters, of Melilote, diachylum ireatum, Emolliens Foresti, diasulphuris
Rulandi.

Point, 3. Of cooling Spleen-Medicaments
Cooling Spleen Medicaments, are internal or external.

I. The internal are, I. Of simples. Roots, Of Cichory-like plants, and of
which mention is made, among liver Medicines. Leaves, Flowers, Fruits, Seeds,
may be also fetched from thence. To these you may ad the barks of willow roots.
II. Of compounds, are the same likewise, to which you may ad medicaments
prepared of tartar and of steel. Trochisks of Sanders, spodium, Carabe,
Barberries.


II. The external are, I. Of simples; Roots, of Mandrake. Leaves of white
henbane, Hemlock, Willow, Water Lillies. II. Of compounds, see those reckoned
among cooling Liver-Remedies.


Article, 8. Of Nephritick Medicaments.
Point, 1. Of heating Nephriticks, or kidny remedies.
Nephritick Medicaments are either heating or cooling, both are internal or
external.

I. Internal heaters are, I. Of Simples; Roots of restharrow, Saxifrage,
Filipendula, Pimpinel, Lycoris; Marsh-mallow, Polypody, Lovage. Leaves of
maiden hair, Walrue, Fluellen, Chervil, Nettle, ground ivy, Pellitory of the
wall, Feverfew, Restharow. Flowers; of Broom, Spike, Elder, Betony, the yellow
of violets, St. John's Wort flowers. Seeds, the four greater and lesser hot
seeds, persly, gromwel, Saxifrage, Cherry-stone-kernels, Peach-stone-kernels,
Oak of Jeru^^lem, Beans. Fruits, Juniper berries, Ivy-berries,
winter-cherries, bitter Almonds, Sweet-briar berries, Corants. Spices, Cassia
lignea, Spica, Indica, Safron. Woods, Lignum Sanctum, Nephriticum, Tamarisk.
Gums, Terpentine, Myrrh, Mastich, Olibanum. Minerals, Lapis judaicus, Lapis
Nephriticus. From animals, the stones of Perches, Crab's-eyes, Earth-wormes,
Eggsshels, Jaws of a Pike. II. Of compounds, spirit of salt, Terpentine, Elder
berries, Strawberries, Cherties, Vitriol, Feverfew. Distilled Waters, of
Rest-harrow, saxifrage, Persley, Hedera terrestris, Alkekengy, Matricaria,
Elder flowers. Oils of Orenges, Juniper, peach-kernels, cherries, bitter
almonds. Tinctures, Elixir proprietatis, of Ambar. Extracts, of veronica,
Ground Ivy, Lycorice. Syrups, of Maiden hair of Fernelius, Byzanrinus so
called, of dialthea, Oxymel. Conserves, of Hedera terristris, veronica, Sweet
briar-berry. Spices and pounders, Lithontripticon, Tartarus Vitriolatus,
Restharrow-Salt, salt of Bean ham, chervil, Nettles.


II. External are, I. Of simples, such as were before aleadged. II. Of
compounds, Oiles, of scorpions, white lillyes. Ointments, Martiatum, Agrippae,
Aregon, dialthea. Emplasters, diachylon simple, Oxycroceum, Melilote.


Point, 2. Of cooling Nephriticks.
Cooling Nephritcks are internal, or external.

I. Internal are, I. Of simples, Roots of Grass, Strawberries, Water Lillies.
Leaves of Porslane, Willow, Venus Basin, Hearts-ease, Lettuce. Flowers, of
Water Lillies, Violets, Roses, Beans. Seeds, the fouer cold, white poppy seed,
seed of purple violets. Fruits, see among the stomach and liver coolers.
Stones, Crystal. II, Of compounds, Waters of Strawberries, Violets, barley,
porslane, Lettuce. Juyces, of Citrons, Strawberries, porslane. Syrups, of Water
Lillies, Strawberries, porslane, syrup of the juice of Cirrons. Con^erves, of
Acacia, violets, porslane.


II. External are the same, to which ad of the compounds, Oils of Roses, water
lillies, sugar of Lead. Unguents; The Ointment of Roses of Mesue, Galens
cooling Ointment.

Article, IX. Of Vterine Medicaments.
Point, I. Of heating Vterine or Womb-Medicaments.
Vterine Medicaments are either Heating or Cooling, and they are internal or
external.

I. The internal are, I. Of simples, Roots, of Peony, Valerian, Laserpitium,
Angelica, Pimpinella, Bryony, Aristolochia rotunda. Leaves, of Mugwort, Rue,
round Birthwort, Mercury, Fever-few, Sabine, Betony. Flowers, of Betony, Chery,
Elder, St. John's Wort, Stechados, spikenard. Seeds, four hot, mountain osier,
red vetched, Rosemary, peony. Fruits, Indian Nut, Juniper Berries, Orenges.
Spices, Cinnamon, Cassia lignea, Nutmegs, Cubebs, Grains of Paradise, Safron.
Woods, Lignum aloes, Ash, Guajacum. From Animals, Castoreum. II. Of compounds,
Waters, of Mugwort, Hysop, Elder, Cinnamon, Zedoary, yellow stock-gillo
flowers, betony with wine. Oils, of Cinnamon, Angellica, Ambar, Cloves.
Tinctures, the Uterine Elixir of Crollius, omitting salt of mother of perle.
Extracts; Hystericum majus and minus of Quercetanus, of the Liver and Spleen of
an Ox, of Baume, of Lignum Aloes. Syrups, of Mugwort, Feverfew, Orenges,
Baume, Cinnamon. Conserves of Marjerom, Betony, Baum, Rose-mary, Mary golds.
Preserves, of Acorus, citron peeles, Orenges, Nutmegs, Zedoary. Pouders,
Diacalamint, Diaxyloaloes, diacinnamomum.


II. External are, I. Of simples, the greatest part of the foresaid, to which
may be added, Gum Olibanum, storax, bdellium, myrrh, Ladanum, Assafetida,
Galbanum, Opopanax, Sagapenum, Ambar. From Animals, Castoreum, civet, Musk. II.
Of compounds, Oils, of cheiri, Angelica, Rue, Castoreum, Nard oil, Scorpions,
Nutmegs. Unguents, of Bay Berries, Gum Caranns, ceratum matricale, or of
Galbanum, etc.


Point, 2, Of wombe-cooling Medicaments.
Womb cooling medicaments are also either internal or external.

I. The Internal are, I. Of simples, Roots, of bistort, comsery. Leaves, of
Strawberry, Shepherds-pouch, Vinca pervinca. Plantane, Oak, great comfry,
Porslane, Nettles, loosestrife. Flowers, of Roses, Quinces, Balaustians,
Water Lillies, Loose-strife, St. John's wort, Comfery, Willow. Seeds, of
porselane, Plantane, Henbane, white-poppy. Fruits, of Acacia, Pomegranates,
Medlers, Myrtils. Woods, Sanders. Gums, Dragons-blood. Earths and miniralls,
Bole Armeniack, Red corralls, Perls, Christial. II. Of compounds, they are such
as are made of the foregoing simples, and may be known by what has been already
said.


II. The external are the same we alleged in the simples. The compounds have
been for the most part declared, in the Nephriticks and Hepaticks.

Chap. 7. Of vegetable Medicaments, referred to the seven Planets.
Planetarie Medicaments are they, which according to the opinions of some Men,
have received their virtues and names from the Planets, and depend upon them in
their operations.

They are as manifold as there are planets, viz. Saturnine, Jovial, Martial,
Solary, Venereal, Mercurial, Lunary.

I. Those are termed Saturnine which are of an horrid aspect, ungrateful or
venomous smell, stiptick taste, lean shape: and they grow in moist places,
filthy and woody, solitary, and dark; and of this kind are woolfs-bane, Agnus
castus, Calves-head, Smallage, Finger-fern, Star-wort, orach, Blites, Shephards
pouch, Hemp, Cappars, Hemlocks, Cumin, Cypress, dodder, Epithymum, Horse-taile,
Fern, Fumitory, Hellebore, Henbane, Great dock, lupines, Mandrakes, Moss,
Opium, pine, Polypody, Sloetree, Rue, Willow, Cetrach, Scrophulary, Sena,
Serpentaria, sesely, Nightshade, Tamarisk, Eugh, Vervaine.

II. Jovial are such as have a pleasant taste and smell, red or bluish flower,
an olive substance, plain leaves, and delighting in fat places: such are
Cloves, Cherries, strawberries, Olive Trees, Betony, Flax, centaury,
Barberyes, Red corants, Avens, Arsmart, Fumitory, Teucrium, Mullin, Comfery,
Galangal, Birch, Ground oak, Almonds, Madder, Prunella, Rhubarb, Loose-strife,
Borrage, Bugloss, Mulberries, wheat, Through wax, Sophia, Pomegranates,
Violets, Coral.

III. Martial are of a pointed rough shape, of a caustic taste, a color tending
to redness, and they love dry places, such as are Nettles, Thistles,
Restharrow, Esula, Rhamnus, bramble, Flammula, Onions, Leeks, Garlic, Radish,
Peperwort, Wolfes-bane, Henbane, Arsmart Asparagus, basilicon, etc.

IV. Solar, are of a regal form, of color yellow or orange tawny, of fragrant
smell, pleasing taste, and love sunny and meridional situations, Such as are: the
Flower of the Sun, Safron, Celondine, Baum, Motherwort, Gromwel, Rosa solis,
lillies, Gentian, laurel vine, Elecompane, St. John's wort, Ash, Marygold,
Gold-flowers, Rosemary, Mints, Citronwort, and some others.

V. Venerial are such as have a white flower, a clammy humor, a sweet taste, a
wanton smell, shape of leaves smooth not jagged: Such as are Satyrium, Vulgar
pease, boletus cervinus, Cuckow-pintel, pine and oake-apple, Parsnips, Water
Lillies, Daffodillies etc.

VI. Mercurial are, such, as have a various color of the flowers, bear cods,
and are bred for the most part in a sandy place; such as are, Beans, Chamemel,
Trefoil, daisies, juniper, Wallnuts, Hasils, Elders, Dragons, Money wort,
Lungwort, Anise, Cubebs, Marjerom.

VII. Lunary, are such as have thick juycie leaves, of a watery or sweetish
taste, they soon grow to their just magnitude, and love marrish watery places;
Such as are, Coleworts, Gourds, Melons, Pepons, Mandrakes, Papaver erraticum or
Red poppy, Lettuce, Rapes linden tree, Duckweed, etc. See hereof Etzlerus in
his I sagoge-Physico-magico-medica, and Helvicus, Dietericus de Novo orb; also
Toxita his Cornu salutis, and Carrichterus de plantis. Also in Turniserus. you
shall find many things.

THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE IDEA OF PRACTICAL PHYSIC.
Title, I. Of the Method of Healing in General.
THe Method of Healing is an Art of Inventing by help of Indications, such
Remedies as are apt to heal the Infirmities of Man's Body.

There are therefore three things therein observable: the Indication, Indicant,
and Indicatum.

I. The Indication is the Method of finding out from the Nature of the
Indicant, the Indicated Remedy, which the Indicant is found to require, for the
attainment of his End. And this is to be understood of the Indication
habitually taken, viz. as it is in the mind of the Artificer. But if it be
considered in its own Nature as it is in the Indicant, it declares nothing but
a certain relation of the Indicant to the Indicatum, as of a sign to the thing
signified, or an Antecedent to its Consequent. In which respect Galen calls it
the strength of Consequence.

II. The Indicans, is that which of it self and its own Nature sollicites the
Physicians help, (...) requrires some profitable medium to attain a good
propounded, and affords a true curative Indication. Now this ought to be, in
the first place, 1. Known to the understanding. 2. An Agent; and to be carried
out to good by its natural Instinct. 3. To be in the body of man. 4. To be
permanent, and not to have its essence in fiery or a momentary transaction. 5.
That, inasmuch as it is one, it indicate only one thing, that it indicate or
hint the same by its own nature, and that as being but one thing, it can have
but one Nature.
Such a true and single indicant, is neither the disease, nor its cause, nor
any Symptom; but the strength, virtue and faculty of a body cureable, or the
virtue and faculty sanative in a body sanable, and that active, which is
naturally moved to health, as to its perfection. Not the Disease: For that is
the primary indicant to which al things are referred; the same is the Condition
of Ends and indicants. But the Physician does al for Healths, and not for the
diseases sake. The indicant is permanent in the body. But the disease does not
stay, without its own Homogeneal Cause. To the indicant we owe an helper,
because it indicates for its own sake. But a disease not for its own, but
healths sake, etc. Not the Cause, for it is not every kind of help, but a
curative help which we seek after. The Cause as it intends the corruption of
man's body, cannot indicate or hint any thing but the corruption thereof. Not
the Symptom, because it abides not. The Forces of the Body are the only and
primary indicant; For you must first consider the Forces and strength of the
Body, before you set upon the Cure. Lighter diseases are to be committed to
Nature; dangerous ones and such as are toward their Crisis, are not to be
tampered with; desparate ones admit no cure. The forces of the body must not be
quite dejected and worsted, for then nothing is indicated; nor yet lusty and
strong, for then they can do al of themselves. Often times nature brings the
morbifick matter through the middle of a bone, and makes an imposthume, casts
out the sanies of the lungs, by urine or stool, expells the stopped courses by
the Eyes, the holes of the teeth the toes of the feet, etc. But they are the
tottering forces of the body, which require help, and consequently indicate.

III. The Indicatum or Remedy hinted, is that which ought to help the diseased
body; safely without danger of a relapse or injury to the body; pleasantly
without nauseousness and overmuch trouble; and quickly without any delay.
Touching which observe, 1. That none reduces health by its own proper force,
but by the Assistance of the inbread Heat, or nature it self, so that Nature
does the work properly and formally, the remedy only as her instrument or
Handmaid. 2. That it is not contrary to a disease, if it be simply considered
as an Entity of such or such a nature: but it is contrary, as it is joined to
an animate body, and actuated by nature. Yet not primarily and of its own
nature, but obliquely and secondarily; both because it assailes the Disease
with forces which are not connatural to it; also because vomiting is often
cured by vomiting, looseness of the Belly by purging, stifness of the whole
body called Tetanus, by throwing cold water thereupon; and finally; because
diseases are likewise commonly cured by their causes. So worms are killed by
the powder of worms, the flux of arterial blood by some drop of blood drunken,
or the powder of dried blood sprinkled on. 3. Their Use, in due quantity time
and place, to which some ad the manner.


Title, II. Of the Method of healing in special.
Chap. 1. Of the Additional Method.
SO much for the Method of healing in general: the special Methods follow, and
they are Additional and Abstractive.

The Additional Method, is that which supplies as much as is wanting in the
powers of nature, by Augmentation and multiplication of the Virtue.

I. It is Necessary, because, seeing no disease happens but the faculty of the
body is hurt: yea and the form of sickness consists in the inability to act, so
that the said inability being supplied, the form likewise of the disease is
reduced to the habit of Health.

II. The Indicant in this Method, is the Sanative or healing Principle in the
Patient; which is neither the Soul, because that is always like it self
subject to no violence or hurt of sickness: nor the Body, because that is
merely passive, and indifferently disposed to sickness or health; but it is the
innate Heat, which is rightly termed the true, proper, and immediate subject,
wherein the curing faculty resides. For by it, verily, the parts do live and
act. Therefore Aristotle calls it the spiritual Warmth, and implanted Heat, and
Hypocrates terms it the Soul of Man, which is always produced and removed even
to his Death. This tempers and tunes the whole body, and moderates all the
offices and ministeries thereof; reduces al excesses to a geometrical
proportion, and such an equability as is convenient to Nature; and because it
congregates and collects things homogeneal and separates things heterogeneal,
therefore it ripens al crudities, seperates al impurities, and tempers and
unites the dry with the moist.

III. Indicatum, the thing Indicated or Remedy in this Method, is somewhat that
is like and familiar to the Indicant. Like will to its like, and cleave to it,
but a thing disagrees and separates from its unlike. Now this Remedy according
to the definition of Petraeus, is a spiritual Quintessence, that is to say, a
certain most thin, and most subtle and delicate substance, as it were of a
middle nature between matter and form, Soul and Body, and that different from
the Elements and their Qualities, perfused with a Caelestial Hea^, and
underpropped with a primigenial moisture, furnished with many noble virtues,
implanted in the first Creation by God, together with the form and seed, that
it might be the proper and immediate Receptacle and Instrument of the form, by
which the Individual, the temper of the Qualities assisting, might be preserved
in a sound condition, and the Integrity of al its Functions, the Species
propagated, etc. See what he says in his inaugural dissertation, and my Father
in Law Vechnerus in his Anacephalaeosis typica Therapeutices Catholice, whose
steps we tread in, at present.

Chap. II. Of the Abstractive Method in general.
The abstractive Method is considered, either in general or in special.
Considered in general, it teaches us to free the sanative Power of the Body
from al Impediments, and to advance it into action.

I. The Indicant in this Method, is the Nature of Man's body wanting health,
hindered and provoked: from which the Causes and Diseases are to be taken away.
The End is their removal.

II. In the things indicated, or Remedies taking away, we are to consider, the
Matter, Form, and Use or Administration.

I. In respect of their Matter, they ought to be commonly opposite to the
Disorders, at least causally and effectively. And therefore there are so many
differences and kinds of them, as there are of preternatural dispositions of
the Body, according to the order whereof, they are elegantly distinguished, as
I shall hereafter declare.

II. The Formality of these abstractive Remedies, is, their ability to assist
the Healing Virtue of our bodies to show it self in its operations. And they
are the best which approach the nearest to the Natural Constitution, and help
the innate heat, or no ways hurt the same, or which according to nature do
agree with a body that is in a capacity to be healed. Here respect must be had
to the strength of the Body, and to such things as agree according to nature,
with a body capable of healing, and restrain the latitude of the Remedy, to
some certain Subject, and Part affected. Touching the Forces of the body,
observe, 1. That not only they are to be considered, as they are at present,
but as they like to be after Medication or use of Remedies. 2. That such as are
lusty, may bear stronger medicines. 3. That such as are in a feeble condition,
cannot without great danger, endure medicaments that stir much; and that they
require alimentary and balsamic Medicaments. 4. That being spent and
exhausted, they must be repaired by balsamic medicaments. 5. That being
overpressed with plenty of blood and humors, and therefore invalid, they
require a sudden, and consequently a plentiful evacuation.
Concerning the Subject we must examine the Nation, Sex, Age, Region, Air,
State of the Heavens, the times of the year, and of the diseases. Propriety of
the Patients temper, because it has many singularities in it, and there is no
knowledge of singular things because infinite, it requires diligent
inquisition, into the Education, Parents, Diet, use of the things called
Nonnatural, Diseases, Medicaments. Natural Inclination, which carries with it,
the Imagination, but especially the Customs of the Party under Cure. Touching
the Part, observe, 1. That it requires a Remedy appropriate, or such an one,
which respects the same by some propriety, to which consideration also vehicles
belong. 2. That the principal parts especially be so handled, that they come
not by resolution of their fibers and strength, to decay and perrish. 3. That
their Qualities and Tempers are likewise to be observed. 4. Also their
situation, connection, their convenient sensation which rejects sharp things,
etc.


III. The V^e or administration of Remedies is circumscribed in the
Consideration of Quantity, Time, and Place. 1. Touching Quantity when the
Question is, whether little or much; or, in what weight and dose: the former is
hinted by the Quantity of the cause or disease. Therefore we must first exactly
know what things are according to nature. So much must be taken from the body,
as is superfluous; yet must we not over do. And we must know that it is always
more safe, in a doubtful proportion, to fall rather too short, than to exceed.
Touching this matter take these rules: 1. Infirmities which have taken deep
root, need stronger remedies, than such as are slight. 2. In a mild infirmity
we must do al at once and suddenly, and so we must in an extreme and dangerous
sickness, because it quickly finishes its course, and quickly kills. 3. In
indifferent and cronick diseases, we must endeavor to expel them by little and
little, and slowly; but we must withal take heed, least while we go about to
quench a mighty flame with a small Quantity of water, we m^ke the fire burn the
faster.
II. The Time respects, 1. Seasonableness, of which note, 1. That we must then
act, when the Patient can best bear it. 2. That the motion of nature must be
always furthered, unless it be dangerous. 3. Turgent humors, must be drawn out
the self same day. 4. About the beginnings and ends of Diseases, stronger
medicines may be given, because then all the symptoms are weaker; in the state
it is better to rest, because then al is at the height. 5. The Constitutions of
the Heavens, that is to say, both the Conjunctions, Risings and Settings of the
Stars, as also the great changes of times, especially in cronical sicknesses,
are to be considered, etc.
II. Method or good order in the plurality of things to be done. Here observe,
1. That disjoined Diseases, do require distinct Remedies, so that they may be
cured either severally, or both together. 2. That connex and complicated
diseases, if they consent, may be cured either together or apart, and you may
begin with which you please; and if they dissent, we must oppose both with a
kind of mediocrity; if they partly agree and partly disagree, we must begin
with that which, though the Cure of it do not help, yet it hinders not the Cure
of the other. 3. In all diseases, whether they be disjoined or conjoined,
respect must be had above al things, both of that which urges, and of the Cause
or Concomitancy; so that we must first cure that which urges most, and that
upon which the rest depend. Under the Motion of Causality or Concomitancy come,
both al Impediments, without the removal whereof no Cure proceeds; as also the
Foments, upon which the other hurts, being linked and chained together, do
depend in their production. Now that is said to Urge, which exceeds the other
hurts of the body, either in magnitude and malignity, or in the vehemence and
celerity of the the hurt they do.
III. Touching the Place, these things are observable. 1. That the inclination
of nature and convenience of the Vessels must be observed. 2. That the matter
must be voided the nearest way, by ignoble parts; by a natural channel; and by
ways clear and direct. But of these things, God-willing, I will treat most
methodically and accurately, in my Syntagona.



Chap. 3. Of the abstractive Method in Special, and first of the taking away of
Causes.
Article, I. Of the taking away of Causes which offend in Quantity.
THe Taking away of Causes respects both Humors offending in Quantity, Quality,
Motion and Place, and likewise winds themselves: of which notwithstanding, they
are not so exactly to be considered and by themselves, but that they may
sometimes be complicated together.

The taking away of Causes which offend in Quantity, is performed by
Blood-letting, Frictions, Fasting, Bathing, Haemorrhoides, Monthly Courses,
Scarification, Cupping-glasses, and Horse-leaches.

I. Touchig Blood-letting these things occur considerable. 1. Whether it is to
be done or no. I. A Vein is not to be opened. 1. If the forces of the body
languish, as being changed by Fevers, long diseases, distemper of the ambient
air or other things, some venomous quality, immoderate evacuation of Humors,
Labor, Grievous Pain, and passions of the Mind. 2. If a Woman be sickly, and
of a whitish color. 3. If it be a child, because its heat is apt to dissipate.
4. If the Patient be over fearful. 5. If the disease be in its highest vigor,
which attains the Crisis. 6. If a crude distemper afflict, without fault in the
blood, and it may otherwise be amended. 7. If crude juyces abound in the whole
Body, especially in the Summer time, the stomach being weakened, the body soft,
and a fever be joined. 8. If a crude and cold juice afflict the mouth of the
stomach, whence an heart-burning proceeds, by reason of the vicinity of the
Heart. 9. If boiling juyces abound in the whole body, which wast the Spirits,
and being carried into the stomach Cause a deliquium. 10. If venomous diseases
afflict the body. 11. If a critical Evacuation were sufficient.
II. A vein may be opened, 1. If the forces of the body languish, being
oppressed. 2. If the disease be great, which afflicts vehemently, for a short
time, with a feverish heat and working of the blood. 3. Yea in a person of
seventy years of Age, provided the pulse be considerable, and the nature of the
disease, and plenty of blood require the same. 4. Also in a Woman with child,
both in the first and last months, if she have an accute disease.
II. We are to consider at what time a vein is to be opened. Touching which
observe. 1. That such diseases as are caused by a plethora, in them a vein
must presently be opened, at any hour of day or night, before it transfer it
self into some noble part and the strength of the body come to languish. 2. In
fevers it must be done, in the times of Remission and Intermission. 3. If the
greatness of the disease require not have; the best time is to open a vein in
the morning, an hour after the patient has been awake. 4. When we would
reiterate blood-letting for evacuations sake, we must do it the same day.
III. How much blood is to be taken; I. where observe. I. Blood may be more
freely taken away, 1. When the Forces of the patients Body are lively. 2. From
Persons of a rosey-color, of a thick and yellow habit of body, having large
veins, and being formerly accustomed co blood-letting. 3. In a vehement and
great disease, when the forces are vigorous, we may let blood til the patient
swoun, howbeit we are not ordinarily to stay so long; but when the color of the
patient changes, and his pulse grows weaker, and when the blood runs with a
lesser stream than before, (unless fat or some other gross matter hinder it)
then we must cause it to be stopped.
II. It is more sparingly to be diminished, 1. In an impure plethora. 2. In a
melancholic plethora; because, it is not so hot as to require cooling. 3. In a
phlegmatic plethora, because the humor being exceeding cold, is made more crude
by blood-letting. 4. In children and old people, specially in the Summer. 5.
When the forces are discomfited, and the disease is urgent: for then it must be
taken away by peecemeal at sundry times.



II. Frictions, Sweats and Baths, do lessen the quantity of humors: because
they raise that which dissipates and dissolves the substance of our body.

III. Tasting does the same, because nothing is rest ored in the Room of what
is dissipated, through restraint of food. Because it equally evacuates the whole
body, it ought to be used in an universal cacochymia. Because it operates too
slowly, it is unuseful for a sudden evacuation. Also old persons can better
bear it then children. Choleric and lean persons cannot endure it long.

IV. External Hemerohoides or a portion of the hemorrhoidal veins, are used to
diminish plenitude, and for the diseases of the kidnyes, womb, back and hip.
They must be opened by frictions, Leeches, Fig Leaves, rough clothes, juice of
Onions, Centaury etc. The internal are opened by clysters and sharp
suppositories, to cure hypochondriacal distempers, of the Liver, spleen and
Mesentery.

V. The Courses are to be moved, then when naturally they use to flow.

IV. Cupping-glasses, are applied when blood is not very plentiful in the Body.
Their greatest use is in Revulsion. They are conveniently fastened to the Arms
of women with child. If their use respect the whole body, they must be applied
to the inferior parts; if they respect any part they must be applied to the
same part.

VII. Scarification, if it supply the place of blood-letting, it is practiced
chiefly upon the thighs, yet sometimes upon the Arms and Back. and so it
revells from the Head. If it be used upon its own account, it is to avoid a
malignant and sharp matter: which is practiced in the Gangren and in
Callosities, or Calous disorders.

VIII. Leeches, if they are applied to evacuate the whole body, they must be
applied to the great and prominent veins which are in the Arms and thighs. In
women with child they are applied only to the Arms.

Article, 1. Of the Removal of Causes which offend in the Quality.
Point, 1. Of alteration,
The Removal of the Causes offending in Quality, consists in Alteration,
Purgation, Vomiting, Urining, and sweating.

Alteration is the contemperation of Causes offending in quality, by convenient
remedies.

And it is so many fold, as there are causes or humors. And therefore.

I. Choler, because it offends in Heat and drouth, needs cooling and moistning;
and if it be withal thick, it needs it cision and attenuation; if thin,
incrassation or thickening. See the Medicaments before. Now for their more
convenient use, we must observe, 1. That Infusions are best in the water, so
that the decoction be made til a third part of the liquor only remain. 2. If a
flux happen to rise we must forbear the use of sharp medicaments, least they
bite and v^x the Gu^ts; yet may we use syrup of red Corants, Barberies.


II. Phlegm because it is cold and moist, requires hearing and drying: and if it
be withal thick and clammy, it needs cutting and attenuation. The Medicaments
we formerly recited. Touching their use observe these rules. 1. Abstain from
such as are very hot at the beginning, least the matter being melted should
swel with greater motion, and the thin parts being consumed the thick should
remain behind. And therefore they ought to be put green into decoctions: in
their defefect, cold things ought to be mingled with the dry ones. 2. Stong
openers ought to be avoided in a woman with child. 3. Because where phlegm is
troublesome there the stomach languishes, to those that are not accustomed we
must give them their drinks actually hot. 4. If you would have the remedies
penetrate the most distant parts of the body, and carry their virtues with
them; they must be given boiled or beaten, in broth of Guajacum, with a great
Quantity of Liquor.


III. Melancholy, in which we must abstain from immoderate use of Vinegar,
especially if the matter be more fervent than ordinary. For black humors do
ferment and swel by the admixture of vinegar. And therefore if we are to use it,
we must give Oxymel with a decoction of Citron peels or some such thing.

IV. If diverse Humors are mixed together, we must chiefly set our selves
against those, which are most active, not quite neglecting the rest, whether
within or without the body. Which shall be done when the veins are free from
obstruction, all the passages of the body open; the humors not far from a
temperature, and the noble bowels free from obstruction. In opening syrups
Heurnius observes this order 1. First syrup of vinegar is given; then syrup of
the two roots without vinegar, then the said syrup with vinegar, after that
syrup of the five opening roots, then Syrups of Byzantinus so called without
vinegar, and lastly the said syrup with vinegar.

Point, 2. Of Purgation.
Purgation, is a convenient ^^awing out of Humors offending in quality, but yet
prepared, out of the Body, by medicaments which purge by way of stool.

I. Those Humors are either small in quantity, or plentyful, and either they
cause a fever; which is vehement or weak, or they cause no fever; or they
wander through the whole body with vehemence of symptoms or not.

II. By Coction in this subject, we do neither understand that which is called
pepsis, and is a changing of the thing to be concocted into the nature of the
Concocter: nor is it that coction which is opposed to crudity which is the
indigestion of aliment, in the stomach, liver and veins; or humors having
passed the mediocrity of Coction, as in yellow and black choler; nor the
redundancy of cold humors: but that kind of Coction which is called Pepasmos,
and is nothing but the reduction of humors disagreeing in substance and
qualities, corrupt and putrid, unto a similitude, and the separation of the
corrupted from the uncorrupted; which is performed by the Efficacy of the
Natural Heat, separating the profitable from the unprofitable. Yet is it not
necessary that al humors be concocted. For there are humors which are not in a
capacity of concoction, being severed from the concoction of the blood, as in
Catarrhs, the Colic, Phlegm, Hydropical water, and such as offend by some
hidden Quality.

III. Preparation of Humors is twofold: 1. To Coction, which is performed by
removal of all impediments, by diminishing the Humors, augmenting the natural
Heat and repairing the forces of the body. 2. To evacuation which is done when
the Humors are made fit for expulsion, such as are clammy being cut, and the
thick attenuated, the ways being made free and open, with clysters, emollient
broaths, and the like.


IV. Touching Medicaments these things are to be observed. 1. That they are
either moderate, which reach only the inferior parts: or vehement, which
penetrate beyond the liver and into the habit of the body: that they are either
catholic or universal, by which al humors are purged together; or such as draw
some particular humors, and they Choler purges, Phlegm purges, Melancholy
purges, Water purges. 2. That they ought to be addicted and accommodated to the
part to be purged. And truly, Agrick is appropriated to the Head, Cassia to the
breast, Aloes to the stomach and Gutts, Rhubarb to the liver, Sena to the
spleen, Hermodactyls to the joints. 3. That they ought to be of equal pace in
operation, that one do not prevent and out-^un another; and that they must be
mixed with odoriferous medicaments of thin parts, least they overthrow the
stomach, and that wind may be dispelled: yet must not these odoriferous
ingredients be in so great quantity, as to move urine. 4. Always to abate
somewhat of their strength 5. That they act by help of the expulsive faculty so
as to disturb and jumble the whole mass of Blood, then to sparate the humors,
whether any part of their substance be drawn into the veins, or they act only
by a vapor sent forth,


V. The Conveniences of Purgaton, viz. Whether or no? How much? When? After
what manner?

I. As for whether or no, observe, I. That you must not purge, 1. If there be
paucity of Humors, 2. If the Body be sound and of a good temper. 3. If the
patients purge only by the smell of the Physic. 4. If the forces of the Body
are weak by way of dissolution; and then the Artery pressed with three fingers
does not fly up; or one finger being removed, it is not felt by the next; or
there are more little than great pulses, more languid than vehement, more slow
than swift. 5. If the stomach be weak, in which case a Clyster is convenient.
6. If there be plenty of crude humors; because gripings are raised, and little
to speak of evacuated. 7. If there be an Impostume in the Gutts. 8. If the
midrif be stretched, raised, burning, inflamed, and the Urine fiery. 9. If the
Member from whence you intend to purge, be troubled with some raging pain. 10.
If the Belly be bound and no clyster given.
II. You must purge, 1. If there be gripings without a fever, heaviness of the
knees, and pain in the Loins, 2. If the matter, conceived in the member be
moveable 3. If the sick be hard to vomit, and moderately fleshy. 4. If nature
do not incline to a Crisis. 5. If the foregoing conditions are absent.
III. You must warily purge, such as are of an healthy and pure body, idle, apt
suddenly to faint away, such as are frampold and hard to please, Children, old
Men, women, such as easily vomit, such as are lean and of a thin body, and
those that are of a cold and moist constitution.


II. As for how much, observe. 1. That you must always purge rather with a
little than a great dose. 2. That the parts in the Region of the Belly, require
lenitives, in the venous or veine-region, moderate purgatives, those in the
habit of the body, vehement ones. 3. Strong forces of the Body, with great
abundance of Humors, does prohibit a medicine, which purges plentifully and
tumultuously, least the spirits be dissipated; but when the humors are not so
plentiful a strong medicament may be given. 4. That the Bodies forces being
weak by repletion, do require smaller purgations, the remaining Humor being
drained out by gentel repeated Lenitives. 5. That the forces languishing
through resolution of the Body, do only require gentle and partial or repeated
purgations. 6. Women with child in the seventh month must be gently purged,
least the child being heavy come by strong agitation of the medicament, to be
cast downward. 7. Old persons, because with tract of years their benign
juyces are exhausted, cannot bear strong purgers. 8. Nor yet children: because
they grow and their humidities do easily evaporate. 9. Men of rare or thin
texture of Body, if they be strongly purged, they suffer detriment thereby. 10.
Lean persons, because they have large veins are easily purged. 11.
Long-legged persons, are easily purged. 12. Such as live hardly, as laboring
Country People, are not moved with a gentle purge. 13. Melanchollick persons,
whether they be so by nature, diet, or sickness, because they are for the most
part of good strength without danger of weakness, and have their bodies solid
and full of juice, must be strongly purged. 14. But stammerers must be gently
purged, because they are liable to a looseness. 15. When only the stomach is out
of frame, gentler purgations must be used, least more il humors be drawn to
the stomach. 16. Great plenty of Humors, profoundly situate in the body, do
need more plentiful purgations either jointly or severally. 17. Where we need
more evacuations, we must begin with the most gentle, 18. We must then use
strong purgations, when gentle will not do the deed.


III. Touching the quando, or when you must purge, take these Rules. 1. That
women with child ought not sooner to be purged then when the child begins to
stir, and that when the Humors work. Women in childbed, must not be purged til
their month be over. 2. In Peracute diseases, If the matter be unruly and in
motion, you may purge the very same day, by reason of the tenuity and
fluxibility of the matter. 3. In the firs of intermitting diseases you must
abstain from purging, in the time of Remission and Intermission, you must
purge, 4. In long-lasting diseases, we must not purge before the matter be
atte^uated and made fluent, and the passages opened. 5. In the Summer time,
before day; in the winter give your purges in the day. 6. The juyces which are
in motion, or will shortly be in motion, must be purged, to prevent the Increase
of the disease, and that the part may not be marred by over abundance of the
juyces. 7. In the Dog Days and immediately before you must not purge; For the
bowels Heated by the violence of the Season, do easily entertain a fever.


IV. As for the question, after what manner, take these following ^ules. 1. To
every Humor you must apply its proper purgative. 2. To near parts, and in
Melancholy cases, liquid Medicines are good: in remote parts, you must use
solid ones, which stick long in a place, and spread their virtue more
effectually. 3. Vomiting, which is wont sometimes to arise, after the taking of
a purge, is stated by stomach-strengtheners, or cupping glasses applied to the
navel, or with juice of pomegranates, in such as are of a weak stomach and hot
liver, it is prevented by holding an Eg to the throat, or putting toasted bread
to the nostrils. 4. Loathing of the stomach is taken away by a linen cloth
wet in Vinegar put upon the Cup, or by washing the mouth with juice of
pomgranates, before the potion is taken, 5. A purge which causes griping, is
mitigated, by a clyster lenitive, or a potion of the decoction of Mastich, or
with lukewarm water. 6. In persons abounding with melancholy, Catharticks ought
to be mingled with lenitives and moistners. 7. Purgers, if they be given with
barley water, do work little or nothing by reason of the abstersive faculty
thereof. 8. Super purgation is stopped with new or old treacle, and a grain or
two of opium, mingled with three ounces of wine. Also with a crust of bread
steeped in vinegar, and laid upon the stomach. 9. In the summer, purges are to
be given with cool things. For the summer Heat calls the juices abroad, which
the Medicine presently draws away. 10. Winters cold, because it will hardly let
the humors go, the habit of the body being compacted; declares that
preparatives are to be premised, and cutters mingled therewith. 11. The Air of
the patients chamber, if it be too hot, it stops the operation of purging
physic, by drawing the Humors into the circumference of the Body. 12. A
Lenitive or gentle medicine must be taken a little before or after meat, least
nature abuse the same by turning it into Nutriment. 12. After a purge is taken,
the Patient must rest, that nature may embrace the medicament: and then a
little motion will do well, to melt the humors, and that the expulsive faculty
may be provoked. Some Physicians bid their patients sleep a little after a
strong medicament, but not so after a weak one. 13. When you give a strong
medicament, let the patient eat, three hours after the Physic begin to work:
when you give the strongest purges of al, let the patient pass over the time of
its operation without dinenig, for such medicaments need no spur. 14. If the
patient cannot hold out, but dureing the purgation, be so hungry as to seem
weakened thereby, let him drink presently after the taking his medicament a
draught of broth, or bread moistened in wine. But thirst declares that the
purgation is finished, by reason of some Consumption of the roral moisture,
provided it be not provoked with a light Catarrh, or the stomach be not
naturally inflamed, and there be no suspician of any inflammation from the
Medicament. 15. When the evacuation is ended, the Broth of a pullet may be
given with sugar, to wash the Gutts.


Point, III. Of provocation of Urine, Vomiting, and Sweating.
Diuresis, or Vrination, is the drawing of Humors out of the Body by diuretic
or urine, forceing medicaments duly administered.

You shall duly administer them. 1. If you give them in such diseases, as are
evacuated by little and little. 2. If you give diuritick medicines properly so
called in thick humors, those improperly so called in thick and adust ones,
which by that means are made more fluid, taking heed of dry diseases, such as
the Consumption, Madness, etc. 3. If you give them not in bodies full of humors,
til the humors have been first abated by purgation, least by their thickness
and plenty, while they rush headlong into the narrow passages, they come to
obstruct them. 4. If you give not sweet medicines to women, least they be
drawn to the womb. 5. If the passages be neither inflamed nor exulcerated.


II. Vomition is the ejection of Humors upwards by vomitory Medicaments,
conveniently given and applied.

Those Humors are, all choleric, phlegmatic and melanchollick humors, but
those especially, which either reside in the Capacity of the Belly, or are
contained in the spleen, hollow side of the Liver, or the Pancreas [Sweet
bread] such as are thin and chollerick and of their own accord tend upwards,
which is perceived by bitter belchings, pain, biting, and heaviness of the
Midrif. Also some vomitings empty the whole body.

Vomitory Medicaments procure vomiting, either because they have an inclination
upwards, or because they do as it were float upon the stomach and oppress the
same, or because they loosen the upper orifice of the Stomach.

The Convenience of preparation and application Requires; 1. That they be given
to persons lean by constitution and habit, but not by sickness; provided they
vomit easily, namely that they have a large breast, firm Head, and use not to
spit blood, nor are in a Consumption, nor are subject to suffusions in their
Eyes, or to frowning or fainting fits. 2. That you be not hasty to give them to
old people. 3. That you give them in the Summer, because then the Humors are
carried upwards. 4. That the Vomit be so much the lighter by how much the
Disease is more vehement; and so much the stronger by how much the part to be
cleansed is far situate in the body. 5. That no oil be used in Fevers,
because of the Relaxation of the stomach whose strength ought to be preserved
in Fevers. 6. That you give them before meat in thin and choleric persons;
after meat in phlegmatic people, because phlegm sticks fast in the body.
Observe more particularly concerning Helebore. That the body be free from al
feaverishness. That the Patient be accustomed as it were to vomit for three,
yea, and for twenty days before, that he may not vomit to purpose, til the
morbifick matter be digested. That the Hiccupping which is wont to arise in the
middle of the vomitings with Hellebore, be stopped by giving the patient
Mul-sack with Rue boiled in it. That it be given in a convenient Quantity. For
a lesser dose than is fit, agitates the juyces, and disturbs nature, to no
purpose.

III. Sweating is an Expulsion of Humors by the pores of the Skin all the body
over, caused by sudorifick Medicaments conveniently administered.

Touching the Medicaments observe. That they have a greater tenuity or subtilty
of parts, than Diuretics have. That they cause sweat, by turning the Humors
into vapors, and thrusting them into the outer parts of the Body. That cold
sudorificks work by an occult Quality.

Their convenient exhibition, is regulated by these precepts. 1. That choleric
persons sweat not without trouble and inconveniency, because of the overgreat
dissipation of their natural Heat. 2. Humors cannot be conveniently forced out
of the Cavities of the stomach, Guts, Womb, and the like, into the habit of
the body. 3. The forces of the body being weak, are more impaired by sweating.
4. In old and cold diseases, as distillations, Palsies, Sciatica, Pains of the
Joints, Sudorificks are exceeding good. 5. They are to be given after universal
purging, in the declination of a disease. 6. They are most of use in
pestilential Diseases, nor is there then so much need to observe, either the
time of the disease, or the strength of the Patient. 7. The Humor to be
evacuated must either be thin of it self, or it must be made so. 8. Plenty of
morbifick matter must not be assailed by sweaters, least being carried unto the
Skin, it shut up the small pores thereof, and either breed or increase
putrefaction.


Article, 3. Of the Removal of Causes offending in Motion.
Point, 1. Of Revulsion and Repulsion.
The taking away of causes offending in Motion, contains under it Revulsion,
Repulsion, Derivation and Interception.

I. Revulsion is the convenient aversion or turning away of matter flowing into
some part, into a part quite contrary.

1. This Aversion is caused, either by Reason of Vacuum, by blood-letting,
cupping-glasses and Horse-leaches; or by reason of Heat and pain, by dolorifick
ligatures, strong frictions of the opposite parts, Clisters, Suppositories, hot
washing, and vesicatories.

When I say that Aversion ought to be made to the contrary part, Observe. I.
That it must be made to remote parts, to difference it from derivation, which
is to near places. Where note, that those parts besides contrariety must have
rectitude of situation, not precisely mathematical but natural, in respect of
the fibers and filaments of the Veins: also in respect of the fibers and veins
which are remote from the part affected, and have communion with the part
sending; also following the rectitude of the Diameter and situation, in
longitude, latitude, and altitude. II. That the Contrariety aforesaid is,
either in respect to the whole body, as when we revel from the Head to the
Thighs or Legs, which is done in universal revulsions, from the right side to
the left, or from the left to the right, which is termed particular revulsion.
III. It ought also to be to its own beginning, if the same be known. So in the
inflammation of the right Leg, we cut the left. The parts above the Sea Riolanus
Anatomy in English.
Claviculae being affected, if it be already a Disease, and the matter flow in,
the Cephalic Vein must be opened; if it be yet to come, the vein betwixt the
Thumb and fore finger must be opened. The Parts between the Kidneys and
Claviculae being Affected, the Basilica Vein must be opened; if there be
danger, its branches betwixt the ring finger and the middle finger. Both parts
being affected, both above and below the Claviculae, open the Vena Mediana. For
the Kidneys you may take your choice. The Ham-Vein, Ankle-vein and the Vena
Saphena, exonerate the parts below the Kidneys.


Revulsion will be fitting and convenient. 1. If it be performed at the
beginnings of fluxions unless they be lasting. 2. If by convenient places,
least the matter be drawn through some noble member. 3. If the pain of the part
affected be first mitigated, and the violence of the Deawing be less.


II. Revulsion, is a convenient rejection of the Influent humor, by repelling
Medicaments.

The Rejection will be convenient, if you consider, Whether or no, How much, and
When.

Touching whether or no, observe. That Repulsion is not to be used. 1. In the
noble parts. 2. When the fluxion is near a principal part, least the matter
being repelled, should be carried into the noble parts. 3. In parts which are
situate too deep in the Body. 4. When a venomous and malignant matter afflicts
the Patients. 5. When the matter is thick and clammy, least it become thicker
and unapt to to be resolved; when it is deeply seated, as in the Sciatica,
least the blood be forced out of the neighboring and ambient muscles, deep into
the connexity of the parts. 6 In case of a wound inflicted by a beast. 7. When
the body is full of a redundant humor. 8. The humor being already impacted into
the Part. 9. When there is a vehement pain. For then astringents, especially if
strong, do cause the pain to increase, by exasperating the tunicles, and by
keeping in biting, sooty vapors, and sharp humors. 10. When Nature acts aright,
and drives the matter critically into some part. 11. When the bowels are
affected, as in an impostume arising in an Emunctory, least a symptomatical
translation of the matter should happen.


Touching How much, know, 1. That the tender parts will not bear over strong
repellers. Therefore in the Eyes we use only brest-milk, and Rose Water, in
which sometimes poppey seeds are boiled, and the pap of Apples, etc. 2. In the
Augment, repellers must be mixed with discussers, lest the humor grow hard, or
be augmented, by stopping the pores of the Skin. 3. That cold and moist
medicines are used, when the humor is thin and is seated in the surface of the
body: when fluxions happen through the over hotness of the parts, and great
heat or vehement pain afflicts the Patient. 4. Astringents are used, when
fluxions are by debility of the parts, and there is no vehement pain. The time
of Repulsion, is the Beginning of a disease.


Point 2. Of Derivation and Interception.
Derivation is the convenient aversion of an humor falling into some part, unto
the neighboring places.

That humor so lies upon some part, that it is not yet shed forth of the Veins
into the spaces of the part, but fluctuates up and down in the Veins.

Touching the Convenience hereof, note, 1. We must not derive before the
plenitude of humors be abated. 2. So much must be taken away, as the Patients
strength will bear, and the disease shall require; which may be known by the
change of color in the Blood. For so long it must be taken away, til it flow
redder and yellower, til instead of red it come lead-colored. For the blood
being phlegmatic in the whole body, will be redder than ordinary in the side
where there is an Inflammation: and that blood which is redder than ordinary in
the whole body, will there through adustion be changed into black. 3. It must be
practiced, before it be fastened in the part. 4. It is done by opening a Vein:
by Nose-medicines and sneezers, if the matter be in the Brain. 5. That the
Communion of the Veins with the part affected must be observed.
So in a Phrenzy, the Vein of the Forehead must be cut; in a Mania or madness
without a Fever, the Veins under the Tongue; in pains of the hinder part of the
Head, cupping-glasses are fastened to the shoulders and shoulder-blades. When
the Ears are inflamed, and when there are risings behind the Ears, a vein under
the Ear: in hot diseases of the Gums, Jaws, Lips, in the Squinzy, the two Veins
under the Tongue. The Armpits and Shoulders being inflamed, the Vein of the
Head must be opened; the Womb, that of the Ham; the Legs, that of the Feet.

II. Interception, is a shutting up of the passage of Humors into any part, by
convenient Medicaments. Those Medicaments are Repellers. For Interception
differs not from repulsion, save only in the place of application. Repellers
are applied to the part inflamed: intercepters are applied to the parts and
wa^es, through which the Humor is carried. They are likewise called Defensives.
Amongst which fatty and oily things are suspected. For they soften the parts,
and if they stick on long, they heat the same. Therefore it is better to mingle
intercepting pouders, with Rose Water and the white of an Egg.

Interception is then conveniently administered, 1. When the Intercepters are
applied to the parts that have least flesh, in which the passages are most
large. 2. When we apply such as are strong, where the habit of the Body is
hard, the vessels large, and the season hot, which loosens and widens the
passages; also where the Humor flows violently into the part. 3. If in contrary
Cases, we use the milder sort.


Article, 4. Of the Removal of Causes offending in place.
Point, 1. Of Softening and Discussing.
The Removal of Causes offending in place, contains Emollition, Discussion,
Suppuration, and Attraction.

I. Emollition is the alteration of a thick and hardened Humor by softening
Medicaments.

An Humor is hardened, either by extraordinary or moderate dryness; or by
plenitude, or by Congelation,

The former is altered by things moderatly hot and moist, least the force of
heat should dissipate the Humor; the latter by opening the pores with an aerie
moisture: the last by things hot and moderately dry.

Medicaments exquisitly Emollient, applied to the principal members or parts
near them, do bring the life in danger.

II. Discussion is a convenient dissipation of an humor sticking in some part,
and softened, by insensible transpiration, caused by diaphoretick Medicaments.

It Is called Digestion and Resolution. I added, and softened. For humors
hardened cannot be discussed, unless they be first softened.

To convenient Dissipation, is requisite. 1. That it be undertaken, before the
Body be evacuated. 2. That it be not used in such as have hot Veins and Livers.
3. That Dissipaters be used in the State and Declination, and that in the
Augment they be mixed with Repellers. 4. That they be not biting, nor
vehemently hot, lest the thinner parts evaporating, the thick become dried and
hard as a stone.


Point, 2. Of Suppuration and Attraction.
I. Suppuration is the convenient mutation of an Humor that cannot be
discussed, into Quittor, by ripening medicaments.

The Convenience hereof requires. 1. That it be chiefly practiced when Blood
offends; for Blood is best changed into Quittor: choler and melancholy hardly,
by reason of that degeneration, whereby they raise Cancers and malignant
ulcers. 2. That it be not rashly practiced upon the internal Parts. 3. That
among external parts, it be not practiced about the Joints. 4. That it be not
overmuch or overstrong: otherwise it will dispose the part to a gangrenous
Putrefaction.


II. Attraction or drawing, is the convenient Motion of matter infixed into a
part, by drawing medicaments.

These Medicaments are either more gentle, which are termed Rubifyrs; or more
strong, which are Bladder-raisers, Crust-procurers, and Causticks.

The Rules of Convenience respect Causticks, and Vesicatories or
Bladder-raisers. In respect of the former. 1 We must not come to Causticks,
before we have tried Rubifiers and Vesicatories; for Causticks take something
from Nature. 2. That they be then used when there is danger least the part
should perish, and especially when there is fear least abundance of matter
should putrefie the Bone. 3. That when there is need of little burning, we are
to use an Instrument of Brass; and an Iron one when we are to burn much. 4.
That Consideration be had of the Age, Strength of the Patient, and the
swellings whereunto they are applied; for many instead of the King's Evil
swellings, have burnt the jugular Veins.
In respect of Vesicatories it is requisite, 1. That they be not applied to
accute diseases, nor to external Parts exulcerated, nor to the region of the
Lungs when they are exulcerated, because by them the ulcers are exasperated, or
to gristley parts, and such as are bare of flesh, because by burning they grow
black. 2. That after the flesh is swelled, the Cicatrized Part is become black
and blew, the Patient is pained, we desist, least the part be stupefied. 3.
That before they be laid on, the place be tubbed til it look red.


Article, 5. Of Expulsion of Wind, called Carmination.
Carmination is a convenient dissipation of the Winds arising in man's body, by
carminative or Wind-expelling medicaments.

That this dissipation may be conveniently affected, medicaments discussing
winds, ought not to be administered before the matter be diminished; otherways
more flatulencies will be raised, by rarefaction of the matter.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE IDEA OF PRACTICAL PHYSIC.
Touching the Removal of Diseases.
Title, I. Of the Diseases of Similar parts and their Cure.
Chap. 1. Of the Method of knowing and curing distempers without matter.
SO much may suffice to have spoken of the methodical removal of Causes, which
ought to be handled a part from the particular cosideration of the causes
themselves: the general method for the removal of Causes follows, which must of
necessity be jointly handled, with the prime differences of the diseases
themselves; seeing it comprehends, not only the diseases but the Causes also,
signs and differences of the diseases.

The primary and essential differences of diseases, are those whereby they are
divided, into Similar, organical, common.

Similar diseases, are either of distemper, or of hidden Qualities. A
distemper, is either without matter or with matter.

A distemper without Matter, is a declinanation of the temperament of a man's
body, from its natural constitution, induced by certain causes proper for such
an Effect.

By temperament you must not understand, that which is called temperamentum ad
pondus, wherein there is equal proportion of the qualities: but that which is
termed temperamentum ad justitiam, wherein the qualities are not in equal,
though in a well ordered proportion, which is convenient for some kind of
actions. 2. Understand temperament both simple and compound. 3. The temperament
of Man's body not only as it is mixed: but also and principally, as it is
liveing, whether it be inbred or influent.


The Sings are taken from the differences.

The Causes, are principally external; of which in the same place.

The Cure is performed by Alteration, if you precisely consider the distemper
it self, but this disease does not long last without matter.

It Is divided into four sorts.

I. One is hot, in which heat abounds. It Is known from such things as may
exhalt and increase sweat, and from such as are the Effects of Heat so
increased. It arises chiefly from five things, viz. Motion of the Mind and
Body, Putrefaction, The nearness of some hot thing, the mixture of something
that is hot, and stoppage of the Body. It Is cured with cooling medicaments,
whether simple or compound, taken in, or outwardly applied. Where we observe.
1. That alterations consisting of heat and cold, are most easily cured. 2. That
an hot disease in a Body which is naturally cold, must be vanquished, by
remedies that are strong. 3. That cold medicaments have four degreers.


II. Another is cold, in which cold exceeds. It Is known from causes which
induce cold, and symptoms, which follow the same. It arises from such things,
as either are of their own nature cooling; or suffocate the innate Heat; or
overwhelm, or dissipate the same, or withdraw its nutriment. The Cure is
undertaken, by heating its medicaments, first such as are more gentle,
afterward the stronger sort. See the Medicaments in the Institutions of
Physic.

III. Another is moist, when moisture overcomes. It is known by the
antecedents and consequents. It arises from the neighborhood of moist things,
and which hinder the transpiration of most evaporations. It Is cured by drying
Medicaments.

IV. Another is dry, in which dryness prevails. It Is known, by former kinds
of signs. It springs from contrary Causes, viz. Alteration of dryers, and
overmuch resolution and and paucity of aliment. It Is cured by moistners.

V. Another is compound; that is to say, Hot and dry, or Hot and moist; Cold
and dry, or cold and Moist. Of which we need not to say much. For it may easily
be gathered what it is, and how to be cured, from the simples.

Chap. 2. Of the diseases of Distemper with Matter.
A Material distemper, is the irregularity of the natural temper of Man's Body,
by the presence of some morbifick matter.

The Signs will be known from the following differences.

The Cause is, a preternatural Humor, and that is. 1. Either collected by
little and little, either through weakness of the part, or fault of the
Nutriment. 2. Or affluent, either by attraction: or by reason of transmission,
either from the whole body, or from some certain parts.


The Cure is perfected. 1. By alteration with Contraries, if we consider the
disease, 2. By evacuation, if need be, and that by blood-letting, if a Plethory
be offensive: by Purgation if Cacochymia or badness of humors off end; by
sweat, if the matter tend to the skin: by vomit, if to the upper parts: by
diuretics, if to the Urinary passages.
III. By opposite diet.

It Is divided into so many distempers, as the material.

I. One sort springs from blood, or a plethorick Constitution of Body, when
such humors as are fit to nourish the Body, abound etc. It Is known by
weatiness etc. It arises from good Nutriment etc. It Is cured, I. By
Blood-letting, II. By alteration with coolers and moistners, especially such as
are appropriate to the Liver. It Is divided two manner of ways, 1. One sort is
from an exquisite plethora, to which all the precedent notes agree. 2. Another
is from a bastard plethora, wherein the cure requires purging likewise. 3.
Another springs from a plethora ad vasa. Another from a plethora ad vires, of
which we spoke before.



II. Another kind springs from excrementitious choler, which is hot and dry.
It Is hardly cured, if it proceed from the yellow choler. Never almost, if it
proceed from leek colored, eg-yolk-colored, or verdigreise-colored choler etc.
The Cure is performed, 1. By alteration with cooling and moistning medicaments,
and if it be very thin, with thickness; if thick, by cutters. Among the former
the chief are, Stalks of Italian Lettices, flowers of water lilly, Porslain,
Plantain, Tamarinds, Jujubees, red poppy, among the latter, the chief are,
roots of Cichory and Dandilion, Sorrel, and such things as are made of these,
Spirit of vitriol, Salt. 2. By evacuation, either by bloodletting, when cholor
is mingled with the blood, or by purgation by stool, with cholagogues. The
chief cholagogues or choler purgers, are Rhubarb, which is neither to be given
alone, because it is subject to fume, nor to such as are troubled with the
strangury; tamarinds, aloes rosata, which is taken only in pills. Syrup of the
flowers of Acacea, of Roses solutive, which must not be given to women with
child, Pills of Ruffi etc. By a cooling and moistening diet.


III. Another is from preternatural phlegm, which is cold and moist. It Is cured,
I. By alteration with medicaments hot and dry, attenuateing and cutting. Where
note, that we must at first abstain from very hot things, lest the matter being
dissolved, should swel with greater motion, and that the thinner parts being
consumed, the thicker should remain; We must avoid strong openers in a woman
with child. The strongest of al are Lignum guaiacum, China root, Sassafras,
Salsaparilla, and Oxymel Scylliticum. Hot stomach medicaments are to be
interposed, because the stomach languishes through overmuch heat. II. By
evacuation with Phelgm purgers. the chief among those indifferently strong, are
Mechoacanna, of which Lozenges are made; it works most effectually given in
powder; Carthamus seeds and Agarick trochisked. Among the stronger are jalap
root, given with Cream of Tartar, Syrup of Coloquintida, and the Pills of
Sagapenum of Horstius. The Golden spirit of Rulandus. III. By blood-letting,
provided the Heat be not dissipated, being expressed with phlegm; and that there
be a plethora. IV. By an heating and drying diet, let the Air be hot and dry,
the meats seasoned with spices, let strong wine be used, the body being first
purged, Frequent use of Cappars, with wine and raisins.


IV. Another sort comes from preternatural Melancholy, whether thick or
dilute, or degenerating into black choler. It Is cured, I By alteration with
heaters and dryers, provided it be not black choler. The roots of Eryngos,
Lycorize, the Herbs of Ceterach, Baume, Dodder; Flowers of borrage, tamarisk,
Cappars, the cordial flowers. Syrup of sweet smelling Apples etc. Avoid
Vinegar; and if it must be used, give oxymel, and a decoction of Citron peels.
II. By evacuation with Melanagogues or melancholy purgers. The chief are
Polipody, sena, Extract of black hellebore. The diet must be heating and
moistning. The Air must be tempered, with a decoction of Mallows and violets;
let the patients meats be boiled rather than roast, Eggs, soft-boiled, flesh of
henns, calves, partriches; corants, a temperate bath of fresh water, etc.


V. Another Sort comes from Serum or the wheyish humor, which is a thin and
Salt liquor by its abundance and quality altering the body of man. It Is cured
by evacuation with hydragogues, sudorificks, Diuriticks etc. The chief
Hydragogues are among the indifferently strong, the tope of elder when they
first shoot forth, dried with a gentle heat; an emulsion of the stones of
elder-berries, Orice root. Among the strongare, Gambogia, Jalap, Extract of
Elatery, conserve of Esul^, pills of Sagapenum. The chief sudorificks are,
Spirit of dwarf elder and of elder; Salt of Cen^ory, of worm wood, of Ash, of
Scabious, Hearts born prepared, Antimony diaphoretick, bezoardicum jovial. Among
diucitick are the diuretical liquor and syrup of Rivius in Renodeus his
dispensatory, Salt of Urine, Amber, beans, Spirit of Salt, liquor of tarrar
Vitriolated, half a scruple, compounded with half an ounce of Cinnamon water,
and two ounces of julep of roses.

VI. Another is compound, springing from some of these humors, mingled
together. In the Cure we must so work, that we resist chiefly those humors
which most of al exercise their efficacy upon the body, not neglecting the rest
either within or without. This will be done, when the veins are free from the
obstruction, all the passages of the body open, the humors not being much
distempered, and the noble bowels of the Body not diseased. Here panchymagoga
or al-humor-purgers are to be used, and the Imperial pills of Fernelius: which
may be seen in the London Dispensatory.

Chap. 3. Of Diseases springing from Hidden qualities.
DIseases, from hidden Qualities, are diseases springing from Causes which
work, by a malignant and venomous force, which cannot be judged to spring from
the manifest qualities of natural bodies.

The Signs are, when a disease has rare symptoms, great ones, and such as are
not to be seen in other sicknesses, no not of the same kind. When there has
preceeded some suspicion, either of some great degree of putrefaction arisen in
the body, or of infected a^re, or of contagion: or of poison, either taken in,
or communicated from without.

The Cause is various, as shall be explained in the differences.

The Event of the cure is judged of, from the greatness of the cause, nobility
of the part affected, vehemence of symptoms, and the Deaths of many persons.
It is undertaken. I. By ridding away the poison, which is done diverse ways
according to the differences of poisons. II By administration of Antidotes,
both common and appropriate to every part of the Body; where nevertheless, we
must not forget the manifest qualities. This is an approved antidote viz. An
Electuary of Masterwort Roots, of sweet Angelica, of Gentian, of white thistle,
of each two handfulls, terra sigillata six ounces, Myrrh an ounce, Venice
Treacle four ounces; Rosemary, Rue, of each one handful; Birthwort three pound,
Bayberries one handful: virgin honey clarified a triple quantity to all the rest.
Make al into an Electuary according to Art.


The differences are taken from the Causes.

I. Some spring from internal Humors.

II. Others from infected Air. The Cure consists in prevention of such air
and avoiding the same. In purification of the infected air, respect being had
to the Cause of the Infection. By giveing of Alexipharmaca or Antidotes, by
which the Heart may be defended, and the malignity driven away by sweat.

III. Some proceed from water. For there are certain metalline fountains,
envenomed, either naturally or by some occasion, yea and drinking of water, has
brought many into the dropsy, and the scurvy is caused by corrupt water. Such
fountains are to be avoided: and faulty waters must be corrected, by boiling,
straining, putting in barley flower or Garlic, etc.

IV. Others come from Contagion.

V. Others from Poisons, whose Cure is doubtful, if present poison be taken in,
and that in great quantity. Impossible if the poison cannot be expelled,
neither by vomit, stool, nor sweat. Respects, 1. Expulsion by Alexipharmaca or
Antidotes, which differ according to the varieties of poisons. 2. Evacuation,
especially by vomit, that those medicaments may better penetrate unto the
Heart. 3. Prohibition of Sleep, least the poison should thereby pierce the
sooner into the Heart and inner parts.
The Differences are many. I. Some are poisons taken into the body, which are
cured by a gentle vomit made of fat things. By purgation, if it stick in the
upper Gutts. By Urine, if it tend to the urinary passages: and in all
medicaments be sure to mingle Antidotes. By Diet, in which case, Milk is
exceedingly commended. II. Others are externally applied to the body, whose
Cure consists in extraction or pulling out the said poison, both by drawing
medicaments and by such things as do it by a certain likeness, which must be
continued, til the evil color pain and symptoms shall cease.
Interception, which is excellently performed, by binding somewhat very hard
upon some part above the place affected. Use of Alexipharmaca, if the Poison
have peirced into the Body; as, was said before.

Title, II. Of organical Diseases.
Chap. 1. Of Diseases of Conformation.
AN organical Disease is the diviation or swerveing of the parts of Man's Body
from their natural structure.

Now because to the said Natural structure Conformation, Number, Situation, and
Connection are requisite, therefore there will be so many differences, and to
this title four heads are subjoined; and also because in Conformation or
Shaping, three things are required, viz. Figure, Cavity, and Surface, there will
be consequently so many diseases.

Article, 1. Of diseases of Figure.
A disease in Figure, is the swerving of the parts of Man's Body from their
natural figure, depending upon certain peculiar causes.

The Signs are evident, so that it is needless to speak of them.

The Causes, are whatsoever may violate the figure of our bodies either by
compounding, or loosening, distorting, or exhausting.

The Cure is not difficult in such as by reason of the Humidity of their bones
are yet in a growing condition. It is hardly to be attempted in persons grown
up, in whom the bones, whose figure the external parts do represent, have
attained greater hardness and dryness. It is performed, 1. By handling and
working the part the contrary way, 2. By binding with swathes and splints.
It may be repeated, if the former succeeded not, if the hurt be very great and
the sick man lusty: and that by breaking of the Callus emollients being
premised. It ought not to be repeated, if the patient be old, the hurt Less,
and the Callus hard.

The differences are from the times of swerving of the parts.

I. Either it happens before the Nativity in the womb, and then the fault is in
the shaping faculty, and it is hardly cured.

II. Or in the birth: and then, either the Infant was too great, or the Orifice
of the Womb too strait.

III. Or after the Birth: where the chief fault is overmuch repletion, which
must be cured with Evacuation; Defect of Nutriment, which requires meats easy
of digestion, of good juice, and of little Excrement. See the chapter of
Arrophia, Violent motion, either caused by the patient himself, or by the
Artist, in which case, fractures of Bones do chiefly happen. The settling of one
part upon another, either by reason of the Resolution or Convulsion of the
Nerves; in which case we must have respect to the disease it self of the Nerves.

Article, 2. Of Disease of the Cavities.
Point, I. Of Diseases of the Cavities consisting in Excess.
Diseases of the Cavities are those, wherein the natural passages of the parts
are hurt. By Cavities or hollow receptacls, we understand both those large
Capacities of the Stomach, Brain, Heart, and Womb: as also the passages of the
Veins, Arteries, Ureters, etc. and the O rifice or Head of the Vessels and al
Cavities whatsoever.

And because the Cavities are hurt, either by way of excess, or in defect; the
diseases of the Cavities are divided into such as consist in Excess and such as
consist in defect.

Diseases of the Cavities in Excess are, when they are greater than naturally
they ought to be.

The SIGNS shall be set down, when we come to speak particularly of them.

The CAUSE is, what ever is of tendency to open, or distend, or fret, and
divide the Cavities.

The CURE is performed by Stopping.

They are divided into Anastomosis, Diapedesis, and Diairesis.

I. Anastomosis is when the mouths of the Vessels are too much opened and
widened. It is known by a plentiful shedding forth of such humor or matter,
which ought to be contained in the said Cavities. It arises from such things
either external or internal, which are apt to loosen, or distend. The Cure
tends to shut up, by astringent med^caments (of which in their place) and has
an Eye withal to their Causes. The chief astringents are, Leaves of
Shepherds-pouch, seeds of Purslane, flowers of Balaustians, small Dasies, bole
Armeniack, juice of Slowes, new Treacle, powder of Man's Bones, Crocus Martis,
etc. As for the differences, 1. Either it springs from an External Cause as
opening medicaments; and then the causes preceding must be removed. Or, 2. from
plenty of Humors especially blood, burthening the faculty; and then the^ signs
of those Humors are present. We must go to work, with blood-letting and
purging. 3. Or from the Quality of Humors provoking the faculty; and then their
signs are present. Evacuations being premised, we must use astringents.


II. Diairesis is, when the Vessels are divided. It Is known by plentiful efflux
of matter with pain. It arises from causes which corrode, distend, or break.
The Cure requires conjunction or soddering by astringent Medicaments. The
diffences are taken from the Causes. 1. It is either from external Causes, viz.
vehement motion, heavy weight, exclamation, leaping, contusion, wounds, sharp
and thick medicaments. 2. Or from sharp biting humors, and then the signs of a
choleric or salt humor are present. The Cure consists in alteraion by cooling
medicaments and such as blunt the sharpness of Humors; by evacuation with
choler and water-purgers, etc. and by a cooling and mitigating diet. 3. Or from
plenty of Humors, in which case, the Cure is the same with that in the
Anastomosis. 4. Or from Winds, and then the signs of wind are present, viz.
stretching without weight, wandering pain; the Causes engendring win^s were
precedent, the disease arose on a sudden, the Urine is full of bubles, etc.
The Causes are, plenty of moist diet, weak heat, which cannot digest the
matter. The Cure requires, that the Cause be evacuated; that winds be expelled
by convenient Medicaments. White Amber is commended in this Case, old Treacle
also and Mithridate, Electuary of Bayberries, Conserve of Sage, Spirit of
Turpentine, Oil of Fenel Seed, Anisseed, Powder of Citron Peels, etc.

III. Diapedesis, when the Vessels are rarefied: it is known, by an over
plentiful sweating forth of Humors. It arises from rarifying and moistening
Causes. The Cure respects the Causes.

Point, 2. Of Diseases of the Cavities in Defect.
Diseases of the Cavities in Defect are, when the Cavities are rendered more
straight than is fit.

The SIGNS you shall meet with in the particulars.

The CAUSES of this straitness are Obstruction, Constipation, Growing together,
Compression, Falling-in, of which in the Differences.

The CURE requires the Removal of this Straitness, which varies according to
the variety of Differences.

As for the differences, under them five things are contained.

I. Obstruction, which is nothing else, but the shutting up of the passages by
Humors or other things. It arises from Humors and things wholly against nature,
etc. It Is cured by convenient application of deobstructive medicaments. It Is
divided according to the Causes, 1. One sort springs from multitude of Humors;
and then Diet is the Cause. Evacuation helps this sort, which must be large, it
the Humors be many, having respect to the places. From the Chest by Coughing,
from the Stomach by vomiting, from the Belly by Stool. 2. Another from thick
and clammy humors; and then we must use abstertion, cutting and attenuating:
sometimes abstertion alone will suffice, if the Cavity be open. The medicaments
ought to be strong, when the viscidity of humors is great, and the place
remote; more mild, when the Case is contrary, and always appropriate unto the
parts. 3. Another is from Stone, Worms, Quittor, Dung, of which we shall speak
in its place: and then we must use al Evacuations, either at once, or at diverse
times. And respect is to be had to the place in which the humors are lodged. 4.
Another sort is from clotters of Blood, then we must use medicaments which
dissolve blood, such as are the Magistery of Crab's-eyes, Powder of Rhubard,
Tormentil, Sperma ceti not rancid, etc.
You have cutting and deobstructive Medicaments, above in the third Book. The
principal shall be specified, in the Cure of particular obstructions.

II. Constipation, when the passage is shut up, by flesh or a tumor bred in the
cavity. It arises from a Caruncle, Membrane, inflammation, Tunicle, Push; which
must be concocted. The Cure requires consumption and evacuation of the matter.

III. Coalescence, is when the walls or sides of the passage grow together,
after an ulcer or wound. It arises from flesh growing to the Cavity, from a
scar, etc. The Cure requires breaking.

IV. Compression, when the passages are stopped by causes incident from
without, which force together the sides thereof. It arises, either from
external causes as cold and dryers, where loosening and moistning things are
good: or fresh Tumors or Bones, removed out of their places. The Cure requires
their Removal, and has an Eye to the diversity of Causes.

V. Falling in, or falling down, when the passages are straightened by the
looseness and falling together of the sides. It arises from over great moisture.
It Is cured by dryers.

Article, 3. Touching Diseases of the Surface.
Diseases of the Surface are, when the parts decline from their natural
Constitution, in the second Qualities.

The chiefest of them are Roughness and Smoothness.

I. Roughness, is a want of that Smoothness which ought to be in a part. It is
caused, either by addition of a Surface in the solid parts, as in fractures
certain scales are seen; and there is need of fetching somewhat off, by
abstersive Medicaments: or by taking away, and then sharp things both external,
as vapors, Winds, Fumes, Meats, venomous Medicaments; and also internal, as
over dryness of the parts when their moisture is consumed, bitter choler, salt
phlegm, etc. In the Cure we must fill up, that which was hollowed, the acrimony
of humors must be be tempered, and the parts not yet affected must be defended.
We must go to work with moist and clammy medicaments.

II. Smoothness, is a defect of that roughness which ought to be in a part.
It Is cured with abstersive medicaments, which have withal some astriction, that
the tone of the fibers may be repaired; and the spaces in the surface of the
part, being dilated by humors, may be again contracted.

Chap. 2. Of Diseases of Number.
A Disease of Number, is when there is a fault in the number of parts.

It Is divided into a Disease of number in defect and in excess.

A Disease of number in defect is, when a part which ought naturally to be
present is absent. That part is either Sanguine or Spermatick, which is not
regenerate or repaired in Specie: or simple, or compound; nor must it be the
particle of a part, but a whole part. The Cause is, whatsoever either by way of
efficiency or privation of matter, may cause the want of any part. The Cure
points us to Restitution, which is made only by nature; the Physician mean
while, preserving the strength of Nature, by defending the natural Heat; by
supplying fit matter thereto, viz. blood; and by removing impediments, that is
to say, Flesh and such like things. As for what concerns the Differences.
Either the fault is original, or through defect of matter necessary to
generation; or through the weakness of the natural faculty, which ought to
attract, retain, and elaborate the matter; and so it cannot be restored. Or
after birth: by cutting, gnawing, putrefaction, refrigeration; and the Cure is
to be directed to its causes.

II. A Disease of Number in Excess, is when there is a thing which naturally
ought not to be present. The Cure requires the removal of the said thing, which
according to the variety of the things to be removed, must be various lest
other parts be hurt, or that they may be hurt as little as may be; it is not to
be applied to such things as do not trouble a man. If you consider the
differences, The thing superfluous is either wholly against nature, as Stones,
Worms, etc. and then the Cure is to be applied to them: or some entire
substance, which arises either through over great plenty of master, and the
weakness of the formative faculty in the first shaping of the Child, or by
reason of of some vicious quality afterward. In these Cases, the removal is
procured by Fire, and hereunto belong actual Cauteries. Iron, whereunto belong
al kind of sharp instruments. Medicaments, Causticks, Vesicatories, etc. of
which we shall speak in their own place, when we handle particular Diseases. A
Vesicatory Plaster made up of one ounce of Cantharides or Spanish flies, half
an ounce of Terpentine, Olibanum, Myrtle, Mastich, Camphire of each one dram.
Oil of Roses, of Wax, of each a sufficient Quantity, is very much commended.

Chap. 3. Of Diseases of Magnitude.
Article, 1. Of Tumors.
A Disease of Magnitude, is the swerving of the parts of Man's Body, from their
natural magnitude.

It is divided into a Disease of Magnitude increased, and of magnitude
diminished.

Magnitude increased is a Tumor, which is a swerving of the Parts of Man's Body
from their natural State, by increase of bulk.

The SIGNS are needless to recount; for if it happen in the external parts, it
is perceived by the sight, if it be within, it either discovers it self by some
external Sign, or by some other internal ones, of which when we come to the
sorts. To increase of Bulk there is sometimes added distemper, if the matter
exceed in Qualities, and communicate them to the parts. Solution of Unity, if
the Continuity be loosened by fretting, or stretching. Faults in the shaping,
either if the figure be corrupted, the Cavities compressed or obstructed.

The Causes are Humors, Winds, solid Substance, of which we shall treat in their
Differences.

The CURE requires Imminution or lessening that which is overgrown, which if
the parts be not sound, it is perfomed by the same medicaments, which are good
in Number abounding; if sound, it is performed by lessening the Parients diet,
digestion, discussion, etc.

The Defferences are sundry.

I. One is from the Humors which is known by the signs of the Humors; it arises
from Blood, Choler, Phlegm, Melancholic, Seriosities, whether they be in the
part by congestion or affluxion; and whether they are included in a peculiar
membrane or not. It Is Cured, and that with Difficulty, if it be suddenly
diminished, and be not evacuated by convenient passages, if a Fever be raised,
or the fever that was before augmented. The Cure varies according to the
variety of the Differences. It Is variously divided. For, 1. Either it is from
Humors stirred up in the part; partly through fault of the part, inasmuch as
the concoct ve or expulsive faculty do not perform their Office; partly of the
Aliment, seeing it is vicious and such, as it cannot be overcome by the part,
and such as affords great store of Excrements. And then the tumor is longer in
breeding: does not take up so great room, no cause or sign of any fluxion went
before. In the Cure we must have an Eye to Alteration and Evacuation; and the
latter must be sensible, if the matter be plentiful, and the part thick;
Insensible, if the matter be little in quantity, and soft. Now concerning the
Congestion of Humors, observe, 1. That the matter which is Collected in the
common cavities, being so increased that it can be no longer there retained, is
poured back to the Cavities and particular pores of the Place. 2. That not only
thick and clammy Humors, but also the ichors or thin Liquors, which separate
themselves from the thick humors, are brought unto, and stick in the the part
affected, especially when they grow cold, out of their own proper place. 3.
Also it may proceed from a spirituous matter, whence it is, that a part being
weakened by a blow, does sometimes remain continually puffed up and swollen. 4.
Also that putrid humors are collected, and hence it is that there will be small
risings in ulcers.
2. Or it is from humors that come into the part from some other place, either
by Attraction caused by Heat or pain; or by Transmission, either from the whole
Body or some parts. Then the signs are contrary to congestion. There was no
pain in the part, if it came by Transmission; there was, if it happened by
afflux. In the Cure we must respect, both the continuing Affluxe, and the tumor
which is in breeding, where evacuation has place, either by blood-letting or
purgation. Revulsion to the contrary. Derivation to the near parts. Repulsion,
Interception, etc. and also the Affluxe already performed, where the same
remedies are useful unless the matter be forced and fixed into the part, which
must then be softened and ripened. 3. Or from humors shut up in particular
membranes or Bags, where the humor is turned in a manner into another
substance. 4. Or from malignant humors, where the signs of Malignity are
present.


II. Another proceeds from Winds, which is hereby known, that there is no
heaviness felt, though there be sometimes pain, and the part is sometimes
greater, sometimes lesser. It arises from causes ingendering wind, and winds
are multiplied and collected either under the skin and about the membranes of
the muscles, in the pores themselves of the similary parts or in the membranes
of the bowels or in their cavities. It is cured and that with difficulty, if it
be contained in the Muscles, because the flatulent spirit is disposed in all
their parts restrained and shut in by the ambient membranes. It is nevertheless
cured by evacuation of the matter, discussion thereof, and Roboration of the
part.

III. Another proceeds from solid parts, whether they be bones fallen from
their own into another place; or soft parts removed out of their place; or
arteries, or veins: of which we shall treat in their proper places.

IV. There is another which is taken away by invisible discussion; and then the
matter is neither much nor thick; nor deeply situate, nor shut up under a thick
and compacted skin. The Body is not impure. Nature is strong: the member grows
lighter: the troublesome pulsation ceases.

V. Another, is term inated by Suppuration; and then the matter is more
plentiful and thick; lying in a deep place under a thick skin; while quittor is
making, a pain and palpitation in the part together with a fever, afflict the
patient: whenthe quittor is produced, the heat is diminished, the pain eased,
the tumor becomes pointed, and begins to be soft and white; the quitt or may be
felt under a man's finger flowing this way and that, unless the part be thick,
or it lie deep.

Another by Induration; and then the matter is clammy and hard, natural heat
strong, the tumor it self diminished, and the Hardness is increased.

Another by Corruption; and then the part appears lead-colored and black, and
the heat and pain are diminished.

Point, 1. Of an Imposthume.
Two things follow a tumor which proceeds from Humors, viz. an Imposthume,
which is sometimies attended with a Cavity.

An imposthume, is a collection of purulent matter or quittor in the Cavity of
of some part proceeding from the Humor which causes the swelling.

The Subject, is the parts and their Cavities.

The Signs, may be fetched from the third difference of tumors ariseing from
humors, where the business of suppuration is handled.

The Cause is the Humor it self, which natural heat ripens and turns into
quittor. Hence it is various according to the variety of the Matter.

The Cure, has respect to two certain times or seasons.

I. When quittor is in making; and then we must act, 1. By anodines and
paine-asswagers. Oil of worms is exceedingly commended. 2. By Ripeners and that
temperatly hot and clammy, in hot tumors, and soft and moist bodies; such as
sweet oil, wheat flower, milk, crummy part of wheaten bread: with such as are
yet hotter, in cold tumors, and cold Natures and parts; such as terpentine,
fire-rosin, larch-rosin, pine-rosin, sigs, raisons, diachylon simple.
II. When quittor is made; where we must go to work with. 1. Evacuation, either
Insensible, which is dangerous not only where there is great quantity of
matter, for fear of hardening the same, but in all cases, by reason of
accrimony, which may be increased by delay. Or sensible; and in this case, the
Imposthume must be opened; either by more benign medicaments, amongst which
are Diachylon simple with mustard seed figs, and salt: or by stronger, that is
to say, potential and actual Causticks. 2. By Clensing with detergents, viz.
Juice of smalladg, of Centory, round birth-wort, wormwood, Betony, Agrimony
etc. 3. By breeding of flesh with Sarcotick medicaments. 4. By covering all
with a scar, by Epulotict medicaments, among which is Emplastrum Diapalma.

In respect of the Differences they are manyfold.

I. Either it is from Blood, and then it is easily ripened, and being ripened
it affords laudible quittor. Or from other humors, which arises with
difficulty, has somewhat in it like quittor, green and yellow.

II. Or it is pure and simple quittor, like either to pap, honey, suit, oil
lees, and wine dregs, and sometimes mixed with many other things

III. The Impostume is either in fleshy parts, and then it is easily changed
into quittor; or near the joints, in nervous and weak parts, which have little
Heat in them; and then it is ripened with difficulty.

IV. Either the quittor flows up and down in the Cavity, and is gathered into
the receptacle thereof, or it is shut up into a peculiar membrane and bag.

Point, 2. Of the Hole in an Imposthume.
The Sinus, or holly hole in an Impostume, is when the quittor diffusing it
self in the depth thereof, the neighboring skin does not cleave to the flesh
beneath it

The Sign is the going before of an impostume, and tents, by which it is best
of al searched.

The Cause, is the quittor it self, which being kept in far below, does make by
its acrimony coney holes as it were, and draws together the excrements of the
whole Body.

The Cure is imposible, if it have collected a Callus and hardness. Doubtful,
if much and unconcocted matter is voided forth, and pain felt in the Hole.
Hopeful if little quittor, good and white, come forth, and there be no pain.
It Is performed, I. By Evacuation of the quittor, which is done either by bare
clensing, if the Hole tend downwards, with barley water, melicratum or mead, and
wine sod with honey: or by Opening, so that either the whole cavity be cut
asunder, if it be small; or only the lower Orifice if it be great, and the part
cannot be cut without danger. II. By production of flesh with Sarcotick
Medicaments, where note.
That an excrement must be removed, as well if it be thin as thick, least it
stick in the Ulcer, Most with the dryer sort, as Orobusmeal, Orice root,
Birthwort, Myrrb, Tutty, pompholyx, in such as are dry; with the less dry, as
Franckincense, Barley meal, and Bean meal, in such as are dry. If the hole be
not wide open, liquid medicaments are to be cast in by a syringe, and to be let
alone a good while. By want of pain, and voidence of little quittor and well
digested, we may guess of the soodering and growing together again of the skin
and flesh, and by contrary signs of the Contrary.

As for what concerns the defferences, either they are shallow and little; or
deep and broad; Either strait or oblique. They tend either upwards or
downwards, and that way the worst quittor is evacuated.

Article, 2, Of diseases consisting in Magnitude, diminished.
A disease of Magnitude diminished, is the diminuition of the parts of man's
body in their natural magnitude.

There needs no signs, seeing the disease it self is evident.

The Causes are, want of aliment, either because it is drawn away, or because
the channelar e obstructed. Straitness of the place in which a part ought to be
augmented: section, putrefaction, refrigeration, ustion: of which in their
places.

The Cure is undertaken. I. By repairing the part with plenty of good
nourishment. in which case drinking of wines, meats of thick juice, little
exerci^e, indifferent rubbings, are useful. A Dropax or pitchy medicament, of
which see the Pharmacopeia. II. By regeneration, if a member be plucked away,
which is the work of nature alone; only let the Physician remove the
impedicaments, etc.


Chap. 6. Diseases in Situation.
A Disease of situation or connection, is the sejunction of such parts of the
Body as ought to be conjoined, and a conjunction of such as ought to be
separated.

It Is needless I should speak of Signs, because the disease is of it self
apparent.

The Causes consist in those things by means of which the parts are fastened
together, and touching luxation, we shall speak in the following Article. Now
the connection of such things as ought to be separate, comes to pass when the
intermediate parts are loosned, or the ligaments broken, or wounded. The Cure
requires the Conjunction of parts disjoined, and separation of parts conjoined.

And because luxations are most frequent of all the diseases of situation: I
think it meet in this place, to treat of Luxation in General.

Article. 1. Of Luxation.
Luxation in General is the slipping of a joint out of its natural seat into
another, whereby voluntary motion is hindered.

The Signs are, the unlikeness of the Member to it self as it was before, in
shape and length; Motion hurt; pain, by reason of Compression of the Nerves,
Muscles, and tendons; the sweling of that part, in to which the joint is slipped;
the hollowness of that place from whence it is fallen.

The CAUSES are, al such things which are apt to stretch or violently to force;
especially the laxity or solution of unity of the parts, wherein the joints are
contained, the Contraction of the Ligaments, etc. The Curemore easy, in
children and soft persons. It Is hard if the^e be great pain, inflammation, a
wound, or dancer of Convulsion. If the Luxation be old and hardened with a
callus. If it happen in childhood, and be not cured. If it tend to a
Consumption, through cessation of Motion and Compression of the Vessels. If the
joints hurt, serve but few different motions. If they are departed far from
their Cavity. If the Brows or edges of the Bones are broken. It Is performed by
Reposition o^ Restoring the joint to its place, which requires, 1. Sufficient
extension, whereby the bone is forced into its place, 2. Reposition with ones
hand; or by common Instruments, or some devised on purpose. 3. By application
of astringent Medicaments, that inflammation may be prevented. 4. By diligent
binding, with swaths and bolsters. 5. By putting it into a gentle posture, and
so that it may preserve its natural figure.


The Differences are sundry. For,

I. One sort springs from external Causes, a blow, a fall, violent extention
before childbirth, and at the time of the birth: which ought to be prevented.
Another from Internal, when an humor slipped into the Cavity of the Joint, drives
it from its seat.

II. One is Perfect, when the whole Joint is fallen out of its place, which is
termed Exarthrema.

Another is Imperfect, when the joint is slipped only to the brim of the Socket,
which is termed Pararthrema.

III. Another is with Inflammation and Pain, in which case, the pain must first
be mitigated, the Inflammation assuaged; lest by distention of the Nervs a
Convulsion arise; and afterward it must be replaced.

IV. Another is accompanied with a Wound which is the most dangerous,
especially if the wound be nigh the Joint, and an accute fever arise. Here,
the Joint, is forthwith to be restored to its place, if possible. If it cannot
be restored, we must attend the Cure of the Inflammation to the seventh or ninth
day.

V. Another is with a fracture, where the Joint is first to be restored to its
place, and the Fracture is to be cured afterward: if it cannot be reposed, it
is then to be restored, when the Callus is bred.

Title, 4. Of Diseases of Unity dissolved.
A disease of Unity dissolved, is the loss of that Continuity and Unity which
ought to be in the parts of Man's Body.

The Causes thereof are, 1. Such as are Corrosive, as al sharp things,
Causticks, and Putrifiers. 2. Such things as divide unity, either by pricking
and stabbing, or cutting. 3. Things which break, as stones, Timber, etc. 4.
Things which bray and tear, either by replenishing or overstretching. 5. Such
as burn, as things heated in the fire, red-hot Irons, etc.


The CURE requires Unition. The Physicians part is to see, that nothing betide
the part affected, which may hinder the same. That the Lips may be rightly
applied one to another. That the temperament of the part it self may be
preserved, and that the symptoms, which may happen, be prevented.

And forasmuch as among diseases of Unity dissolved, the chief are Ulcers,
Wounds, Fractures; I must speak something of them in general.

Chap. 1. Of Ulcers.
AN Ulcer, is a solution of Continuity arising in a soft part, diminution of
Magnitude, caused by some fretting and eating matter.

The Subject is a soft or fleshy part, comprehending not only the flesh of the
Muscles, but that also of which the Guts, Bladder, etc. do consist.

SIGNS are needless in such as are external: the Internal may easily be
gathered from the particulars. The Times of Ulcers, if you consider them, at
first, a watery Sanies, thin, crude and plentiful, flows forth, the Symptoms,
viz. pain, itching, etc. do afflict. At the Augment the Symptoms are
increased, the Sanies begins to be digested, and is lessened in quantity; al
things are greatest in the State; in the declination they are less.

The CAUSE is either external, viz. Caustic medicaments, the Contagion of the
Whores-pox, etc. or internal or humors, which are either bred in the part
affected, or flow thither from elsewhere; which may happen in the spring time,
or by reason of exercise, in cacochy mical Bodies.

The CURE is difficult if it reach to some noble parts of exquisite sense, full
of moisture naturally. If it follow other diseases, because then nature drives
the vicious humors to that part. If the Ulcer be great, because the external
air can work strongly upon it: If it be round, because the extremities are more
hardly reunited. If it be old; because the bone must needs corrupt. If it tend
to look green and black, for so the Heat of the part affected is extinguished.
If it run with much sanies, thin, pale, lead-color'd, black, and stinking. If
the spleen being in fault, it affect the Thighs, because thick and Melancholy
Humors flowing to the Ulcer, hinder its closing. It Is performed, I. By
Evacuation, if the Body be cacochymical. II. By Blood-letting, if it be
plethorick. III. By Suppuration, when blood shed out of the veins, sticks in
the pores of the part; where note, that abstersives are excellently mingled
with suppurators, lest the Ulcer should become too moist, and that nature which
then seperates the Excrements, may be assisted. Among them are Turpentine, Oil
of Mastick, etc. IV. By Abstersion, of which I spoke but now; which is
performed by detergent Medicaments. V. By generation of flesh, with Sarcotick
Medicaments. And here observe, 1. That they ought to be neither strong nor
weak: lest by the former, the ulcer become dry, the flesh be consumed, bloody
liquors be voided: and by the latter, the flesh grow flaggy, and too great
abundance of sanies be collected. 2. That moist medicaments be applied to the
softer Bodies; yet so as that, Plasters, Ointments, Liniments be so soft that
they be not melted with Heat of the part, and breed flesh too loose, and unlike
that which is beneath: Pouders must be put upon hard and dry bodies.
VI. By Introduction of a scar, by epulotick medicaments. Where observe. That
they ought to have a drying faculty both actually and potentially. They are
then to be applied when the Ulcer is nor quite full of flesh; lest if it be put
to it, when it is full, seeing the flesh does still grow, the Scar becomes more
extuberant.


The Differences of Ulcers are sundry.

I. One is great, little, long, short, straight, crooked. Aequal, in which the
flesh is equally consumed in all the particles of the part affected. Unequal
which is, contrarily disposed. Superficial, Profound, External, Internal.

II. Another is with a Distemper. I. Either hot, which is known by Redness of
the Flesh in the Ulcer it self. 2. By feeling of Heat, Pain, by reason of the
acrimony and biting nature of the excrements. It arises from hot Air, too great
a Quantity of Swaths and Clothes, over hot medicaments. It Is cured by coolers
which are withal Pain-asswagers and binders, such as are Plantane, Roses,
Sanders, Sugar of Lead, Bole Armeniack, Turpentine often washed in Plantane Water.
II. Or cold which is known, by the Whitness, Leadcolor'dness, and softness of
the Flesh, in the Ulcer it self. It arises from cold Air, or such like
medicaments. It Is cured not so difficultly, because the Ulcer and Distemper may
be cured at one and the same time by Heaters, such as are Oil of St. John's
wort, Nard Oil, Orice Oil, Oil of Rue, to which may be added, Fomentations made
with Wine. III. Or dry; which is known, by the hardness and dryness of the lips
of the Ulcer, and the few excrements proceeding therefrom. It arises from like
causes. It Is cured with difficulty, because we are forced to neglect the Ulcer,
and sometimes, apply our selves wholly to remedy the distemper. For to moisten
withal, lukewarm Water is good. IV. Or moist, which is known by the
Excrescence of Flesh, and the softness and flaccidity thereof. By store of
Excrements in the Ulcer. It arises from like Causes. It Is cured, by strong
sarcoticks, made of Cyperus Root, Smiths dust, Hoar-bound, first washing the
same to cleanse away the filth, with a lotion wherein astringents have bin
steeped.


III. Another is with Afflux of humors, whether they come from the whole or from
the part. It Is known from the swelling, which is seen in the lips and bordering
parts; by pain, if nervous parts be affected; by plenty of Excrements, greater
than the Magnitude of the Ulcer seems to require. It arises from Humors. It Is
cured, 1. By Revulsion, among the remedies whereof, the chief place is ascribed
to fontanels, if Ulcers are lasting 2. By Interception or defense, to which
intent the medicaments must be applied above the exulcerated part, toward the
root of the Vessels. 3. By Repulsion, whose medicaments thereto subservient,
must be laid upon the part affected. 4. By more vehement Sarcoticks. 5. By
Epuloticks.


IV. Another is Sordid, which sends forth a thick and snotty Excrement, sometime
with putrefaction and grievous smell, which is sometimes followed by a
Sphacelation or a Gangrene. Now it is fordid or filthy, 1. Either by reason of
the Humors: and then the lively color of the part is vanished. The Cure is
performed by Diet; by Evacuation. By detersion with very abstersive
Medicaments, among which Spirit of Wine, a decoction of Vetches, Oil of Roses a
pound, and Mercury Precipitate one ounce, boiled and mixed with other things,
are commended. 2. Or by reason of Unctious Medicaments, and such as weakly dry;
then the Ulcer appears white, and that whitness goes about the whole Ulcer like
a bordering of cloth. It must be cured with gentle abstersives. 3. Or by
reason of strong medicaments, then the Ulcer becomes hollow, and grows every
day more red than other; a small quantity of thin and hot quittor flows forth.
It Is cured with cooler and gentler Medicaments, as the Ointment of
Diapompholygos.


V. Another sort is Lead-colored which comes either from the Air, or by afflux
of Humors. It Is cured by scarification; that the blood may be drawn out by
application of dry sponges. By drying with strong Medicaments, viz. the green
water of Platerus, and Hartman his water in his Chymiatrical Paradise, in the
Chapter De Ozaena.

VI. Another is callous, which proceeds from the use of over drying
Medicaments. The Callus is removed by Emollients, or with corrosive
Medicaments: but it must be warily removed in nervous parts, or cut off.

VII. Another is with a Tumor, which is known by the sight. It arises from
Humors flowing in. It is cured after the manner of Tumors.

VIII. Another with proud Flesh. It springs either from abundance of blood; and
then the Flesh is good conditioned. It is taken away, by fasting and
application of dryers. 2. Or by reason of the weakness of Flesh-breeding and
drying Medicaments. Then the Flesh is loose and spungy. It Is cured by Lignum
aloes beaten, and dried on a rafter, with spirit of Wine rectified, twice
inflamed, and prepared. Bartholinus of Causticks.

IX. Another is hollow, when the quittor being overlong detained, eats it self
holes and Convey-burroughs as it were. See the Cure in the fifth Book of the
Observation of Valleriola.

X. Another has Worms in it, which bred there. It is known either by the Eye if
the ulcer be wide; or by a preception of biting pricking pain, and a kind of
motion. The Cure requires, 1. Their drawing-forth, if they are at hand. 2.
Their being killed, by medicaments which take away putrefaction and moisture.


XI. Another is with varices or black-sweled veins which is known by the signs
of varices. It cannot be cured unless the varices be first cured, and taken
away.

XII. Another with corruption of the Bone Which is thereby known, in that the
flesh above the ulcer is flaggy and soft. The ulcer is frequently renewed, the
sanies flows out in greater plenty than is agreeable to the largness of the
ulcer. The Bone is perceived to be uneven, if you put in a Probe. It arises, 1,
From external causes, cold air, incision, contusion, Sharp medicaments. 2.
From internal causes, viz.
Affluxe of sharp humors to the Bones, pravity of the Sanies, manifest or
occult etc. The Cure is difficult, especially, if the flesh be lead-colored; if
the rotteness be near nervous parts, or in the joints, or about the Heads and
tendons of the Muscles, or about the great Vessels. It Is performed, I. By
laying open the Bone, either by putting in gentian root, or with a Caustic, or
by Incision. II. By removal of the Bone, either by exceeding drying
medicaments, among which Euphorbium is the best: or by Manual operation, if the
Rottenness lie deep, and sudden cure be required: which is performed by showing
or rasping, with a scraping-Instrument or an Augur. By burning, after which the
inflammation must be pacified and Pain prohibited.


XIII. Another is with a fistula, which is nothing but a narrow and long Hole.
It Is known by putting in of a probe, and the flesh round about, is white, dry
and hard. It arises either from plenty of bad humors, or the unskilfulness of
the Physician. The cure is difficult, if many parts be eaten and fretted, if
the Fistulas be deep, winding near the noble members. If they reach to the
heads of the Muscles, the veins, arteries, Nerves, Bones, Joints, Chest, Belly
etc. Not to be taken in hand, if the Fistulas be far from the noble parts; and
if superfluous humors be purged out by them. Palliative, whereby, universals
being premised, the Fistula is dried, with the water of Baths, of chalk etc.
True, which is performed. I. By premising Vniversals, under which Vulnerary
potions are comprehended. Mercurial purgations are good in this Case. II. By
removeing the Callus, I. By convenient medicaments putting into the Orifice of
the Fistula pencils made of sponge, the pith of Elder, bryony root, gentian
etc. when it is widned, things are squirted in with a syrringe, and they are
liquid or dry. Such are, Serpentary root, Centory, Fig-Ashes, Unguentum
Apostolorum, Agyptiacum. By opening the Fistula, which being done, the Callus
must be taken off with a penknife, or with a red hot iron, the part being
guarded with a defensative. III. By Consolidation, the filth being cleansed
away, by Centory, pimpinel etc.
As for what concerns the differences, 1. Some have diverse holes or Cavities,
and then more quittor flows out, than can be contained in one Cavity. 2. Others
have diverse orificies and then if the liquor squirted in by the syring, flow
back through al, and if the humidity be of the same coler, it is but one Fistula.
3. Another terminates upon flesh, then that which we touch with the probe is
soft, and the quittor that comes forth is white. 4. Another reaches to the
nerve: then pain is felt when we search it. 5. Another bottoms at the bone, and
then that which we touch with the probe is hard. 6. Another ends upon a Vein
and Artery, and then if they be gnawen asunder, blood breaks forth: if not, a
certain matter, like lees or dregs comes out.


Chap. 2. Of Wounds.
A Wound is the solution of Unity in a soft part, made by somewhat sharp and
cuting, either by way of a prick or stab, or by way of a slash or gash.

The Subject is a soft part, and that either external or internal, etc.

There need no Signs.

The Cause is expressed in the definition.

The Cure is none, if the Heart be wounded, so that the vital spirits be
dissipated, if there be a vessel in the Lunges, out of which blood being shed,
overwhelms the Heart. If some great internal vessel be so hurt, that it cannot
be shut up whereupon, blood being plentifully shed, the spirits are dissipated.
Doubtful, if the weapon were poisoned, if the wounded person be weak and full of
bad humors; if an inflammation happen, in the inner more nervous parts, and such
as have more exquisite sense, which is followed by an afflux, of humors and
sometimes by a Gangreen. It Is difficult, if it be joined with a Cachexy and
dropsy, because overmuch moisture, hurts the cure. If it be purged out with
difficulty. If it be complicated with other diseases. If it be in a part apt to
receive a Conflux of humors. If it have in it some extraneous thing, which
cannot at first be drawn forth. If on the Critical days (to which wounds are
so far subject, inasmuch as they have in them some matter requiring Concoction)
there is no change to the worse. If the wound be oblique or circular. If
convulsion happen, or contusion be also present. It Is performed. I. By
exemption of superfluous things. Where note, 1. Clotters of blood must be taken
away only at the third binding, because by stopping the Orifice of the veins
they hinder a flux of blood. 2. Those broken bones are only to be taken forth,
which are perfectly free. 3. The weapon must be pulled forth, if the patient
may live, when that is done. 4. That the weapon may be taken out, either by
thrusting them along, if the passage be short, and neither bone, nerve nor
vein prohibit; or by extraction, and both ways are performed, either with
section or without the same; those things which cannot otherwise be removed
must be brought out with drawing medicaments, nor must they be by any means
left to Nature.
II. By conjunction of the Lips of the Wound, where respect must be had to the
manner of binding up, and to which belongs swathing, placing of bolsters,
slipping, and the right placing of the part tied up. III. By Digestion, that
the blood which flows out of the smallest veins, in the part wounded, and
sticks in the pores of the part, may as soon as possibly be changed into
quittor. Where observe 1. That in moist bodies vulgar moisteners must warily be
used, least putrefaction being induced, the wound should turn to a sordid
ulcer. 2. In dryer bodies, they are more profitable to correct the dryness. 3.
That Digestives must be corrected with sarcoticks, and that we must not trust
to one medicament. See the Medicaments which move quittor in the Institutions.
This is the best: Red clear terpentine and Gum Elemi of each one ounce and an
half, Weathers grease two ounces, old Hog's Grease one ounce. Melt al over the
fire, and make a Liniment. 4. By Conglutination of the Parts, which is
performed either by a medium of the same kind, in the soft and fleshy parts, in
which plenty of blood, by strong heat is more easily changed into flesh; or by
a Callus in the bones; or by a scar in the skin. Which is furnished by
sarcotick medicaments; of which in another place; also by vulnerary potions,
concerning which observe: That they are not to be used at the beginning, nor
when external medicaments may serve the turn, and when there is a fever and
Inflammation; those things must always be used, which are appropriated to the
parts. Hereunto appertain, The Vulnerary Balsom of Hartmannus in his
chymiatria, the glutinatory powder of Crabs, Balsam of Ear wax, and Rulandus
his balsam of sulphur. 5. By averting the fluction, where we are to use, 1.
Bloodletting, if the body be plethorick. If the blood did not issue out two
much before. If the wound be great, and there be no inflammation caused by
pain, 2. Purgation, if the body be full of bad humors, if the humors be thin,
hot and choleric; least they make the blood apt to stir.
If it be used at the beginning. If there be no fever withal.



The Differences of wounds are sundry.

1. One is of the Vessels, and that either of a Vein and then the blood Issues
more violently, and it is thicker, blacker and less hot: or of an Artery, and
then the blood is yellow, hot and thin; the patients strength is much spent, by
reason of loss of spirits; it is hardly cured, by reason of the hardness of the
Arteries, their perpetual motion, and the force of the blood in them contained.
The Cure calls for the stoppage of blood, which is performed 1. By joining
together the Lips of the wounded vessel, either with a man's fingers or a swat
he, by which means nevertheless, the blood will hardly be stopped. By stopping
the Orifice of the Vessel, either by application of ones finger, or by
medicaments which stop blood. The external medicaments are, Crepitus Lupi, a
kind of puckfist or toadstool so called, vitriol poudered and put in a cloth,
the powder of Agricola consisting of two drams, of Sugar of Lead, White
franckincense, red myrrh; one dram of Saffron and Camphire poudered, wet with
Frogs-spawn water, and dried at a gentle fire, put into the wound. Internal
medicaments see in the Chapter of bleeding at the nose. 3. By Revulsion with
blood-letting, diverse times administered, or by Cupping glasses, if the patient
be weak. 4. By Interception with intercepting medicaments, which ought to be
applied to the vessels, by which the blood flows. 5. By dissolution of the
blood after it is congealed and clottered, see the medicines above.


II. Others are of the Tendons which cause pain but not very great. They are
less dangerous. They are cured as those of the Nerves, Or the whole tendon is
cut asunder in the mids and then the motion is taken away: but if nor, the
motion is only weakened.

III. Another is of the Nerves, which are known from the writings of
Anatomists, by their vehement pain, to which convulsion and inflammation are
wont to succeed. They are cured with difficulty, by reason of following
symptoms, especially, if there be no tumors. If appeareing, they suddenly
vanish. If the Nerve have conceived putrefaction, and that be communicated to
the near and remote parts. In the Cure. 1. Pain and Inflammation are to be
removed by blood-letting and purging. 2. The wound must be kept open that it
may vomit out its Excrements. 3. Temperate and drying Medicaments of thin
parts, must be applied, mostly hot, respect being had to the Constitution of
the body and affluxe of Humors. 4. The intermediate parts, must be fomenred
with oil of white lillies etc. If you consider the differences.
I. Some are caused by way of pricking, and then the kind of the weapon and the
wound agree together. The Symptoms aforesaid follow. The Cure is hard because
the disease is dangerous. Especially if it betide an impure body, and if the
tumor ariseing, do vanish, and raveing follow. It respects, 1. The purging of
the body from vicious humors. 2. The asswagement of the pain, by anodyne Oils,
or Cataplasmes. 3. The drawing forth of sanies or corrupt moisture either by
drawing medicaments, or by section Cross-wise, or by tents, yet so as that they
touch not the nerves. 4. Application of thin medicaments, moderately heating,
and drying, as balsam of Peru, St. John's wort oil, 5. Diet in which cold air,
wind, passions of the Mind and venery, are prohibited.
II. Others come by Cutting, which happens, I. Either according to longitude,
and then the pain is not so great, nor is there so great fear of Convulsion,
seeing the fibers are not so affected. In the Cure, the Lips of the wound are
to be closed together with a swath band. The corrupt liquor must be suffered to
have its egress, which is like sometimes to milk, water, whey, whites of Eggs.
The foresaid Medicaments must be put in. The wound must be covered with a
plaster of Diapalma, or some other. 2. Or athwart the Member, and then it is
either cut quite in sunder: and then motion and sense are abolished without
pain: or it is not cut in sunder, and then the pain is not so great; there are
all the symptoms which may be in a prick. In the Cure stitching must be used,
but so as not to hurt the nerve.



IV. Others are of the Joints, which happen in the Cubit, knee, and Joints of
the fingers. They are, 1. Either without Luxation, in which case the Cure is
Difficult, because the Joints easily receive fluxions, and are apt to be
pained: especially, if they happen in the inner part, where the vessels are
greater. It is performed. 1. By drawing the Lips together, so that an issue may
be left for the quittor. 2. By preventing the affluxe of humors, by evacuation,
Interception, a right situation of the Member. 3. By repulse of cold air, by
Cataplasmes and other things.
II. Of with luxation or disjointing, where there is greater danger because of
tearing asunder the nervous parts. Halting follows. In the Cure, the joint
must not be restored; for death would then follow. With the wound you must
proceed as with other wounds, the binding up, only excepted. The fluxions must
be prevented chiefly by purgations and Sudorificks.


V. Others are with Bruising when a weapon is blunt, or heavy, or a man is
beaten against somewhat. In the Cure you must have regard to, I. The Contusion,
where, 1. Afflux of humors must be prevented by revulsions, defensatives and
repellers. 2. The blood which is flowed in, must be changed into quittor, by
medicaments not too moist, and Cataplasmes must be applied round about where
the part is bruised.
II. The Wound, which, 1. Must be cured with digestives, of rosin, terpentine,
and yolks of Eggs. 2. When quittor is bred, we must use abstersion and
consolidation. 3. If it will not be suppurated, and there is danger of a
Gangreen, we must Scarrify etc.

The Differences are taken from the parts. I. Either it is of the Nerves and
Tendons, where the part must be fomented with discussing Oils, made hot. If the
skin be withal bruised, the pain is first to be assuaged, with the white of an
Eg, mingled with Rosewater: then a while after, the part must be fomented with
astringent wine lukewarm: finally, Cataplasms must be laid on, of Elm leaves
boiled in oil, or the Ashes of vine spray with Hens-grease. If hardness remain,
Emollients and Digestives must be applied. II. Or it is of the Ligaments, where
we must deal with heating and drying medicaments etc.


VI. Others are by Gunshot, which are known by the very sight. The Cure is
hard, if the Body be cacochymical. If the the bones be withal broken. If they
are made with a poisoned buller. It Is perfected. 1. By drawing out the bullet,
with fit Instruments. 2. By changing into quittor, what is bruised, with
Quercetanes Ointment, P. 145. The balsam of Pareus recorded by Sennertus lib.
5. Of Wounds made by Gunshot; so as to prevent a Gangreen. 3. By abstersion
with detergents, either stronger if there be much quittor, or milder. See
Quercetanus Dispensatory p. 146. 4. By breeding of new Flesh, by Medicaments,
which may be seen in the forenamed Author, and others.
See besides Ludovicus Botallus, and others, Quercetanus his Treatise of
Gunshot-wounds.

VII. Others are poisoned, either by an infected venomous arrow or other
weapon, or by the biting of some beast: and then, in the wounded place there is
greater sense of pain and pricking, and grievous symptoms happen. In the Cure
we must thus proceed, as, 1. To stop the passage of the poison to the inner
parts of the Body; to draw it out by cupping-glasses or other medicaments; by
moderate binding of the part above the wound; by cutting of the Flesh, unless
it contain Nervs; by washing the wound, with Wine and Treacle mingled together;
with Causticks, etc. By fortifying the Heart with external and internal
Antidotes. 2. To cure the wound it self.


Chap. 3. Of Fractures.
A Fracture is the division of a Bone, by an external Cause, violently
assaulting.

The SIGNS are, want of due motion in the member; bitter pain before the bones
are composed; shortness of the member, by reason of the broken bone. The Causes
are external; yet aptness to break, does proceed sometimes from the natural
Constitution, sometimes from acquired rottenness, from the french pox, or some
other Cause.

The CURE respects, I. The Inflammation, if there be any, which must be in the
first place removed, respect being had to the part, with repellers, lest the
Humors should flow in. II. The Fracture it self, where note, 1. It must be
extended, without any pain, or as little as may be: by one man if the lesser
hones, by two if the greater be hurt. 2. They must be rightly placed in their
proper places, so as the ends may fitly join one to another, so that the
Eminencies of the Bones may not be forcibly thrust into their Cavities, lest
they should be broken. That if they break out of the Skin, they be handled
after a peculier manner. 3. We must see whether they be rightly placed and
framed together, which is known by Cessation of pain, and that there is no
cavity: that the broken part feels just as the whole, save that it is thicker
possibly, by reason of afflux of humors. 4. They must be duly bound up, which
is then done, when a medicine made of the white of an Egg beaten with
astringent pouders, is first laid on to prevent Inflammation. When the binding,
is neither too loose nor too strait. It is then too loose when the Patient
finds that he is lightly pressed, and the same night feels himself more
strongly bound, and the day after a swelling arises in the extremity of the
Member; if it be too strait the contrary signs follow. If it be not loosed
before the third day. 5. The member must be rightly placed, that is to say,
softly, lest it be pained; equally, that it may not be distorted; it must be
somewhat raised, lest the Humors flow to it.
III. The Body of the Patient, where if need be, blood-letting and purging must
be used. IV. The Callus, and then meats of good juice must be given.
Medicaments which breed the Callus must be drunk down and applied, especially
in grown persons, one dram of Osteocolla, with Comfrey Water. See Aquapendent
and Hildanus in their observations. V. The Symptoms. 1. Inflammation whereto
respect is to be had presently at the Beginning, nor is the part to be bound,
or at least not so hard. 2. A Gangrene, which see in its proper Chapter. 3.
Itch and Excoriation, which proceeds from sanies; where the Sanies is to be
washed off, and afterward unguentum album Camphoratum, Rosaceum, etc. must be
used. 4. Pain, which either springs from the overstraitness of the Swath-bands,
and then a swelling appears in the extremity of the part, and the sick Patient
complains that he is extremely pressed. The swath-bands are to be loosed, and
the binding to be made more easy. Or from a pricking bone; and then a pain
arises from a light handling of the part. The Bone is either to be restored to
its place, or taken out, or cut off. Or from a Confluence of Humors, and then
it is cured like a beginning Inflammation. Or from an evil situation of the
Member, and then the Patient easily discovers the same; the situation of the
Member must be changed. 5. The Gracility or leanness of the member, and then
either an over-thin diet, or long binding of the swathes, is the cause.
Nourishment must be drawn to the part.



The Differences of Fractures are sundry.

I. One is athwart, so as the Extremities do not at al stick together. It Is
known by this, in that you may feel the ends of the broken bone asunder one
from another, and in the place of the Fracture a nonnatural Cavity is observed,
etc. It Is more easily healed, especially if it be simple and equal, and the
broken bones be not removed out of their places.

II. Another is when a bone is broken into diverse parts. This is hardly Cured,
especially if sharp eminences or points do prick the parts adjoining. If they
cannot be reduced to their former state, and the member is become shorter and
unfit for service.

III. Another is according to the length of the Bone, which is called a Clift.
This is known by the preternatural thickness of the member. It Is easily cured
because there is no need of any laborious replacing of Bones; but it suffices
that the gaping Chinkt or Rift of the bone be closed up.

IV. Another is Flesh, which is easily consolidated.

V. Another is old, which is hardly; because Inflammation being added, extension
is dangerous. The extremity of the Bones grow hard. Galen says, if the Cure be
protracted beyond the seventh day, there is danger that the bone will be blasted.

VI. Another is alone, of which all that has bin hitherto said, must be
understood.

VII. Another is with conclusion of the flesh, and has a wound joined
therewith. This is dangerous, if the wound be great, and in the greater
Muscles; inflammations easily arise thereupon; the splints and other things for
the better repose thereof, cannot so well be fitted; but an hole must be kept
open for the Wounds.

VIII. Another, which happens in the middle of the Bone, and then the division
is lighter.

IX. Another which is near the Head above or beneath; and then because in the
former there are more nerves, in the latter more tendons, greater pain happens.

X. Another is near the Joint; and then by ligaments, nerves, tendons, the part
broken cannot be conveniently bound up; in a bloodless part the Heat is weak;
the motion of the member is hindered, by reason of a Callus or hard substance,
which binds up the tendons or muscles.

XI. Another is, when Two Bones joined together are broken, as in the Arm the
Radius or Ulna: and then the Cure is hard.

XII. Another when One, and then the Muscles can be less contracted, because
they are kept stretched by the whole Bone.

Title, II. Touching Symptoms and their Removal.
A Symptom is a preternatural Disorder, in such things as beside the
Constitution of the parts are necessary to action, following some other
preternatural thing.

It Is many ways divided, but two ways especially. For,

I. One is of Action hurt, whether it be abolished, diminished, depraved, or
augmented. It comes to pass, either through fault of the Faculty, when the
immediate instrument is ill affected; to which the Absence of the Spirits and
Influent Heat is referred: or by reason of some external Error, when those
things deceive, with which the actions are performed, or at least, without
which they cannot be. Another is of Things voided, and things retained. Another
of Qualities changed, which depend upon the Hurts of Actions; and the Humors
depending thereupon.

II. Others are Symptoms of the natural Faculty, viz. the Nutritive,
Augmentative, Generative, Retentive, Attractive, Concoctive, Expulsive. Others
are of the vital Faculty; others of the animal Faculty, to which belong
Symptoms of the external Senses, of the internal Senses, of the motive
Faculty, etc.

The CURE of Symptoms, is their Mitigation or asswagement, and that must be
sudden, when they are urgent, that is to say, do threaten so great danger, that
we cannot stay to take away the Disease, or its Causes, upon which they depend;
but if we should wait, danger of death, or some great Inconvenience would
threaten us. Of these we shall Treat in the particulars.

But because amongst al symptoms the most frequent is pain, we shall speak
somewhat thereof, in general in this place.

A single Chapter. Of Pain in general.
PAin is a sad and troublesome disposition, arifing from a sudden and vehement
alteration in the sense of feeling.

The Subject, are the nervous parts, especially the thicker membranes, which
bring vehement pains.

SIGNS, are needless, the sense it self shows it.

The CAUSE, is whatsoever eminently and suddenly alters the part; or dssolves
the Continuity thereof.

The CURE, must be hastened, least a fluxion be raised; especially in a
vehement one, the Disease also must be set aside, if there be no other Remedy.
It Is performed, I. By intigation with Anodynes, and Narcoticks. Among the
former, oil of Lillies, Earthwormes, Chamomel, a Cataplasme of bread Crumbs,
milk and Safron boiled together, a pultis of Marsh-mallow roots boiled in Milk.
Grulingus his Unguentum Jovis. Among the latter, are the extract of Thorn apple
seeds, the Narcotick trochisks of Fernelius, Quandanum opiatum. II. By removal
of the Causes both by internal and external remedies.


The Differences are taken, either from the Causes or from the parts affected.

I. One kind of pain comes from an eminent and sudden alteration of quality,
which is taken away, by the remedies of a contrary quality. And it comes either
from heat and dryness: then the causes have preceded, the pained part is red,
we must go to work with things cold and moist. Or from cold and dryness. the
suitable Causes have preceded. The skin is white or grows black and blew by
binding. It Is eased with things hot and moist.

Another springs from Solution of Continuity, which is caused either by many
humors, which stretch; sharp ones which fret; in which cases, bleeding and
purgations are useful. Or from winds, which tear as it were in sunder; in
which case, having premised Carminatives, we must deal with universals. Or
from external Causes, beating cutting burning; where the Cure must be directed
to each particular Cause.

II. One f^^rt is pricking, in the Membrans which compass the ribs and
subcostal Muscles. Another is beating, proper to the Arteries, the sign of a
great inflammation. Another is a dull pain and m^^medness which happens in the
fleshy membrane, which is spread out beneath the skin which happens from
Refrigeration, external Contusion, or compression.

Another is a pain, as of some heavy thing which burdens, which is commonly
felt in the kidneys, sometimes in the Liver and spleen. Another is a stretching
pain, according to the longitude of the part, proper to the Nerves, which
extends it self into both parts of the Nerves. Another is stretching according
to the latitude, proper to the membranes which cover the muscles. Another is
wandering, which arises for the most part from winds in the larger Cavities, of
the Belly, womb etc. Another is a boring pain, in the Guts; it arises from cold
humors fastened into their Coats. Another is a leaping pain, which happens in
the coats of the brain, where rising as it were from a root, it suddenly leaps
into the Circumjacent parts. Another is Vlcerative or soreish, which commonly
happens in the skin and parts beneath the same, also in the Gutts, from the
Acrimony of Humors and worms, and is common to the dysentery. Another is deep,
which happens in the periostium, and presents it self to the senses, as if the
bones themselves did ache, or the marrow in the bones. And so much for the first
differences of Diseases.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE IDEA OF PRACTICAL PHYSIC. Treating of External Diseases.
Title I. Of the Several sorts of Tumors.
SO much may suffice to have spoken of Diseases in general and of their cure.
Diseases considered in their several sorts, are either External or Internal.
The former are Tumor or Sewllings, Diseases of the Skin, Diseases of the Hair,
Ulcers, Dislocations or Disjointing, and Fractures: and therefore there will be
likewise, just so many Titles in this Book.

Chap. 1. Of Swellings or Tumors Caused by Blood.
Article, I. Touching overgreat Corpulency.
SOme Tumors spring from Blood, others from Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy, from
Watery and wheyish Humors, and some from a Mixture of these one with another.
Those which spring from Blood are, Overgreat Corpulency, Inflammations, Bubo's,
Phygetlon, Phyma, Furunculus, Parotis, Paronychia, Perniona's, Ecchymofis,
Carbunculus.

Corpulentia nimia, is an overgreat increase of the Bodies Bulk caused by too
much plenty of Flesh and Fat.

Signs are needless. The Consequences thereof are an Hindrance of the Motions
and Operations of the body, shortness of breath, by reason of the passages
being stopped, sometimes sudden Death in such as grow Fat when they are young,
Barrenness because of the seeds watrishness.

The CAUSE is, the Increase of Flesh and Fat. The CURE varies according to the
variety of the Differences. The DIFFERENCES are taken from the Causes.
I. One sort springs from Increase of Flesh, which is Caused through plenty of
good Blood, made by a temperate Liver out of meats of good Juice, the hot and
moist temper of the Musculous p^rts of the Body, assisting thereunto. It is
Cured. 1. By Evacuation through Blood letting, Cupping, Fasting, Eriction. 2.
By Consuming the Flesh, with such things as strongly dry, and moderately heat.


II. Another from the increase of Fat, caused by the Oyliness and fattyness of
the Blood, falling out of the Veins into the Membranous parts, and there
congealed by the moderate heat and Efficacy of the said parts. It Is Cured 1. By
Evacuation, but it must be sparing, because such persons are apt to fall into
cold Diseases. 2. By Consumption of the Fat, effected by things hot, bitter,
diuretic; yet so as care be had, that by over much heating, another Disease be
not Caused.


Article, II. Of an Inflammation.
An Inflammation is a Preternatural swelling of the fleshy parts, springing from
blood which besides the intent of Nature flows into the said parts.

The SIGNS are, Heat, which is caused partly by reason of the Blood, partly by
the stoppage of the pores springing from plenty and thickness of blood, which
stoppage will not suffer the Fuliginous Vapors to exhale; and partly by the
bloods putrefaction. Pain, both by reason of the distemper, and the solution of
continuity, caused by plenty of blood, filling and distending the part.
Redness, the blood communicating its color to the part affected. Tension or
Stretching, because of the abundance of blood distending the whole substance of
the Part. Renitency or Tightness, from the same Cause. Pulsation by reason of
the distention of the inflamed parts, caused by the heaving of the Artery,
which wants freedom of room to move it self.

The CAUSE is, the plenty of blood, or its sharpness by reason of Chollerick
Humors; which because they provoke Nature, they are by her thrust out, she
using the blood as her Vehicle or Chariot to ride in, which flows plentifully
to the part, by reason of its pain. The Manner of its Breeding, is this. An Hot
Fluxion, causing the blood to fall into the Muscles, first the great Veins, then
the lesser, then the least of al are distended. And when the fluxion can be in
them no longer contained, it partly sweats through the Coats of the Vessels,
which have also their pores; and is partly sent out of the small Orifices of the
Capillary Veins, which open themselves into the substance of the part, and shed
into the empty spaces, which are between the first bodies or Particles; whence
the parts gather Heat.

The CURE is performed. 1. By Blood letting, that more blood may not flow into
the part. If we should presently fall to work with repellers, the matter would
be carried to another place. 2. By Purgation, because sharp Humors give
occasion to the Flux. 3. By Alteration that the blood may be cooled and
thickened, provided the Veins be not strait, and the Patient not troubled with
obstruction of the Bowels. 4. By Revulsion, that the Humor may be drawn to a
contrary part: which is then best performed by bloodletting, when the matter is
much in quantity and violently moved; by other ways and means, when it is
little; Yea, and in such a case, it may be done by Repellers and Discussers. 5.
By Repulsion, with repelling Medicaments, either watery only, or withal
restringent. The Former are to be used. in thine Humors, seated in the surface
of the Body, not much in quantity, Joined with Heat; and of that sort are House
leek Venus-navil, or Penny-wort, Violets and such like. The Latter have place
in extremity of pain, where the Vessels are large, and the fluxion is caused
through weakness of the parts affected. Surgeons frequently use the Whites
of Eggs beaten together with Rosewater. 6. By Interception with Defensative
Medicaments, which are fitly applied to such parts as are not fleshy, and
through which the larger Vessels run. Oil is judged improper to be mingled with
these kind of Medicaments. 7. By Derivation of that blood, which has flowed
into the parts. 8. By Discussion with discussive Medicaments; amongst which,
the Gentler are the Roots of Marshmallows, and of white Lillys, Chamamel
flowers etc. The Stronger, Orice Roots, Elder flowers, Gum Ammoniack, Bdellium,
Bears Grease. The Strongest of al are Nitre, Sulphur, Lime etc.


The DIFFERENCES are taken from the subject and Cause.

From the Subject. 1. There is one of the Fleshy parts, which is finished in
the fourteenth day. Another of the Tendons and Ligaments, which because their
substance is more compact and hard, is terminated with greater difficulty: yet
it does not exceed the fortieth day.

From the Cause. Either it is from good Blood and is termed simply a Phlegmon
or Inflammation; or from bad Blood, which has either quite changed its nature,
and that raises no kind of swelling; or it has other Humors mingled therewith;
and then, if Choler be mingled, it causes that Inflammation which is termed
Phlegmone Exysipelatodes; is phlegm, Phlegmon Oedematodes; if Melancholy,
Phlegmon Scirrhodes.

Article, III. Of the Bubo, or Inflammation so called.
The Bubo, is an Inflamatian of the Kernels which are seated in the Arme-pits,
or in the Groines.

The SIGNS are a stif swelling that yields not to the touch, with redness,
pain, and a slight fever.

The CAUSE is Blood slipped into the Kernels, together with a vicious Humor
provoking Nature to expulsion.

The CURE is Doubtful, when they ripen slowly, because they may turn to
dangerous fistulaes. It is according to the Cure of Inflammations. Digestion
must be procured by stronger Medicaments, because the part affected is colder
Suppuration ought to be hastened, least new ones should break forth. The Balsam
of Sulfur and the Plaster of Sulphur of Rulandus, are commended.

The Differences are diverse.

I. One is Symptomatical to which that which was lately said is appliable.
Another is Critical, which follows another Disease, and eases the sick by its
breaking forth. It must be left to Nature, if the Crisis be perfect: if it be
imperfect, the Humor must be drawn forth, by Cupping-Glasses and drawing
Medicaments.

II. One sort comes in the Groines, which is sooner ripe, because it springs
from blood, and more Heat flows to those parts. Another is in the Arm pits,
which for the contrary Cause, is long ere it come to Maturity.

III. Some Buboes are Neither Malignant nor Contagious; which being in the
extreme parts of the Body, are soon suppurated, and not dangerous. Others are
Malignant, Pestilential, or Venerious: of which see in their proper places.

Article, IIII. Of the Phygetlon, Phyma, Furunculus, or Felon Tumor so called.
Phygetlon or Panus, is an hard swelling, sometimes arising after Fevers or
pains in the Kernels or Almonds of the Ears. It Arises either Externally from
an Ulcer, Pain, Bruise: or Internally from Chollerick Blood, or a Fever, and
is long in ripening. Oil of Guaiacum Wood, is good in this case. Phyma is a
round swelling of the Kernels, smaller and flatter than the Phygetlon, less
read and less painful, which soon comes to its height and turns to
suppuration. It Arises from Phlegmatic Blood, and troubles Children chiefly. It
is Cured by ripning, through application of tosted Wheat etc.

Furunculus or Dothien, a Felon, is a little swelling sharp pointed, not
exceeding the largness of a Pigeons Egg, remarkable for its redness and pain
when it tends to Suppuration.

Its Signs are known by the definition. It seldom comes single. It Springs
from thick blood, and is thereby distinguished from an Inflammation; and the
said Blood is not much a dust, and so it is differenced from a Carbuncle. The
Cure is easy, especially if it rise high pointed, and is not hard nor forked.
It is performed by Ripening. It is either Mild and Gentle, occupying only the
Skin; or Malignant, rooted in the flesh. Or it is Pestilentical and Epidemical,
which being black or green, is joined with a Malignant Fever.

Article, V. Of the Tumer Parotis.
Parotis is an Inflammation of the Kernels behind the Ears, proceeding from
Blood, either pure or mixed with vicious Humors.

The Signs are, Swelling, Pain, Redness which appears behind the Ears. The
Cause is blood, either alone, or mixed with other vicious Humors, which slips
into these parts, being sent from the whole body, or from the Brain. In the
Cure, we must not repel, but Discuss by gentle Medicaments, least stronger
should exasperate the Pain; Also Suppuration may be procured, when Nature tends
that way.

The DIFFERENCES are diverse.

I. One sort is Critical, arising with Critical, signs, which is easy to cure;
unless it hapen in the end of a Disease, after other Evacuations, without the
Abatement of the Symptoms. If it vanish away without Suppuration, it will come
again. It must be left to Nature; and being returned, it must be judged of,
according to the Nature of its return. Another is Symptomatical, which if it
spring from crude and undigested matter, it is dangerous, because the place is
so nigh the brain. In the Cure, its antecedent Cause must be deminished: and
the Matter discussed, softened, and opened, that the Quittor may do no hurt.

II. Some are without fevers: others with fevers which are more dangerous.

III. Some are without Malignity: others are Pestilential and Malignant

IIII. In some the matter flows from the whole Body; in others, from the Brain.

Article, VI. Of Nail-sores, Kibes and Chilblaines.
Paronychia, the Nail-sore, is a Tumor arising upon the fingers ends, beside
the Nails.

The SIGNS are taken from the Situation, and greatness of the Pain, because
the Nervous parts adjacent are affected and the said pain reaches sometimes all the Arm over.

The CAUSE is blood adust, sometimes Malignant, which Nature thrusts out into
those parts.

The CURE is contrived by Evacuation, Mitigation of Pain, and Suppuration.
Repellers must not be used, least we exasperate the pain, and fix the Humor.
Oil of Lead is commended by Agricola Page, 216. And Eare-Wax applied with a
piece of Ele-Skin. Page, 246.

Perniones, Kibs and Chilblains, are swellings which arise in the winter time,
upon the Heels, Toes and Fingers, with other parts of the Hands and Feet.

The SIGNS are, Refrigeration forgoing, Pains, Itch etc. The CAUSE, the winters
cold weakening those parts, and by pain drawing blood unto them. They are
sometimes long-lasting, and though they go away in Summer, they return again in
winter. In the Cure. 1. The cold must be expelled by plunging the part into
cold Water. 2. The Part must be fomented with blood warm Milk, wherein
Rose-Mary, Bay berries etc.
Have bin boiled; or it must be put into hot Water wherein frozen Turnips have
been boiled.

Article, VII. Of an Ecchymoma.
Ecchymoma, is the effusion of Blood into the neighboring spaces whereby a
Part comes to have a livid, black and blew color.

SIGNS are needless, seeing the Disease is apparent to our Eyesight.

The CAUSES are various; viz. Anastomosis, Diapedesis, Diaeresis, Contusion,
etc.

The CURE is performed. 1. By Blood-letting, if the Disease be great, least
Inflammation be caused. 2. By Repelling Medicaments which must not be moist,
least blood flow in, and they must have discussors mingled with them. Honey of
Roses laid on with blew Paper is good, as is terra Sigillata dissolved with
Water of Life. By Digestion, to which intent the Root of Solomon's Seal bruised
and steeped in Wine or other Liquor is good. 4. By application of
Cupping-Glasses, if digesters help not. 5. By laying on Ripeners that are. Of a
middle Nature between strong and weak. 6. By opening the Tumor, least the
Quittar corrupt the neighboring parts, or make hollow fistulaes. 7. If the
part incline to a Gangraen, we use to scarrifie the same, and to wash it with
hot Vinegar, wherein the Root of Solomon's Seal has been boiled. Inwardly, such
things must be given as dissolve clotted Blood.


Article, VIII. Of a Carbuncle.
A Carbuncle is a Tumor springing from Adust, thick, and most fervent blood
degenerating into black Choler, which corrupts the part.

The SIGNS are these following. A crusty Ulcer arises, blackish or Ash colored;
not long after, a round Bubo, sharp and burning, which is worst toward the
evening, breaks forth, and the flesh round about is very hot. There concurs a
Fever, stomach-sickness, womiting, panting of the Heart, Swownings, Ravings,
etc.

The CAUSE is such blood as aforesaid, which being bread in the Body, and
having attained a certain degree of Malignity, is cast out, and continually
generated by a new afflux of Matter.

The CURE in general is in a manner None, if having been red, they presently
vanish away. Hard, of such as are black, and which are seated in the
emunctories; and near the noble members of the body. Easier, of such as are
red, Small, Single. The manner of proceeding in the Cure is this. 1. Let a Diet
be prescribed cold and moist. 2. Blood-letting must be practiced at the
beginning, to take away fervent blood, provided it be not drawn through some
noble Members. 3. The Malignant Humor must be prepared and Mitigated, to which
intent Scabious is most prevalent. 4. We must Purge warily because of the acute
Fever. 5. The part must be Scarrified where you are to note, that the
Scarrification is to be iterated, if the blood require the same again. We must
not Draw, if the Humor flow violently into the part, least the Fever and pain
should be augmented. Nay rather, moderate Repression is to be caused, by
applying Medicaments to that end three fingers space round about the Carbuncle,
To which intent the Pap of Appels is used, boiled with Vinegar of Roses into
the form of a Pultis. A Qiniment of Bole-Armoniack, with a sufficient quantity
of Oil of Roses etc. The Plaster of Agricola T. 1. Page, 139. The part being
Scarified must be washed with Salt Water hot. 6. After it is washed Medicaments
must be applied which resist putrefaction, especially made of Scabious and
Devils-bit. 7. If Scarification help not, we must use Burning; but so, that we
presently anoint the Crust with Unguentum Aegyptiacum, or apply thereto a
Cataplasme of Orobus meal and Oxymel simple, to remove the same, least if it
remain upon the place, it prevent the breathing forth of the Malignant Humor.
8. The crust being removed, the Ulcer must be cleansed etc.
The Cure thereof, see in Agricola T. 1. Page, 139. If you please.

The Difference is twofold.

I. One sort is without any Pustle which discovers it self by those signs, of
which mention is made in general, and there is nothing singular in the cure
thereof. Another is with a Pustle; which is known, because an Itching is first
felt, and soon after, one small pustle or more, like the graves of Milet shoot
forth, which being broken a crusty Ulcer shows it self. In the Cure there is
nothing singular observable.

II. Another is Pestilential, and then the Constitution of the year is such;
the Symptoms are stronger. The Cure is most Difficult, if it break out after a
pestilential Fever, the heart being possessed by Malignant Humors. It Is easier,
if it break out before, unless violent Symptoms appear soon after. In the
progress thereof, these things are to be noted. 1. That Blood-letting must be
avoided, because it breaks forth, after the Patients strength is dejected. 2.
That we are chiefly to make use of Antidotes both Internally, and Externally.
3. Al possible diligence must be used, to hinder the putrefaction from
spreading.
To break it, the Plaster of Heurnius in his comment upon the 55. Aphorism of
the fourth Book, is commended. Oil of Antimonial butter, the Magnetic Plaster
of Hartman, in his Chapter of the Plague. Agricola his Oil of Mercury. T. 1.
Page, 139. Elixi Pestilential of Crollius, etc. A Cataplasme of radishes beaten
with Rose-Vinegar described by Joel T. 6.

Another is not Malignant and milder, which at first looks red like a Flegmone
or Inflammation, and afterward waxes Yellow. For its Cure, see the general Rules.

Chap. 2. Of Tumors springing from Choler.
Article, 1. Of an Erysipelas or Tumor so called.
ANd so much may suffice to have spoken, concerning Tumors arising from blood.
From Choler proceeds Erysipelas and Herpes.

Erysipelas, or St. Anthonies fire, is a Chollerick Tumor springing from
Chollerick blood, flowing together into some part under the Skin, with a spot
which is red, broad and dispersed up and down.

The SIGNS are, it seazes the patient with shiverings; after which a Fever
follows. There is a vehement biting and burning, so that small bladders sometimes
arise. The color is red inclining to yellow; not red inclining to brown; which,
being pressed with the finger, vanishes and quickly returns. A pain which is
neither pulsative nor vehement, and stretches it self out to the neighboring
parts without tension. These signs are not observable in an Inflammation or
Phlegmon.

The CAUSE is Chollerick blood, which is bred by an hot Liver, whereby it
becomes more thin and movable: or by nature, many times because of a malign
quality, it is driven into the outward parts, or is moved by external Causes
etc.

The CURE is hard, if it follow upon the baring or fracture of bones. It if
turn from the external to the internal parts. It is putrify, or suppurate. If
it arise on the Head or Face, because the Tumor being augmented, it causes the
squinzy. If in the Liver or Womb of Women with Child, because it kills the
Infant. It respects. 1. The driving away of the Disease, to which end are
subservient. 1. Blood-letting from the Liver or median Vein, in Plethorick and
gross bodies. 2. Purgation by the cooler sort of choler-purgers. 3. Provocation
of sweat by Venice Treacle, in Elder-flower water etc. 4. Application of Topic
or external Medicaments, which must be liquid and thin, and frequently renewed.
The principal are, the Lapis Medicamentosus Crollij. Menstrual blood dissolved
in Groundsel-Water and Rose-vinegar. Balsom of Litturige with Camphire, in
Frog-spawne-Water. Decoction of red Myrrh and Olibanum, each one ounce, in Wine
and vinegar of each four ounces. A Linen bay full of wheat bran, heated. The
Liniment of Sebize* at the end of his Book de Acidis.
2. Preservation from this Disease. Where Blood-letting is useful twice a year.
Purgation by Choler-purges. Diet enclining to cooling and moistning, wearing of
stockings wet in Frog-spawn-water. The use of that Preservative mentioned by
Sinnartus, in his second Book of Fevers Chap. 16.


It is divided two manner of ways.

I. One is Exquisite, to which the general rules aforesaid agree.

Another is Bastard, and that either Phlegmonodes; Oedematodes etc. Wherein the
Tumor is greater.

II. One is Simple, in which the top of the Skin is colored and tainted, and
dry scales are raised like bran. In this case, after general remedies, cooling
Topics are to be applied, and the discussion must be left to Nature.

Another is Vlcerous, in which after the pustles are broken, saines or
Blood-Water and quitter come out. It quickly breaks froth, with an evident
Fluxion. It has great moist pustles. It Is quickly come to solution and of its
own accord: and so it is distinguished from Herpes. To this al other things
corresponding, cooling Topics or external Medicaments may be applied, til the
color of the skin be altered. See the Cure in Rulandus.

Article, II. Of Herpes, or the Shingles.
Herpes, Fermica, or the Shingles, is a Tumor raised by Yellow choler pure and
unmixt with other Humors, upon the surface of some part of the body, and
creeping along to the neighboring parts.

The SIGNS are, a broad Tumor, ruffing the Skin; hardness, pain, sense of
burning; it makes a Circular kind of progress, the middle parts healing, while
the extreme parts break out a fresh.

The CAUSE is Yellow choler sincere or unmixt, and thicker than in St.
Anthonies fire, proceeding from its causes

The CURE respect. 1. The whole Body, which must be Evacuated. 2. The part
affected, which must be gently cooled.
Digestion must be used and discussion, by dryers, if heat permit.

Its divided into Simple, and Eating.

I. The Simple or Milet fashon'd Herpes, roughs the top of the Skin, and is
quartered only under the Epidermis or Skarfe-skin, raising thereupon very small
pupples, which have very small height from the skin, like the grains of milet.
If the pustles are whole, cold and dry things must be used: if broke,
cleansers. Water of Quicklime and Sugar of Lead are very good. A Decoction of
Arse-smart and Resberry leaves in water and Wine etc.

II. The Eating or devouring Herpes, the pustles being broken exulcerates the
true Skin, spreading it self in depth and breadth; and is long in coming forth
by little and by little, it has dry pustles, lasts long, and comes unattended
by a Fever. Thus it is distinguished from an Vlcerous St. Anthonies fire.
Stronger Medicaments must be used in these sorts of shingles.

Chap. 3. Of Tumors springing from Phlegm.
Article, I. Of the Tumor called Oedema.
OEdema, (being the only Tumor arising from Phlegm) is a swelling caused by
Phlegmatic matter, which Nature exples into the parts of the Body.

The SIGNS are, the softness and looseness of the Tumor, pain none or very
little, whiteish color, no heat.

The CAUSE is Phlegmatic matter, the colder and moister part of the blood;
which is sometimes expelled by Nature, sometimes tends downwards, by its own
weight, and settles in the extreme parts: It chiefly quarters upon the Hands
and feet, being Members remote from the Fountain of Heat.

The CURE is performed. 1. By Diet, which must not occasion Fleagm and
crudities. Fish are allowed, that swim in stony-bottomd Rivers. 2. By
Alteration and Digestion, where Oxymel and Oxysaccharum are good. 3 By
Resolving with Discussers, but the part ought first to be heated by frictions
and fomentations. 4. By Suppuration, if by pulsation and pain, we perceive it
tending thereto.
Whereof see Platerus.

The Differences are sundry.

I. One springs from Phlegm alone, which is more lasting; and is for the most
part discussed by Resolution, that is to say, through the pores of the Skin.
Another comes from it and other Humors mixed therewith; which sometimes
suppurates, especially if it be in an hot part.

II. One arises of it self which is not dangerous. Another sort follows other
Diseases, as the Consumption, cooling of the Liver etc. Which is dangerous and
threatens death. In the Cure, regard must be had of the Diseases upon which it
depends.

Chap. 4. Of Tumors proceeding from the Melancholic Humor.
Article, I. Of the Tumor called Scirrhus.
THe Tumors which arise from the Humor of Melancholic are the Scirrhus and
Cancer.

The Scirrhus is an hard Tumor without pain, springing from a Melancholic
Humor, which is thick, clammy and roaping.

The SIGNS are, little or no pain overgreat hardness, and want of feeling when
it is pressed.

The CAUSE is, an Humor either Malancholick, that is to say the dreggy part of
the Blood, or the natural Malancholick Excrement; or sometimes also Phlegmatic,
which is either thickened by heat, dissipating the thinner parts; from thence
Inflammations, St. Anthonies fire etc. Follow: or it is hardened by an
Immoderate Application of repellers, astringents and strong Discussives.

The CURE is None, if it have no feeling: otherwise some cure may be. It Is hard
by reason of the stubbornness of the matter. It is performed. 1. By Diet, which
must yield very good nourishment. 2. By the frequent Evacuation of the prepared
Humors. 3. By Removing the Contment Cause, by Emollients and Discussers, either
mixed together or used alone one after another, interchangably. The milder sort
in persons tender and soft fleshed and when the Tumor is new. The stronger in
harder bodies, and where the Scirrhus is old. Fabricius Hildanus his Plaster
of Hemlock mentioned in the 25. Observation of his 3. Century. A Cataplasme of
Briony Roots, Goats-dung and Vrin; are very good. 4. If it come to suppuration;
by cleansing away the quittor with the Plaster of Diachylon simplex, omitting
heaters and section or lancing, least it turn to a Cancer.


It is divided into a true or Legitimate, which is void of sense, and in which
hairs grow upon the part, for which there is no Cure: and a bastard which is
contrarily disposed to the former.

Article, II. Of a Cancer.
A Cancer is a round Tumor, blue or blackish, having Veins round about it, full
and swelling, resembling the feet of a Crab; and springing from black Choler.

The SUBJECT are parts of the Body as well external as internal, especially the
moister and upper parts, as the Dugs of Women.

The SIGNS are drawn from the manner of its Rise. At first, its hardly so big
as a bean, in the progress it exceeds a Wal-Nut and an Eg; it is hard, of a
Leaden or livid color, or Else blackish, with heat, pain and pulsation; the
veins round about swel with black blood, and resemble the feet of a Crab.

The CAUSE is adust and black Choler hanging in the veins, and by its thickness
unable to pass along; which springs partly from Nutriment affording such an
Humor, which has not been drawn by the Spleen, partly from an hot burning
distemper.

The CURE is difficult in all; both because it comes from a stubborn and
Malignant Cause: and because it lurks in the deep veins. It is not to be
undertaken, if the Cancer be hidden. If it be seated in a Cavity of the body,
in the palate, Fundament, or womb. There is no Cure, if it be confirmed, and
seated in some noble part of the body. It is of some Hope, if it be small,
fresh, and stick in the surface of the body. How it is to be performed, see in
the differences. As for what concerns the differences.

1. One sort is Exulcerated, which is easily known, and is caused by a matter
sharper than ordinary. It has the appearance of corrupted flesh, with stench,
filthy matter coming forth, an horrid aspect, Lips very hard and turned in.
There is a slow Fever conjoined, Swowning, black or yellow sains or
Blood-water, running out of blood etc. Its Cure is either Palliative by
gentle-dryers and coolers: or true. 1. By Incision to the quick, after which
the corrupt blood must be pressed forth, the Ulcer concocted, mundified (see
Hartmans ponder, in his Chapter of a Cancer in the breast or Dug) filled with
flesh etc. 2. By burning, either actual or potential, if the profounder and
greater vessels be thereby occupied.


Another sort is not Vlcerated, which arises from a milder matter. Is Cured, 1.
By Diet Moystening and cooling. 2. By Blood-letting. 3. By repeated Purgations
of the Humor, with extract of Hellebore, pills of Lapis Lazuli; after it has
been prepared with Fumitory, Hops, Juice of Fragrant Apples etc. 4. By
Application of External Medicaments, in which case gentle Repellers are useful,
as the compound of Frogs-spawn.
Discussers which have no biting quality, as Pulvis Benedictus of Hartman, the
Magistery of Crabsshels etc. See Agricola also, T. 1. Page, 145.

II. Another springs from Suppression of the Courses: Another of the
Haemarrhoides. The Cure must be applied to those Diseases.

Chap. 5. Of Tumors springing from Wheyish, Salt and Choleric Humors mingled
together.
Article. I. Of Scabbyness.
TUmors springing fom mixed Humors, do arise either from salt, Wheyish and
Choleric Humors: or from Phlegm, Melancholy and Choler; so that the conjunct
cause is no longer an Humor, but some other matter bred of Humors. Hereunto
belong Scabbyness, the Grecian Leprosy, Phlyctinae, Sudamina, Sirones, Vari,
Epinyctides, Alphus, Leuce, Impetigo, and Gutta rosacea.

The Scab, Is a Tumor arising from corrupted blood, vexing the Patient with
distemper and Exulceration of the skin.

The SIGNS are set down in the definition.

The CAUSE is corrupt blood, mixed with black choler and salt Phlegm; which
either comes from suitable Diet, especially when the Liver is distempered with
Heat; or it is corrupted by contagion: and being brought unto the skin, it
sticks therein, and causes Exulceration.

The CURE is accomplished. 1. With Diet which requires boiled meats. 2. By
Contemperation and Evacuation of the Humors, and reducing the Liver to its due
temper by the Syrup of Coral of Quercetanus.


It is divided three manner of ways.

I. One is Symptomatical, to which what has been said ought to be applied.

Another is Critical, which breaks forth after acute or long Diseases.

II. One sort is moist, out of which much sains or blood-water Issues. It is
caused by Salt Phlegm. It Is Cured more easily than the dry Scab, and that. 1. By
Evacuation to which end whey of Goates-Milk, and Fumitory are much commeded. 2.
By provoking Sweat, either by half an ounce of Spirit of Dwarf-Elder and two
ounces and an half of Fumitory Water, or by Spirit of Guaiacum, or Antimonium
Diaphoreticum, if it be more hard to be removed than ordinary. 3. By
Application of External Medicaments. And here bathes of fresh water, and
brimstone stone bathes, are useful. Also to apply the Yellow middle bark of
Frangula with Vinegar. And Sinnertus his Ointment Book 5. Page, 1. Chap. 27.


Another Dry, in which nothing is voided, or a little quantity of thick matter,
and the Ulcers are Lead colored. It Is Caused by an adust Humor. Cured with
difficulty, after the same manner as the former, having respect to the Causes.
Another sort is termed Volatica the Running Scab, which infects all the skin, in
one night for the most part. In this, universal Remedies being premised, it is
good to wash the Scabs, with the blood that comes from a Woman with the
afterbirth. See Agricola T. Pape, 280.

III. There is another sort termed Malum mortuum, which vexes the Patient with
a Leaden and black color, crusty pustles, black, Dry, without sense or pain,
chiefly in the Legs. It Springs from a Melancholic and Scorbutic Juice. It Is
Cured after the same manner, having respect to the Difference. Another sort is
the Leprosy of the Greeks, which differs only gradually from other Leprosies.
It Is Known hereby, because it Eats deeper into the Skin; and scales as it were
of Fishes fall of, whether the Patient scratch or scratch not; and the Scabs
stink filthily. It Is Caused by black-Choler oftimes mingled with Salt Phlegm.
Cured, by the same kind of things as the Scab, but stronger. The distmper of
the Liver must chiefly be redressed. Sweat must be procured with a Decoction of
Salsaparilia, Guajacum and China.

Article, II. Of the Phlyctaenae, Sudamina, Sirones and Vari, Tumor so called.
Phlyctenoe, (or wild fire) are little blisters or Bladders raised in the skin,
by exceeding sharp Humors. They are known hereby, because they are like such as
proceed from scalding, and when they are broken, a yellowish Humor breaks
forth: Spring, from a Chllerick wheyish Humor, which is thrust out into the
skin either by Nature, or some external cause. Are Cured by a Decoction of
Duckweed (universal Remedies being premised if need require) an Epitheme of
strong Lie made of Beech Ashes, mixed up with Lin-seed Oil and walnut Oil of
each a like quantity, and frequently applied. 2. By Breaking; a drying
Cataplasme being presently applied.

II. Sudamina, are pushes like milet seed, which Vlcerate and ruff the skin.
They are known most easily. They arise from plenty of sweat, restrained within
the skin, especially in an hot and moist stomach, after an hot Diet. Are Cured
by washing with Oaken-water, to which a grain or two of Camphire may be added,

III. Sirones or Chriones, are Pustles in the Palms of the Hands, or soles of
the Feet, which have little worms in them. The worms must be Dug forth: then
the place must be washed, with a Decoction of Oake-leaves with Alum; or of
Sulphar with Oil of Tartar.

IIII. Vari, are little hard Tumors on the skin of the Face, curdled up of an
hard thick Juice. They are known easily. They are of the bigness of Hemp-seeds,
and they infest young people that are inclined to Venery, and fruitful; but
chaste withal and continent. They arise from an alimentary Humor for the most
part, which insinuates it self into the pores of the Skin, and sometimes has
Choleric blood mingled therewith; and then they shed forth an ichor and turn
to ulcers. They are Cured with Difficulty, if there be a deep redness in the
Face with pustles. If the same be joined with a bloat Face and Hoarsnese of
th^^^ice. The Cure is wrought, by Discussers and Emollients, premising such
things as purify the blood. Commendations are given to Oil of Vitriol Sulfur,
or Tartar smeared on in the evening, and washed of again in the morning with
warm water wherein bean-flower has been steeped.

Article, III. Of the Epinyctides, Alphus, and Leuce.
Epinyctides, are small Ulcers, which break out, of their own accord especially
in the night, in the eminent parts of the Body, resembling Bladders which being
broke in sunder, bloodwaterish matter runs forrh. They are known by their
leadenish color or blackish, vehement inflammation, pain enerasing in (...)
night, by reason of the motion of black-Me^^choly, and the nights cold,
stopping the pores of the skin. They arise from a wheyish and Melanchollick
Humor, like the Cause of a Carbuncle in all things save Malignity, and greatness
of the Tumor. The Cure consists in Evacuation and Topics that bridle and
temper the churlishness of the Humor offending.

II. Alphus, The Morphew, are great Blots or spots upon the skin, changing the
color thereof, which are spread up and down here and there, with a certain
roughness. They arise from blood badly nourishing and they trouble Men more
than women or Children. They are either Black springing from Melancholy blood
through default of the Spleen, which are Cured after universal Remedies, by
good Diet, bathings, anointing with Mustard Seed powder mingled with water: or
White but not exactly agreeing with the whitness of the skin, which spring from
Phlegmatic blood, chiefly through default of the Liver. The skin is by them
made white, but not the Hairs, and if it be pricked, blood follows. They are
Cured more easily than the black one. They require not blood-letting by reason
of the coldness of the blood.

II. Leuce, is a continued blot, changing the color and substance, both of skin
and flesh. It Is known, both from what is set down in the Description: and
because it makes the hairs fall of, and others grow in their place, like down.
The skin is flatter, than in other places. If pricked with a pin, a watery and
white liquor comes forth. It springs from Phlegmatic blood, with which the
flesh being nourished, first becomes of a middle nature between that of Animals
that have blood, and that of bloodless Live-wights, and after^^rd when it
cannot change it into the form of ^ed-flesh, it becomes like the flesh of
Oysters and Locusts. The Cure is Desperate, if after rubbing it look not red.
If pricked, no blood follow: if the blot continualy increase. Difficult, if it
be small, if rubbed it show some redness, or be upon the hand or foot. It Is
Performed. 1. By Preparation of Humors by heaters and cutters. 2. By Evacuation
with Flegmagogues. 3. By external Applications, the parts being first rubbed
with a Course Cloth.


Article, IIII. Of the Impetigo and Gutta Rosacea.
Impeti^^^ Or Licheu, a Tetter or Kingworm, are hard pustles upon the Skin,
which spread themselves into the bordering parts, with dryness, roughness and
great itching.

It Is known by what is in the definition expressed. It arises from a thin,
sharp, wheyish Juice, mingled with an earthy Humor, which comes from a suitable
Diet, and sometimes in the Spring and sometimes in the fall it enclines to the
outward parts, and breaks forth. It Is Cured. 1. By good Diet, which must be
neither salt, nor, biting. 2. By Alteration and Evacuation of the Humors, if
they too much offend. 3. By Application of Topics.
Vnguentum Citrinum with Oil of Eggs, live Brimstone, Oil of wax, of Cloves, and
Camphire are commended, after a somentation of Mallows Mullein and Fumitory.
Also Oil of Tartar per Deliquium with a like quantity of Oil of Wax mingled.
It Is Divided into a Gentle sort, which being anointed with fasting Spittle, or
with the Roots of the sharp-pointed Dock, beaten with Vinegar, is sometimes
cured: and a Feirce or Angry sort, in which, besides the former Medicaments, a
water distilled out of Oil of Tartar, with crude Mercury is good, the Mercury
being in a quadruple proportion to the Oil of Tartar. Joil his Experiment of
the rust of Iron, Book. 10. Of his Practice, S. 3.

II. Gutta Rosacea, is a Pustulous and sometimes Tuberous redness of the Face,
Representing Rose-colored spots. It Is known by the sight. Its Original is from
thick blood and fervent, bred through default of the Liver originally or by bad
Diet, and carried up into the Face and there sticking, by reason of its
thickness. It Is Cured. 1. By reducing the heated Liver, to its right temper,
with Syrup of Cichory, Straw-berryes, and Coral. 2. By opening the stoppages
thereof. 3. By Topics as the menstrual blood of a Virgin dissolved in hot
water, Oil of Toades etc.
See Hartman of redness and Pustles in the Face.

Chap. VI. Of Tumors wherein the Humor is included in a proper Membrane.
TO such kind of Tumors there are three sorts referred.

1. Strumae, or Scrofulae, which are a Scirrhous, Tumors of the Glandules,
contained in a peculiar Membrane. Their Subject are the Glandules or kernels in
the Neck, Dugs, Armpits and groins. They are known by the sight especially
among the inhabitants of the Alps. They Arise from a Phlegmatic, Melancholic,
mixed Humor, which proceeds from the crudity of Diet; or from a gross Juice
nourishing those parts, mixed therewith: which is shut up in a peculiar
Membrane, made by the formative faculty. See the Cure in Book 5. in a peculiar
Chapter. It Is divided into simple, of which now, and Cancerated which are mixed
with a Cancer by reason of Black-choler.

2. Into Free which are Joined to no Vessel; and Intangeld or Intaild, which
are Joined with some remarkable Artery, Vein, or Nerve.

II. Ganglion, Which is a Tumor situate upon a Bone, by reason of a
Preternatural twisting or wreathing of a Nerve, which is grown together into
one body. The Subject are parts which are covered not with much flesh, but skin
only. It is known, both by its situation, and that it is void of pain, and of
the bigness of an Eg, may be stretched to the sides, and being pressed it makes
the body feel the pressure. It arises by occasion of a blow, reaching, or
labor, which stretches and as it were breaks a Nerve or tendon. Whereupon the
excrement of the Nervous part sweats out. and sticks about the Fibers and
Nervous parts, and by their formative faculty, is changed into this substance.
It Is Cured, by Emollients as Emplastrum de Ammoniaca; and digesters; and if they
suffice not with suppuraters and by Section; concerning which see the Authors.

III. Those kind of Tumors, which spring indeed from the same cause, viz. A
Phlegmatic Humor or Alimentary Juice; only they are distinguished, by the
matter contained in the bladder, and from thence take their respective Names.
For it is named Meliceris, if the matter included be like Honey, the Tumor
rounder than ordinary, and giving way when it is touched. Atheroma, when it is
like Water Gruel or Hasty-pudding, and hard to the Touch. Steatoma, when it is
like to suet.

Chap. VII. Of Tumors arising from a solid Substance.
TO such kind of Tumors, these three sorts following are to be referred.

I. Verrucae, Warts, being Tumors standing upon the skin like Hittocks. They
are known very easily. They arise from, either a thick Melancholic and
Phlegmatic matter, or from such Juice as is ordained to ^ourish the Skin and
Scarf-skin. They are Cured either by Application of appropriate Medicaments,
such as are the Juice of Willow-leaves, and Cichorium Verrucarium or
Wart-cichory, water which Stands on the stumps of felled Oaks. Spurge Milk an
Onion bruised with salt. They are divided into Hanging warts, which the Greeks
term Acrochordones, being broad on the top, and small at the bottom where they
are fastened to the skin, as it were by a stalk: Thymia, which are colored like
time, are likewise small at the skin, broad, hard and rough on the top, being
smaller than the hanging-warts: and Sessiles which the Greeks term Myrmecioe,
lower than the Thymia, scarce bigger than Lupines, hard, broad-bottom'd, deep
rooted, and causing pain.

II. Clavi corns, which are wont to breed on the Toes and Soles of the Feet,
by the pressure and wringing of shoes; which sometimes of their own accord prove
very painful, and are always troublesome to the goer. They must be Noynted
with the blood of an Ele, and Oil of Mercury; and when they are softened, with
Oil of Snailes. When they are cut, smeare them with the Urin of a dog, and lay
on a Plaster of red Wax.

III. Callus, Brawnyness; is an hardness bread in the surface of the skin, in
the palms of the Hands and the lowest parts of the soles of the Feet. It has no
deep Root, and is void of al pain. It may be pared of, after frequent washimgs
and soaking in water.

Chap. VIII. Of Tumors caused by solid parts falling from their due Situation.
Article, I. Of Aneurisma, Varix, and Elephantiasis by the Arabians so called.
TUmors proceeding from solid parts falling down into or lying upon any part
are many: we shall here speak only of the Aneurisma, Varix, and Elephantiasis of
the Arabic Physicians so called; the rest we shall treat of in their proper
places.

I. Aneurisma, is a Tumor arising from a breach in the inner coat and a
widening of the outer coat of an Artery. It Is known, because it is a soft Tumor,
beating with the pulse, and for the most part, yiedling to the finger; and if
it yield not to the finger, nor pulse, which may fall out in a great one: yet a
noise as it were of boiling water is perceived, because of the passage of
spirits through narrow ways, and so it is distinguished from an Ecchymoma. It
arises through default of the Artery, which in respect of its inner coat, which
is hard and thick, is opened; in respect of its external coat, which is thin
soft and rare, it is widened. It is wont to happen, either by the Violent
Motion of the flood, or by some external force; most frequenly, when either an,
Artery is opened instead of a Vein, or an Artery together with a Vein is hurt.
For then, the external coat, as being soft, and of kin to the coats of the
Veins, growing together, and the inner remaining open, the blood and spirit
Issues through the hole and distends the external coat. It Is Cured with
Difficulty, if small, if new. Is in a manner incurable if old and great; and if
Section be made, danger of death is incurred. The Cure is undertaken. 1. By
Application of Repellers and astringents; where Emplastrum Contrarupturam is
useful etc. 2. By Section or cutting; touching which see Authors.


II. Varix is the Dilatation of a Vein. It happens Chiefly in the Thighs,
under the Navil, and sometimes in the temples. It befalls men principally, yet
hardly before they come to Age. It Is known by the swelling of the Veins, and the
part being Lead-colored or black. It arises from thick Melancholic blood,
which falls into the place, either through its own weight, or being thrust
thither by some violent Cause. Varices ought not to be Cured if they be
critical, and free the patients from other Diseases, as they are wont to do
from madness. If they are to be Cured, they are hardly Curable by Section; but
best of al by extraction, of which see Aquaependens.

III. Elephantiasis of the Arabians, is a Tumor of the Feet, springing from
Melancholic, Phlegmatic blood, and the Varices. Herein the Thighs are
swelled, of a Leadencolor, black and full of Ulcers. It can hardly be Cured
without* a continual and long Course of Phyfick.

Chap. IX. Of Malignant Tumors.
A single Article. Of the Elephantiasis.
MAlignant Tumors are sundry, Viz. Buboes, Carbuncles, Small Pocks, Meazels,
Elephantiasis. Of the rest I have spoke or shall speak elsewhere. I shall here
treat only of the Elephantiasis. It Is called also Leontiasis, Satyriasis, and
Lepra, Being a Cancerous Tumor of the whole Body, springing from black choler
infected with a Venomous quality, and shed into the whole habit of the Body'
causing many Symptoms.

I do not mean the Elephantiasis by the Arabian Physicians so called, nor the
Leprosy of the Jews.

The SIGNS are either of the Diseases beginning, as frequent spots in the Body,
roughness of the skin with risings, like a Goose with the Feathers of, with
many scales and chinks, especially in the Face, Hands and Feet, falling off of
the hairs. Or coming to the height, as a Tetter upon the tops of the fingers
and the Chin, and the Eyebrows, which are thick and hanging over, hoarsness of
the voice, sweat easily turned into salt, which will not melt in water; the
blood being washed leaves grains and Sands in the bottom of the water. See the
Trial of this Disease in Horstius his Medicinal Epistles, S. 4. Tim. 1.

The CAUSE is a Melancholy Humor and black Choler; which arises either from
external Canses, dry constitution of the Air, and Diet suitable; or from
internal, viz. An hot and dry distmper of the Liver. Also it contracts a
Venomous and Contagious quality, whence the Disease comes to infect others. The
CURE is None when the Disease is confirmed, it is Difficult when it is newly
begun. It Is Performed. 1. By Diet, where Viper Wine is good, and the flesh of
Vipers boiled, their Head and Tail being cut off, Cider, Chickens fed with the
flesh of Vipers or Snakes. 2. By Preparation of Humors by the Herba Kunigundis,
an Herb so called, with Fumitory, boy led in whey, Straw-berry water,
Dodder-water, Decoction of Tamarisk. 3. By Evacuation, both by Bloodletting,
which must be Practiced in the spring, viz. In both Arms and on the Ankle: and
by Purgation, where extract of Blood-Hellebore and whey with Epithymum boiled
therein are good: likewise by the Hemorrhoides. 4. By use of Bathes, of fresh
water, and of brimstone waters etc. 5. By giving appropriate Medicaments, viz.
Hares-blood hot, salts Theriacal, Treacle, Bezoarticum Ammale, or Bezar-stone.
6. By Mitigation of the Symptoms: of which in their peculiar places. 7. By
burning, of which see Authors.


As for the Diffierences there are four sorts thereof.

I. Alopecia, in which is an obscure redness, swelling of the Face, redness of
Eyes, bleeding at the Nose. It springs from blood and is more gentle than the
rest.

II. Tyria, so called from the scaly Serpent Tyrus, which casts of his Skin in
the spring. In this, there is whitness, Seals, dandruffe. It springs from
Phlegm.

III. Leonina, so termed from the Ruggedness of the Lions for-head. In which
are prickings, bitings, Tetters. It arises from Choler and comes speedily to
the Augment.

IIII. Elephantiasis, peculiarly so called, being greater than the rest and
slower in its Augmentation, has its original from Melancholy, and is known by a
cloudy blackness, knots and stupidity of the Patient. These sorts are seldom
separated, and most frequently Joined together.

Title, II. Of Diseases of the Skin.
Chap. 1: Of Lentigines, Ephelides, Naevi-materni, Infantum Maculae.
ANother kind of external Diseases, are the disorders of the Skin under which
are comprehended Lentigines, Ephelides, Naevi Materni, Maculae Infantum Maculae
Hepaticae, Pruritus, and Malus Odor.

I. Lentigines, Freckles, Are small specks of a yellowish brown color for the
most part, seated sometimes in the Face, sometimes on the breast, sometimes on the
hands. They are known by the description, and because they are subject to ruddy
people and such as are yellow-hair'd. They arise from blood adust, either by
inward causes, or the Suns heat, Occupying the Scarf-skin, especially of the
forhead, because being there thicker than ordinary, it retains the Vapors
longer. They are Cured by the waters of Elder-flowers, Bean-flowers, and
Scrofularia. By Goats and Cowes-milk mingled with powder of Glass. With
Cherry-tree-Gum dissolved in strong Vinegar, with a little Oaten-meal. With
these they must be washed or anointed.

II. Ephelides, are brown spots on Women with Child, which quarter upon their
Foreheads chiefly, their temples or Cheeks, as large many times as an
hand-breadth. They are known, by the presence of such Symptoms as are wont to
afflict Women with child, especially loathing of wine and meat, frequent
spittings, and gnawings in the stomach. They arise from suppression of courses:
in Virgins sometimes from eating of Beetes. A Pap made of the powder of
Bayberries and Toad-stool-water is commended, being smeared on in a Bath.

III. Naevi Materni, are spots and mark^s imprinted upon the Child in the womb
by the Mothers Imagination. They are abliterated either by the Afterbirth
while it is hot, or the blood thereof: more easily, if privately, as the common
people imagine: or the distilled water of Caryophyltata-Montana, if the infant
be washed therewith; or with the me^nstrual blood.

IIII. Maculae Infantium Volaticae, which Nurses call the Red-come, are red and
purple spots, which creep up and down the bodies of young Infants. And if they
touch any Orifice of the body as the Mouth, Nostrils, Eyes, ears, it is counted
a deadly sign. For Prevention the Orifices must be wet with Rosewater tinctured
with a little Saffron.

Chap. 2. Of the Maculae Hepaticae, Itch, and bad smells.
MAculae Hepaticae, or Liver-spots, are brown spots sometimes appearing and then
vanishing, with a slight roughness of the skin, and falling of scales. They are
known by the description. Arise from a thick blood, which seeing it cannot be
assimilated, it sends forth what is Excrementitious into the skin: if they
continue long, they are accompanied with quartan Agues. They are Cured with
Diet, and after universal Medicaments, with bathes, before which Treacle must
be taken; and afterward, they must be nointed with green Mustard Seed, reduced
with water into the form of Pap, which must presently be washed off, so soon as
it raises heat. Also Mans-blood destilled with Brest-milke, is good.

II. Itch, is a pain which stirs up a desire of scraching, without any
roughness or Exulceration of the SKIN. The SUBJECT is, sometimes the whole Body;
but especially the soles of the Feet, because they are covered with a great and
broad Tendon, and with an hard Skin, so that the Humors have not egress. It Is
KNOWN, by the sense. It arises, either from Choler, or thin salt Phlegm, so as
it may insinuate it self between the smallest particles; but clammy and
roaping, that it may stick faster to the parts: which is bred of salt Meats,
and Hot, through fault of an hot and Dry Liver. The CURE is seldom performed
upon decrepit persons. None at al, in such as have the Consumption, if it
follow after Costiveness. It Is performed, 1. Ey Attemperation of Humors, by
Goats-Milk Whey, and Syrup of Fumitory. 2. By Evacuation of the antecedent
Cause, by Jalap and Syrup of Peach-flowers. By Hemorrhoides and courses
provoked, if their stoppage have been the Cause. 3. By Mitigation with
fresh-waler bathes, into which Mortar is to be cast, and the Ointment of
Hartmannus. 4. By Discussion with the said Baths, wherein Pelitory of the Wall,
Mallows, sharppointed Dock. Alum, Sulfur, Vitriol etc. must be put.


III. Bad smell Vapors, sometimes from the whole Body, sometime from its parts, as
the Armpits, Privities, Feet. From the whole Body, either because of some
propriety of temper, or by reason of the blood and seed being corrupted in the
Womb, or through some accident during the time of a Woman's Belly-bearing. From
the Parts by afflux of Excrementitious Humors, in moist bodies, which being
thrust thither, because they cannot freely exhale, they conceive putrefaction
and stench. In the Cure regard is to be had of universal Remedies. Let the Diet
incline to dryness and resist Putrefaction. Let also the foresaid parts be
often washed with a Decoction of Scabious, Mirrh, Guaiacum; and anointed with
an Ointment of Orice-Roots, Lignum-Aloes, Ballom of Citrons, and Nutmeg
compounded together, or let them be sprinkled with Pouders.

Title, III. Of the Diseases incident to the Hair.
Chap. 1. Of falling off of the Hair.
THe third kind of external Diseases, are those of the Hair under which are
comprehended, Shedding of the Hair, Graynes of Hair, Dandruff, and the Plica.

Shedding of the Hairs, is when they do for certain Causes fall from the Body.
It is divided into certain sorts, viz. Defluvium, Calvities, Area, and Tinea.

1. Defluvium, is such a falling of the Hairs, that either all or most of the
Hairs, fall of here and there in several places. It is known most easily. It
arises from diverse Causes. 1. From defect of nourishment, as is seen in persons
having the Consumption, and such as are sick of a Malignant Fever. In the
Consumption there is no Remedy. In other sorts, the Head must be frequently
rubbed, that the nourishment may be brought thither. The Head must be washed
with a Decoction of Capillary Herbs. 2. From the Pravity of Humors which Eat
and corrode the Roots of the Hairs. In which case, universal Remedies being
premised, things moderately Discussing are to be used. Ladanum is to be mixed
with Ointments. 3. From the Rarity of the Skin* Then such things as thicken the
Skin, as Ladanum, Oil of Mastich, and Myrtles, a Decoction of the Roots of
Burdock, made in Lie.


II. Calvities, Baldness, is when the Hairs fall wholly of from the fore part of
the Head. It Is known by the Eyesight. It Arises from defect of Aliment, dryness
of the Brain, either through Age, or some violent cause, as too much use of
carnal Embracements. There is no Cure of baldness: yet it may be preveted and
deferred. 1. By good Diet, in which biting, salt, and astringent things, strong
Wine, too much venery, ought to be avoided. 2. By supplying nutriment to the
Hairs, by such things as correct the dryness of the Brain. 3. By drawing
Aliment to the Roots of the Hair.
In which case Moderate frictions are good, and drawers joined with things
moderately astringent. Ladanum dissolved in Oil of Mastich. Washing the Head
with a Decoction of Faenugreek etc.

III. Area, is the falling off of the Hair from certain parts of the Head, so
as to leave bare and bald patches, here and there; arising from a bad and
corrupt Humor, fretting the Roots of the Hairs. It is known by the sight. and
by the differences; of which anon. It arises from the Humor named in the
description, especially from Phlegm, Salt, adust, and putrified, through fault
of the Brain and an hot Liver, and corrupt meats, as toad stools etc. The
Cure is easy, if the Disease be fresh. If the place being rubbed, quickly
grows red. If the Extremities of the bald patches which border upon the hairy
parts, begin to shoot forth Hair afresh. Hard, if the Skin be thick, fattish,
and wholly void of Hair. If the Disease be old. None if the place being rubbed,
grows not red. It Is Performed. 1. By Evacuation of the Vicious Humor, by purges
and Apophlegmaiismes. 2. By driving back the said Humor, while it is in Flux.
3. By digesting the same, when it is fastened into the Skin by Medicines hot,
and of thin parts, not very dry, least the Aliment be Discussed.
First the Weaker sort as Southern-wood, reed-Roots burnt; afterward the
stronger, Mustard, Watercresses, white-Lilly Roots which ought at first to be
more Liquid, and left so long on, til some alteration be perceived in the Skin.
Beares-Grease helps by a secret Propriety, of which with the Hairs of a Bear
burnt, Oil of Mastich-tree, and other things before recited, an Ointment may be
made. It Is divided two manner of ways. 1. Into Alopecia, which keeps in its
spreading any kind of Fignre, and happens in the beard and hair of the Head, in
any Age: And Ophiosis, which begins on the hind part of the Head, exceeds not
the length, of two fingers, creeps toward the ears with two heads, and in
some as far as to the Forehead, til the two Heads meet before, It chiefly
haunts Infants. Herein also the Skin is superficially Excoriated, the Color
thereof changed, and if it be pricked, Wheyish blood Issues forth. 2. Into that
which springs from the Whoremasters Pox; that which comes from the Leprosy
which is incurable; and that which comes from other gentler Causes.


IIII. Tinea, when the Hairs fall off, one by one, being Eaten and consumed by
certain Worms. It Is known because the Hairs are shorter one than another and
uneven. Small worms thick in their ends. The color of the Hair becomes like that
of Ashes. It arises from Excrementitious Humors, penetrating into the Hairs
with their nourishment, and therein by Heat changed into worms. It Is Cured,
Universal Remedies being premised, by Abstersion with docoction of great
Nettle, small Centory, etc.

Chap. 2. Of the Porriga, and Plica.
POrrigo, Dandruff, is when a man scratches or Comes his Head, and there falls
somewhat out like Bran. It arises from serous, Choleric, and Phlegmatic Humors,
which are carried to the Head with the nourishment of the Hairs; the more thin
parts being Discussed, the thicker stick about the Hairs, and go into dandruff.
They are attracted by an over-bot brain. The Cure, is by Evacuation of the
peccant matter. By Discussion, and Abstersion, with some astringents. A
Decoction of Vetches and Mallows, is good in this Case.

II. Plica, is a tangling and folding of the Hairs into Elfe-locks or thickly
thrummed and matted bunches, arising from plenty of matter profitable to
nourish the Hairs but unprofitable for nutriment of the Body, and causing
diverse Symptoms. It is known by bunchings and complications of the Hair, pains
vexing the Joints and bones, convulsions, plenty of Lice. The Nails of the
great Toes are rough and scaly, black, like a Goat-Bucks-Horn. The Cause cannot
sufficiently be explained. It Is thought to be a Matter affording plenty of
nourishment to the Hairs, but such as is hurtful to the Body: as familiar to
the Hairs as in the running Gout. Wheyish matter is to the joints; or Polygonon
and bone-glew to the Bones; whereupon, if the Hairs be shaven, they shed
blood. It arises from a peculiar corruption of the place, Air, and water. It Is
carried thither with the Blood; sometimes Witchcraft may be joined. The Cure is
hopeful, if there be no pains. For so Excrementitious matter is thrust forth
into the hairs, and the Virtue becomes stronger. There is no perfect Cure,
seeing the Causes are not sufficiently known. It Is made worse by Purgations and
Blood letting. Some wash the Head with a Decoction of Bears-breech. A certain
Country man used Baths to Cure this infirmity in which the Patients grew at
first hairy, and then their hairs being out off, they were Cured. See Hercules
Saxonia.

Title, IIII. Of Ulcers in Particular.
Chap. I. Of the Gangraena.
THe fourth kind of external Diseases are Ulcers, under which are comprehended
Gangaena, Sphacelus, and Ambustio. A Gangrene is a corruption of the soft parts
especially, tending to mortification; proceeding from the Corruption,
Suffocation, Dissipation, or extinction of the natural Heat in the Part.

The SIGNS are the change of the Color in the part to black and blue,
Imminution or Lessening of the Pulse and Sense, Abolition of the Heat. Motion
remains, if the Head of the Muscle be entire: nor is there always a tumor, but
there is always an Ulcer of necessity. The Cause is, the Corruption,
Suffocation, Dissipation and Extinction of natural Heat in the part.

The CURE is evermore Difficult, especially if it be with afflux of Humors. If
it be in the moister parts of the Body. If it be Joined with the dropsy. It is
accomplished. 1. By convenient Diet. 2. By due Evacuation with Blood-letting
and Purging. 3. By Strenkthening the Heart against putrid vapors. 4. By
Defending the sound part against the speading Corruption by Defensatives and
Antidotes.


The Differences are taken from the Causes, which are either External or
Internal.

I. One kind proceeds from Too much cold oppresing the natural Heat of the
part. It is known in that sudenly a sharp and prickling pain aflicts the
patient. The redness of the part is soon changed into a Leaden-color a coldness
and nummedness is perceived as it were in a Quartan Ague. It Is cured. 1. By
plunging the coold part into cold water or rubbing the same therewith. 2. By
drinking down hot potions to procure gentle sweates to excite the natural heat.
3. After the heat is returned, by rubbing the part with warm liquors to which
intent a Decoction of Turnips is good. 4. If the part be already gangraenated,
the parts must be scarified and fomented with hot cardiack medicaments.


II. Another sort springs from bindings which intercept the Blood and spirits.
In the Cure, the ligatures must be losed, Medicaments discussive and resisting
putrefaction must be applied. If the gangrene have made progess, we must act
acording to the symptoms.

III. Another springs from defest of Nutriments or Atrophia so called. It Is
known in that, excepting leanness, neither tumor, heat, nor pain are
perceived. when pustles arise, pain and fever follows. In the Cure, prescribe
a diet hot and moist, smear the Body with moistening oils. Draw nourishment to
the part by Cupping-glasses without scarrification, and anointing with oil of
Earthworms etc. If the Gangra in proceed, scarifie the part, and do as shall be
here after specified.

IIII. Another sort springs from External Heat which happens after great
burnings. If so, in the Cure prescribe a cool diet. Temper and purge hot humors
scarrifie the part, and soon after wash it etc. Proceed not to an actual
Cautery unless necessity compel.

V. Another springs from the biting of venomous Beasts. It Is known by relation
of the patient, In the Cure. 1 The venom is to be drawn out by an actual
Cautery, or scarrification. Medicaments resisting putrefaction, and such as
draw, are to be applied, 3. Ulcers arising from scarrification or burning must
be Cleansed, in which case we must not forget to use spirit of wine.

VI. Another sort springs from the flowing of malignaut Humors into the
external parts. It Is known hereby, that in parts, especially those which are in
the Extremety of the body, a blader appears, under which there is a black spot.
there is a continual fever, fainting away etc. It Is Cured 1. By a drying Diet,
into which coolling cordial Medicaments are to be put. 2. By Blood-leting and
evacuation, if need be. 3. By sudorificks, which must be lustily plied in this
Case. Dittamus of creet, Vincetoricum, and Treacle, are good in this Case. 4.
By Scarifications, Cupping-glaces, and application of Leeches to the part
affected, if blood be not otherwise, sufficiently drawn forth. 5. By washing
the same, after Incision with salt water, or some other fomentation, according
to the greatness of the Corruption. 6. By applying Vnguentum Egyptiacum, or some
resolving, drying and putrefaction hindering Cataplasmes, after washing. 7. If
no ammendment appear, Causticks actual or potential, such as Butter of
Antimony, or Mercury Dissolved in Aquafortis, and precipitated with oil of
tartar, are to be applied. 8. By timely Romoving the Crust, least new
putrefaction arise thereunder.


Chap. 2. Of the Sphacelus.
SPhacelus is a perfect Mortification of a Part which seases not only the
softer parts of the Body, but the hones themselves.

The SIGNFS are, there is no sense in the part, whether it be cut or burnt.
Coldness sharpness, and blackness of the Flesh. At last it smells like a dead
Carcass, and the skin is by the fingers separated from the flesh beneath it.

The CURE consists in cutting off, the manner of which see in Practitioners.
And then. 1. Some part of the sound part, being very well bound must be cut off,
rather than the cutting should be practiced upon the in infected part. 2,
Section must be made in the fingers and Toes. 3. In the Feet, if the Disease
reach above the ankle, the thigh must be cut off below the Knee. 4. In the
Arm, very little of the sound part must be cut of etc. See Fabricius Hildanus,
in his Treatise of the Gangraena and Sphacelus.


Chap. 3. Of Burnings.
COmbustio, Burning; is a solution of Continuity in the Scarf-skin and commonly
in the skin it self, sometimes in the Muscles, Veins, Arteries or Nerves, by the
force of fire.

Touching the Signs it is needless to speak, seeing burning is manifest of it
self. The Cause is either Fire, Scalding water, Oil or melted metal or Fat etc.
The Cure varies according to the differences In the first place, the fire must
be fetched out. In the next place least pain attract the Humors and blood, we
must use repellers and defensatives. Then we must by Diet, purging,
blood-letting, Cupping-Glasses and other means diminish the same. A Mucilage of
Quince-seeds, Extracted with Rose Water, and mixed with Line-seed Oil, must be
use at the beginning, which will satisfy al Indications.

The Differences of burnings are Vatious.

I. One sort is very slight, which is known hereby, that the burning thing
which caused it, was light, the skin is red, the pain most bitter and pricking,
the place is puffed up, pustles arise full of clear and white water. At last the
Scarf-skin comes off. It Is Cured. 1. By taking out the fire, that no Pustles may
arise. Which is performed, either by steeping the Member in hot water, or by
Application of a Linne Cloth wet in Lie, or Application of Onions beaten in a
Mortar with salt; which nevertheless, is not good for burns in the Eyes.
Exceeding Commendation is given to an Ointment made of one part of Oyl-Olive,
and two parts of whites of Eggs, beaten together, and frequently anointed on,
with the Feather of an Hen. 2. By opening the bladders, the third day after
their arising, when the Scarf-skin begins to breed on fresh.


I. Another sort is indifferent great, which is known hereby, in that the part
is forthwith swelled and inflamed. Pustles arise, wherein is contained a thin
subtle water of a yellowish color, the Patient complains his skin is
stretched. It Is Cured. 1. By Cutting the Pustles, that the hot and sharp Humor
may flow out. 2. By application of Defensatives, least Humors and blood may
flow to the part affected. 3. By Application of tht Ointment of Fabricius, made
of three ounces of fresh butter, washed in Rose Water.
Oil of Violets, Yolks of Eggs, and of sweet Almonds, of each half an ounce.
Barley meal one ounce and half. Saffron one scruple, Mucilage of Quince seeds
one ounce. Wax as much as shall suffice.

III. Another is extreme, which is known hereby, that in the very moment that
the thing burning sticks to the body, pustles arise, but fall soon after, the
skin beneath is black or livid and Lead-colored. If pricked, it feels dully.
When the Crust falls off, a putrid and profound Ulcer arises. It Is Cured. 1. By
cutting the pustles or bladders, that the water which is contained in them, may
be dried up. 2. By Separation of the Escar the second or third day, which if it
cannot be effected, it must in many places be cut with a Penknife. See
Fabricius his ^yntment. 3. If a Gangraena begin, the Cure must be applied
thereunto. 4. The Eschar being separated, the Ulcer must be cleansed, filled
with flesh, and covered with a Skar.


IIII. Another is, from Gunpouder, in which the grains of the powder, must be
taken out with a Needle, or some there Instrument. If they cannot be taken out,
the pustles must be fuffered to arise. If they arise not, they must be riased,
by vesicatories, and cut; the powder must be taken forth, and the place must be
washed, with a Decoction of Fenugreek etc. Another sort comes from thunder, in
which case sweat must be provoked by some Antidote. The Arteries, Lips, Tongue,
Nostrils, must be anointed with Treacle wine. The Escar being removed,
Mundificatives and flesh-breeders corrected with Bezoarticks are to be applied.
If a bone be broken, the Vulgar astringent Cataplasmes are to be avoided.

V. One sort is of the Face, in which the Medicine of two Eg^whites, Oil of
Roses two ounces, Rose water one ounce has place. Another is of the Eyes, in
which case warm breast Milk must be dropped on. If a Crust be raised, we must
use Emollient fomentations, lest the Eye lids be drawn back. The skin must many
times, with both hands, be drawn back. Another, is of the Joints, in which the
afflux of Humors must be stopped. Pain ass waging Topics are to be applied;
least the Nerves be contracted, or the joint become crooked, we must be very
Vigilant etc. But touching al these see Wilhebmus Fabricius Hildanus his
Treatise of Burnings.

Title, V. Of Luxations in Particular.
Chap. 1. Of Luxations of the Jaw Bone, the Clavicula and the Vertebrae.
THe first kind of external Diseases are Luxations; and they either of upper
Limbs or of the Lower. To the former belong, the Luxation or Disjoynting of
the Jaw Bone, the Clavicula, the Spine and Ribs, the shoulder, the Arms, the
Hands and finger joints.

1. The Luxation of the Jaw Bone is caused toward the fore part of the Face,
the foremost and sharp process like a beak, being slipped beneath the Jugular.
It Is known hereby, both because the nether Jaw sticks out foremost, and the
process sticks out by the said jaw: as also because, the mouth continues
always open. It arises from too much opening the mouth and gaping, and
stretching the Jaws, whether it be by yawning, or by taking some burden by the
teeth, and lifting it high up; yet is it hardly done, because of the strength
of the Muscles, wherewith it is fastened to the upper parts. The Cure is
undertaken. 1. By Reposition, least the Belly void choler, or vomiting be
raised; and it must be suddenly procured, least the Brain be drawn to consent,
by reason of the Nerves inserted into the temporal Muscles: touching which, see
Authors. 2. By Praecaution of Inflammation and other Symptoms. If the Patients
neck be pained, a vain must be opened in the Arm. 3. By Retention of the
replaced Bone etc.
It Is divided two manner of ways. 1. Into that of one side of the Jaw; and then
the jaw with the Chin is bent toward one side, the mouth is distorted, the
teeth answer not one to another. And into that of both sides of the Jaws; and
then the whole with the chin hangs over toward the breast. The temporol Muscles
are stif. A certain eminency is perceived in both parts. 2. Into that which
happens only to persons of ripe years, and that has been here described: and
into that which betides Infants. in whom because the Mandibula is divided into
two parts, and is joined together in the middle of the Chin by a large gristle,
the said gristle being loosened by afflux of Humors; or the bone being
separated from the gristle, which in grown persons turns to a bone, it may be
disjoined toward the right or left side.


II. The Clavicula is disjoined either toward the Breast Bone, or contrary
wise toward the top of the Shoulder Blade; but seldom, by reason of its firm
connection with both the bones. It Is known, because the shoulder swells, and in
the place from whence the Clavicula is slipped, there is a manifest Cavity. It Is
Cured with difficulty, and for the most part, the Arm is deficient in some of
its motions. A strong binding must be used.

III. Luxation of the Vertebraes, is either outward, or inwards. It Is easily
Cured in Children, hardly in persons grown up.

Chap. 2. Of Luxation of the Humerus, Cubitus, Radius, and the Fingers.
TO the Laxation of the upper Limbs there likewise belongs, Luxation of the
Humerus, Cubitus, Radius and Fingers.

I The Luxation of the Humerus or Shoulder is when the Head thereof, which is
round, inserted into a shallow Cavity, and fenced with a very loose Ligament,
slips out of its proper place. It arises, for the most part, from a violent
cause, stretching of the Arm etc. It Is divided into that which is caused under
the Arm-pit, and then somewhat round and hard, is sensibly felt under the Arm,
the Cubitus suddenly becomes more distant from the Ribs. It may be restored
either by turning round the Head of the Humerus about the neck of the Scapula,
or by the Heel, or by a Ladder, or a pestle, or by putting the Shoulder under
etc. And into that which is made forward. Then there is in the hinder part an
Unusual Cavity, and in the fore part there is seen an over great protuberancy,
the Head of the Humerus is distorted to the breast. The Cubitus inclines to the
hinder parts. In the Restitution, a contrary motion is to be made; and although
the member be not made shorter, yet because we unfold and loosen the Head, some
extension must be made, though but small. See Aquapenent.

II. Luxation of the Cubitus seldom happens, both because it is a joint
variously Figured; as also because the ligaments are exceeding strait; and
therefore it is likewise reposed in its seat with difficulty. It Happens. 1.
Either toward the forepart: and then we cannot bend our Arm being stretched
forth, and our Cubit is made shorter. An unwonted Tumor appears in the fore
part, and a Cavity in the hinder part. It Is Cured by Extension Obilquely, and
reposition of which there are diverse ways. Either toward the hinder part, and
then a Tumor appears in the hinder part, a Cavity in the former. By Extension,
which is hard in this Case, when the fresh Dislocation is reposed only by the
hands. 2. Or toward the outside. Then the Tumor is in on the outside, a Cavity
on the Inside. Or toward the Inside, and then al things go contrary. And
extension being made, the impulse of the Cubitus ought to be made, to the
contrary side. Anadyne, and astringent Medicaments must be applied after the
Reposition. 4. Or the Radius follows, and then the distance of the Cubitus form
the Radius is perceived by the touch; or it subsists.


III. The Luxation of the Radius is wont to happen, toward the external part.
And then a swelling appears in the outward part, the Cubitus and Radius stand
gaping one from another. Extension being made, it is easily restored to its place.

IIII. The Wrist is dislocated. 1. Either towarsts the hinder part. Then the
fingers cannot be stretched, because the Tendons and nerves are compressed by
the bones. Or to the fore part. Then there is a Tumor in the forepart of the
Fingers. The fingers cannot be bent. 2. Either Inward or Outward. Then the
swelling is in that part, the Cavity in the contrary part. See the Cure in Aqua
pendent.


V. The Fingers are disjoined toward the fore part, the hinder part, and
side-waies. The Signs are most manifest because those Joints are without Flesh.

Chap III. Of Luxations of the Thigh, Knee, and Ankle.
TO the Luxations of the nether Limbs pertain, the Luxations of the Thigh, the
Knee, and the Ankle.

I. The Thigh is hardly dislocated, both because of most strong Muscles, and
the abundance of their flesh; also because of the deepness of the socket of the
receiving bone; and likewise because of two strait and short Ligaments. It Is
likewise restored with Difficulty, especially if the Luxation contract a callus
and so grow hard, and humors flow in about the Head of the Thigh. Reposition is
effected, either without extension, or with extension performed by the Hands,
or by certain cords fit for that purpose. The Thigh is dislocated. 1. Either
toward the foreside. Then the Thigh being stretched out cannot be drawn in,
because the Musculi Inflectentis, are compressed by the Head of the Thigh Bone.
The Urin is suppressed. The Buttocks appear rugged. Or toward the Hinder-side.
Then the Thigh cannot be held forth, because the Musculi extendentes are
affected. That leg becomes shorter than the other, because the Cavity is in the
lower, the Head in the upper place. The Heel does not touch the ground. The
Head of the Thigh appears through the Buttock. 2. Or inwardly, then the Knee,
the Leg and Foot bear outward. The Thighs cannot be bowed toward the groins.
Just against that place which is between the stones and Fundament, an evident
Tumor, appears, in the outer part of the Sinus. Or externally. Then between
the Cod and Fundament, the part makes a Cavity; but by the Buttocks, it is raised
into a Tumor. The Knee, Foot, and Leg bend inwards. The Heel touches not the
ground, but the Sole.


II. The Knee does not so sone fall out, because it has too Ligaments; also it
has an Head and a double cavity. It Is dislocated, 1. Either imperfectly, where
impulse is required only to the contrary part. Or perfestly, and when extension
is necessary, 2. Or into the external, or internal, or Back part. Then the
Tumor is in an unwonted place, the Sinus appears in a contrary situation: the
figure is departed, the motions are weakened and perish.


III. The Talus or Ancle is Dislocated, 1. Toward the inside. Then the lower
part of the foot, is turned externally, or toward the outside, and there it is
contrarily turned. 2. Toward the forepart.
Then a broad and strong tendon in the Heel, becomes hard and steched, and the
foot becomes less. Toward the hinder part; then because the joint is slipped to
the Heel, the Heel is hidden, the sole of the foot is greater and the foot
longer. The Cure ought to be made by Extension and Reposition.

IIII. The Bones of the Pedium and Tarsus never suffer Luxation. And those of
the Toes, seldom, because they are underpropped with most strong ligaments and
many tendons.

Title VI Of Fractures in Specie.
Chap. 1. Of the more usual Fractures of the Bodies.
THe third kind of External Disseases are Fractures of bones; which are either
more or lose frequent. To the more frequent sort belong.

I. The Fractures of the Brachium viz. that Bone which is between the Elbow and
the wrist; which if it happen in both the bones, seeing they have no propor
stay, and the neighboring parts are easily hurt, it is the more dangerous: if
in one, and that the uppermost which needs less extension, it is less
dangerous: if in the nethermost, it is so likewise because the Elbow serves for
a stay; and a swathing band is more safely hung on. The Cure requiers Extension
and Direction of the broken bone, with joining together, and reposition. It
grows together within the space of thirty days.

II. Of the Humerus or shoulder, whose bone being great, and requiring long
time to breed a Callus, it is forty days in growing together.

III. Of the Crus or that part which reaches from the knee to the foot. In
which either Both bones are broken; and the whole leg may be bowed in: or the
Tibia or shank bone, and the whole bone, as in a place without flesh, may easily
be seen. And it is cured with greater difficulty, seeing there is need of
greater extension. Or the Fibula, and the broken part bendes inward, and the
Patient can sooner set his foot to the ground because the Tibia bears most of
the bodies weight. These bones grow together within the space of forty days.

IIII. Of the Femur or Thies, which If it be broken toward the knee or in the
middle and diligent care be taken, they escape without halting. If toward the
Hip commonly they halt after it. Both because, the bowing tending outward, it
is easily crooked Toward the inside, and toward the outside it bunches out
like a bow as also because, being but one single bone, it cannot easily be kept
in its place, It grows together in the space of fifty days.

Chap. 2. Of less Frequent Fractures.
TO the less ordinary Fractures, there appertain the Fractures of.

I. The Nose, which is either equally flatted, so as to make a saddle-Nose; or
it is broke only on the one side: or it is writhen aside by the Gristle: or the
bones thereof are broke into small fritters. There is Joined, sometimes a wound,
and sometimes and Ulcer is raised within the Nostrils. Unless the Nose be
immediately rectified, it must for ever remain deformed.

II. Of the lower Jaw Bone, whose bone is either broken so athwart, that the
Bones nevertheless do in some measure hold together: or so, that one bone
sticks out above another, and one tooth sticks out beyond another. They are
consolidated within twenty days, unless Inflammation happen. Also the teeth
remain sound,

III. Of the Clavicula, or channel bone, which is broken either athwart, and is
easily reduced into its natural seat by extending and compressing the same with
a man's fingers: or long-waies, which has always some Eminency, which can
hardly be brought into order. Its fracture is known by the touch and by the
pian. It is soddered together within the space of twenty days.

IIII. Of the Scapula and that either in respect of the shoulder tip. and then
Inequality is perceived, if the hurt part be compared with the sound or in
respest of the broad part Then a certain cavity is perceived by the touch. the
Arm just against it, is benumbed. If the fracture be in the neck of the
Scapula, or in the Jointing of the shoulder, Inflammation is soon caused,
because of the veins, Arteries and nerves which spring from the Vertebraes of
the Neck.

V. Of the Brest-bone, whose fracture is known, by the bones giving way when
pressed with the finger, by shortness of breath, etc. and it is dangerous
because of the Neighborhood of the noble parts.

VI. Of the Ribs which are either so broken that the extremities of the broken
bones, do neither go in, nor stick out: And then few are either Feverish or
spit blood. Or so as that the Ends of the Bones are out of their places. Then
the flesh above the broken Rib is blown and heaved up: and if the place be
pressed with the hand, a noise is heard of the departing Air. Inflammation,
Fevers, Impostumes, do for the most part follow. Or the whole Ribs are not
broken* Then there is neither great pain, nor a Fever.

VII. Of the Backbone, which frequently, by reason of the hurt ensuing to the
spinal marrow, the Membranes and the Nerves, especially if the fracture happen
by the Vertebra's of the Neck, proves deadly: especially if a palsy either of
the Arms and Hands, or of the Legs and Feet, do follow thereupon.

VIII. Of the Patella or Whirl-bone of the Knee, which is known, by inability
to go, and an hollowness which is perceived in the place of the fracture. It
happens either long ways; and then the bones are easily joined together again.
Or athwart or slanting. Then no art can so help it, as to hinder the Patient
from halting.

IX. Of the Bones of the Feet, which is wont to be caused by an heavy and
strong thing. It Is easily known by sight and touch, because the parts are
fleshless. It is not so dangerous. See Galen upon Hippocrates of the Joints and
Fractures.

And so much shall suffice to have spoken, touching External Diseases.

THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE IDEA OF PRACTICAL PHYSIC.
Touching Fevers.

HItherto we have treated of the external Diseases of the Body. The internal
are either universal, which affect the whole Body; or Particular, which vex some
parts only. The Universal are Fevers. A Fever is considered generally or
specially. Generally considered, it is divided into Nonputrid and Putrid,
Hectic, Malignant, and Pestilential.

Title, I. Of Fevers in General.
A Fever in general, is an hot Distemper of the whole Body, arising from an
Heat Preternaturally kindled in the heart, and by means of the spirits and
blood, through the Veins and Arteries diffused into the whole Body, and hurting
the natural actions thereof by a Crowd of Symptoms.

The Part affected is the Heart, wherein the heat is first kindled, and soon
after the whole Body, at least in respect of the noble parts, sometimes. For the
Heat being diffused, possesses the parts, either Habitudinally or Habitually.
Also their temper consisting in the innate and influent Heat, is changed. Now
this Distemper is joined sometimes with dryness, other whiles with Moisture.
Hence, though the feverish heat do always tend to dryness: yet often times the
disposition of the Body, upon which that heat acts, and the moisture, do hinder
the Body from falling into a Morbifick Dryness.

The Cause is, whatsoever kindles Heat in the Body. Now heat is kindled. 1. By
Motion, whiles the rest of the parts, by frequent smiting one against another,
causing a conflux of more Humors than can be discussed, do grow hot. 2. By
Putrefaction, while by the external Heat, the internal is called forth. 3. By
Contact and Nearness of some hot thing. 4. By stopping of the pores and
interception of sharp vapors and Sooty steams, which makes the body unhealthy;
and this is the Principal Cause, without which other Causes can hardly effect
any thing. 5. By the mixinre of some hot thing.


The CURE of a fever in general is performed by Alteration, wherein such a
progress must be used, as that the Cause be not fomented: and by mitigation of
Symptoms.

The principal Symptoms are. 1. Thirst, the inner coat of the stomach, being
either parched with the burning heat; or soaked with an hot, sharp and nitrous
Humor. 2. Hiccuping, sharp and biting Humors twitching and nipping the Stomach.
3. Vomiting, either by reason of an hot and Chollerick Humor; or a very cold
Humor; or of a thick and Clammy matter; or some Vapor. 4. Looseness of the
Belly, when the stomach is so far irritated, that it can in no wise embrace or
digest the meat: and when liquors extremely cold are drunk down. 5. Dryness,
Blackness and Roughness of the Tongue, by reason of sooty Vapors, which so
burn the same, that the Spittleish moisture is consumed, which arise sometimes
from a clammy humor sticking about the Teeth and jaws, and beclam and fur the
Mouth. 6. Lipothymia, and Syncope, Swowning and Fainting, which sometimes
proceeds from the permicious nature of the Humor, and sometimes from rusty,
green or black Choler fermenting, and coming out of the Veins into the Heart.
7. Shortness of Breath, occasioned by the oppression of the Midrif through the
fervency of green Choler boiling about the heart, or by plenty of Humors:
sometimes it is caused by the heat of the Heart or Lungs, when Choler and
putrified matter, is inflamed about those parts, or when matter swelling and
fermenting in the Veins, rushes violently and settles it self thereabouts. 8.
Headache, want of Sleep, Apileptick Convulsions etc. Of which in their places.


Title, II. Of Vnputrid Fevers.
Chap. 1 Of the Fever Ephemera.
UNputrid Fevers are either the Ephemera, or the Synocha simplex.

The Fever Ephemera is a fever which arises from the Inflammation of the Vital
spirits in the heart, and continues the space of one day.

It Is termed Ephemera, because it transcends not the natural day, as the Beast
Ephemeron, and Colchicum Ephemeron, a plant so called.

The SIGNS are: A sudden heat arises in the Body, no loathing of meat, or
wearyness without cause, deep sleep, or frequent Yawning having preceeded, with
none or very slight shivering, unless the Body be full of bad juice, diffusing
much and biting expiration, which by reason of the colds stopping the skin, or
the closing up of the secret passages, being suppressed, smites the Nerves. The
Vrin in color, substance, and sediment, is little or nothing differing from the
natural, unless the Cause which brought in the Fever, have raised some
extraordinary mutation in the blood. The pulse is more quick and frequent than
ordinary: but yet, even, ordinate, great and strong. Inspiration is greater and
quicker than expiration.

The CAUSES are procatarctick, of which in the differences.

The CURE is easy, unless it change into a Synocha imputrid, in a youthful and
full body; or into a putrid, the fourth or fifth day, in a body Cacochymical: or
into an hectic in an Hot, Dry, thin body. It Is Absolved. 1. By Alteration
through cooling and moistening things, given inwardly, and applied outwardly to
the Region of the Heart, the pulse and forehead. 2. By Evacuation, or opening a
Vein if there be a plethora: or by gentle Purgation, if it arise from a
redundancy of evil Humors and some light obstruction. 3. By strengthening the
Stomach; Regard being had to the Humor and Symptoms.


The Differences of the Fever Ephemera are taken from the causes.

I. One sort comes from Cold Air striatning the skin. Then the beginning is
without shivering. The Urine and pulse are little changed, the Heat is more
moderate in the state. It Is Cured by removing the Cause.

II. Another springs from Buboes, which is known by the presence of Buboes, by
a swift and great pulse, by much heat, by a ruddy Face. It Is Cured by
blood-letting, by which if blood be sufficiently taken away, the Bubo appearing
a little, vanishes away by the use of repellers or relaxers: if not, it must by
fomentations be brought to suppuration. Vide B. 2. de Bubone.

III. Another from straitness of the skin, which is known by the hardness and
compactness of the Patients skin, other things being as in other persons
healthy. It arises from plenty of blood, cold binding, or dryness. It Is Cured.
1. By Blood-letting, if the blood offend in quantity. 2. By Purgation, cutters
being premised, where there is plenty of thick Humors, and swear is wont to
follow. 3. By relaxation with hot and moist things, temperate baths, moderate
frictions, frequent washing, if it proceed from cold.


IIII. From Crudity, and that nidorous, which is known by the presence of such
signs as attend a Diseased Stomach. It Is Cured, 1. By Vomit, if stomach sickness
and Aptitude to Vomit, be present. 2. By Purgation, if there be danger in
Vomiting. 3. By Corroboration, with Medicaments whose quality is opposite to
the peccant Humor.


V. Another springs from Heat of weather, Anger, Sad Pensiveness, Watchings,
Wearyness, etc. Of al which, consult with Practitioners.

Chap. 2. Of the Fever Sinocha Simplex.
THe fever Synocha simple, or the Ephemera of many days, is a Fever without
putrefaction, arising of the Boiling and working of the spirits and blood,
without remission, lasting three, four, or more days.

It Is termed also Inflativa or Puff-up, because when the blood works and
boyles, the Vessels are distended, and a wearyness of the body is perceived.

Its SIGNS are wearyness which comes of it self, without any exercise of the
Body. Heaviness about the temples and forehead. A certain Itch of the Nostrils,
a gentle Heat. Moistness of the skin, with distention of the Members. A pulse
great, full, frequent, quick. Difficulty in fetching breath. Urine thicker and
more red than ordinary.

The CAUSE is, the working and boiling of thin blood which arise from the
hinderance of Transpiration, in a plethorick body, which sends forth many hot
Vapors.

The CURE is not very hard, because it seizes for the most part strong bodies,
or temperate ones, or such as are hot, or moist, of middle Age, of a fleshy,
square, Aldermanlike constitution, unless it degenerate into another sort. It Is
allayed and terminated, sometimes by sweat, or by plentyful Nose-bleeding,
within the fourth, or at most the seventh day; unless through some very great
Error of the Patient, the Physician, or the Assistants of the sick, it turn to
a putrid fever, or a grievous Disease which is wont to spring from fullness.
It Is performed. 1. By Blood-letting, by which the Patient is cooled, and the
increase of Vapors is diminished: but it must be speedy, little in quantity,
and diverse times celebrated. 2. By Evacuation of the first Region, least more
fumes be added to the store. Tamarinds, Rhubarb, Syrup of Roses solutive,
Cream of Tartar, are good. 3. By Alteration, which ought to be performed, by
cooling potions, the spirit of salt and vitriol, being mixed therewith.
Clysters, Oxyrrhodines, Epithemes, Bathes for such as are accustomed to them,
but not before the Rigor of the Fever be over. 4. By Corroberation, with Manus
Christi perled, Diamargaritum Frigidum, Conserve of Roses Vitriolated, of
Wood Sorrel etc. 5. By a cooling and Moistening Diet.


Title, III. Of Putrid Fevers in General.
A Putrid Fever is Generally or Specially considered.

A Putrid Fever in general, is a Fever, which arises from hot Vapors, raised
out of the Putrefaction of humors, which affect the heart; with a
praeternatural heat.

SIGNS thereof, are: Invation with shivering, and shaking, no antecedent Cause
having preceded; No, nor no procatarctick, unless the body be so disposed that
a small matter affects it. Accessions and Paroxysmes or fits, which yet agrees
not with all. The heat at the beginning, is not biting, by reason of
suffocation; biting in the augment by reason of a Fuliginous excrement. The
Urine is crude, or obscurely digested. The Pulse is at first small, the
contraction swifter then the dilatation, by reason of plenty of sooty
excrement. It abates upon sweat or some other Evacuation.

The Causes immediate are, putred vapors, sharp, biting, plentiful, so as they
cannot be discussed. The Mediate is the putrefaction of humors, whose cause. 1.
In the first assault of the Fever, is either their bad nature, contracted from
meats of bad juice, which soon putrify, from il preperation and use of diet,
and the faults of the Parts which serve concoction; or an External agent, where
hindrance of Transpiration has place, or from the straitness of the pores of
the skin: for hot things, in an hot place, if they have not freedom of a^^e,
do suddenly putrify; or from the obstruction of the Vessels and Passages in
the Body. A Fever Ephemera, especially in hot Natures. Heat arising from the
Nonnatural things; Nearness of putrified humors. 2. In the Continuance, is the
fault of the parts ordained for Concoction. Inquination or Defilement remaining
after the Paroxysme, which inserts the humors herein.


The Cure for the most part does not oppose the Fever so as to neglect the
Cause, especially if the Remedies for the Fever do increase the Cause, unless
the Fever be very great. Yet sometimes we may resist the Fever and neglect
the Cause, namely when it is remiss. The safest way is so to direct the Cure to
the one, as not to neglect the other. It is performed, 1. By Blood-letting,
which must be practiced, 1. For evacuation to put the blood in motion and to
cool the same. 2. In continual Fevers on the third day, in intermitting
Fevers after the third day; in all having first given a gentle Lenitive, if
any thing reside in the first ways, and when the disease is most remiss. 3.
When the evil humors are not in the first passages, but are mingled with the
blood in Vena Cava. 4. When there is plenitude.
It must be repeated the same day, if it be done for Evacuation: sometime
after, if for Revulsion.

II. By Vomiting rightly instituted, with Aqua Benedict a Rulandi, Asarum Roots
etc.

III. By Purgation, and then Lenitives ought to precede, by reason of the
stomachs weakness; and plenty of humors in the Mesaraick Veins, and stoppage of
the Belly at the beginning; either by Clisters or Potions. Stronger Medicaments
ought to follow. 1. There having preceded both Coction, which must be observed
in Fevers, especially such as are continual and acute, according to the
precept of Hippocrates; by which Nature assisted with art makes separation of
putrid humors mingled with the blood: and Praeparation, which opens the
passages and ways by opening Medicaments (here Cichories, Endives, and Sorrels
have place) and impediments in the humors are removed, where syrup of Vinegar,
of the Juice of Citrons, have place, and a dram of Spirit of Tartar compound,
which must be given with caution in choleric natures, by reason of the Treacle
water. 2. Which must be omitted, if the Humors are not in the first passages,
but mixed with the blood in the Veins. If the Humors are turgent, that is,
either move to some determinate part, or are so disposed, that they may run
violently into some part. For the feverish matrer is wont at the beginning,
though little, because like Leven it corrupts the rest of the humors, to be
moved by nature, and either to be thrown out of the body, or to be thrust into
the more ignoble parts of the body.


IV. By sweating provoked by Sudorifick medicaments, and that not very hot,
least the Fever be increased, yet sufficient, least the matter should be only
stirred, administered after other evacuations, least Transpiration should be
more hindered. Yet is it allowable in the beginning, sometimes to give strong
sudorificks, that the said ferment may be dissipated to dispose the patients
body to sweat through the whole disease, that the body may freely transpire. To
repeat it as often as need shall be, that the matter may be accustomed to
expulsion. Salt of Wormwod, of Centory, of Carduus benedictus, Spirit and Rob
or quiddinie of dwarf-elder, of Elder; Magistery of Mother of Perle, of
Crab's-eyes, Antimonium diaphoreticum etc. are commended.

V. Diet, in which are principally considerable 1. Meat, which ought to be of
good juice, easy of digestion, of small excrement; so that great respect be
had to the patients strength, the disease, and morbifick Cause. The times of
the disease it self must be observed, least the patients strength be
overwhelmed. The Quantity, Quality, and manner of the use, ought to be weighed.
Howbeit a more liberal diet may be used, the strength of the Patient being
diminished by Evacuation. A thin when it is weak by suffoeation, that plenitude
may be diminished, and nature the better betake her self to the Concoction of
Humors. A very nourishing one, to preserve the strength. Medicamental, to drive
away the Disease and its cause. At any time, when the strength is decayed, by
Evacuation and fasting. In the declination or intermission, the Patients
strength being suffocated by the vehemence of the Disease. 2. Drink which ought
to be nourishing, in the Patients weakness. And Medicinal in reference to the
Disease and its Cause. Such is, a Decoction of Barley, Oxymel, Whey corrected
with Annis-seed, Fennel-seed and Cumin-seed. Cooling Juleps. In the first days
of continual Fevers little, afterward more plentifully. In Agues, when the
fit is near, none at al: least the separation and exclusion of the putrefying
Humor should be hindered: when sweat is ready to break forth, hot, to further
the same. The Wine in Agues must be austere and hard, because such Wine
moistens, further excretions, and is more easily distributed into the body: in
continual Fevers, about the beginning of Coction, little; in quartans before;
in the Progress of the Disease, more. In the Declination, if there be weakness.
The feverish heat be not intense. Crudity of the matter prohibit not. Headache
and like disorders be absent.

Chap. 1. Of Continent putrid Fevers.
Article, I. Of the Synochus Putrida.
Putrid Fevers specially considered are either Continent, as Synochus putrida
and Causus: or Continuae Periodicae, or Intermittents.

Synochus putrida, is a fever arising from blood putrified in the vena cava
without any periodical Remission and Intention, afflicting alike from the
beginning to the End.

It is also termed Pur, Fire; because of its very great Heat. Assodes because
it makes the Patient very unrestible. Taraxodes because it vexes the Sick with
imaginary Apparitions. And Pericaes Puretos, the burning fever, because of the
Excess of burning Heat.

The Pathognomonick or peculiar Signs are, extreme thirst and burning Heat,
howbeit the thirst is allaied by coughing, which causes an Afflux of humors. To
these signs are added, great tumblings and tossings of the Body, by reason of
great heat, and the acrimony of thin vapors, which in every part vex the body.
The Vrin is little in quantity, through plenty of sweat and heat, which consume
the same: sometimes it is crude and troubled, which by the settling of the
adventitious parts, and evaporation of the turbulent spirits, does afterwartd
wax clear; sometimes it is thin, very cholorick and flame-colored. The stools,
unless the dung be scorched and hardened by the fevers Heat, are liquid and
saffron-colored, choler being shed into the belly and making the dung thin. The
pulse is quick, frequent and unequal. swifter in the Contraction, because the
Arteries by sudden compression, endeavor to expel those sooty vapors, which
greiviously afflict the heart. Breathing is laboursome, and expiration is
quicker than drawing-in of the air, by reason of the extraordinary necessity of
sending forth the fiery exhalations. The Mouth is bitter, because choler is
soakt into the inner Coat of the stomach, which is common to it and the mouth.
The Tongue is dry, and furred, and black, because the burning heat consumes the
moisture of the tongue, and lodges its sooty vapors therein. Raving, by reason
of the mounting of choler into the head; which if it follow trembling, it is a
sign that the choleric humor is transferred out of the veins into the Nerves,
out of the nerves into the Brain. Sleep is sometimes profound, especially when
the fever is not exquisite, but bastard; because thick vapors carried into the
Brain, do stop the passages thereof.

The CAUSE is Blood putrefying, through a peculiar propriety of the liver,
occasioned by meats of an over heating faculty: or from crude, cooling meats,
apt to be corrupted etc. Which blood is either Choleric, and then the
symptoms specified in the definition are more vehement, and the fever is
termed Causus exquisitus, an exquisit burning fever: or Phlegmatic, and then
the fymptoms are milder and the fever is termed nothus a bastard burning fever.

The CURE requires that we regard the Fever, Its cause and the patients
strength. The fever is terminated by sundry excressions, especially when the
patient happens to shake upon a critical day, the signs of Coction appearing:
and that not by reason of the shaking, but because of the Excretion, whose
forerunner is the shaking fit. It Is performed, 1. By blood-letting, that the
burning heat of the Blood may be repressed, the plenty thereof diminished, and
its faltiness corrected. It must be done at the beginning, while the patient is
yet pretty strong, and because the violent motion of the Disease, shows we must
take time while we may. It must not be done at al, it the Fever have its Rise
from Evacuation, fasting, journeying in heat of Summer, drying of the Veins,
and consumption of the Blood-water. Also when Age, Sex or some other thing
prohibits. Then Scarrifications, Cupping-glasses etc. must supply its place. 2.
By Purgation, with cooling choler purges, or temperate ones, as pulp of Cassia,
syrup of damask Roses. 3. By Vomiting if there be Stomach-sickness and the
stomach be vexed with Choleric Humors, which is known by the Mouths
Bitterness. 4. By Alteration and preparation with cooling Medicaments, where
note, that there is then need of External Medicaments, when the feverish
burning is abated with internal coolers, and the putrefying Humor is for the
most part drawn forth. 5. By Corroboration of the Patients strength, with
Electuaries, Lozenges, etc. 6. By Mitigation of Symptoms: of which see in the
proper Chapter. 7. By Diet, of which see what was said before.


Chap. 2. Of a continual Periodick Fever in general.
A Continual Fever keeping its Periods or Courses, is Generally, or Specially
considered.

Generally considered, it is a Fever arising from Excrementitious Humors,
putrefying in those Veins, which are of a middle size, betwixt the greatest and
the smallest, Capillary or Third Veins; abating at certain Periods of time,
without any Total Intermission.

Its Signs are, that it remits of its Violence, and then grows again
Exorbitant, at certain Periods of time, but never intermits so as to leave the
Patient free from Feverish distemper more or less. Its Exacerbations, or
Exorbitancies, are not ushered in by any cold, shivering or shaking, nor does
any sweat follow its Remissions or Abatements. It is exasperated at certain set
Periods of time, both by the arrival of Morbifick matter to the Heart, by
uneven quantities (because of distance of place) if it do not exactly keep its
times: and also by communication of new matter from the Members subservient to
the second Digestion, if it hold punctually its times.

The Causes are Excrementitious Humors which are bred in the Spleen and Liver,
either by their fault, or the fault of the Chylus; yet they may be bred in the
Meseraick Veins, and brought to the Liver. They are not only jumbled together
with the blood, but also perfectly mixed therewith. Their place is the Veins,
not the greater, for so it should be a Continent Fever; nor the lesser, for
then it should be an Intermittent Fever, or Ague: but of a middle size betwixt
the great Veins, and the Capillary, which are small as the Hairs of ones Head.

See the Method of Cure in the Sorts.

Article, I. Of a Primary Continual Fever.
Point 1. Of a Continual Tertian Fever
A continual Fever specially considered, is either Primary, or Symptomatical.
The Primary is that which has no other Disease preceding as the occasion
thereof; and it is either Tertian, Quotidian, or Quartan.

A Continual Tertian, is a Fever springing from Cholorick Blood, putrefying in
the Branches of Vena Cava, which holds continually, but afflicts the Patient
most, every third day.

Its Signs are, the Symptoms of continual and burning Fevers, its being
exasperated every third day, by reason of the Nature of Choler, which is so
moved. The Cause of its Abatement, is; both the distance of the place, where
the offensive Vapors are bred; and likewise their small quantity, by which means
they are all dissipated, before any more can be bred to succeed in their place.

Its Cause, is Choleric Blood, and whatsoever is apt to increase Choleric bad
Humors in the Veins, and to make them putrefie, when so increased. The Cure is
performed, 1 By Blood-letting, (a Clyster being premised) because the Humor is
mingled with Blood. 2 By Alteration, Lenitives being first used; in which case,
a little Vinegar must always be added to Syrup of Roses solutive, that it may
pierce more easily into the Veins, and not be turned by the Stomachs heat into
Vapors, which will cause thirst. Give them fasting, that Concoction may not be
disturbed. With Moderation, lest they cause Crudities. Spirit of Nitre, of
Salt, etc. are commended. Topics must be applied unto the Heart, which is
chiefly affected, but not before the state. Not cold, lest the Heat driven
inward, and gathering Head, should burn more fiercely. 3. By Evacuation
downwards, and that in the beginning, if the matter provoke, if it be
plentirul, and the Patient strong, It must be performed by gentle Medicines,
and let Rhubarb and Myrobalans, be given in their Infusions with cooling
Waters, rather than in substance. After Concoction, if Nature be lazy. 4. By
Sweating and provoking Vrin. 5. By Diet which must be contrary to the Disease,
and its Cause. Such as are upon the mending hand, if the Fever be terminated
with a perfect Critical Evacuation, let them never eat to satiety. Often, and a
little. Let them abstain from al Evacuations, save by stool. Let them use the
Electuary Diarrhodon Abbatis, to strengthen their Bellies. If by an Imperfect,
so that some relics remain, let them purge the said Relics, especially by
Urine. Let them keep a thin Diet.


The Differences are taken from the Causes.

One sort is Choleric, from Choleric blood, pure and exquisite, which the
Liver being peculiarly affected, produces. This sort afflicts with sharper
Heat, Thirst and Watchings. They are subject to it, who abound with choler. The
pulse is vehement, swift, hard. The Urine flame-colord and thin. It Is finished
in the compass of seven, or of fourteen Exasperations. It is not deadly, unless
either some remarkable Error be committed, or some malignity attend the same.

Another is Phlegmatic, or Melancholic, when Phlegmatic or Melancholic blood
is mixed with Choleric: where together with coolers, things gently warming and
cutting are to be mixed. It Is termed Notha, or a bastard Continual Tertian.

Point. 2. Of a Continual quotidian, or every day Fever.
A continual quotidian, is a Fever raised by the Phlegmatic Humor putrefying
in the Branches of Vena Cava, which is exasperated every day.

Its SIGN is a daily Exasperation, which happens toward the Evening, because
of the natural motion of phlegm about that time; with heat, which is at first
feeling mild, but afterward more vehement, by reason of the slow and uneven
kindling thereof, caused by the variety of the parts of Phlegm. With a light
coldness of the extreme parts of the Body, which nevertheless, is not found in all these Fevers.

The CAUSE is, the Humor of Phlegm putrefying, which is proper to old Men
because of their coldness, to Children through their greedy eating. It Causes
so pertinacious and stubborn a Fever, that it lasts, sometimes, three score
days, its beginning reaching to the twentieth day; it vehemently weakens the
Stomach; whence arises a Cachexy and Dropsy.

The CURE ought to be thus managed 1. The first passages must be evacuated
with Clysters, or Lenitive Medicaments, in which case Honey of Roses is
effectual; or the Stomach must be purged with Vomit. 2. Let a Vein be opened,
if Nature be oppressed with overgreat plenty of Humors, and the Urins be
thicker and redder than ordinary. 3. Purge by stool when signs of coction
appear, premising attenuators that heat not much; first with a gentle, then
with a stronger Medicament. Agarick trochisked, Hicra picra, Pills of Fumitory
are good in this case. 4. Procure Sweatings, after the matter is lessened, with
Salt of Wormwood, and of Carduus Benedictus, and a little Treacle. 5. Let
strengtheners be given, viz. Trochisks of Rhubarb, of Wormwood, and of
Agrimony, etc. 6. Let the Diet be sparing for three days, if there be
Crudities in the Stomach, and in the first ways. At first give Hydromel or
small Metheglin to drink instead of wine or beer, and let no fish be Eaten, in
the whole course of the Disease.


This Fever is divided three manner of ways.

I. One sort is Simple and Exquisite, which arises only from phlegm, and has
fits eighteen hours long. Another is bastard, when phlegm is joined with other
Humors.

II. Another is termed Epiala, in which in the smallest particles of the body
(understand to the sense) both heat and cold are felt at one and the same time.
It arises, either from phlegm mingled with Choler; or from Glassie phlegm which
in that part that is putrified, is hot, in that which is not putrified, is
cold. It Is Cured in the same manner that other putrid Fevers are, but we must
observe. 1. That Blood-letting is hurtful. 2. That spirit of Nitre in Juniper
water, is excellent to cut phlegm. 3. That vomiting must not be neglected, which
may be procured by six ounces of Juniper water distilled per Descensum. 4. Care
must be had of the Stomach, which nine drops of Oil of Vitriol, with three
spoonfuls of the best Canary will strengthen, and cut the phlegm; or two ounces
of Aquae Vitae, stilled out of Juniper berries by way of Descent.


III. Another is called Syncopalis, by reason of the swoning fits; which is
either Minuta so called, springing from a thin Humor, little in quantity, but
venomous and corrupt: or Humorous, proceeding from plenty of Phlegmatic and
crude humors, with weakness of the stomachs Mouth, and frequent faintings away.
The best way to proceed in the Cure is. 1. By Rubbings, in such whose skin is
more than ordinarily hard. 2. By loosing the belly, with Manna and Cream of
Tartar. 3. By Digestion and Evacuation of Humors, giving such things as are
necessary for the Syncope. 4. By a thin Diet, in which wine may likewise have
place.


Point, 3. Of a continual Quartan Fever.
A continual Quartan Fever, is a Fever arising from Melancholy blood
putrefying in the branches of Vena Cava, whose heat always endures, but is
Exasperated and Augmented every fourth day.

Its SIGNS are, obtuse Heat, but sharp and pricking, by reason of the Density
and dryness of the putrified Humor which causes the Fever. The Pulse at first
small, slow; and buried as it were under the skin; afterward great, full, and
swifter than in an Ague. Sometimes the Patient Spawles much, which argues either
the overgreat moisture of the Stomach, or the Spleens fault, in not separating
the Melancholy Humor.

Its CAUSE is, Melancholy blood, putrefying in the middle sort of Veins, and
springing from its proper causes.

The CURE is altogether hard, both because it lasts to the fortieth day and
further, unless peradventure it be a Summer Quartan: and likewise because,
seeing that Humor is hard to putrify, it argues there is a great cause. It Is
Performed. 1. By opening the inner Vein of the left Arm. 2. Cy Preparation of
the Humor, which must tend much to moistening. 3. by Purgation with
Melanagogues frequently repeated, as also the use of sweaters, and
piss-drivers. 4. by strengthening the Patient, with borrage, bugloss, Citron
juice etc. 5. by Diet, which ought to be cutting, moistening and cooling etc.


Article, 2. Of a continual Symptomatick Fever.
Symptomatick Fevers, are such as follow upon other Diseases, which being
removed the said Fevers Cease.

Their Signs, Causes, and Cures are to be drawn from those Disease which they
wait upon.

Their Differences are sundry.

I. One sort is That which follows the Inflammation of some inward
partespecially, and which is near the heart, or has a consent and sympathy
therewith, the Vapors which arise out of the blood shed into the part inflamed,
and putrefying there, being communicated to the heart, and heating the same. It
is as many-fold, as the Inflammation is. The Cure respects the Inflammation.

II. Another sort there is, termed Lipyrias, in which during the whole course
of the Disease, the inner parts are as it were burning up with Heat, and the
outer parts mean while cold. It arises from a vehement inflammation or
Erysipelas of some internal part, especially the Stomach, the blood and spirits
having recourse to the part inflamed. Either the Cure is not to be undertaken;
or if it be undertaken, resistance must be made inwardly against the
putrefaction and extreme heat; external, after the parts have been rubbed,
heaters, and openers of the pores must be applied. In which case Oil of Dill,
and Oil of Orice Root, with oil of Vitriol, and strong spirit of Juniper
berries are good.

III. Another is slow, which is hereby known, in that it afflicts with a
gentle heat, with which appear the notes of putrefaction, in in the Urine and
Pulse. It is not burdensome to the Patient by any grevious symtome. The
Patient can hardly stir on his Legs for weakness. The body pines away by
little and little. It Is protracted beyond the fortieth day. It Is exasperated by
the use of Purgers. It keeps no order. It arises from putrefaction of matter
shed forth of the Vessels into the substance of some bowel, or at least fast
fixed in the Capillary Veins, which are dispersed through the substance of the
bowels, and by its putrefaction corrupting the said substance. From whence
Vapors cannot be carried toward the heart, in such great plenty, as in other
Fevers. It Is Cured by aperitives, attenuat^rs and detergents, appropriate to
each part. We must also use gentle Purging, etc.

IV. Another sort there is Which arises from the Putrefaction and Corruption of
some Bowel. From whence putrid Vapors are communicated by the Veins inserted
into the heart, and heat the same. It is sometimes more gentle, otherwhiles more
Vehement. It happens for the most part, in Putrefaction of the Lungs, in
Fistula's that pierce deep into the Call, Nesentery, Womb etc. The Cure is to be
directed to the Ulcers and Fistula's of the internal parts.

V. Another, springs either from Corrupt Milk, as often betides Infants; or
from Blood somwhere Putrefying without the Vessels; or from worms; or from
Crudity, familiar to infants because of their greedy feeding, with swelling and
inflammation of the Hypochondria; putrid Vapors being communicated to the heart.
In the Cure, respect is to be had to the Causes and parts affected.

Chap. 3. Of an intermitting Fever or Ague in general.
AN intermittent Fever [commonly called an Ague] is a Fever arising from
Vapors which proceed from Humors bred in the Mesaraich Veins. Putrefying, and
ever and a non entering the Vena Cava, invading the sick person at certain set
times, and ending with excretions, or Evacuations.

It Is SIGNS are, to come at certain set times, with shaking, shivering, or
cold, the sensitive parts being vexed and nipped as it were with a sharp Vapor.
To end by sweating. Urine, or passage of the Vapors through the pucrepores of
the skin; by scabbyness, if the thicker part of the Humor be thrust forth into
the skin. Now, necessary it is, that it should come at certain seasons, and
then remit, and come again. For there remains a defilement in that part which
is the seat of the putrefaction, with a weakness also in the said part.
Whereupon the affluent Humor though it be good, is defiled by the impurity of
the part, as it were with Leven, and through the weakness of the parts it is
corrupted. Now this return of the Fever or Ague is caused. 1. Partly by the
diversity of Humors, seeing it always agrees to them, nor ever varies, into
whatsoever body it happen: partly, because of a peculiar Quality they have,
which ought either to be ascribed to celestial Causes; or it arises from a
peculiar corruption. 2 It comes either just at one and the same time, or by
reason of some external causes, which move the Humors it anticipates; or the
Humors being diminished, it comes later. Also the fits are either short, if the
matter be little, or thin, the bodies constitution not close compact, the
Patients strength Vigorous; or long if the premises be contrarily disposed.


The next Cause is a putrid Vapor, arising from an Humor and assailing the
Heart. Touching the humor three things are to be observed. 1. That it is a
Putrid Humor, which appears by the Urine, which has in it signs of
putrefaction. Nevertheless it does not All putrify at once in the first
Paroxysme, but only a Part, which is disposed to putrefaction: the rest in the
following fits, til al be consumed. 2. That the Hearth and Tinder as it were
and place of the said Humor, as well out of the fit as in it, is the Mesarick
Veins. Which appears both by the stomach sickness, Vomiting, stretching and
pain of the Hypochondria etc. With which the Patient is troubled; and also by
the frequent Vomitings of Choler in very great quantity at the beginning of
these fevers, which could not be evacuated in such a manner from the remote
Veins; likewise because the approach of the fit is collected by the compression
of the pulses at the beginning of the fit, which the Greeks term Episemasia;
and the matter is purged out by Urine, 3. That the said Humor is ever and anon
transferred into the Vena Cava and the Artery. The truth is, Crudity and
Coction are observed in Agues or intermitting fevers, as well as in the
continual. At first, the Humors are moved from the Circumference unto the
Center. And seeing, the branches of Vena Porta, are inserted into the substance
of the Liver, and their mouths communion with the Vena Cava, and the Arteries
proceeding from the heart, are in the Stomach, Guts, Spleen, and elsewhere
joined to the mesaraick Vessels; the ways by which these Humors may be carried
thither, are evident enough.


The CURE of intermitting fevers or Agues is Performed. 1. By Removing the
Debility consisting in the part, by altering Medicines. 2. By Withdrawing the
Putrid Defilement with Purges, Blood-letting; if blood abound in Vena Cava, and
be corrupted by Vicious Humors.
By Sudorificks, which are of greatest force in this Cure Precipitating
Medicaments are commended at first, as Crollius his powder of snails shells,
powder of mother of pearl calcined four scruples, and the Magistery of Crabs
eyes. Externally are applied, Cobwebs and Populeon Ointment, the fish we call a
Tench bound to the soles of the feet etc.

Article. I. Of a tertian Intermitting fever, or tertian Ague.
An Intermittent fever specially considered, is either a Tertian, or a
Quotidian or a Quartan. Howbeit there are Quintans, Septans, Octans, Nonans.
But those modes of Ague^^ are seldom seen, and are but certain sorts of the
simpler Modes aforesaid, only a fit Two or three happen to be omitted. So a
Qintan is a sort of tertian, in which the third day, is without accession.

An Intermiting tertian Fever, or tertian Ague, is a fever springing from
excrementitious cholor putrifting in the mesaraick veins; afflicting every
third day, with a cold shaking fit, which is followed with a hot fit and other
symptoms.

Its SIGNS are Paroxysme or fit which seazes the patient every other day with
a shaking cold. The shaking cold being over, much Heat arises, the pulse is at
the first beginning of the fit, small, slow, afterward frequent. The Vrin reddish
etc.

The CAUSE, is a Choleric filth in the mesaraick veins, either alone, or mixed
with other humors, and putrifting Springing from meats apt to be corrupted, or
others fit to generate the same, and sending putrid vapors to the Heart.

The CURE is performed. 1. By Evacuation of the first ways with lenitive
medicaments or clysters. 2. By Vomit if the matter tend to the stomach, and the
patient be troubled, with Heart burning, stomach fickness and desire to vomit:
but so as the humors be not thereby drawn out of the veins to the first
passages. Salt of vitriol, Asarum, Broom water of pismiers or Aunts, are
commended, if warily administered. 3. By Blood-letting, if the Humor have
penetrated out of the first region of the body into Vena cava, which is known
by the redness of the Urines; and it ought to be performed upon the day of the
Agues Intermission. 4. By preperation with cooling medicaments, moistening, and
such as cleanse the first passages. Taraxacum, or dandelion, sorrel, Barley,
Cichory, Spirit of vitreol, Cream of tarter, Tartarum vitriolatum, syrup of
juice of Citrons, are good: also these specificks Centory, Devils-bit etc. 5.
By purgation down wards, and that for the most part on the well day; yet on the
fit day, if the matter of it self incline to go away by stool. Rubarb is
good, and syrup of Cichory with Rubarbe. 6. By sweat, procured by sudorificks,
salt of wormwood, of Centori of Cardus, Hartshorn prepared, Magestiry of
Mother of Pearl, which are to be given either before the fit, or in the end
thereof. 7. By strengthening the Liver and stomach. Salt of wormwood dissolved
in spirit of Niter, and again coagulated into Christals, is good, being taken
to the quantity of a scruple. 8. By application of topics, such are the
Cataplasme of Mynsichtus P. 368. The powder of a dried manchet beaten with
green sage; the white of an egg and a little vinegar being added, and so
bound to the wrist.
The Herb Potentilla wild tansie or wild Aegrimony, beaten with salt and
vinegar, and so applied, to the pulses and the soles of the feet, in the fit. A
Cataplasme or pultise, of Bryony Roots, Black Hellebor, bay salt, white
pepper, saffron and figs. It Is divided into Exquisit, Bastard, an Pernicious.

I. The Exquisit Intermitting Tertian, is hereby known. 1. In that the shaking
coldness at the first coming is vehement and pricking, arising from an humor
and Vapor very thin and small in quantity shipping out of the veins. It Is small,
if the matter be plentiful; and not easily moved: more vehement, by how much
the matter is thinner and sharper, the expulsive faculty stronger, and the
sense of the parts more exquisite. 2. In that the Heat is much sharp and
biting, and spreads it self al over the body in the Hight of the Hot fit. And
if you hold your hand long upon the patient, it grows gentler by reason of the
easy discussion, at what time the body is al over bedewed with a gentle
moisture. 3. In that the pulse at the Beginning of the fit, is small and slow,
the matter being not yet conquered by the oppressed heat, yet is it not drawn
back; in the Progress of the fit, it is vehement, swift, frequent, a little hard
straightened by reason of the store of matter newly inflamed like green wood, more
swift in the Intermission of the dilatation, by reason of the heat of the small
quantity of humor, remaining in the Chimney of putrefaction, communicated to
the rest of the humors, and carried to the heart. 4. In that, the fits last not
above twelve hours. 5. In that the Urine is reddish and yellowish, of a
midling Consistence, showing a white cloud or a swim, in the first fit: and
then the Ague lasts not beyond the fourth fit. It arises from choler, sometimes
resembling that which in the Gal-blader, regurgitating into the first passages,
sometimes verdigreise colored or green, bred in the stomach and veins.
The cure is now of the hardest, for it is terminated for the most part within
the compass of seven fits. It is ended either, by sweat, if the humor be cast
bak into the veins which are in the surface of the Body; or by vomit and
stool, if to the stomak and entrals: or by name of these, if a great part
consist in the misaraick veins; and then the patient feels a pressure, pains
and Inflammations about the midrif. Blood-lettiug must be administered, before
the third fit, least it fall in with the state of the dissease.

The Bastard tertian, is hereby known, in that the Heat is milder, nor is it
diffused through the whole Body. In that it is terminated neither by vomit nor
sweat, by by egresse of vapors in the Declination. In that the Pulse is at
first hard, the hardness increasing til the seventh day, growing afterward
more soft, as the Urines become better digested. In that, the fit lastes, many
times, eighteen houers, and the Ague reaches to the fourteenth and sometimes to
the twentyth day. It arises from cholor mixed with melancholy or phlegm; nor
is it generated only in summer, but in the Spring, Autumn, and Winter. In the
Cure, a vein must be opened after the third fit, when a good quantity of the
morbifick matter, is mingled with the blood in Vena Cava. In the Praparation,
we must have an eye to the Diversity of Humors.

III. The Pernicious Tertian; which happens from seven causes. 1. If an Error
be committed by the Patient or Physician. 2. If that Humor which ought to be
sent out of the vessels, by reason of their closure, do come to settle in some
principal member. 3. If it be too Thin and putrid. For thence come frequent
swownings, and over great sweats without any ease to the patient. 4. If it have
some peculiar pravity, either through adustion, or badness of diet. For the
humors being inflamed, roughnes of the tongue, and unquenchable thirst are
thereby caused. Holowness of the eyes by reason of the wastings of spirits.
Fiery Urin with choleric stools. Anulcerous pain of the whole Body. Paucity of
sweat, by reason of the thickness of the matter. 5. If a thick humor melted by
heat, settle in some part. Hence follows, by reason of the difficulty and
faculty of it is inflammation, an inequality of being heated. The melting and
plenty of a thick humor and which seemed to be little in the greater vessels,
but by rarefaction caused by Heat, it becomes in the small vessels more in
quantity. Hence it is that the hot fit is interupted by a cold, and the cold
fit by an hot. The Urin becomes watery, of much and thick sediment. The pulse
is sometimes intercepted. In the declination, sweat issues from the navil to
the head. Neither Augment, nor state, nor declinotion are equal. 6. If it a
contagious or pestillent malignity. 7. If ^he Heat either draw the womb in
conceit, and move the humors contained therein, or cause a dangerous Catarh,
Tissick, or Gout.


Article. II. Of a Quotidian Intermittent.
A Quotidian Intermittent, is a fever arising from phlegm putrefying in the
misaraick veins, and aflicting the patient with every day a fresh fit.

'Its SIGNS are. The foregoing of such causes as breed phlegm. 'Its daily
Assaults, which are for the most part in the night time, whence it is more
dangerous, by reason of the unseasonabelness of giving Physic at that time;
and they come with a shaking and Cold fit. Which Heat slow, vapors, nor very
burning when it has dispersed it self through the Body. The Vrin^ at first
white, thin, and crude; when the matter is digested, thick, troubled and often
red. The Pulse is exceeding small, seldom and slow. The fit lasts eighteen hours
and sometimes twynty four. Vomiting and Sweating if they happen at first, they
proceed from strength of nature and thinness of the humor.

The CAUSE is, Phlegm putrifting in the Masaraich veins, which is colected by
means of the heat of the bowels diminished, cold and moist kind of diet.
superfluous feeding upon such matter. It putrifies through the causes afforsaid.

The CURE is firequently hazardous, both because it lasts forty days, yea
three months and longer: and also because hurting the stomach and liver very
much, it throws the patient into a Cachexy. It Is performed 1. By preparation
of the petcant matter, by convenient medicens, moderaly hot, which a clyster
and gentle vomit may proceid. 2. By evacuation of the the said matter being
concocted, by vomit, where extract of Esula and water of radishes and green
walnuts, distilled with vinegar, are good. By purgation of phlegm and sweat. 3.
By strengthening the stomach and Liver. 4. By Diet.


It is differenced according to the causes.

I. One sort comes from thick phlegm. Then the urin is white and thin, but by
little and little it begins afterward to grow reeddish, and the settleing
becomes thicker and the patients mouth is continually full of watterishness. It
requiers strong medicines to digest it, and those frequently repeated; to
which, preparations of tartar, ought always to be added. Vomiting is
profitably procured with mercurial pills. It Is good to purge with an infusion of
the species diacarthami, senna and ginger in Centory water, some drops of
spirit of vitriol being added. Once in a week one dram of Venice Treakle may be
given.

II. Another is from thin acid phlegm, and then there is pain in the forhead
and left Hypocondrium, costivness, and acid belchings. It must be scilfully
cured, least it turn to a quartan. The liver vein of the left side may be
oppened. Before the fit, some specific medicament must be given.

III. Another is from salt thin phlegm. Then faltness and dryness are felt upon
the tongue. The Urin is red and thick, with sense of hear and sharpness in the
making. The Liver vein on the right side arm may be opened.

Article. III. Of an intermitting Fever or Quartan Ague.
An Intermitting Quartan, is a fever arising from melancholy blood in the
misaraick veins, which takes the patient every fourth day.

'Its SIGNS are; Reachings and yaunings, with a shaking fit after, which at
first is small, but afterward like those that in the extremity of winter are
pained with the cold; for it does not so much prick as beat and bruise as it
were. The Heat is kindled by degrees, because of the thickness of the matter.
The Paronysmes return every fourth day. The Pulse is rare and slow, but in the
vigor of the Fit, swift and fr^^^ent. The Vrines are at first thin and watery,
afterward more colored and thick. The Sweats are at first very small,
afterward exceeding plentiful.

The CAUSE is a Melancholy humor, collected and putrefting in the Mesaraick
veins, about the spleen and neighboring Bowels, arising from Causes like it
self, among which Vinegar is one.

The CURE is wholly difficult. For it is a long lasting ague, and sometimes
reaches out for certain years; especially if it begim in the Fall of the leaf.
But, it is more difficult, when it springs from black cholor: if it happen to
old people, whose weak heat, cannot overcom the Matter. If it be a double
ague. If it be joined with some greivious Affection of some of the bowels.
Easyer if it be a legitimate Quartan, and unattended by any disease of any of
the Bowels. otherwise such as are taken with a quartan Ague, are little
troubled with Convulsions; or if they are, the matter turning toward the
Hypocondria, and remaining no longer mixed with the blood in the veins, they
are freed of cheir Quartan Ague. It Is performed, in general first by gentle
then stronger medicines. In particular. I. By opening the Basilica or Mediana
Veins, at the very first the first passages being cleared, if plentitude of
blood requier so much; not so soon if there be no plenitude. Blood plentifuly,
if the blood come thick and black; stop it quickly, if it rune thin. II. By
preparation and Coction of the pecant matter, reapeated with moisteners, and
splenicks; such as fumitory, Maidenhair, Ceterach, Roots of Eringos, Decoction
of Turnips, syrup of fragrant apples etc. III. By evacuation thereof, either by
vomiting, after which a dram of venice Treacle may be given, before the
following fit, mixed in a cup of wine: or by stool, to which end are good in
the first place the Pilulae Tartareae of Quercetanus or Senertus: afterward
extract of black Hellebore; at last the pil^ of Saga penum of Camilus de
Camilis in Quercetans Pharmachopoeia: or by the Haemorrohides, leeches being
applied: Or by Sweats, which may be well procured by Treackle, Antimony
diaphoretick, or six or ten grains of sal Ammoniac purified in Cichory water,
before the fit. The patient being strong and Coction appearing, a purge is
happelly given a little before the fit. IV. By strengthening the bowels,
especially the spleen, by their appropriate remedies, such as will not augment
the fever, both external and internal V. By Mitigation of symptoms of the
shaking cold by treacle, or Aqua vitae given four hours before the fit. Of the
Backpaide, by application of Hartman his faccolus in his Chapter of the quartan
Ague. VI. By Diet, where observe, that we must order absence from al kind of
food, on the fit day, wine that is ripe and thin may be allowed. Apropriate
medicaments in this fever are, Amoniacum seven times sublimated. Powder of
Vipers given the Quantity of one scruple or half a dram, before the fit in some
convenient Liquor. An Hares Heart prepared like Fox-Lungs. Oil of Myrrh, from
four to eight drops, before the fit.


The Quartan Fever or Ague is distinguished two manner of ways.

I. One sort, springs from natural Malancholly, in which we must go to work
with moisteners and moderate heaters.

Another, arises from adust Humors, which is known from decay of Appetite,
vehement thirst, Headache and redness of Urine. It arises from such things as
burn the Humors. In the Cure, we use things moderately cooling, to which in the
progress of the Disease, Cutters and attenuaters ought to succeed. A Bath of
sweet fair water is commended, or rather to wash the Feet therein.

II. One comes of it self, without another Disease foregoing. And then a Diet
somewhat thin is good at first; afterward somewhat grosser; and then agin
toward the state, somewhat thin.

Another follows other Diseases. Then a thicker kind of Diet must first be
used. Afterward the state, it must be somewhat diminished. In the fit nothing
must be taken.

III. One sort is gentle; of which in the premises.

Another is dangerous, which is known hereby, that on the fourth day the fit
retures, with extreme weakness, the Urine being exceeding red and troubled. It
arises from burning Diseases, black choler being bred by the adustion and
turning to ashes of the Melancholy Humor, or yellow choler. It Is cured with
extreme difficulty.

Article, VI. Of compounded Fevers, Particularly the Semitertian.
Fevers compound are, when one Fever is joined with another.

This Conjunction is various. For sometime a nonputrid is joined with a Putrid:
sometimes a putrid with a Putrid; and that, either with a continual or an
intermittent; with an intermittent; or contrary wise.

The SIGNS are the same with the Signs of simple Fevers, especially the return
of cold, shivering and shaking after some respite. After many shaking fits, one
hot fit; or after a cold fit, no sweat. The 'Contaction of the pulse is most
frequent, by which we gather a new motion of the matter and a new fit to
follow. The Cure is Hard, because they vex more than simple ones, and there is
hardly time to use help. It is apparent from the cure of the simple Fevers.
They are variously divided.

I. Some are confused, when two Fevers begin and end at one time, so as hardly
to be distinguished; because diverse Humors mingled together putrify in the
same place. Others Implicit, when the nature of each may be distinctly known.

II. Some are Subintrantes, interfering; when the fit of the second begins, ere
the fit of the first be over. Others are Coalterna keeping due times, so that
one fit being done, after a small space another begins. Other Communicantes,
when the fit of one begins presently after the fit of the other.

III. Some are Intermittent, under which are comprehended. 1. A Tertian, both
double, which comes either once a day or twice; arising from choler putrefying
in two places of the Mesaraick Veins; and Triple which comes thrice in two
days; once in one day, twice the other; and springs from choler putrefying in
three several places. 2. A double Quotidian, which comes twice in twenty four
hours. 3. A Quartan; both double, which leaves one day free, and comes the two
next days following: and Triple, in which the Patients are sick every day.
Both these are wont commonly to proceed from an unseasonable use of hot
Medicaments, especially Sudorificks.

IV. Some are continual, such as is the Semitertian, For it is a Fever
compounded of a continual Quotidian, and an intermitting Tertian, vexing
continually, but the third day with a shaking fit. It is known by the signs of
both Fevers. It arises also from the same Causes, but most frequently from the
Inflammation of some of the Bowels. It Is Cured with difficulty. For it is not
simple, but compound. It frequently overthrows the stomach. It hurts the
Nervous parts, which is wont to be the ground of its long lasting, and
vehemently stirs up what lies in the depth of the Body. Respect had the Fevers
and their Causes, Agarick among Purges bears away the Bell in this Case. It Is
divided two manner of ways. For 1. One is Legitimate, when the Quantity of
Choler and Phlegm are equal. Another bastard, when choler exceeds Phlegm, or
Phlegm Choler. 2. One is Malignant, Contagious and Epidemical, which is known by
signs of Malignity. Another is of its own Nature intermittent, but with the
Inflammation of some Viscus or Bowel, which is caused, when part of the
feverish matter, is thrust with the blood into the Entrals, stomach, Liver and
bordering places.
Thin, a Symptomatick continual Fever is raised. There are signs of
Inflammation. The shaking fit happens, sometimes ordinately according to the
Nature of the Intermitting Ague, sometimes inordinately, when the Inflammation
happens to a new part, or when Quitter is made. The Cure depends upon the Cure
of the Intermitting Fever, and of the Inflammation of the Bowel. See Spigelius
of the subject.

Title, IV. Of the Hectic Fever.
AN Hectic, is a Fever arising from heat, in such sort Occupying the parts of
the Body, that though it be fomented by no cause, yet it continues.

Its SIGNS are these; Heat, which causes no pain, because the solid parts are
already altered. It Is weak at first; because of paucity of Vapors; biting
afterward, because of the solidity of the Parts. In the Arteries greater
because of their correspondence with the heart. An hour or two after meals, It Is
augmented, because of the Humectation of the dry and solid parts; freely,
without compression, without Horror and Rigor, with a great and swift pulse;
the Meat being distributed it ceases. It also dries up all the radical moisture,
consumes the secondary Humors, and melts all the fat in the Body.

Its CAUSE is, either other Fevers either burning or long-lasting; or Diseases
of the internal Bowels, as chiefly of the hea^ ^, and parts in the Chest, the
Kidneies stomach and Midrif. Or External Evident Causes, very vehement, which
consume much of the substance in the solid Members, raise up very great and
long heat, yet introduce it not into the solid parts before they Have
introduced it into the spirits in the first place.

The CURE is perfected. 1. By Humectation and Refrigeration; Internal by
flowers of Violets, Borrage, Bugloss, four coold seeds, Milk of Perles, of
Corals, and other gentle things, least the weak heat of the Patient be
overwhelmed: External, as Baths of fresh water, of Milk, of Oil Olive.
Nointings of the Backbone, as with Oil of sweet Almonds and of Violets. 2.
With convenient Diet; Here Woman's breast Milk, Asses Milk, are of use, unless
there be a Putrid Fever. Meats of Almonds, Pine-kernels, Pistachios etc.
Broaths of Snailes, waters of Capons, Eels, River-Crabs of which see Joel in
his fifth Tome, Aqua Mirabilis Ferdinandi, which is made of the blood of a young
Hog newly beheaded two pints, one pound of Venice Terpentine, half a pound of
scraped Lycoris, Corants five handfuls, fifty Figs, Orice Roots three ounces
Pineapple Kernels claensed three handfuls.
Tobacco Leaves two handfuls. Crumbs of bread half a pound distilled in a Glass
Limbeck. The dose is two ounces with Sugar. See him in his Observations History
the 21.

An Hectic is divided two manner of ways.

I. One sort is without a Consumption, when the dewy moisture of the parts is
not yet consumed. When it begins; it is hardly known, unless a man may gather it
from the bodies leanness, its Chollerick Complexion, and straitness of the
Breast. In the Progress and Ephemera being present, the Heat lasts beyond a day
with increase; about the third day, the heat is increased after meat.

Another is with a Consumption, and is twofold the one called Marasmodes, when
the dewy moisture is consumed, and the fleshy substance begins to be preid
upon. Then the body grows lean, the Temples fall, the palms of the Hands and
soles of the Feet, are hot; and those other accidents follow, before mentioned.
The stools have a greasy substance among them. It is also voided by Urine,
not much at once as in persons of good constitution; nor with pain of the
Kidneis, as in solution of the fatness of the Kidneys; but slowly, and a little
at a time. Sediment like bran is seen in the Urine, without any Disease in the
bladder, swelling of the Thighs, and a looseness, which threatens Death.
Another is when the Fibrous and Membranous substance, is violated by the
Feverish heat. Hence follows the Marasmos, which happens sometimes to Young and
Old Preternaturally: sometimes through defect of Aliment, and extinction of the
natural heat, either in regard of Age, or of some Scirrhous Tumor. See thereof,
Joel in the foresaid Tome.

II. One sort is simple to which what has been before said in general may be
applied. Another is Complicated, and that either with a Putrid intermittent,
and then the greatest part of the Heat remains in fiery, and the least is come
into Act. The fit being finished, the places of the Arteries grow hot, the
other parts are temperate. The Pulse looses not its frequency and swiftness,
and the Patients meat does not eucrease strength. Or with a Continual Putrid,
and then it is hardly known. The dry heat remains after the end of the
declination, or of the whole Fever. The Body is more extenuated. The Urine is
fatty and Oily.

Title, V. Of Malignant Fevers.
Chap. 1. Of Malignant Fevers in General.
HItherto we have treated of Benign or well affected Fevers: the Malignants
come next, which are Generally or specially to be considered.

Malignant Fevers generally considered, are Fevers arising from some hidden
cause partaking of a Venomous kind of Quality, causing more grevious Symptoms
than ordinary, and yet not killing many, or suddenly,

Their SIGNS are, great weakness from the beginning, without any manifest Cause,
more than the Fever and Feverish heat could probably produce. Pulse frequent,
Small, Weak: or if the Pulse being natural, seem to deceive, it is known by the
presence of other Symptoms. The Vrins are some times, in the first days, like
those of heathly persons: sometimes thick, colored, troubled, having a thick red
and troubled sediment. The Heat milder than suits with the Nature of the
Disease and Symptoms. A Mass of Symptoms, animal, Vital and natural.
Swellings or spots break forth etc.

The CAUSE are, either the Disposition and Plenty of Humors, or Contagion.

The CURE is Hard, if greater and more constant Symptoms appear. Dropping of
blood at the beginning signifies the working of the Humors, their bad Quality
and the Patients weakness. It Is performed bp Bezoardicks and other things of
which in the Differences.

The Differences of Malignant Fevers are taken from the Causes,

I. Some are from the Bad Dispositions of Humors and their Plenty whether in
the stomach, about the Midrif, or in the first ways. They are known by
Stomach-sickness, Pain, Heat, Bitterness of the Mouth, anxiety and other
tokens. They arise either from corrupt meats, or from some other cause. Are
Cured. 1. By Blood-letting, which ought to be Practiced after the Evacuation of
the first ways by Lenitive Medicaments, least a greater Ebullition and working
of the Humors becaused, and that before the fourth day. 2. By giving of
Sudorificks, which neither augment the Fever, nor are very strong, that either
the Body may be disposed to sweat, or at least the Malignity may be expelled.
3. By alteration and preparation, with such things as stop the Commotion of the
blood and refist the malignity thereof. The Juice of Citrons, Pomegranates, and
the Root of Scorzonera are commended etc.
Yea and also the spirit of Vitriol with other Syrups, unless the Patients be
aged and lean: and unless their Lungs be otherwise diseased than through phlegm
stopping the Vessels. IIII. By Purgation, which ought to be effected by gentle
Medicaments and scarce before the fourteenth day. V. By giving cooling
diuretics, if the matter of the Disease go that way. VI. By application of
Topics to the Pulses and the heart all the time of the Disease. VII. By
mitigation or taking away such Symptoms as shall happen. VIII. By Diet, in
which we must abstain from wine, unless faintings happen. A Decoction of
Hartshorn with such a Quantity of spirit of Vitriol, as may cause a grateful
acidity; to which a little Julep of Roses or Viollets may be added; must be
given. They are divided two ways.

I. Sometime there is no Poison, but the Disease is urgent, by reason of the
Causes Vehemence, or some evil quality conjoined. Sometimes there is an hidden
Venomous Quality. 2. Sometimes the Putrefaction and Malignity are equal.
Sometimes the Putrefaction is greater than the Malignity. Where the first ways
must be Evacuated, not only by Clysters, but also by Syrup of Roses solutive,
Cassia, Tamarinds, etc. Sometimes the Malignity is greater than the Putrefaction.

Some arise from Contagion, in which the Cure ought to be undertaken by
Sudorificks and Antidotes, and Nature must be assisted if she expel any thing.

Chap. 1. Of the several sorts of Malignant Fevers.
Article, I. Of the small Pocks.
MAlignant Fevers specially considered, contain under them, Fevers with small
Pocks, Meazels, and such like Eruptions, the spotted Fevers, Sweating-sickness
of England, The Hungarian Disease, the Fever with the Cramp, and the Fever
with a Catarrb and Cough.

The Small pox are pustles arising by means of the expulsive faculty on the
surface of the skin, and parts that hold proportion with the skin, with a
continual fever, by reason of a peculiar boiling of the Blood.

The SIGNS of the small pox when present are needless, for they appear to our
Eyesight. That they will shortly come forth, is signified by pain of the head
with heaviness of the eyes, also of the neck and back, itching of the nostrils,
Diminution of Respiration, dryness of the cough; trembling of the Feet the when
patient turns, frequent sneesing panting of the heart. The Vrin is sometimes
like that of Healthy bodies, the vicious matter being driven into the outward
parts of the body; sometimes it is troubled by reason of the great working of
the Humors. Tears bursting out of the eyes without any cause of sorrow. A
fever raise by the working and boiling of the humors. Spod breaking forth of
the Body etc.

The CAUSE is either external viz. Impurity of the Mothers Blood, which the
infant in the womb atracts in the last months, because there is none purer.
This blood being drawn into the whole fleshy substance, is for some years
insensibly hidden: at length no longer able to bear it, it begins to ferment
like new wine or beer that works; by which frementation or working, the pure
is separated from the impure; the impurity is drawn forth by a certain kind of
Crisis, and the Heat is ^mmunicated to the heart, and a fever raised.

Or external or contagious, when out of Bodies so diseased, a sickly vapor is
comunicated to another: or the Air which by reason of the Influence of the
stars or other causes, does either rupt the humors or set them in agitation.

The Physicians care has two scopes. I. Preservation, which in persons of years
is contrived by blood-letting, purgation and taking heed of the Infection; and
in infants only by the last means of the three. II. Curation, which is Hopeful,
if they soon break forth, and appear high above the skin, great, separate,
white or red; If the Heat abate after they are broken forth; if large bleeding
at the nose have proceeded; if no greivious symptoms attend them.
Doubtful, if either they come flowly out, or go in again; if they are of
violet color, green, lead-color, hard, and touching one another; If the fever
abate not after their breaking forth; If the patient breaths not freely, faint
away, and other symtoms be present. It Is performed, I. By mittigation of the
Ebullition or fermentation of the Blood least over Ebullition produce more
greivious symptoms; which is effected by blood-letting and light purgation in
persons grown up: by Clysters of the decoction of barley with fresh butter,
common sugar in Infants; or by giving them syrup of Citrons and syrup of violets
mixed together, or a bit of pomecitron. II. By assisting nature in the
expulsion, where impediments are taken away by the foresaid remedies; and the
malignity is likewise resisted. Expulsion is furthered by Pulvis Joelis in his
4, Tom, Book 9. sect. 5. of the seeds of Nasturtinm or water cresses and
brooklime of each one dram, powder of Unicorns horn one scruple, or of
hartshorn half a dram. Red coral pearls prepeared of each a scrupel. Make al
into a powder. The dose one dram or an half dram. The decoction of figs of
Mynsichtus in the 25. section of his Armamentarium. Terra Sigillata of Silesia.
Seed of white turnips. A decoction of lentils unhusked, with fennel-seed and
gum dragant, etc. III. By defense of the parts. To which end the eyes must be
rubbed with pure gold; or nointed with plantane and eye bright water and a
little camphire and saffron. If they cannot be opened, they must be fomented,
either with hot milk, or a decoction of Barley. To the Nostrils a nodule of
sanders and camphire dipped in rose water, must be applied. If thut, they must be
nointed with oil of sweet almonds. The throat must either be smeared with
diamorum, or washed with a decoction of plantane and barley, with Honey of
roses. The ripening of the poxs, must be furthered, with anointing the same,
with oil of sweet almonds. When they are ripe, they must be opened with golden
or silver pins, that they may leave no warts behind them. They must be washed
with a water distiled of al manner of flowers and man's fat, or with ointment of
Forestus. IV. By removing the symptoms which appear with, or follow the same;
now they are, Epilepsy, and convulsion when the membranes and nerves are beset
with poxs; and the palsy when they are thereby obstructed. Hard swellings which
must be dissipated by emollients, without suppuration. External Ulcers,
Dysentery, where emollients are to be avoided and such things as dry and stop
without acrimony, are to be used. Hearing impared, where evacuation being
premised, either vesicatories or vapors received into the ears are useful.
Inflammation of the Eyes, etc. Of which see in their proper places.


Article. II. Of the measels and such like Breakings forth.
The Morbilli or Measels, are small red pushes breaking forth upon the skin,
with a continual fever, caused by the expulsive faculty, and a peculiar
working or boiling of the Blood.

The Signs, Causes, Differences, and Cure, vary not much from those of the small
pocks: of which we newly discoursed.

Like Breakings forth to the measels are.

I. Crystalli, Cristals, pushes about the bigness of Lupines, breaking out upon
the Body, and shining like Crystal, out of which a watrish humor flows. The
Germans call them Schafs-blattern.

II. Tubercula, little risings not thick together, with little moisture in
them, without any fever and soon cured.

III. Rubeolae, small red Pimples, which come sometimes a lone with heat and
Cough; sometimes they are sprinkeled among the small pox or measels, and
sometimes they happen to persons in Health.

IV. Rossalia, red fiery spots, which break out at the beginning of the
disease, al over the Body, as it were certain small Erysipela's, though the
tumor is hardly discernable; sometimes they break not forth til the fourth or
fifth day; in the progrses of the disease they occupy the whole body, so that it
looks as it were al^on a red fire. Which color is again changed into spots as
at the beginning; which vanish at last upon the seventh or eight day. The
Epidermis or scarf-skin, faling off like scales. The Cure of these requires
nothing singular.

Article. III. Of the spotted Fever.
Febris pefechialis, or the spotted fever, is a malignant Fever, in which
certain spots like flea bitings of sundry colors, but chiefly red, appear upon
the skin.

These spots are called puncticulae, petechiae, peticulae. Whence the fevers
are termed also puncticulares, periculares, and lenticulares.

The SIGNS are the same as in malignant fevers. The sports are without any
itching, extuberance and exulceration. They appear in the back, Arms,
Thighs, Breast; viz. places through which the most notable Arteries and veins
do pass. Seldom in the face because the cold air repels the matter from
thence. There appears no prick in the middle of them, and so they are
distinguished from flea-bitings.

The CAUSE is, the thinner part of the putrid humor, which makes that they
soon vanish. It Is driven forth by the expulsive faculty, Seldom critically,
seeing they commonly show themselves at the beginning without any remarkable
evacuation: always for the most part Symptomatically, and by how much they are
more plentiful, they do the more signify the abundance of corrupt matter in
the Body.

The CURE is Hazardous, if the spots are many, because they show that there is
much matter. If they be few, and accompained with sings of Natures weakness. If
they disappear; because it is a sign they strike in again. If they come forth
slowly; because it argues grossness of matter, or compactness of the Skin. It Is
Performed. 1. By withdrawing the matter, effected by blood-letting, which must
be practiced before the fourth day, Lenitives being premised to loosen the
Belly, to which a little Camphire may be added: if blood be drawn later, the
Patient will be over weakened. 2. By Expelling the same, with Sudorificks resist
malignity, premisiug (if you please) such noyntings as may open the pores. In
this case, Bezar stone is good, and emulsions of Navew and Citron seeds, with
Carduus Water and Syrup of Citrons. The Bones, Blood, horns and Skin of the
Rhinocerote etc. 3. By Roborating the Faculties, with Emulsions of Corals and
Pearls. Confectio Alkermes, etc. 4. Sometimes also by Revelling the Humor to
the external Parts by Vesicatories, if the external parts are cold, there be
Headache, ravings, Convulsions, etc.
If the Patient be loose bellyed, we must not stop the looseness, unless it be
too excessive.

The Differences are taken from the Quanrity and color. 1. Some are plentiful,
others few. 2. So^^e small, others great. 3. Some are red from putrefaction of
temperate blood, others Yellow or Green, from choler; others of a Pomegran^^^
and Black-choler, from Melancholy, etc.


Article, IV. Of the Hungarian Disease.
Morbus Hungaricus is a continual fea^er, malignant and contagious, Jo^n^^l
with abundance of evil bumor^ about the stoma^^ and first Passages, and with an
extreme he adach.

It may be called the Compe or Soldiers-sickness, because, it had its original
in the Soldiers Camps. Its Signs are, the same with those of malignant Fevers.
Also great pains in the Head, as also hardness above the stomach and are
renitency to the touch, I under the Mucronata Cartilage; cavings, which cease
when the matter turns to the Ears, and causes Deafness: many times spot^
appear, as in the spotted Fever, etc.

The CAUSE is either their Putrefaction and corrouption of Humors in Ve^^^
Ca^^; or Contagion.

The CURE is hopeful, if the matter rend to the Ears. If it be Evacuated by
(...). It Is Performed according to the Nature of the Causes, which see in the
Differences: and has great respect, both to the Fever and the malignity.

It Is divided with respect to the Causes.

One sort comes from Corruption of humors in the Vena Cava, which are cumulated
by Errors in Diet. For the Hungarian Air, is thick a Nights, thin and hot a
days. The Soldiers neceive in, the Vapors which ex^^^e from the ground. Their
Diet is commonly had, and tending of it self to putrefaction, etc. It Is known
by the Diet foregoing, and pain of the stomach. It Is Cured. 1. By drawing forth
the Humors, both by stool, where Agarick is commended; and by vomit: also by
opening a Vein in the Arm or Ankle, which must be done the first or second
day: if some days are slipped, and either the belly be loose, or vomiting
happen, omit it. 2. By Dispelling the maliguity by moderate Sudor^ficks
frequently given, where both Antimony Diaphoretick, and Treacle are useful,
given in cooling Waters. 3. By Diet suitable to malignant. Fevers.
Those that drink Wine, ^^esure to die for it.

Another comes by Contagion or Infection; in which case Purge^s (...) Vomiters
must be ^miteed, and only the maligni^y resis^^

Article, V. Of the Sweating sickness, the ^^lignant Fever with Cramping,
(...) that with the Cough and Cata^^.
The S^^or Anglicus or sweating-Feaver, began in England in the da^es of Hene^y
the seventh, vexing the Patients with ex^^^am Headache, Unquietness, Panting of
the heart, p^^pe^ual and plentyful sweats. The C^^se is said to be the moist
and Venomous Constitution of the Air, enemy to the spirits, Heart, and more
sub^ile part of Humors; one peculiar Influx of the stars concurring to the said
Corruption. It Was Cured merely with Sudorificks, viz. Sorrel Water, Scabious
water, Terra Sigillata, etc. The sweat was ^^^^in^ed twenty four (...) ours
together. The Patient was not permitted to sleep (...) the sweat was over^ nor
to be uncovered, but was in the mean while refreshed, with the Juice of
Ci^rons, Pomeg^^ats, etc.

The Malignant Fever with a Cramp, which arose in Germany in the year 1596.
Does vex the Patient with sundry Symptoms, and the Cramp among the rest. Many
were suddenly taken, some with falling sicknes^, others with the Apoplexy, in
some ravings did endure for some days, by reason of the Contagion, which in
the space of two years after, did Glue it self, spread abroad, etc. It Is Caused
as was thought, by pes^^lent Ichors or blood-waters, and malignant Vapors
infesting the Nerves. Which were judged to arise from bad diet occasiond by a
general Death. In the C^^^, the had and Ve^emou^ matter was removed, and the
Nerves being debiliated were made strong again. See touching this Disease a
discourse of the Phy^^tians of the V^^^^ty of Marpurge; and Sennertus, Book 4.
Chap. ^6. De Feb^ib^s.

A. Malignant Fever with a Catarrh and Epidemi^^ Cough, arose in the year,
1980. And about the rising of the Dog star or beginning of the Dog days, it
ranged almost al Europe over. It took the Patients with a feverish heat,
Headache, and dry Cough, pain of the breast and Septum Transversum, roughness of
the Jaws, shortness of breath, etc. It Is thought to arise from the moist
constitution of the forgoing years, and continual blowing of the South ^wind.
The Fevers Cause might be the Rheumatick matter, diffused through the Veins,
unless hapily, the Fever being the p^^macy Disease, I Nature endeavored to
eject part of the Humor she was troubled with, that way. In the Cure respect
was had to the Humor which Fomented the malignity, which was expelled, and the
malignity. it self, which was encountted with Alexipharmaca, and the Relics
of the Humor were altered. To the Member affected which was assisted by
appropriate Medicaments.

Title, VI. Of Pestilential Fevers.
A Pestilential Fever, is a continual putrid Fever, which arises chiefly from
the Air and Contagion, kills most it seazes, receives Putrefaction and beat from
the destructive and Venomous Nature of the poisonous Seminary, and afflicts the
Patient with Bubo's and Carbuncles and greater Symptoms than are usual in
malignant Fevers.

Its SIGNS are, Symptoms Fewer and milder than are usual in the Plague: of
which we shall treat in the next Chapter, fee more in the Differences.

The CAUSES are the same with those of the Plague, and differ only in respect
of the Contagion, Vehemence and Magnitude.

The CURE is hard or easy according to the multitude, Paucity, Benignity or
Vehemence of the Symptoms. Regard is therein to be had, both of the
Pestilential Venom and of the Putrefaction and Fever, which are to be compared
one to another. It Is Performed. I. By Sudorificks not very hot, especially if
the malignity and Putrefaction are more urgent. Distilled waters are most
efficacious; and Volatile salt of Harts-born. II. By Blood-letting, before the
malignity be shed abroad into the whole Mass of Blood, other things being
considered which are contained in the general Precepts. III. By Purgation of
the first Passages, especially by Clysters, especially if bad Humors abounding
be the Cause; but Antidotes must be given afterward. IV. By Application of
Vesicatories, to the Thighs, Arms, the bending of the Arm, as the place shall
advise, to which the matter we would reveal or derive, does take its Cause, or
about which it is chiefly resident.


This Fever admits a threefold Division.

I. One sort comes with the Pestilence, another is without the Pestilence.

II. One sort in which Both Putrefaction and malignant are at the Height. Then
the Patients are extreme weakened and by reason of the Putrefaction diverse
Symptoms, as watching, Head^ach, Unquenchable thirst, etc. Show themselves.
Another in which Putrefaction is high and the malignity remiss. Then the
Patients are not so much weakened, the Heat in the outward parts is answerable
to the Putrefaction til the state; about which time, if the Patient must die,
the outer parts begin to be luke warm, and soon after grow cold. Another, in
which the Putrefaction is remiss and the Malignity Vehement. Then the Fever is
gentle and the Heart exceedingly hurt. It kills the Patient, while the Patient
and Physician are secure of any danger.

III. One sort is believed to be an Ephemera, another Humoral, another Hectic.
But because the spirits are not only heated, but also corrupted; because the
heart is not only affected in its temper, but vitiated in its substance; no
Pestilential Fevers, can be either Ephemera's or Hectic. Howbeit, because
some difference appears among them, and now the heart it self, at another time
the spirits, and another while the Humors are most affected; by reason of the
similitude it has with others properly so called, it may receive such a
Denomination.

A Single Chapter, Of the Pestilence.
THe Pestilence is a Contagious Disease of the Heart, bred of a Venomous and
Contagious matter, Suddenly and mortally afflicting all the Actions of the
Heart, with an Heap of al kind of Symptoms.

It is a Disease, and that. 1. Epidemick, because of the common Cause and of
the infection. 2. Joined with Putrefaction, so as not to be judged of chiefly
thereby, for so a Pothists shall be more pestilent; in putrid Fevers there
should not be more heat than in the Venomous sort; Antidotes were needless; nor
does it always cause a fever, as appears by many instances. 3. Venomous,
because it oppresses all the vital faculties, and suddenly kills.


The SIGNS are, either of it when coming, as 'its being in neighboring places;
the proceeding of such things as may infect the air, such as filchy vapors
issuing from the earth, corruption of fruits. Effects of the air enclining to
corruption as are, great abundance of toadstools, withering of plants,
multitude of Insects, frighting of the Cattle, mustiness and clamines of bread
exposed to the nights Air, soon stinking of flesh, plenty of small pox and
measels, etc. Or present, a suspicion whereof is, when very many that are taken
sick die. if it creep from one sick person to another. If the patients be
suddenly extremely weakened. If Bubo's and carbuncles appear in a place, the
air being infected. If the spots called plage tokens, be seen upon the dead
bodies.

The CAUSE of the pestilence, is a venomous and contagious matter. This
proceeds. I. From the Air, which is sometimes prepared to receive the
pestelence, by mutation of the first Qualities; sometimes it is corrupted,
without any mutation; either by permission of sundry exhalations, breaking
forth of the earth and waters, especially when Saturn passes through the signs
of Aries, Capricorn and sagitrius, being after an accute manner and totally
adverse to the Heart; or by some hidden aspect or Influxe of the stars. II.
From Bad Diet, where the saltiness of the Humors, the sooner shows it self,
if some occasion happen from the Air. III. From the witchcrafts of Necromancers
living and infecting; and of dead witches which are laid in their graves,
before their Heads are seperatted from their shoulders. IV. From imagination
and Terror, which agitate the humors in the body, stir up the pestilential
seminary, and plant it deep in the heart.
Touching the Contagion, we have spoke in the first Book,

The Physicians Care respects three things; Preservation, cure, and Removal of
Symptoms.

As for the point of preservation. I. The Causes which infer the pestilence
must be removed. II. The Bodies must be made less apt to receive the pestilence.
Let therefore the body be purged thrice a week with pil ruffi a scruple. Let
not the body be weakened by Blood-letting. Let Meat be used of excellent Juice
sawsed with antidotes. An Issue may sometimes be made, to give the Humors
scope. The Air must be kept pure with fire and perfumes. Let the nostrils be
nostrils be smeared with vinegar oil of scorpions, etc. Le^ Amulets be hanged
about the neck of quick silver enclosed in a out-shel; Arsnick, etc. Nor let
any thing be mingled with the Arsnick to abate 'its Virtue. Nor let these
amulets be heated by motion, least they penetrate through the pores into the
Body. Amongst Antidotes Treackle is commended, Electuary de Ono, Elixir
proprietatis, Bezoar stone, Salt of vine branches and of Millefoile. Extractum
Junipernium, etc. Let Hot medicaments be tempered, and first macerated in
vinegar.

The CURE is absolved, I. By Blood-letting, which must be perforemed after the
taking of an antidot if there be so much plenty of blood, that a putrid fever
is feared in any side, if there be no piane; if there be, on the Arm of that
side where the pain is unless a Carbuncle shall cause great pain and
inflammation, in the space of twenty sour Houers. II. By purgation, after an
antidote has bin given, if il humors give suspicion of a seaver to follow; if
the pestilence have risen from an inward corruption of Humors. III By giving
Sudorificks and Alexipharmaca among simples the Hereinian Unicorn is commended.
The blood of a Rhinocerote, five drops given in sorrel water. A bit of his
hide boiled in water of sorrel in which red hot-gold must be quenched. The
juice of the Pap of the Brasiliah fruit called Muracujao Hasu. The Berry of
Mol^^^^ poudered to the quantity of five grains, in rose or sorel water. The
juice of Galega or Ruta Capraria, the quantity of three ounces, etc. Of
compounds, the syrup Melissa Fernelii; Septalius his syrup or succo Galegae,
Quidiny of elder berries with Treakel Vinegar, Crollius his Elixir
pestilential, Diascordium, three drams, especially in women with child and in
children, Powder of smaragd stone prepared, Bezar stone of each eight grains.
Hyacinth praepared three grains see Sennertus of Fevers toward the End. In
the Use of these things observe. Hot antidotes like treacle must be tempered
with such as are of a colder nature. That treacle and Methridate, and other
stronger medicaments must not be given to women with child, nor to children.
Such as have weakness in their stomach and Head, must abstain from Camphorat
Medicaments. Some Medicament is to be given or other thrice every four and
twenty houers. At first the medicaments must be very often changed, least
nature growing accustomed, come not to be moved thereby. Waters, Spirits, and
such other things as will most easily penetrate must be given principally. The
patient must abstain from sleep til he or she have under gone two sweats.
While the sweating lasts, refresh the Patient with the Juice of Citrons,
Carduus water etc. The sweat being finished, cold Air must be avoided, and the
sick refreshed with meat.

Symptoms of the Pestilence are, the Bubo, the Carbuncle; the Burning Fever.
The Bubo imports less dnager, if it be great and eminent, if it breaks out at
first, and in the groins. It is more deadly, if it be lead colored and black.
If it lie lurking under the Skin. If it breaks forth beneath the Neck or under
the armpits on the third or fourth day. Most dangeour; if it vanish and leave
the Patient weak. When it Strike in it must be called forth, either by fixing a
Cupping Glass, or with a 0734 0 pultis of Radish Root and Scrophulary the
great, with a little of Salt, Vinegar. When it comes far out, it must be drawn
to the more ignoble parts; from the Neck to the hollow of the hand, from the
Groins to the soles of the Feet. To this purpose there is an useful Cataplasme
made of two ounces of the greater Scrophulary Root, Radishes one ounce, beaten,
and with one ounce and half of the strongest Leaven, and boiled in Wine
Vinegar, and so made into a pultis, and applied to the Palm or hollow of the
Hand or the Sole of the Foot, or that side on which the bubo is. It must be
renewed three or four times in a night. Being Fixed. 1. it must be often drawn
with a Cupping-Glass and store of flame, without Scarrificatian. 2. The
Cupping-Glass being removed, let it be covered with a ripening Cataplasme, and
drawing, made of the Roots of Scrophularia, Salt, Black Soap, and strong Leaven
boiled in Vinegar. 3. After six hours let a Cupping-Glass be again set on, and
let the Skin be cut with a Lancet or small Knife. 4. Let a Cataplasme ripening
and drawing made either of a great Onion hollowed, filled with Treacle and
roasted in the Embers til it be soft; or of the middle rind of Elder boiled in
Cream, and mixed with Leaven; be laid on at Night, and often renewed. 5. Let
the Tumor, the following day, be either cut or brok, and the Blood water
squeezed forth; and let a mundifying or clensing plaster of Turpentine washed
in Scordium water, and honey of Roses mixed therewith, be applied.


Touching the Carbuncle and Fever, which is also entertained by certain
symptoms, see in their proper places. See concerning the Plague Peter Salius
Diversus, Joel Tom. 5. Sect. 3. Septaliws in a peculiar Treatise and Valerius
Martini. And so much cancerning Fevers.

THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE IDEA OF PRACTICAL PHYSIC.
Of the Diseases of the Head.
Title, I. Of the Diseases of the Brain.
Chap. 1. Of the Distemper of the Brain without Matter.
HItherto we have treated of Diseases in the general; the Particular now
follow; and these are either such as are not Venomous, or such as are Venomous.
Unto those belong the Diseases of the Head, the middle, and the lowermost
belly, commonly called the three Regions. The Diseases of the Head are either
those of the Brain, or of the Eyes, or Ears, or of the Nostrils, or of the
Tongue, or of the Lips, or of the Face, or of the Mouth, or of the Teeth, or of
the Gums, or of the Cheeks, or of the Wesand or Windpipe, or lastly of the Jaws
and Tonsils. Unto the Diseases of the Brain are referred (as thereunto
belonging, a distemper, (which the Latins call Intemperies) the straightness (or
stoppage) of its passages, Commotion, Inflammation, Hydrocephalius, (being a
cold Disease thereof proceeding from water and Phlegm, Contusion, wounds and
Fractures. The distemper (or Intemperies) either is without matter, or else
with matter.

The Distemper of the Brain without matter, is the declining thereof from its
due and right temper, through some external causes.

For the Signs and Causes, see of them in the differences.

The CURE is performed by Alteration and Purgation, lest that the Body, if it
be either Plethorical, or Cacochymical, should attract more Vapors.

It is divided into four species, or kinds.

I. the first of them is hot, when the Brain declines unto an immoderate or
overgreat heat. It is dscerned and known by the beating of the Temples, the
agitation within the Cranium or Skul, by the sleep which is either none at al,
or else very short, and by the instability and mutabillity of the Imagination.
It arises from external hot causes, to wit, Air, meat, drink, and exorbitant
affections, etc. It is to be cured. 1. By alteration and that by cooling
mediacments, as well internal as external; and these not over strong,
especiallly in children and women; having in them a mean and indifferent
astrictive quallity left that the humors should be either attracted, or
dissipated; not too frequently applied and made use of, lest that they should
introduce and cause a kind of sencelessness or stupidity; and then lastly, they
are to be mingled with dissolvers, when the distemper is in it is declination.
The chief and principal of them, are the leaves of Lettice, and Purslan; the
flowers of Roses, Waterlily, white and Red Popy, and Saunders wood; together
with those medicaments that are preprepared and made out of those, such as are
fomentations; which are to be corrected with such things as penetrate by reason
of the thinness of their substance, as does Vinegar, etc. These remedies are to
be applied to the forehead, Temples, and Sutures. So soon as they begin to wax
hot, they are to be changed; neither are they to be tied on or covered with
thick clouts, or linen often doubled. For Embrochations and washings of the
Feet, are most in request, the Leaves of Sengreen, vine Leaves, and the Leaves
of the Willow Tree. The flowers aforesaid, as also of the Elder Tree, and the
root Rhodia, a cataplasm made of willow Leaves and Vine buds. 2. By Evacuation,
for the cause before alleged. 3. by a diet inclineing to coolness more than
ordinary.


II. The second is Cold, when the Brain declineth unto an excessive or over
great coldness. And this is known by the swelling of the eyes, the palness, of
the face, the heaviness of the head, propension to sleep, slothfulness and
slugiggishness. It proceeds from things external, that either are cold in
themselves, or at leastwise induce and cause cold. It is cured, 1. By
Evacuation, if the body be Cacochymical. 2. by Alteration, which is effected by
the use of things External and internal that are hot, and these must be taken
after meat, and never before.
The chief of them, are, the Roots of Piony taken out of the earth at the
waning of the Moon, the root of round Aristolochia, Castorium. The flowers of
staechas or cotton weed, primrose, pealings of the bark of the linden or tyle
tree, of flowers of lillyes of the valley, of Rosemary, Bettony, Marjoram, Black
chery water, the water of swallows, Treackle water. The Quintesence of Rue, of
Rosemary, of Succinum, or yellow amber. Of condites, the Indian met, nutmeg;
treacle, Mithredate, the restorative Confection, called Anacardina, and
Alpermes. Distilled Oils, as of the Wood Guajacum; and of sassafras, taken
either in waters, or else in small morsels. The leaves of Rue; Wild bettony and
the right Verveyn. Balsams, of Lavender, Rosemary, yellow amber, Cloves,
nutmeg, etc. 3. by a diet somewhat inclining to warmth; where likewise
suffumigations have their use and place.

III. The third is Moist, when the brain inclines unto an overgreat humidity
or moistness. It is known by the humidity that appears in the nostrils, and
the eyes, by the Catarrhs that follow upon it, and the propension unto sleep.
It arises from some external causes that are not natural, and such as produce
humidity; such as are showers of rain, the moon beams, etc. It is cured, 1. by
Alteration, we his archived by such things that being in their own nature
moderatly drung are mingled with coolers, and not strong sented or perfumed:
but internally by decoctions, and especially that of China, and Guajacum, into
the which a little veal broth (to allay and qualify its dryness) is to be put.
Externally, there must be prescribed Embrocations, and those little baggs that
we commonly call sacculi, made of millet or Hirse, salt thoroughly dried by the
fire, the roman nigella or nightshade (commonly called Gith or pepper wort)
etc. 2. by a diet conformable unto that that is p^escribed to such as use the
decoction of Guajacum.


IV. The fourth and last species is dry, towit, when the Brain recedes unto an
excessive and immoderate dryness. It is known by the hollowness of the eyes,
want of sleep, deformity of the face; the sharpness of the senses, and the
Causes before going. It arises from External causes; but more especially from
the over great evacuations of the body, excessive and frequent waterings,
fasting or an over spare diet, melancholy or sadness of the mind, and overmuch
Study. It is cured. 1. by Internal moisteners. as for instance, the emulsion of
the greater cold seeds, and Violet flowers or externals, such as is the top or
froth of whey. 2. By a diet more than ordinarily moist; such as is the fat
broths made of young flesh, eggs rere boiled and sup't up, and a bath of sweet
water, etc.
And here Salt must be very sparingly eaten, or rather altogehher carefully
avoided.

V. A Fifth and last Species or kind of the Brains distemper is Compound: the
Nature and reason whereof may be known from the connection of the simple or
single distempers; so that it is no way requisite or necessary, that we here
speak any thing more concerning it.

Chap. 2. Of the Distemper of the Brain with Matter.
THe distemper of the brain with matter is, the declination thereof from its
due temper, caused and brought upon it both by external and internal causes,
towit, the humors, and flatulencies or windinesses.

The SIGNS are, the Progress of the internal causes, and the alteration and
change of the disease at the first apearances of the Moon.

The CAUSES are internal, towit, humors, and Winds or windiness, which proceed
either from the weakness of the brain, or else from the repletion of the
inferior parts.

The CURE is performed, I. By an Evacuation, and that as well General, where a
regard must be had unto the Pills that are to be taken, towit, that in respect
of their ingredients ought to be made most efficacious, and then given in the
morning; unto the whole Body, which ought to be purged; unto the absence, and
presence of a Fever, lest that there be an Evacuation of such things as are
not concocted; unto the Clysters that are to draw back the peccant matter, and
these are by no means to be omitted: as Special, where in the first place are
to recounted those Medicaments that are usually thrust or put up into the
Nostrils, (we call them Errbina) and these ought to be such as are most of al
drying, provided notwithstanding that there be nothing amiss in the Eyes and
Nostrils. Secondly, Those things that provoke unto sneezing, (we term them
sternutatoryes) especially if the Head be filled with Vapors, and within
cherish a gross and thick snotty matter. Thirdly, Apophlegmatisms, if the Lungs
be free from an Ulcer, and the Humors not over thin. Fourthly, Those Remedies
which we call Cauteries, Setacea, Topics, etc. II. by Correction of the
Distemper.


It is divided in a Threefold manner.

I. The first is according to its Essence, when the matter is generated in the
Brain. It is known by this, that those Symptoms that follow upon the Affect do
presently appear; that they continually afflict, unless happily the matter be
generated in the Head by certain intervalls and degrees; and that the Causes
affecting the Head went before. It arises as well from a fault in the Brain
through an ill concoction, as from the retention of the excrements thereof, by
reason of the hurting of the expulsive Faculty, or its passages. The Cure
differs not from that which has been before spoken of, and of which we shall
speak further in the following discourse.

Another division of the Brains distemper is, by Consent, (or sympathy, when
the matter is transmitted and derived unto the Head from some other place. It
is known, by the general signs, of which we have spoken in the first Book, and
first Title thereof. It proceeds likewise from the same causes, of which we
have there at large treated. In the Cure, 1. We ought to begin with the part
transmitting, but if there be any Crisis, there is nothing to be applied,
unless there be a vehement motion of the matter. 2. There must be a Revulsion,
or drawing back, by opening of a Vein in the Arms or Thighs, by
Cupping-Glasses, by Clysters, by frictions or rubbings, and by cauteryes. 3.
There ought to be used repulsion, or Driving back, by Medicaments made of
Vinegal and Roses (we call these Oxyrrhodina) unless there be a discovery made
either of a Fever, or a Catarrh, or overmuch watchfulness and want of sleep,
by reason of some wound either in the Cranium or skul, or else in the Membranes
of the Brain. 4. There ought an interception to be made: The Differences
whereof are various, according to the Variety of those parts from which the
matter is sent.
1. From the whole body, as in Fevers; and then we must rather study to make
use of revulsion and Evacuation, than Repulsion or driving back. 2. From the
Stomach, Spleen, Liver, Rains, Womb, Diaphragme (or Midriff) and the External
parts. And then it is known by the effects of the transmitting parts, and
accordingly the Cure is to be taken from them.


II. Another is from a wind or vapor, which is known by the sense and feeling
of an Extension or stretching out, or by an heaviness in the part affected, a
kind of singing noise in the Ears, the extraordinary beating of the Arteries,
and the Vertigo, or lightness and giddiness of the Head. It arises from the
same causes, of the which we have already spoken in treating of the causes in
general; unto the which in special, there may be added, as thereunto
appertayning, scents or smells, to wit, things of an ill Savor, Vapors arising
from Metals, the smoke of coals, etc. It is Cured diversely according to Nature
and diversity of its species, or several kinds. It is divided in a two fold
manner. 1. The former division is taken from the external Causes, as Metalline
Vapors, etc. And this is expelled by Zedoary, by the smoke of coals, in which
case (as the remedies thereof) there is required an Air free from al il Savors,
Treacle Water, and Sternutatories, or such things as cause Sneezing; by the
wind, either when cold, or hotter then is usual; for the remedying whereof,
such things as are thereunto opposite, are necessarily required, and very
serviceable. Another proceeds from things internal, whether overhot, or
overcold. 2. There is another Species of it by its Essence, and then a pain and
heaviness of the Head undoubtedly preceded, without any affects of the inferior
parts. This is to be cured by internal discussives, and the scent of things
that are appropriate unto the Head. There is another kind thereof that is by
Consent, or agreement with some other parts; and then the Neck veins are
distended, the Urins (in the top or superficies of them) filled full of little
windy bubbles; winds arise, either by the fore part, with the extension (or
stretching out) of the Breast, and the beating of the Arteries at the very
bottom thereof; or else by the hinder or back part, together with a distension
of the Veins and Arteries of the same aforesaid part. They arise from other
parts that lie underneath. In the Cure, regard is to be had, first of al unto
revulsion, or drawing back the offending matter by Clysters somewhat stronger
than ordinary; and next unto repulsion, or driving byck the said peccant
matter, externally by Application of things made up of Vinegar and Roses (as
above said) and internally by the Conserve of Roses, etc.
And then lastly, special regard ought to be had unto Evacuation by purgers
corrected with Carminatives.

III. Another Division is from the Humors; and this is either proceeding from
the Blood, or else it is Choleric, or Phlegmatic, or serous and wheyie; or
otherwise it is Melancholy, and Adust, as consisting of burnt Choler.

I. The Sanguin Distemper of the Brain proceeds from the blood either over
thin, or too thick. It is known (unless it proceed from some external Cause) by
the extension and heaviness of the Head (Especially when the South West wind
blows) the redness of the Eyes, the gentle and moderate heat, and by the pain
of the forepart thereof from the Ninth hour of the Night unto the third hour of
the morning or day following. It arises from a Plethory and its Causes. It is
derived into Act, and made to appear by the extreme and over vehement
affections and passions of the Mind, much drinking of wine, and by such other
things that cause heat or pain in the Head. The Cure must forthwith be set
upon, and attempted, lest that an inflammation or some other affect should flow
therefrom. And this is accomplished, 1. By the Diversion of that blood that is
flown into it, by opening the Cephalic or Head Vein, or else the Saphena and
Foot Vein, if there be a suppression of the Monthly Courses, or of the
Hemorrhoides; (for by no means we are in this case to attempt the opening of an
Artery, for fear that the Tumor Aneurisma should follow) which aforesaid
blood-letting does both Evacua^e or empty forth, and draw back the peccant
humor: as also by the Application of Cupping-Blasses unto the Loins, shoulder
blades, and Neck; and likewise by a gentle Evacuation: as also by repulsion or
driving back, which is effected by the Use of repellers that (in the winter)
are potentially cold, but in the Summer time actually such; if the sick person
be young, unless there be present a Catarrh; and this repulsion ought to be
instituted by frictions or rubbings. II. By a sensible drawing forth of the
blood that has flown in by the passage of the Nostrils, rubbed hard and chafed
with Milfoil or Yarrow, by opening of the Vein that runs strait along into
the forehead, if it be the hinder part that is affected; by Discussion, and by
a Convenient Diet.


II. The choleric distemper of the Brain proceeds from the Superabounding of
choler. It is known by that sharp and pricking pain, especially on the right
side; by the extraordinary burning heat; by the depravation of the actions of
the Brain; by the many, and those very yellow excrements of the Ears; and
lastly, by the bitterness of the Mouth. It arises from Causes generating
Choler. It is divided into that which is such by its Essence; in which the Cure
is to be administered, I. By opening the Vein of the right Arm, after a gentle
Clyster, and without the ordayning of any preparative before it, if there be
not any Fever present. II. By Preparation (if it be needful) by cooling and
moistening Cephalic Medicaments, which ought to be more or less strong,
according to the power and strength of the choler. III. By Purgation with
Aloticks (that is such Medicaments as have Aloes for their basis) and other
Remedies that are specially appropriated unto the Brain. IV. By wasting and
consuming the remainders or relics, where Camphire (by reason of the over
much want of sleep) ought carefully to be avoided. V. By Digestion, in the use
of digestive Medicaments. VI. By a Diet that is wholly opposite unto the
distemper.
And Secondly it is divided into that which is by Consent; in which we are to
proceed, according to that way and Method formerly mentioned, and laid down.

III. The Pituitous, or Phlegmatic distemper of the Brain is known by the signs
alleged and mentioned in the cold distemper of the Brain. The sleep in this
case is very profound and deep, or at lestwise over much, unless happily the
Phlegm being loosened and dissolved, a Catarry and Cough be thereupon excited.
The pain is most of al in the hinder part of the head, afflicting the Patient
from the third hour of the night unto the ninth. There is likewise an
extraordinary paleness in the face, unless perchance it happen to be colored,
or (as it were) painted al over with a certain kind of redness, through the
daily and continual residence of a part of the blood brought and derived
thi^her. It arises from Causes generating phlegm, more especially from a cold
Brain, a hot and moist Liver, which transmits thi^her a sort of blood that is
full of Vapors. The Cure hereof is something difficult, especially in the winter
time; and this very Disease does easily degenerate and turn into the Apoplexy
and Palsy. The cure is porformed, I. By Alteration, after the clearing and
Evacuation of the first ways and passages; and this must be done by Cephalic
Medicaments hot and dry, at first benign and gentle, and afterward by degrees
stronger; and these ought frequently to be reiterated; and here we may
prosperously Act by the Decoction of Chyna Root, Guajacum, and Sassafras. II.
By Purgation now and then interposed during the time of Alteration; and here
the Pills Assajereth, Aureae, and Cochiae, or the Extract of these, have their
place and use. III. By a particular Evacuation, by medicines put up into the
Nostrils, by Masticatories, Gargarisms, washings of the Mouth, etc. IV. By the
Application of Topical Remedies, among which Fomentations, Embrochations,
Sacculy or little baggs, (by all which, the matter is insensibly evacuated) have
their place and use. V. By Application of a Cautery unto the coronal Suture, or
else by making an Issue in the Neck, if the Distemper be altogether refractory,
and will not give place, no^ yield unto the aforesaid Remedies. VI. By
Corroboration, which is effected by appropriat Cephalicks. VII. By a Diet that
is opposite and contrary unto the Cause and the distemper.
It is divided into that which is from thick Phlegm; (where preparatives have
their place, as being of singular use; neither may blood-letting in this case
be safely allowed of) and that which arises from Phlegm that is thin and fluid,
and which excites and begetts a Catarry; and in removing of which, sneezing
wort, and al sorts of Sternutatories, and Errhina (liquid Medi^aments to be pu^
up into the Nostrils) that are over strong and violent, ought carefully to be
avoided.

IV. The Sercus or Wheyish distemper o^ the brain is known by those signs and
tokens that are before mentioned. It is derived unto the Head, either sensibly
and by degrees, especially together with the Arterial blood it self, and
likewise the spirits; or else al at once, by reason of some external more
forcible Causes, to wit, overmuch drinking of wine, anger, violent exercises
etc. It is Cured. I. By the Evacuation of the serous Humor from the Brain,
without the premising or use of any preparatives whatsoever. This Evacuation is
performed. 1. By a purgation of the Humor with such Remedies as draw forth
water. 2. By blood-letting, especially if there be present any Fever (although
never so gentle, and an extraordinary heat which moves the serous part of the
blood unto the Head; and in case the accostomed Evacuation be suppressed. 3. By
the Exhibition of Sudorificks that are over hot, as for instance, Antimonium
Diaphoriticum, Bezoarticks, the Lunar Fumary, etc. 4. By the drinking of
Diuretics which are likewise very good and profitable to the spleen.
II. by Correcting the Distemper; for which purpose we usually prescribe the
powder of a man's bones, drying Lotions, etc. III. by Diet, touching which fee
and consult the practical Physicians.


V. The Melancholy distemper of the brain is known by the dotage that
accompanyeth it, together with fearfulness and sadness, a pain especially on
the left side, turbulent dreams and oftentimes a sudden loss of al motion. Is
Proceeds from Causes that generate Melancholy. The Cure hereof is easy in
its beginning. It is Accomplished, I. by the reiterated Preparation of the
Melancholy Humor, (after the Purgation of the first ways and passages) by the
use of those medicaments that both heat and moisten, among which the syrup of
apples is excellently good. II. By the evaccuation of the said humor by purging
potions, at first, such as are genttle, but afterward such as are stronger in
opperation (and here for this purpose Lapis Lazuli is much commended) adding
thereunto such things as moisten; after which there must immedeiatly follow an
evacuation by the frequent use of those remedies that we term Errhina, and
other such like. III. by corroberating and strengthening the Brain by the
confection Alkermes, with other suchlike confections. IV By diet, i^ the which
vinegar (in rega^^ that it does ferment, and as it were leaven and sour the
mellancholly humor) is principally to be avoided.
It is divided into that that is Essencially such; (in which likewise the
opening of the cephalic or head vein of the left arm, and a copious letting
out of the blood, if it be black, but a more sparing evacuation thereof if
pure, has its place and use, and into that which arises from the suppression
either of the Monthly Courses, or of the hemorrhoides, in which case revulsion,
and the opening of the Ankel vein is to be put in practice.

VI The Atrabiliary distemper of the brain is Known by the want of sleep, and
extreme dobting of the sick party, and it arisath from such causes as foment
and supply a melancholy Juice, and together with these (as it were burning of
the same aforesaid Juice) the extraordinary heat of the bowels may do very
much. The Cure is very difficult, in regard that it to far receeds from the
Temperament of the Brain. It is atchived, I. By an often repeated preparation,
by coolers and moisteners, an evacuation of the first Vessels or passages being
before premized. That compound which we commonly call Cachund (of which has
already bin spoken in the melancholy destemper) has here likewise its place
and use. II. By a frequent and reiterated evaccuation of the black choler by
medicaments, such as they term Melanagogues, well mingled together with
Moisteners; as also by those things that peculiarly and properly purge the
brain. III. By digestion, and that by Topics, and sweet water baths, if yet
the distemper will not give place, nor be removed, then let the patient drink
the whey of milk together with such things as are specifical remedies against
melancholy, and of a moystening quality.
It is divided, I. into that which is such in its very sense; (where the
opening of the cephalic, or the common Basilick vein has its place) and that
which is caused by the suppression of the courses, or the Hemorrohides; of the
which sufficiently above. II, into that which is from the blood burnt or over
heated; in which distemper the sick party is evermore very apt and propense
unto laughter.
And this is to be cured by letting blood; in the same manner as was that that
was generated by yellow choler, (in which a brutish kind of dotage, and fierce
anger gets the upper hand) and that likewise that had its original from the
Melancholy humor, in the which pensiveness or sadness, and a continued
silence, or else happily (after a while, that this silence is broken) a tedious
extreme talkativeness has the predominance, etc.

Chap. 3. Of the straintness or narrowness of the passages of the Brain.
THe Straightness of the passages of the Brain then happens when the said
passages are either obstructed; or compressed by their causes.

Those passages are the pores of the Brain, which is of a spungy substance; the
pores or passages of the stomach, the Veins, Arteries, Nerves, and the sutures
of the Skul.

The SIGNS are taken from the diminution, or else the utter abolition of the
actions of the Brain. The Causes are, either obstruction from pituitous and
flegmy humors, blood poured forth out of the vessels, gross and thick Vapors;
or otherwise, Compression, and this either from the skul, by reason of some
violence offered thereunto, or else from blood distending the vessels, (from
whence they are affected with a phlegmatic distemper) or else happily such as is
shed forth and fallen into the substance of the body, by reason of the a
bundance of its thinness, or acrimony; apituitous or flegmy humor having first
obstructed the Basis of the brain; and lastly, by an hard tumor or swelling.

The CURE is Various according to the variety of the differences.

The differences are taken from the many and several causes.

I. One difference is from Causes External to wit, the fumes that arise either
from coals, beer, or new wine, (commonly called musty) which even as it were
Suffocate and Choke the sick person: And then in this case the patients are to
be exposed into a free and wholesome Air. The vapors are to be discussed with
aqua vitae mingled with treacle; and then a vomit or sternutation is to be
excited. Or else by the Compression of the Skul, from some blow. And then in
this case the standers by and the Patient himself are to be advised withal. The
brain is to be elevated or lifted up, as we shall show further when we come to
treat of a fracture. Or else it may proceed from the compression or defect of
the Sutures, which can no way be corrected; or lastly, it may have its rise
from the Humors and Vapors by their Obstruction, which said Humors, etc. are to
be discussed by Fomentations.

II. Another difference arises from Internal Causes; to wit, I. From Blood,
either poured forth without their Vessels, and so obstructing the Meander-like
winding passages thereof; or otherwise so distending the Vessels, that of
necessity the passages must be compressed. And then for the most part a
Plethory is present and joined therewithal, and the blood oftentimes breaks
forth by the Mouth and Nostrils: unless this be done, it hasteneth on an
inflammation, etc. by its putrefaction and rottenness. It is to be Evacuated and
drawn back by blood-letting and Cupping-Glasses: and then it is to be derived
by opening the forehead or the Tongue Vein. II. From Phlegm that is clammy and
thick, elther compressing the basis of the Brain, or else obstructing the
original of the nerves, and so shutting up and imprisoning the Animal spirits.
Then some Causes generating Phlegm, heaviness of the Head, dimness or darkness
of the Eyes, the suppression of the wonted Evacuation of ^legm by the Nostrils
and Jaws, went before; unless this be timely and speedily Evacuated, it causes
unavoidably the Palsy, etc. The Cure is to be begun and proceeded in after the
same manner that we showed before in the Pituitous or Phlegmatic distemper.
III. From Vapors, that proceed, either from more than ordinary food taken in,
or else such as is excessively vaporous and windy; from which the sick person
must now carefully abstain: or otherwise from Humors that stick fast in the
lower parts, which are to be Evacuated. Or else in the beginning of Fevers;
where there is special regard to be had unto the quality and Nature of them,
and then accordingly the said Humors are to be drawn back, and depressed. IV.
From a Tumor, which is hardly ever discovered while the sick person is alive,
neither is it by any means curable.


Chap. 4. Of the Commotion of the Brain.
THe commotion of the Brain, is a removal of the same from its natural place,
by reason of some External and violent causes.

The Subject of this distemper is the brain, but more especially according unto
the superior parts thereof. The Signs hereof are, a sudden Consternation of the
sick, insomuch that they become, as it were, altogether dumb, speechless, and
like wise altogether deprived of motion, only they open their Eyes.

The CAUSE is either some violent blow, or dangerous fall, or the extreme and
overlong noise of Guns and Thunderclaps; which either only disturb the
spirits for the present, or else they cause a fracture of the skul.

The CURE is accomplished, I. both by the Revulsion of the Blood by opening a
Vein, that so it may no longer too abundantly flow thereunto; as also by
Repulsion or driving of it back again, evermore avoiding such things as are dry
and astringent, lest that the pores should be obstructed, and the very
breathing intercepted. II. by Evacuation of the blood (if any of it be shed
forth, by opening a Vein, as well that we call Puppis, that is above the Lambdoid
suture, as that other which is under the Tongue. III. by Discussion, and that
at the first joined together with Repulsion, but afterward used alone, by those
Medicaments that heat and moisten.


It is divided into that which more Moderate and gentle, and that that is more
grievous.

The Lighter and gentler of it is that, in which the Animal virtue is only with
violence drawn back into the brain, and there follows no rupture of the
Vessels. And then there happens only a kind of drowsiness or sleepiness, and
this likewise not over profound.

The more grievous Species hereof is that, in which also the parts of the brain
are removed from their Natural Situation, the passages are smitten, and the
vessels broken. Then there chances an Aphony, or loss of speech. Elood is
plentifully poured forth by the mouth and Nostrils. Vomits like wise (by the
consent of the Stomach) infest, and exceedingly afflict the Patient. And after
this, the matter becoming putrid and rotten, there arises a Fever, a dotage,
a Sphacelus of the brain, etc. And the matter being thrust down unto the
Nerves, other dangerous Symptoms follow thereupon.

Chap. 5. Of the Inflammation of the Brain.
THe Inflammation of the brain is a swelling thereof proceeding from blood
poured forth out of the Vessels into the void spaces of that part, and there
putrefying.

The SIGNS are, an acute and continual Fever, which from third day to third
day is exasperated; a perpetual doting, which began sensibly, or gradually, and
by little and little, a red kind of color and deformity of the Face and Eyes,
the Membranes being dried up by the burning heat, Salt and sharp tears, the
Excrementitious moisture flowing downward (as it were) of its owns accord by
reason of the weakness of the part, a swift and quick Pulse, etc.

The CAUSE is, blood falling out the Vessels, and there putrefying, the
transpiration there of being intercepted. It is Poured or emptyed forth, either
by reason of its store and over great abundance: or else by reason of its
thinness and acrimony; those things likewise helping forward and furthering the
same, which either carry the blood to the Head, or else at leastwise violently
move and stir the same; and such are, the heat of the Air, pain, striking, a
wound, wrath, etc.

There is but very little, or rather No hope at al of the Cure hereof, if a
Convulsion follow upon it; if the Urin be white and extraordinary clear,
because then the choler is forcibly drawn up into the Head; if a doting being
at the first present, there follow thereupon gnashing and grating together of
the Teeth by reason of the Convulsion of the Muscles in the temples, and Jaws;
if it tend to a suppuration in regard that the Pus or filthy Corrupt matter
cannot possibly be evacuated within or betwixt the Skul and the Membrane. There
may be some hopes, if on the critical day store of blood flow forth at the
Nostrils; if there be much (and that hot) sweat from the Head, and if after the
height of the disease there be an Evacuation of abundance of yellow choler by
the belly. There is but small hope of a Cure, if many of the Functions be hurt
and empaired; if there be a trembling of the Tongue; if a kind of cold
stiffness infest and invade the Patient, after he has voided downwards white
Excrements; if there appear to fall from the Nostrils a black drop, and that
such is sincere or bright, in regard that it proceeds from a very vehement
adustion; and lastly if they scrape together Straws, etc. It is Performed (if
at al,) I. by Revulsion or drawing back of that Humor that flows in, either
by opening of the Cephalic Vein, or else, 1. Of all the Median or middle Vein
(if there be present great store of the Humor) but yet not unto fainting or
swooning away: or otherwise by Cupping-Glasses with a profound and deep
Scarification, in the parts both above and beneath; or else by some other kinds
of Revulsions. 2. By Repulsion or driving back by the frequent use of
Repellers, unless the matter tend toward, and as far as the skin of the Head;
or else by the applying unto the head, being close shaven, Remedies a little
warm, tempered and qualified with Vinegar that is not over strong, if there be
not present either an internal, or an External heat, or if there be any such
heat, then by Medicaments that are cold. 3. by Interception, by the rolling of
swath bands about the Neck. 4. by a gentle Purgation.
II. by Evacuation of the Humor that is already flown in; and this must be
performed by opening the Veins of the Head, those of the Nostrils, those under
the Tongue, and the Aplication of Vesicatories, and a Cupping-Glass unto the
fore part of the Head. By Discussion through the use of Medicaments made up of
discussives, the Alabastrine unguent. III. by a Diet, in the which emptiness
and over long fasting must be avoided as pernitions and extreme hurtful; etc.


It is divided after a Threefold manner.

I. The first species in the division is that which Precedes a Fever, in which
we are allowed to purge while the fever is absent; and more especially if
there be present an extraordinary cacochimy, cupping-glasses are to be imposed
and applied unto the very top of the crown, with scarification following
thereupon. Another kind thereof follows the Fever, in which likewise, we may
purge with those Medicaments that are gentle and moderate, especially if the
turgency or heightening of the Matter require it.

II. Another sort thereof arises rather from blood than Cholor; in which a
greater quantity and portion of the blood is to draw forth by opening of a
Vein: but then there is likewise another, which proceeds from Choler rather
than from blood; in which we ought rather to purge, than use any other means.

III. Another is an Inflammation of the Membranes of the Brian; unto which the
signs before alleged do very fitly agree. Another there is of the substance
of the Brain it self, in which there is at the first a pain seizing the Head,
which by the hinder part thereof penetrates even unto the very nook of the
Neck. In this distemper the sick persons do not dote, but yet notwithstanding
they lose both their external and internal senses; they likewise speak very
little, or not at al, etc.

Chap. 6. Of the Tumor Hydrocephalus in the Head.
HYdrocephalus is a swelling of the Head, arising from the collection of some
serous or wheyish Humor in some one part or other of the Members that
constitute the Head.

There is in this distemper no need at al of SIGNS; for the disease may be
sufficiently known by the very sight of the party. It is rather the disease of
Infants than of persons of years and strength.

The CAUSE is a Humor that is waterish, wheyie, and sometime dreggy, yea
moreover also bloody.

The CURE is exceeding doubtful; as well because the distemper is in a Noble
part; as likewise because the subject part is very tender: as also in regard
that an Apoplexy or a Lethargy do easily soon seize upon the party. But the
cure (if there be any) is to be Performed, I. By drawing forth the Water with
Hydragogues, sweats, Urine, Medicaments that insensibly discuss and dry, and by
opening the part affected. II. By Reducing of the Brain unto its pristine
temperament by hot Cephalic Remedies.


The Difference is taken from the Scituatiof the Humor. For one kind hereof is
from a water sticking between the Skin and the Pericranium; and then the Tumor
is soft, transparent by candle light, or the light of the Sun; as also it being
void of pain yields unto the touch, and immediately arises up again: being
pressed together it exhibites a motion of a fluctuating water. It yields more
easily unto the Medicaments that are prescribed, and may be wholly taken away
be the alone opening and cutting thereof. There is another Species or kind
thereof proceeding from a water (as aforesaid) consisting and residing between
the Pericranium and the Cranium or Skul. Then a pain affects the party; and
in this case a twofold Section or cutting part affected is to be administered.
Another kind hereof there is from a water (as above said) gathered together
betwixt the Cranium or Skul, and the Membranes. Then the swelling is not so
soft as usually, but the pain is far greater; and the forehead is born out
forward more than usually: and likewise also the Disease is almost, (...) not
altogether incurable.

Chap. 7. Of the Contusion, or Bruising of the Head.
A Contusion of the Head is a smiting or knocking together of the same (the
external part thereof mean while for the most part, appearing sound and entire)
by something that is weighty, hard, obtuse and blunt.

The SIGNS are manifested by those things that went before; the blood is poured
forth out of the Veins; and there is an excited soft Tumor or swelling, black
and bluish, and yet without any great, or much pain.

The CAUSE is expressed in the definition. The Skin being for the greatest part
whole and unhurt, there are notwithstanding small Veins opened under the same.

The CURE is in such manner to be instituted, that, I. The great afflux or
flowing to of the Humors may be prohibited; and that by blood-letting, if the
Contusion be greater than ordinary; as also by laying to and applying repellers
and astringents; which are often to be removed and changed, lest that they
become overhot. The hair of the Head being close shaved off, the place is then
to be anointed with the Oil of Roses, about the time of the pains mitigation.
II. Let the Blood that is poured forth under the skin be Evacuated, by the
insensible Application of a betony plaster, the Cerot or searcloth of Vigo,
that of simple or red Lead, or de minio, de Matris ilva, de quatia dei, etc.
III. The Suppuration, (if it may not be impeded) is to be helped on, and
furthered by Triapharmacon, which is compounded of one part of sweet Oil, two
parts of common water, wheaten Meal as much as will suffice; unto al which the
Yolk of an Egg is to be added. IV. The matter being converted into Pus or
matter (a Section being made in a sloping place) is so to be extracted and
drawn forth.


It is divided in a Threefold manner.

I. One is with a wound of the skin; of which we shall speak further in the
following Chapter. Another is without any such wound; of which we now speak in
this place.

II. Another is, in which the Muscles of the Temples are bruised together. Then
doting, a Palsy, Convulsion fits, and death follow thereupon. A Section or
opening ought to be instituted in some near place, that so the ^uscles moving
the Head may escape unhurt. Another difference there is, in which the aforesaid
Muscles are not Confused or bruised together.

III. There is one Species or kind thereof in men grown, and of perfect Age; of
which those things that have been before spoken are to be taken and understood.
Another there is of Children and such as are young and tender; in which, 1.
(The Head being shaven or at least Polled with a pair of Sizers) a Linen cloth
thoroughly wetted in the white of an Egg, Vinegar and Rose water, is to be
imposed and laid on; and then binding it about for the space of one whole
natural day, the outward linen cloth is to be moystened as abovesaid. 2. The
day following the Cataplasme called Benedictum is to be applied, and so to be
continued on until the ninth day. 3. After the eleventh day, the Emplaster
Diapalma Galeni, which is likewise to be shifted and changed the third day. 4.
After the twentyeth day, the Emplaster called Barbarum. 5. If it proceed from
Child bearing, the Emplaster Diaphaenicinum made of Roses, etc. does
excellently discuss.


Chap 8. Of the Wounds of the Head.
Article, I. Of the Wound of the Skin, and the Pericranium.
THe Wounds of the Head are in a threefold difference. For either they reach
unto the Skin alone, and the Pericranium, the Cranium or Skul Remaining
untouched: or else they reach the Skul, without touching the Membranes; or else
lastly, they attain unto, and reach even the very Membranes themselves.

The Wound of the Skin (the Cranium mean while remaining unhurt,) is, to wit,
when the Skin alone, the fleshy pannicle, the Muscles, or even also the
Pericranium is wounded.

As for what concerns the SIGNS; the wound is either apparent unto the very
view and sight; or at least it may easily be discovered with the Surgeons
instrument termed the probe.

The CAUSE, in regard that it is evident and manifest, there is no need that we
should speak any thing more thereof.

The CURE is various, according to the variety of the differences of the
distemper.

It is divided into a wound with a Contusion, and without a Contusion.

In a Wound with a Contusion or bruising together, 1. It is to be moystened and
mollifyed in such a manner, that the natural heat of the part, debilitated and
weakened by the contusion, the external Air, by medicaments, may be together
cherished. 2. In the very beginning we must act and operate with Ripe Oil of
Roses, mingled well together with the Yolk of an Egg in bodies soft and fluid,
but in bodies hard to be wrought upon, with the Rosin of the Larix or Larch
tree. 3. Turpentine is very excellent and sovereign for all wounds, especially
of the Nervous or sinewy parts. 4. About the seventh day the Pus or filthy
purulent matter does more apparently show it self. 5. If it be from the biting
of a wild beast, then the Lips of the wound ought to be scarified, and the
rotten nasty corruption must be drawn away by blood-suckers or leeches; and
then the ulcer is to be thoroughly washed with appropriate Medicaments.


In a wound without contusion, 1. the internal cause, viz. The hot and painful
dyscrasy of the part is to be removed, by anointing the same with unguent of
Allabaster, roses, etc. 2. If the gaping lips of the wound cannot be close
Joined together with binding only, then the suture whether bloody or dry, must
be brought unto the touch; but some kind of digestive medicament is to be
imposed upon the wound: neither is this (notwithstanding, very easily done, and
that by reason of the pericranium, which within adheres closly unto the Cranium
or skul, and by the sutures is knit and joined together with the internal
membranes. 3. The skul being made bare and naked by shaving (which is done,
that so a fit matter for the generating of flesh may be supplied, neither yet
is without much difficulty to be effected) there are no unguents or ointments
to be laid on, but medicaments both actually and vertually dry together with
drying liniments, (and of a bone-like temperament) are to be applied.
But see more of this in the practical Physicians.

Article. II. Of the wound or fracture of the Cranium or skul.
The wound or fracture of the skull, is a continual solution in the same,
caused by some external violence and force, and yet such as reaches not,
neither attaineth unto the membranes of the brain.

The SIGNS are taken as well from the concourse of the symptoms that follow it,
(as for instance, a vomiting of Choler, a flux of blood by the nostrils and
ears, a fall, a noise of a broken bone, etc.) as from the nature and condition
of the blow, where regard is to be had unto the striker, or that which gives
the blow, unto the condition of the head receiveing the blowor stroke, and the
disposition of the instrument: as also it is discovered by the chyrurgions
probe (which ought to be neither too sharp, nor over thick) by ink, and by
shaving thereof, etc.

The CAUSES are evident, dissolving and loosening continuity in the Cranium or
skul.

The CURE is not to be hoped for, (for Cure there is none) if after the seventh
day a caver come to appear; because it is a certain sign and token of
putrefaction and rottenness in the brain; or if the wound become withered, dry,
purulent, and black.

The cure is very doubtful, if instantly the patients strength and spirits fail
him; (especially if the Party be old, because then his heat is by much, weaker,
and the blood serous or wheyish) if the head be prone and subject unto
distillations, and the tumors called Erisipelas; if the symptoms, that soon
began to appear and show themselves, on the fourth or seventh day, still
continue and rather increase than otherwise. The Cure is a work of great pains
and difficulty, if it be to be attempted in the summer time in regard of a fear
we are to have of an inflammation iminent and very nigh at hand; if it be in a
moist Climate or country, because the brain is very easily offended by cold and
moist things; if it happen at the full of the moon, by reason of the abundance
of humors more at that time than other; if the wound be very nigh unto the
brain; if it be in the fore part of the head, and the middle of the brain,
because that the brain being a near neighbor hereunto is more arcuated or
arched, and there is not fit passage left for the efflux of the filth and
corruption; if it chance to be in the Temples, because the muscles of the
temples do abound with arteries, veins, and sinues, or nerves, and so by this
means the motion of the lower Jaw is much prejudiced and hurt, if it be in the
sutures, both because that there the skul is weak, and because likewise that
there the dura matter is knit unto the fibers; and lastly, if it happen with a
contusion, in regard that the said contusion causes very many, and those
likewise hidden mischeifs and Evils. Touching the ordinance and institution of
the cure, (if at least, there be any hope thereof) these things are to be
observed, I. That the patient is to be evacuated or emptyed; because that in
Plethorick and full bodies even those wounds that are in themselves but slight
and very inconsiderable do yet by reason of the abundant humidity attract and
draw together many dangerous symptoms; insomuch that unto the milder and
gentler sort of medicaments stronger may and ought to be added, and chiefly
such as purge choler and the thin wheyish part of the blood; we ought likewise
to institure and appoint venesection or opening of a vein; and clysters are
also to be aplied. II. Those things that alter choler, and the serous humors,
and do withal hinder the motion of hot humors unto the head, are chiefly and
mainly profitable in this case. III. If the skin be wounded, and yet the
orifice not wide enough, it is then to be more and wider opened, until that the
whole fissure or cleft appear manifestly unto the view of him that searches
it. But then indeed a Section or opening of the Pericranium ought to be
attempted, when there is any suspicion that the Skul is hurt. That kind of
Section that is (in regard of its transverse lines) made like unto the figure
and fashion of a Cross, is the most fit and proper in this case. IV. The
Muscles of the Temples, (by reason of their Nervosity or Sinewiness) ought very
carefully to be avoided in the aforesaid Section; and so likewise are the
sutures, by reason of the transverse passage of the Fibers. V. In the wound of
the Forehead, we must take heed that the Section be not made transverse: for if
the Muscle that lifts up the Eyelid should by this means be cut, the Eyelid
then Unavoydably falls down.
And therefore the Section ought to be made from some inferior part, and so
upwards, etc.

The Differences of the Fracture of the Brain are five in number.

I. A Fissure, or cleft, from some heavy and bruising weapon, (in a harder
bone) and that such as is very evident and conspicuous, inconscicuous,
Capillary or hayry, short, Long, strait, Crooked, etc.

II. A Contusion, or collision, of which there are two Species. One, when only
the Skul yields and falls down upon it. Another, when the Skul is only
depressed, and acquireth and makes a little pit, in a soft bone.

III. A Depression, when the bone is cloven, and so gives back, and retreateth.

IV. That which we call Seeds, when the skul is hurt by a sharp and keen weapon,
insomuch that the print and mark of the Edg of the weapon laid violently upon
it, is manifest and conspicuous. And hitherto also belongs that Species,
which they term dedolation, that is to say, a kind of hewing of squaring.

V. A Contrafissure, or Xymphory, which has in it three several kinds. 1. When
the place that is cloven, and that likewise that is smitten, are both of them
in one and the same bone. 2. When the exterior part of the same bone being
smitten, it (notwithstanding) remaining whole and sound, the interior part
thereof is cloven and gapeth. 3. When a bone that is smitten by the cloven bone
is disterminated by a future.
Concerning al which consult the Practitioners in Physic, and especially in
the first place see the Golden Book of Jacobus Berengarius Carpensis, Touching
the Fracture of the Cranium or Skul, printed and published lately at Lions.

Article, III. Of the Fracture of the Skul, together with the hurting of the
Meninges.
The Fracture of the Skul, together with the hurt of the Meninges, is twofold.

For, either the dura Meninx is at least hurt together with the Skul; and then
the blood flows forth abundantly in regard that there are many Vessels
Scattered and running along throughout this Meninx; and likewise a sore and
grievous pain in the Membranous part greatly afflicts the Patient. In the
Cure, (in the least not neglecting those things that respect the wound of the
skul) the blood is first of al to be stanched. Then the pain is to be mitigated
and assuaged with the Oil of Roses a little warm. If it begin to grow purulent,
it is then forthwith to be cleansed with honey of of Roses: If this effect not
the cure, we must then have recourse unto those Medicaments that are far
stronger, such as the Unguent Aegyptiack, etc.

Or else, the Pia matter, or the thin Membrane, is likewise together affected.
And then an extraordinary efflux of blood, and withal an inflammation is to be
feared. For the Cure hereof, See Johan Hildanum Aquapendentem, in the Second
Book and twentyeth Chapter of his Surgery.

Title, II. Of the Symptoms of the Brain.
Chap. I. Of the Symptoms of the External Senses.
THe Symptoms of the Brain do infest and disturb, either the sense of
touching, or the common sense, or the imagination, or the imagination and the
Ratiocination together; or else more than one of the internal senses, or the
Animal motion, or the senses internal, external, motion, and the discoursive or
Raticcinative faculty, or else many of the actions of the Animal faculty al
together; or else lastly, the excretion and retention. The Pain of the head
appertains unto the first of these.

A Single Article, Of the distemper Cephalalgia, Or, the pain of the Head so
called.
The Cephalalgy is a disturbance and corruption of the touch in the Membranous
parts of the Head, made and caused by the solution of continuity.

The Subject hereof is the Head, according to its Membranous parts, the Skin,
and Pericranium, covered with Nerves and Membranes, and the very substance it
self of the brain not excluded.

There is no need of signs; for it is sufficiently known by the relation of
the Patient.

The CAUSE is, whatsoever any manner of way causes a violent solution of
Unity, whether it do this secretly and undiscernably, or else more manifestly
and openly: whether this be any thing that is External, as for instance, al
sorts of pulse in general, and particularly that which we call Ervum, ^he
drinking of milk, the nuts of Palm trees, and the acorns of the Oak tree, the
seed of the willow, and the black olive tree, and lastly, any stinking and
offensive smells, etc. or whether it be Internal and inward; touching which
consult and weigh well the various differences.

There is here Good hope of a cure, if there appear on the fourth day good and
promising Signs: if pus, to wit, snot or filth, or water flow forth by the
nostrils, ears or eyes. But is somewhat doubtful, if there be present with it
an acute fever, and that the ut in be white, because then the choler is
carried upwards, and an inflammation is greatly to be feared; if the Patient
vomit up that which is Eruginous, or in color like unto brass; and that the
Party be over long kept awake, and deprived of his rest (especially if a
deafness accompany it) in regard that by reason of the choler that is gotten
together, they suddenly fall into a violent and vehement madness; if they be
surprised with a Congelation or taking (as we call it) together with a stoppage
of the belly a fierce and wild countinance, and that the face be
extraordinarily red and fiery because then they are suddenly surprised with a
crick in the neck (that affect which we usually term opisthotonos) if likewise
there happen together with it a sound or ringing in the ears without a Fever,
if there accompony it a vertigo or giddiness in the head, a hoarsness of the
voice, and a benummedness in the hands; for then they sudenly become either
appoplectical, or Epileptical, and Apoplexy, and Epilepsie or falling sickness
most commonly following thereupon. But there is no hope at al (or if any very
little) if where ^^it was very vehement, it suddenly vannish away and conceal
it self, there following no alleviation by the crisis; if the extreme parts
become exceeding cold, because that the native heat being drawn back, a
Phlegmon may easily be excited; if it happen to be with an acute fever and
that on the fourth day there appear some pernicious sign or other; if a sound
person so soon as he is surprised and taken herewith, become instantly
speechless, and snort, and yet is not afflicted with any strong fever, whereby
probably he might be freed from the aforesaid distemper. The Cure (if there by
any) is performed. I. By mettigation of the pain, either by anodines (of river
craw-fish beaten well together with rose vinegar, vervain water, and the root
thereof well bruised and imposed on the part affected, the Allabastrine unguent
before mentioned; al which ought to be applied unto the su^ures and temples: or
else by narcotick remedies, which may only be applied unto the forehead, and
laid thereon. II. It is to be accomplished by removai of the Causes, and
strengthening the part, touching which see further in the differences.


The Differnces of the Cephalalgy are many, and those very various.

I. One difference hereof is symptomatical, of which we here treat. Another is
Critical, which begins not to afflict the patient from the first rise of the
d^stemper, but much about the time of the Crisis: and then the breathing
suddenly becomes short and very difficult, the Hypecondria being drawn back;
the veins are swollen, and the arteries beat in the Temples; the cheeks wax red,
and tears flow forth of their accord, the patient not being able to withstand
it; the sick party streacheth his nostrils with his hands, and then most
commonly there flows a streaming forth of the blood.

II. Another is External, which seizes the pericranium, is perceived in the
very superficies, reaches unto the roots of the eyelids, is exasperated by the
compression of the hairs and hands. Another internal, which becomes easy and
moderate upon the very touch, especially if it be without any distention; and
it extends it self even unto the roots of the eyes.

III. Another is from Causes External, to wit, 1. Ebriety with beer in which
the herb Chamaepence is boiled, easily and soon causes. And then the matter
fluctuating in the stomach is to be cast forth thence by vomit. The leaves
either of the Colewort or Cabbage, thoroughly moistened in warm water, or else
the leaves of Rue well bruised together with rose vinegar, are to be applied. The
head is to be al over wet and besprinkled with the spirit of wine, and the feet
are chafed and rubbed with salt and vinegar. 2. By a Contusion, stroke, wound;
in which case the cure is to be sought for above in and from their proper
places. 3. By the heat of the sun, the heat of a Bath, and of the soucherly
winds: And then the head is to be dealt withal by cooling fomentations, etc. 4.
By the use of other things offensive, such as are dates, walours, chestnuts,
Filbirds, toad-stools, hempseed, the seeds of Coriander not prepared,
Frankincense, styrax and Mirh if moderatly taken, etc.


Another is from Internal causes, to wit, 1. From a distemper without matter,
which if it be hot, the pain is vehement, and the head becomes hot: if it ^e
cold the pain lasts so much the longer, and the head is cold. In this case
the little rols or cakes of diam^scum dulce, and a little bag of heating
Cephalicks are very convenient. If it be dry, the pain is moderate, dull, and
notacute, and there went before causes that were extremely efficating and
drying. 2. From a distemper with matter, which is either from blood; and then
the pain is more gentle and moderate, which chiefly seizes the fore part of
the head, and increases before the time of repast. The Cure is to be sought in
its due and proper places. Or else it has its original from yellow choler, and
then the pain is extremely pricking and corroding, and for the most part
fasteneth upon, and seizes the right side of the fore part of the head. In the
cure, those things that are most fit and likely to effect it, are Epithen^s of
Opiat Laudanum, with rose water, vesicatories applied unto the neck, the
smelling of rose water with Camphire, washing of the head with a decoction of
agarick* together with the flowers oscamomil, scarification of the lips, of the
ears, etc. or else it proceeds from phlegm; and then a pain afflicts the
patient on the right side or the hinder part of the head, rather then else
where. Medicaments good and sucessful against this malady, are, oxymel with
squils, the water of the flowers of the elder tree, of penyroyal, of rosma^y,
with cristal of nitre; the shells of peaches beaten together with verveyn water;
the oil of nutmeg pressed or drawn forth, the Balsam against the Apoplexy, that
of yellow amber, and the sacculus or little bag of Hartmannus. Or else it
arises from blak choler or melancholy; and then the watchings are very
extreme grievous, together with a pain of the left side of the hinder part of
the head. Let the cu^e be sought for in i^s proper place. 3. from a wind, and
then the pain wandereth (as it were) and flies up and down, hi^her and
thither, it puffs out and extends the part where it is, often returning and
running back again at some certain constant hours of the day. It is discussed
and scattered, if so be that the temples and the coronal suture be frequently
anointed and chased with garlic thoroughly bruised, and then mixed together with
wine vinegar, or the Urin of an Infant.


III. there is Another Cepha^algy, that is, such in its own essence, (we term
it primary) which now and then arises likewise from worms, with a certain kind
of gnawing, and a^ itching of the nostrills; and this comprehends under it all the forementioned differences. Another there is by the consent of the Heart,
(as in fevers) of the hypochondria, the stomach, the womb, etc. and this for
the most part is hemacrania, and affl^cting only the one half of the head; see
the first Title of the second Chap. of this Book.

IIII. Another Cephalalgy there is peculiarly and specifically, so called which
indeed is nothing else than a pain that as it is new, so it is also very light
and gentle, and such as is most easily removed, without any great imbicillity
and weakness; having its original (most usually) from causes external, likewise
it is accompanied with a Fever.

V. Another is that we term Cephalaea, or, a long continued contumacious pain,
Infesting and ann^yingwith the greatest paroxysmes (and yet notwithstanding,
such as are stirred up even by the smallest and most inconsiderable causes) the
whole brain, and head, or at least, to be sure, the greatest part thereof, but
most especially the Membrains. Another called Hemicranio, which is a painful
distemper of one half part of the head only, which arises from those parts
that are situated beneath it. In that that proceeds from the stomach, there
is usually perscribed (as most profitable) for evacuation the Pills of
Fernelius, formed of the best Aloes half an ounce, the powder of the Electuary
of precious stones, or de Gemmis, of the three saunders (called in the shopps
Diatrion santalon) and red Roses, of each of these six Grains; and so made up
(to the number of thirty) with the Syrup of Wormwood and violets; and then two
or three of them are to b^^vallowed down the tenth hour before supper. Unto the
Head there may be applied and laid on an Epithem of the green Root of the Wild
Cucumber, boiled together with Vervein and Wormwood of Pontus, in Oil and water.

Chap. 2. Touching the Symp^tomes of the Common sense.
Article, I. Of over great and extraordinary watchings.
THose Symptoms that infest and invade the common sense, are watchings, and a
drowsy and sleepy distemper, called Cona.

Watchings preternatural are, the exercise and (...) sense, and the external
(likewise) beyond a due and fit measure; arising from the continual
uninterrupted influx of the spirits into the Organs.

There is no need at al of SIGNS, For the relation of the sick will suffice.

The CAUSE is expressed in the definition. But the Spirits flow in, because
they can by no means be brought to rest and sleep; and that either in regard of
externals, to wit, objects (overmuch light, cares* Cogitations or
thoughtfulness) or else by reason of somewhat internal, to wit, a hot distemper
of the brain, a pain, etc. the cure is difficult, if the said watchings happen
unto those that are young, and not at al accustomed thereunto; if they bring on
the party a doting, or a Convulsion, or a cough; if they last long; if they
have their Original from internal causes. The Cure consists, I. In Removing of
the Causes that occasion and produce those watchings. II. In Procuring sleep,
either by cooling Cephalicks outwardly applied, or inwardly given, or else by
Narcoticks.
The Fat of the Fish Lucins (that is, the Pike) anointed upon the Temples, the
Hypnotick Wine of Mynsichtnus, the Soporiferous Compound of Saxony, the Liquor
of the small spungy sprigs of Eglanrine, pressed out of them after they are come
to a maturity, Opium corrected with Saffron, the magistery of Corals, and the
spirit of Vitriol, a pultise of Poppy seeds with the Oil of Hen-bane, and the
breast milk of a woman, applied to the pulses, and the Pediluvium (or Lotion to
wash the Feet) of Hartmannus; etc. al these are excellent for the purpose
aforesaid.

The Difference is taken from the Causes.

Some of them are from External Causes, to wit, 1. The passions and affections
of the mind, Fear, Grief, Cares, Custom: (and then these things are to be
removed) (...) because they are wont to occasion the distemper of the head, we
ought to withstand and prevent the increase and growth of the Humors. 2. They
proceed from the objects of the external senses, which are to be rejected. The
annoynting of the Nostrils with Oil of Nenuphar or the water Lily, and the
eating of Lettice, is here in this case much commended.


Others there are from Internal causes, to wit, 1. From a hot and dry
distemper, either without a Fever, which disturbs and drives to and fro the
spirits, and dissipates the vapors; (The cure of this may be sought out in its
own proper place:) 2. From hot Vapors, that are sharp and salt, which dist^rb
and trouble the spirits by their pricking and twinging the Membranes of the
brain. These, either they are elevated by some Apostem of the Head, and that
either from the whole Head, or from some certain parts thereof; and this
likewise either without a Fever, or with a Fever. The Signs and the Cure
ought to be sought for out of their own Chapters: Those Medicaments that
qualify, sweetly allay and temper the Vapors, are to be exhibited after
supper. 3. From the defect of Vapors that might cause rest and quiet unto the
spirits; in regard either that they are not al generated, (as it happens
after an overlong abstinence from food, and by reason of crudities in the
stomach, and then in this case, in the Cure, a special regard is to be had unto
the Diet) or else it is, because that these Vapors, so soon as they are
generated, they are forthwith dissipated and scattered; like as it chances in
an hot distemper: and then a regard also is to be had unto the same. 4. From
Pain, in which when once the common sense is together affected, it being
vehemently and violently moved, all the other senses moved and disturbed
together with it.
And hitherto apperteyneth a Cough, the flux and extraordinary looseness of the
Belly, etc. which deprive a Man of his sleep.

Article, II. Of the sleepy and drowsy Coma, or Cataphora.
The somnolent or sleepy Coma is a deep and profound kind of drowsiness,
arising from hence, to wit, that the Sensus Communis, or Common sense, is
become so dull, sluggish, and stupid, that it permits not the Animal spirits to
be diffused unto the external senses, neither does it know, or is able to Judge
of those objects that it receives from them.

The SIGNS are taken from this, to wit, that the sick party sleeps for the
most part with his lower Jaw Bone hanging down, and with his Mouth gaping and
wide open; when he is rouzed and stird up he opens his Eyes, and answers,
but immediately again falls asleep. And so it is distinguished from the sad
distemper Carus, from the the Apoplexy, and the suffocation of the Womb.

The CAUSE is, whatsoever impedes or hinders and prohibites the influx of the
Animal spirits unto the Organs of the senses, and withal Renders those spirits
more unapt unto the Animal actions and operations.

The CURE is Doubtful, if it follow upon the extreme imbecility of the
Patients strength, occasioned either from some most acute Disease, or else from
some deplorable and grievous affect of the brain; if it chance in continual
Fevers; if it has its original from some malignant cause. There is almost no
Cure to be expected, if it take its rise from hot and dry Diseases; for then by
this means of necessity there must needs be an extraordinary cooling in the
brain; if the malady grow to be so sad and grievous, that both the sense,
motion, and the very breathing it self is taken away. In what things the Cure
chiefly consists, and by what means it is to be wrought, see further in the
various differences thereof.

It is divided according to the variety and difference of the Causes.

I. There is one Species thereof, that arises from the Humidity, or the
frigidity of the Brain, And then the matter in the Head ought to be Evacuated
and discussed, in the former of them, by the irrigation or the frequent washing
of the Head with the sharpest sort of Vinegar thoroughly mixed together with
Roses and Camomil Flowers; but in the latter of them, by anointing the Head
with Dil Oil a little warmed. And in both of them we must remember to put in
practice the frequent use of Apophlegmatismes, Errhines, and sternutatories.
Another kind thereof there is from Narcotick Vapors, inducing and bringing in a
certain dullness (and unaptness for any thing) upon the Animal spirits; which
said Vapors either are from over much drink; (and then, the drink yet remaining
in the stomach, Vomiting is to be excited and provoked) Or, for the greatest
part they are conjoined with Fevers. Then, 1. The Vapors are to be drawn back,
either by opening a Vein in the Thighs, or by Clysters, frictions,
Cupping-Glasses, etc. 2. The same Vapors are likewise to be repelled and driven
back by Oxyrrhodines (to wit, Medicaments consisting of Vinegar and Roses)
actually hot, and applied to the Coronal suture; unto which former remedy let
the Vinegar that is added, be in a plentiful measure; or else, which is yet
better, they are to be discussed with Rue, Castoreum, Vinegar, etc. 3. Great
caution must be had lest that those Remedies that are exhibited and administered
to expel sleep and drowsiness, should any way augment the Fever.
Or otherwise, these Vapors afflict without those fevers. And then they are
elevated and drawn up from the stomach, Womb, or some other inferior part.
These are to be taken away by the very same remedies as the former were. Those
things, that infringe and weaken the strength of Narcoticks, are, Rue with
Vinegar, the balsam of Rice, Castoreum, Nightshade, snuffing up the fume of
Brimstone, etc. As for the Diet, what it should be, see and consult the
Practitioners.

Chap. 3, Of the Symptoms of the Imagination.
A Single Article, of the Vertigo, or turning round of the Head.
THat Symptom of the Imagination which likewise very often hurts even the
common sense also, is called Vertigo, which is nothing else, than a false
imagination of ones turning round and dizzy reeling about; arising from an
inordinat and circular motion of the Animal spirit in the Forepart of the brain.

The SUBJECT hereof is, the brain, according to its anterior, or forepart, as
it is an organical part, as it contains the Animal spirits, and as it is
endued with certain passages in which the said spirits are moved.

Of SIGNS there is no need at al. Un^o some of them al things seem to be turned
about as in a Ring or Circle; others of them have their very sight obscured;
and again in some of them there is sensibly perceived a sisling Noise, and as
it were a kind of singing in the Ears, etc.

The CAUSE is whatever either suppeditateth and genera^e h Vapors of
themselves, and in their own Nature, such as are garden Radishes, Garlic,
Mustard, Wine, etc. Or else, (...) as is wont to stir, disturb, and agitate the
Humors; and hitherto appertains purgation, as being chiefly requisite in this
case.

The CURE is very doubtful, and scarcely to be hoped, if this distemper happen
to Old people, because they have but a weak brain; if it continue long, because
it is then the forerunner, and indeed the foreteller likewise of the Epilepsie,
or the Apoplexy, if in it the Head or the whole body seem to wheel and turn
round. The Cure is Performed, I. By Discussion, and then let the holes of the
Nostrils be anointed with the Oil of Marjoram, and the Oil of Nutmeg; or else
together with the aforesaid, let Rose water and Vinegar be put and applied
thereunto: let the Temples, and the hand-wrists be anointed with rose vinegar,
and Rose water, mingled with a drop or two of the Oil of Cinnamon; or else let
them be thoroughly wet and besmeared with the Juice of the black beet: let the
palate be anointed with Treacle. II. By opening a Vein, if it be over
powerful and violent. III. by Revulsion, if it proceed from the inferior parts.
IV. by a Diet, in the which meats that are known to generate many Vapors, beer
brewed with much Hopps, and such like hurtful things, are carefully to be
avoided. For a preservative, Caraway seed macerated in Wine, dried, and daily
taken about the time of going to bed, is held to be very excellent.


The Differences are taken from the Causes.

I. One is from Causes that are Evident, exagitating and exasperating the
spirits; and such are a turning round of the whole body a long while together,
looking much and steadily upon things while they are moved circularly, and a
prospect or looking downward to the earth from a place of an extraordinary
height. For so by this means the spirits (by the beholding and looking upon any
thing unto which it is not accustomed, or that is dreadful and terrible) are
diffused and drawn back. It is known by the relation of the sick party. It is
cured by rest and sleep. If it yet be not altogether ceased, then we are to
conclude the Cure by frictions. If it be from Hunger and fasting, a piece of
bread dipped in the Juice of Pomegranates, or in sharp sour wine, is first of al
to be administered.

II. Another is from the narrowness or Streightness of the Passage of the
Brain, through which indeed the Animal spirits are moved; but when they are
thus impeded and hindered, they then retreat back again. It arises either from
a partial obstruction, which if it be caused by gross and thick Vapors, it is
soon dissolved; if it has its rise from serous and Phlegmatic Humors; it is
then of a long continuance, and there is withal present a sense of fluctuation.
In the Cure there ought to be a respect had unto the Nature of the Cause. Or
else it proceeds from the compression of the brain, and the fracture of the
skul; of which see further in their own propper places: Or else, it is from the
Coalescence or knitting together of the Arteries, from their first rise, and
their entering into the scalp or Skul, by that general and common passage
through the brain, touching which there is hardly any thing to be certainly
determinded, while the Patient lives.

III. Another is from a Vapor full of windiness, generated and bred in the
brain, which by an inordinate motion being poured forth into the Veins and
Arteries, does so trouble and disturb the Animal spirits by driving to and fro,
that they thus become to be circularly moved and turned round, and then they
exhibit and represent unto the common sense or Fantasy this false and feigned
species and appearance of things, otherwise than indeed they really are. It is
known by that vehement pain, and dull heaviness of the head, a long continued
tinging and hissing Noise in the Ears, and a certain kind of hurt and detriment
of the external senses. This Evil or Malady is very frequent, and such as
surpriseth a man upon a very small and light occasion; and yet it lasts, and
(as we use to say) sticks long by him. It arises from causes that generate
and breed winds and windiness, and more especially if the wonted Evacuation be
suppressed. It is Cured, either in the Paroxysm, (of which we have before
spoken) or, out of the Paroxyim; 1. By the Evacuation of the Matter that
fomenteth and supplieth these Vapors; and that as well a general as a
particuliar one. Some there are that are a fraid to prescribe, and there are
others again as fearful to take those Medicaments that Practioners term
Er^^^^es, which are to be taken up into the Head by the Nostrils, to open and
purge the brain. 2. by Revulsion or drawing back of the said matter, as also by
Derivation, and Discussion of the same, by Vesicatories, Cauteries, frictions
and lotions of the Head. 3. By Corroborating and strengthening the Brain, both
by external and internal Remedies.
Among the specifical and Appropriate Medicaments, those that deserve the
greatest commendation, are, the dung of the Peacock (one dram thereof by
weight) macerated in Wine, strained, and so drunk up; the extract of
Scorzonera, the Roots of Doronicum (an excellent drug brought out of
Mauritania) eaten, Bears Ear, the fat of Does, and land Snakes, by annoynting
the Temples therewithal; the powder of Silkworms dried and strowed upon the
Crown of the Head. Very effectual likewise for this purpose, are, the spirits
of Rosemary, the Chemical Oil of Yellow Amber, Hippocrates his Treacle, the
powder of the Right mineral Cinnabar, half an ounce thereof: Margarites
prepared, and red Corals prepared, of each two scruples; Saffron one scruple;
and then add to the aforesaid ingredients the leaves of Gold, in number ten,
and so let it be administered (the dose is one scruple) in the water of lillies
of the Valley; and lastly, the electuary of Saxony. It is divided into that
which is from extreme hot blood; and then there is present a redness of the
Face, and a beating of the Arteries. In the Cure, especial regard is to be had
unto the opening of a Vein, and that chiefly and primarily, of the Basilike, if
a Plethory accompany the distemper; and then presently after, of the Cephalic
or head vein, if the peccant matter abound most, or only in the head. It is not
to be drawn forth al at once, but by many Essaies, at several times, by
intervals. We ought not to be over rash in attemping the cutting or opening of
an Artery: and into that, that is from a pituitous or Flegmy Humor. Then, the
place where we have treated of the Phlegmatic distemper is to be consulted. An
Evacuation (after that a Clyster has first of al been administered) may very
conveniently and successfully be expedited by the extract of the Pills called
Cochiae, from half a scruple to a scruple; by a Lixivium, and a Balsam: See
further hereof in Agricola, in his first Book, 38. Chap.

IV. Another there is from an extreme windy Vapor, elevated from other parts.
It is known by this, that there went before it no hurt or annoyance of the
s^^ses, and that the distemper afflicts the pa^^ frequently, and by fits; and
withal there are present the signs of the part affected. It arises either from
the stomach, either pirrocholick or full of bitter choler, or Pituitous and
Phlegmatic, or else by reason of its imbecility corrupting all the food that
comes within it: and then the Cure must chiefly respect, and be directed unto
the stomach. And here take place (as most requisite and proper) a grain or two
of Frankincense taken after meals, the confection of Fennel, of Coriander,
Sugar of Prunella, Saccharum Rosatum or Sugar of Roses, the electuary of the
Conserve of old red Roses, Diacydonium simplex, that is an electuary of the
conserve of Quinces, the spirit of vitriol, and the Syrup of mints. For what
remains to be done in this Cure, see more in the diseases of the stomach. Or
else it arises from the Liver, Spleen, Womb, whole Body, as it usually
happens in Fevers: and then in this case there ought to be an especial Care
and regard had unto the Nature and condition of the parts affected, and the
Various Symptoms.

Chap. 4. Of the Symptoms of the Imagination and the Ratiocination, when they
are hurt.
THe symptoms hurting the imagination and the Ratiocination or rational
faculty, are, the hurt of the Memory, dotage, a Frenzy, Melancholy, madness,
and Raging or raving, which we term Hydrophobia.

Article, I. Of the hurt of the Memory.
The hurting of the Memory, is a diminution or utter abolition of the same,
arising from Causes that hurt the dryness of the Brain conjoined with a
moderate heat, (and very necessary as to the memory) and so by means rendering
the Animal spirits, either torpid, that is over dull and sluggish; or else
(which is as bad) inordinately moveable.

There is no need of SIGNS; for the very actions of the sick party discover the
Symptoms.

The CAUSES that hurt the temperament of the brain (that is absolutely
necessary for the preservation of the memory) either they weaken and diminish
the Native heat, and that likewise either Externally, as do al things of a
Poisonous Nature; al Narcoticks applied to the fore part, and likewise the
hinder part of the Neck: or else Internally, as does a temperament cold, and
moist, which either affects Children and ancient people, by reason of their
Age; or else it afflicts others, by reason of meat and drink that is of a
cold and moist Nature, or by reason of a Gross and thick Air, sicknesses, and
other Causes, (of which we have already sufficently spoken in the cold
distemper) Or otherwise, they dissolve the said Natural heat; such as are,
externally, al Philtra or amorous potions, watchings, excessive thought
fullness, Medicaments, that are hot of quality; Internally, hot Diseases,
impostums of the Brain, abundance of Yellow Choler, etc. Or else they exalt the
same, such as are hot and dry temperaments, that cause an inordinate motion of
the Animal spiritts. Or else lastly, They impede and hinder the motion of the
Animal spirits; and such are, a less (than is requisite) conformity of the head
and brain, the over great thickness of the same, etc.

The CURE respects the several Causes, and may be taken and understood, by what
has been already above spoken. Those medicaments that are appropriated, either
for the conservation or restoration of the memory, are reputed and accounted to
be that they term Tinctura lunae, taken in the water of lilies of the valley;
The powder of Trithemius, (of which there is sufficiently spoken in the
miracles of Mullerus) the Anacardine Confection, in weight half a dram thereof
exhibited and taken with all possible cautions unless happily an hot and dry
temperament hinder it. Those things that resist, and therefore are good against
a cold and moist distemper, are, that water that Practitioners call Aqua
Magnanimitatis Cunradi. The lily of the vallys, balm frankincense, in weight
half a scruple, taken with wine, Nutmeg, etc. Toughing which consult the
practitioners in Physic.

Article. II. Delirium, or dotage.
A deliry or dotage is a depravation of the Fantasy, and the ratiocination
Faculty, arising from the bringing and presenting of an absurd and inconvenient
Phantasme.

The SIGNS of a delirium, beginning, are garrulity or talkativeness in a
person of few words, and so on the contrary; fierceness in a quiet and mild
person; ribaldry and scurilous speech, the quick motion of the eyes, in regard
that they are associated with the brain, Arteries, veins, and nerves; a pulse
with perturbation in the Hypocondria. But the signs of that that is present,
are speeches and actions that the patient has been altogether unaccustomed
unto, and which in themselves are indeed very absurd and incongruous.

The CAUSE hereof is an absurd Phantasme having its rise and original from a
default in the Animal spirits, (as well those that are fixed, as those that are
movable) which ought to be pure, clear and transparent, temperate, and
regularly and ordinatly movable: For if they swerve from those aforesaid
requisites, there is then an error and mistake communicable unto the Phantasmes
(about and upon which the Reason is employed and busied, and then those
Phantasms are represented unto the intellect or understanding) otherwise than
they ought to be.

The CURE is different according to the variety of the differences.

It is divided into a dotage that we call primary, and that which we call
sympathetical.

I. The Primary is that, when the brain is in its one proper substance and
essence (that is, in it self) affected, and this is either with a fever, (of
which more in the Chapter following) or else, without a fever, containing
under it, as well that wherein Paraphora and Leron, (that is to say, an error of
the mind, or a dotage and busying of it about toies and trifles, proceeding
from the imbycillity of the principal faculty, by reason of an immoderate flux
of blood, or else by reason of long continued watchings) as that we term
downright folly, in the which the principal faculties are not only impared, and
diminished, but likewise extremely depraved, and corrupted.

II. That which is sympathetical, when the Cause is communicated from other
parts. It is disposed and divided into that which is without a fever, (which
comprehends under it temulency, or a kind of drunkeness and distemper brought
upon the spirits, either by wine, or beer; or else from hemp, darnel, henbain,
the dry sticks of that they call Levanthe, the rinds of mandragoras, opium, and
the like. Those things that preserve are the small strings of wormwood and Rue
eaten upon an empty stomach, the cabbage or colewort, and a morsel of bread
eaten after a draught as aforesaid; those things that accomplish the cure, are,
vomits, and the use of things Acid, and sharp etc. (and into that, that is with
a fever, which often hapeneth in acute fevers, and not otherwise; And then
the fever is at hand, and presently appears: if it show it self in the very
beginning, without any apparent signs of concoction, it introduces a Frenzy,
which is quallified and in great part removed by sleep: but if it happen to be
with concoction and other hopeful signs and tokens, then it is Critical and
decretory. It is cured. 1. By revulsion, by the opening of a vein in the feet
and other such like remedies. 2. by tempering and allaying the extraordinary
heat of the blood in the head, by topical or local medicaments. 3. By the
application of hypnoticks, or medicaments caussing sleep. 4. both by the
evacuation of the matter which has already seized the head (and this is to be
done by openining either the forehead, or the tongue vein) and likewise by the
discussion of the said matter, by applying unto the head pidgons dissected and
cut in midst and withal the decoction of Camomile, etc.
Or else it happens in an inflammation of the parts, and especially the
diaphragme. And then the breathing is unequal; the Hypocondria are violently
drawn back more inwardly; there is likewise Joined therewith a deliry or
dotage, together with a Cough, and a pain of the side, The Cure ought to
proceed according to the Nature and condition of the part affected.

Article, III. Of a Frenzy.
A Frenzy is a perpetual and Continual deliry or dotage, arising from the
Inflammation of the Membranes of the brain, and afflicting the Patient with a
continued Fever.

The SIGNS are, a perpetual doting, a continual Fever, incessant watchings,
and short and frequent drawing of the breathe.

The CAUSE is an inflammation of the Membranes of the Brain; of the which we
have already above treated in this very Book.

The CURE ought to be ordained according to the Disease, the Nature of the
watchings, and the suppression of the Urine. In this distemper, Venesection or
blood-letting is one especial, if not the only Remedy. But then a plentiful
measure, or, as we say, good store of blood is sometimes to be drawn forth at
the Nostrils, by putting up a Feather made into the fashion of a Star, even
unto the very Root of them, and forcibly turned about therein. But touching
what we are now upon, more may be seen in what has been already delivered
concerning the Inflammation of the brain. Neither must we forget, (by reason of
those aforesaid watchings) together with repellers, to mingle Hypnoticks, that
cause rest; or else they ought to be administered severally and by themselves
alone, as we see good. Three grains of Opiat Laudanum cautelously administered
in a convenient liquor, (least the Frenzy should by any means degenerate into
that Disease we call Veternus, that is, the Lethargy, or drousie distemper) are
very much commended. This said mutation or change is wont to happen, either of
its own accord, or else because the sick persons neglect, and cannot endure to
reply unto those that speak unto them; and it is soon removed and taken away by
the use of Emollient Fomentations. In this grief, there have their use, that
which we term Luna Potabilis Hartmanni, six drops thereof; and that they call
Pharmocum Phantasticum, of Bartoletus, (the dose whereof is from one dram to
two drams) and lastly, the spirit of Terra sigillata, or the sealed earth
brought from the Isle Lemnos.

Article, IV. Of Melancholy.
Melancholy is a dotage arising from a Melancholy phantasme, with the which
whosoever is affected, and deteyned therunder, he becomes wholly and only
addicted to thoughtfulness, being as it were altogether ingulphed therein,
without either fury or Fever, but yet without pensiveness and fearfulness.

The SIGNS are, a deep sadness and fearfulness without any apparent cause, and
then likewise another sign is Taciturnity, and a long continued silence, or
else incongruous discourse, and talk at random, and this more especially of
some o^^ thing more than other.

The CAUSE is a Melancholy Phantasm that proceeds from an error, vice, and
distemper of the Animal spirits, the which (when as they ought to be clear,
thin, subtle, and moveable) are hereby rendered and made obscure and misty,
opacious, thick and dark, as also fixed and almost wholly immovable. And hence
it comes to pass, that al kind of objects are imprinted upon their several
species, according to the condition and quality of the vitiated and depraved
disposition of the spirits. And they acquire and gain this disposition from a
default in the Brain, declining from its genuine whitness, and generating such
like spirits as these: or else they have their original from some default in
the matter out of which they are made and bred, to wit, the blood and the Vital
spirit: or else lastly, they got this vicious disposition from some impure and
melancholy Matter, (which is mingled together with the blood and spirits)
whether it be an Humor, or a vapor, or both.

The CURE is facil and Easy, if the distemper be recent, and but now
beginning; for so it is cured by diet alone, together with the humectation of
the whole body, and sometimes of the head in particular; as likewise if the Body
receive any augmentation and growth from the aforesaid food; if only the
imagination be no more than hurt; and then again, if it be with some kind of
laughter accompanying it. But Cure there is none, if the affect be hereditary.
See above further hereof (touching the Progress to be made in attempting the
Cure) in the Chapter of the Melancholy distemper of the brain; and below, in
the differences. Notwithstanding, observe here. 1. That in this case an
especial regard is to be had of the diet; and that sleep by all manner of means
be procured, lest that happily the Patient fall frantic and mad. Vinegar is not
here to be administered, but only that by it the dry Vapors may be diverted and
called away from the brain. A Bath of sweet water is by no means to be
neglected. 2. That the sick person is to be wrought into an Imagination quite
contrary. 3. That now and then for some certain time the Patient must wholly
abstain from Medicaments.
The Remedies that in this case are commended, are, Confection of Alkermes, the
Tincture and Extract of Lazulus, Elixir proprietutis, the bezoar stone,
Cachunde, an Indian Medicament; the description whereof see in Lacutus his
Physical History, 1. Book, Page, 310.

It is divided into some certain species.

I. One is that of the brain, when the brain (in the Nature and quality of its
substance) departs from its natural cleerness and purity. It is known by
this, that the doting is perpetual and vehement; that there are present signs
of Melancholy abounding in the head; that the blood, if it be let out, is not
thick, nor black. It arises Externally, from a strong Fancy or imagination,
from fear and other such like sad and grievous affections of the mind. It
arises Internally, from a Melancholic Humor heaped up in the head; and this,
either by reason of some acquired cold distemper of the brain; or else in
regard of its Melancholy constitution, (which may soon be known from the
affects) or otherwise, lastly, by reason of some cold and dry matter left
behind in the brain, after some hot distempers there, the heat now abating, and
the thinner part of the matter being now resolved, and gone. It is Cured, 1. By
the Alteration and Preparation of the peccant matter by Fumary, the water or
syrup of sweet smelling Apples, and Tartar of Vitriol. 2. By the Evacuation
thereof with the Extract of Hellebor (the inferior ways and passages being
first opened) by Errhines, and Sternutatories. 3. By Procuring rest and sleep
in the use of Hypnoticks. 4. by Corroberating and strengthening the Head, by
the Tincture of the Chrysolite, and other appropriate Remedies.


II. Another is that of the whole Body, when a Melancholy blood abounds
throughout the whole body, and is from thence transmitted unto the brain. It is
known by this, that the deliry or dotage is indeed continual; but yet so, that
it is with some certain exasperations, exacerbations, and remissions; and
likewise, in that there are present signs of Melancholy abounding in the body,
and that there went before the Causes thereof. It arises from its own proper
Causes, of which we shall speak further in the Differences. It is Cured, by the
frequent repetition of Venesection or blood-letting. But because there are but
very few spirits in Melaucholly persons; it must not be of too much blood at
once; it may be either in the left Arm, or in the Ankle, or else the thigh
Veins (if large) may be opened by Leeches. 2. By a Preparation of the Humor, by
the Syrup of Odoriferous Apples, Fumary with the cream of Tartar, and Tartur
vitriolate, by the fection of Alkermes, the Whey of Milk, with the Juice of
Cichory and Fumary. 3. By a gentle Evacuation thereof, often Reiterated, and
corrected by such things as corroborate the spirits and the principal parts;
and likewise by those things that Humectate, moisten, and mollify: but then
the Evacuation may, and ought to be stronger, if so be the blood be over thick,
and unless the body be already extremely and over much wasted. This Evacuation
must be seconded and followed by Moystening Baths, unto the which Emollients
are to be added. 4. By drinking of tart, sharp, and somewhat sour potions, and
also by the use of hot baths. 5. By the strengthening of the Head, both by
internals and externals, among which Embrochations are highly, and indeed
chiefly commended. 6. By a Diet, in the which there ought to be a careful and
continual abstinence from al sorts of pulse.
It is divided, according to the Nature and diversity of the Causes. 1. One is
from Causes altogether external, as Fear, watchings, Cares, al which exsiccate
and dry up the Radical Moisture, have in them a power sufficient to alter and
change the blood in the whole Body, and to detain the Melancholy Humor. Now
then, in this case, Venesection is not reputed to have any place at al. Another
there is from internals, to wit, either an hereditary constitution (which
indeed ought not over hastily and rashly to be tampered withal) or else, from
either a cold and dry, or a hot and dry constitution and disposition of the
Liver and spleen; in the which upon the cessation of the burning Cause, the
heat likewise cease to be, and the thicker parts, that are cold and dry, are
left to remain behind. And then, either it is with blood; (from whence proceeds
a doting with laughter) or else, with phlegm, from whence happens a dull
sloathfulness and oblivion; or with yellow choler, from whence proceeds
anger, etc. In the Cure a regard is likewise to be had unto the nature, quality
and condition of the Causes.

III. Another is of the Heart when the vital spirits that are bred, by reason
of a cold and dry distemper, are cold, dry, and of an impure nature. The Cure
differs nothing from the former.

IIII. Another is Hypocondriacal, when a melancholy humor, (that is sometimes
cold and serous or wheyish, or else oftentimes that which is adust and burnt in
the branches of the Porta vein) is gathered together in the hypochondria, and
so from time to time by those black melancholy vapors that are continually
sent forth, poluteth and defiles the Animal Spirits in the Brain. It is known
by this that it seizes the party by intervals, and at some certain seasons;
and most commonly in its access and approach it surpriseth the party suddenly
and without any notice given; but sometimes again (and that likewise very
frequently) it first of al couseth ructures, windy belchings, together with a
pain diffending and streatching forth the stomach; and then by and by it
introduces great anxiety of mind, difficulty of breathing, the palpitation of
the heart, the immovableness of the tongue, and at length a mist and darkness
before the Eyes, a tingling and (as it were) ringing noise in the Ears, and
lastly, a stupidity and benummedness in either or both of the Arms. It arises
from a feculent and dreggy Vapor, that being collected and gotten together in
the Hypochondria from a Melancholy humor flowing from the Antipraxy, (as we so
term it) or renitency of the Spleen, Liver, and Stomach; and then tending
upwards toward the superior parts, and forcibly rushing in upon the members, it
produces and brings in the aforesaid Symptoms; and being transmitted and sent
into the brain, either by the Orifice of the stomach, or else by the branches
of the Vena Cava (or hollow vein) it there cloudeth and darkeneth the spirits.
For the Cure hereof see more in the Hypochondriacal affection.

V. Another is (that we call Vterine) from the Womb, which is easily Discovered
by this, that the sick complain of a pain in their left side, and a manifest
pulse and beating in the back parts near about the Diaphragm. It arises also
from a Vapor proceeding either from the suppression of the Courses, or else
from some putridness in the seed. For the Cure, see in its proper place.

VI. Another is that we term Erotick, as proceeding from love, which is either
contracted from Philtres or Love potions; (and then there must be given, 1.
Vomitories of the Root of Asarum, together with Bezoarticks, Aqua Benedicta
Rulandi; 2. Sudorificks, as for instance, Treacle water, Diaphoriticum in acute
distempers; the Appropriate remedy is the Secundine powder, touching which see
more in Hartman:) Or else from a Venereal lustful appetite, and an over great
abundance of the seed; then in this case we are to deal with those things that
allay and qualify the Veneral heat, and extinguish or (at least) diminish the
seed. See more of this Nature in Ferrandus, in his peculiar tract.


VI. Another is that we call Errabunda; which most an end uses to infest the
Patient in the Month of February. In this case the sick persons abound, and are
even overspread with Ulcers in their thighs; neither can they possibly for an
hour together take their rest in any one place.

Article. V. Of madness.
Madness is a continual motion of the mind, with an unwonted boldness and
Fierceness (yet without a fever) arising from a fiery heat of the Spirits.

The part affected is the Brain, (the memory (for the most part) being still
preserved, and kept entire) and the Heart, which is (as it were) collected and
straightened by the over vehement passions and affections, and a daily and
perpetual enduring of the winters cold, the heart too copiously diffusing the
natural heat.

The SIGNS are, Fierceness, and so it is distinguished from melancholy; the
want of a Symptomatically fever; (in regard that there is here no
putrefaction) and by this it is distinguished from a Frenzy. Unto the signs
aforesaid there are likewise oftentimes added extreme and over watchings, (for
want of rest) and diverse other signs, that are likewise common to a deliry or
dotage.

The CAUSE is the exceeding great and boiling heat of the Spirits; unto the
which it is apparent, that of necessity there ought to be conjoined an occult,
secret, and more potent cause; from the enormity and long continuance of the
symptoms: But now, from whence this extraordinary heat has its original, shall
be discovered, when we come to speak of the differences.

The CURE is difficult, because that the affect is of a long continuance, as
well by reason of the cause, (which is most pertinacious, and has in it (as it
were) the nature and quality of Leven) as also in regard of the sick persons,
who will by no means yield obedience unto what is enjoined. But there is good
hope of a cure, if the courses and hemorroides flow forth, if the Belly be
loose and solluble; if the symptoms be gentle and moderate; if there be a
plentiful flux of the blood, out of the nostrils, out of the greater crooked
and wreathed veins of the hips, thighs etc. (the Practitioners term them
varices) and out of the womb; if there sweats present; and lastly, if the
distemper be turned into a kind of silent decipience, or (as we say) playing
the simple one. It is to be performed, 1. by an opposite diet, in which the
Patient must carefully avoid the drinking of wine; but by all means sleep is to
be procured, and the sick calmed and delighted with music. 2. By the removal
of their causes that induce and generate the excessive heat; of which we shall
speak further in the differences. 3, by a mitigation of the symptoms, and more
especially, the extreme and over long watchings.


The differences are taken from the Causes that introduce excessive heat into
the spirits.

I. One is from Causes external, as for instance, the extraordinary heat of the
dog days, vehement and exorbitant wrathfulness, drinking of hot and strong
wines, Nightshade, the brains of a cat and of a weasel, wine turned by
lightening, Philters or love potions, the eating of dogs and wolves; the curing
of fistulaes and old ulcers; al which may be sufficiently known from the
relation both of the Patient, and the bystanders.

Another from Causes internal; of which more in the second difference.

II. Another is from adust or burnt blood, which is known by the signs and
tokens of Plethory, rednes of the eyes, by playing or toying, singing, and
excessve dancing, etc. It arises, sometimes from a hot distemper of the liver,
and sometimes from the suppression of the courses and of the hemorrohides. The
Cure is to be accomplished by venesection or opening of a vein, in the mean
time not neglecting those distempers and diseases by which it is caused.

Another is from black choler accompanied and attended with a certain accuce
and secret property; which is known by this in that it is perpetual if it be
once lodged and has taken up its residence in all the veins, or else at least,
in those that are next unto the principal members; if the dorage be accompanied
with raging; if the strength of the sick be extremely impaired and weakened and
in a manner dissolved by long continued watchings; if there be withal present a
raging and mad desire and endeavor to bite and tear, etc. It arises sometimes
from an ex^ream hot spleen yiedling and pouring forth abundance of black
choler. It is to be cured, 1. by letting blood, as well by the opening of the
left arm vein, and likewise thesalvatella vein (and this letting out of the
blood must be in the greater quanity, if the blood be blacker than ordinary;
but then it ought to be more sparing, if it be of somewhat a reddish hiew, as
by the opening of the hemorrhoid, and those obtorted and wreathed veins called
Varices, (if at least they apear) but the forehead vein, if the mallady be
refractory and obstinate. 2. By preparing the peccant humor by coolling and
moistening cephalicks. For this end and purpose there is much commended, the
oil of champhire, one ounce, the oil of musk, in weight one dram, and mingled
well together, and so administered the quantity of half a dram at once for a
dose; the decoction of that pimpernel that has a purple flower. 3. by the
eduction or drawing forth of the said humor, by melanagogues (we are to
understand hereby, medicaments having in them a virtue and property to draw
forth blak choler or melancholy) more especially the stone called Lapis
lazuli, and honey helleborat; of which last Petraeus has written at large in
his Nosology, or treatise of diseales. 4, By strengthening the heart and brain
with the confection Alkermes, and de hyacintho. 5. By the use of topical
remedies; in the classi^ and number of which Cauteries applied unto the coronal
suture have their due and proper place; opening of the cranium on skul with the
trepan; a Lee made with Laurel berries, and roots of the true black Hellebor,
with which while it is yet a little warm the head ought to be washed, etc.
Those remedies that are specifical, are Liquor of man's blood, with the extract
of Lapis Lazuli; Saturaine Crystal administered with the greatest caution that
may be; the blood of an ass taken out of the veins behind the Ears; of which
Hartman has written sufficiently, etc. see Likewise hereof Rulandus, in his
medicinal Cures.


III. Another is that, which is such Essentially; unto the which al those
things before mentioned may be atributed.

IIII. Another is by Consent, especially of the womb; from whence that kind of
fury that we call utrine has its original and denomination; of which more in
its proper place.

Article. VI. Of Rabies, or raging Madness.
Raging madness is a deliry (or doting) produced from some certain peculiar
poison bread in any living creature, and communicated unto a man, with a strong
and vehement abhorring of al things that are liquid, but more especially,
water.

The Animals (or living Creatuers aforesaid) that communicate this poison unto
man, are, the wolf, the cat, and the dog; and chiefly this last.

The SIGNS are, (in the beginning thereof) anger soon moved and a continual
inclynation thereunto; a complaning of the Air, as if it were Southerly and
moist; little or no desire to drink; a great desire to have candles lighted up
in the day time; and lastly, a vertigo, lightness, giddiness, or swimming of
the head. The signs of this distemper confirmed, are these; a distension of the
members, but this is not continual; foaming or froathing at the mouth, frowning
fierce looks, spitting and spawling upon those that are nigh, a barking like as
of dogs, an abhorring of, and flying from water, by reason of a singular and
peculiar antipathy and dislike; from whence this affect is termed (and that not
improperly) the Hydrophoby.

The CAUSE is poison, that is generated in a living creature, from some peculiar
inclination it has and then comunicated unto man by breathing upon him,
kissing, spitland biting. In some it is generated (if we may believe Donatus)
from an extreme terror; and in others, from touching the dog-tree (which they
call Cornus) or by the touch of bloodwort, or else, the Sorb or service tree.
But now this deliry is produced in some persons sooner, within twenty days at
the utmost; but in others more slowly; yea even the twelfhth year after. And
this comes to pass, either by reason of the variety of the part that is
bitten; (for some of them are more noble, others again are less noble) or
else, by means of the diet that is used, which possibly may much weaken and
abate the strength of the poison; or by reason of the diversity of patients; or
else, last of al, from the difference and Dissimilitude of Countries, times,
and seasons.

There may be some good hope of a CURE, if the wound or hurt reaches not unto
any nerve, vein, or Artery; and if it be not very deep. But there is small, or
no hope, if there be present a fear of water; and if sighing or sobbing happen
thereupon. But if there be any cure, it then consists. I. in preservation,
lest that the poison penetrate into the body; and there occure and take place.
1. A Ligature upon the part afflicted; but if the part will not well endure it,
then a laying upon it those things that have in them either an intercepting, or
astringent quallity. 2. Cupping-glasses, with good store of flame, and with
scarification, if the wound be little; but without, if the hurt be great, and
the wound large, 3. Enlarging and widening the part if the wound be over
narrow, that so the poison may the better flow from the part affected. 4.
Attraction, by Medicaments that are vehemently attractive and drawing, or else
by actual Cauteries.
II. The Cure consists in that way and Method of Curing that is properly so
called; where those Remedies that have their place, are, 1. Purgation by
Hellebor. 2. Appropriate Sudorificks, but chiefly, the simple or single
Mixture. 3. The strongest sort of Vesicatories (we mean here by all such
Remedies as raise and cause Blysters) 4. Antidotes; and these are to be
administered and given in a double quantity and proportion to what they are wont
to be in other ordinary cases, etc.



Chap. 5. Of the Symptoms of more of the Internal senses.
Article, I. Of the Waking Coma.
THe Symptoms that infest and annoy many of the internal senses at once and
together, and are, the Waking Coma (as they call it) and the Lethargy.

The waking Coma is a propension to sleep, and yet withal an utter disability
thereunto, arising from Narcotick (or dull sleepy) Vapors, that induce and cause
a drowsy and sleepy disposition, and withal trouble and disquiet the mind.

The SIGNS are, a Connivence or winking with the Eyes, and yet withal a
frequent opening also of the Eyes; a mopish or doting kind of discourse in the
Patient; and likewise an inordinate motion of the hands and thighs.

The CAUSE is conjectured to be Narcotick Vapors, unto the which there is
adjoined something that brings along with it a necessity of waking; and so does
a Frenzy, a Malignant Fever, etc. It sometimes also proceeds from an
extreme debility of the strength and powers of the body, contracted either from
some vehement Diseases grievous and intolerable pains, and an excessive
immoderate Evacuation; and then in this case it is very dangerous, if not
deadly.

The CURE is very difficult, in regard that the affect is easily changed into
the Lethargy or Frenzy. It is very doubtful, if the parties speech be
hindered: if while they breath a murmuring noise be heard in the throat; if the
sick persons cannot swallow down what he drinks without much ado; and lastly,
if a thin Humor 'distil from out of the Nostrils. It is Performed (if there be
any Cure at al to be expected) by Revulsion, and the Evacuation of the Matter,
from which it proceeds, and has its first rise and original, etc.

Article, II. Of a Lethargy.
A Lethargy is an insatiable propension to sleep, together with a gentle
Fever, forgetfulness, and a dull sloathfulness or Laziness; arising from a
Pituitous or flegmy kind of blood putrefying in the hinder nooks, windings, and
Cells of the brain.

The parts affected are the Posterior or hinder ventricles and Cells of the
brain; in regard that in this distemper the Memory is that which is chiefly
hurt.

The SIGNS are, an insatiable desire after sleep, as being never satisfied
therewith; by reason that the brain through its over moistness cannot possibly
be expanded; and because likewise that the Animal spirits are as it were bound
and locked up, by unwonted extraordinary obstructions. Another sign is, a mild
and gentle Fever, in regard that the putrefying Humor is not extremely sharp
and fretting, and that the heat is allayed and qualifyed by its Contrary; but
then this Fever is Continual, in regard that the heat (being as it were to
boil it up) is continued, and in a manner perpetual, and ever more, from day to
day, rerturning about the beginning of the Night. Another sign is Oblivion or
forgetfulness, because that the hinder part of the brain is hurt. Another,
slowness of breathing, in regard the Nerves of the Thorax, breast or Chest, are
affected. Another, a Cough, by reason of the Flegms Defluxion into the Larinx,
or entrance of the wide rough Artery, (we commonly call it the winde-Pipe.)
Another sign is a Turbed, That is to say, a thick, pudled, and troubled Vrin,
in regard that the Crude Humors are agitated and driven about by the hear, and
yet are not separated. Another sign is, great Pulses, by reason of the Fever
that accompanyeth it; but then such as are not very quick and frequent, but
slow, by reason of the imbecility of the Natural strength and powers of the
Body. It differs from the Catalepsie, by the winking and shutting close of
the Eyes; from Carus, by the Fever that is present herewith; from the
Apoplexy, because it does not suddenly, and al at once invade the party;
neither does it deprive of al kind of motion: It differs from the Hysterical
Passion (we term this affect the fits of the Mother) in that the Lethargical
persons are able to speak and make answer (the others not so) and withal they
are affected with a moderate and gentle Fever: and lastly it differs from
Coma, by that excessive and insatiable desire of sleep (of the which they have
never enough) and out of which they are no sooner rouzed and awakened, but they
immediately fall back again thereinto.

The CAUSE is Phlegm or snivel, rotting and putrefying in the hinder parts, (we
usually call them the ventricles, nooks, and Cells) of the Brain. Where it is to
be noted as Observable, 1. That sometimes the said Phlegm is diffused al about
the brain, and the Meninges, and that then it induces a swelling or Tumor,
that is not very great, nor very hard: but that sometimes likewise it is even
stuffed and impacted into their very substance, and becoming altogether one
with them, and causing them to rise and swel up like unto a sponge. 2. That in
old Age (for the most part) a pituitous of flegmy blood is carried into the
aforesaid parts; and this ill blood has its original from Narcotick Crudities.
Now the reason why it Putrifieth, proceeds from the retention of those Vapors
that ought to be dispersed and driven forth.


CURE there is none for it, if it be such as is rightly and properly so called;
if the strength and powers be day after day wasted and weakened, if there be an
increase of the cold sweat of the head; and lastly, if it end in a Sphacelus.
The Cure is very doubtful, if it happen unto one that is young, and in the hot
Summer time; if the Urins that are made are become clear and thin; if the
Excrements that are thrust forth by the belly be many, and also liquid; in
regard that this proceeds from the resolution, weakness, and wasting of
Nature: if there happen withal a kind of trembling, because that this imports
either great plenty of matter, or else the resolution of Nature; and lastly, if
a frenzy chance to follow immediately upon it. There is some good Hope of a
Cure, if so be the seventh day be over past and gone without any sensible hurt
and prejudice unto the party; if the Animal actions be not greatly impaired; if
the sick persons find themselves the better, after the expulsion of the matter
unto the Nerves; if the matter when it is putrified has an Evacuation by the
Ears or Nostrils; and lastly, if there happen an impostumation behind the Ears.
The Cure is to be effected. 1. By Revulsion, which is performed, 1. by
Venesection, (and this likewise must be maturely, timely, and seasonably
administered) after the putting up of a Clyster; unto which said Venesection,
(if there be want of strength in the Patient to undergo the loss of much blood)
may be added as subservient thereunto, Ligatures, Leeches, and Cuppingglasses
affixed unto the back and shoulders. 2. By Purgation, instituted by the milder
and gentler sort of Medicaments, by reason of the Fever; to wit, Cholagogues
in the beginning, and Flegmagogues in the progress. But the Remedies ought to
be stronger and more operative, if the Fever be remiss and gentle, and the
matter urgent: the said Purgation is to be corrected with Castoreum, which is
here very proper, as being appropriate unto this distemper: but we must not by
any means omit the making use of sharper and stronger Clysters, if there be
present a greater and more intense Fever.
2. By. Repulsion or driving back, which is to be administered after
blood-letting, by the gentler sort of Medicaments, applied unto the Coronal
Suture; not neglectng the putting in practice likewise of Revulsion. And for
this purpose Oxymel Scilliticum (or with squils) is especially good. 3. by
Preparing of the matter, if the Disease will allow but of so much time, and
truce; but here the Arabian Stoechas is carefully to be avoided, if the Fever
be over great and intense. 4. By a Particular Evacuation of the Brain; where we
are to take notice, that Castoreum is ever more to be added, and mingled
therewithal; and that Sternutatories ought not to be made use of from the very
first beginning of the distemper; neither are we continually to persist in the
use of them, in regard that they fill the Head: and then again we must not
forget that Vesicatories are to be imposed behind the Ears, and likewise
applied unto the Crown of the Head, or to the Coronal suture. 5. By
Corroborating and strengthening of the Head by its appropriate Remedies. 6. By
a Diet, in the which (at the beginning or first entrance thereinto) the food
that the Patient takes, ought to be but little, and thin of quality and
substance, but especially such as affords a good Juice and Nutriment; and
withal the sleep ought to be very sparing, etc.


It is divided in a twofold manner.

I. One is that which is Legitime, and properly so called; of which we
hitherunto been speaking. Another is that we term Noth^s; which is altogether
without a Fever, and is (indeed) nothing else but a profound and deep sleep,
and as it were of a middle Nature betwixt Caros and the waking Coma.

II. Another there is that is such by its own Essence; touching which, al
before said is to be taken and understood. Another is by consent; there being a
certain matter communicated and den^^ed unto the Brain, by reason of the
suppression of the courses, or of the Hemorrhoids; or else by means of some
other Disease.

Chap. 6. Of the Symptoms of the Animal Motion.
Article, I. Of Lassitude, or Litherness.
THose Symptoms that offend and hurt the Animal Motion, are, Lassitude,
Unquietness or Restlesness, a Vehement cold and Stifness, a Trembling, a
Palsy, and a Convulsion.

A Lassitude is a certain unaptness and unfitness (together with a certain kind
of pain) unto the exercise of the Animal motion, which ought to have been
performed freely and in a natural way.

As for the signs, the relation of the sick party will sufficiently acquaint us
with them.

The CURE is, whatsoever does burden, weary, and make Lither the Muscles that
are the instruments of the Animal Motion; whether it be any thing External or
Incernal.

The CURE is accomplished by the removal of the Causes, and likewise by the
cherishing and comforting of the Muscles.

It is divided into six Species or kinds.

I. One is that that is not Spontaneous or voluntary: unto which, that we term
Exsiccative, does appertain. Another is Spontaneous or voluntary; which (in
regard that it signifies and manifestly declares that Humors superabound in
the body) may therefore not unfitly be said to presage Diseases; and if it
persevere and continue after the cessation of the Fever, it signifies a
certainty, or at least an extreme danger of falling back into a relapse. And
unto this kind belongs that we call Gracility Vlcerous, tensive, Phlegmonodes,
and Ostocopos.

II. Another is that which we call Exsiccative, which proceeds from an extreme
and over great motion of the body. But in this there is no danger at al, unless
it chance to befall a Cacochymical body. It is cured, I. by rest, especially
that rest that is taken in sleep, because that then the members are placed in a
middle kind of frame and posture, upon the Relaxation of the Muscles. II. By
Exercise, if it be more moderate than the former, in regard that it discusseth
and disperseth those Humors that are moved up and down throughout the Cavity of
the whole body.

III. Another is that we term a Lassitude of Gracility, which has accompanying
it no grievous or disquieting sense of pain. It arises from a Consumption of
the flesh and Fat of the muscles. It follows upon either Chronical or else
(it may be) after some acute Diseases. It is to be Cured by a Convenient Diet.

IV. Another is ulcerous; which is known by the signs and tokens of a choleric
cacochymy, by a sensible pricking and shooting throughout the whole body (from
whence indeed it takes its name and denomination) and by a kind of extreme and
vehement stifness that ensues thereupon. It has its Original from some sharp
and biting (either) Humor or Vapor; or else from heat diffused and dispersed to
and fro, or else such as is wholly dissolved, wasted, and consumed by excessive
and inordinate exercise. It is Cured by Purgation, if it be so that the matter
fix and stick in the more profound and deep parts; but by frictions, and
motion, if the matter be only in the Superficies.

V. Another is that we cai Tensive; which is known by a manifest and sensible
extension or stretching out in the Tendons of the muscles, the Fibers, and
Nerves. It arises from a Plethory. It is to be Cured by frictions or rubbings
with sweet Oil, and by baths of ^weet Water.

VI. Another is that we call Phlegmonodes, which is known by a sense of
Con^usion and Contraction, and (as it were) an inflammation of those muscles
especially which have their place and situation under the Skin. It has its
rise, either from a great abundance of blood fallen forth of the Veins unto the
muscles, or else such as is attracted and drawn together by overmuch and
violent exercise; and then the Cure is to be performed by Venesection or
blood-letting: or otherwise it arises from the Humors that are in the manner
and by the means aforesaid drawn and led along thither; and in this case there
will be great need of Purgation.

VII. The last is that we call Ostocopos, which is known by the extension and
stretching out of the interior Nerves adhering unto the bones of the Tendons,
and encompassing and wrapping about the bones of the Membranes. It proceeds
from black choler or Melancholy seizing upon and possessing those Membranes. It
usually concurreth and shows it self together with the Scurvy, Quartane
Fevers, and the French Disease. The Cure ought primarily and chiefly to be
directed and instituted according to the Cure of the aforesaid Diseases.

Article, II. Of Restlesness, or Unquietness.
Restlesness or Unquietness is a frequent various shaking to and fro of the
whole body and the several members thereof, arising from matter molesting and
disquieting those parts that are capable of suffering.

There need no SIGNS; for the Affect is apparent enough to the very view.

The CAUSE is a sharp matter, whether it be a humor, or a hot Vapor.

The CURE must be directed, and so ordered that it look toward the said matter,
accordingly as it appears in the following differences thereof.

It is divided into Critical and Symptomatical.

The Critical consists in that sudden and unexpected perturbation of the
Humor; and from whence there is no danger to be feared.

That we call Symptomatical, is that which happens in general; and it
contains under it, I. That which we term Stomachical, which is known by a
kind of Nauseousness in the stomach, sometimes without, but most commonly with a
vomiting, and likewise a pain of the stomach. It arises either from the Humors
pulling and twinging the mouth of the stomach, etc. (as it were) soaked and
drunk up into the Cotes or Tunicles thereof, (in which case purges that abate
and lessen the acrimonious quality have their proper place:) or else from food
unseasonably taken; and here we are to help and succor the Patient by vomiting
of him. II. That that we term Inflamatory, which proceeds from the
Inflammation of some one of the Bowels. III. That which we call Febrilis, that
appears in Malignant Fevers, and is very dangerous, if it be attended with
the imbecility of the natural strength and powers of the body.
In the Cure we ought to have respect unto the several species or kinds of the
Disease.

Article, III. Of Rigor, or an Extreme Stifness.
The Rigor or unnatural vehement stifness is a vibration, shaking, and
quavering of the Muscles of the whole body, conjoined with Refrigeration, and a
certain pain, arising from something that does molest, by a sudden and unlookt
for twinging and pulling of the sensible parts throughout the whole
Circumference of the body; and likewise by Irritating and stirring up the
expulsive faculty.

The Part affected is the whole body, or at least, the Muscles of the same,
whether they suffer together more inwardly, or not.

There is no need of Signs; the Refrigeration that happens herein, either it
is of the Skin alone, by reason of a pain excited and stirred up by the
acrimony and sharpness of an humor; or else it is also of the Muscles; whether
it proceed from the Diffusion of the Humor, or otherwise from the Inflammation
of Bowels.

The CAUSE is something that is grievous and burthensom; whether it be collected
and contained in the very Muscles themselves; or else be transmitted thither
from some other place. But now then the said matter is sharp, corroding and
biting, much of it in quantity, and such as is swiftly moved and carried up and
down from place to place. And this happens most especially in Fevers.

The CURE is accomplished by the removal and taking away of the causes. The
Disease, (if it cease not upon the use of an Evacuation) is very evil and
dangerous; and so likewise if it be attended and accompanied with a
Consumption, and wasting of the whole body.

It is chiefly and especially divided in a threefold manner.

I. One kind (or species) hereof is from things External; as for instance, a
cold Air, or an External heat diffusing and dissipating the Excrements that
before were at rest, and were quiet, without any molestation; sprinkling of
cold water, upon the body; the falling of a spark of fire upon the skin, etc.
The Cure here has nothing in it worthy of Observation. Another there is that
proceeds from Causes Internal; to wit, a Choleric humor, a salt Phlegm,
Melancholy, black choler, and acrimonious sharp Vapor. The Cure has respect
unto the several sorts of the Disease. All the kinds of them are sometimes to be
Mitigated with the Oil of Rue, of Bay Berries, of Castor, and of the several
sorts of Pepper, together with Treacle and Mithridate.

II. Another is vehement with a continual fever: and then, if it chance to be
in the beginning, it betokens an inflammation of some bowel; but if in the
end, it shows, either that the feverish matter is moved out of the Veins, or
that the Inflammation tends to a Suppuration: Another is but little, and not
much considerable, being such as only gives notice of Fevers to follow; of
which see further in these Chapters wherein they are particularly treated of.

III. Another is Periodical, which afflicts the party but now and then, and
by fitts at certain seasons. And this is the best and the most hopeful species
of this Disease, if it happen to appear on the Critical day; if upon its
appearance the body waxes hot; or else that any Evacuation of excrements
follow thereupon. Another is Symptomatical, when as the matter is thrust forth
into the external parts, and the Circumference of the body, without any Crisis
at al; and this is that of which we are now speaking.

Article, IV. Of Tremor, or Trembling.
This Trembling is a depravation of the Voluntary motion, (by reason of the
which the Member elevated and lift up cannot be kept in its own proper
situation) arising from the debility and weakness of the faculty of motion.

There is no need of SIGNS: It Differs from a Convulsion, because in this
latter the part is contracted, and so kept; from a Palsy, because that in this
the part is seldom or never lifted up, or at least very slowly; from a
Palpitation, in regard that in this not the whole Member, but the flesh, and
especially the Skin is moved; and the member unmoved, one while falls down,
and again another while is distended and stretched forth; and lastly, it
differs from the Rigor or stifness aforesaid, in regard that it is without
any pain.

The CAUSE is a weakness of the moving faculty, which happens either by a
default in the Animal spirits, or the Nerves.

CURE there is none, if it befall those persons that are in years, by reason of
the extreme imbecility and weakness of the spirits and the brain; if it happen
in a vehement Frenzy, or Melancholy; for then it is caused, either by means
of the exsiccation or overgreat drying of the Nerves by a Fever, or else by
reason of a corrupt and depraved quality: if it be hereditary, or that it
proceed from some fault and disorder in point of diet, especially in such that
have the Organs of the Animal faculty extremely weakened; if the sick person
Shrink and Start when he is touched; in acute Fevers, because that the Nerves
are either exsiccated and over dried, or else are pulled and twinged by some
depraved and vitiated matter, upon which there follows a Convulsion. The Cure
is more facile and easy, if it proceed from Causes that are evident. It is
doubtful and difficult, if it happen on the lest side, in regard that then the
innat heat of that part is the more easily impaired and made to decay; if it
turn into a Convulsion, because then the peccant matter assumeth unto it self
and worse and more offensive quality; if it happen to be in a burning Fever,
and that a doting follow thereupon; for then some great and grievous Disease
succeeds, and the strength, and powers of the body are wasted and consumed;
if the sick party Shrink and Start when he ^s touched, for then the Nerves are
become over moystened by the peccant Humor. But when we set about the Cure,
(and that there be any hopes of effecting it) it is then to be instituted and
prosecuted according to the Nature and disposition of the several Causes and
differences, touching which we purpose to speak further in the sequel.

The Differences are al of them taken from (...) the Causes introducing the
same.

I. One is from External Causes, especially such as are Malignant and
Narcotick, as (to instance) Quicksilver, Poisons, opiates, Henbane, the
Retention of the Secundines or Afterbirth, and the suppression of the blood
after delivery; al which are to be removed. Another is from Causes Internal, of
which we shall speak more in the Second Difference.

II. Another is from the Scarcity and want of Spirits; which either are not
generated and bred in a due and fitting sufficiency, by reason of a cold
distemper of the brain, (and in this case, in the Cure thereof the Nature of
the Disease it self ought heedfully to be regarded) or else after they are
generated they come to be dissipated, wasted, and consumed, by an excessive,
heat an over great Evacuation, and some long continued tedious Diseases: and
here we are to deal and do our endeavor by prescribing a fit and convenient
Diet.

Another there is from some faults and faylings in the Nerves themselves; which
may be, I. A Cold and moist Distemper of the brain; and there are some signs
present of a misaffected brain. The Cure must turn toward, and Eye the
Distemper. For those Remedies that are taken inwardly, these following are
chiefly commended, VIZ. The Essence of Balm, and stoechas of Arabia. Among the
Medicaments that are to be externally administered, these are highly approved
of, to wit, the Oil of the flowers of Trifoyl or the three leaved Grass,
vulpinum, or the oil of a fox, the oil of pepper the Oil of castor, etc. 2. A
Plethory when some wonted Evacuation is suppressed; and then in this case let a
Vein be opened. 3. An Obstruction of those same Nerves, such as we term partial
ones, or a stoppage of them but in part, whether it proceed from thick and
gross Humors, or else from Gluttony and sur-charging the stomach, and other
such like Causes. See further hereof in the subsequent Cure of the Palsy.

Article, V. Of the Palsy.
The Palsy is a spautaneous and voluntary abolition of motion in the parts,
(without any the least hurt of the Reason,) arising from a defect and want of
the Animal spirits, through some fault and error in the Nerves.

There is here no need of SIGNS; the motion for the most part perishes, the
sense and feeling still remaining, there is likewise a kind of softness and
tenderness in the part affected; a coldness also, a weak pulse, etc.

The CAUSE is a defect and failing of the Animal spirits, which happens by
some fault of the Nerves.

There is no CURE at al to be expected, if it chance to be from an extreme and
forcible Relaxation or Loosing of the Vertebrae, in regard that then the Nerves
are greatly crushed together and very much bruised, insomuch that an
inflammation follows thereupon; if it proceed from an incision or cutting of
some one of the greater Nerves, or the the spinal Marrow, because there is then
no Hope of a Coalition or closing together again of the incision. The Cure is
likewise exceeding Difficult and hard to be effected, if it happen unto aged
people, in regard that it denotes an imbicillity of the heat; if the member be
extenuated, and the natural vegetative heat thereof be changed and altered;
especially if the eye on that side be impaired, because it argues then that
the heat is well nigh extinguished, if there be many of the nerves and muscles
affected; if it succeed and follow upon an Appoplexy, in regard that then the
cause is over vehement. But the Cure is more easy, if the resolution be in the
things or feet, because that in those parts the nature and constitution of the
nerves is dryer than elsewhere; if the member resolved and loosened be actually
hot; and lastly; if a trembling, or a fever follow upon it. It is to be
instituted and ordained, according to the nature of the causes, and the
differences.

The differences of a palsy are very various.

I. One is Universal, in the which either the whole body (the head alone
excepted) is seized upon, or at least, the one half thereof or one side of it.
And then, if the Face be affected, the brain also, (together with the spinal
marrow) is affected: But if all the parts beneath the face, then the beginning
and first entrance into the spinal marrow (which we call the marrow of the back
bone) is very far amiss in its transverse situation: but if the affect surprise
only the one half of the body, one side then only of the Said spinal marrow is
likewise affected, and becomes faulty.

Another is particular, when alone some one certain part suffers. And then,
if the Arms and hands be deprived of their motion, then the nerves that proceed
forth from the vertebre of the hinder part of the neck, offend and are faulty.
If the Feet, then those nerves that are in the vertebrae of the Loins, and the
Os sacrum or channel bone. If the eyes, then the second pair of nerves is
affected, If the Tongue, then the seventh payr of the nerves is affected. And
lastly if the voice fail, then those nerves that are called recurrentis, they
only are affected and do suffer.

II. Another difference there is, arising from a distemper in the nerves
themselves, by reason of phlegmy and cold humors, that relax or loosen and
dissolve their tone: and these for the most part descend from the head. These
humors may be known and more fully understood what they are, out of the Chapter
touching the distemper of the head. The Cure is to be wrought, 1. by a gentle
evacuation and employing of the first and most principal passages, least that
otherwise the preparatives draw the crude humors into the stomach; (and here
vomiting procured and excited by the use of Crato his vomitary made of the
Juice of the reddish in the which black hellebor has bin steeped and infused,
has its place if the stomach be stuffed full of phlegm) but then if the matter
be in its flux and motion, the evacuation ought to be so much the stronger. 2.
by a preparing of the matter, more than once, by Cephalic medicaments; among
which Iva Arthetica, primrose flowers, the Flowers of Lilies of the Valley, are
the best that are now adays in use. 3. by purging, with mechoacan, or the Pills
so much used by Solanander and Mathiolus. 4. by exciting and provoking of
sweats with the Hidrotick of Quercetan, and the sudorifick of St. Ambrose; unto
which there must be added, Guajacum, china, Treacle, Bezoardicum Lunare;
together with other apropriate remedies; al which are to be followed and
attended with frictions of the neck or the spina dorsi with onions, and the new
fresh root of the flowerdeluce. 5. by a particular evacuation of the brain, by
errhines, Apophlegmatisms, etc. 6. by the application of Topical remedies;
where have their place, frictions, rubbings and chaifings with the water leaves
infused in Malmesey, Bathes with formicetes, Rubifications (or rubbing the part
til it become red) with green Nettels and other suchlike; inunctions with the
unguent of vipers, the unguent likewise of the several sorts of pepper, the
Unguent of Castor, the grease of the wild Cat, man's fat, etc. Natural or
Artificial hot baths; touching which se further in Heurnius his method. 7. by a
diet that is hot and dry; concerning which consult the Practitioners in Physic.


Another is from the straightness or narrowness of the Nerves; which is caused,
1. By an obstruction, proceeding from a pituitous flegmy humor, and other
things that are subservient hereunto, and conducing unto the purpose aforesaid.
Then the cure has regard unto the Cause; touching which we have spoken
sufficiently above, 2. a Constipation from some tumor or swelling, that has
its first rise in the substance of the spinal marrow, or of some nerve. 3.
Compression, and that either from some external cause, or else from a Tumor,
etc.


III. Another is from those Causes that dissolve or make a solution of unity in
the nerves, in the number of which there is, 1. a Contusion, fall, or blow. And
then a vein is to be opened lest there should happen an afflux unto the
contused or bruised part. Astringents together with discussives are likewise to
be applied and laid upon the part affected, unless (happily) there be present an
inflammation. 2. a dissection; and for this there is no remedy at al to be had,
3. a relaxation (or loosening) of the vertebrae of the Back, suddenly caused,
of the which sufficient has been spoken in the second Book.


Another is from things narcotick, as for examples, a touching of the sea fish
Torpido, quicksilver, and the immoderate unseasonable drinking of wine, which
rendereth the spirits extremely stupid and dull: and here in the cure whereof
there ought to be a special regard had unto the nature and quallity of the
Cause.

IIII. Another is Colical, when a humor from the intestines is moved, not so
much unto the beginning of the orifice or first entrance of the nerves, as unto
the very muscles and tendons. The Cause hereof is a thin humor, that is both
chollerick, and wheyish. In the Cure we must deal chiefly and principaly by
clisters, that so the perverse motion of nature may be inverted. A vein is to
be opened, if there be present a Plethory and orver great abundance of pure and
good blood. We ought then to purge with gentle purgers (as we term it) by an
Epicrasis or an often reiterated evacuation, and drawing forth of the peccaut
matter, leisurely and by degrees, some now, some then, and not al at once. Let
sudorificks then follow, administered in primrose water, and the water of
Lilleyes of the valley. The spirit of Niter is also of excellent use in this
case.

Another is that which we term Scorbutic; touching which see more in the
Scurvy.

Another is that we call Hysterical; of which also we may see more in its own
proper place.

Article. VI. Of a spasm, or convulsion.
A Spasm is an involuntary, perpetual, and painful Retraction (or drawing back)
of the Muscles toward the place of their original and first beginning, arising
from the abbreviation and shortening of the nervous (or sinewy) parts; which is
evermore attended and followed with a Rigor or Extreme stifness, and a
depravation of the figure, shape, and symmetry of the foresaid parts.

The part affected is a Muscle, and especially a Tendon.

The SIGNS are apparent of themselves: the Muscles are in such manner drawn
back, that the parties are altogether immovable toward, and unto the contrary.

The CAUSE is, either a certain matter pulling and twinging the expulsive
facculty of the parts; or else some disease voilently stretching out the
nervous parts: and this sticks fast either in the beginning and sourse of the
nerves (to wit, the Brain) or in the Spinal marrow, of else in some one
peculiar nerve.

There is hardly any CURE to be had, or hoped for, if it be from hellebore; if
it arise and appear after a Phrensy; if it proceed from a wound, especially in
the brain, by reason of a filthy stinking and corrupt matter pulling and
twinging the nerves. The Cure is very difficult (although not altogether
without hopes) if those parts that are situate near unto the brain be affected,
and suffer; if it happen primarily by the consent of some nerve, in regard that
then the sick person cannot possibly hold out and endure by reason of the
vehemence of the Symptoms; if it arise from an abundant flux of blood; if it
follow upon the monthly Courses in women; if it attend and follow upon fevers;
or if it chance to be accompanied with vehement and accute pains about the
bowels or intrals. It is more easy, if those parts only are surprised and
siezed upon that are more remote from the brain, and consequently the less
noble and considerable; if it be by the consent of the Brain, unless the affect
that the brain lies and labors under, be pertinatious, obstinate, and
unyielding. The Cure ought therefore to be Instituted, according to the Nature
and disposition of the Causes; of which more fully in the Differences.

The Differences of a Spasm are very many and Various.

I. One is Universal, which affects the whole body. The Cause whereof, either,
It is in the Brain, and then together with the body, the Muscles likewise of
the Face are also drawn and pulled together, and suffer a Convulsion, or else
it is in the Original and beginning of the Spinal Marrow, from whence it
happens that the Muscles that move the Head and the spinal Marrow are
retracted and drawn back. And then, either the body (with the Neck and Head) is
drawn to the inner parts, (from whence arises that we term Emprosthotonos:) or
else the twelve Mulcles that extend the Head being affected, the aforesaid
parts are drawn backward, (from whence is that we call Opisthotonos:) or
otherwise the Muscles and Nerves (as well the anterior as the posterior) being
al of them affected, the whole body remains altogether inflexible and
unmovable: from whence arises that we call Tetanos, with the which whosoever
are affected, either they die within four days; or else if they pass and
outlive these, they then escape and recover. Another is Particular, of the
Eye, Mouth, etc. Of which we shall see further in the proper place.

II. Another is from Replexion; which dilateth the breadth of the Nerves, and
diminishes the Longitude thereof. It is known by the foregoing of the Causes,
a sudden invasion and surprisal without any evident and manifest Cause, and
exhasting, together with a Phlegmatic habit and temperament. It arises, I.
From the Afflux of a Pituitous and Phlegmatic humor into the Nerves, according
to their Tunicles (or little Cotes) and as they are essential constituting
parts of the Muscles, and instruments of the motive operaation. Then there went
before it such a like kind of Diet, and the monthly Courses, Hemorrhoides, or
other wonted Evacuations are suppressed. In the Cure, 1. We must attenuate and
Cut the peccant matter by a timely administering of a Clyster. In the next
place, those things that are highly commended and approved of, are, the Treacle
of Andramachus, the Water or the spirit of Juniper, and the Balsam of
Quercetan. 2. We ought to Evacuate oftentimes with the milder and gentler sort
of Medicaments; the stronger sort of them pour out, and quite expel the matter.
3. A Revulsion must be made by frictions, Gargarisms, Cupping-Glasses, etc. 4.
A Discussion of the offending matter must be wrought with the Oil of Castor of
Euphorbium Turpentine distilled, the Oil of Nutmeggs, and the Hot Baths of
Sulphur. 5. In the Diet that is used there must be no kind of Wine drunk.
II. It proceeds from an Inflammation of the Nervous parts; and then there is
present a Plethory: a fall, or a blow, or something else that was violent, long
continued and acute pains in the Nervous parts, vehement anger, and passions of
the mind, etc. had their precedence. The afflux of blood hotter than ordinary
is in great part the Cause hereof. The Cure is to be directed, and to look
toward the Inflammation. III. From extreme windinesses: and then the Causes
thereof, went before and it soon passes away, and is gone. To Discuss, Vervein
and Mother-wort, imposed upon the Neck, are very available.
4. It happens from the wounding or pricking of a Nerve, whether the said
wound and hurt be simple, or poisonous; but of this kind of spasm we have
treated before in the second Book.

Another is from Inanition, or extreme emptiness, in which the Nerves are
rendered and made shorter by reason of the exsiccation and sudden drying up of
the Native Rudical Humidity. It is known from hence, that it makes its
approach sensibly and by degrees, with a diminution of the member. It arises
from Causes, that do either excessively evacuate, such as are, frequent and
much bleeding at the Nose, sweats, and purgations with Hellebore; or else they
vehemently heat, and dry up the radical Moisture; and such are, Inflammations,
watchings, hard labor and over working, the drinking of much wine, immoderate
and excessive venery, a long lasting pain, the Hectic Fever, and lastly,
Cauteries or Vesicatories over frequently applied unto the Nervous parts. It is
to be Cured. 1. By a moystening Diet. 2. By Medicaments that are Analeptical or
restorative, and moystening; and such are the unguents de Ansere and Cata
assatis, (that is to say, of a Goose and a Cattrosted) and baths made of Oil;
the fattening water of Ferdinand, (in his third Book, and the Chapter touching
an Hectic Fever) made of swines Blood. Morsels of the Flesh of the Tortoise,
or of Crawfish. The Magisterial of Hyacinth is specifical.


Another is that we call Phusodes, which has its original from a gross and
thick spirit or Vapor, (excited by Crudities,) that fills out the spaces of
the Muscles, and distendeth them with a grievons pain. It endures so long as
until the Muscle be relaxed: it is quite removed and taken away by frictions,
and rubbing and chasing of the parts affected; or else by annoynting it with
Treacle, or Juniper water.

Another is Illegitimate, (as we term it) which proceeds from the
exstimulation, goading (as I may so say) and pricking forward of the Nervous
parts by some painful affect, but yet without a perpetual extension and
stretching forth of the said parts, and for the most part it happens by
consent of the Orifice of the Stomach, or of the Womb. The aforesaid grievous
and painful affect is either from some distemper, or else from the solution of
continuity.

Chap 7. Of those Symptoms that hurt the Internal senses, the Reason and
Motion, together with the External Senses.
Article, I. Of Incubus, or the Night-Hag, and Catalepsis.
THe Symptoms that hurt the Internal senses, the Reason and motion, together
with the senses External, are Incubus or the Nightmare (as we usually term it)
Catalepsis, (we commonly call it a Taking) the Epilepsie or falling sickness,
Carus, and the Apoplexy.

Incubus (the Night-haggs) is an interception of the motion, especially that of
breathing, and the Voice, with a false and Erroneous dream of some heavy and
weighty thing lying along upon the Breast, and thereby causing a suffocation
(as it were) and choking of the Party, by means of the impeding and hindering
the free penetration of the spirit (the Passages being obstructed and stopped)
unto the Nerves.

The part affected is the Brain, espeacially in the hinder part thereof, by
which the passage reaches and attaineth unto the beginning of the spinal
Marrow. The Diaphragm is likewise compressed, and kept down.

The SIGNS are, a heaviness, and immovableness of the body, and chiefly the
Chest or Breast, a slow and dull sense, and imagination and conceit of a
suffocation, (especially in the first beginning of sleep, and the party lying
upon the back) and as it were an oppression and keeping down by somewhat lying
heavy upon it; insomuch that the Patient can by no means distinctly call and cry
out, but only make a confused and unintelligible Noise. The alone interception
of breathing and the voice is brought and offered unto the imagination; in
regard that the motion of the breast alone is mainly and principally necessary
in the time of sleep.

The CAUSE is, an interception of the Animal spirits, arising from a light
Obstruction of the Ventricles of the brain, and more especially of the
beginning of the spinal Marrow. That that Causes this obstruction is a Gross
and thick Vapor, that is oftentimes cold, yea even Narcotick; and hence it
comes to pass, that the party thus affected is so hardly awakened. That which
proceeds from a gross and thick Phlegm, or from a Melancholy Humor sticking
fast in the Hypochondria, and near about the Precordia, this (in these persons)
from Gluttony, furfetting and drunkenness (the stomach being thereby
sur-charged) from Crudities, or other such like Causes being swollen and puffed
up, and then moved, exhaleth and compresseth the Diaphragm and the Lungs,
rusheth violently into the beginning and entrance of the Nerves, and so
creeping (as it were) and insinuating it self into the very seat of the
Imagination, there intermingleth it self with the spirits.

The CURE is the less to be hoped for, if from an internal cause it fieze upon
those that are well in years; if it be of long continuance, and frequent, and
such as after which the sick person remains stupid and blockish; if it happen
unto the party while he is half asleep and half awake, because that then it
comes the nearer to the Epilepsie or falling sickness; if after the awakening
a cold sweat, a trembling of the heart, a spasm, convulsion; or a syncope
follow thereupon. It respects, 1. the Paeroxysm, in the which the sick
persons are to be awakened and rouzed up, and the vapor is then to be
dissipated by frictions and Vehement rubbing. 2. The Cure respects the time
out of and after the Pharoxysm, in which. 1. A Diet is to be kept, which
exactly requires a thin and pure Air, sparing meals, especially a light and
sparing supper, the use of no other Wine or beer but what is diluted and so
made weak and small; and lastly, a careful avoiding the supine posture of the
body, or lying upon the back, when they go to sleep. 2. The matter that Foments
the Vapors (if it be deeply seated) is to be Prepared by such Medicaments as
cut and cleanse; and then forthwith to be Evacuated in a due and fit manner.
The opening of the Cephalic or the Hepatick vein, and if Women (that complain
of the suppression of their Menstrual blood) the opening of the Saphena Vein,
(especially in case a Plethory be present) is very much to be approved of. 3.
The head being first well purged, is, without delay, to be strengthened;
internally, with the Black seed of the male Piony; and likewise with Treacle
exhibited and administered in the water of the male Piony; externally, by
Lotions made of Cephalic Medicaments. 4. The Vapors that offend after meats,
are to be Remedyed and prevented by the frequent use of Diacydonium, Corianders
prepared, etc.


Catalepsis, or Catochus, is a sudden surprisal of all the senses, the motion,
and the mind, with the which those that are fiezed upon and invaded, remain and
abide stiff in the very same state and posture in which they were taken and
surprised, with their Eyes open and immovable.

Of SIGNS there is no need. As touching the Cause, the learned differ among
themselves. It is most probable, that the spirits are fixed and rendered
immovable by a Fixative Vapor, in such like manner as we read, that both men
and Bruit Beasts have been Rendered stiff and immovable by lightening, Vapors,
and exhalations breaking forth of the Earth. Yet notwithstanding even in this
Disease there are to be recounted several Degrees. For some of them neither
see, nor hear any thing; others both hear and see, but speak not at al; some
again are seen to move their heads; and some of them being driven and thereunto
forced, do walk. For the Cure of this most rare and sad affect, see more in the
Practical Physicians. In the Topical Remedies hereunto apperteining, we ought
to abstain from Vinegar, lest that by it the Congelative power should be
augmented.

Article, II. Of the Epilepsie, or falling sickness.
The Epilepsie is a Cessation of the Animal and principal actions, together
with a Convulsive motion of the whole Body, arising from a sharp matter, which
by a peculiar and proper power and quality, it has, that is hurtful and
Prejudicial to the Brain, pulling and twinging the Nerves where they begin,
streightening, and as it were binding them fast together, and Irritating them
unto Expulsion.

It is likewise called the Puerile, or Childish Disease, the Herculean, the
Comitial Disease, (or the Falling Sickness) the Lunatic, divine, Sontick, or
noysom and hurtful, and lastly, Caducus, or the falling Evil.

The Signs are, either of one Imminent and night at hand, and these are, the
trembling and quivering (as it were) of the Nerves, splendours and birght
shinings like unto the Rainbow flying and waving to and fro before the Eyes,
the sense and smelling of some offensive stench, the Vertigo, and the
yellowness of the Veins under the Tongue; or alse of one Present, and these
signs are, a sudden falling, a Contorsion (as they call it) or writhing of the
Members of the Face, very improportionate unto, (or bearing no proportion
withal) the matter thereof, a kind of Roaring and Howling noise that they make,
the guting, and close clashing together (or as they call it, Collision) of the
Teeth, the shutting and fast holding together of the Fingers, an involuntary
and insensible letting out of the Urin, and sending forth the other filth and
Excrements, foaming and froathing like unto the white of an Egg, etc.

The CAUSE is, either a thin and froathy Humor, or Vapor, the which whilst
that they (by a peculiar and proper power and quality that is in them) twing
and pull in the brain the principal of the Ne^ves, and so thereby introduce a
constriction and streightning of the Passages; and whilst likewise they
extimulate and provoke the sensible parts unto the expulsion of what is noxious
and offensive, from hence it is that there follows a shuting up, and drawing
back of the spirits causing sense (which they term Sensifical) and so
consequently by the want and defect of them, there follows also ad ^iminution
or total abolition of the aforesaid sensifical Spirits. And from hence it is,
that all the parts suffer a convulsive motion. That which disposes hereunto is
either (by propagation and inheritance) from the parents; or else from their
nativity, when as they have their birth in and during the Lunar Eclipse. That
which fomenteth and makes an abundant supply of the matter, is, the frequent
use of Goats liver and Goats flesh; of Quails that devour and feed much upon
helebor, pigeons when they are somewhat old, Eels, sparrows, al kind of Pulse,
Lentiles, etc. that it moves and much promoteth the same, is the moon beams,
the smelling of offensive and noisome stinks, the scent or smell of that fat and
clammy earth that we call Bitumen, of the Agath or Jeat stone, of Goats horns,
hearts horns, Goats skin, Myrh, Sulfur, Garlic, smallage, etc. an extraordinary
strong and vehement fear, much tikling, and lastly, the impulse of the devil,
etc.

The CURE is the more difficult, if all the Functions be abolished, if the
convulsion be stronger and more vehement than ordinary, and of a longer
cotinuance, and that withal the Excrements flow forth of their own accord; if
it happen before ripeness of years, and if it infest old and decriped persons;
if it invade women with child. It is easier, if it be but now beginning, if it
has shorter Paroxysmes, a convulsion not extremely vehement, if the sick party
has his breathing freely. But theris almost no cure to be hoped for, if it be
hereditary, if it grieviously afflict little infants, if upon the use of
sternutatories the sick Party yet cannot be made to sneez. The Cure (when we
set about it) respects. 1. the very paroxism it self, either instantly and
near approaching, and then a drop or two of the essence of Castor, or the spirit
of white Amber in the Antepileptical water of Langius, or else one pil of
Opiate Ladanum, (unto which there ought to be added and therewithal mingled one
fourth part of the oil of Camphire) is to be taken and swallowed down: or else
it has respect unto the Paroxisme now present and in being, in which (among
other remedies) the mouth is to be opened and a little bag filled with Rue,
Castorium, etc. is to be interposed betwixt the teeth; then a Revulsion by
frictions and ligatures is to be ordained; in the next place, the belly is to
be opened and employed either by suppositoryes, or a sharp and quick Clyster, in
the which there are some that boil the dross or refuse of Regulius Antimonii.
The Nostrils are to be anointed with the balsam of Amber, and of Rue. The
tongue and palate are to be besmeared and anointed with Treacle, dissolved in
the^ ^inegar of Rue: if the patient be not yet ex^^ed and raised by these
means, then sternutatories are to be administered and applied, or else a turtle
having al its feathers first pulled off, is to be imposed on the navel.
Inwardly there is to be administered the water of sweet black Cherries, and
that likewise of swollows, with the oil of Amber, as also that of a man's skul.
2. the Cure has respect unto the time without (either before or after) the
paroxysm, in which. 1. Let the matter (the root of the evil) be prepared, the
blood being first diminished, unless happily the malady be inveterat: then let it
be purged forth by the inferior ways and passages, with Agarick, or some other
convenient purger (and this at several times by repetition, and not al at once)
with special regard had unto the humors that possibly may very much abound.
Then let the remainder of the same aforesaid matter be quite removed, and taken
clean away by Sudorifickes, especially those exotic and forrien sweaters, to
wit, China, and Guajacum, together with our Country birdlime of the Oak. 2. the
matter that is left remaining behind in the brain, is to be drawn forth by
errhines, Apophlegmatismes, those remedies that we call setacea, and lastly, by
issues. 3. Let the brain be corroberated and strengthened by cephalicks and
Antepilepticks. 4. Let there be a diet kept and observed, in the which al meats
generateing vapors, specially such as favor and cherish the disease, wine,
venery, etc. are carefully to be avoided. 5. Those things that are appropriated
unto the head, and do specifically resist the Epilepsie (of which we are now
treating) are to be added and together mingled with all the aforesaid remedies;
such as are, the root of the male Peony gathered in July, at the waning of the
moon, the right boof behind of the beast called Alx, bird-lime of the Oak, the
magistery of man's skul, the water of Swallows, of Cherries black and sweet, of
the Linden or Til tree the oil of white Amber, the oil of man's skul, wafers
made of the dew that is gathered at the feet of St. John Baptist, in the night
of that day, a Powder that consists and is composed of one dram of Crystal
prepared, red Coral two scruples, oriental margarites one scruple, oriental
Smaragds prepared half a dram, and so Exhibited and given in a fit and
convenient matter, according to its own propper dose. There may be applied,
outwardly, the skin of a wolf, taken s^^m that part where it sticks and
grows to the spina or Back bone, of two fingers breadth and worn like a
girdle, and also the Amulet (ex frutice sambuci in salice) of Hartmans
invention. One sign of a perfect Cure is this, viz. If the Patient fall not
into his fits (which appears by his falling upon the ground) when there is
put near unto his nostrils a suffumigation of things of an il and stinking
savor.



The differences of an Epilepsie are very various.

I. One is that we term Recent, or new begun which if it be neglected in the
beginning, most commonly it dies together with them that are deteyned and kept
under the power of it. Another is that we call inveterate, which whether or no
it may be cured, is for the most part very doubtful and uncertain.

II. Another is that which is more mild and moderate, in which only some
certain parts are drawn together and suffer a Convulsion; and the sick person
when he comes again to himself, as we say, is wholly ignorant of all that he
did. Another is more sad and greivious, in which there is a Concussion and
convulsion of the whole Body.

III. Another is that we term Periodical, which invadeth and seizes the party
once or twice in every year, or it may be, every month (at the new and full
moon) or perhaps oftener, but yet evermore at those times and such intervals as
it was always wont to keep. Another is that which keeps not, neither
observes any periods, But afflicts and surpriseth the patient, sometimes more
rarely, and sometimes again often, and frequently.

IIII. Another is that which is such in its own essence, to wit, when there is
an epileptical disposition in the very brain. It is known by this, that a man
suddenly falls down, without any the least pre-apprehension and sense of its
paroxism, and that when he returns to himself he remembereth not any one
thing of what was done, and lastly, that he is affected herewith chiefly and
principally (to which I may likewise ad, very frequently) about the new and full
of the Moon. It arises and has its first birth from those very same causes of
which we have spoken above; and it is also to be Cured in the self same manner.
If there there be any need of venesection, then let the Cephalic vein in the
Elbow be opened; and here likewise fontinels or issues, and those external and
manual remedies which practitioners call setacea, are of singular use. In this
difference alone there may be a cautery applied unto the Coronal future. It
sometimes hapeneth by reason of an impostume in the brain; and sometimes from
the corruption of the Meninges or Membranes thereof; sometimes again by means of
a rotten and putrified skul, a wound, etc. touching which enough has been
already said in its proper place.

Another is by Consent or agreement with some other parts, when the cause being
before produced and begotten in the inferior parts is lifted up into the head,
and there exciteth an Epilepsie. It is known by this, that the paroxysm when it
is nigh approaching may be perceived and foreknown; and a certain kind of air
(as it were) ascending from an inferior part, there is a pain perceived in some
one part or other; and then the sick person returning to himself remembereth
the paroxysm. The Cure is to be ordered according to that part that most
requires and commends it, and the matter that tends upwards is to be drawn
back again. It is variously divided; of which we shall speak more in the
following difference.

V. Another is from the stomach; in the which the sick persons fall into the
epilipsie: if they take not their food often, then there are present signs and
tokens of a distempered and affected stomach. In the cure, we may safely and
successfuly have recourse unto vommits, etc.

Another is from worms, which are easily discovered by their signs. Unto
scolecobrotick Medicaments there ought to be added and therewith mingled
Antepileptical remedies.

Another is from the womb; which is known by this, that there is then some
affect or other of the Womb present; to wit, the suppression of the courses,
the retention of the Seed, or the Secundines, a dead child in the womb, etc.
The Cure is to be directed and to look toward the Affects in the which the root
of round aristolochy is much commended. Note here, that the water of swallows
distiled with Castoreum, Galbanum, and vinegar, is most proper and convenient;
that for a woman great with child there ought not upon any terms sweet
smelling odoriferous things be applied or laid near unto her womb; yea
likewise, that al odoriferous medicaments, since they offend the Head and make
it heavy, are well removed from it.

Another is from the External parts, either wounded, or ulcerated, or else hurt
by biting, which is exactly and diligently to be examined and inquired into,
left that otherwise it should be mistaken for that which proceeds from the
Womb. It is to be Cured according to the Nature and quality of the Causes.

VI. Another is of such as are grown up, and have attained to maturity of
years; unto whom all that has hitherto been spoken upon this subject, is to be
applied as most suting and agreeing unto them.

Another is of Infants, in the Cure of which, if they be yet sucking at the
Breast, in the Paroxysm we must then proceed so as is above declared; only
there must be special Care and regard had unto the tenderness of their Age. Out
of the Paroxysm, the Nurse ought (as far as necessity requires) to have
appropriate Medicaments given her to drink; and withal the Infant is to be
Evacuated and emptyed with Syrup de Tribus (as the shops call it) and then his
brain is to be strengthened, and the impostums, (if any there be that break
out) are by no means to be hindered in their flux, but on the contrary, they
are by all means possible to be furthered. There are some that (in this case) do
very much commend the anointing of the whole Body with Butter unwashed,
unsalted, and Mingled with Rue bruised and beaten in a Mortar. An approved
Remedy to preserve from this sad and fearful affect, is, the preserving power
of Hartman, the Aqua Vitae that is usually Exhibited and given unto Women with
Child; Oil of sweet Almonds with Sugar, given to Childeren new born. In that
Difference that is by consent; there is to be highly commended the Emplaster of
White Amber, of Frankincense, and of Mastick, of each one dram and an half, of
Galbanum, Opoponax, of each one scruple, of Birdlime of the Oak two drams,
Amber six grains, Musk three grains, Male Peony seed half a dram, Ladanum a
dram and half, of the Oil of Nutmeg a small quantity, al these aforesaid being
strewed over with the powder of Cubebs, the emplaster must be spread upon
leather, and so imposed upon the Abdomen or lower belly. But if (in Women) it
happen, as many times it does, from the Curdling of the Milk, then that which
is of singular use is a Cataplasme formed of Elmleaves (three parts) boiled in
the Urine of a Child, with two ounces of butter new and fresh, and then applied
unto the Region of the stomach. The Cure of Children that are weaned differs
not much from those before mentioned.

Article, III. Of Carus.
Carus is a deep and profound sleep, with the hurt of the sense, and motion,
(the breathing only excepted) and likewise the Imagination, arising from the
impeded motion of the Animal spirits.

The SIGNS are, sleep (with the Eyes always shut) so profound, that the sick
person being asked never so many questions, yet answers nothing at al; and so
it is distinguished from a Catalepsie and a Lethargy: a retraction or drawing
back of the Member if it be pricked, which is not done in the Apoplexy; a free
respiration and breathing, unless the vehemence of the Cause be most extreme
and intense.

The CAUSE is the prohibition and hindering of the influence and exercise of
the Animal spirits upon the senses and the Motion; of which the diverse and
different Causes shall be declared in the subsequent differences.

CURE there is None, if it chance in the declining of continual Fevers, the
strength and powers of the body being extremely weakened. It is of much
difficulty, if the breathing be hurt; if it be Joined together with the
heaviness of the Head, because that, a humor not over gross and thick
penetrating into the substance of the Nerves and extending them, immediately a
Convulsion follows; and lastly, if it befall the party after some great
Evacuation. It is Accomplished according to the quality and condition of the
Causes.

It is divided five manner of ways.

I. One is, When there are no Animal spirits generated, which happens when
either the Arteries Carotides that earry the Animal spirits unto the brain are
hurt, or else when the Muscles of the Temples, (having a very notable and
singular agreement and consent with the brain, by the intercourse of some
eminent Nerves) are Compressed, or bruised.

II. Another is, when the Animal spirits are dissipated, which comes to pass,
either from some extraordinary and excessive Evacuation, or else from some
exquisite pain, proceeding from either an external or an internal Cause; or
else, issuing from the Defatigation, wearying, and tiring of the Brain, by
reason of an overgreat and extreme shaking thereof; which comes to pass in
that heavy deep sleep that happens in the Close and conclusion of the
Epileptical Paroxysm.

III. Another is, When the Animal Spirits are stupefied and made, as it were
drowsy. And this is done, either externally, and that, 1. From the fume of
coals kindled in some close room, or Parlour; of which we have likewise spoken
above. 2. From the use of Narcotick Medicaments, Opium, Hen-bane, etc. Where
Castoreum with Oxymel or Cassia Lignea have their place. 3. From Poisons,
either taken inwardly, or else outwardly applied; where Treacle ought to be
administered.
Or else, internally, 1. From Vapors sent forth in Fevers; and 2. From the
same Vapors elevated by Worms; touching which, their proper places are to be
consulted. The Cure may be fought out and found in the following Member of the
Difference.


IV. Another is, When the spirits cannot penetrate unto the Members. And this
is done, I. From the Compression of the skul and brain; of which above. II.
From the Obstruction of the Passages; and then there will be present signs of
Phlegm.
In the Cure; (a regard being had unto the whole body) Revulsions, head-purgers,
etc. are to be administered; and then we may see what is further to be done, in
the Cure of the Apoplexy.

V. Another is, when the spirits are greatly disturbed, as in case of a blow,
fall, or any other accident whereby the Head is hurt, etc. Of al which see more
in their own places.

Article, IV. Of the Apoplexy.
The Apoplexy is a sudden abolition of all the Animal functions, the breathing
alone remaining, (and this likewise now and then exceedingly afflicted) arising
from the streightness and shutting up of the Passages, (especially about the
basis of the Brain) by the which the Animal Spirits are derived unto the
Members.

The part affected is the Brain, not only according to the ventricles thereof;
but likewise according to its pores, and especially near about the inferior and
hinder part thereof, where the Nerves begin and take their Original.

The SIGNS are (of an Apoplexy imminent and nigh at hand) sometimes none at al,
sometimes a lightness and swimming in the head (which we usually call the
Vertigo) dimness of the Eyes, and welinigh loss of sight, the Incubus or
Night-hagg, a trembling of the whole body, the grating of the Teeth in sleep, an
extreme coldness of the External Parts, an abundance of Snot and Snivel, the
heaviness of the Head, etc. The signs of an Apoplexy Present, are, the
abolition of the sense and motion, and this suddenly and with snorting; and by
this it is distinguished from Curus, that it is without a Fever and
excitation, and so it is differenced from a Lethargy; that it is with a
Relaxation and looseness of the Members, a full pulse, and the Face reteyning
still its color; and thus it is distinguished from a Syncope, and the
Suffocation of the Womb.

The CAUSE is, the streightness or narrowness of the turnings and windings, and
of the pores of the Brain, (especially of the Basis thereof, and of the Rete
admirabile therein,) as it effects a shutting up, or shutting in of the
spirits. But from whence this proceeds, we shall show further in the
Differences.

CURE there is None, if upon a Difficult drawing of the breath a sweat ensue;
if immediately the sick persons stricken suddenly mute and dumb, and without
snorting aloud, be not surprised and set upon by an acute Fever, which happily
might attenuate and dissolve the Pituitous flegmy matter, and likewise the
flatulent Vapor. The Apoplexy usually, if not always, if terminated, and
ends in a Passie. It Respects, 1. Preservation, which preventeth and takes
away the Antecedent Cause, and this varyeth according to the Nature of the
Differences. 2. I^ has respect unto the Cure spoken of in the several species;
which is to be begun with a Prognostic, (when we are to make a discovery
whether or no there be any life in the Party) either by lighted Candles (the
windows being shut) put as near as may be unto the Nostrils, or else by a
looking-glass clean wiped and put to the mouth of the party.
It is to be Performed, 1. By a due and fit placing of the sick person, that so
he may the more easily attract and draw in the Air, together with a light and
gentle concussion and shaking up of the party (lest that by a more violent
rowsing of him the matter should be dispersed all the body over) as also by a
rubbing of the extreme parts with Salt and Vinegar. 2. By the Revulsion of the
matter, by Cupping-Glasses imposed on the head, (which is indeed the only
Remedy) by strong forcible Clysters and Suppositories; by opening of the
Cephalic vein, or the common Median Vein, (without the least delay, and that
likewise by several Repetitions, and not al at once, and yet al within the
space of a very few hours) and also, lastly, by opening of the Jugular veins,
according to their length. 3. The matter is dissipated and scattered by the use
of Antepileptical waters, by which the Brain is exceedingly recreated.


The Differences of the Apoplexy are many and Various.

I. One is Legitimate, of which more in the subsequent differences.

Another is that we call Bastard or Spurious; which arises either from the
Obstruction of the Arteries Carotides, and the Jngulas Veins, (of which see in
Carus) or else from Narcotick Vapors, that stupisie and make dull the spirits;
where Revulsion has its place, the Evacuation of the matter somenting and
cherishing the Disease, and the breaking of the stupefaction by Castoreum with
Vinegar.

II. Another is from the Obstruction of the Basis of the Brain; which is
caused, I. Either from a Phlegmatic and thick Matter, either dissolved by heat,
or else driven forth by cold into the Passages of the brain. It is known by the
tokens of a cold distemper. It driseth from the same Causes. It is Cured, 1. By
the Evacuation of the peccant Matter, by Venesection, after that by a strong
and forcible Purgation, by Errbines, and Sternutatories put up in the form of a
powder; among which that Nose-purger (the Latins and Late Physicians call it
Nasipurgium) of Bartoletus is much commended; by Frictions of the tongue and
Palate with Treacle, or Mustard Seed, this last Boiled in strong Wine, by
Cauteries, Issues, etc. Vomitories have here no place. 2, By strengthening of
the Brain, by Cephalic waters, the spirits of black Cherries, the Essences of
Rosemary, Sage, the Balsames of Marjoram, Amber, Rue, etc.
II. Or else from gross and thick Vapors, with the which we ought to proceed,
and to deal in the very same manner, as aforesaid.


Another is from Compression, which is Caused, I. Either from Violent Causes,
as for instance, a Concussion, a Blow, a Wound; of al which see above. II. Or
from cold and moist humors, (heaped up in the Brain,) by their constant and
continual watering and moistening of the Brain, Rendering the substance thereof
(that is naturally soft) by far more soft and loose; touching which see more in
the former member of this same Difference. III. Or else from that which they
call Flegmonodes, diathesis, that is to say, an abundant store of blood al at
once (as it were) rushing and thronging into the sourse and spring head (as I
may so term it) of the Animal spirits. It is known by the signs and tokens of a
Plethory; there is some wonted Evacuation suppressed. It arises from the same
Causes. It is Cured, like as is that which is caused by a Phlegmatic
obstruction; Yet notwithstanding in this case plenty of blood may be emptyed
forth of the veins.


III. Another is a light and gentle Apoplexy, which most commonly ends in a
Passie of the one side or the other, and in which the breathing keeps some
kind of order.

Another is Vehement, in the which the Respiration or breathing is violent,
unequal, inordinate, and intermitting.

Another is strong, in which the breathing is violent, there is also a snotting
to be heard, and there appears likewise a froth which is but very little, if
it be excited by the very humidity of the Lungs from some most vehement
compression of the Heart; but very much, if it proceed from a pituitous or
Phlegmatic humor that is full of Wind.

Another is the strongest and most dangerous of al, in the which the breathing
is (as to the sense) altogether abolished.

Chap. 8. Of the Symptoms of the Excrements of the Head.
A Single Article, Of a Catarrh.
The Symptom of those things that are sent forth from the Brain (by way of
Excrement) is a Catarth, which is nothing else but a Defluxion or flowing down
of some Excrementitious Humor (generated by reason of the Concoction of the
Brain its being hurt) from the Head upon the parts that are situate underneath
it, proceeding from distemper therein, or else from an over abundant Repletion
irritating and stirring up the Expulsive Faculty.

The SIGNS are, of that imminent and near approaching, a sensible weight and
heaviness in the head, dimness of the eyes, a sluggishness and drousiness of
the senses, sternutation or sneesing, etc. The Signs of a Catarrh present and
in being, asensible feeling of a distilling humor, a cough, frequent sneezing,
etc.

The CAUSE is a Phlegmatic humor, which is sometimes altogether insiped and
tastless; sometimes sharp, salt, acid or tart, discolored; it is sometimes
corrupt, and peccant in its substance: which. 1. is generated either in the
brain, by reason of its concoction hurt; or else by some fault of the very
brain it self, or else by reason of something amiss in the aliment; or from
some other place, and sent thither, especially in those that have either their
brain cold, but their stomach and their Liver hot; or otherwise these cold, and
their brain hot. 2. it is moved, either by the expulsive faculty irritated and
excited; or else from causes introducing heat, that attenuate and make thin the
humors, and withal open the passages; or else from Causes producing coldness;
which either expel forth those humors that are in the brain, or else (at least)
melts and dissolveth them by the fuliginous and sooty quality that is
retained, and likewise the heat therein augmented; or else from Causes
Concussune (as we may term them) which over vehemently move and shake the
brain. 3. It flows downward, in regard of the term or place from whence it
descends; or else from the parts that lie underneath the Scalp of the brain
it self; or else from those parts of the head that ly without the skul,
especially under the skin of the Crown of the head, where the extreme parts or
ends of the veins (by the face and the Temples creeping up (as it were, into
the head) are terminated: in regard of the term or place to which they flow,
it is either unto the internal parts, the lunges, the nostrils, the stomach,
etc.
or else unto the parts external and that not alone between the skin and the
flesh; but likewise throughout the veins and arteries, and also the Continuity
of the muscles, veins, and nerves.

The CURE is the more Difficult, if the Catarrhs be more frequent than
ordinary, and withal more greivious; if they rush down with a kind of
impetuousness and violence; if they invade ancient people; if they are joined
and meet together with a pain of the head. It bath an eye and regard, 1. Unto
the matter generated, which is forthwith to be evaccuated: and in the next
place we must endeavor to prevent the further growth and breeding thereof; and
to this end, the disposition of the part that supplieth and fomenteth it is to
be corrected. 2. It respects the matter as it is now flowing; which is to be
drawn back, intercepted, and the part receiving it to be corroberated and
strengthened. See more hereof in the differences.


A Catarrh is (especially) divided in a three fold manner.

I. One is from a humor both cold and moist and this, 1. either copious, and
rushing downward with a greater violence; (and then venesection in the external
vein of the elbow is to be administered; lest that from the rest of the Body the
humors should flow hitherunto) or else, but very little, neither rushing down
with any force at al; (and then in this case, especially in old age, we ought
to abstain from venesection) 2. or else, from a humor thin and waterish; and
then it ought to be prepared moderately by those remedies that incrassat or
thicken; as for instance, the decoction of frankinsense, of Mastick, of Betony,
and of Nutmeg: we must then purge but with medicaments of the gentler sort,
that so the peccant matter may not be too much stirred, and so dispersed
throughout the body; and such remedies are as follows, to wit, Manna, and
Mechoacan: we ought in the next place to make use of particular evaccuations,
by Errhines, if the Mother flow into the Breast and stomach; but by gargarisms
and Apophlegmatismes, if it flow unto the eyes and nostrills; and then al
things being so disposed, that they may fix and inpede the impetuousness of the
Catarrh, the said catarrh is then to be dried up, and the head to be
strengthened, with the little roles of the flower of sulfur, yellow Amber
pulverized, tied up in a small bag, made warm in the spirit of malmsey,
besprinkled with some drops of the oil of Amber, and so applied unto the crown
of the head; the nostrils and the Temples having been first of al well anointed
therewith; with the decoction of the China root, Sassafras, etc.
or otherwise from a humor that is thick; and then it is to be prepared with
such medicaments as warm and attenuate, viz. the decoction of Hisop, Rue,
Oximel Simple, Oxymel scillitick, (or with squils) we must then purge with
Agarick, and the extract of the Cochy pills. Then we ought to evacuate
particularly; where, among the Errhines, we prescribe the Seed of Roman
Nightshade pulverized, and together with the water of Marjoram snuffed up into
the Nostrils out of the hollow of the hand. Then the Head is to be fortyfied
and strengthened; for which purpose we commend the water of wild betony
distilled with Wine, of Hartman; as likewise the Medicate wine of the same.

Another is from a hot humor, which is, 1. to be removed and taken away, by
Venesection, or Cupping-glasses, lest that (the Head being so hot) there should
be more of the Humor attracted. 2. It is to be Prepared with cooling
Cephalicks, and such as are moderately astringent. 3. It is to be Evacuated
with Rhubard, etc. 4. The Fourth proceeding in the Cure ought to be as is
before declared.


II. Another is that that rusheth with force and Violence, which (besides the
diversions, and those other Remedies already spoken of) requires also
Interception by Medicaments that stop the flux, and incrassate or thicken the
thin Humor, and these to be administered, after Supper, about bedtime, without
any waiting for, or expecting a concoction thereof: and such are, Treacle new
made, Bole Armoniack red and light, the bones of a man's Skul burned, Opiate
Laudanum, Pills of the herb Cynogloss or hounds Tongue, Pills Asajereth, the
Arabic Pills, Wierus his pills, Pills formed and made of Styrax Calamite; the
Juice of Liquorice, Frankincense, Myrrh, Opium, of each halt a dram, Saffron
one scruple, with as much of Poppy and Rheubard as Shall be thought fit and
sufficient; the Trochisques of Poppy of Mynsichtus. If the humor be salt, then
Spike is to be added; and in those that are Asthmatical, al sorts of
Odoriferous suffumigacions and perfumes are to be shunned. So soon as they
awake in the morning, that that has flown down into the Breast is to be
Evacuated.

Another is Suffocative and choking, which with great violence flows to the
Lungs and Heart. Unto this we must with all possible speed apply a Remedy by
Revulsion by Clysters, Frictions, Applications of Emplasters (the hair being
first cut short, or shaven) that have in them a power to suspend and keep off
the Catarrh; inunctions and often anoyntings of the Nostrils with the balsam of
yellow Amber, Suffumigations, etc. In this case, likewise, there is not known a
more present Remedy than a Vomit, in regard that it also drives and casts
forth whatsoever is stuffed and impacted into the Lappets of the Lungs.

III. Another is from a Matter that is gotten together in the brain, through
some default of the said brain,

Another is a certain matter, that is communicated unto the brain, either from
a colder stomach, and a Hotter Liver, or else from some other Bowels. In the
Cure of this, the parts commanding are especially to be heeded, and due
provision is to be made for them. And those that find themselves subject and
liable unto more frequent Catarrhs, these ought every month (a little before
the new of the Moon) gently to purge the Body, and more especially if their
belly be dry and costive. The Wine of Pope Adrian, which is so extremely
commended against Catarrhs, is Composed of the Rinds of all the Myrobalans,
together with there Kernels first of al dried, of each two drams and an half,
Cinnamom one dram, Cloves, Galangal, Cubebs, Cardamon's, Grains of paradise, of
each half a scruple, Red Roses dry one dram and half, the flowers of Rosemary
(or Anthos) and of Lavender, of each half a dram, well beaten together, and then
mingled with seven measures of Wine.

Title, III. Of the Diseases of the Eyes.
Chap. 1. Of the Affects of the Eyelids.
WE have thus finished the Affects of the Brain; the Diseases of the Eyes,
either they affect the parts encompassing about the Globe of the Eye, or the
constituting the same; or else they touch and affect the whole globe it self of
the eye. Those parts that surround and encompass the Eye are the Eyelids, the
Eyebrows, and the angular flesh at the corners thereof.

The Maladies and affects of the Eyelids are;

I. That we call Trachoma, or a certain roughness of the internal part of the
Eyelids. It is known, by the redness thereof, the itching, and (as it were)
the sticking out of Millet grains. It arises from an adust humors, that is,
Salt, sharp, and biting; and oftentimes likewise, from over sharp Collyries. It
is Cured by the Evacuation of the body; by the averting and turning away of the
matter by Repercussives; by the application of Topical, first those that we call
Emollient or mollitying, and qualifying the Acrimony of the peccant humor; and
then by and by such Topics as cleanse; as for instance, Aloes dissolved in
Rose Water, and Myrrh dissolved in a Woman's Breast Milk; which ought now and
then to be intermitted, lest that they over forcibly make an impression of
their strength upon the Eyes; and by rubbing of the Eyelid inverted and turned
the inside outward with Sugar Candy, even until the blood follow. It is divided
in a twofold manner. I. Into that we call Dasutes, in which the Eyelids are
only red, rough, and itching; Sycosis, in the which there are sticking out as
it were the small grains or seeds of Figgs; Tylosis, in which the part being
exulcerated contracteth to it self a scissure, and callosity or an insensible
hard and thick Skin; and that we term Psorophthalmia, or a scab of the Eye,
which affects the whole Eyelid, and specially toward the corners of the Eyes,
and this is Cured, (Universal and general Remedies being first premised) by a
Liniment of Roses, and adding thereto a very little of Tuty prepared. II. It is
divided into that which has its original from the blood; in which the itching
is not so great as in the former; from yellow Choler, in which there are small
pustules or pushes; from Salt Phlegm, out of which there passes forth more of
the serous or wheyish humor; and lastly, from black Choler or Melancholy in the
which that which comes forth is discolored, Black, and Bluish.


II. The second Malady and affect of the Eyelids, is that we call Emphysema, a
Tumor or swelling of the Eyelids; which happens, either from external
Causes, to wit, the spiders touch, the stinging of the wasp, the Be, or the
Nettle (and then a Be bruised and beaten to pieces is to be imposed upon the
place) Treacle, and the Juice Of Plantaine, are to be spread; and the place
anointed therewith. Or else from Causes internal, to wit, a Hot humor; (where
the Ophthalmick of Rhasis has its place, and is of singular use:) A Waterish
and Wheyish humor, in Fevers of long continuance, watchings, and in the
Cachexy; and here Fomentations of a Decoction that Mollifyeth and scatters,
are rightly and fitly administered.

III. The third Affect is termed Coalitus, when either the Eyelids grow
together one to the other, or else with the white, or the horny, or both those
Tunicles of the eye. It is not to be Cured without much difficulty; if the
Eyelids wholly grow together: but seldom or never, if they grow together with
the Cornea (or horney) Tunicles: but more easily, if it stick only unto the eye
in the extremity thereof and if it be only (as it were) agglutinated or glewed
together unto the Adnata Tunicle. It arises either from an Ulcer negligently
and unskilfully Cured (in the which whatever in the healing thereof might have
been drawn forth, has been agglurinated; and here in this case opening of the
part affected takes place) or else it has its Original from a Phlegmatic, and
Viscid or clammy matter flowing unto the eyelids; and here we are to make use
of Revulsion by Vesicatories, and likewise Repulsion or driving back of the
aforesaid matter.

IV. The Cancer, whether exulcerated, or not; of which we have sufficiently
spoken before in the second Book.

V. Inversion, which we may likewise call Ectropium, to wit, the turning inside
outward of the lower Eyelid, arising, 1. from a Resolution, or Palsy; of
which see elsewhere. 2. From the Increasing of the flesh in the internal part,
which is either to be consumed by Medicaments, or else wholly to be taken away
by section and cutting thereof. 3. From the ill curing of the wound or Ulcer;
where likewise incision has its fit and proper place.
Or else it is that which we term Lagophthalmos, to wit, of the superior
Eyelids; proceeding from the undue conformation, or ill frame thereof, which
in regard of its composure will hardly admit of any Cure. 2. From the custom of
Children, that in their Cradle are continually looking upwards; and this may be
Remedyed and prevented by rolling and swathing about their Head with black
clothes, whiles they lie in the Cradle. 3. From Convulsion and contraction; and
this requires Emollient Ophthalmick Remedies. 4. from a Wound or Ulcer ill
Cured; in which case, either the Cicatrix is to be Mollified; or else there
must be a Manual operation as the Cause, and as necessity shall require.


VI. That we call Hydotis, (the Latins term it Aquila) or an increase of the
unctuous substance in the upper Eyelid, pouring forth (continually) a Humor,
especially in the morning betimes, before the light appear. It arises
(especially in Children) from a serous or wheyish humor, that is fallen forth
and gotten betwixt the Membranes of the Eyelids, in the midst whereof there is
that Unctuous 'or Oily substance. And this is either Recent and new begun, (and
then it is sometimes taken clean away with Fasting Spittle;) or else it is that
that has been of long Continuance, and included in its peculiar Membrane; and
this requires the operation of the hands.

Chap. 2. Of the Affects, or things that are anniss, in the Eye Brows.
THe affects of the Eyebrows are;

I. That we call Hordeolum, being a small Tumor or swelling, which when it comes
unto a Suppuration is very like unto a Barley Corn; from whence it has its
aforesaid denomination. It has its Original from a Phlegmatic Humor, thick,
and mingled with blood. It is taken away by Barley masticated or chewed upon an
empty stomach, and so applied; or by the body of a fly (the head thereof being
cast away) if it be rubbed therewith. If it cannot be suppurated, then Let it
be cut and opened.

II. That which we call Grando, being a round little rising or swelling,
transparent, and movable thither. It rises from a matter that is hard, even as
hard as a stone. It is to be Mollified and suppled with Ammoniacun dissolved in
Vinegar, and mingled together with the Fat of an Hen, or Turpentine and Wax.

III. That we call Madarosis, or a Shedding of the hair, which for the most part
invadeth the party after Malignant Fevers. See more hereof before, in the
second book. If there be together present with it a Crassitude or thickness, a
Callosity or insensible hardness, and a redness of color, and that the Eyelids
swel, and become shining, it is then named Ptillosis.

IV. Trichiasis when preternatural Hairs growing up under the Natural hair and
pointing inwardly, do prick the Tunicles of the eyes. It arises from Humors
flowing to the extremities of the Eyelids, either by Reason of some long
continued swelling, or else by reason of their being shut up, and, as it were,
bound in there. It is Cured, 1. By the Total Evulsion or drawing forth of the
peccant Humors (and an inunction or anointing with the blood of green Frogs
ought ever more to follow upon this said devulsion:) 2. By Corrosion, by
Corrosive Medicaments anointed upon the place with due caution. 3. By Section
or cutting, of which see further in the Practical Physicians.


V. Phalagosis, when (the Eyelids turning inward) the hairs appear not, unless
the Eyelids be lifted ^p. It arises, either from Pituitons Flegmy humor that
load and make heavy the Eyelids; or else from the exsiccation or excessive
drying of the Cartilage, together with a depression of the Skin toward the eye
brows, ever more following upon the former. For the Cure hereof you may
likewise consult other Authors.

VI. Phtiriasis, or a great abundance of Lice, arising from Nastiness and
Filthiness in those especially that seldom or never wash, and keep themselves
cleanly, and such as use a naughty and corrupt kind of Diet, delighting
themselves in unwholesome food; and sometimes also it has its rise and beginning
from Contagion and infection. It is to be timely and seasonably Cured, lest
that it excite and cause sharp Defluxions. And here (in this case) the washing
of the Eyelids, with the Decoction of Betony and Stavesacre, is much commended.

Chap. 3. Of the Affects, and what is amiss, in the Flesh that is in the
Corners of the Eyes.
THe Affects of this Angular flesh, are;

I. Rhyas, or a Diminution of the Caruncle, (Viz. The little piece of Flesh)
that is situate in the greater Angle or Corner of the Eye; upon which there
flow forth involuntary Tears. It arises either from a defect of Aliment; or
else from Corrosion, and this either proceeding from Corrosive Medicaments, or
else from the afflux of a sharp and Tart Humor, and it happneth after the
Epiphora or dropping of the Eyes with Rhume; the small Pox and Measils, and deep
Ulcers: or else from incision, which can by no means be Cured.

II. Encanthis, or the increment of the Caruncle according to the greater Angle
or Cornet of the Eye. It has its Original, either from the ill curing of the
Pterygia, (as we call them; they are certain distempers in the little wings and
as I may so term them, of the Eyes:) or else from an overgreat afflux of
aliment: if the Malady be great and of long standing, its not then to be Cured
without calling the assistance of Surgery.

III. Aegilops, which is a little swelling, arising betwixt the greater corner
of the eye and the root of the nose. It proceeds from a certain matter driven
forth to the Corner of the Eye. It is Variously divided; 1. Into Anchilops,
which is a Tumor not yet broken, and without any inflammation; it proceeds
from a dull and sluggish Humor, (somewhat resembling honey, and a Pultise) that
most commonly is shut up in the little bag thereof, and affecting the part,
without solution of Unity; and it is to be quite taken away by Section or
cutting, and 2. into Aegilops, properly so called, which is a swelling broken,
and with an inflammation. It is known by the smart and pain that attends it,
the change of its color, and the immobility and fixedness of the Tumor or
swelling.
It has its Rise from blood poured and shed forth of the Temple Veins, the
Forehead, or the Face Veins; and chiefly if there be a Concurrence of any
external Cause. It is Cured, 1. With some Difficulty, especially if it fiez
upon the deeper parts thereof, if when broken it retire inwardly, because that
it easily Corrupts and spoileth the bones that lie underneach it; if it come
near unto the Nature of a Cancer. 2. Is cured after the manner of other
inflammations.
And for the most part that kind of Fistula they call Lacrymal, follows and
attends upon it; which (as well by Reason of the continual afflux, as the
perpetual motion of the Eye) is for the most part to be accounted a Chronical
Malady and distemper. In its Cure, before it be consolidated, we ought well to
look and consider, whether or no it has contracted and gotten to it self a
Callum (as they term it) or insensibleness, and whether or no there be any bone
Corrupted which the roughness of the bone, or the sound and noise that it
makes will soon discover.

Chap. 4. Of the Diseases of the Adnata Tunicle.
Article, I. Of the Ophthalmie.
THe Parts Constituting the Eye, either they are the Tunicles, Viz. Adnata,
Cornea, Wea, and Aranea; or else they are the Humors thereof. The Diseases of
the Adnata, are, the Ophthalmy, Pterygium, Panniculus, and Hyposphasma; of the
which two latter, this is common to the Cornea Tunicle, that unto the Eyelids.

The Ophthalmy is an inflammation of the Adnata Tunicle, arising from a sharp
blood distending the small Veins thereof.

The SIGNS are, redness of the Eyes, a flowing forth of tears, a pain, etc.

The CAUSE is Blood, which either alone, or else castigated by other Humors,
sliding forth unto the part affected either by an afflux, or else by congestion
is dispersed through the Veins, and so distendeth them.

The CURE is Difficult, if it arise in cold Regions, and in a cold time,
because then the Members are more than at other times streightened and
confined; if it infest and annoy little Children, because that it continually
follows from a tender and weak Head; if the pain presevere and long abide,
because it argues a matter either corroding, or vehemently distending, or
suppurating; if it be by consent from the Membranes of the Brain, and the parts
contained within the Skin; if there appear in the Eye small grains of filth,
because these signify a slowness of Maturation. It is more easy, if it be by
Consent from the external parts; if the tears be more abundant, and more
smarting, because it comes the sooner to an end; if the belly be quick, in
regard that the looseness of the belly freeth the party from it. It is to be
accomplished, according to the Method of other Inflammations. It is to be noted
in this, that sometimes by Venesection the greatest Opthalmies are wholly taken
away within the space of an hour. 2. That Vesicatories applied behind the Ears
do very well draw back. For this purpose there is much commended by Hartman the
meat of the Herb Rocket in a quilted bag. 3. Errhines, (and those not
overstrong and violent) are to be administered, if the sick person has bin wont
to evacuate the excrements of the head by the Nostrils. 4. Topics are to be
applied, (but yet not until the end of three whole days) and these are to be
actually some that warm, without any the least mordacity or Carroding quality,
well cleansed and purified, and corrected by such repellers as are in their own
propriety helpeful; neither must they be too cool, nor too astringent, neither
over dry; and those may presently be put unto the forehead, and the neck; and
they are to be followed with Anodynes, which (if there be any fear of a greater
afflux) are very fitly applied to the eye, from the very beginning. 2. the
women's milk is every hour to be changed, lest that after long continuance it
contract a certain kind of acrimony from the heat of the eye. 3. Opium and
opiate medicaments are by no means to be admini^tred without great and urgent
necessity. 4. Great caution must be had, lest that there should be any
suppuration in the inward parts. 5. In the diet, wine and the use of baths (in
the declination of the disease) may very well and without danger be allowed and
permitted unto the sick person. A Cataplasme of the Crumbs of wheat bread and a
roasted apple, with the brest-milk of a woman, together with a little saffron
and sugar of saturn, is exceedingly commended. And so likewise is the water
that is made of the juicy substance of Craw-fish distilled, two pints thereof,
of Rose water one pint, and Crocus metalorum half an ounce, infused altogether:
as also of the waters of the eyebright, and Fennel, of each alike five ounces,
with metalorum one dram; unto which there may be added a fit proportion of
rosewater. Among the discussives, Sarcocol well washed, and the true Tutty of
the Arabians, (which dries without any kind of biting) obtain their place and
use.

The Differences of the ophthalmy is threfold.

I. One is that we call Taraxis, or a perturbation, which is known by this, that
the eyes only appear to be hotter, with a certain redness in them, and without
any great abundance of tears. It arises from external Causes, to wit, 1. the
heat of the Sun, or the fire: and then the Cataplasme before mentioned may very
si^ly be applied. 2. from a pain of the head contracted from the suns scorching
heat; and then likewise the aforesaid Cataplasme has its place, unless happly
general and Universal remedies ought altogether to preceed, and take the the
first place. 3. from wind, smoke, and dust; and the eyes are to be washed with
milk luke warm, and fleep to be taken thereupon. 4. from a blow, or a fall; and
then blood ought immediately to be drawn forth by opening a vein. 5. from the
stinging of a Be, Wasp, or Hornet; and then Repellers of the white of an Egg,
the breast milk of a woman, etc. are to be imposed.


Another is the true and genuine ophthalmy, which proceeds either from hot,
or from cold causes; and to this all that has been before spoken does properly
and chiefly belong.

Another is that we call Chemosis, whenas the eye lids are as it were inverted,
and ^urned the inside outward, (neither can they be closed) and then there
appears a swelling of something that is white above the black of the eye; and
this needs and requires the stronger sort of remedies.

II. Another is Periodical, which keeps its intervals; it is familiar unto hot
and moist heads; and at length it casts the eyes into a consumption. Another
is that, that keeps not its periods. Another is Contagious.

III. Another is Moist; (...) which we have now most chiefly treated.

Another dry, in the which there is but a very small flux of tears, and in the
nightime the Eyelids contract an hardness. It has its original from a humor
that is not much in quantity, but very salt and nitrous. And it is either with
an itching attending it; (which if tears gently flow forth, it is then called
Psorophthalmia; but if there be no tears at al, and that the eyes are only red,
without any swelling, it is then called Xerophthalmia) or else without an
itching, and with a certain hardness of the Eyelid, and then it is-termed
Sclerophthalmia. The Cure hereof follows the method of that before mentioned.

Article. II. Of the Nail, or little wing, the web, and the Hyposphagm of the
Eye.
I. The Nail (or little wing, as they term it) of the eye, or, as some call it,
the arrow, is a little membrane that is nervous, sibrous, and somewhat white,
which proceeds forth from the corners of the eyes (the greater of them
especially) and cleaves fast unto the Adnata tunicle; and is sometimes drawn
forth in length even unto the Cornea tunicle; and very often (if it so much
increase) covers and over spreads the Pupilla or Bal of the Eye.

This Affect needs no SIGNS, since that it is evidently exposed unto the
view. It is discerned from the Lachrymal flesh by its white shining brightness.

The CAUSE is Blood, mingled together with thick, viscid and clammy Humors,
flowing down from those parts that are contained betwixt the Skul and the Skin,
and bringing upon the place a certain kind of Scabbiness or scurfiness, which
while the nutritive faculty endevouereth to render and make equal, it produces
an increase of the membrance beyond the ordinary course of nature.

The CURE Requires. I. The Premising of the general and universal remedies.
II. the extertion and extirpation of the nail, after it has been for a while
fomented, either with a decoction, or some temperate distilled water. Among the
several sorts of medicaments, there is commended the powder that is made and
prepared of Egg-shels, and then cast upon the eyes; the Medicinal stone of
Crollius in the water of roses and Eye bright; the specific of ^artman, of the
fish Lucius we call it the Luce or Pike; the same Hartmans water of the whits of
Eggs; and other such like remedies; which if they be sharp and piercing, ought
to be quallified and corrected with Tragacanth, and the like; and exceeding
great Caution must be had, that the tunicle Cornea be not touched. III. It
requires Chyrurgery; of which you may see further, if you consult Authors upon
this very subject. IV. A Diet in which there ought to be an abstinence from
wine and meats that generate store of vapors.


It is many ways Divided I. One is that we call Albicans, or tending to
whiteness; Another there is that tends to a blackness, which is not to be
removed by any remedies whatsoever. II. Another Recent or new, which may soon
and very easily be dispersed, and quite taken away. Another is Inveterated and
old, unto which if a thickness chance to accrue, and be added thereto, it ought
then to be cut out: yet sometimes notwithstanding it sticks so close and
pertinaciously unto the Adnata tunicle, that it cannot be taken away thence, no
not by the Surgeon himself without manifest hazard and danger of hurting
the eye. III. Another is that which is produced only unto the Cornea tunicle,
and no further. Another, that is extended along even unto the very pupilla or
Eye-bal; and this if it be taken away, it indeed wholly freeth the eye from
fluxions; but if a Cicatrix or star be left remaining it very much hinders
the sight of the eye. IV. Another is Cancerous and Putrid, which admits of
no Cure at al; Another, that is not as the former.


II. The Pin or web of the Eye is a certain red substance like unto a small
piece of cloth, arising from the exuberancy and over great abounding of blood,
in the Exterior veins of the Eye.

There is here no need of SIGNS. There appears (especially in the superficies
of the tunicle Adnata) as it were a fleshy web, with an itching, a pain, an
offending of the eyes by the light, the sight obscured, or quite and clean
taken away.

The CAUSE is a blood derived unto the eyes, either simple and alone, or mixed,
either by the way of fluxion or of congestion; and this either by the external
vessels, and then the forehead swells a little; or otherwise; by the internal
vessels, and then there is a certain pain extending it self even unto the very
roots of the Eves.

The CURE is performed, I. By the Use of Vniversals, or remedies in general.
II. By Abstertion, by those things above mentioned. III. By Surgery;
touching which those Authors that are extant upon this Subject.


III. The Hyposphagm, or Sugillation (as they call it) is a blemish or spot,
reddish or black and blew, arising from blood poured forth of the veins being
opened, and common to the tunicle Cornea.

There is no need of SIGNS, forasmuch as the malady or Evil is easily
discovered by the very beholding of it.

The CAUSE is whatsoever may open the veins, whether it be External or
internal; as shall be further shown in the differences.

The CURE is Easy, in the beginning, It is performed (Universal or general
remedies having gone before) if the afflux be greater than is usual, by
discussives, at first such as are more gentle, and corrected by astringents;
but afterward, those that are stronger and more forcible, and yet withal such
as are void of acrimony and tartness, lest that there should more of the blood
be enticed and drawn forth unto the part affected.

It is Divided three manner of ways.

I. One is from Causes External, a blow, clamor, and sounding of trumpets; in
which we must presently have recourse unto Topical remedies, to wit, the
decoction of the flowers of Melilote, and of Roses, Fenugreek seed; Colliry
composed of the blood of Pigeons, taken out of their wings, two drams thereof;
the breast milk of a temperate Woman half an ounce, and frankincence one
scruple. Another is from internal Causes, to wit either great store of blood,
(where Venesection must by no means be ommitted) or else from the extraordinary
great heat thereof; and then the spot or blemish tends unto a Citrine color.
We must withstand and oppose the inflammation by the white of an Egg well shaken
together: if there present any Pus or filthy purulent matter the same is to be
lessened by a Collyry composed of the Muciluge of fenngreek, with fennel water
and honey of Roses.

II. Another is Recent and new beginning; in which the blemish is of a red
color. Besides the Topical rememdies above mentioned, the tops of hissop boy
led in ordinary and common water, tied up in a little bage, and so applied, is
of singular use and bennifit in discussing the peccant matter. Another is
inveterate and of long standing; in the which the spot or blemish is black and
blew. And for this we usually prescribe (as most proper and convenient) a
Colliry composed of the Juice of the greater Selandine and Carduus Benidictus,
of each half an ounce; of the fat of the bird they call Quoestula (or Queist)
liquified and dissolved, two drams, and of mirrh half a scruple; as also the
Root of sigillum Solomonis or Solomon's Seal, well shaken together, etc.

III. Another is, When blood is cast forth either into the Adnata or the Cornea
Tunicle. And another, When it is cast forth into both these Tunicles at once,
and together; and then all the Objects that the Sick person looks upon seem
to be of a color tending to Redness.

Chap. 5. Of the Diseases of the Tunicle Cornea.
Article, I. Of Crassities, Nebula, and Albugo.
THe Diseases of the Tunicle Cornea, are, Crassities or a certain kind of
thickness, Nebula, (or a little Cloud) Albugo, (or a white spot in the Eye)
Pustules or Pushes, Ulcers, Wounds, and Pain.

I. Crassities (or thickness) Is an extreme drying of the substance thereof,
and therewithal there Joined a certain Corrugation or winkling. It is known by
this, that (as it were) in the superficies thereof there appears a little
blood, and the sick persons see as through smoke. It arises either from the
incautelons and careless Application of Cold Remedies, and this especially
after an Ophthalmy; or else from Gross and thick humors, that insinuate
themselves. In the Cure, there is to be commended the Juice of Salendine
pressed forth, and instilled into the Eyes drop by drop.

II. Nebula or the little cloud, as the Color of the Tunicle Cornea, altered
and changed by a subtle Humor flowing forth. That which is prevalent in this
case, is the powder of Margarites prepared, in the water of Roses and Fenel;
and the Cataplasm of Platerus, in his second Book and 19. Observation.

III. Albugo or (as they call it) Lencoma, is a white spot, rendering the Cornea
(tunicle) so thick, that there is denied al manner of passage unto the visibl
species. It arises either from a Cicatrix (or scar) after a wound, or an
ulcer; and then the Cure is difficult in those that are ancient; but more easy
in children and young people. It is performed, 1. By the appliing of emmollents
or mollifiers. 2. By abstersion, where the watter of Rosemary flowers dropped
into the eyes, and the fat of the fish Mustela, have their place and use.
Or else it proceeds from phlegm gathered together betwixt its lapps; and then
the Cure is easy. And to this end the purpose excellent good is the colyry that
it prepared of Lapis Calaminaris thrice burnt and twice extingwished in wine
vinegar, one scruple hereof, Myrrh, lead burnt and washed, of each half
ascruple, of Oriental Saffron five grains, opium eleven grains, of burnt brass
four scruples, the decoction af fenugreek one ounce; al these thoroughly beaten
together and incorporated upon a marble stone or Porphyry.

Article. II. Of the Pustules and Ulcers of the tunicle Cornea.
Pustuls are little risings, that are common to the Adnata and Cornea tunicles.
They are known by the very sight in magnitude equalling the grain or seed of a
millet, of a black color, of an exact roundness, and in that they exhibet not a
white circle in the bottom; by these they are distinguished from the falling
forth of the Wea (the fourth Membrane, or thin Skin) of the Eye. They arise
from a Humor that is sharp and serous or Wheyish, lifting up the tunicles. They
are Cured the more easily, if they be in the Adnata Tunicle; but with more
Difficulty, if they be nigh unto the Pupilla or Bal of the Eye: and not at al
by any means possible, if the Cornea be broken into the internal part. They are
divided in a twofold manner, Like as the Ophthalmy. I. Some are with an
inflammation, which are Cured like as other inflammations. Saccharum Saturni (or,
the Sugar of Saturn) with the water of Eye bright, is (here) of al Remedies the
best and chiefest. Others from a waterish Humor, which require Exsiccating and
drying Remedies, as for instance, Tutia Lapis Calaminaris, etc. II. Others are
Superficial, called Epicaumata, which appear in a darker color. Others more
deep, under the second or the third film, (called Encaumata) which by reason of
the whitness of the Cornea Tunicle seem to be the whiter; and are therefore
dangerous, because they can and often do eat through the whole Cornea Tunicle.


II. The Ulcers of the Cornea Tunicle arise, sometimes from External, and
sometimes from things Internal, or that flow in, or that are heaped up together;
And they have various and different names given them, (by which they are
sufficiently known and distinguished) according to the variety of
Circumstances. That is called Bothrion, that is hollow, narrow, and hard.
Roiloma, that which is broader, but not so deep. Argemon, that that arising in
the External party colored circle of the Eye, and being of somewhat a Red color
round about the external part of this circle that is parti-colored, but white
about the internal part thereof, Comprehends likewise within it al things
that surround and encompass it. As touching the Cure, it is to be well observed,
that Medicaments are to be applied and put to the Forehead, and also unto the
Temples, (that so the influx may be impeded, and that the said Medicaments
ought to be gentle and temperate. The Ophthalmick Water of Mynsichtus is (here)
by some exceedingly extolled.

Article, III. Of the Wounds of the Cornea (Tunicle) and the pain of the Eyes.
The Wounds of the Cornea (in general) require, 1. Evacuation, and that more
especially by Venesection. 2. Revulsion, (that so the inflammation may be
prevented, and hindered, and the pain mitigated) by Cataplasms imposed upon the
Eyelids alone, that so both the Eye and the Eyelids may be opened. 3. By
Consolidation.
And for this purpose, there is very much commended that part of the white of
an Egg which the Germans call das Tuchen, and the Italians Galatura, well beaten
together; as also the Red Oil of Saturn. If we consider the Differences, 1.
Sometimes the Cornea alone is wounded; but then again sometimes together with it
the Eyelids likewise; where care must be taken that they be not glewed
together with the Eye. 2. Sometimes the wounds do not penetrate so deep.
Sometimes the Cornea, is broken, and then there flows forth a Watery Humor,
which likewise happens in Ulcers.
And then, if the wound be Narrow, it has in it the less danger: but if the
Wea (Viz. The fourth Membrane, or thin Skin of the Eye) fall forth, it is
altogether incurable. The Cure is one and the same with that of a wound and
Ulcer of the Eyes.

II. The pain of the Eyes, chances unto and befalls the Eyes, chiefly and
especially by Reason of the External Tunicles. It is known by the Relation of
the sick party. It arises from Causes that Excite and hasten the Solution of
Unity. It is Cured by taking away the Causes. It is Mitigated by the Whites of
Eggs, the Pap of a roasted Apple with Sugar, Camphire, Saffron, Rose Water, and
the Brest-Milk of a Woman. We must (here) beware that we preseribe not the use
of any Opiates whatsoever.

Chap. 6. Of the Diseases of the Uvea.
Article, I. Of the falling forth of the Uvea, and the Dilatation, Widness and
Narrowness of the Pupilla, Viz. The Bal or Apple of the Eye.
THe Diseases of the Wea (one of the Tunicles in the Eye) are, the falling
forth of the said Wea, the Dilatation of the Pupilla, the Narrowing and
contracting of the same, as also the Suffusion thereof.

I. The Wea falls forth, when the Unity of the Cornea is Dissolved, either
by wounds, or by Ulcers. It is known, and discerned from Pushes, from hence,
that the part that falls forth is either black, or Skie-colored, and in the
bottom of it exhibiteth a white Incle, (which is from the Lips of the Cornea
eaten through) and the Pupilla, or Eye-bal, appears as if pulled asunder in
some one certain part thereof. It is Cured by Medicaments that are Astringent
without any asperity; and if it be not removed by these, then it is requisite
that we make use of the incision knife. For the Differences see further in
Aegin^la.

II. The Dilatation of the Pupilla, called Mydriasis and Platucoria, is when
the Pupilla is enlarged (above and besides the ordinary course of nature)
toward the it is or parti-colored circie of the eye. It is known by this, that
the sick persons (either by reason of too much of the External light breaking
in upon the eyes, or else, in regard that because of the falling of the Sun
beams in an oblique manner upon them, (these oblique ways being weaker than
those that are perpendicular they are not able to see and discern so clearly
and acutly, when they would look upon any object, they then a little close
their eyes, and the one of them being shut, the pupilla of the other cannot be
dilated. It arises from the Extension and stretching out of the Wea, (of
which this said Pupilla is the hole or inlet) either by reason of external, or
else internal causes. For the Cure hereof, it must be sought for in the
differences. It is divided in a threefould manner. I. One is native, and such
as is contracted from the very birth. Another Adventitious, and happening
accidentally. II. Another is from external Causes, as a blow, or a fall from on
high, etc. which^^^ it be altogether without any inflammation, is easily and
soon cured but not so if it be accompanied with a rupture of the Wea. Another
from Causes internal, which are particularly expressed in the following
difference. III. Another is from siccity or drynes extending the Wea, (like as
we see in skins or hides that are perforated) and this is not to be cured
without some difficulty. The best remedy in this case is Goats milk, if the eye
be well washed therewith and as it were drenched therein. Another from humidity;
the cure whereof is so much the more easy, if it chance not after an extreme
and Vehement pain of the Head.
It is performed (universal and general Remedies being first premized) by the
drawing forth of blood out of the Temple Veins, and the Veins in the corners of
the Eyes, and by the applying of Cupping-Glasses in the hinder part of the
Head, and Leeches behind the Ears; and likewise by the Use of Resolving
Medicaments (among which salted Water is much commended) that have in them but
little of astriction. Another from blasts and blowings, (which happens unto
Trumpeters) and these flaculencies or windinesses are to be discussed and
scattered, as aforesaid, in affects of the like Nature.

III. The straightness or narrowness of the Pupilla (which they term Myosis) is
when it is rendered and made narrower than naturally it ought to be. It is
known by this, that al objects whatsoever that the sick persons look upon seem
bigger than indeed they are; that the visible species being conveied in through
a straight and narrow inlet, may be and are dilated in that broader space near
unto the Crystaline humor. It arises from the contraction of the Wea. It is
Cured, according to the Nature and quality of the differences. It is Divided
according to the diversity of the Causes. One is from overmuch humidity,
contracting the Wea from the Circumference toward the Center; For the which,
those Medicaments that are exsiccating and drying, (such are Rue and Selandine)
are a very fit and propper Remedy. Another is from a defect of the watery
humor; and then the Patient will see and discern better in the room that is
obscure and dark; because that the visible species are more aptly and speedily
Conveyed unto the Crystaline humor. In this case an aliment and supply is to be
attracted and drawn unto the part, by applying of milk and sweet water unto the
head. Another is from a more scant and spare afflux of the visive spirits unto
the said Pupilla.

Article. II. Of a Suffusion.
A Suffusion (otherwise termed Hypochyma) is an obstruction of the Pupilla,
bindering the sight, and caused by a humor consisting in the eye, and residing
in that part thereof.

The SIGNS are diverse, according to the quality and Condition of the rise and
original, of the augmentation, and of the perfection or Period thereof; and
they shall severally and apart be explained in the differences.

The CAUSE is a humor, either sincere and single; or else mingled; whether it
be there collected, or transmitted thi^her by the veins of the tunicles, the
Wea tunicle, or the Nerves. It is collected most especially in those eyes that
are great and sticking out (we term them Goggle eyes) in regard that the visive
virtue, when it is diffused in a wide space, is the more infirm and weak, and
the laxity of the ways or passages affords a very facile and easy entrance.

The CURE is difficult, if it chiefly happen from a feave, or some
extraordinary vehement pain of the head; if it chance unto young childeren or
old aged people; and none at al, if the suffusion be black; if the sick person
discern not the light. It is wrought (if at al) I. By the drawing forth of the
obstructing matter by purging Phlegmagogues, and especially hiera, and the
electuary that they call diacarthamus; but before these we may premise and
administer preparatives. II. By revulsion of the same matter by
Cupping-Glasses, Vesicatories, etc. III By a discussion of the said matter by
Topics mingled with Emollints or mollifiers, and the clearing and cleansing of
the eyes. And here (for this purpose) there is commended the water called aqua
Joelis, the remmedy of Bovius, formed of the gal of a Cock, half an ounce, the
blood of a mouce three drams and a half, and so made up (like unto a Colliry)
with the breast-milke of a woman: or else water of man's dung, known by the name
of aqua stercoris humani Elambicata, with the gal of a Weasel, and likewise of
a hare, saccharo caudi rosato, and margarites prepared. IV. By Chirurgical
operation; of which we are (for further satisfaction in this point) to consult
those Authors that have treated at large upon this subject.


The Differences of a Suffusion are Various.

I. In regard of its Situation; 1. One is in the Center of the Pupilla, which
Represents the Objects as though they came and passed through the Windows;
and this ought not by any means to be attempted by the needles point, lest that
the whole Pupilla be filled with the peccant Humor flowing thereunto. 2. Another
resideth between the Wea and the Cornea Tunicle; and then the Pupilla is
evidently seen to be extremely obscured and darkened; and the Pupilla is of
necessity dilated by Reason of the Humor that distendeth it. 3. Another
resideth betwixt the Wea and the Crystalline humor; and then the opposite unto
the former do manifestly appear. 4 Another is seated in a deeper place; and
then the Pupilla is very narrow and much straightened. Another is situate in a
place less profound and deep, and then the said Pupilla is larger and wider.


II. They differ in regard of the degrees; for One is but new beginning, and
then there fly to and again before the Eyes as it were Gnats or some certain
other dark and dim appearances. Another is Augmented; and then the color of the
Pupilla appears like unto that we call seagreen; or else it is like unto the
Air when full of little Clouds. Another is Perfect; in which the sick person
discerns nothing at al; and then the Pupilla appears to be of a white color.

III. They differ in regard of their Cause: 1. One is from a thin matter and
such as is Fluxile (as for most part it is wont to be in the beginning) and
then, if there be present a Plethory, we may prescribe Venesection, and cause a
Vein to be opened. Another is thick, clammy, and tenaceous and then we ought to
abstain from bloodletting. 2. Another resembles the clear and pure air; as
also it resembles silver, Playfter or Parget, and Margarites; and this kind
leaves some Hopes of a Cure. Another is black, which is by no means to be
Cured, no not by the Needle. Another is Green; which is likewise altogether
incurable.


IV. Another is that which is truly and properly so called; (and of this all that has hitherto been said upon this subject ought to be understood;) which
siezeth only upon one of the Eyes; or else if both, yet not together, not a
like, and whose Symptoms are constant and continual. Another is Bastard and
Spurious, which carries it self quite contrary unto the former; and arises
from a Vapor ascending from the imferiour parts; and is wholly taken away,
when the Affect is removed.

Chap. 7. Of what is amiss in the Humors of the Eyes.
THe Humors that (together with the Tunicle) constitute the Eyes are in number
three, to wit, the Watery, the Chrystalline, and the Glassie Humor.

I. The Faults or things amiss in the Watery are especially sour. I. The
Diminution thereof, by reason of heat, dryness overmuch Evacuation; which in
regard that it is conjoined with the dryness of the whole body, is there not to
be Cured without much difficulty. II. Effusion, when it is poured out, which
happens in the Rupture of the Cornea; and then a wound or Ulcer went before;
the Cornea Tunicle lies underneath. This Humor is sometimes bread again of its
own arising from the admixture of thick Humors or Vapors; and then the Humor
appearth not to be altogether so clear as it is wont; and certain resemblances
or babies (as we term them) fly up and down before the Eyes; etc. IV.
Obscuration, and another kind of Color, by Reason of the Humors that are
therewith mingled. These things may be well known at the first sight and by the
very view.


II. Those things that are amiss in the Crystalline Humor are especially these.
I. Glaucoma, when this Humor is turned into a Gray color. It is known by this,
that about the Pupilla there appears a notable and manifest whitness somewhat
deeply seated, and al things are seen as it were through smoke and little
clouds. It arises from exsiccation, which happens either by Reason of Age,
or else from some other Cause. II. Solidity and Obscurity, which therefore
needs a greater illumination; from whence proceedeah that we call Nuclalopia,
or a Nocturnal blindness; with the which such as are affected, see
indifferently well in the day time, but more obscurely and dimly after sunset,
and in the night time nothing at al. III. The Situation changed, which is wont
to happen many ways. 1. Upwards or downwards, from whence the incruciation (as
they call it) or Crossing of the Optics is dissolved; or else the Axes of the
Pyramids thereof are fixed in a double plane, and so al things appear double,
2. At the sides, and then things appear more on the right side, or on the left,
than indeed they are. 3. Toward the middle and the Center; from whence it is
that those things that are night at hand are rightly seen, but things more
remote are not distinctly enough discerned. 4. Beyond the middle and Center,
toward the Optic; and then those things that they desire to discern, they are
constrained of necessity to lay them close to their Eyes. Toward the Pupilla
or Bal of the Eye; and then they rightly discern those things that are remote
and at a distance from the Eyes.



III. Those things that are amiss in the Vitreous or Glassie Humor are, I. The
Augmentation thereof, by which not only the Pupilla is the more dilated, but
likewise the Crystalline Humor is obscured, and has as it were a mist and
shadow, cast before it, and the Spirits also much dulled and blunted. II.
Diminution; from whence the Tunicles are wrinkled up together, the Pupilla
contracted, and falling down above the Crystallaine Humor and abbreviating the
space betwixt it and the Tunicles (in the which the external splendours meet
together) produces the very like affect as in those that wink with one or both
Eyes that they may the better behold the bright body of the Sun. III. A
Crassitude, or thickness, which arise^h either from the mingling together
therewith of an humor, or else from the admixture of some other adventitious
substance.


Chap. 8. Of those Diseases that infest and annoy the Globe of the Eye.
THose Diseases that infest and affect the Globe of the Eye, are, Atrophy,
Procidency or standing out, and Strabismus or Squinteyedness; unto the which
may be added out of the Symptoms, the Debility or weakness of the sight, and
stark blindness.

I. Atrophy is then, when the parts of the Eyes consume and wast away. It
arises most especially from excessive Evacuation, and over great exsiccation.
It is Cured, by those Medicaments that humectate and moysten (and chiefly the
Breast-Milk of a Woman) laid therein.

II. Procidency, when the Eye either stands out of its Orb in an unusual and
unbeseeming manner; or otherwise falls out so (at least) that it cannot be
covered with the Eyelids. It arises from Causes as well External (a blow
blowing of Trumpets, strangling, Hard Labor in Child bearing, etc.) as
internal, to wit, the resolution of the Muscles and Nerves, a Tumor thrusting
forth the Eye, etc. In the Cure we must have regard. 1. Unto the putting back
of the Eye into its proper sear, or if that may not be done, then wholly to
take it away. 2. Unto the Deteining and keeping of the same in its place or
seat, by Fomentations made of Astringents, to wit, Roses, Pomegranate flowers,
and Acacia.
Neither must we forget to let blood; and the inflammation is likewise to be
repelled and driven back. If Resolution be the cause thereof, then
Apophlegmatisms are very available.

III. Strabismus is then, when the Pupilla or bal of the Eye declineth from the
midst, so that it appears more in one part of the Eye than in the other. It
arises, either from an ill frame and composure at the first from the very
Womb, and then it is not by any means to be Cured: or else it chances from an
ill custom, as it is usually to be seen in infants: and in this case Vizards or
Masks are to be put upon the Face, having in them a place and holes made fit
for the Eyes to look forth at, that so by them the visive rays may be sent
forth. Or else from a Convulsion or Resolution of the Muscles, and then some
Disease went not long before.

IV. The Weakness of the sight, and Blindness; they differ at leastwise in the
greatness of the Causes. It arises either from the fault of the Brain that
makes and yields not a sufficient supply of the Animal spirits (from whence
likewise the rest of the senses are most commonly affected) or else from some
thing amiss in the Animal spirits themselves, which ought to be bright and
shining, thin, and good store of them. And these are to be corroborated with
those Medicaments usually termed Oxydorcicks; among which there are the water
of Rosemary with Sal Gem, the water of the distillation of Junipers, Nutmeg,
Myrobalans those of them called Chebulae, etc. or else from some default in the
Optic nerves, which are either too much straigtened, and Narrow, (from whence
proceeds that we term Gutta Serena, (in the which there is not any thing at
al to be taken notice of as amiss in the Eyes, unless it be that the Pupilla
appears blacker and larger:) or else they are broken, or writhed together. Or
else, lastly, from some fault in the Humors and Tunicles; of which enough has
been spoken in what went before.

Title, IV. Of the Diseases of the Ears:
HItherto has been spoken of the Diseases and things amiss in the Eyes; in the
next place, the Diseases of the Ears are, an Inflammation, an Ulcer, and Worms.

I. An Inflammation, or Tumor, is known from the most vehement beating pain in
the part affected, and by a redness of color extending it self even as far as
the Cheeks and the Temples: there accrue likewise and Join herewith a Fever,
dotings, and sometimes also Convulsion fits. It arises from Blood that is thin
and Choleric, fallen forth of the small Veins of the Brain into the Membranes
of the Ear. The Cure is doubtful, by Reason of the greatness and intensiveness
of the Symptoms, and especially in such as are young; which yet notwithstanding
(if they live beyond the seventh day) are wont to escape it. And likewise in
Infants and little Children, which by reason of the quickness of their sense
are the less able to sustein and undergo the sharpness of the pain. It is
accomplished, like as in the Cure of other inflammations, only by the way let
these things be well observed; 1. That the Cephalic Vein is to be opened, for
Revulsions sake, 2. That we must not easily be drawn to make use of Repellers;
but if at any time we do chance to make use of them, they are then to be
mingled with those things that moderate and assuage pain, such as are Women's
Breast-milk, and other the like. 3. That in furthering and promoting of the
Suppuration, there ought to be provided a ready and expedite Composition of
Figs boiled in Milk, and well mashed and beaten together with Hogs Grease. 4.
That for the Rupture, we must administer (as that that in this is much approved
of) the Juice of a small Frog, with a fourth part of the Breast-Milk of a Woman.
Leeches are here succesfully to be placed and applied behind the Ears.
It is divided into an Inflammation profound and deep, in which (by Reason of
the Compression of the greater Arteries) the beating is so much the greater;
and the pain (because of the near neighboured of the Brain) the more Vehement;
and which (by Reason that Nerve called Auditorius is affected) has very much
danger in it; and that which is less Profound and deep, which is in all
Particulars apposite to the former.

II. An Ulcer, which is known by the filth and corrupt matter and also the
blood that issues forth. It arises from those things that either pour forth
Pus or matter, or else such as by their acrimony and tartness are of a
Corroding Nature. It is Cured like as other Ulcers. It is te be washed with
warm Wine, in which Roses and Ivy Leaves have been boiled. It is to be well and
thoroughly cleansed either with Wine wherein betony has been made scalding hot,
or else with honeyed Water, in which the Root of white Hellebor has been
sodden, or at least, has lain until the said water be seething hot. It is
divided sundry ways. 1. One is from an impostum broken after the Inflammation.
Another is from biting and corroding Humors that by their acrimony exulcerate
the Ear. Another from the filth and impurities of the Ears over long kept in
and detained. Another from some sharp and tart liquor from without slipped into
the Ear, and which thereby gnawing and eating causes an Ulcer; in the Cure
whereof we are to have respect unto their proper Causes. 2. Another is Recent,
and but new begun; in which (the pain of the Head, and the preturbation of the
senses ceasing at and after the flowing forth of the rotten filth and
Corruption) there is then some good Hope of a Cure appearing forth. Another is
inveterate, and such as very easily degenerateth into a Fistula, and
contracteth a kind of Scurf and crustiness. III. Another is Fistulous, which is
to be known by the oldness and long continuance of the Ulcer, the Virulency of
the filth, and the Callosity or hard insensible thickness of the Flesh; for
which the Wine wherein Frankincense or white Hellebor have been boiled, is
exceeding good and applyable. Another not so as the former. IV. Sometimes a
stinking filth flows forth at the Ears, upon the breaking of an impostumation
in the brain; and then, there first of al issues out great store of the said
filth, but then afterward it is sent forth by some and some at a time, until
that at length al of it be consumed and wasted; and there went likewise before
signs of the Inflammation of the Brain; and hereunto the Care ought to look, as
mainly respecting it. Sometimes again (without any Apostem) there is sent forth
a certain filth that is generated and bred in its Veins; and then, after it
has been once exhausted it is again and again heaped up as before; and here
head purgations are exceeding profitable and useful. The Vrin of an Ass or of a
young Child, in which the shavings of the wood Guaiacum have laien a good while
soaking, does much good if conveyed thereinto. V. Sometimes, the flowing of the
said filth being ceased, all the pain is vanished and gone. Sometimes again
(there being some certain filth and clods as it were of Corrupt blood left deep
in the bottom of the Ear) the pain still remains; and then we ought thoroughly
to cleanse the impure place with honyed water together with the Gal of a Bull,
the Oil of bitter Almonds, Vinegar well warmed with the best Honey, etc. And
this especially in ^ase there be Clods of blood.

III. Worms, which discover themselves by the corroding pain, restlessness, and
other such like conjectural Symptoms. How these Worms ought to be drawn forth,
see further in the Practitioners. They are killed by the Ointment of Capons
Grease, and the Oil of the Hazel Nut or Filberds, mingled with two grains of
Mercurius Dulcis, and so put into the Orifice of the Ears with Silk: they are
killed with the Decoction of Hemp into the part affected.

IV. Water fallen into the Ear is again drawn forth by infusing Oil thereinto.

Ticle, V. Of the Symptoms of the Ears.
Chap. 1. Of Pain, and Deafness.
THe Symptoms of the Ears, are, Pain, Deafness, Tingling, and a Hardness of
hearing, together with a mistaking therein.

The Pain needs no signs: in Infants if the part be but touched, it is then
discovered by the moan and complaint that is made. It arises from Causes
distending the Membranes encompassing about the Cavity of the Ear, and endued
with an exquisite sense. The Cure hereof is somewhat doubtful, if it infest and
annoy those that are young and tender; if in those that are declining in years
it be accompanied with frequent Relapses; and if it abide and keep its
residence in the deeper part or bottom of the Ear. It is performed by Anodynes,
and if it be Vehement and intolerable, by those Medicaments that stupefie.
Among these are the green Leaves of Tobacco moystened either with a specifical
and proper Water, or at least with Rue Water, and so applied, together with
three grains of Opiate Laudanum. Those things that are applied externally ought
to be gentle, lest that the pain be exasperated and Augmented.

The Differences are taken especially from the Causes.

I. One there is from Externals, as to instance, from somewhat fallen thereinto
from a Wound, etc. which are al to be known by the Relation of the sick person.
Another there is from Causes internal; to wit, a Distemper either without or
with matter; and this either cold, (in which the Juice of Onions with some kind
of liquor is very helpful) or else hot, in which the Breast-Milk of a Woman
together with the Juyces of cooling Herbs do much avail and profit: a Wind, for
the which those things are useful and proper, which in the following discourse
touching the noise and sound in the Ears, remain further to be spoken of: from
an Inflammation, of which enough has been above said: or lastly, from an Ulcer
and corrupt matter, of which likewise sufficiently in the same place.

Deafness is an Abolition of the Hearing, differing from that we call Barucoia,
or Hypocophofis, (in the which a man not without much difficulty hears and
perceives sounds although at a Just and meet distance) only in regard of the
greatness and intensiveness of the Cause. It arises from the default of those
things that concur to the constitution and perfection of the Hearing, and I. Of
the Brain, in that it either produces no Animal spirits, or else does not
transmit them, by Reason of some peculiar Disease. II. Of the Auditory Nerve,
which has no passage or conveyance for the said spirits, either by Reason of
some thing amiss in its very frame and formation; (and hence for the most part
those that are deaf are likewise dumb; and this kind of Deafness is altogether
incurable) or else by means of some obstruction, thickness, etc. III. Of the
Animal Spirit it self, which either is not at al generated, by reason of some
extraordinary great distemper of the Brain; or else is abolished, by reason of
the extreme straightness and narrowness of the passages: or otherwise it
passes not through, by Reason of something amiss in the Nerve: or else it is
but very little, and that likewise over thick and impure, by Reason of the
Ambient Air, or from other Cause. IV. Of the Inbred air; which either fails,
(to wit, by Reason of a wound, or an Ulcer, etc.) and passes forth; dissipated
and Scattered by noises and sounds, the contusion of the Head, or a Vehement
affect of the Brain; not restored and made good again, by Reason of a failing
and want of Nourishment: or else it is impure, either from some matter, sent
thither from the brain, or from elsewhere. V. Of the Auditory Passage, which
either is formed amiss. Or else stopped, and that either but in part, and then
there is only a diminution of the Hearing; or else wholly and altogether, and
hence it is that the external sound is not at al perceived, but then there is
another new one produced by the Air left remaining there; or else from things
External falling or sent thereinto; or otherwise from internal Humors,
filthiness and impurities, Ulcers, etc. Or else it is condensed and thickened,
by an Inflammation, some small Tumor or rising, etc. Or else, lastly compressed
and thrust together, by Reason of some fracture of the Bones. VI. Of the
Tympanum or drum, which may be broken, loosened, rendered thicker or drier,
extended, and otherwise infested by an inflammation arising about or near unto
it. VII. Of the three little Bones, which either are not rightly formed, or
else are moved out of their place. And yet notwithstanding most frequently from
a Pituitous and Phlegmatic or Choleric humor, which happens in acute and
violent Fevers; and sometimes it discovers that the matter is carried forth
unto the exterior parts. In the Cure hereof we must see and look well to it,
that the Medicaments be applied Warm; that there be no new remedies laid to,
until after that all the filth and Impurities be thoroughly cleansed and wiped
away; that there be never more than three drops conveyed in at once; that we be
not over forward in tampering with those things that are Viscous and Clammy;
and the sick person lie upon that Ear that is sound and well: and lastly, that
there be care taken of the Head. There are here commended, the destilled Water
of Carduus Benedictus, the Leaves thereof being twice infused in the Glass
Vessel; the Juice of an Onyon well soaked in the spirit of Wine, and then
roasted under the Embers; the Juice that is pressed forth of Ants Eggs, or the
destilled Water of the same; the Gal of an Hare with a like proportion of
Virgin Honey, and such like; of all which you may see further in Petraeus, and
Hartmannus.


Chap 2. Of the Noise or Ringing of the Ears, and thickness of Hearing.
THis Tinnitus or Ringing noise is Defined to be a Preternatural sound in the
Ears, made and perceived in the instrument of hearing, or else in the Cavity of
the Head bone, arising from Vapors, first shut up therein, and then moved.

In this Affect there is no need at all of Signs.

The CAUSE is conjectured to be that which they term Pneuma Physodes, as it
preternaturally moves up and down the inbred Air. Now this indeed arises, 1.
Either of it self, or otherwise by the Consent and agreement of other parts, to
wit, the Spleen, the Liver, the Womb, the Stomach, etc. And then there are
present certain signs of those parts affected. 2. Or else from External Causes
exciting and raising up Vapors, to wit, the extreme cold or over great heat of
the Air, overmuch feeding, and fullness either of food or Wine, from whence
Crudities are heaped up together in the Head; from the north wind blowing
immediately after the South wind, which is very easily removed; from frequent
smiting upon the Head and Temples; which is very difficultly Cured, in regard
that (the Humors by Reason of the pain flowing together unto the Organs of
hearing) it is wont to turn into a deafness. Or else from Internal Causes that
send forth the very same; and this 1. By Breaths and blasts that are over
heating, and filling forth that little Artery that runs under the Ear; and
then the Disease is wont to be of long continuance: and here we are to deal
with those Remedies (whether Decoctions or Juyces) that both cool and moisten.
Opium may likewise in this case be administered, but then it must be with very
great caution. 2. From a Humor Phlegmatic and cold, and then the Malady began
by little and little, and from less to greater; and returns likewise at some
certain seasons and by intervals; the noise or sound is cleerer and more
distinct than ordinary; and lastly, there were some Causes of the same that
went before. In the Curing hereof (general Remedies being evermore premized,
and taking the first place) we are to act operate by such things as attenuate
and discuss, (which ought to be applied in the morning, and before Supper;) as
namely, the Vapor of Vinegar together with an Ox Gall; the Secret Remedy that
is Compounded of those little Worms that he betwixt the wood and the bark of
the Oak Tree, and the Oil of Rue, and that Oil likewise known by the name of
Olium Castinum; (see further hereof in Petraeus:) the prepared Gal of the fish
Lucius, or the Pike, (as we commonly call it) and the Fume or smoke of the Herb
Mercury. 3. From a Choleric Humor, and then it chances in Fevers; it also
seizes the Patient either Symptomatically or Critically; and sometimes it is
dissolved and vanishes of its own accord; and sometimes again not until after a
Choleric flux of the Belly. 4. From filth and Impurities, which ought to be
washed forth with the destilled Urin of an Ass or a little Child, in the which
there has been first well soaked a fit quantity of the Wood Guaiacum, a due
proportion of Castoreum, and a little bundle of wild mints. 5. From an
Apostume, which discovers it self by its own signs.



Thickness, as we term it, or hardness of Hearing, (otherwise called
Paracousis) is then, When the hearing preceiveth its object ^ry confusedly. And
this is Caused, either by an Ulcer not rightly cleansed and consolidated, when
as the Windy Vapor being driven through the Arteries by its impetuous violence
offends the hearing, or else in Fevers, Vapors being lifted up into the
Head, and then poured forth into the Ears. Or else without any Fever, when
there is a hot Evaporation continually and without any intermission exhaled and
drawn up into the Head from the impure Entrails.

Title, VI. Of the Diseases and Symptoms of the Nostrils.
Chap. I. Of the Ulcers of the Nostrils, as also of Ozaena, and Polypus.
THe Affects of the Nostrils, are, Ulcers, Ozaena, Polypus, the Hemorrhage,
hurt of the Smelling, Stuffing thereof by a Rheum falling down from the Head
thereinto, and Sternutation or Sneezing.

The Ulcers of the Nostrils happen sometimes from a blow, a Contusion, a fall, a
wound, and other Causes that are evident, and sometimes from the Acrimony of
those things that pass by them, as Salt Phlegm, etc. They are known, divided,
and Cured, like as are other Ulcers, accordingly as we have shown in the first
Book. The principle Difference is that whereby they are divided into Ulcers
Recent and newly begun, and those that are Old, as having been of a long
continuance. Recent Ulcers are known from hence; that they very frequently
issue forth a small quantity of blood, and that more especially when they are
hard touched upon, and thereby Irritated; and that the Nostrils are by this
oftentimes moystened: and that if they be suffered and let alone; they are then
over grown and covered over with a dry scurf and crustiness and that most
usually of a black color, which sometimes falls off upon the strong and
Violent cleansing of the Nostrils by blowing of them.

II. That that is Old and invetterate, and now become a putrid ulcer, is called
Ozena. It is known from hence, that from it there falls off a more and filthy
crustiness, and likewise that there issues therefrom a kind of snotty filth,
of a very il and offensive savor; insomuch that then the sick person is
himself offended with the stench thereof, and is likewise very noysom and
offensive unto al those that are near about him by the contagion of a foul and
stinking breath; and that, if the mallady be of long standing, the wings (as we
call them) of the nostrils, or that that stands betwixt them, or the other
tender and soft bones of that place are eaten through and putrefied; and the
palate also being eaten through is oftentimes perforated; and this especially
chances, if it has the resemblance of a Canker, or be contracted and caused
by the venereal and foul disease. It has its original either from externals,
to wit, suffumigations from Mercury and Cinaber inconsideratly administered: or
else from internals, to wit, sharp and corroding humors, (and which happens
in the french pox) such as are extremely mallignant. It is Cured, I. By the
administering of Universal or general Remedies, that so new affluxes may be
turned away from the head. II. By the Evacuation of the Head by Gargarismes,
Masticatories, etc. and the strengthening thereof by external and internal
Cephalicks. III. By the 1. Detersion or wiping and clensing of the ulcer,
either by the Juices of Milfoil, Horehound, Betony, with honey of Roses; or by
Alum water; or by the green water of Hartman, before which the mollyfying and
suppling of the Crust by the vapors of emollient herbs ought to be premized,
and first made trial of. 2. by the Excication and drying of the said ulcer by
the vapor of the refuse and dross of fire-hot iron be sprinkled with red wine;
by the suffumigation of orpiment (commonly called in the shops Auripigmentum)
Cinnabar, Benzoin, styrax Callamite, and Cloves, al together thoroughly mingled
one with the other, the nostrils being first stopped at their roots, lest that
otherwise the brain should chance to be smiten and hurt. 3. By Consolidation,
with the Trochisques of Rondeletius, etc.



III. Polipus is a fleshy excrescence in the Nostrils, hanging thereat by
certain thin and small Roots or strings, and now one while hanging before out of
the nostrils, and then as soon again descending unto the Palate,

It is known by this, that this said flesh is loose, thin, soft, and of a
various color that at full of the moon it grows exceedingly, and about the
change or new moon it becomes altogether as flaggy and small in appearance, etc.
It has its Rise from viscous and Clamy humors; and chiefly from phlegm mingled
with the blood, which falling down from out of the brain unto the exulcerated
nostrils sticks fast in the Ulcers. The Cure is by all means to be hastened,
lest that it turn into the Cancer. It is accomplished, either by Surgery, or
by cutting it off; of which see further in the Practical Authors. Or else by
Pharmacheutick^ or medicinal remedies; and among them (universal and general
medicaments being first premised) about the new of the moon, ther^ are to be
administered, either the oil of vitriol uncorrected dropped into wool, and (after
the flesh shall have been scarrified) so applied unto the part affected; or else
tents of the Gentian Root, by the prescript of Hartman or Joel his liniments.
It is divided after a twofold manner. I. One is soft and white, which being
void of al pain is the more easily and the sooner cured. Another inclining
somewhat unto a Reddish color, which is more difficult in the curing. Another
Livid or black and bluish, which refuses by any means to be cured, and soon
degenerateth into a cancer. In this affect there are commended the yolks of new
laid eggs beaten together in a leaden morte^ even unto a blackness, and then
made up into the form of an unguent, with one scruple of Camphire. Another
hard, in which Emollients in the form of a fomentation ought to be premized.
II. Another is profound and deep, which in regard that it is nearer unto the
brain, is therefore withal the more dangerous. Another such as is to be
discerned by the eyes, and has its existence and being somewhat more outwardly.


Chap. 2. Of the Hemorrhage, or Bleeding of the Nostrils.
THe Hemorrhage is an immoderate excresion (and in the whole kind thereof
besides and above the course of nature) of the blood by the veins of the nose,
the said veins being divided, rarefied, or opened.

The thing we are now treating of is to be understood of that homorrhage that
is Symptomatical, (and not of that which is merely Critical) which is caused in
Fevers by the strength and vigor of nature, with signs foregoing of
concoction, and a Crisis on that day the Judgment is to be made; and which
discharges and terminateth the disease.

The SIGNS of this Affect are of themselves sufficiently manifest. It is
foreknown by that Anarropia (as they term it) or tending upwards of the humors
unto the superior parts; the which is signified by the pain of the head and
neck, the heaviness of the temples, the dimness of the Eyes, the extension or
stretching forth of the Hypochondrium, involuntary tears, difficulty of
breathing, etc.

The CAUSES are, whatsoever it be that can open, divide, or rarefie the veins
of the nose; of al which we shall make mention in the differences.

The CURE is difficult if it be so immoderate and immeasurable, that in
choleric bodies (the Choler inflaming and burning the blood) the face
becomes of a Citron or oringe color; in Flegmatik bodies, (the phlegm being
multiplied; of a leaden color) and in melancholy bodies, of a black and
duskish color; and if it flow forth to the quantity of four pints thereof; if it
befall such as are Phlegmatic and melancholy, in regard that they are more
cold thereby, than are the sanguine or Chollerick; if it affect those that are
of an high and red color with a certain kind of pain in the head; if it does
not terminate and put an end to that disease wherein it happens, and that a
chilness and stifness follow thereupon; because that the body being exhausted
of spirits, is extremely cooled and chilled, and by this means breeds
diseases that last and continue a long while. It is not at al to be attempted
in those persons that in a burning Fever are afflicted with pains in the head,
together with aches in the neck, and the whole body; and where there is present
a weakness with a kind of trembling; in regard that this puts an end unto
the disease; in those whose monthly Courses fail them; in those that are
afflicted either with deafness, or the distorsion of the back bone and a
difficulty of breathing, or else with a strong pain in the inferior parts, al
other things being thereunto answerable and correspondent. It is very doubtful,
if in the affects of the Liver it flow from out of the left nostril, and in the
affects of the spleen out of the right nostril; and especially if it be
accompanied with a sweating of the Breast or head; if it happen to those that
are Feverish, and that thereupon when they begin to Recover the belly is
humectated, and becomes overmuch moystned in regard that the nattural innate
heat being debilitated, a dropsy is very likely to follow thereupon; if it
happen to be attended with weak, faint, and (as we call them) cold swea^s, and
therewithal a kind of chilness, because that hereby is signified and shown an
extreme and overgreat dissollution and subversion of the Spirits; if in an
accute disease it has together with it joined a quick and suden motion of the
eyes, a turbulent and troubelsom sleep, and frequent watchings or want of
duesleep; it in acute and burning Fevers, on the fourth day, there issue forth
drop by drop a thick, gross, and black blood, together with other Sympcoms
because this argues and evidenceth the imbicility or weakness of nature; and
lastly if such a bleeding chance to be in diseases of long continuance. It is
wrought and accomplished, I. By Revulsion, by opening of the median vein
(provided that the said venesection be moderate, and as often as there shall be
cause, Repeated) on that side the nostril is of, out of which the said blood
flows; as also by cupping-gasses applied unto the hypochondria, if the blood
be not naught, by Frictions, etc. II. By those Medicaments that stanch and stop
the Hemorrhage or bleeding flux; and those either such as are Cooling, or
astringent and binding, or of an agglutinating Nature; or else lastly, such as
act and operate by a secret and occult quallity; and the^e aforesaid
medicaments either to be outwardly applied, or else drunk in and taken down
inwardly.
In the number of those Remedies that are internal and to be taken into the
body, the chief (that we know of) are believed to be these, Sperniolae
compositum (or the composition of frogs) mentioned and prescribed by Crollius;
three or four grains hereof to be administered in the water of the herb
shepards pouch; Crocus Martis, with the Juice of Quinces, and some few grains
of Opiate Laudanum; the Syrup of Coralls of Quercetan, in a Chalybeat water;
the Extract of Crocus Martis, three grains thereof with plantane water; the
sperm or seed of frogs, collected in the spring time, dried, and then drunk
with wine. Among the External Remedies, the unguent of Quercetane, compounded
and made of Crocus Martis beaten into a most small powder, and Cr^cus Veneris,
of each two ounces, these well mingled together with the oil commonly known by
the name of Oleum Vici Pomarum Symplicium; the water of the sperm of Frogs,
with a little Champhyre and sugar of Saturn, put round about the neck; Argilla
furnace^, that is to say, Clay baked in an Oven, and well mingled together with
strong vinegar, like unto a pultise; and applied after the same manner; Asses
dung, or swines dung dissolved in Rose vinegar, and then put up into the
nostrils; the shavings or Fragments of Fungus Betulinus (the mushrom or toad
stool of the Beech tree) the Root of white Succory, dig'd up about St. James
tide, at noon day (when the sun is at full south) and chawed betwixt the teeth.
As for the Magnetical Curing hereof, by Vitriol, see further in Beccerus in his
Medicus Mycrocosmus, in the Chap. of the blood, etc.

The Hemorrhage is divided in a threefold manner; from the Causes, from the
blood, and from the places from whence the said proceeds.

I. One is from that we call Anastomosis (or an opening of the orifices of the
veins) which either is caused by the abundance of blood; (and then the face is
red, the veins strut and are distended, and a full feeding went before: and here
venesection has its place; the head is by no means to be washed or so much as
wet with cold water, lest that the blood being there detained, something that
is worse follow upon it; neither is there any linen cloth to be wet in cold
water, and at the first beginning of it to be cast about the neck, lest that the
ways and pasges between the brain and the heart should by this means be shut
up) or else it is caused by the acrimony of the blood, and the thinness
thereof; (and then there ready at hand signs of a Cacochymy) and in this case
we are to do the work with those things that incrassate and thicken, as Bole
armonick, Dragons blood (in the shops termed Sanguis draconis) and such like.)
Orelse it is caused by the irritation of the facculty, (and then the very same
things as before, are present and ready at hand) or else by the weakness of the
said faculty; and then there is blood issuing forth by intervals, but it is not
much; and some disease weakening the liver went before; and therefore the Cure
ought likewise to be prosecuted with special regard had unto the same.

Another is from a diairesis (as we term it) or a division of the veins, by
some sharp corroding humor, and like by other means; and then the blood issues
forth in a far greater abundance; or there went before some violent Cause; or
else lastly there are present certain signs of a Choleric Cacochymy.

Another is from that we call diapedesis (or as we may to term it, a passing
through by leaping) and then the blood that issues forth is but very little,
etc. See more hereof in the first Book.

II. One is of the Arterial blood, which is hot, somewhat red, subtle, leaping
forth with a froth, and with violence. Another is of the vein blood, and this
is Thicker and Blacker.

III. One is of blood issuing and passing forth out of the veins of the Brain;
and then there went before a pain of the head; and the flux is not easily
stanched. Another is of the same blood leaping or starting out of the nostril
veins; and then the contrary of what was said touching the former happens and
appears.

Chap. 3. Of the Hindering and Hurting of the Smell, Gravedo, (or Stuffing) and
Sternutition (Or Sneezing.
THe principal burt of the sense of smelling, is the abolition, or the
diminution thereof, which differ only in degrees, and in the greatness of their
Causes. And this is caused, 1. Either from a distemper of the brain, which
either possesses the fore part thereof, (and then the Taste likewise by reason
of the branches of the third pair of nerves of the brain, Forming the tongue,
is abolished; the voice is loud and shril, and no way to be found fault with;
the Cure here, is to have an especial regard unto the distemper) or else it
possesses and resideth in the process of those nerves that constitute and
frame the organ of the smelling; and then there is no hurt at al to be
perceived in the brain or in the other senses. Or else it is caused by the
narrowness and streightness, and that too either of the Brain, (and then there
is present and sensibly to be felt a heaviness in the head; and here we may
operate by errhines, and yet not toomany of them neither; and here likewise
sternutatories are exceeding useful and profitable) or otherwise of the
Processes of the brain, or of the nose within, and the Ethmoid Bone; and then
the voice and respiration are vitiated, and the wonted excrements restrained
and kept in. The smelling is sometimes totally abolished, if the Phlegm by heat
be baked and hardened at the holes and enterances of the aforesaid bone, which
chances unto such as being troubled with the pose or distillation called
coriza, heedlesly and without any consideration go into baths. In these cases
that that chiefly deserves commendation, is, the Root of Gentian fitly put up
into the ^os^ils; Castoreum well soaked in vinegar, and afterward sweetened; the
Oil of Nightshade, the Errhin of Zacutus, in his seventh Book. 15. Chap. P.
517. etc. touching which we have before spoken in the Chapter of Cactarrhs.

II. Gravedo or Coryza is a defluxion of the Excrements of the Brain (being
crude and thin like water) unto the nostrils, which is accompanied and attended
with a frequent sternutation or sneezing.

This Malady is well enough known, and by it self discovered. It arises from
the distemper of the brain, either hot, or cold: concerning which enough above.

III. Sternutation is a violent and involuntary expulsion (by the nostrills) of
the flatulent windy spirits, and sharp vapors offending the Brain.

It is done with a Loud voice, as well because the Windy spirit breaks forth
altogether at once; as by reason that it forces its passage through the
straight and narrow holes of the nostrils. It arises either from external
causes, (and then the nostrils are to be supled and gently stroked with the oil
of roses, or milk) or else from internal humors and vapors brought thither;
touching which see further in their proper Chapters: but is wont for the most
part, and too commonly to be neglected by the Physicians, unless in Plethorical
bodies it happen to be accompanied with a distillation in the very first
beginning of the disease. The little veins in the greater angle of the eyes,
and that is nighest unto the nostrils being forcibly pressed together, do
forthwith stay and stop the frequency thereof.

Title VII. Of the diseases of the Tongue, and the Symptoms thereof.
THe Affects of the Tongue are, a Tumor or swelling, Ranula, a blackness, a
Palsy, a stammering, an Aphony or Speechlesness, and a hurting of the Taste.

I. The Tumor arises either from External Causes, as the anointing thereof
with hyd^arge or quicksilver, the eating of poisons Mushroms, etc. and then,
those things that purge are to be eschewed, and not meddled withal; the Tongue
is to be washed and cleansed with the decoction of Scabious, and plantane,
together with a little treakel, and honey of Roses. Or else from internal
causes, to wit, an afflux of a matter hotter than ordinary, to wit, blood or
Chollor; (and then, for the most part an inflammation is excitted) or else of a
matter that is colder than usually; and then, the tongue waxes white, and very
much phlegm flows fourth; or else of a poysonus matter, as in the French
disease, and this carries its signs along with it; or else the master is
corrupt and canckerous, and then the malady is almost incurable; and a
putridness, or a flux of blood (in tongus that are quite eaten through)
happening at the Root of the tongue, at length the persons thus affected dye
thereof. For all and each one of such like patients aninunction with the oil of
vitriol and honey of Roses is very conducible; as likewise the opening of the
veins under the tongue.

II. Ranula is a swelling, in shape resembling a frog, which now and then
arises and grows out under the tongue, out of that soft flesh on which the
tongue lies, and unto which it is tied and fastened as with a chain.

It is known by the bare looking upon it. It arises from a viscous and
Pituitous blood flowing thither, and exciting a soft and loose swelling, that
being opened yeildeth forth a kind of snotty filth like unto the white of an
egg. It is cured, either by topical remedies, (among which the oil of vittriol
with the honey of Roses, is very prevalent and avaylable, or else by Chyrurgial
Operation, which ought to be seconded with liniments of torrefied Tragacanth;
together with the Hermodactyl root, and the white of an egg; or with
gargarismes; or with both together.

III. A Blackishness with a scabbedness and clefts sometimes arises from hot
and fiery vapors and Exhalations, and this especially in burning fevers. It
ought to be washed with the Milk of a Goat, or that of a Bitch; and also to be
cherished with the Mucilage of the seeds of Psylium or fleabane, and
quinceseeds; and after al to be washed with refrigerating waters, together with
the salt or stone prunella.

IV. A Palsy hapeneth unto the tongue; and that either unto the whole tongue,
(and then those nerves that are derived from the seventh Conjugation of the
Brain, near unto the place where the spinal marrow has its beginning, are
wholly impeded and stopped; and there is also very great fear of an Apoplexy
impeading, and now nighe at hand) or else only unto a part thereof (whether the
right or the left) either by the default of the Nerves, or the Spirits. In the
Curing hereof (Universals always premised) we commend to you the Salt of
Margarites, ten grains thereof in Malmesey; the Oil of Rosemary, with the
little rols of Diambra or Diacastoreum; the Water or Spirit of Black Cherries;
the rubbing of the Tongue with Tobacco Leaves, Rocket Seed, and Treacle. See
likewise the Electuary of Solenander, in his Consultations.

V. Stammering and Stuttering infest the Party, either from Drunkenness, or
from an ill Composure and frame of the Tongue, or from the shortness, and
excessive thickness thereof; or else from its Immoderate dryness, or overgreat
Humidity and moisture. It is not to be taken away, and Cured, but with much
difficulty.

VI. The Aphony, or Speechlessness, arises either from a default and error in
the natural Formation thereof; or else from the Palsy when it is Consummated.
It is to be Cured like as the Palsy. And for this purpose there is commended
the water of lillies of the Valley, and of Lavender; with the Blood of a
Turtle, the Oil of Anni-seeds, and the Spirit of Vitriol.

VII. The Hurting of the Taste is then said to be, I. When it is either
Diminished, or wholly Abolished; and this either by the overcooling of those
softer Nerves derived from the third Conjugation of the Brain; or else by the
affecting and hurting that part of the Brain from whence they proceed and pass
forth: there is here to be prescribed the opening of the Vein under the Tongue;
as likewise al those things, or which we made mention in the Aphony and Palsy.
II. When it is depraved, so that another kind of Savor is perceived; which then
happens, when either the body of the Tongue or the Membrane that encompasseth
it about, is Replenished with a noysom and foul Humor, that either alone of it
self, of else dilated together with the Liquor of those things that are Eaten
and Drunk, penetrateth into the Body of the Tongue, and the soft Nerves
thereof; and then the Savor is perceived to be, in taste, either Salt, or
bitter, or acid and sour, according to the nature and quality of the Exhalation
and Humor. And here we approve of the Rubbing of the Tongue with the Root of
Zedoary, or Gentian, the Raddish pickled in Salt Chewed before Supper, and the
Mouth afterward washed with Wine, etc.


Title, VIII. Of the Diseases and Symptoms of the Lips.
THe Affects of the Lips are, Clefts, Ulcers, Trembling, and Preversion.

I. Fissures or Clefts are a solution of the Continuity of the Lips, by
overmuch dryness and extension.

They are known by the view. They have their Original from overmuch dryness and
extension, as was said before in the definition. It is Cured by Correcting the
dryness with those things that Humectate and moysten, and by uniting of the
dissolved Union. For this purpose we prescribe that Fat which distilleth out of
those wooden Spoons used in Kitchings to boil withal, if they be put near unto
the Fire. They are variously divided, I. Some are from the very Birth; and
these are hardly Cured. Others are Adventitious, which are more easily Cured,
unless they chance to degenerate into a Cankerous matter. II. Some are from
Causes External, Cold, heat, the North wind, etc, and then the relation of the
Patient will suffice.
In the Curing of them, like as they al must be removed, so ought there to be a
regard had unto each particular of them. For those of them that have their
originanl from Cold, the White Pomatum is excellent good. Others from Causes
Internal, to wit, I. Hot Humors, which are many times devolved from out of the
Head, and these bring along with them a kind of itching, and profundity. In the
Cure, the matter being Evacuated, fine soft Linen clouts, well soaked in the
Juice of Sengreen, are to be imposed and laid on them; and if the Chaps or
Clefts be somewhat deep, they are then to be anointed with Goose Grease, and
Capons Grease. II. From Vapors which are Hot, Dry, Salt, and Sharp. They ascend
up from the inferior parts by the Oesophagus, or the great rough Artery called
Aspera Arteria. They infest wanton lustful Women, from the dryness of their
Womb, by Reason of the common Tunicle; and they produce Clefts without any heat
at al, or itching, or much hardness, neither are they very deep, or frequent.
In the Cure, regard must be had unto the parts transmitting. In all of them, the
Lip is to be turned inward, and then the mastication or chewing of Mastick
being premised, it is to be moistened with the Tongue.


II. Touching the Ulcers of the Lips, these things are well to be noted. I. That
al of them do proceed from Humors that are sharp, Choleric, and Serous or
Wheyish, either from adustion and putridness, or else from their admixture, II.
That sometimes they are covered over with a cruftiness, and sometimes running.
III. That sometimes they are Critically thrust forth in Malignant, and likewise
in other Fevers; and these are easily Cured of themselves, and they design the
end of the Fever; if they be together with the Natural strength and Vigor much
impaired, they then threaten death: and sometimes they are thrust forth
Symptomatically, and that either by Reason of a Contusion of the Lip; or by
reason of Poisons; or by Reason of Humors, as in the French Pox. In the Cure,
Medicaments are most fitly and best of al administered about the time of the
Patients sleeping. Al sharp meats ought carefully to be avoided.


III. The Trembling of the Lips proceeds, either from External Causes, to
wit, 1. Cold, with a gracing of the Teeth. 2. Wrath or Fear, the spirits being
thereby either dissipated, or made to retire into the more inward parts.
Or else from an Internal Cause, as from the weakenning of the Nerves in some
extraordinary great affect of the brain; in the Nauseousness of the Stomach,
and propension to vomit, from a sharp Humor pulling and twinging; or else from
the agitation and disturbance of the Stomach by the consent and agreement of
the Membrains thereof, in case of Worms. The Cure must be ordered according to
the Causes.

IV. The Perversion of the Lips proceeds from the affect of the Nerves of the
third pair, there being then a Convulsion of the Muscles; and this either of it
self, from dryness; or else from the Event, or when the near allied and
conjoined Muscles, (that together and at once lift up or press down some one of
the Members) are drawn together and suffer a Convulsion; or else when the
Muscles Antagonistae are resolved. It is deadly, the strength and powers of the
body being extremely weakened, in Continual Fevers, and when there is a
peculiar defect of the Organs. It is void of al danger, if the powers of the
body be strong and vigorous, the actions thereof constant and Uniform, and when
the Metastasis (as they term it) or transferring of the Critical Matter unto
the Head be accomplished.

Title, IX. Of the Diseases and Symptoms of the Face.
Chap. 1. Of the Opening of the Mouth, Gaping, and Yawning.
THere belong unto the Affects of the Face, the opening of the Mouth, Gaping,
Yawning, the Writhing thereof, and that we call the Ptyalism, or frequent
spitting.

I. The Opening of the Mouth is, when that bone that by Nature ought to have
been shut is yet not shut.

This comes to pass, I. When the lower Jawbone Joyneth and grows unto the
Head; which very rarely happens. II. When tumors arise near about the
Conjuncture of the Jaw bones, in the inflammations of the Jaws and the Tensils.
III. When the Roof of the Mouth, (in the which the Cheek is turned and moved,)
waxes stiff, and the Mouth becomes so close shut together, that even in windy
ructures or belchings it cannot be widened and enlarged, there being gotten in,
and deeply inserted into that Juncture and the bonds thereof a most filthy and
nasty humor. IV. When the Neck is distended by Reason of a wound in the Nerves,
because that then the Jaws wax stiff like unto the bones.


II. The Gaping of the Mouth is then, when the M^^th that by Nature (one Lip
falling do^^ and resting upon the other,) ought to have been shut, Gapeth. If
arises, 1. From an il Custom. 2. From the Relaxation of the Nether Jaw Bone.
3. From the Obstruction of the Nostrils. that so more store of Air may be
attracted. 4. From the ascending up of extreme hot Vapors, in Fevers; and
then, if there be pains of the Jaws (without any swelling) that albeit they be
but small, yet seem as though they would suffocate and strangle the party, then
the minds disturbance and alienation is portended and threatened. 5. From the
Hurting of the Memory in the Lethargy.


III. Oscitation or Yawning is a vehement distention of the Mouth by Halituous
and windy Vapors gathered together in the spaces of the Muscles of the nether
Jaw Bone, and of the Cheeks, and Exstimulating or provoking the Excretive
faculty to do its office by Excretion. Touching the Signs, we need take no
great pains to find them out: but indeed, in regard that the Passage of the Ear
at that time does not sufficiently admit of, and give a meet entrance unto the
Air, and likewise that the Auditory Nerve is compressed, it has therefore
Joined with it an hardness or thickness of hearing. The Cause is expressed in
the Definition. The Cure is scarcely to be Hoped for, or expected, if it happen
in Childbearing. It is somewhat Doubtful, if it Relax and loosen the lower
Jaw Bone. But otherwise, if it happen without a more frequent occasion, if the
matter being widened the Air be abundantly and greedily drawn in, and then
instantly excluded and thrust forth again with a loud noise, it presageth
Diseases; and it is in very deed the Preludium of Fevers, by Reason of the
ascent of Vapors from the matter collected together in the lower parts, and
there puttefying. It is to be effected and wrought, I. By excluding the matter
that fomenteth and supplieth the Vapors. II. By the Discussion or Revulsion of
the Vapors themselves.


Chap. 2. Of the Writhing of the Mouth.
THe Writhing of the Mouth is a distention thereof, proceeding from this, to
wit, when either the Muscles of the Face, or the Nerves of the third and fifth
Conjugation, or those that descend from the first and principal Vertebrae of
the Neck.

The SIGNS are, that one of the Eyes can never be rightly shut; and that the
Patient being bid to spit forth, does it on the one side only: and if there
were no other signs, yet this there will be, that the Party being commanded to
laugh, or to pronounce the letter O, can by no means stir or move one side of
the Mouth.

The CAUSE is expressed in the defininition.

The CURE is so much the easier, if this unseemly affect has no consent or
agreement with any other part of the body. But more difficult, if it be
lengthened out and protracted beyond the sixth month. How the cure is to be
performed shall be further shown in the differences.

Now it is divided in a two-fould manner, according to the nature and condition
of the Causes.

I. One is from Resolution, which may be known by this, that the part affected
is loose, and the softer part thereof drawn to that part that is sound; and
that the sense in the part affected is very obtuse and dull; that the eye lids
in part fall down; that the face is extended without any wrinkles at al, and
that it continually inclines toward the inferior parts. It arises from the
very same causes from which it portendeth a palsy or an apoplexy. It is Cured
in the manner as a palsy. I. By Vniversals; where note well, 1. That before the
fourth or the seventh day (unless there be a fear of the before mentioned
diseases) we must have no recourse unto the stronger sort of medicaments. 2.
that a vein is to be opened, first in the Arm, and after that under the tongue.
3. That Cupping-glasses with scarification ought rather to be applied unto the
shoulder blades, than unto the first vertebrae, lest that if they be too often
imposed on the neck they may happily cause a trembling.
II. By Particulars, and then Errhines and Apophlegmatismes are of good use.
Gargarismes are not to be administered before errhines, lest that the matter be
thereby drawn unto the face. Outwardly, let therebe inunctions of Castoreum.
Let the mouth by Ligatures be reduced again unto its natural state. Let the
sick person be put into an obscure and dark place, lest that by much light the
humors being scattered run together unto the nerves. Let a looking glass be set
oppositely before him.


Another from Convulsion; which is known by this, that the part affected is
hard, and for the most part, full of pain; that the sound part is sometimes drawn
unto that extended; that the skin in one partthereof is rugged and wrinkled,
and in another extended; and lastly, that there is here present but very little
Salivation or spiting. It arises from the same Causes with the Convulsion. And
it is likewise as hardly cured (or else not at al) if it seize upon both sides
of the mouth (we call it then a chemical spasme) and be violent and strong; for
sometimes within four days, and sometimes again (at the furthest) within twelve,
the matter being transferred unto the head kileth the party thus affected; or
if it happen in burning fevers, a pernicious Phrensy, etc.

II. Another is, when the Muscles are affected; and then the vicious and
deformed figure seazeth only that part of the face which the affected muscle
covers. Another, when the nerves; and then, their springhead and beginning
being affected, the Brain is likewise affected in the one half thereof; and
half the face also, together with the whole body, suffers; but if they be
affected in their progress, ^hen the distorsion or writhing seizes upon the
one half of the face throughout all the parts thereof: when the third pair of
nerves are affected, (in regard that the same part thereof stands forth by
the same holes with the moving nerves of the eyes) the eye chiefly suffers:
if the fifth pair be affected; then there is likewise some slight hurt of the
hollow or inner parts of the Cheeks; but if the first vertebrae of the neck,
then the hurt that befalls the Cheeks is so much the greater; but then the
eye (unless withal the Temple muscle, into which the fifth Conjugation sends
forth a small branch, be affected) is the more freed from suffering.

Chap. 3. Of the Ptyalisme.
APtyalism is a frequent and involuntary spitting and spawling, without any
Cough or retching, proceeding from a superfluity and over great store of
spittle.

Our discourse is of that ptyalisme that is Symptomatical, and not of the
Critical, which freeth the sick person from the disease he lies under.

Of SIGNS there is no need at al. It is termed involuntary, the better to
distinguish it from that that is by use and Custom; whether it be in concluding
of a sentence in a discourse, or whether otherwise, it makes no matter. It is
said to be without any cough or retching, in regard that what for the most part
upon excretion or reaching is cast up out of the Thorax or breast, is most
properly called spittle; and that sallivation or spawling, that is cast forth,
and comes away without the s^id stretching or retching.

The CAUSE is an excess and over great store of Spittle. For if it be
considered as it is Naturally in its Mediocrity, so it is requisite, by its
mixture to prepare the mea^ while its masticated and chewed in the Mouth, for
the first Concoction; to further and help the speech, and to be the Vehicle of
the several Tastes.

The CURE (in general) is to be directed toward, and ordered unto the
Corroboration of the Tonsils, in regard that it is bred in the assistent
Glandules on both sides the Tongue, (which they call Tonsils) by the concurrent
heat of the Tongue and the other parts in the Mouth. This is done with the
Decoction of the Leaves of Myrtle, Plantane, and Alume, etc. Which are only to
be kept and contained in the Mouth, and not to be Gargarized therewith lest
that thereby more Phlegm be attracted and drawn unto the Superfluous Spittle.

It is divided according to the Causes thereof.

One is from Causes External increasing the Spittle, to wit, that dangerous and
pernicious anointing with Quicksilver, full feeding upon moist meats, and
excessive drinking. And this arises and shows it self after meals.

Another from internal Causes, to wit, a waterish and Phlegmatic Humor; which
1. Sometimes falling down from the brain unto the Jaws mingleth it self together
therewithal; and then the same thing likewise is done and happens in the
Relaxation or loosening of the Columella, the inflammation and Ulcers of the
Mouth. The Cure is to be directed and ordered according to that of a Catarrh.
2. And sometimes that that is heaped up in the Whole Body is transmitted thither;
and this most commonly happens in Infants. 3. Sometimes it (as it were)
swears out of the overmoist and empty Stomach, and this especially after
Chronical Diseases; and then, a regard is to be had unto the purging of the
Stomach by Aloetick Medicaments, Frankincense, and Mastick taken in wine, Meats
well sawced with Mustard, and Diagalanga. 4. Sometimes it proceeds out of the
Intestines, as in Worms; from the Spleen, as in those that are afflicted with
the Scurvy; out of the Breast and Lungs, etc.


Title, X. Of the Affects of the Mouth.
Chap. 1. Of the Aphthae, or Exulcerations of the Mouth.
AFfects of the Mouth properly so called, are, the exulcerations termed
Aphthae, and Faetor, or the stinking of the Mouth, and the Breath.

The Aphthae, are certain Hot and Fiery Exulcerations in the highest part or
Superficies of the Mouth that have in them something of heat.

There is in this case no need of SIGNS; they are sufficiently known by the
sight alone.

The CAUSES, as well External, as internal, shall be expressed and explained in
the Differences.

The CURE is performed by Repulsion; in the beginning with astriction, and in
the progress with discussion; but by Discussion alone, and Maturation, if they
incline and tend toward a suppuration; and here Milk boiled, or the Decoction
of Raisons of the Sun, is to be made use of, and it is known to be of singular
benefit.

They are divided after a various and Different manner.

I. Some of them are from an External Cause, to wit, an anointing with Quick
Silver, Meats of a sharp quality corrupted in the Stomach; the eating of
Mushroms or Toadstools; and the Retention of the Menstrua or monthly Courses,
etc.

Others from Internal Causes, to wit, 1. Ill Humors either generated and bred
there, or else transmitted thither from some other place, and then they
resemble in color those Humors they proceed from. Those that take their
original from Phlegm are perceived to be less hot than the rest. Those from
Choler for the most part are inflamed. Those in little Children, if they be
black, and have a kind of crustiness over them, are pernicious, destructive,
and deadly. These require Universal Remedies. 2. Vapors, that are sent forth
either from the whole body, or else from part thereof only, and that more
especially an over hot liver. They easily by their Acrimony offend and hurt the
uppermost parts of the Mouth, by Reason of their softness and tenderness: and
in fevers they very frequently produce such a like Disease.


II. Some are Recent and new, which are the more easily Cured and healed;
others old and Inveterate, and these not without much difficulty; and this, as
well by Reason of the quick sense and apprehensiveness of the part, which is
further Irritated by sharp and piercing Medicaments as that the Medicaments are
diluted and vitiated by the Spittle; and lastly as by Reason of the speedy
hastening of the Malady (being in a place hot and moist) unto a Rotteness and
Putrefaction.

III. Some of them are Sordid and foul, which may be washed with Sugared Water
well mingled with the Oil of Vitriol. Others leaving behind them their Sordid
and filthy Ulcers; and then the Green water of Platerus is fitly and properly
to be administered, and this is to be followed by the washing of the Mouth with
Plantane Water.

IV. Some of them do only infest and annoy the uppermost Skin, and from thence
by degrees creep along into the gums, pallat, the sides and Root of the Tongue.
Others Penetrate and pierce more deeply and eat quite through the Palate and
the flesh of the Tongue; especially in infants; in regard they have the softer
and more tender bodies. There is here to be commended the Decoction of Savory
and Betony in Wine, if the Mouth be thoroughly washed therewith; as also the
Water of Nuts destilled with Vinegar, and a Sponge therein dipped, and so applied.

V. Some are in Children, which most usually proceed from the Breast-Milk when
it is hot, sharp, and Salt; (and these are to be Cured with the Syrup of
Mulberries, together with Honey of Roses, or Oxymel, or honyed Vinegar. Others
in such as are Older, and grown up to their perfect state; and these require
and call for Universals.

Chap. 2. Of the Stinking of the Mouth.
THe Faetor or Stinking of the Mouth is the offensive Vnsavoriness of the
Breathing, proceeding and arising from a stinking Vapor passing out of the
Mouth.

There is no need of Signs.

The Chief and nearest Cause is a Vapor, which proceeds, I. From Meats
either stinking and unsavory in their own Nature, as Garlike, Onyons, etc. And
the stink soon, and of its own accord, vanishes: or else such as are corrupted
in the Stomach, or the void places betwixt the Teeth. II. From the Excrements
of the intestines, when the inferior Orifice of the Stomach (by which it
opens it self into the Intestines) is not closely shut; which befalls
common drunkards; and then in this case, Cloves, Nut-Meg, Zedoary: the Roots of
the French flower-de-luce, Rinds of Citron, etc. Are to be held and kept in the
Mouth. III. From stinking Humors, either in the Stomach; and then they are best
of al Evacuated by Aloetick Remedies; or else in the strainer bone, if at any
time corrupted; or else in an Ulcer, and wound, of the Lungs, the Gums, or the
intestines. IV. From Worms, having their residence in the Intestines, etc.


Title, XI. Of the Diseases and Symptoms of the Teeth.
Chap. 1. Of the Diseases of the Teeth.
Article, I. Of the Corrosion of the Teeth.
THe Diseases of the Teeth are, Corrosion and Mobility.

The Corrosion of the Teeth is a diminution of their magnitude from Causes that
Eat through them, so that they are broken, fall forth by piecemeal, the said
diminution or corrosion now and then producing Fistulaes.

The SIGNS are easily discovered, both by the touch, and by the sight thereof;
and for the most part, those that have such Teeth, when they are fasting send
forth a stinking and Unsavory breath or Vapor.

The CAUSES of Corrosion are, either External, Women's Fucusses or Face
paintings made of Hydrarge, etc. Al sweet meats more especially Sugar (as
Experience testifies) food taken in too hot, or else meats that are overcold
taken in immediately or in a very short while after the hot Food. Or else they
are Internal; to wit, 1. Sharp Humors, which for the most part run down from
out of the Head; and then in the Cure, we ought so to proceed, that in the
first place the Flux be stopped. 2. That the putrid humidity be quite taken away
by the Decoction of the Roots of Capars, Bay Berries, Gallia Moschata, together
with mastick put into the hollow Tooth. 3. Corruption must be carefully
prevented by cleansing of the Teeth (with a Penknife) from meats that stick
betwixt them; and likewise by washing of the Mouth with Wine.
And here are commended the Odontalgick Remedy of Crollius, one grain thereof,
wrapped up in Cotton, and so put upon the Tooth; the little round Bals of
Trallianus formed and made of Thebane Opium one scruple, Mirrb, Styrax
Calamite, of each a dram, white Pepper, Saffron, Galbanum, of each one scruple,
and so made up with Honey of Squils, and then thrust into the Tooth. II. Worms,
which are to be drawn forth by those little Pellets that are formed of the
Henbane seed, the Onion, and Garlic, with a sufficient quantity of Goats
sewet, and so imposed upon the Hollowness of the Teeth.

Touching the Fistula's of the Teeth these two things are to be noted.

I. That they destil almost insensibly and by little and little a Corrupt
Humor, and a kind of Rotten Filth, which Sometimes flows into the Mouth with a
stinking Savor. Sometimes it is leisurely derived and drawn forth unto the
external parts, along by the Roots of the Teeth, and the passage holes of the
Jawbone, through which the Vessels glide down, and slip into the said Jaws: and
so this Humor exciteh certain little risings and swellings in the Cheek, or in
the Chin; and Sometimes the Ulcer remains ever more open.

II. That it is hardly ever to be Cured, unless that the Tooth be wholly pulled
out by the Roots; in regard that their little risings albeit they may be
broken, they will yet grow up again a new, so that the Ulcers cannot by any
means be shut. But now, that the tooth may the better be drawn forth, it may be
well rubbed with the Fat of Green Frogs living in trees; or else those same
little pellets formed of the Juice of Tithimal, (or Milk-Thistle, and
Ammoniacum, may fitly be put into the cavity or hollow thereof; or else it may
be anointed with the dissolved unguent of Gum Ammoniack, and the seed of
henbain. But here observe, 1. That the near neighboring teeth ought to be well
guarded and fenced, lest that otherwise they be touched by the aforesaid
medicament. 2. That the mouth is to be kept open, that so the Spittle may the
better flow forth. 3. That nothing is to be swallowed down.


Article. II. Of the Looseness, or Movableness of the Teeth.
The Mobillity of the Teeth is the weak and infirm standing of them, proceeding
from the proper Causes thereof; upon which said vacillation or infirmness the
falling forth of them does oftentimes ensue.

The Teeth are the Subject, (but especially those that we call Insicorii, or the
Cutters) which are fastened with one root only.

The tooth it self if touched will furnish us with a SIGN.

The CAUSES are either External, or internal.

External, to wit, a blow, or a fall; and then we are to deal by astringent
medicaments; but chiefly with the remedy that is compounded of Acorus one dram,
burnt Alum, Gals, the Juice of Aaccia, of each half a dram; red rose leaves
half a handful; decocted with a pint of red wine, until it be fallen a thumbs
breadth in the boiling, and then strained; with which the teeth ought daily to
be washed.

The internal are, I. an il depraved Juice corroding and eating through the
gums or the roots of the teeth; and then sharp distillations had their
precedence, and the teeth their pain; in this case the powder that is made of
red coral prepared and mastick, is very available; if this happen in the
venerial disease, for the Cure we must have reccurse unto the said disease. II.
Overmuch humidity loosening the roots of the teeth; and then the mouth
abounds with spittle, and the gums are soft. In the Cure we are to make use
of astringents of the decoction of Sea-fern, Capars, Myrtle leaves, with the
oil of Sulfur. Pomgrannet rindes, Pomgranet flowers, and vitriol, in regard
that they make the teeth black are carefully to be avoided; if it chance from
the scurvy, we must then have respect unto it in the cure of the distemper in
hand. III. A deffect of aliment, which happens in old people, and in such as
are in the way of recovery out of a disease: from whence it is that the holes
of the teeth are the more widened and enlarged. It is not possibly to be cured,
but yet notwithstanding ye are to make use of those things that are moderately
astringent.


I have already said that sometimes there follows a falling forth of them;
touching the which, observe. I. That in infants (in case the roots remain, in
which the only hope of their shooting forth again consists) they then of
their own accord spring up and grow again. II. That the Molar appendix (as they
term it) seldom or never falls forth, in regard that it is so closely
conjoined with the teeth, that the boney part of them may be seen. III. That
the Gemini, or twin teeth, if they fall out, they scarcely ever return and grow
forth again. IV. that the vacant places of them may be filled up with
artificial teeth made of ivory, and put fast unto their places, always
provided, that due care be taken lest that from the Compression, there should
chance to follow an inflammation of the Gums, or of the Nerves.


Chap. 2. Of the Symptoms of the teeth.
Article. I. Of the Odontalgia., or pain of the Teeth.
The Symptoms of the Teeth are, Odontalgia, Stupor, Stridor, and Nigredo.

Odontalgia is a sad and greivious sense of pain in the teeth, proceeding from
the Solution of Continuity in them by reason of humors.

I call it an afflicting and grievous sense of pain; for both the teeth, and
likewise the soft and tender nerves of the Brain proceeding from the fifth and
sixth Conjugation are partakers hereof: and the little membranes that encompass
about the internal Cavity have likewise a little nerve implanted at the very
root of the tooth.

The Teeth (and especially the Grinders) are the Subject. Yet notwithstanding
that pain is different, and to be distinguished from the pain in Children while
they are breeding teeth (which is greatest) and at he height, when the
dogteeth (as they are commonly called) break forth; the which said pain arises
also from the hardness and thickness of the Gums, and soon vanishes away, if
the aching tooth be anointed with the far of a hen, or the milk of a Bitch.

There is no need of SIGNS: and yet notwithstanding it is dilligently to be
discerned and differenced from the pain of the Gums, that are sometimes
inflamed, swel and putrefie, and which is not at al removed, or so much as
mitigated, although the to^ch be drawn and taken forth.

The CAUSE is a humor dissolving continuity: touching which more in the
Differences.

There is Good hope of a Cure; if there be a kind of pus or purulent matter
gathered together in the Ear; and if the swelling arising in the Gums or in the
Cheeks not first appearing, the matter be transmitted and thrust forth from the
inward unto the exterior and outward parts. But there is but very small hopes,
if there happen withal a burning fever, and an unusual grating of the teeth;
in regard that this last (especially when it invadeth the patient by reason of
the convulsion of the temple musles) seeing that it denot^th the touching and
hurting of the brain; it therefore first of al threateneth a de^iry or dotage,
and soon after (in regard that it betokens the confirmation of the mallady)
it menacheth and portendeth even deach it self. It is performed, I. By the
mitigation of the pain (if it be externaly urgent and intolerable) by
narcotick medicaments. That that is here profitable and expedient, is, two
grains of opium with an equal part of Saffron wrapped up in silk, and put into or
betwixt the pained teeth; the washing of the mouth with vinegar and Opium; Pills
formed of Opium and the Treacle of Andromacus; touching which see beckerus, in
his medicus microcosmus. The pain being once assuaged, let the mouth be forth
with well washed with the decoction of sage and Rosmary. II. By the evaccuation
of the peccant humor, by bloodletting; and here, (when it is for Revulsion) the
blood must be drawn our of the greater vein; but when for derivation, from the
lips of the ears, or else from under the tongue; neither are we to forget or
neglect the use of vesicatories behind the ears. III. By the repulsion and
interception of the said humor; and for this purpose serves well the Emplaster
of mastick, Gum elemy, and Taccamabaka thoroughly warmed, and so applied to the
temples. IV. By discussion, with the plaster of Melilote, and other the like.
V. By the Application of such remedies as act and operate by their own
specifical property; among which the chief are, the tooth of a dead dog, burnt
in the furnace, mingled with posset drink, and so imposed; the root of the
sharp and sour sorrel taken up in the spring, before it blossom and bud forth,
well dried, and so applied unto the pained tooth; That we term senect a
serpentis, boiled in wine or vinegar; Gum Hedera put into the teeth. VI. By
extraction and drawing it forth; which will be much facillitated, if the tooth
be first touched with the distilled water of Sal Armoniack: take notice of
this, let the Cause be what it will: Take the Fern root and Cinquefoyl, of each
three drams, Bistort, two drams; the leaves of Rue, of Sage, of Betony, the
Flowers of Roses, of each half a handful; boil al these in a sufficient
quantity of red wine that is most astringent, and as much common water as you
think fit, (until a third part be wasted) for a Collution to wash the mouth
withal.


The differences are taken from the original, place, and quality of the Humors.

I. For their rise and original; they somtims flow together from the highest
part or crown of the head; and then, the Revulsion ought to be by the Cephalic
vein; and likewise those things that we hinted before touching repellers, are
heedfully to be observed. Sometimes they arise from the inferior parts, and then
the revulsion ought to be made by the Basilick vein.

II. For the place; sometimes they, stick and abide in the tooth, and then the
pain is not altogether so deep; but is extended according to the latitude of
the tooth. For the most part it conteyneth within it a worm; by the motion
whereof the pain is exasperated. Sometimes in the little nerve tending toward
and into the roots of the tooth, and the nervous membrain thereof; and then the
pain is the more vehement. It extends it self in breadth al along the Gums,
and reaches even unto the Ear; the tooth being taken forth, it is much eased,
in regard that (by reason the way is opened) the pain may the better be
dispersed and blown abroad. Sometimes it seateth it self in the very Jaw-bones
themselves; and then, it flows into the upper Jaw Bone along by the greater
Angle of the Eye, and into the lower by the Temple Veins. We cannot attempt the
Cure by Repellers, without apparent danger; in regard that the matter being
brought unto the Jaws inevitably suffocateth and choaketh.

III. For the Qualities; some are hot, Serous or Wheysish, Salt, and Sharp;
which excite a most violent and intolerable pain, but hot withal such as soon
has an end, by Reason of the sudden changes. It is very rare that they have
adjoined to them (as a Concomitant) the swelling of the Cheek. They are removed
and taken away by Repellers; among which are, Roots of the sour Sorrel boiled
in hard and austere Wine, and together with Wine held in the Mouth as long as
need requires; the Roots of the Wild sloes; (the outward Rind being taken
away) and this indeed is one of the chief Remedies, al things else
corresponding, and answerable thereto. Others are Cold and Phlegmatic; from the
which that pain that proceeds is indeed more remiss and gentle, than the
former, but then it is of longer continuance: these most commonly produce a
swelling of the Cheeks. This pain is to be taken away (after that Universal and
general Remedies have been made use of) with Camphire half a scruple, Spirit of
Wine two ounces, or of the Juniper Gum half an ounce, boiled together with
eight ounces of Rhenish Wine, and for a while kept in the Mouth: Or lastly, of
the Distilled Oil of Cloves, two drops thereof, with a small proportion of
Camphire, put upon the Tooth being first wrapped up in Cotton.

Article, II. Of Stupor, Stridor, and Nigredo, in the Teeth.
THe Stupor, or (if we may so term it) the astonishment of the Teeth is Caused,
I. Sometimes from the Sowrness either of meats, or of the Humors, or else of the
fumes and vapors; which frequently befalls those that are Hypochondriacal.
II. Sometimes from the imagination at the Noise that is made in filing of hard
metals, or the Mastication and Chewing of sharp sour fruits by one standing
near.
If the sound be very acute, piercing, and making a loud crashing, then the
imagination suffers a kind of violence (the Application of the said noise
being made within an extreme narrow compass) and then next of all the Membrane
of the sense of hearing being likewise as it were smitten is offended, and
thereupon is immediately contracted, and together with it certain little Nerves
also even unto the Root of the Teeth; into which place a new Air suddently
falling in and getting entrance, causes a certain kind of horror about the
Teeth. It is Cured and taken away by Chewing of Wax, hot bread, Cloth, etc.

The Stridor, Grinding, or Crashing noise of the Teeth, proceeds. I. From the
imbecility of the Jaw Bone, Muscles, produced and caused by cold. II. From
Worms, the brain being affected by Consent. III. From the multitude of Vapors,
is in the beginnings of Paroxysmes. It is wont to threaten the Apoplexy, and
likewise in Fevers the Deliry or Dotage; (in such especially as are not
accustomed thereunto) in case this doting went not before the Fever.


III. Nigredo or blackness, proceeds from diverse Causes, as well External, as
Internal. And these external are, a Carelessness and neglect in Rubbing and
Cleansing them; the use of sweet and hot things; and the anointing of the upper
parts with Quicksilver or (as they commonly call it) Hydrarge: These latter, to
wit, the internal, are, 1. The Exspiration or breathing forth of Crudities by
reason of surcharging the Stomach with meats or Drink. 2. A fault of the
Humors, by reason of the impurity of the Bowels (and chiefly of the Spleen)
left remaining behind after a Quartane Fever.
It is taken away by the Dentifrice Compounded of Marsh-Mallow Roots, and of
the Illirian Flower-de-luce, Boiled in Water with Salgem, and Alum, of each
alike, and as much as will suffice, and after that thoroughly dried in a Furnace,
beaten together into a very small powder, and mingled well together with some few
grains of Musk. There are other dentifrices that are formed and made of the
Jawbones of the Lucefish or Pike, burned, White Coral and Date Stones burned,
the Bones of the Sepia or Cuttle fish, and Egg-shels burnt, Hearts horn burnt,
etc.

Title, XII. Of the Affects of the Gums.
THe principal Affects of the Gums are, an Excrescence, and a Purulis.

I. The Excrescence is sometimes so great, by reason of the Spungy rarity and
looseness of the Gums, and the abundant afflux of Blood, that the Teeth (and
especially the Grinders or Molares) are quite covered over. The Excrescent
flesh is sometimes Lax and loose, fordid, and flagging and if it be now and then
touched upon, it sends forth likewise a crude blood. It is sometimes
accompanied with a putridness and rottenness; but then again it is often free
from it. In the Cure we are to use Astringents, to wit, Alum burnt, Sal
Ammoniack, Mastick, Frankincense, al of them reduced and made into a very fine
flour; in case there be no putrefaction present; but if there be; then the
Green Water of Platerus, and Hartman; and likewise the Unguent of the herb
Celandine, are commended. And this that follows is by frequent use found to
be singularly useful, and therefore much approved of. Take Powder of the Leaves
of Celandine, Sage, Crisped Mints, and Nut-meg, of each half an ounce; Alum
burnt one ounce, the purest honey four ounces. Let the Honey be thoroughly freed
from its scum by the fire; and then when it is scummed, while it is yet hot,
let the powders be sprinkled thereinto; and make a Liniment, for the anointing
of the Teeth therewithal.

III. Panulis is an Inflammation of the Gums, extending it self inwardly unto
the Root of the Teeth, and outwardly so sticking out, that even the near
neighboring parts are likewise distended, grow hot, and become Red.

It gets into, and sets it self in the upper Jaw Bone, from the greater
corner of the Eyes; and into the lower, by the Temples, out of the Veins there
ending, upon this there follows an Impostumation, the filthy corrupt matter
whereof break forth and rusheth violently not unto the Skin of the Face, but
unto the Roots of the Teeth, that are covered over with a thin Skin or
covering. If the Ulcer be ill Cured, then there will be a little piece of Flesh
that will stand out, and hang forth very much; and this is called Epulis. The
way and Method of Curing this Inflammation Parulis is one and the same with that
in all the other Inflammations. There may be the Vein opened that is under the
Tongue. Useful likewise are Cupping-Glasses applied unto the Nook of the Neck.
In Topical Medicaments, it is to be observed, that al those that are rough, and
of a corroding and biting quality, are to be abstained from. Vinegar must be
forborne, in regard that it corrodeth the Gums that are in their own Nature soft
and loose. In the Epulis, Vitriol sprinkled thereupon much benefiteth.

Title, XIII. Of the Affects of the Jaw-bones.
THe principal affects of the Jaw-bones are, Immobility, and Reluxation or
looseness.

I. Immobility, or unmovableness, happens unto the nether Jaw Bone, either by
Reason of some Luxation (when it is put out of Joint) from a Coalition or
growing together of the said Jaw Bone with the Head; or else, by reason of a
distillation derived from the Crown of the Head, which flows into the Joint
thereof at the Root of the Ear; there following upon the same a pain, and
likewise a Hard and Conspicuous swelling: and hitherto appertains the
Scorbutical Rigidness and stifness of the Jaw-bones.

II. The Luxation (or disjoynting) of the Jaw Bone is, the rare but dangerous
Depulsion and forcing of the same (in the one only or both parts thereof) unto
the foremost parts. It is known from hence, that in this case the Mouth cannot
be shut, the speech is depraved, and the Mastication or Chewing of food taken
away; and if the Process be disjoynted like unto a Bil or Beak, that which is
inserted under the Jugal bone is made to become lower in situation than the
Jugal bone it self, and is carried forth without the same Jugal bone. Touching
the Cure hereof it is to be noted; 1. That it is with all possible speed to be
taken in hand, lest that the affected Muscles, (by Reason of those branches of
the Nerves, which taking their original from the Second and fifth pair of the
Brain are inserted into the Muscles moving the Jaw Bone) should likewise draw
the brain into a Consent and agreement with them. 2. That if it be not
restored, it then threateneth danger of Death, about the tenth day, with a
continual fever accompanying it, as also an irresistible necessity of sleeping.
It is divided into that, in which the Jaw Bone is driven down in one part
alone; (and then) it stands forth from that part more toward the forepart; it
and the Chin are inclined unto the adverse parts; the Mouth is writhed and
stands awry, and the inferior and higher row of the Teeth does not so answer
the one to the other, (as in truth they ought to do) that the dog-teeth (as we
call them) stand directly under the incisorij or Cutters; see for the Cure in
the Professors and Practitioners in Physic:) and into that, in which the
Jawbone is forced and down in both parts thereof; and the Ranks or rows of the
Teeth answer and fall in one with the other; the Mouth gapethmore, and a
stuttering and stammering in the speech follows thereupon; the lower Jawbone
can by no means be Joined close with the upper, but this stands out further
than that. It is the more dangerous, in regard of the Affect of those four
Muscles that draw upward the Jaw Bone, and likewise of the Nerves inserted into
the said Muscles; from whence proceeds pain, an Inflammation, an acute Fever,
and Griping pains of the Stomach. As for the Cure, See as above.

Title, XIV. Of the Affects of the Windpipe or Wesand.
THe Principal Affects of the Wesand, are, Laxation, and Inflammation.

I. Laxation is, when it (to wit, the Wesand) preternaturally swelling up (yet
without any Inflammation) for the most part from a Phlegmatic Humor transmitted
from the brain, is extended into an extraordinary length.

And it is then called Cionis Chalasmene; but it is termed Staphule, or the
Grape, when in its lower part Waxing thick and growing round, it becomes more
slender than that above which it hangs; so that it bears the resemblance of
a grape hanging by its little foot. But then (to tell you the truth) it lies
upon the Root of the Tongue, and the Jaws, with a kind of troublesome
Titillation or tickling; with which whosever is affected, he is perpetually
striving and endeavoring (but al in Vain) to devour it; fearing lest that by
the impetuous violence thereof he should be strangled. The Columella it self
becomes soft, somewhat whitish, and of the same color with the Palate, without
pain and heat. The Humor is sent down from the brain; and this especially
comes to pass in Catarrhes. This Affect is Cured like as the Inflammation. If
the Columella be Eaten through, the sharp Humor is to be tempered and
qualifyed; and after this Abstersion or Cleansing must follow. That which is
here of singular benefit, is, a new laid Egg Eoyled unto a hardness, cut
through the midst, and for some hours applied to the Crown of the Head; in
Infants, a clean Paper four double, well wet in the Mothers Milk and Rose water
(as much of one as of the other) applied and laid upon the Crown of the Head; a
Powder compounded of Long Pepper one scruple, the Juice of Acacia, and
Tormentil Roots, of each two scruples; so blown in after the use of an
Astringent Gargarism.

II. The Inflammation of the Wesand, is, the rising or swelling of the same,
from a Choleric Blood fallen down into it, with a redness, burning heat, pain,
danger of suffocation, and sometimes also with a Fever. The business is here
alike as in other Inflammations.

Title, XV. Of the Affects of the Tonsils.
THe Principal Affects of the Tonsils are, an Inflammation, and an Ulcer.

I. The Inflammation of the Tonsils is a rising or swelling up of them, produced
by the afflux of Humors.

It is known within under the Jaw Bone by the touch, and by the sight thereof;
where like unto a small Gobbet sticking in the Jaws, it presses by its
weightiness, and hinders, so that neither Meat, nor drink, nor spittle, can
easily pass through either up or down. There are also present, pain, a burning
heat, redness, and a thirst; and it falls more easily into the Tonsils than
the Wesand, by reason of the sostness and looseness of its proper Temperament,
and likewise its place. It arises Externally in little Children, by Reason of
their Voracity, and insatiable feeding (the Greeks call it Addephagia) unto
which there is likewise added a weak and tender Constitution of Body; in
Children that Suck, by Reason of some fault and pravity in the Milk: in Girls,
from an insufficient Purgation of the Menstrua or Monthly Courses: in those of
Riper Age, by Reason of their overmuch drinking of that wine that is not first
diluted and weakened; as also their much and more greedy of al sorts of Meats,
but more especially those that are sharp and rough Internally, from the afflux
of humors that are hot and sharp. Cured it is after the same manner as are
other inflammations: yet this notwithstanding is attentively to be heeded, that
sometimes the Tonsils are made the harder by the over frequent use of Coolers
and Repellers.

II. Touching Ulcers, these things come in the next place to be taken notice
of, I. That there is the less danger in them, if they be without a Fever. II.
That those of them that appear, in the heat of Summer (because they then
immediately creep forward) are worse than those that arise at other times. III.
That they may sometimes be and appear (without any Inflammation at al) either
from some Salt distillation eating through those parts, or else from some Vapor
or Exhalation ascending upwards, which happens in the Venerial or French
disease; and sometimes again from other Causes, the Spring time, and a
Pestilential Air.


IV. That some of these Ulcers are Familiar and mild, (which are small, clean,
not descending very deep, neither inflamed, nor exciting any pain;) Others
Malignant and Pestilential; and these are broad, Hollow, growing Nasty and
filthy by reason of some congealed Humor that is either white, or black, or
Livid, black and blew: but now if these aforesaid congealed impurities descend
deeper, then there is bred that which we term an Eschar, or Crustiness. V. That
those of them that Creep about the Jaws, with much trouble and annoyance; Cause
a difficulty of breathing; but that if by the Trachaea Artery they Penetrate
into the Breast, they then strangle the Party the very self same day. In the
Cure, we are to understand, that all the Ulcers of the Mouth (as well) lest that
they Creep and proceed further, as also because that they evermore become the
moyster by Reason of the Spittle, do need and require the stronger sort of
Astringent Medicaments. And thus much touching the Diseases of the Head.

THE NINTH BOOK OF THE IDEA OF PRACTICAL PHYSIC.
Of the Diseases of the middle Venture or Region.
Title, I. Of the Diseases of the Jaws, or Angina, that is, Squinancy.
ANd thus much shall suffice to have been spoken touching the Diseases and
Affects of the Brain. There follow now the Diseases of the Middle Region; which
Contain and Comprehend under them the Affects of the Jaws, the Throat, the
Aspera Arteria or ^ough Artery, the Lungs, the Chest, the Teats, and the Heart.

The Disease of the Jaws is that we call Angina, (or the Squinancy, but more
vulgarly the Quinsey) or the shutting up (as it were) of the Jaws, that is, of
the Supreme parts of the Gullet and the throat, through which is an entrance
and Passage not only for the meat and drink, but likewise for the Breath;
Producing and Bringing along with it a Difficulty both of breathing and
Swallowing.

The Common signs are, Difficulty of breathing, in regard that the Throat is in
a manner stopped and shut up; the Impediment or hinderance of the Swallowing, as
well in regard that the Gullet is obstructed; as that likewise the two Muscles
deriving their Original from the Larinx (called Oesophagici and Circulatores,
because they embrace and encompass about the Oesophagus with their transverse
Fibers resembling a Semicircle) are busied in helping forward the thrusting
down of the Meat and Drink unto the inserior parts, whilst that they draw up
the Larynx, in the time of swallowing, that so it may give way unto the food,
whether Meat or Drink: as also, in regard that the Muscles of the Jaws
thrusting down the food unto the Oesophagus, (while they are Contracted and
drawn together unto the place where they begin) do here suffer. A pain about
the Jaws, which is either augmented or diminished, according to the quality and
condition of the Causes and the subjects.

The Causes are al things whatsoever that are apt to stop the breath, as we
shall further show you in the differences.

So for Cure in the differences.

In regard of its causes, it is divided into three sorts or kinds; the first
whereof has comprehended under it four species.

I. One is from an Inflammation, which is known by the continual fever
accompanying, if withal there be together present such other things as usually
concur. It has its original from that blood that flows into those parts from
out of the branches of the Jugular veins; there going before, for the most
part, a difficult moveing of the neck, without any apparent causes, and withal
a certain pain; as likewise an unusual heat about the Jaws. It is very hardly
cured, if there be present a great and Intence fever the spittle somewhat dry,
Clammy and thick. The Event of the Cure is somewhat doubtful, if (the matter
being transmitted into the Lunges) there arise an Empema or impostamation of
the Lungs to the Head, if it exciteth and causes a doting, or delire: if to
the Pleara Membrane, it causes a pain of the whole Breast, with a cough, and
difficulty of breathing: if unto the heart, it then introduces and brings
along with it a kind of trembling, and almost undiscernable beating of the
pulses. There is no hopes at al if the fever prevail the greatest height and
intensenes; if the face of the sick person become greenish, if the angles or
corners of the Eyes somewhat black and thick; and lastly, if there appear froth
about the Mouth, in regard that it signifies an exteam streightning of the
heart. The Cure is to be ordered according to the rule and method in other
inflammations; which are notwithstanding there come these few peculiar things to
be observed. Touching Venesection, is to be noted, 1. If it be doubtful whether
side thereof be the more afflicted, (since that the Liver is the part
transmitting) the blood ought then to be drawn forth of the right arm. 2. Where
there is not so great a difficulty of brathing, the blood may be drawn forth
the more freely and plentifully, but when the difficulty of breathing is great,
there ought to be the less blood taken away, and that at several times, and the
intervall of four or five hours betwixt. 3. That if Cuppinglasses be forthwith
applied unto that part that is nighest unto the place affected, then there will
be excited in that said part the Greater Conflux; and therefore they ought to
be put upon the Reins, and not upon either the Arm or Neck.
Purgation is forthwith in the very beginning, to be ordained. Repellers ought
inwardly to be administered unto the Jaws; and this especially indeed in the
form of Gargarismes, Mouth-washings (termed Collusions) and Luctures. And here
there is commended, Lapis prunella, The Composition, of Mulberries, Must (or
new Wine) and Nutshels; (in regard that it has in it an extraordinary
astringent quality and power;) those Medicaments that are formed of Sengreen,
Plantane, and Purslane, etc. On the third or fourth day Digestives are to be
mingled together with Repellers. In the Declination of the Disease, the Ashes
of burnt Crevises or Crabs is to be well mingled with Honey; or the White
Excrements of a Dog, or that of a Hen, or that that is taken out of the
Swallows Nest, poudered, and siersed. Among the Maturatives or Ripeners, there
is the pith or pulp of Cassia, kept a while in the Mouth, Gargarisms of blood
warm milk with Sugar; The Emplaster that is formed of Marshmallows and the
Common Mallows, of each one handful, Camomile Flowers, Melilote Flowers,
Linseed, Fenugreek Seed, of each half a dram; full and fat figs, in Number ten;
wheaten meal, two Pugils or little handfuls. For the breaking thereof,
excellent good is the Cataplasm of the Cream of the new and fresh roots of the
flower-de-luce, with butter and the Oil of Violets. Among the Specifical
remedies are, the Mushrom or the Elder Tree, boiled and drunk; the Powder of
Swallows, if after they have had Salt cast upon them, they together with their
feathers, be burnt in an Earthen Vessel; and the Ashes mixed with Honey spread
and anointed upon the place affected; one scruple of the Shavings of the Bores
tooth, if it be mingled with half an ounce of the Oil of sweet Almonds, and
sweetened with white Sugar Candy; and lastly, the secret of Guntzmannus,
mentioned by Hartman. In the Patients diet we are to come at length unto
Nutritive Clysters. It is divided in a twofold manner. 1. Into four species or
kinds, Cynanche, etc. Of which more below, Number, 4. 2. Into that that is from
Pure blood, in which there is a greater distension of the Neck, and the color
of the Face is somewhat Red; and into that which proceeds from a Phlegmatic
blood in the which all the Symptoms are more mild and Gentle.


II. One is from the Relaxation of the Vertebrae of the Neck, and then either a
fall or a blow went before it as its efficient Cause; or else some Humor or
other has preternaturally loosened the Joints and Ligaments of the Vertebra,
or otherwise has dislodged them from their proper seat; there appears here
none of those signs, that in the others are manifestly discovered: The Neck is
hollowed behind; and is not to be turned, about the Oesophagus; without much
ado, and pain withal. The pain is felt, if the part affected be but externally
touched: the Tongue falls forth from its proper place. The Cure is to be
sought for in its own due place, that is to say, from its sourses, spring, and
Fountain.

III. One is from a Pituitous or Phlegmatic defluxion residing upon the Joints
and the Muscles of the Neck; and then the pain is not great and violent, but
dull and heavy; the swelling is somewhat broader, but then it has in it very
little or no redness; there is present no fever, or if any, it is but moderate.
The voice waxes hoarse, there is great store of spittle, the sick Persons
always gape with open mouth and drawing Air, there is likewise some difficulty
in swallowing, but yet without any great hazard of suffocation. The Cure is to
be ordered according to that of a Catarrh.

IV. That which arises from an inflammation, one is called Cynauche, which
lies hid in the internal Muscles of the Larynx or the Throat; and then whether
inwardly in the Jaws, or outwardly in the Neck, appears there any redness or
swelling at al; but the Jaws are so vehemently pained, together with great
danger and peril of suffocation, that the diseased persons are enforced to take
in the Air and to breath with their neck erected strait and upright, and with
open mouth. The fever that accompanyeth it is most acute; and the disease
strangleth the party, within four days at the utmost, but very usually within
eighteen hours time. That which in this case much profits is Cupping glasses
applied unto the veins under the tongue: touching which see further in Zacutus
Lufitanus in his eigth book. Chap. 2.

Another is that we call Paracynauche, which sticks and has its residence in
the external Muscles: and then there is to be found within a certain swel^^ng
and redness, the mouth being drawn aside and writhed after a strange manner,
and the tongue depressed and kept down: if it vanish away at any time when
there is no crisis to be expected, and a little swelling or rising appear (but
yet such as is altogether void of pain) which cannot be suppurated either by
the Vigor of Nature, or the help and benefit of Art, it then threateneth Death,
and a return of its red color; the former, in regard that the thick matter
being left al without, the more thin, and hotter part thereof is converted unto
the throat; the latter, by Reason that there is likewise (by some accident) a
hotter kind of matter driven inwardly.

Another Synanche, which is contained in the interior space or Cavity of the
Jaws; and then, it likewise extends it self unto the Root of the Tongue, and
comprehends the Neck it self; there is then also apparently to be discerned a
swelling and a redness (in the outward parts) together with pain and heat; the
which said swelling if it have recourse unto the more internal parts without
any manifest cause, it then suddenly vanishes away upon thy translation of the
matter: the Symptoms ares here never a whit more mild and gentle than in the
other sorts, but yet notwithstanding there is here greater hopes of safety, in
regard that the Inflammation advancing into the outward parts, may possibly be
drawn forth, and digested.

Another is that we call Paracynanche, the which seizes upon the Neck alone,
and the Muscles thereof, that appertain unto the Tongue and the Hyoid bone.
This of all the rest is least to be feared as having least danger in it, because
of its distance from the Throat; as also by Reason of the constitution of the
parts affected, which being Kernelly, soft, and loose, may the better without
any difficulty receive the Humor that flows unto it, in regard that the
Muscles of the Larynx are not inflamed, neither the way and passage of
breathing intercepted and stopped.

V. One is that, which is dissolved and removed by a Diaphoresis or Sweat, the
Cause thereof being thereby diverted, drawn back, Evacuated, or at least
dispersed and scattered. Another, that is Cured by Maturation, and the
Evacuation of the Pus or corrupt Matter out of it, being first opened. Another,
which is terminated and ended by the Translation of the Peccant matter unto
some other Part; which is known by the sudden and unexpected cessation of the
swelling and the pain, and likewise by the alteration and change of the Pulse.
The matter is Transferred, 1. Unto the Brain, and then there follows a
grievous pain of the Head, a Frenzy, and a Dotage. 2. Unto the Muscles of the
Neck, and then there is usually produced and excited an extreme pain, a
swelling, and sometimes a Convulsion. 3. Unto the Lungs, and the Pleura
Membrane, and then there arises a pain of the Breast, Cough, and difficulty of
breathing. 4. Unto the Heart; whereupon a Trembling, swooning; and an obscure
and weak pulse affect the Diseased Party.


Title, II. Of the Diseases of the Throat.
A Single Chapter, Of those Kernels we call Strumae, and of Bronchocele, a
swelling in the Throat.
THe Diseases of the throat, are Strumae, and Bronchocele.

I. Strumae ( commonly called Scrofulae, or the Kings Evil) in the Throat are
swellings in the Glandules or Kernels, generated of thick and Clammy Phlegm, and
included in their own proper Membrane.

There is no need here of many SIGNS; the swellings are round, Pendulous and
hanging, easily moved if touched, and such as are separable from the Skin.

The CAUSE is phlegm, which is sometime alone, but other while conjoined with
Melancholy, it arises from Meats that afford a Crude, raw, and thick Juice,
and thereupon it is most Familiar unto Infants, and such as are yet in the
state of Childhood. It may especially likewise be thrust and made to appear by
those Waters that contein in them Mercury or Quick Silver, such as are those in
Carinthia, Styria, and about the Alps. It is sometimes (together with a
nourishing Juice, if the said Juice offending in quantity be not wholly
consumed and wasted) by Nature sent unto the Glandules as unto the more ignoble
parts. The Membrane in which they are included is never by the Formative
Faculty produced in Vain, or to the end it should be idle and of no use. For
when as the Memberane is distended by the Superfluous Humor in great abundance
thereunto flowing, and happily likewise thereby broken, Nature then attempteth as
it were the contexture and forming of a new kind of Membrane.

The CURE depends chiefly upon the Particulars following. I. The matter that
is the Cause thereof ought to be Evacuated. II. The same matter is to be wholly
wasted and consumed with the Herb Scrophularia commonly called blind Nettle,
and Water Betony, the Root of the dead Nettle, the Roots of Herbs, Filipendula
and Gladiotus, but especially the Root of the shrub Ruscus or Butchers broom;
of which there is to be taken (after it has been reduced into a small powder)
every day for a while one dram thereof in wine. III. The said matter is to be
cut and dissipated by Emollient Topics. And for this purpose there are
commended the Leaves of the Cypress Tree, the powder whereof being sprinkled
with Wine, let it be so made up into one Mass or Lump; and then let the
aforesaid Strumae or kernels be anointed therewith for two or three days. IV.
It is to be suppurated, and when it is brought unto Pus or Matter, then the
swelling is to be opened, the Pus or filth to be emptyed forth, the hollow or
Cavity thereof to be thoroughly cleansed, and purged; and lastly to be filled up
again with Flesh.


II. Branchocele is a swelling in the throat, sticking and strutting forth so
that it takes up much room; arising from a windiness, and conjoined with an
extension.

The aforesaid windiness breaks in under the Skin, and the general Membrane,
that is situate under, and knit unto the Skin in the more inward parts of the
Neck. It is Caused by the Air, which, (when the Skin, whose Membrance in that
place is more thick, and somewhat more red than else where) is violently pulled
away from those seats and places that are subjected unto the Aspera Arteria or
rough Artery, and the Anterior Muscles of the Neck, by some extraordinary
vehement streining of the Body (and this often comes to pass, whilst the
breath is long held in, that so the Excrements, or the infant in Childbearing
may the better and more speedily be thrust forth; or when Trumpets are strongly
blown, and thereby the Cheeks extremely swollen and puffed out) and being rent
and divided as aforesaid, it causes and produces there a void and empty
space) to prevent a vacuity breaks in, and so elevateth and lifts up the
Skin and Membrane into a Tumor or Swelling.

Title, III. Of the Diseases of the Aspera Arteria, or the great rough Artery.
THe Diseases of the Aspera Arteria are, Asperity or roughness, Narrowness or
streightness, Wounds, and Ulcers.

I. Asperity or roughness, which is a want or defect of the Natural Smoothness,
is known by the hoarsness of the Voice. Either from Externals, as from Oil, if
by Reason of its Age, or frying therewithal, it become Rank; from Nuts, from
dust, from Smoke, etc. Or else from Internals, either Humors fallen down from
the Head; or else A Vapor striking upon the foldings thereof. It is to be Cured
by those Medicaments that moisten, Mollify, and make smooth; and these
Medicaments (termed Arteriacal) either they are wholly void of al kind of
Mordicacity and biting quality; to wit, Butter, Milk, Sweet Must, the Decoction
of Raisons, Liquorice, Jujubes, Tragacanth; or withal abstersive, as, Sugar,
the Honey or Juice of dried Figgs, the Sugar of Penidies, the Syrup of Violets,
and of Jujubes; or else with a kind of Acrimony and Tartness; as Hyssop, the
Flower-de-Luce Roots, Nettle Seed, spike, Frankincense, and Mirrb. But that
which is here most profitable and expedient, is, that sort of Pills that we
term Bechichae, likewise the Troquisches Bechici, and the Oil of Sweet Almonds
with Sugar Candy.

II. The streightness or narrowness of the Rough Artery is known from the
difficulty of breathing, and the fear of a near approaching suffocation and
strangling, which is sometimes gr^^ter, and sometimes less. It arises either
from those Causes that Compress or press it down, as the Relaxation or
Loosening of the Vertebrae, Inflammations, Swellings, the halter, etc. Or else
from those Causes that Obstruct, as things external fallen thereinto; which are
to be removed. Or else internal, to wit, Humors thick, and of a slimy and
Glutinous Nature, (which are to be Cut, attenuated, and cleansed forth, with
the Syrup of Maiden hair, Horehound, and Liquerish) or by reason of Purulent
matter, and small stones, (Particularly that called Grando) bred in the Lungs,
and a certain kind of flesh that is bred and brought forth after wounds and
Ulcers.

III. Wounds, either they touch only the Superficies thereof, and then they may
be cured; or else they touch the Cavity thereof; and then the Air passes forth
in such a manner, that if a candle be put thereinto it is forthwith
extinguished: if the Cartilaginous substance be wounded, (especially after a
transverse manner) it can hardly ever be brought to unite again; if the wound
be betwixt the two little rings thereof, they are now and then Healed.

IV. Touching Ulcers take this advertisement, to wit, that they arise from
Humors that are sharp and Salt, from Poisons, and from Medicaments: and that
they afflict with pain, spitting of Blood, (pure in the beginning, but
afterward purulent) insomuch that even scales, and a kind of Crustiness may
now and then be cast forth: If they seize upon and possess the Internal Cavity,
they are then, (by reason of the Nature and Situation of the Parts) very hard
to be Cured: and lastly, that if the Cartilages be eaten through, and that
there happen thereupon any putrefying affect, it is then altogether incurable.

Title, IV. Of the Diseases of the Lungs.
Chap. 1. Of the Distemper of the Lungs.
THe Diseases of the Lungs are, Intemperies, Peripneumonia, Angustia, or
streighness, a Wound, Phthisis or an Ulcer.

The Distemper of the Lungs is the declining thereof from its natural temper
unto that which is preternatural, as well by reason of External as Internal
Causes.

The SIGNS shall be expressed in the Differences.

The CAUSES are either External; (and these likewise various, to wit, cold or
hot potions) medicaments applied, the Air that being little or nothing altered
is carried and conveyed unto the Lungs, in such as are destitute of the
columella) or else they are internal, to wit, the Humors that are drawn along
thither either from the Head, or else from some other parts, but frequently
from the Liver.

The CURE is to be ordered according to the several Causes: where, in regard of
the humors, take notice. 1. That in respect of the situation of the part it is
not to be removed without much difficulty; yet notwithstanding that it ought to
be evacuated. 2. That if there be there a greater store than ordinary of phlegm,
it is then more fitly to be removed with those Remedies that expectorate and
mollify (such as are Eryngo Roots; and marshmallow roots, common mallows, and
Raysins) than by those medicaments that cut. 3. That many hot remedies are not
here convenient, lest that the thinner parts being wasted, the thicker remain
behind. The best remedy in this case is Linseed. 4. That if there be present
an acute fever together with the matter; we ought then to abstain from those
medicaments we call Eclegmata; for these by their dryness and clamminess do much
if not wholly supress expectoration; from whence there follows a more
frequent respiration, or thicker fetching of the breath; and the matter also by
the extraordinary heat becomes the more contumationus and obstinate.


The Distemper of the lungs is divided after a twofold manner.

I. One is without matter, which indeed has in it no danger at al of
suffocation, and is also more easily cured: Another with matter, which is to be
Evacuatted and drawn back, like as we shown above.

II. One is hot, which is known by this, that the Cheeks by reason of the sumes
ascending become red; and that there is evermore a dryness of the tongue
(together with a thirst) which can no way be qualified but by the breathing and
drawing in of the cold Air; infesting the sick person; and likewise that the
breathing is more than usually frequent and swift. In the Cure Cooling
medicaments (which through the rough artery are thither to be conveyed) ought
to be administered; where note, 1. That those medicaments that are mainly
cooling and repelling are altogether enemies and offensive to the Breast, by
intercepting the passages of the blood and spirit, and by their weakening and
impayring the very nature of the Breast, since that it is Cartilaginous and
bony 2. That among the principal internal Remedies we are to account both the
white and black Poppy, Rheas, Violets, Endive, Barley, Water-Lilies and their
syrups. 3. That the diet ought to be conformable; and that for a drink and
potion, the water of barley with the Syrup of Violets is excellent good.


III. Another is Cold, which is known by this, that Cooling Causes went before;
that the Breathing is but weak, slow, rare, and the Pulse like thereunto; and
that the Breath that comes forth is colder then ordinary. In the Cure we are
to Use medicaments that heat; among which these are to be accounted of as very
fit and proper, to wit, saffron, which is as it were the very life and soul of
the Lungs, the Extract of calamus Aromaticus, old treacle, Coltsfoot, Nicotiana
or tobako, scabious, the root of the Flower-de-luce, and the root of Aron or
Cuckowpint, prepared; Elixir proprietatis, that Mixture they term Simplex
oxymel Scillitick, etc.

IV. One is Moist; which is known by this, that the voice is hoarse, the
breathing thick and frequent, with a kind of wheezing, snorting, and much
spittle. In the Curing hereof we ought carefully to avoid those medicaments
that are overdrying and astringent. The Chemical oil of sulpher, and the
flowers of sulphur or brimstone, (the shops call this latter flores sulphuris)
in a rere egg that may be supped up; the wine wherein the eyes of crabs or
crefishes have been mucerated, sassafras, China root, etc. are here of singular
use and benefit.

V. Another is dry; which is known by this, that persons thus affected wast and
consume away without any Ulcer at al; that the breathing is very little and
weak, but thick and short; that there is present a continual christiness, and
but small store of spittle. In the Cure hereof, Raysons of the sun, women's
breastmilk, and Asses milk the destilled water of Tortoises, the broth of veal,
and the conserve of violets, are especially good and profitable. Externally, a
Bath of sweet water ought to be Presc^^bed.

Chap. 2. Of Peripneumonia.
PEripneumonia is an inflammation of the Lungs from blood poured forth into the
substance thereof, with a straightness of the Breast, a difficulty of
breathing, an acute Fever, and a cough.

The SIGNS are, the narrowness of the Breast, with a dull and heavy pain, that
extends it self and reaches even unto the spina or Backbone; where the
membrains that touch upon the Pleura are fastened and upheld; and this pain is
more remiss and moderate; unless the membrain be together inflamed; but if it
be, then the pain withal becomes extremely pricking. There is likewise a
difficulty of Breathing, and indeed greater than that in a Pleurisy; so as
that the sick person is (with extreme hazard and peril of suffocation) enforced
in a strait upright posture to draw his breath, the breast or Thorax in that
kind of situation being the more easily dilated, forasmuch as in those that ly
along in their beds it falls down, because that the parts of the Thorax or
breast decline and rest themselves upon the spina or backbone, which being
erected, the Thorax is likewise together born out, and so is no longer heavy
and burthensom unto it self. The aforesaid Respiration is sublime, so that in
it the very top of the Thorax is moved, even unto the very covering of the
shoulder-blades: it is also frequent and often in the beginning, and likewise it
is greater than ordinary; which in a short time (by reason of the weakness and
decay of the natural vigor, and the instruments of breathing) is chainged into
that which is far less, and is increased by the frequency thereof. The
Breathing is hot; and because that by the expulsion of the sooty and misty
vapors the Heart is lightened, they are therefore the more eased and
lightened, the more they breath forth the aforesaid offensive and oppressing
sumes. The sharpness of it in a fever is greater than in the pleurisy in
regard of the near neighborhood of the heart; and hereupon, there exhale hot
vapors unto the Head, which hurrying the blood along together with them, make
an impression upon the cheeks, (where the skin is but thin) and so cause the
face ^o become red; the eyes and the Temple veins swel; the cough is very
troublesome, by reason of the affect of the Lungs. It is conjoined and
accompanied with spitle, that is ten^ forth at first with a kind of thinner
putrefied and rotten matter, and by and by dyed with blood, and likewise
otherwhile otherwise colorea; and sometimes it is spit forth full of froth.

The CAUSE is blood, which is poured forth of the right angle or comor of the
Heart into that vein that we call Arteriosa, and so fills not only the veins
and Arteries of the lungs, but likewise also the whole body. It is raised and
stirred up from external causes, as a cold Air, and especially the cold
northern Air immediately following upon the southerly; the drinking of generous
and strong wines; a violent and more vehement motion, after long rest and
quietness, and this upon a full stomach, the body being likewise full and wanting
Evacuation; Anger, and other the passions of the mind, etc.

There is some hopes of a CURE if the Spitle being of a mingled red and
yellowish color give out and intimate any sign of concoction in the Lungs
affected; and if the impostumations be thrust forth either unto the Ears, or
unto the inferior seats of the Thorax; and so they either pass and turn into a
fistula (and so may be evacuated) or else they are derived unto the Thighs. It
is something doubtful, if there be want of spittle, by reason of the contumacy
or unpliablness of the matter, and the imbicility of the natural powers; if
there issue forth and appear with much and thick urine, those sweats that at
first did arise about the neck and the head; because those aforesaid sweats are
thought to preceed from a forcible constraint, suffocation, and violence. As
for all other things in the cure, if follows the method of other inflammations.
If it succeed any otherdisease, and the blood be already evacuated, then
Cupping-Glasses with scarification ought to be applied unto the Arms and the
Thorax or Chest: let the Expectorations be of the stronger sort, and so
likewise the Topical Remedies.

The difference is taken from the subject and the causes.

I. One is of the whole lungs, which if together with the heart it be inflamed,
to that it proceed and exceed it self unto the side, it then produces in the
sick person a resolution or palsy. For the blood flowing abundantly into the
great Artery, so that the intercostal Arteries are thereby filled; and so that
also those little branches that penetrate throw the holes of the vertebra, of
the Thorax into the spinal marrow, do swel, the Nerves there passing sorth from
the spinal are compressed, and being thus pressed together they cause a
resolution, and Palsy.

Another there is of the one side or other of the Lu^gs, and not in the whole,
and then there is a pain and heaviness self sensibly and perceived in the one
or the other part thereof; if the upper wing be disaffected and suffer, then
the Affect extends it self even to the Channel bones of the throat; but if
the lower, then it reaches unto the diaphragm. The vein on that side wherein
the inflammation is, ought to be opened.

II. One is from pure blood, from whence there arises a Phlegmone. It is known
by this, that there is produced a bloody spittle, unless happily the disease be
extremely Crude; a streightness of the pracoerdia and of the whole Breast
oppresses the party; an extraordinary great and intence heaviness contracteth
the stern (to wit, that part of the Breast where the ribbs meet) and the Back;
the Patient is not much afflicted with any acute Fever. But now that blood,
sometimes in the Angina or quinsy, breaks forth violently out of the Jaws;
and then they die within seven days; if they escape these, then they become
purulent. And because that in those that are in the midst betwixt old age and
the vigorous flourishing estate of those of full and perfect growth, the
expulsive faculty, is more Languid and weak than in younger persons, they are
therefore not to be cured but with much difficultty. Sometimes it is derived
thither from the Pleurisy, and yet not by the vessels, because that there is
no convayence for them; but by the membrane that investeth all the parts of the
Thorax; and then in this case likewise, in regard there is a translation of the
matter from the outward parts unto the inward, that is to say, from the less
noble unto the more noble parts, and such as are nigher unto the Heart, the
Malady is therefore the more dangerous.

Another from Chollerick blood; from whence it is that the Quinsey is
frequently turned into the Peripneumonia; and the Luugs being of a spungy
substance does easily admit of a Choleric and the thinner sort of matter, and
drink eth it in more deep than other. It is known by this, that the cough
rayseth a yellow spittle and that that is not mingled with much blood; the
streightness of the Chest, and the sense of weight and the veins is less than
in the former differences; and lastly, it is known by this, that the patient in
his fever is even scorched with a more ehement and intence burning heat.

Chap. 3. Of the streightness or narrowness of the Lungs.
The streightness of the Lunges is the interception of the vessels thereof by
reason of obstruction, Compression, or exsiccation, producing a Cough,
oppression, and a difficulty of breathing.

As for the Signs, Causes, and Cure thereof, let them be al sought our from the
differences.

The differences are taken from the Causes and the parts affected.

I. One is of the rough Arteries, (touching which let the Reader advise himself
further, and satisfy himself fully from the following differences) the which
proceeds from an obstruction etc.

Another is of the smooth Arteries, which is known from the breathing, which is
with much difficulty: yet not only in the beginning, but likewise in the
increase thereof; from the pulse, being altogether various, unequal,
intermitting, great, swift, slow, rare frequent, vehement, by reason of the
Combare betwixt nature and the Morbifique cause, she being not able to expel
the fuliginous or sooty fumes, by reason of the streightness and narrowness of
the Arteries; from the palpitation or beathing of the heart (it being now very
much oppressed) and from fainting and swooning. It a^iseth either from thick
Visced or clammy, and phlegmatic humors; (and then the pulse is by the
extension) it differs much from it self, but yet it is for the greatest part
more equal in it self; and this is not very hard to be cured, especially if it
newly begun; the cure remameth to be spoken of below. Or else it arises from a
little riseing or swelling, and then the pulse is hard by extension and
dryness; its inequality is uniform, by reason that the Cause is more fixed.
Touching the Cure, we shall speak more anon.

II. One is (understand this of the Rough Arteries) from an obstruction by
blood, a humor etc. Touching which more below. Another from Compression, and
almost from the very same causes, as in the dropsy. Another from Exsiccation,
very frequent and incident unto such as work in Metalls; and this for its cure
requires almond milk.

III. One is from blood obstructing or compressing the rough Arteries expelled
and driven forth thither either from the Lungs, or from else where, which is to
be driven back and evacuated. And lastly, if it become Clotted, by Oximel
scillitick, and a posset, that is, a mixture of water and vinegar, (six ounces
thereof in weight) so that it be pleasant to drink, and likewise so that by
reason of the vinegar it provoke not to Cough; (and this to be administered
blood warm three or four times in a day) it is to be dissolved.

Another from a Humor, and especially that that is Phlegmatic, which is
plentiful and abounding, and then (if by distilling it flow forth only into
the Membrane that surroundeth and grindeth in the throat) it obscureth the
voice, and causes a hoarsness: if this humor fall into the hollow, and the
channel of the throat it produces a little sheeps cough (as we call it) with a
certain sense and feeling of an acrimony that continually provokes to
Coughing, or else the said humor is thick and viscid or clamy; but this is very
rarely generated in the Lungs in regard that they are nourished by a thin and
pure blood; it almost always arises from Catarrhs falling down from the head;
the which in tract of time by the force of the heat is changed into a Glassy,
or Plasterlike Phlegm which being by the many distillations returning in a
round (as it were) and circuit stored up in great abundance, causes the
Asthma. The same likewise exceedingly afflicts the Patient with a kind of dry
Cough, by the which there is hardly any thing expelled and brought away; it
rendereth the breathing difficult; and causes in the taking in and putting
forth of the breath a snorting or wheezing, as we term it, in regard that it is
impacted, and pertinaciously stuffed into the Lappets of the Lungs; it has
signs and tokens foregoing of a distillation either from the head, brain, or
from the neighboring parts. In the Cure, whilst the matter is in preparing,
with Colts foot, Horehound, and other attenuateing and cutting Medicaments, let
Borrage, Liquorish, and Raysons be mingled together. The purgation is well
performed with Agrick.

Another is from the Pus, or purulent Matter that is powered forth out of some
Apostume; and then expectorating Remedies have their place.

IV. One is from Causes that in their whole kind are preternatural: amongst
which are, I. Little Substance, some of them very hard and solid, others of the
consistence of old Cheese; all of them included in their own proper Cisterns
and Bladders, and producing the Asthma. II. Little Risings or Swellings, which
have their Original from a matter collected in one part, and thence strutting
and standing forth, without any token or sign at al of any distillation
preceding, and these said swellings adhere and stick close unto the Aspera
Arteria, or great rough Artery.
They are divided into those that are Crude or raw, (which are very hardly
known, and they are never suppurated, neither have they any Fever joined with
them) and such as are Suppurated, in the which the Pus or filthy corrupt matter
is so strictly and closely shut up in its little Membrane, and proper bladder,
that hardly can there any noysom and stinking smell expire and breath forth of
it into the Body. Then the sick persons are of a black and blew, or leaden
color, their Tongue is replenished with a certain kind of Clamminess,
especially when they have abstained long from Food: the Urine is dyed, and has
a tincture, either from the vehement motion and stirring of the Body, or else
from meat and drink that is hotter than ordinary; after an extreme and violent
motion, there are little pills, and small round bals or pellets (like unto a small
Pease) included and wrapped up in a little Membrane, ejected and cast forth of
the Lungs. There is then likewise a troublesome Cough, and a difficulty of
breathing excited. A pain there is that continually affects sick persons, but
then chiefly when they are moved with a more vehement and violent morion. The
Patient recovereth not to be well of these, unless, 1. The Suppuration be
speedily wrought. 2. Unless the Suppuration when it is made suddenly break
forth. 3. Unless it tend upwards, and be cast forth by Coughing. 4. Unless all the Pus, and the whole filth be evacuated and emptied forth. 5. Unless the belly
(that is, that Cavity in which the Pus or purulent matter was contained) be
perfectly agglutinated and united as formerly.


Chap. 4. Of the Wounds of the Lungs.
THe Wounds of the lungs are well known by the difficulty of breathing, by
reason of the hurt the organs have received; by the casting out of froath and
blood by the mouth with a cough; by the spitting up of a red and froathy blood
out of the chest without any pain at al; by the swelling and strutting of the
neck veins; and lastly by the various color of the faceone while red, and as
soon again pale and wane.

Now these wounds are Caused in a twofold manner. For Sometimes it so chanseth
nhat the fleshy substance of tee lungs may be hurt; and then, in regard that
the blood destilled inthe Cavity of the Thorax, and that neither a spitting of
blood, nor any Cough whatsoever urges the party, the breathing thereupon is
not without much difficulty; there appearreth a virlssitude or interchange of
heat and cold, by reason of the exhalations and fumes from out of the heart,
Sometimes the veins of the Lungs are affected; and then there flows forth in
great abundance a blood somewhat red, black, and frothy: the Cough likewise is
perpetual, unless perhaps there be present a prostration and decay of the
Natural strenghth and vigor, or an oppression of the Lungs from the blood.

They are Cured, I. If the profuse flux of blood be stanched, and the
inflammation unto which the Lungs by this means becomes obnoxious, be prevented
and hindered by venesetion. II. If the blood (in him where it was poured forth
into the Cavity) subsist, and abide there. III. If (when the said blood cannot
flow forth by reason of the narrowness of the wound) the said wound be widened
with a penknife.
Among those Medicaments that stanch and stop the blood, there are these, viz.
The Strawbery bush, Betony, Scabious, the herb Ladies mantle, sanicle, Comfry,
etc. without, these are altogether void of any biting quality, viz. Bole
armeniack, Frankincense, etc. [Read more of this subject in the guide to
Physic and Chyrurgery, Riverius Practice of Physic, and his Observations, and
the London dispensatory: all the last Editions englished by me]

Chap. 5. Of the Ulcer of the Lungs, or Phthisis.
PHthisis is an Exulceration of the Lungs, from a sharp corroding matter, with
a gentle Fever, a Ccough, and a spittle that is both bloody and purulent; by
the which the whole body is sensibly, and by little and little consumed and
extenuated.

The Subject of this exulceration is the Lungs together with the parts thereof,
towit, the fleshy substance, the lappets, the vessels, and the Membranes; in
those especially, that have their heads easily and soon filled, and where the
head sends many distillations unto the organs of breathing; in those, that
from their very nativity have their Lungs of a vicious substance, that is, such
as is tender, soft, and easily wasted, as being most subject to corruption. And
hence it is that such as are descended of a tabid stock (that is to say, those
that issue from parents affected as beforesayd) do all of them at the length
(as it were by a right of inheritance) necessarily wast away and consume in the
aforesaid manner: in those, that naturally have a streightness and narrowness
of the Chest, and likewise a depression of the same, a straight neck or narrow
throat, a lean and spare body, and their shoulder blades sticking out behind
them like as if they were wings.

The Signs are, a Gentle and moderate Fever proceeding from vapors elevated and
arising out of the Lungs, and assaulting the heart by their sudeen and violent
irruption thereunto with which there are also joined other fevers that are
otherwise sometimes Erratick and fleeting, and sometimes again invading the
patient after the manner of a Tertian, whilst that the humors within the veins
by that heat as were kindled and set on fire corrupt and putrefy; and this (the
truth is) being by its continuance and without any the least intermission,
turned into the Hectic, immediately after meals, and in the night time, (like
as do others) increases and grows more prevalent. 2. A frequent Cough (like
unto that of foxes) without any great pain, which chiefly afflicts and
troubles the party in the night time; and it has its existence from a matter
that is sharp, by reason of the irritation of the Lungs. 3. A bloody and
purulent spittle: but this is not in all. Some there have been found, who after
their retching, and the spitting up of a liquid and yellow humor, (being soon
after seized upon by a light and gentle fever have thereupon begun to fall away
and wast; and after some time, have cast forth by retching a certain small
quantity of blood, together with a kind of Pus or corrupt matter: and many have
been by sensible degrees taken away in whom (throughout the whole course of
their lives) there appeared nothing at al of this bloody and purulent spittle.
But I must tell you, that this Phthisis is incident unto those that are young,
rather than unto aged persons, in regard that young persons most commonly
abound with blood, and consequently are affected with the heat and acrimony
thereof, with the laxity or looseness of the vessels, and likewise the hardness
of the same, and in regard likewise that these exercise themselves in a more
violent manner, and have little regard to their diet. This has one thing
singular as propperly and peculiarly belonging thereunto, towit, that it
proceed from the very substance of the Lungs, it is then frothy, and if it be
put into the fire it stinketh, and is very offensive to the scent. 4. The
extenuation of the body, which is from the aforesaid continual, but gentle
fever, the which by its fiery heat (dispersed throughout the whole body
dissolving the Arterial blood, the mingling whereof together with that of the
Veins is altogether necessary unto Nutrition) hinders the Concoction of the
Aliment in the whole body, and by its preternatural heat wastes and consumes
that which is Concocted and stored up.

The CAUSE is a sharp corroding matter, fallen down thither; of which we shall
speak further in the differences.

The CURE is not to be despaired of, no, not though it be attended with an
Ulcer already appearing. For Galen sends such to Tabae a City in Cilicia, and
prescribes milk for their Diet. Yet notwithstanding it is something Difficult,
as well in regard that the filth and purulent matter sticking in that soft and
Spungy flesh, cannot without a Cough be purged forth; by which the Lungs are
from day to day more hurt and prejudiced; as because that in this daily motion
of respiration or breathing, (unto which there is moreover added and adjoined a
violent cough) there cannot possibly be any Consolidation made; and also (in
the third place) because that Medicaments in their full strength and Virtue
cannot penetrate so far; and lastly, because that Fevers require moistening
Remedies, which are altogethet hurtful to an Ulcer. The Cure has chiefly
respect unto these six things in Particular. I. The removal and taking away of
the Catarrhe, touching which more below in the Difference. II. The Cure of the
ulcer; and here there is commended Flores Sulphuris (or the flower of
Brimstone, as we commonly call it) with a soft and rere egg, syrup de Erysimo,
or water Cresses, of Lobelius, of the Juice of Ground Ivy, with the Flower of
Brimstone, of Marshmallows of Fernelius; of the Juice of Mouse Ear, Milfoil,
and Citron Rinds Prepared; the Decoction of Pimpernel, Walwort, Sugar of Roses
Old, with the Whey of Goats Milk; the Secret of Freytagius, (of which you may
see further in the same Author, in his tract of Opium) China Root, Guajacum,
etc. Let the Patient every hour lick in the Lohoch of Walwort, with the
Conserve of Red roses. III. The Correction of the Blood, that so that that
flows unto the part affected may be good. And therefore in the Diet, Milk is
accounted wholesome, because that by its serosity it cleanses the Ulcer, and by
its Caseosity (if we may so term it) or Cheesie part it Consolidates: and then
(lastly) by its Aereal and buttery Fatness it Humectates and moisteneth the
wasted and extenuated Body. And certain it is that Goats Milk ought to be taken
at dinner time (at least, if there be present no great Fever, or pain of the
head) that so it may not sour in the stomach or Cause unsavory belchings. At
Supper, the Emulsion of white Poppy Seed, and of the greater cold Seeds, of
each one dram, of the Milk of sweet Almonds one pint, also milk Boiled with
Rice. If Milk be not thought convenient, Barley Hulled, and with the broth of a
Cook reduced into a Cream. Distilled Medicaments are not here approved of,
because that their Nutritive faculty does not transcend the Alembick. IV. The
Removal of the Fever by those things that cool and moisten. V. The Depulsion
of the Extenuation by those things that have in them a power restorative; And
here Pultises of Milk, the Yolks of Eggs, fresh Butter, Sugar, and the meal or
flour of Barley and Rice, have their place. Then let a Bath of warm Milk be
made for the sick person; after which let a Roasted pullet that has been
fattened with Milk succeed; and then the distilled liquor of Snails, and the
Aqua Mirabilis, of which we may see more in Zacutus his Eight Book. VI. The
Nerfion of the whole Nocturnal Colliquation by Sudorificks or Sweats. Then in
the evening we must administer the Conserve of Red Roses, with the Syrup of
Poppy, of Jujubes, and Diacodium. The Breast and the Backbone are to be
anointed, and a Liniment Resumptive (as Practitioners call it) with the Oil of
Roses and Violets, etc. The Phthisis is divided in a twofold manner, according
to the quality and condition of the Causes, and its Duration.


I. One is from Blood, which being got forth into the Lungs, there clotteth and
putrefieth. And in this (if al things else be answerable) Phlebotomy has its
due place, in the very beginning thereof.

Another from a sharp Humor, whether it be Serous or Choleric, which is either
sent from the Head, (neither may it be cast forth by Coughing; and then the
Cure is to be ordered according to the Nature of the Catarrh) or else it is
poured forth from the Heart into the Lungs; or else it regurgitates from the
suppressed Courses or Hemorrhoids; and then the Cure must be sought for in its
own proper place.

Another, but that is very rare, from Sweet Phlegm, if in too great abundance it
flow unto the lungs, obstruct the lappits thereof, render the substance thereof
over moist, and there putrefie, by reason of its long abode there, and for want
of Ventilation.

Another from Pus or corrupt stinking matter, upon the breaking of the impostum
of the Quinsie, of the Uvula, the Pleurisy, etc. And hence is that of
Hippocrates, those (says he) that after a Pleurisy happen to be impostumated,
if in forty days they be not freed thereof they then become Phtysical.

Another by Contagion from the breath of the Phthisical; and hereunto belongs
that of the Sea hare, corroding and eating through the Lungs by its specifical
Poisonous quality; and likewise the breath and stench of Cats and Dogs, sent
forth especially in the dissecting and opening of them.

II. One is Recent, and but newly begun; in which the Symptoms are not so
strong and Violent.

Another such as is confirmed, and of a long continuance, in which the Cheeks
wax black or of a Leaden color, with a Paleness in the Face, although (I grant)
at sometimes the Cheeks, by Reason of Vapors ascending from the Lungs, may
appear to be of something a red color. The Breath. (by reason of the imbecility
of the breathing Faculty, or the obstruction of the Bronchia, (we call them the
Lappets of the Lungs) either from store of purulent matter sent thither, or
else from the many Excrements that in the weakened Lungs are gathered together
and heaped up) becomes very difficult, and is hardly drawn. The Pulses are one
while languid and slow, another while quick and swift; one while hard, by
Reason of the dryness of the Body; and another while soft, in regard of the
Humid matter moystening the Arteries. Sweats in great abundance break forth in
the time of sleep by reason of the debillity of the natural Faculty. And at
length the Malady having now gotten the upper hand, certain small parcels and
portions of the putrefied lungs are cast forth, with an intolerable strength.
The Hair of the Head sheddeth and falls off, by Reason of the defect and want
of Aliment, and the Corruption of that that is bred in the Body. The Nails
become Crooked, that Flesh that was wont to be at the Fingers ends being
consumed. A Small sort of Lice are generated, in regard of the Corruption of the
Aliment. The Extreme parts, especially the Feet, by reason of the extinction of
the Native heat, are much swollen. And at length the Flux Diarrhoea (together
with a suppession of the Spittle) follows upon it, from the weakness of the
retentive Faculty of the Stomach and the Intestines, See further in Freytagius,
touching the Phthisis.

Title, V. Of the Diseases of the Thorax or Breast.
Chap. I. Of the Inflammation of the Mediastine, or the Transverse Muscle, and
the Tumors of the Diaphragm.
THe Diseases of the Thorax or Chest, are, the Inflammation of the Mediastine,
the Swlling of the Diaphragme, the Pleurisy, the Empyema or Constipation, the
Consumption or wasting of the Back, and the Worms of the Back.

I. The Inflammation of the Mediastin, (that disjoyneth the Lobes of the Lungs)
is known by the continual Fever, the frequent thick and swift breathing, an
extreme and intense burning in the Breast, a small pain at the stern, unto which
the Mediastine is tied, and by the spitting and casting forth of that that is
at first red, and then afterward Yellow. But the matter that is thus cast up
(because that it is gathered together betwixt a double Membrane, as it were,
and is not easily Evacuated, unless the said Membrane be eaten through) is not
in any great abundance. It arises from the Blood, and chiefly the Choleric.
It is Cured after the manner of other Inflammations. Where take notice, that the
Repressing Medicaments ought indeed, to be cold, but no way astringent; and
that in this Case the Oil of Violets is chiefly approved of; which must be made
blood warm (unless it be in the summer time) and the Breast therewith anointed.

II. The Tumors or swellings of the Diaphragm are of two sorts.

Some of them are Cold, which are known by the difficulty of Breathing, the
stretching out of the hypochondria, and yet no swelling appearing in them upon
the touch, and no deliry or dotage accompanying it. They arise from a matter
that is crude and thin, penetratting into the thickness of the diaphragme,
either from the compression or wounding thereof. They are hardly Cured, if they
be of long standing, in regard they bring the sick person to a consumption: but
more easily, if they be Recent and newly begun: but not at al, if there follow
a deliry or doting. First then we are to administer those medicaments that
evacuate the prepared matter among which those we term Hydragoga or water
purgers, are especially commended) and afterward with those things that mollify
and digest; and chiefly Sarsaparilla, unless the humor has begun to be
hardened.

Others are hot, which are known (in their first rising) by a fever that is
both continual and accute, a pain, the breathing little, but often, the
extension of the Praecordia, a palpitation or panting near unto the diaphragm,
and sometimes a kind of leaping in that place: (in the Progress) by the doting
that attends it, the unequal respiration or breathing, being sometimes small
and sometimes great; swift, and as soon again altogether as slow and rare. They
arise, from a blood hot and choleric. The Cure is difficult, in regard of the
extreme peril therein. It likewise resembles the inflammation of the Lungs.

Chap: 2. Of the Pluresy.
THe Pleurifie is an inflammation of the Pleura Membrane, and the adjacent
muscles, arising from the influx (or flowing) of a hot humor, with a pricking
pain of the side, a Cough difficult breathing, a continual acute Fever, a hard
pulse, unequal, and frequent.

The SIGNS Pathognomick (as we call them) are, an extreme pricking pain, because
the aforesaid membran (which we call pleura) being of a most exquisite sense, is
extended by a sharp matter. A Pulls that is hard, unequal, and bearing a kind of
resemblance with a Saw, in regard that the part that is inflamed is Nervous. A
Cough, by reason of irritation and transudation, (to use the terms of
practitinors) which in the beginning is dry, but in the progress adjoined with
and attended by a spittle that is bloody and purulent. A Breathing frequent and
but very weak and small, in regard that the muscles (by reason of the extreme
pricking pain) cannot be sufficiently dilated. An acut fever, in regard that
the inflammation is so nearly neighboring unto the Heart. And al these signs
ought to conspire and meet al together, and not to be present in a scattering
manner, one after another.

The CAUSE is an extreme hot matter; or blood, either pure, or impure which
flows forth especially out of the vena cava (or great hollow vein adjoining
to the heart by the Branch that is termed Azugos, into the little thin stems
and sprigs thereof; which being opened, broken or the pors thereof dilated, it
^unneth violently into the plura membran; and sometimes it likewise rusheth
thereunto through the upper intercostal membran; but more rarely, through, the
thoracical, and that we term mamaria. The Supply of the aforesaid blood is from
a Plethory, Cacochymy, and the overgreat heat of the Sanguifying bowels. It is
promoted and furthered by various external Causes, and chiefly a sudden
chilling, and cooling, cold northern blast after the great and warm south wind,
over much and violent exercise, etc.

There is good hope of a CURE; if the spittle receive a mature and speedy
concoction, and be easily and fitly cast forth; and if on the foruth day the
sick person spit forth that that is white, light, equal, and this by coughing
three or four times be terminated on the seventh day, and if on the seventh,
that then it be not extended beyond the leventh or foreteenth day at the
furthest; if on the crittical day there happen a flux of blood out of the
nostrils, the Hemorrhoids, or the womb, with signs of Concoction; if (which is
indeed very rare) there chance a Metastasis or translation of the matter unto
the joints and the members of less account. It is doubtful, if there be spit
forth only thin Ichores, (which are a sort of little ulcers) if yellow choler
very much mingled with spittle, appear long after the beginning, in regard that
hereby is signified that nature attempteth nothing against the disease. If the
Spittle be yellow, sincere, and mingled with much watterishness; if the said
spittle be Glutinous and Clammy, because this clammy quality is contracted from
a burning and scorching heat; if it be full of a green ^ustiness and very
frothy; if it be black, because hereby is signified the pravity of the humor;
and the extinction of the native heat; if striving much by reaching does not
stay the Cough, and facilitate the Breathing, because hereby is manifested
either the Malignity of the matter; or the weakness of the expulsive faculty;
if after fourteen days it turn into the Empyema; if it degenerate into the
Peripneumonia or inflammation of the Lungs; if it befall aged persons, because
that through the want of heat the matter is not concocted; if it happen to
those that have thick bodies, and that are accustomed to exercise, al things
else being thereunto answerable. No hopes at al, if in it there be nothing spit
forth; if the pulse be hard, little and by reason of heat very thick, and most
frequent; if there happen (in the beginning thereof) a flux of blood, without
any alleviation or ease, in regard that in this case the patient most usually
dies on the fourth day; if the pleuresy be so great, that the liver and the
stomach be likewise drawn into a consent and fellow suffering, and that also
the flux diarhoea follow upon it; if the pleuresie invade a Cachectical Body,
after some other long continued disease; if from the spittle there arise a
noise and much ratteling in the breast, and that the continuance be dejected;
and the eyes veyled and blind with mists and darkness, or, (as many times it
is) with the yellow Jaundis. The Cure (when we set upon it) has respect. I.
Unto the humors already flown in, and likewise to those that are like to succeed
and follow, which are to be drawn back. II. Those that are at present flowing,
which are not to be intercepted, neither driven back, but derived. III. Those
that are impacted and stuffed up in the part affected, which are to be
dispersed and scattered, or removed by any manner of means. IV. The Pain, which
is to be mitigated. V. The Fever, which is to be kept under and moderated. VI.
And lastly, the natural vigor and powers of the Body, which are to be
Corroborated.
Touching al these, let what follows be well observed. 1. That Venesection is
with all speed to be administered, on the opposite side, for repulsion, if the
body be Plethorical; if it be not directly on the side affected. 2. That if the
courses or the Hemorrhoids be suddenly suppressed, then the evacuation is in
the first place to be out of the ancle vein, or that of the Ham; but if the
suppression has been of long continuance, out of the arm vein. 3. That in
derivation, the blood is to be drawn forth so long, as until the color of it be
changed. 4. That fomentations may be administered (to moderate the pain) in a
body that is not Plethorical, yea even before Phlebotomy; but not so when the
Body of the patient is Plethorical. And for this end and purpose excellent good
is the Unguent made of dialthea, or of Marshmallows, one ounce thereof, and
half an ounce of the oil of sweet Almonds, with the pained parts ought to be al
over anointed, and upon it the fine small powder of Camomile flowers is to be
lightly strewed, and then the leaf of a Colwort or Cabbage anointed with Butter
or hogs fat is to be laid upon it very hot (and this is to be continually done
dureing the whole time of the cure) adding likewise a little of the distilled
oil of dil Champhyre. 5. That forthwith in the very first beginning a sweat may
very fitly and properly be raised and excited, by exhibiting, either of the
water of the Poppy Roses, three ounces there of, with one dram of the powder of
Corral, red Filberds, the Jaws of the Luce-fish or Pike; or else of the simple
Mixture, one dram, with the water of Carduus Mariae, or of the Spirit of Nitre,
with the spirit of Wine, of each one scruple, the spirit of Tarttar half a
scruple, in the water of Poppy Roses, or else the simple water thereof, etc. 6.
That pectoral decoctions (together with their appropriates) are continually to
be administered, (after the premizing of universals) that so the spitting may be
facillitated. 7. That these following have in them a Specifical propriety of
operation, to wit, the flower of the wild poppy, of the dry dock, and of the
white Eglentine or sweet Brier, the seed of Carduus Muriae, the Bulls pizzle,
or the pizzle of the Heart or Stagg, the shavings of the Boars tooth etc. (see
Petraeus) Al which are to be made into a very fine powder, and then to be put
upon bread that has been well dipped in Scabious water. 8. That the impostume may
best be broken with a Cataplasm of the herb kaly, the roots of the White lily
while they are new and fresh etc. applied unto the side that is payned. 9. That
after al those aforesaid, Chalybeated milk (unless a Fever hinder it) is the
best.


I. One is (as we may term it) Legitimate and exquisite, (unto the which only
whatever was said before, as to this point, is to be referred, and understood
thereof) which. I. arises either from blood that is pure; (in which there is a
bloody spittle, an extension of the veins about the Temples and the forehead,
with a sense of heaviness near about the hollow of the Eyes, and the fore parts
of the head) or else from a blood that is Choleric; (in which the spittle is
yellow; and which if it suddenly vanish without any apparent cause, the sick
person is immediately surprised with dotage; It is best and soonest of al cured
by opening the salvatella vein) or thirdly from a Phlegmatic blood, (in which
the spittle is frothy, more slow, and as it were sweet, the syrup of Zacutus in
the Eight Book, Chap. 3. of his History, is very efficacious in this kind) or
else, lastly, from a Melancholy blood, which very rarely happens by way of
afflux. II. It affects either the interior tunicle (and then the sick person
does with the more ease lie and rest upon the grieved side; in regard that now
the tumor is not immediately under it, neither does it in this case distend the
grieved part) or else the Exterior, about the bones, (and then the case is
quite contrary unto the former) or otherwise both of them, and then the patient
lying upon the back is the freer from pain. III. It affects either the right
or the left side; or the superior part extending it self to the throat, or else
the inferior reaching even unto the Hypochondria.


II. Another is bastard, and spurious, which is distinguished according to the
quality of the matter, and the manner of its situation. One is from Windiness
(in which the pain is not fixed, but runs from place to place; it is
mitigated, and oftentimes wholly dispelled by fomentations; there went before
causes generating windiness; the powder of Cummin sprinkled and strewed upon a
Cabbage leaf anointed or spread over with butter, and outwardly applied unto
the pained part, is very successful in giving ease:) Another from a
distilation, which has with it a sense and feeling of a defluxion, or
something at certain times falling down; it is exasperated by being touched,
neither does it any whit yield unto fomentations; the cure is to proceed
according to that of a thin catarth. Another is externally when the blood
through the branches (from the Axillar is ramus) is emptied forth into the
External Muscles of the Thorax; and then the pain waxes very intolerable upon
the pressure thereof; lying down upon the grieved side is extremely
troublesome; there is in this case nothing cast forth by spitting, and the
transition or passing over of it into that which above we termed Vera, or the
true and exquisite Pluresy, is very facile and easy.

Chap. 3. Of Empyema.
EMpyema is the Constipation of the Cavity of the Thorax or Breast from an
abundant purulent matter, causing and producing a difficulty of breathing with
a Cough and a purulent or rotten spitting.

The Subject is the Cavity and capacity of the Thorax being that void space
betwixt the Thorax and the Lungs; albeit the Lungs themselves and the vessels
thereof may not here be altogether excluded. But now indeed, because that the
Lungs by the Mediastine is divided into two parts, the Pus is collected either
in the one or the other part, or else in both of them together.

The Signs are a difficulty of breathing with a spitting, and a perpetual
purulent Coughing; a sense and feeling of a heavy and dull pain in the bottom of
the Thorax and especially near about the diaphragm; a redness of the Cheeks,
and that chiefly about three or four hours after meals etc.

The Cause is that very purulent filth it self filling up the Thorax; the
abundance whereof together with its stinking smell, and acrimony, inflicteth
very sad and grievous pain and mischief.

There is some hope of a cure, if upon the opening or burning, there flow forth
a white Pus or corruption; if it be rather on the right side than the left, and
that the Patient be strong and able; No hopes, if the whole Thorax be lifted up
in the breathing, if the whole cavity be possessed; if the left side; if upon
the lancing or burning of it, that which issues forth be somewhat bloody, and
il savored; if upon the same occasion Pus or filth, or else a water flow forth
generally and in a great quantity; if in them the searching instrument or probe
be colored by the Pus and filth like as by the fire. It respects, I. The
Concoction of the suppuration. II. The breaking of the Impostume, which is
effected by the eating of salt meats, by frequent retchings and spittings etc.
III. The Evacuation of the Pus or matter; where we are to have eye upon natures
motion and which way she tends, to wit, whether upwards, or downwards unto
the intestines, or the bladder.
The spittle may be notably procured by the oil of Sulphur and the spirit of
Turpentine, pectoral decoctions being therewith well mingled. There is likewise
much commended the juice of ground ivy, of Horehound, made up into a ^ohock
with Myrrh, Frankincense, diapenid: Touching the decoction of Ebony, and the
syrup of shel Crabs, see more in Zacutus his 8. Book, Chap. XI. If these
prevayl nothing, we ought then to proceed unto Section or lancing, and also to
burning; touching which consult those Authors that have written upon this
subject.

As concerning the differences; one is from a rupture of some proceeding
Apostem, as of the quinsey, the Plurisy, the peripneumony, whenas they are
terminated by suppuration.

Another, when out of a vein opened, broken, or gnawen asunder, a portion of
the blood issuing forth into some particle of the Lungs is converted into Pus
or corrupt filth, and in the top thereof forms and frames for ^^t self a
bladder; of which we have spoken suffciently above, in its proper place.

Another from a distilation fallen down from the Head unto the Breast, and in
fourteen days time not purged from thence by spitting.

Chap. IV. Of the Consumption or wasting, and the Worms of the Back.
THe Consumption of Back is, when the Back withers, pineth and wastes away.
There are four species or kinds thereof. I. From Excessive venery, and
immoderate use of women; and then it seems to the party, as if Emmers from
the superior parts, and out of the head fell into the Spina or Backbone; the
seed passes forth both by day and by night; there is no fever there at the
first, but within a very short time there is a fever attending it. II. When the
natural inbred heat of the Spinal Marrow is in a manner overwhelmed by an
abundant store of blood, and thereby well nigh extinguished. III. When it is
overmuch dried, those passages being altogether shut up throw which the
Nutriment is carried and conveyed unto the same. IV. When there is a depraved
baneful distillation continually incumbent and lying thereon. For this see
Salius Diversus, and others.


II. The Worms of the Back (called Crinonis) most commonly infest and trouble
Children and infants. They are known by this. That these infants eat indeed,
but are never a whit nourished thereby; yea they wear and wast away, because
that in regard of that most troublesome perpetual itching that follows them,
and there being now and then lanced, they can never be quiet, but are always
restless; and by this likewise these may be known to have worms, when being
brought into the Bath, and there forcibly rubbed, there bud forth out of the
Skin certain small hayres resembling ashes, or else of a blackish color. They
arise from a viscous and Clammy matter shut up under the skin, in the Capillary
veins. They are taken away if the infants be anointed on their backs with a
Liniment formed of wheaten flower and honey, and the little heads that these
small worms in a short time thrust forth, be cut off with a Razor, etc.

Title, VI. Of the Symptoms of the Lungs, and the Thorax, or Breast.
Chap. 1. Of the vices, or things amiss, in the Breathing.
The Symptoms of the Lunges, and the Thorax, are, the fault in breathing, the
Asthma, the Cough, and the Hemoptysis or spitting of blood.

Unto the faults of Respiration or Breathing there belong.

I. Macropnoea or a great Respiration exceedingly distending the Breast and
drawing unto it abundance of Air; which happens by the violence and strength
of fevers in which the heat of the heart is inflamed, so that thereupon there
is a great want and indigency of refrigiration and drawing forth of fuliginous
sooty fumes.

II. Tachypnoe a, or a Respiration greater and more frequent, what is agreeable
to the course of nature, its use being augmented by the heat and sooty fumes.
It arises either from the distemper of the heart, the Lungs, the Breast; or
else from the abundance of hot vapors and exhaltations, especially when the
faculty is weaker than that it can suffice for the Just and right dilating of
the Thorax.

III. Dispnoea, or the difficulty of breathing; arising from the default of the
organs themselves; which is easily known, for it manifests it self unto the
sense of its own accord. It arises, 1. either from things external, to wit the
fume of quicksilver, the smoke of coals, Calcarth, or vitriol, lime, anointing
with Mercury, and other such like, or else from internals, that produce the
streightness and narrowness of the vessels, either by obstruction, or by
compression; of both which we have spoken before. It is wont likewise to fail
by Reason of extreme dryness, (although this very rarely happen) when the
Substance of the Lungs by an Ulcer is so consumed or dried away, that it can
now no longer be dilated; and this sometimes chances unto those that are
Phthisical, before they dye. II. Another is Essentially such; and unto this,
what has hitherto been spoken does properly belong. Another by the Consent and
greement, 1. Of the Thorax, whose motion is hindered by the fault either of the
Spirits, or of the Muscles. 2. Of the Diaphragm, whose motion is hindered,
either because the Nerves inserted and implanted therein are hurt; or else
because the Vapors exhaling from the inferior parts reside and settle near
about the said Diaphragm; or else lastly, because that a Waterish humor
presses it down, and. 3. Of the Liver, Spleen, and Stomach, which sometimes are
distended, and swollen.
III. One is Lighter or less, in which the breathing is thicker and more
frequent, yet without any noise or panting, and of this must be understood what
has been already said. Another is more sad and Grievous, which we call Asthma;
touching which more anon.


IV. Apnoea, or the taking away of al sensible Respiration, accompanied with an
extreme great danger of Suffocation. It arises, partly from the very same
Causes, peccant in the highest degree, and partly from the Contrary, to wit,
Necessity deminished, or the use taken away. It happens sometimes after the
eating of Mushroms, and sometimes in the most sad and grievous suffocation of
the womb, and likewise in the Syncope or swooning fits. The Cure is to be
ordered according to the Causes and the Diseases; touching which elsewhere.

Chap. 2. Of Asthma.
ASthma is a frequent, thick, and short Respiration or fetching of the Breath,
proceeding from the pertinacious either obstruction or Compression of the
Lappets of the Lungs.

The SIGNS of the beginning hereof, are, the heaviness of the Breast, difficult
breathing in running or going up a steep place, hoarsness, a Cough, and a
windiness in the Praecordia, etc. The Signs of one present are already
expressed in the Definition. There is present now and then a Fever, as also a
certain rattling noise or Wheezing, in regard that sometimes the matter sticks
fast in the foldings of the Rough Artery, which when it is expelled by the
breath, there is the aforesaid sound and noise excited; and sometimes without
them, in the smooth Arteries. The drawing in of the Breath is here more
difficult than the exspiration or Putting it forth. For whenas in taking in the
breath, neither the Lungs, by Reason of the store of matter, nor the Thorax, by
Reason of the imbecility of its motion, can easily be moved; Nature
interposing, endeavoreth as it were by rest and quietness to cherish and repair
the weakened and dejected powers; but in Exspiration or breathing forth the
Organs and instruments of that work fall down and so give way of their own
accord.

The CAUSE is the Obstruction and compression as well of the Rough Arteries as
of the Smooth; of which we have spoken above; and from what causes it
proceeds we shall declare in that which follows.

The CURE has respect unto the Causes; and it is something Difficult, if the
sick persons be aged There is but small Hopes, if the sick person be thereby
rendered Gibbous, and caused to go stooping with the back bunching out; because
that in these the Lungs growing, and the Spina not growing nor increasing, in
the streightness of the Breast the heat is stifled and smothered; if it be with
an acute Fever, in regard that the Cause of the Asthma being dried up by the
Feverish heat, is thereby rendered and made the more unfit and unable to eject
and cast forth that which offends upon the ceasing of the Cough, the
difficulty of breathing still remains; if the strength be much weakened,
because then they soon fall into the Syncope or swooning fits.

The Diffecences are taken, partly from Causes obstructing and compressing, and
partly from the accessions, and other the like Causes.

I. One is from a Viscid or Clammy Humor stuffing up the Lappets; which may be
known by this, that the breathing forth is Difficult, and with a sound, as it
were, and a noise, together with a Wheezing Cough. It is Cured, 1. By opening
the Basilick Vein, if nothing hinder. 2. By cutting and dividing the matter by
those Medicaments that moderately cut and divide, and that have in them
humidity, to moysten; but these ought to be often changed, lest that other wise
Nature should be too much accustomed thereunto. For the purpose aforesaid there
is commended the Oil of Angelica, the Syrup of Nicotiana, or Tobacco, and that
Syrup of Theodatus in his Pantheon Hygiasticon; the Decoction of Joel, of
Zedoary, Gum Ammoniack, the Flower of Brimstone, and Saffron; the Oil of Sugar
of Grulinguis, and Petraeus in his Nosology; the Secret of Frytagius, in his
Aurora Medicorum; Oxymel Scillitick with the Syrup of Violets, etc. 3. By
Evacuation, with the Asthmatick powder of Rulandus. 4. By Exsiccation, with
Guajacum, Sassafras, etc. The Humor is divided into that that is Collected in
the Lungs, (and the sick person by degrees begins to breath with difficulty
and much ado and this difficulty is continual) and into that which flows unto
it from elsewhere, and then it is not wholly continual; the Exacerbations
thereof are manifest. And here all those things that have in them a purging
quality are to be shunned and avoided, because they are not without danger.


II. One is from a serous and Wheyish Humor, waxing hot in the greater branches
of the Vena Cava, and rushing altogether and violently through the right
ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs, and pressing down the Artery; and this
is most frequent. It proceeds chiefly from the Liver; and hence it is that
the Feet of the Asthmatical person do swel by reason of the weakness of the
said Liver; the humors in the first place rushing unto the Lungs, by their
falling to the Kidneys, excite and Cause a difficulty and stoppage of the
Urine, Ructures or sour belchings, and windiness in the Praecordia are
accounted to be in the number, and among the signs thereof.

III. Another is from a little Crude or raw Swelling, that we term Grando, and
small stones and Gravel; touching which we have treated above, in the
streightness of the Lungs.

IV. One is more light, gentle, and moderate, with a snorting, Noise, and a
violent Cough, the Diaphragm, and the Intercostal Muscles, yea likewise the
Muscles of the Abdomen, affording the assistance herein. Another there is more
grievous, (we call it Orthopnaea) in the which the breathing is very little,
thick, and exceeding swift, which is not performed but with the breast and Neck
straightly erected, the Superior Muscles of the Breast and the shoulders likewise
contributing their help and assistance.

V. One is Not Periodical, and that observes not its Paroxysms. Another is
Periodical, when the Humor either of its own proper Nature extends it self
and seeks for more space and room, or otherwise is driven and chased up and
down by External Causes, if it be there collected, or else at the certain and
wonted time it flows hither from some other place. Those excerbations are
wont to be chiefly in the Winter, or in Autumn, because the matter is
Phlegmatic; and in the Nighttime, because it is then moved according to the
Motion of the Moon, and this usually every fourth day. This may be greatly
Remedied (other things not omitted or neglected) either with a Scruple of
Saffron in Malmsie, and given hot, or with Brumerus his small Potion, made of a
dram of Ammoniacum, Hyssop water four ounces, and two ounces of Rhenish Wine.
[Read more of this subject in the Guide to Physic and Chyrurgery, Riverius
Practice of Physic, and his Observations; and the London Dispensatory. Al of
the last Editions, Englished by me.]

Chap. 3. Of the Cough.
THe Cough is a vehement, thick, and loud Efflation or Blowing forth of great
store of breath (together and at once) that was first attracted and drawn in by
the Lungs, Caused by the swift Contraction of the Lungs and the Thorax, that so
what ever is burthensom and Grievous unto the Organs of breathing, may be
expelled and shaken forth.

In a Symptom so evident, there need no SIGNS at al.

The CAUSE is, whatever may affect the Lungs, the Rough Artery, and that
Membrane wherewith is is encompassed, and as it were swathed about within,
whether this be something External, or else a Humor, or a Vapor, etc.

The CURE either respects the Cause, from whence it arises; or the Cough it
self, if it be vehement; which is either mitigated by Lenifiers or Anodynes or
else is wholly taken away by those Medicaments that stupefie and Dull the sense
and feeling, as for instance, the Syrup of Poppy, Diacodium, Treacle fresh and
new, etc.

The Differences of the Cough are Various.

I. One is from External Causes, as a Cold Air, the Vapors of Live things Rank,
and musty, as likewise such things as are Oily and Fat; a vehement Scratching
of the Ears, from whence there arises a very painful affect of the Nervous
parts; which yet is the less violent, if it proceed not from something fallen
into the Trachaea or the great rough Artery; and it is then also less
dangerous. It is Cured, if the Cause be taken away; if it proceed from Cold,
then it is Cured by the mere restraying and keeping in of the breath.

Another is from Causes internal, to wit. I. a Humor, which 1. Either is
viscous and clammy; (and then there is nothing or very little spit forth) after
Coughing, if it has conjoined with it a cold temper and constitution, it is
then the stronger and the more violent. It is cured (Universals first premized)
by those Medicaments that cut and expectorate. Among purging Remedies, dilutum
Agarici (as Practitioners term it) with a little oxymel Scillitick, is of
singular use and benefit. Among those things that cut and expectorate, the
Bechicall Aquavitae of Joel, the Liquor of Sugar of Hartman, the Elixir
Proprietatis, from six drops, to twelve. 2. Or else such as is thin; and then
there is nothing spit forth, because that in the very spitting of it forth, it
is so dispersed and divided by the breath, that it falls back upon the Lungs;
it has for the most part a hot temperament and constitution, and likewise a
Catarrh Joined with it, and attending it. The Matter putrefying inwardly,
exciteth, either a Putrid fever, or an Hectic fever, or an Ulcer. It is cured
(after that General and Universal remedies have been first made use of) by
those things that increassate or thicken, and lenify; such as are, the syrup of
Jujubes; the syrup of Poppy rhaeas, diatragacanth; fridg^d, etc. 3. Or else it
is contained in the lunges, (and then a due regard ought to be had unto the
distemper) or else it flows thereunto from some other parts as the Brain in a
Catarrh, and here there will evermore be present the signs of a Catarrh; the
Cough, in aged persons is more vehement and of longer continuance, because that
it is not maturated and ripened, and therefore the more dangerous; if it be
frequent and long lasting it brings at length to the spitting of blood: or
else from the inferior parts, as in the dropsy, the inflammation of the spleen,
the liver, and the stomach, etc.
II. From a Vapor which either obstructeth the Lungs, or else hurts the
membrane; and then for the most part, the vapor is sent thereunto from other
parts, and diseases; the Cough is dry, and sometimes a little irritating; and
it usually happens when the patient either speaks, or gapeth much; In the
cure we are to deal with those things that remove the cause sending the vapors;
and likewise to endeavor the driving back, and the Revulsion of the vapor; etc.
It happneth either in Fevers, (which show that the Paroxysm is now nigh at
hand, and forewarneth that impostumations are like soon to follow; and if it
remain after the termination and ceasing of the Fever, it then threatens the
danger of a Recidivation or Relapse;) or else in the wringing pain of the Gutts
by worms (we call this Affect Bermina) which either by impulse of putrid vapors
unto the Lungs, or else by the twinging and gnawing of the Membrane of the
Oesophagus, which draws the Membrane encompassing the rough artery into a
consent and agreement with it; and it discovers it self by the signs and
tokens of Worms. III. From Pus or Corrupt matter which chances in the
Phthisis, Peripneumony, Peluresy, the wound and inflammation of the diapharagm
etc. IV. From alitle swelling, or (as we term it) Tuberculum that is Crude and
raw, from Grando, etc.


II. One is dry, in which there is nothing cast forth by Coughing; either by
the fault or the faculty, or the Matter. Another is Humid or Moist in which
something is ejected and cast forth.

Both these are either Recent and newly begun (this properly termed Cerchnos,
in which there is only a light and gentle propension to Coughing continually
afflicting the sick person, not much unlike unto the Nauseousness of the
stomach that goes before Vomiting; and this is sometime removed and ceased by
the-alone holding of in the breath for a while) or else it is inveterate and
old, bringing along with it more grievous symptoms.

III. One is Periodical, which twice or thrice in the year, by certain
intervals, afflicts the Patient; and most usually proceeds from a
distillation suddenly and violently rushing in.

Another, which either continually, or at least with very little intermission,
troubles and even wearyeth the Party; which has for its Cause either a
vicious affection of the lungs, some old obstruction, or in a word, some other
fixed and rooted internal Cause.

Chap. IV. Of Haemoptysis, or spitting of Blood.
HAemoptysis is the Rejection and casting forth of blood (together with a
Cough) from out of those parts that are destined and ordained for Respiration
and breathing, happening unto them without any inflammation of the aforesaid
parts.

There is no need of Signs, in regard that the Affect is apparent unto the
sight.

The Cause is, whatsoever dissolveth the unity of the veins, whether this
happen by means of Anastomosis, or a Dierisis, and a Diapedesis.

The Cure consists in stanching the blood, and stopping the bleeding; and it
especially has respect unto the Causes. Observe in it, that there ought to be
a revulsion made by opening a Vein in the Arm; or otherwise, in the Ankle, if
there be present a suppression of the Monthly Courses; and likewise that the
ill quality of the blood is to be tempered and qualifyed; that the purgers are
not to be hot, neither strong and forcible, that the inflammation in that part
from whence the blood issues forth is to be speedily averted and turned away
that the clods of blood are to be dissolved, and this to be effected not with
vinegar alone; that before ever we make use of remedies that avert and turn
aside, we ought to forbear Astringents or those things that stay and stop the
blood; that Cold topics must be carefully avoided. Among those Remedies that
stanch and stop, there is especially commended Centinody, boiled in broth, and
applied unto the parts; the powder of Scaliger; of which see more in Petreus
his Nosology.

The differences are taken from the Causes, and the parts.

I. One is from the Anastomosis of the veins; Another from the Diaeresis; and a
third from the diapedesis of the veins; touching al which see further in the
Chapter of the Hemorrhage, or bleeding of the Nostrils.

II. One is from the Brain transmitting and sending it, which is known by this,
that the blood is little or nothing frothy, rejected and cast forth sometimes
by retching, and with a cough; that there is a heavy pain in the Head; that the
veins in the forehead are elated and strut out; it is known also by the
frequent retching and stretching, and the sense of heat, and the tas^, as it
were, of blood. Gargarismes are here of singular use.

Another from the Jaws which is known by retching, the solution of Continuity,
which is very evident and conspicuous when the tongue is pressed down; which
said solution discovers even the Gums and the parts of the mouth, with a
simple exspuition, the Party spitting forth nothing but what is simple and
unmixed. It is taken away by a Gargarism of the rinds of the roots of the
wildsloe trees, sumach etc.

Another from the Throat, in which there is cast forth blood, with a freqent,
small, and easy Cough, together with a pain of the Larinx.

Another from the Rough Artery, in which there issues forth a small quantity of
blood, that is red and hot; sometimes with small strings cast forth together
with a gentle cough, and some kind of pain in the part affected.

Another from the Thorax, or Breast; in which the blood is little or nothing
frothy, but blackish, and clotty, sometimes stinking, and mingled with purulent
matter; and it is ejected with a Coughing and pain. It is cured, 1. By opening
the Hepatick vein of the right side, and the blood ought to be drawn forth by
degrees, and often repetitions. 2. By Evacuation with Cholagogues or such
Medicaments as in purging extract and draw forth Choler. 3. By incrassation;
where Trochisques of Crabs Claws, de spodio, and de terra sigilata, or the
sealed earth of Lemnos, etc. are much approved of.


Another from the Lungs, in which the blood is continually frothy, colored,
hot, compact, accompanied with a Cough, and void of pain; and sometimes there is
together with it rejected a small quantity and portion of the said blood
corrupted and putrefyed.

Another from the inferior parts, in which a little blood is cast up by vomit,
together with a pain, and a bloody ejection, etc.

[Read more of this subject in the Guide to Physic and Chyrurgery, Riverius
Practice of Physic, and his Observations; and the London Dispensatory. Al of
the last Editions, Englished by me.]

Title, VII. Of the Affects of the Heart.
Chap. I. Of the Palpitation of the Heart.
THe principal affects of the Heart are, a Distemper, a Palpitation, and a
Fainting or Swooning.

Touching the Distemper, (especially that which is hot) we have spoken already
in the second Book. Concerning that which is moist, Cold, and dry, there is
nothing singular that offers it self to consideration, but what we may as well
make mention of in the other Species and kinds thereof: and therefore we intend
to treat only of those two sorts.

The Palpitation of the Heart is an inordinate, and (by its dilatation and
contraction or settling it self) composed motion of the same, whilst it either
expels that which is burdensome unto it, or else attracteth, that that is
requisite and profitable unto it, or else restores that that is Deficient and
wanting.

It differs from Trumor (or the Trembling of the Heart) in that this latter
shifteth its place, but the former seateth and fixes it self in one place
alone, whether it be greater or less; this of the Moving faculty; that of the
instruments; and it may happen unto those parts that are otherwise immovable.

The SIGNS are evident and manifest enough unto the very senses, to wit, the
sight; the touch, and the Hearing. The Jugular Arteries are especially those
that leap and Beat; and their pulse is unequal and inordinate.

The CAUSE is either any thing irritating the moving faculty, or else a
necessily of refrigeration and cooling, by Reason of the hot distemper; or a
Defect and want of the spirits, touching al which specially and particularly in
the Diffe^^^ces,

The CURE ^s exceeding difficult, for the Disease^ extremely perilous; it
being very acute in each particular Paroxysm; but of long continuance, in
regard of its intermiting, and frequent returns. If it proceed from the
Coldness of the Heart, if it continue long, and from year to year, and make
many Recidivations, it then for the most part is terminated, and by a Syncope
concludes in Death. It Respects, I. The Paroxysm; in this Case the
Fomentation of Balm and Borrage, the Water of the hearts of Animals (known in
the shops by the Name of Aqua Excordibus Animalium) of Heurnius, and the Juice
of Mother wort, or (as we call it) succus Cardiacae, etc. Have their due and
proper place. II. It respects the Causes; touching which we will treat further
in the Differences.


The Differences are taken from the Causes.

I. One is from a Vapor, or a Windiness, exciting and irritating the Expulsive
Faculty of the Heart, which is known by this, that its approach and surprisal
is sudden and unexpected; that it is excited by every light and gentle motion
of the Body; and there often a Trembling Seizes upon the Knees, and a darkness
and dimness upon the Eyes, etc. This, 1. Is either Collected there in that same
place, being Resolved of a matter Old and thick and fixed in that same place,
oftentimes with a Cold distemper, but more seldom with a hot; which if it be
unequal, it then raises up many Vapors; and it is to be removed and quite
taken away by opening the Vein either of the left or the right Arm, according
as the Pulse and beating is in this or that more restless and unquiet; and
especially if there be present, a Plethory, or over fullness of pure and good
blood; by the application of Cupping-Glasses to the Thighs; by the removal of
the Cause that is constantly and continually giving in supplies of matter; and
moving it up and down, and from place to place, and likewise by the discussion
of the said matter. And here there avails much the Oil of Citrons with some
Conserve, the right and true Phaponticum two scruples thereof given in Wine,
the Confection of Alchermes, the Treacle Water with Camphire of Crollius. Or,
2. it is sent from the Inferior Parts, the Stomach, the Womb, the Hypocondria,
etc. And then regard must be had unto those parts. 3. Or else it is Malignant
and Poisonous, and then there is present an extraordinary vehemence of the
Motion, which passes into an inequality of al sorts, as also into a fainting
of the Heart, and a Syncope or Swooning fits. In this case there is commended
the Cordial of Crollius made of Gold, the Emulsion of Margarites with the water
of Borrage and Cynnamon; the Experiment of Thanckius of red Cora prepared, and
Margarites dissolved in the water of lavender, by the inspersion of the oil of
sulphur, or vitriol; the water of Cinnamon with the spirit of Juniper, etc.
Epithems of Alexipharmicks. 4. Or else it is not poisonous; unto which those
things above mentioned may fitly be applied.


II. One is from a humor, which is known by this, that its invasion is not
altogether so sudden and unexpected, and that it continues longer. And this
is. I. Either waterish, having its residence in the Pericardium; which is not
known but with much difficulty, albeit the malady be continual, and that the
sick persons complain of the suffocation of the Heart. It is taken away by
discussives, as well such as are internal, as Treacle, Confection of alchermes,
the Species of diambra; as those that are External, namely, hot Bread
besprinkled with a cordial water, and applied to the region of the heart.
Neither vesicatories, nor venesection are here to be made use of. Or else it is
sent from some other parts, and by its weight either burtheneth too much the
veins, Arteries, and the ventricles of the heart, so that it is thereby
deprived of the freedum of its motion (as it hapeneth in wounds) great fear and
terror, etc. or else by its quallity it infesteth the same; which is especially
wont to be done by Choler a dust, and terrefied by excessive heat; and then
there will be need of evacuations and revulsions. For the Cauteryes, if we make
use of any, there are no cantharides to be therewithal mingled, or put
thereinto. Treacle outwardly applied (if the matter be cold) is here commended.
2. Or else it is not malignant; and of this what has already been spoken ought
to be understood: or else it is Malignant and poisonous, and then there is
great variety in the Pulse, which chances especially in regard of the
greatness and smalness thereof, etc.

III. One is from a Tumor, which if it be hot the inflammation in the Body will
be so much the greater, and the breathing will be difficult: if the swelling be
hard, and in the Pericardium, the motion is then continnual, and the sick
person wastes and wears away by degrees, and without any manifest Cause. The
Cure is to be proceeded in according to that of a Tumor.

IV. From Worms, which are discovered by the Convulsion: for the whole and
entire cure hereof, see in Hartman. The Bezoar stone is here of excellent use.

V. From the defect of Spirits, which is known by the foregoing of dissipating
Causes. It is Cured by those things that Cheer and Comfort, as odoriferous
wine. etc.

VI. From a hot Distemper; touching which the second Book is to be Consulted.

Chap. 2. Of Fainting or Swouning.
FAinting or Swooning is a sudden and Precipitate failing of all the Spirits,
and especially of the vital powers and strength, with a pulse much weakened,
and almost totally abolished, as likewise with a cold sweat, arising from an
extraordinary great, weakness of the Heart, through the fault and defect of the
vital spirits; of which those that remain retire also from the External parts
of the Body unto the Center, to wit, the Heart.

According to the diversity of the degrees of this sad affect, so are the names
thereof various and different. Ecclusis is a small and light fainting;
Lepothimia and Leipopsychia is that which is somewhat more greivious; and
Syncope is the most sad and greivious of them al; which last, if it proceed so
far, that the pulse or beating is abolished in the whole Body, it is then
termed Asphyxia; the reason whereof shall be declared in its definition.

The Signs (and that first of the affect not yet present, but very near
approaching) are, especially in persons unaccustomed thereto, an Anxiety that
neither was nor indeed could be foreseen, a vertigo or swimming in the head, a
representation, as it were, of strange and various Colors, an often reiterated
change and alteration of the Pulse. The Signs of the Affect present, are, a
suden fall and failing of all the Powers of the Body, a Pulse most weak and
obscure; and so it is distinguished from the Apoplexy, and the strangling of
the womb, the Chilness and Coldness of the whole Body, but more especially of
the extreme parts, a cold sweat, and therefore termed syncoptick, breaking
forth, and chiefly in the temples, neck and Thorax; which if it be with an
abolition of the Pulse it is then to be accounted a sign Pathognomick.

The CAUSE is a sudden failing of the vital spirits, whithout which neither the
heart, nor indeed any other part of the body can perform its actions; but as
touching this we shall speak more fully in the differences.

There is some hope of a Cure, if it be only from the single or simple
distemper of the heart; if it proceed from evident and apparent Causes; and if
it be by Consent: There is no hope, if the patient fall often into these
fainting fits, and that without any manifest cause; if it befall a weak body; if
the sick person be not raised out of these fits after the sprinkeling of Rose
water upon his face, and the drinking of wine; nor yet even after sneezing wort
has been administered; if the heart primaryly lie and labor under this affect;
and lastly, if it affect those that are Feverish and (by reafon of the great
store of humors) with an inflammation of the stomach and the Liver. The Cure
has respect. 1. Unto the paroxysme; in the which the Spirits are to be
refreshed and cheered with the vinegar of the flowers of tunica (a kind of
Gilly-flowers) the vinegar of Rue, and of the Elder Tree; the balsam of white
Ambor; and likewise by putting to the nostrils wine, Rosewater, Cinnamon water;
and carbuncle water, etc. When the disease is hot, then cooling Medicaments;
but if the Affect be Cold, then those Remedies that heat and warm, are to be
administered; and unto women those things that afford the most strong and
stinking savor. Unto the Region of the Heart Epithems, and inunctions of
treacle, Mithridate, and the oil of Citron, are to be applied. Wine that is old
and odoriferous, is here most efficacious. II. It respects the intermission;
touching which more shall be said, now we are come in the next place to speak of
the differences.

The Differences are taken from those Causes that produce a defect of the
Spirits.

I. One is, that Spirits are not generated, either by reason of a defect of
Matter, to wit, the blood overmuch evacuated, and the Air corrupted; or else by
reason of some defalt in the faculty, as well in regard of the more noted and
considerable diseases of the Heart (whether they be from its distemper, or
whether they be instrumental) as in regard of the Arfects of the Brain and the
Liver, yea likewise of the stomach and the womb; and of al these there ought to
be a special and due regard had in the cure.

II. Another is from the Dissipation of those spirits that are generated and
bred; which is caused. 1. by those insensible evacuations, that are either
habitual, or else happen from the over great rarity and thinness of the skin:
(and in this case we must have recourse unto perfumes and sweet smelling
medicaments, and to those kind of meats that afford a good and wholesome Juice,
the skin is to be condused and made thicker with the oil of the myrtle tree,
and with the oil of Mastick) or else it is from the thinness of those things
that are to be retained; and therefore here those meats that are not over
fluid, and easily dissipated have their place, as being most fit and proper. 2.
By Evacuations that are sensible, as well of the blood, as of other humors:
(where Note, that these Evacuations are to be stopped; that the body ought not
to be besprinkled with those things that are cold; that in a large and abundant
sweat, only such things as close and bind the skin are to have any place or
use) 3. By diseases, as overmuch want of rest and sleep; (of which enough
before) a vehement pain, the gnawing or pain of the stomach, the Colic pain,
the Nephritick, or pain of the stone in the kidneyes or blader, the pain of the
Teeth, etc. a sudden breaking of an impostume; in which there may a
restoration be made by restorative meats sweet smells, and rest. 4. By such
things as are evedent and apparent, as namely, extreme hunger, the immoderate
use of venus, too much and over violent exercise, etc.


III. Another from the alteration and corruption of the spirits, (which is
caused by a, malignant matter, whether external or internal, as for instance,
the rottenness of humors) poison drunk and taken down, the bitting of venomous
Creatures, and then the Cure is to be sought for in its peculiar and proper
place.

IV. Another from the suffocation of the spirits; which is caused, 1. By
overmuch blood; and then there are present and appear signs of a plethory; and
in this case the opening of the Basilick vein helps much. 2. A humor that is
Crude and thick, very much abounding about the heart, and the veins and
arteries thereof, the capsula (or purse of the heart) and the near neighboring
members; and this is either there cellected, or else transmitted either from
the head and other parts; and then the habit of the body is Hydropical, neither
can the patient undergo and bear either the opening of a vein, or purgation:
Frictions or rubbings downwards, anoyntings with oils that open and loosen, the
use of Oximel with the decoction of other things that cut and divide, and
fasting, (unless the pulse be suddenly changed and discover an extraordinary
weakness) al these help and conduce much to a Recovery. 3. By fuligenous
vapors, gathered together in great abundance about the Heart and the Members
adjacent, by which the respiration or breathing is hurt; these are soonest and
best taken away by discussives. 4. By a Sudden Terror and Fear; for which
Evacuation is most convenient, lest that from the afflux of Blood some
obstruction in the Vessels, or else an Inflammation should be excited. For what
remains, see further to the Treatises, of the Practical Physicians.


Title, VIII. Of the Affects of the Paps, or breasts in Women.
Chap. 1. Of the Diseases of the Papps.
Article, I. Of the Tumors or Swellings of the Paps.
THe Affects of the Paps or Dugs are either Diseases, or Symptoms: unto the
former of these there belong, Tumors, the Cancer, and the Magnitude.

The Tumors of the Paps are four.

I. An Inflammation, which is a hard swelling. It is known by the redness, the
pain, the pulse or beating, and the heat thereof; by which it differs from
that we call the Clotting or Curdling of the Milk, and the overgreat abundance
thereof. It arises from the great store of Blood that is attracted,
transmitted, or suppressed. It is Cured, 1. By a Diet that is thin and spare,
cooling and moistening. 2. By Diversion, which is performed by letting blood in
the Ankle, if the Causes be suppressed. 3. By Evacuation, by opening the
internal Vein of the same side, and so letting out the Blood; as also by a
gentle Purgation. 4. By the Application of Topical Remedys, in the Inflammation
of such as thereunto accustomed.
And here we are to take Notice, that the Repellers ought to be temperate, lest
that the Heart be overmuch cooled; that in the Augmentation thereof there is
commended beer and butter well warmed, and so applied; that the extreme Hardness
may most properly and succesfully be prevented and removed by the Medicament
that is formed and made of the Marrow of a Calves Thigh, two ounces thereof, of
Oesipus or the moisture of greasy sheeps Wool, one ounce; of Saffron four
scruples; of Cummin well bruised two scruples; that when it is Suppurated, (in
regard that the Breasts or Paps are Spungy and full of hollow Caveties) it is
most commonly to be opened in diverse places thereof; that the Pap affected is
very rarely cured and healed, unless the Milk of the other that is sound be
dried up, in regard that the blood equally flows unto both; and lastly, that
the Pain is to be moderated and mitigated; if it be in Summer, most fitly with
the Leaves of Henbane; if it be in the Winter, then with the Roots of the said
Henbane, roasted under the Embers, and then well beaten together with Hogs
Grease.

II. Oedema, which is sometimes diffused and spread abroad throughout the whole
Paps or Breasts, so that they wholly and equally swel. It is known by this,
that it is soft, and that by intervals, and at certain times (to wit, in the
time that the Courses flow) the swelling and the pain is exasperated; but yet
notwithstanding, that there is evermore some of the swelling remaining. The
Original and the Cure hereof are to be sought for out of that which is spoken
in the general touching these Tumors. And here it is only to be Observed, 1.
That in the retention of the Courses, those meats that are Tosted and Roasted
are not so fit and convenient. 2. That the stronger sort of Maturatives are to
be made choice of in regard that here the matter is tenacious and very loath to
yield. 3. That a due regard is likewise to be had of the Stomach, that is the
Receptacle of the Phlegm.


III. The Scirrhus of the Paps is either Exquisite, or not Exquisite, 1. The
Exquisite is various. I. One is that which is but newly begun, or but now
beginning, which upon the touching thereof is a little painful; and in this
regard it is distinguished from a Cancer that is likewise but now beginning;
and it is very hardly Cured. Another Old and Inveterate, which is hard, without
pain, incurable by Medicaments, especially if it resemble the color of Capers;
or if hairs grow therein; it is sometimes Cured by Manual operation. II.
Another is by the Congestion or heaping up of a Humor that is in it self thick,
in the Curing of which we are not to use Vinegar, either in the beginning, or
long, at any time, lest that either the residue thereof should be hardened and
become like unto a stone; or else that the substance of the part being
overdryed should wast and consume away: neither ought we to attempt any thing
by Manual operation, if the whole Breasts or Paps Wax hard, and that the
swelling so add hereunto the Thorax or Chest, that without extreme peril it may
not be thence removed. Another by Resolution, in which the thinner part is
dried up by preposterous Medicaments; and which Galen Cured by an Evaporation
of the sharpest and sourest Vinegar, poured forth upon the Pyrites stone, (we
call it the fire stone) Red hot, but this was after the use of liquid and
moystening Medicaments. In the Curing of them al, we must be sure that we have
a special regard unto the Spleen, and the suppressed Courses, and that
Emollients and Resolvers succeed one the other, and be interchangably applied.
2. The Scirrhus not Exquisite is known by this, that the swelling is bigger
than in a Cancer, of the color of Ashes, with an hardness, and the Veins
thereof somewhat black and bluish in the outward parts; and that it sometimes
vexes the Party, especially upon the near approaching of the Menstrua or
Courses. It arises from Black Choler mingled together with Melancholy,
especially in such as are barren, or such which soon ceased their
Childbearing, or else, lastly, those that have altogether a suppression of
their Terms, or monthly Courses. In the Curing hereof, among the Repellers
without astriction, there is commended the Unguent of Frogs; of which see
further in Castrensis his first Book of the Diseases of Women, Chapter, 21. See
likewise touching the Manual Operation in the Same Author.


IV. A Windy Tumor, which is known by this, that the pain is very acute,
especially in the left breast, with an Excruciating and torture of the Arm, the
whole side, the Ribs, and the Shoulder blades. It arises from an Exhalation
that is thick and drawn up from the Menstrua, or the Seed suppressed, or else
from some other Excrements, and so extending the said Paps. In the Cure hereof,
take notice, that a Linen Cloth soaked in Soapsuds; or else wet in Water, and
then dried, is commended for dissipation, and when there is occasion to
disperse and Scatter; and that the Pain is well mitigated with bread taken hot
out of the Oven, and then moystened with the Oil of Nard, the shops call it
Oleum Nardinum, and of Rue.

Article, II. Of the Cancer, and Greatness of the Paps.
I. The signs of the Cancer in the Breasts, as also the Causes, and the Cure,
may be known, and sufficiently understood by what has been already said in the
Second Book touching a Cancer. Let it suffice here only to add, I. That the
Cancer that is not Exulcerated may be rendered and made more mild and gentle,
if the Courses being recalled return to their pristine state and condition,
either by the Course and Vigor of Nature, or else by the assistance of Art, and
the help of Medicaments; or else if the Body be preserved free from a
Cacochymy, either by a good order of Diet, or else by Medicaments. There may
likewise be applied unto it that Unguent that it compounded of Lithargyrum, two
ounces thereof, in a Marble Mortar drawn about with a Leaden Pestle, and
incorporated with Rosewater and the Oil of Roses, of each three ounces. II. For
the Cure of the Cancer Exulcerated, see in Hartman, who writes that the said
Cancer may be perfectly Cured with Aqua Fuliginis that has in it a clensing
Faculty, and with the Oil of Arsenick fixed, and well tempered in Plantane Water.


II. The Magnitude of the Paps (unseemly as it is) is exposed unto the sight.
It arises from the often handling and stroaking of them, and especially from
the great abundance of Flatulency and windiness, the Retention of the Courses,
etc. The Cure hereof ought therefore to be Endeavored, because that by how much
the greater and bigger they grow, but so much the more easily they may be
affected with the Cancer. It is performed, 1. By Meats that are Astringent, but
little or not at all flatulent or Windy. 2. By Driving back the blood, or other
the Humors flowing unto them; and here the Juice of Hemlock, and the Partridg
Eggs, anointed upon the place, are much approved of. 3. By the Discussion of
that that is already gotten unto the part affected; for which purpose that
Unguent that is compounded of the Dirt or Clay that is to be found in Barbers
Mils, two ounces thereof, the Oil of Myrtle one ounce, and Vinegar half an
ounce, is much commended. 4. By the Compression of them by Artificial ones of
Lead anointed on the inside with the Oil of the Seed of Henbane, etc.


Chap. 2. Of the Symptoms of the Breasts.
Article, I. Of the want of Milk, too great abundance thereof, and its
Coagulation or Curdling.
THe Symptoms of the Breasts are, the Defect, Redundence, and Coagulation of
the Milk.

I. The Defect of Milk (according to the Nature of the Causes) is twofold.

For one is from a Fau^^ in the Blood, which fails by reason of Dis^^^ that
over dry the body; from a distemper in the Liver, from much rasting and
spareness of Diet; and lastly, from extraordinary Evacuations; of al which
there must be care taken in the Cure. Now to generate and breed Milk, these
things following are experimentally found to be good, Namely Crystal prepared,
the leaves, Roots, and Seed, of Fennel, while they are fresh and green; the
ponder of Earthworms prepared, and taken in Wine, the Electuary of Zacuthus,
in the Ninth Book of his Pract. Hist. and last Chapter.

Another is from something amiss in the Lactificall or Milk breeding Faculty,
when it is so weak, that it can neither attract the blood, nor contract it,
either by reason of External refrigerating Causes, and such as are likewise
Astringent; or else by reason of other Diseases; unto which we ought to have
due respect in the Cure.

II. The Redundance or over great store of Milk proceeds from the abundance
of blood, and a strong Lactifical Faculty. In the Cure, the Luxury and
prodigality of Nature in the breeding of Milk is to be restrained; and the Milk
that exceeds and is over and above, ought to be dissipated and dried up. For
this purpose venesection in the first place, is approved of; and then driving
back by Medicaments, which ought to be put upon the Paps, toward the Arms; And
also those Medicaments that wast away and lessen the Milk, such as that they
call Muria (a kind of brinish Liquor, or Pickle) with the powder of Cummin, and
Hemlock Boiled in Chervil Water and Vinegar, etc.

III. The Coagulation or Curdling of the Milk is then Caused, when the more
thin and subtle parts do by little and little exhale, and the thicker remain
behind; from whence the Glandules or Kernels wax hard, and swellings, yea and
also impostumes arise. In this Case the Infant ought not to be suckled out of
the Breasts affected; and yet notwithstanding the Milk is to be sucked out, lest
that which is bred anew should be Curdled by that Milk that is already become
(as it were) Cheese, and that part of the Curdled Milk that begins to be
dissol^^d should putrefie. For the Dissolving hereof, excellent good is that
broth that is made of the stalks of the Herbs following, (together with an
Ablution or washing of the Paps with Water, Wine, and Vinegar mingled
together;) a Fomentation of the Decoction of Marshmallows, Fenugreek, and
Melilote, etc. A Liniment laid thereupon of the Oil of Roses, Sweet Almonds,
the Juice of Smallage and Parsley, and Vinegar, in which there has been first
dissolved the Curd or Runnet of a Hare. The Water of Hemlock is thought to be
good for both the foresaid Purposes.

And so much of the Diseases of the Chest or middle Region.

THE TENTH BOOK OF THE IDEA OF PRACTICAL PHYSIC.
Concerning the Diseases of the lower Belly.
Title, I. Of the Affects of the Gullet.
Chap. 1. Of the Diseases of the Gullet.
THe Diseases of the lower venture comprehend under them the affects of the
Gullet, stomach, Guts, Anus, Mesentery, Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, Bladder,
Genital Parts in Men and Women, the Navel, and Belly.

The Diseases of the Gullet are, Distemper, Tumor, Straitness, Wounds and
Ulcers.

Article, I. Of the Distemper and Tumor of the Gullet.
1. The Distemper of the Gullet is a recession of it from its Native to a
preternatural Temper: its known, by the swallowing being hurt. It Is divided
into a hot one, which happens from without, from fumes, pouders, etc. from
within; from Vapors in burning Fevers, a hot and dry Distemper of the Womb;
and then there is perceived a Redness and Roughness on the Tongue, with thirst,
which is cured by cooling means and somewhat clensing. 2. into a cold one, which
either proceeds from too cold drink, or otherwise, and is taken away by things
that heat. 3. Into a moist one, which issues from the Defluxions of catarrhes,
Salivation, etc. and Causes a Relaxation of the Gullet, so that the lower part
of it, and the upper mouth of the Stomach lie open. 4. Into a dry one, which
arises from dry things and Causes Roughness, and is Cured by suppings of
Chicken Broth, or fresh butter.

II. A Tumor of the Gullet, is its excess in its Magnitude. It Is known by the
pain in swallowing, most of al in the hinder part and back; by the stoppage in
swallowing, so that if a great bit be to be swallowed, sometimes the drink runs
through the Nose; it proceeds from the same Causes, from which we said Tumors
in general did arise. It Is often hard to cure, because it endangers
Suffocation, but after the same manner as other tumors, viz. In the beginning
by replling means, in the Augment by external and internal resolvers, in the
state by discusives; let vomits be avoided for fear of suffocation, unless when
it is come to suppuration that the Tumor ought to be broke. It Is divided. I. Into
a hot one, with which is Joynd a Fever, great thirst, pain, in the Cure of
which bleeding takes place: and into a cold one, in which the pain is less, and
in the Cure of which the repellers ought to be gentle, the resolvers and
discussives stronger. II. Into that which possesses the upper part of the
Gullet, and then meat cannot go down, and into that which infects the lower
part, and then the Meat after it has descended a little way stops there.


Article, II. Of the Straitness, wounds, and Ulcers of the Gullet.
I. The Straitness of the Gullet is when its Passage is Contracted: it is known
by this, that liquids are easier swallowed than solid things. It Is divided
according to its Causes, for one is from external Causes, as from astringent
medicines, or some things swallowed; and then the business is known from the
standers by, or the Patient himself: it must be cast up by vomiting or
Coughing; or furthered by moistning and Emollient means applied outwardly and
inwardly; or be thrust down with a Sponge Dipped in Oil of sweet Almonds, or
taken out with that excellent Instrument of Fabricius Hildanus. Another Cause
is from a Tumor, Worms ascending out of the Stomach and Guts; from Scorbutical,
and Hypochondriacal Vapors distending the Gullet, and compressing the rough
Artery; from the Luxation of the Vertebrae of the Neck and back, which may be
seen in their proper place. Another is from thick Phlegm, kurdled milk, etc.
Sticking in it, where Oxymel of squils and vomits takes place.

II. The Wounds of the Gullet in respect of their Causes are twofold, for
either they are Caused by a weapon, and then the situation of the wound shows
it, if vomiting happen, somewhat is cast forth through it, and it is hardly Cured:
Or from some small bones swallowed, and then it is easily manifest. Medicines that
are grateful to the Stomach ought to be administered.

III. An Ulcer of the Gullet is known by the pain, when some sharp, sour, or
Salt thing is swallowed though in little quantity, by its biting, and by the
casting up of matter. It Is hard to be Cured because the parts will scarce grow
together in a Membranous body. It has its Differences from the Causes, for one
is from external corroding things, as Aqua Fortis, mercury Sublimate; and then
we must work with Lenient Vomits, and such as are clammy, as the Mucilage of
quince Seeds, Fat broths; Another is from a wound, Tumors, imposthums, another
from the casting up of sharp Humors, etc.

Chap. 2. Of the Symptoms of the Gullet.
AMongst the Symptoms of the Gullet, the Principal one is the hurt of
swallowing, which is twofold: for one is by Reason of the resolution of the
Gullet, the faculty being hurt, by Reason of the Resolution of the Nerves of
the sixth or seventh Conjugation; its known by this, that solid things are
easier swallowed than liquids, as being thrust down with less labor, for these
require a greater force, to make them yield to the impulsive Body. It arises
either from a Defluxion, and then there is felt a heaviness in the Head, a
distension of the Neck, and the Rheum it self; or from some other Disease, it is
dangerous, and ought to be cured by Medicines good against Palsies: the Second
is by Reason of Convulsions, which arises also from a wound, and it is most
dangeous in old people. There is another from the affects of the part, of which
we have treated formerly.

Title, II. Of the affects of the Stomach.
Chap. 1. Of the Diseases of the Stomach.
THe Affects of the Stomach are either diseases, or Symptoms; to those belong
distempers, Tumors, wounds and Ulcers, the other see hereafter.

Article, I. Of the Distemper of the Stomach in general.
The Distemper of the Stomach is a preternatural constitution of its similar
Parts in the first qualities.

The SIGNS of that are the hurt appetite and concoction, a change in the
Excrements, a heaviness in the Stomach, and waving of it, and distillations
from the Head which most commonly happen.

The CAUSE is whatsoever can Internally or Externally alter it. The CURE is
performed, I. By the alteration of the distemper by contraries, then the
Medicines ought to be grateful to the Stomach, rather solid than liquid, rather
meats that are Medicinal than exact Medecines, mixed with astringent things that
the Stomach be not Relaxed, not sharp, Salt, corroding, lest they offend the
mouth of the Stomach: if the Medicines be external, they must be applied to the
sword-like Cartilage toward the Navel, and upon the back to the twelfth and
thirteenth Vertebrae. II. By taking away the Causes both External and Internal.
III. By Strengthening the Stomach, where appropriate Medicines take place, as
the Magistral of red Coral, the inward Coat of a Hens maw, etc.


It Is divided into a distemper without or with matter, of which in the
following Articles.

Article, II. Of the Distemper of the Stomach without matter.
A Distemper of the Stomach without matter, is a preternatural disposition of
the similar Parts of the Stomach in its qualities, produced by external and
Internal Causes without the presence of any Humor.

Its SIGNS and Causes shall be explained in the differences, the Cure relies
only on alteration, and removing the Causes.

It Is divided according to the qualities.

I. One is Hot, which is known from the want of appetite to meat, indorous
Belchings, clamminess of Spittle, dryness of the jaws and Tongue; it arises
externally from the six non Natural things increasing its heat; internally from
internal Diseases, burning Fevers, Inflammation of the Liver, Spleen, etc. It Is
Cured, 1. With cooling things, but lightly and not too long applied. 2. With
cooling Diet where Barley Water takes place, and Emulsions of the four greater
cold seeds.


II. Another is cold, which it known from the greatness of appetite, unless it
be too cold, by sour belchings, if neither much nor cold meats have been eaten,
nor phlegm do abound, by wind and two much spitting. It arises externally from
the six non Natural things, internally from the parts incumbent, as the Liver,
Spleen, and Muscls of the Belly which induce a coldness. It Is Cured, 1. By
appropriate heaters, but not too much, inwardly and outwardly moist, lest
dryness be caused. 2. By Diet, where Wormwood Wine takes place; it is
distinguished into a positive, of which we have now treated, and a privative,
which is conjoined with dryness.
It arises from the defect of innate heat which is Caused by things that heat
too much, as the frequent use of Wine, the want of nourishment, the heat and
dryness of the incumbent Parts, as of the Liver, of the muscles of the Belly,
and the Call.

III. Another moist, which is known by want of thirst, by abundance of spittle,
etc. it arises from external Causes inducing moisture, it is Cured. 1. With
dryers without eminent heat or cold, as are the ashes of Hens Guts, of
Swallows, burnt hearts horn, red Coral, troschiskes of Vipers, Galangal, burnt
Salt. 2. By a contrary Diet.


IV. Another dry, which is known by the extenuation and Contraction of the
Region of the Stomach, which is accompanied with a slenderness of the whole
body. It arises externally from a drying Diet, too much emptying and fumes of
metals; internally from the dryness of the incumbent parts. The cure is the
more difficult, because with the Feverish heat it induces a consumption; if
vomiting happen it argues a great want of innate heat; the Cure is performed.
1. By moistening which is best of al accomplished by nourishments that are
medicinal, 2. by Diet, where Milk takes place, beginning with a small dose, new
laid Eggs, Almonds, Raisons, Pine Nuts, etc.


There is another compound, the Nature of which may be collected from the
simple: those that labor of a hot and dry distemper, have little blood, unfit
for nourishment, are lean, bound in body, with Veins eminent, subject to the
dry Scab.

Article. III. Of the distemper of the stomach with matter.
A distemper of the stomach with matter is, when the stomach falls from its
temper by reason of some humor either generated there, or falling thither from
some other place.

The Signs and causes are put in the difinition: in the differences they shall
be more largely Explained.

The CURE is finished. 1. By the alteration and evacuation of the peccant humor.
2. By strengthening of the part by appropriate external meats. Look into the
differences.


The Differences of this Distemper are Diverse.

One is from the matter generated in the stomach; then the symptoms appear
continually; the whole body and all the members are sound. It is cured by
emptying of the matter, which is comodiously done by medicines of aloes, hiera
picra, mechoacan; and by corroborating the part. Another is from matter falling
from another part, then that part which was periodically affected, is no longer
troubled; some accustomary evacuation is suppressed: or the usual diet has bin
changed, or somewhat stops in the whole body, or in some particular part. The
symptoms are more remiss. For the cure we must have respect to the parts that
send the matter.

II. Another is from the matter sticking in the cavety of the stomach, then
there is a waving or nauseousness which is attended with vomitinge or a
looseness. Another from the matter impacted in the coats of the stomach, then
there is a nauseousness without vomiting, oftentimes with the hickops.

III. There is another chollerick, viz. hot and dry, which besides the former
signs is discovered by nauseousness, bitterness of the mouth, with a certain
sense of knawing, and sometimes by chollerick vomitings. It arises from
choler, either sent thither from the bladder of gal, or generated there from
corrupt meats. It Is cured. 1. By diet, wherein chicken broth seasoned with
lettice and endive does excel. 2. By emptying of the matter, both by vomits
made of the powder of the down or flower of walnuts dried in the smoke and
given a dram weight in honey and water; and purgers compounded of hiera picra.
3. By alteration and coolers and moisteners, amongst which do excel succory and
violet water, syrup of pomegranates, of coral of Quercetan, of strawberries,
currants; tincture of roses, let^^ce and succory condite, etc.


IV. There is another phlegmatic, to wit cold and moist, which is known, both
by the signs formerly reckoned up, and by a sense of heaviness in the stomach
especially some hours after meat, by a waving and sour belching, it proceeds
from thin or thick phlegm, it is cured. 1. By emptyers both by vomit, to which in
thick phlegm we ought to premise things incisive given in a solid form (amongst
which excels diatrion pipereon, diacalaminth, the essence of balm, pennyroyal,
etc.) and by purging; so that the purges be administered either alone, or mixed
with preparatives. The vomiters are, viz. of salt of vitriol given in broth,
oxymel with the decoction of radish, Heurnius his vomiter of hellebor. 2. By
strengtheners, amongst which excels inwardly taken, the roots of callamus
aromaticus and citron pills, and of oranges, with the phylosophical spirit of
vitriol, and the Elixir proprietatis: outwardly, ointments compounded of the
distilled oils, of wormwood, mint, cudmin; peneroyal, mastick, a cerote of one
part of pure Ladanum, with too parts of wax applied an hour before dinner, is
good. 3. By a contrary diet.


Article. IV. Of the tumors of the stomach.
A tumor of the stomach is when the same is elevated into a bulk or magnitude,
greater than is due. It contains under it three things.

I. Inflammation, which is known both from the general signs, and also from the
vehement pain, heat, thirst, a most burning fever, vomiting or often going to
stool, unless when the orifice or pylorus is possessed, to these are added the
symptoms of the principal faculties, if the brain be drawn into consent. It
arises from blood preternaturally poured forth by the veins derived from the
porta whether it be pure or mixed, whether sent thither or attracted. It Is cured
after the manner of other inflammations, where observe. 1. that emptying by
vomiting or stool is not convenient, unless where there is an eruption of
matter collected. 2. Bleeding is rather to be repeated, than to take much blood
at once. 3. Amongst external repellers, sugar of saturn with planta^^ or
nightshade water, adding a little of wormwood or mint, is commended; internal
things ought to be administered with a moderate actual coldness. 4. resolvers
which ought to be gentle and Emollient, must be corrected with astringents by
reason of the excellency of the part, 5. If suppuration cannot be prevented,
the heat must be cherisht with things moderately hot, moist and clammy, both
inwardly and outwardly. 6. The imposthumation may excellently well be broken
either with the juice of Scabious alone, or mixed with honey.
It Is divided according to the parts of the stomach. One is of the whole
stomach, in which what posture soever the sick lies down in, he is full of
pain. Another is of part of the stomach, 1. Either external, in which the pain
after the concoction of the meat is increased, by reason of the intension of
the transverse fibers, the appetite is not very bad, nothing of the
impostumation is cast up by vomit. Or of the internal part, in which al things
are contrary; but it is better, if the matter pass into this, than under the
peritoneum; because there it may easily be purged forth, but here not so. 2.
Either of the upper part, in which because it is endued with exquisite sense,
there happen most grievous symptoms, and the strictness is most of al
perceived toward the latter end of swallowing, where the attraction is
strongest. Or of the lower part, in which the pain is increased more in the
disgestion of the meat. 3. Or of the former part in which the tumor may be
perceived by the touch. Or of the hinder part, in which if the outside be
affected, the sick can hardly lie down on his back, if the inside, not easily
on his face.


II. An Oedema and Schirrus, of which we meet with nothing remarkable.

III. An Inflation, when the magnitude of the stomach is increased by wind
contained in its capacity, it is known by its distension, molesting the region
of the stomach above the navel by the tumor, and by its resisting the touch, by
belchings with which the malady is eased. It arises from matter ministering
wind, of which in its differences. It Is hardly cut'd, if it befall one
recovering, because it signifies a relapse; if it be in acute Fevers, because
it shows that the natural heat is wasted by the preternatural; if it last long,
because it ends in a dry dropsy. How it may be be cured, see in the
differences. It Is divided according to the nature of the causes, 1. One is from
windy nourishment, which is known by the patients relation, it is cured with
good diet and discussives, to wit with balsome of fenel, oil of carawaies
inwardly and outwardly applied, by baths of warm water, in which are boiled
danewort roots, by baggs, by bread hot out of the oven sprinkled with oil of
Rue. 2. Another is from a phlegmatic matter which causes wind, and is known
from the signs of a phlegmatic distemper, it is taken away by emptying the
matter prepared, and discussing the wind, a great cupping glass, also does
discuss being applied with much fire, without scarification, and often
repeated, and one dram of sows pasterne bones burnt and prepared with Rue water
given in a draft of wine.


Article, 5. Of the wounds and ulcers of the Stomach.
I. The wounds of the Stomach are known from hence, that the belly is loose,
deeper over against the Stomach, hickops, and vomiting of choler do ensue,
sometimes the meat and drink is cast up again. They are no ways cured, if the
whole body of the Stomach be perforated, or if its upper part about the orifice
be wounded; very difficultly, if only the outer coat, and if the bottom of the
Stomach which is fleshy, and able to endure medicines. The cure is accomplished
as in other wounds; mastick any ways taken is good. The wound that penetrates
and is large, ought to be sowed up, leaving an orifice in the lower part; they
must abstain from al sharp things in their diet.

II. An ulcer of the Stomach is known, by the pricking and ulcerous pain, by
a heat molesting above the navel, caused by the receiving in of hot meat; by
stinking belchings, by causes generating ulcers, by a slow fever, etc. It
arises. 1. From external things, as sharp medicines and poisons, and then the
relation of the patient which show it. 2. From sharp humors there derived from
some other part, or generated there; and then we must have recourse to the
distemper with matter. 3. From an impostumation broke after inflammation, and
then this was precedent. 4. From the rupture of a vein, and then vomiting of
blood proceeds.
It Is hardly cured, both because detersives cause pain, and because being
always moistened by the chyle it cannot be dried. Inveterate ulcers cause a
lientery. In the cure note, 1. The humors if there be any, ought to be brought
forth only with lenitives. 2. Vomits are wholly to be shunned, lest that which
is ulcerated be delacerated more. 3. To internal consolidating medicines,
somewhat moderately abstersive is always to be mixed.


Chap 2. Of the Symptoms of the Stomach.
Article. 1. Of the pain and heat of the Stomach.
THe Symptoms of the Stomach are Pain, Heat, want of appetite, too great
appetite, a vicious appetite, too great thirst, hurt of concoction, hickops,
belching, rumblings, nauseousness, Vomiting, and the Choleric passion.

I. The pain in the stomach, is a sad sensation of the same, arising either
from things that distend it, or know it, and so dissolve its continuity.

There is no need of Signs in this symptom, unless the patient be diseased in
mind.

The Cause, is explained in the definition, and we shall be more large of it in
its differences.

The Cure has respect unto. 1. The symptom it self, if it be too urgent, in
rebating of which a bagg made of the roots of marsh mallows, camomel flowers,
red roses and wormwood, is good. Quercetans anodyne water in his Pharmacop.
restitut. Oil of chamomel saphirine, a bolus made of three drams and a half of
electuary diaphenicon, and two scruples of philonium romanum is most commended
by some. Four grains of laudanum opiate with the decoction of chamomel. After
the use of all which, things that strengthen the stomach must be applied. 2.
The cause it self, of which in the differences.


The differences are taken from the parts and Causes.

I. There is one pain of the coats which is simple, and to which the former
things ought to be applied: another of the mouth of the stomach, which
discovers it self by faintings and swounings, sometimes by immoderate sweats and
anxiety: and then it arises both from an attrition of the Stomach, which
happens after taking of meat with coldness, a stoppage of the pulse, and
breathing, either from the meat boiling in the Stomach before it be sent forth,
or turned into phlegm; and it is cured with oil of spiknard applied hot to the
Stomach, and one dram of pepper exhibited. And from the astriction of the
Stomach, which happens by reason of the astriction of both orifices, and the
meat descending it cease; they ought to be distinguished. The cure is past
hope, if it befall them who have an orifice of exquisite sense; if their extreme
parts be cold, and if it proceed from poysenous things.

II. Another is from external causes, as kernels, pins, sharp, corrupt, or much
meat, and then a vomit does good; and if poison have been taken, things
alexipharmacal must presently be applied.

Another is from internal causes. 1. From humors, viz. Choleric, Phlegmatic,
either falling thither from some other part, as is wont to be in fevers, or
generated there, which if by mixing with the meat they become less acrid, upon
taking of nourishment the pain is assuaged; if cleaving to the coats they are
stirred by taking of meat, or sticking to the bottom they be raised up; the
pain is increased after meat. The cure ought to be sought from the chapters of
distempers. Observe that hiera in a tough humor ought to be mixed with stronger
medicines that it may overcome the matter. Zacutus his syrup and powder, Lib.
ult. c. 2. n. 11. hist. is very good. 2. From vapors either contained there, of
which Tit. 2. c. 1. a. 4. Or sent from some other part, from the womb, worms,
etc. 3. From worms ascending to the orifice, of which in its place.


III. Another is from diseases molesting the Stomach, viz. distemper, tumors,
wounds, ulcers, etc. of which we treated before.

II. The heat of the stomach, is an ebullition of humors in the stomach caused
by the power of preternatural heat, so that the heat is perceived even to the
throat.

There is no need of signs in this symptom.

The CAUSES, are acrid vapors raised either from meat acrid in its own nature,
in choleric bodies, during the concoction of the meat, and the Stomach
troubled with strong motion: raised up from a choleric humor, which whiles
they are compelled to break forth by the gullet sticking there, they burn that,
and the mouth of the Stomach.

The CURE, is more difficult in those whose substance of the stomach is as it
were besmeared with choler, because the Region of it is dyed by the bladder of
gal with a saffron color, and the same ftain does penetrate even to the
internal membrane. It does respect, 1. The heat it self, to allay the which
many remedies are given; the chief are these, a Bolus compounded of two drams
of sugar of Roses, two ounces of crabs eyes prepared and bole armenick half an
ounce, swallowed in parcells. A powder compounded of Crystal calcined one dram
and an half; Pearls prepared one scruple; Coral prepared. Chalk, each one
dram, Sugar Candy two drams; the dose is one dram given in drink. Spirit of
vitriol coagulated one scruple given in drink, which ought to follow a liniment
of the best pomado half an ounce: Camphire one dram, oil of bricks two drams,
badgers grea^e half an ounce; Salt of vitriol one dram. 2. The cause of the
heat, which is to be tempered, and emptyed.

Article, 2. Of the want of Appetite.
An anorexy, is the prostration of appetite in relation to al meats, arising
from the defect of the sense of sucking in the upper orifice of the Stomach.

This symptom needs no Signs, The patient complains, and it is observable by
the standers by.

The CAUSE, is the defect of the sense of sucking in the lower orifice of the
Stomach, which from whence it proceeds, shall be said in its differences.

The CURE is doubtful, if it happen in the declination of a disease, or from
the long continuance of it, or from weakness, or moderate evacuation, because
it indicates the extinction of natural heat, and threatens a relapse. If it
befall children, who are naturally great eaters, and want much nourishment,
because it signifies a great preternatural excess. If it afflict in a disease
of long continuance with sincere stools, because it shows an extinction of the
appetitive faculty in the orifice of the stomach, either by reason of
extraordinary cold, or of some matter extremely putrefied. If it arise from the
brain by the hurt of the nerves of the sixth conjugation. Of little hope, if in
some disease there presently follow it a great appetite to meat, no crisis
preceding, nor an abatement of the disease, because, it signifies a hurt of the
brain, and an extinction of the sensitive faculty. It relates to the causes, of
which we shall treat in the differences.

The differences of the prostraction of appetite are various.

I. One is Greater, which is properly called Anorexy, in which nothing at al is
desired, with which agrees the former definition. Another is less, called a
dysorexy, in which meat is desired, but less or later than nature requires it,
it and arises from the sense of sucking weakened or overthrown.

II. There is another without nauseousness and hating of meats, which may be
called shappetency; of the Causes of which shall be treated in the following
difference. Another with hating, and it is called a loathing of meats. It arises
from Choleric and corrupt Juyces, yet void of acidity and saltness, which
because they are unfit to nourish the body, they are not sucked in by the veins,
yet do possess the Orifice of the Stomach. It Is Cured with those things which
do correct a hot distemper, and empty the Humor. See the Cataplasme, in Zacutus
l. vlt. c. 1. n. 5.

III. There is another from the want of Sucking, which is Caused, 1. By the
abundance of nourishment in the whole body, in which the strength is not cast
down, the which is taken away by fasting, exercise, frictions, etc. 2. By an
impotency in the Stomach, to corrugate or wrinkle i^ self up, either by reason
of a distemper, either hot, relaxing the stomach, and diffusing the matter; or
cold, destroying the Native heat, the first Cause of appetite: or by reason of
a redundancy of vicious humors, especially crude Excrement, insipid, Clammy and
Phlegmatic, whether generated out of the meats, or flowing thither from some
other part. The Cure ought to be fetched from the Chapter of distemper. 3. by a
defect and weakness of attraction. Either by reason of a cold and moist
distemper, or by reason of the interception of the passages, by the obstruction
of the mesaraick and hollow part of the Liver, in the Cure of which, those
parts must be respected. 4 By hindrance of Evaporation, either when the
substance of the body is not emptyed, either by reason of the constipation of
the pores and thickness of the Skin, which a Bath of sweet water will take away;
or the weakness of Native heat whether acquired by a cold distemper, or
idlenss, or by reason of the tenacity, sixth and firm concretion of the
substantifical moisture, which does not easily yield to the gentle and pleasing
heat that feeds upon it.


There is another from the not perceiving of the sucking, which, 1. by Diseases
of the brain in which either the Nerves of the sixth pair are affected, or the
Animal spirits are not generated, or their influx is hindered, or which happens
in acute Fevers, they do languish, or the faculty, as in the Phrenitical, etc.
is converted another way. The Cure ought to respect those Diseases. 2. by
Diseases of the Stomach it self, whether they be of distemper, or of
Composition, or of solution of unity, of which we treated before. The appetite
is raised by taking away the causes, partly by cooling things if a hot Cause
did precede, partly by heating things, if a cold. Wormwood Wine is very much
commended.


Article, III. Of too great Appetite.
Too great Appetite is distinguished into two Species, viz. A Dog-like
Appetite, and Bulimus.

I. A Dog-like Appetite is a continual insatiable desire of Eating, arising
from a Vehement sense of sucking in the mouth of the stomach, afflicting
sometimes with vomiting, sometimes with a looseness.

There is no need of SIGNS, whereas they are expressed in the definition.

The CAUSE is a Vehement sense of sucking and pricking in the Orifice of the
stomach, but whence it comes, is explained in the Differences.

The CURE which is timely to be administered, least the sick fall either into a
custom of vomiting, or into the Caeliacal passion, or into a dropsy, does
respect. 1. The hunger it self, which is allayed either with the Use of Fat
things; or with the Yolks of Eggs hardened in Water, or what is best with Wine.
2. The Causes, of which we will treat in the Differences.


The Differences are taken from the Causes urging the Suckings.

I. One is from the too great want of nourishment in the Body, or by Reason of
worms feeding on the Child, which show themselves by biting, and they are cast
forth by the use of Hiera Picra; or by reason of too great Evacuations both
sensible and insensible, by the habit of the Body, by Reason of too great a
heat of the moisture, to which conduces much, the tenuity of the Humors, and
thinness of bodies, Laxness of pores, etc. And then sweats do molest; The Cure
is to be turned to the Particular Diseases. Or by reason of the long use of
Detersive Nourishment, as Pigs, Lobsters, etc.

II. There is another from cold, acid, and more austere Humors, wrinkling the
Orifice of the Stomach, compressing and pulling it: as are acid Phlegm, and
Melancholy poured into the Stomach, and then the signs of a cold distemper are
present; amongst purger Hiera Picra is good, as also Zacutus his Wine, Lib.
Ult. Hist. Prax. ca. 2. n. 9.

II. Bulimus is a great Appetite, Periodical, which aftentimes ends in a
Nauseousness with Faintings away, and loss of strength.

The Signs are explained in the Definition.

The Cause is doubted of by Physicians: yet most do hold that it is a cold
distemper of the Stomach, whereupon it is wont often to happen to those that make
long Journeys through deep snow.

There is no Cure, if it happen in Chronical Diseases, sometimes after Fevers
and other Diseases it threatens a relapse. It respects, 1. The time of the fit,
when the swouning happens, in which we must use frictions and revivers, as the
smell of Wine, Vinegar, etc. 2. The time out of the fit, in which after the sick
has recollected himself, meats of good juyces must be ministered, bread dipped in
Wine, etc. And by external means the heat must be restored to the Stomach.


Article, IV. Of a Depraved Appetite, or Pica.
Pica, which is also Citta and Malacia, (is so called from the bird Pie which
is sick of this disease) it is an absurd appetite to a strange substance liquid
or solid beside the ature or essence of nourishment, from a sad sense of
sucking, and corrupt judgment not discerning things fit, or unfit for eating,
from a Vicious Excrement imbibed in the coats, by a peculiar propriety of
substance molesting the mouth of the Stomach.

The SIGNS are manifest, because they desire meats of Vicious qualities: there
preceded excess, indigestion, use of meats and drinks of evil qualities, a
suppression of the Courses, etc.

The CAUSE is a sad sense of sucking Molesting, which is Caused by the matter
impacted in the Coats of the Stomach, either acting by its whole substance, or
by a manifest quality, arising from an evil Course of Diet, or sent from some
other part, as from the womb, whereupon it is familiar to Childing Women about
the second and third Month: but there is wont at the beginning while the Causes
do alter, to be raised a desire of contrary things; but when by long custom
there is a familiarity contracted, things like are desired.

The CURE must be haistened, left a Cacochymy or Dropsy be caused.

The peccant matter is most commodiously cast forth by vomit, which in Childing
Women must be Caused by those which are more gentle. The Stomach may be
strengthened with water of Cinnamon, of Orange Pills, magistral of Corals, etc.

Article, V. Of too great Thirst.
Too great thirst, or Poludipsia, is a greater and oftener desire of accustomary
drink, by reason of a sad sense of sucking in the Mouth of the stomach, arising
from the defect of moist nourishment, and the alteration of its proper Humidity.

The SIGNS of the Symptom are manifest of themselves.

The CAUSE is a sad sense of sucking which the want of moisture, and the plenty
of heat have raised: but whence that proceeds, shall be explained in the
Differences.

The CURE does respect, 1. The too urgent Symptom, which is mitigated by
Crystal or Coral held in the Mouth, cold water corrected with a little Vinegar,
the juice of live Crabs with water of violets and Housleek, sprinkled; with a
little Niter, a Lohoc compounded of the Mucilage of the Seeds of fleawort and
quinces, of each half an ounce; Sugar Candy of violets pouderd, Starch,
Tragacanth, of each one dram; Syrup of violets as much as is sufficient. With
spring Water boiled with Sugar Candy, adding a Pome Citron cut in two, etc. II.
The Causes of which shall be treated in the Differences.


The Differences are taken from the Causes.

I. One is from the defect of the dewish substance of the Stomach, which is
known from the preceding Causes, absence of loathing, etc. it arises from
those things which can wast moisture, as are Labors, watchings, fastings,
immoderate Evacuations, etc. The Cure is to be perfected with meat rather than
with drink, water which causes vomiting and a looseness in them, is to be
shunned: the beginning must be taken from moistning, which a gentle cooling
ought to follow.

Another from the dissipation of the moisture in the Stomach through heat,
which is known by the loathing of meat, roughness of the Jaws, bitter, Salt
nitrous taste. It arises, 1. Either of it self, or from external things, the
hot Air, sharp, Salt meats, hot Potions, Vehement Motion of the Tongue,
poisons; al which ought to be removed. Or from internal Causes, as chiefly from
an inequal distemper of the Stomach, where we must empty; and moisten with an
Emulsica of the four greater cold Seeds. 2. Or from other Diseases, viz. A
Fever, heat of the Lungs, a dropsy; etc. The Cure of which must be fetched
from their proper places.


II. There is another without a Fever, which Choler, or Salt Phlegm do Cause.

Another with a Fever, in the beginning of whose fit no drink is to be
administered, lest a greater heat be kindled, but the thirst must be deluded by
things held in the Mouth; in the Vigor we must use moistening and cooling
Gargarisms; in the declination, unless the Patient will abstain, drink may be
allowed; that sweats may flow more plentifully.

Article, VI. Of the hurt of Concoction or Chylification.
The hurt of Concoction, is a fault of the concocting faculty in its action
about the nourishment, by which it comes to pass, that it either does not
concoct at al, or slowly, or depravedly.

It contains therefore three things under it, Bradupepsy, Apepsy, and Dyspepsy.

I. Bradupepsy, is a slow and weak concoction, when the meat is left either
half crude, or is not disgected but in a long time, by reason of the
frustration of the faculty, and weakness of heat, chiefly proceeding from a
cold distemper.

The SIGNS are, a distention of the stomach by wind after a full Concoction of
the meat, the sent of the meats rising to the Palate many hours after, sour
belchings, Phlegmatic vomitings, stools moist and crude, the Concoction of
meats easy to be concocted, scarce done in a long time. The Adaequate cause is
the frustration of the Concocting faculty, which either is hindered by some
Organical Disease, as a Tumor, inflations, etc. Or is weakened by a cold
distemper induced by those things, which either do cool, or suffocate, or
dissipate, or withdraw the nourishment, or it is hindered by an external error,
which either Excrements heaped up in the stomach, or sent from some other part
do Cause; or nourishments not regularly taken, in just quantity, quality, time
and order; or sleep.

The CURE, unless the grief proceed from an external error; is principally to
be directed against a cold distemper; for this inwardly are good, the tincture
of amber, magistral of corals, Elixir proprietatis, Diacorum nobile, the fruit
of Eglantine condite, extract of calamus aromaticus, of Juniper berries, of
Zedoary^, spirits of vitriol if cross humors are presumed to be in the
stomach, but it is then worst of al when the heat of the stomach is Languishing,
for this, the bluish or green spirit of wormwood, Mynsichtus his elixir of
vitriol, syrup of Juniper berries, conserve of roses vitriolate, the
phylosophical salt compounded of salt of niter prepared and molten, gemmae,
each two drams; of wormwood, blessed thistle, tamarisk, each one dram; of
galangal, cubebs, mace, each two scruples; Birckmannus his powder of the root
of cuckowpint prepared in Quercetans Pharmacopea. The distilled oil of orange
pills, of wormwood, Bartoletus his potable oil, of nutmegs, cinnamon, mastick,
etc. outwardly do best agree, Cratoes stomach oil, tacamahac, balsome of Peru,
Hartmans stomach scutum, Stokerus cerote of ladanum, etc.

II. Apepsy, is the concoction of nourishment in the stomach quite abolisht,
proceeding from the privation of its alterative faculty, by which it comes to
pass, that it descends crude into the guts.

The SIGNS of it are, the precedent causes, belchings after the space of 6. or
7. hours, savoring of the nature and quallities of the meats, the casting up of
them inconcocted, or voiding them so by stool, etc.

The CAUSES are stronger than those, which were alleged in a Bradypepsy.

The CURE also ought to be fetched from thence, the arcanum of tartar is
commended, if ten grains of it be taken every day in broth.

III. A dispepsie or diaphthora, is a corruption of the meat, and a change of
it into a strange quality, by reason of the frustration of the concocting
faculty of the stomach.

The SIGNS of this are, nidorous belchings, adust, acid, far, stinkings, which
are often attended with rumblings of the belly, murmurs, pains bitings,
vomitings, very stinking stools, impatiency of hunger, anxiety, etc.

The CAUSE is the distemper of the stomach, and that oftentimes hot, which
burns up, corrupts, and putrefies the meat; but every thing corrupted,
according to its nature puts on a strange quallity: hence it is, that things
smell so diversely. Chiefly the nidorous coruption is the offspring of heat,
which arises from hot diseases, nourishments of the same quality, and easily
corrupted, as milk, fishes, mushrums, fading fruits, the sour corruption
proceeds from cold.

The CURE is to be turned to the distemper, the hot one chiefly, of which we
spoke before; here the Spirit of sorrel, and Quercetans syrup of corals
challenge the first place.

Article. VII. Of the Hickopps.
The Hickop is a convulsive motion of the stomach, consisting of the distension
and dilatation of the fibers of its upper part, by which the expulsive faculty
being irritated, does endeavor to cast forth things hurtful that are fixed in
the coats of the stomach, especially of the mouth of it and gullet, with a
noise and vehement contorsion.

There is no need to reckon up the signs, it is heard by the standers by.

The CAUSE is matter residing sometimes in the whole stomach, but pulling the
stomach either by an inimicous quallity, or by compressing it.

There is no Cure, if a Dilerium happen with it, because it is an argument,
that either acrid vapors are raised up to the head from the stomach inflamed or
that the brain being inflamed, the evil is comunicated with the nerves of the
orifice of the stomach, if it arise in a deep sleep, in swouning fits, or
convulsions. The cure is doubtful, if fainting be feared with it, if it befall
old people purged above measure, if it arise from an inflammation of the liver;
if it invade after vomiting, because it is a sign the stomach or brain
suffers no small inflammation; if it happen in sincere vomiting, because there is
signified some great burning of the parts about the stomach; if it proceed from
the Ileon, because it is an argument that some nervous part which has consent with
the brain is affected, if it be joined with loss of speech. It respects, 1.
The symptom it self, which is restrained by things stupefying, as of philonium
romanum one scruple; saffron, cinnamon, each two grains; Laudanum Opiate one
grain, with oil of sage as much as is sufficient. 2. The causes, concerning
which consult with the differences.


The differences are taken from the causes and other things.

1. One is from external causes, as refrigeration, either by reason of the
air, or cold drink, where holding of the breath, and anointiag of the back
and stomach with hot oils does help. From sharp nourishments or medicines,
where Ptissan drink, or oil of sweet almonds is a remedy from too much
emptying, which is followed with a dryness and corrugation of the stomach,
where an imulsion of the four seeds with temperate anolepticks takes place.
From corrupt meats, which aloes will purge forth; from poison taken, which treacle
resists.

Another is from internal causes, as are. 1. hot and acrid humors, which
require a vomit or gentle purge, by the use of terra sigillata, or bole
armonick, they grow more mild. 2. Cold humors, which must be prepared and
emptied; the extract of castor is of force, oxymel of squils, Elixir
propriates; and sneezing takes its place. 3. Wind, which is discussed by a
nodulus compounded of dil and poppy seeds, by oil of Cumming seed, or by the
imposition of oak ashes sprinkled with mallego wine, aplaister of bay berries.
4. Matter which is wont to be in an inflammation of the liver. 5. internal
diseases, as an inflammation of the liver, womb, stomach, brain, or some other
part; also a fever, in which observe, in the beginning of the fever it ought
to be taken away by gentle evacuation; in the state we ought not to fear,
because it is a sign there will be a crisis by vomiting; in the augment it
signifies either that the humor flows to the cavity of the stomach, and then
the hickops is sildomer, and by taking of meat, or a gentle medicine it is laid:
or into the substance of the stomach, and then the hickops is so frequent, that
by reason of it the patient seems to be choked; it must be stopped by
stupefactives, if by reason of the vehemence of the fever we may not purge.


Article, 8. Of belching and rumbling.
I. Belching is a violent breaking forth with noise of wind residing in the
Stomach, through the upper parts.

There is no need of signs to discover it, for it is manifest.

The CURE must not be neglected, for if they be frequent and much, they signify
the vehemence of the cause, and trouble digestion; if they be before meat they
dispose to the colic, if after, to the dropsy. Yet belching is good if it be
supervenient to an asthma; if it happen in a long looseness, when as it was not
before, because it is an argument that there is again some concoction. It
respects principally the cause, of which elsewhere.

The CAUSE, is wind generated in the stomach, or sent thither from other parts
especially from the hypochondria.

As concerning the differences it is divided threefold.
I. One is moderate which (because it voids by the mouth windy excrements) is
not to be stopped: another frequent, which is to be taken away. II. Another is
acid, which is either from meats of hard concoction, or from a cold distemper
of the stomach, and then honey, sugar and other things turn sour. If it
continue long it threatens a dropsy or lientery. The sick are not easily
subject to a pluresy. The cure is to be turned to the distemper. III. Another
is Nidorous, which is either from the meats sending such a vapor from them as
are radishes, onions, fried meat, fried eggs; or from the too much heat of the
stomach. So corrupting the meats, whether it be so, either essentially or by
consent. IV. There is another insipid, which proceeds either from flatulent
meats, or from the plenty of it; and if a long time after the taking of the
meat it savor of the same, it signifies a great weakness of chylification.
II. Rumbling is a sound of the belly caused by humors or wind, running up and
down the Stomach or gutts.

It has the same causes; the differences are allotted, both according to the
diversity of the sound, whose cause is plenty of excrement, and the largness of
the passages; and the nature of the part in which it is contained. For it is
dry and thin which makes an acute sound; moist and thick which makes a grave or
base. It is either in the thick guts, from whence the graver sounds break
forth; or in the small gutts, from whence the clearer and acuter: and if there
be moisture with it, there arises a small murmuring, which is the forerunner
of a moist stool at hand. It is either in the cavity, or within the coats: nay
there has been known a wind that ascended to the throat, making show as if it
would suffocate, and after an hours space has returned to the stomach.

Article, IX. Of nauseousness and Vomiting.
I. Nau eou ness is a vain desire to vomit with a sad molestation, heat and
anxiety, by which the stomach, contracting the lower parts, and dilating the
upper, does endeavor to cast forth those things which are offensive to it; but
by reason of weakness, or the scarceness or contumacy of the matter, it voids
nothing by the mouth but a thin watery humor.

There is no need of Signs, the causes are declared in the definition, and
differ only gradually, from those which cause vomiting; therefore we shall treat
of them, when we do of vomiting.

II. Vomiting, is a sensible and palpable casting up with violence through the
upper parts, the matter contained in the capacity of the stomach.

There is no need of signs, when as the symptom is manifest. But the business
is not of that which is Critical, which happens as the work of nature for the
benefit of the sick, and either lessens, or takes away the matter: but of that
which is symptomatical, which is foretold, by a pain in the head caused by
consent, darkeness appearing before the eyes, rigor, coldness of the lower
parts of the hypochondria moveing of the lower lip, the flowing forth of much
drivel, etc.

The cause is whatsoever can offend the upper orifice of a weak stomach, and
irritate it to expulsion, either by its plenty, or biting quality, or by the
nature and disposition of its substance.

The Cure is difficult, if al colors be vomited because they signify dangerous
affections in the body, if that vomited be of a leek color or black, because it
indicates an excessive heat in the veins, and great corruption of the humors,
unless it proceed either from the crudities of some meats, or be critical. It Is
past hopes; if the matter be livid, and smell strong, because it denotes
putrefaction with an extinction of the native heat: If with it, there be other
matter which from the corruption in the body has contracted blackness, it
being by nature not black, it relates to, I. The urgent symptom it self, which
is to be stopped, 1. By revellers, whether they be strong and sharp Clysters,
or hot things applied to the extreme parts, 2. By things that compress the
motion of the expulsive faculty, and strengthen the Stomach. Inwardly are
commended, Zacutus his Pills, lib. 9. hist. prax. cap. 1. number. 4. Lignum aloes
poudered and given with the syrup of the sharp juice of Citrons. The crude
juice of quinces taken a spooneful, laudanum opiate, a vomit.
Outwardly a plaster of treacle, Zacutus his cataplasme, an epithem of the
decoction of wormwood, mint, made in smiths water.

The differences are taken chiefly from the causes.

I. One is from external causes, as are meats either taken into great quantity,
or offensive, by their hurtful qualities, vomiting medicines (then are commended
new treacle, spirits of wine) imoderate drinking and drunkenness, vehement
motions after meat, unaccustomed going to Sea, violent coughing, the fancy
and beholding of things loathsome, blows on the body, a wound of the skul,
poison taken, etc.

Another is from internal causes, either diseases, or humors, of which shall be
treated in the following difference.

II. Another is from diseases infesting the stomach, as are, Ulcers, tumors,
straitness and smallness, the stoppage of the lower orifice, which must be
considerd in the cure.

Another is from humors, which are either bred there, and then there was some
fault in the diet, with a continual nauseousness; or flow from some other part,
and then there must be respect had to those parts; or they lie in the cavity of
the stomach, and then they are cast up with a little straining, there is a
distension and anxiety after meat, and vomitings when they have taken no meat:
or they adhere to the coats, and then they vomit not, unless upon taking of
meat nauseousness is very troublesome. These humors are, 1. The Chyle, which
must be suddenly remedied lest an atrophy steal upon us; this happens in an
ulcer of the Stomach. 2. Excrements, which are cast upwards in the Iliaca
passio, as also Glysters. 3. Blood, which is cast up either by reason of the
cutting of some member, or after the suppression of some evacuation of blood:
where it must be dissolved lest it putrefy, with oxymel in which a dane-wort
root has been boiled, afterward it must be emptied, at last it must be
stopped, with two ounces of the water of the greater nettle, and spirit of
vitriol as much as is sufficient for a gratful sharpness, with the essence of
crocus Martis, and gelly of Quinces, with the old conserve of roses given with
gum tragacanth; Or by reason of the opening of the vessels, where the same
means must be used. Syrup of purslane with terra sigillata is powerful in
astriction. 4. Cholor sometimes comes theither, if the channel of choler be
inserted into the Stomach; and then the nature of the humor cast up must be
considered: vomiting troubles them most when they are fasting: it is sometimes
happily stayed by opening the Salvatella, if we may credit Zacutus. 5. Phlegm,
melancholy, matter, worms, stones, etc. which are best of all discovered by
their proper signs.


Article, X. Of Choler.
Choler, whether it come apotes choles, that is from yellow choler, from which
it most frequently arises; or apo ton cholodon, that is from the gutts, is
twofold, moist, and dry.

I. Moist choler, which also is the true, is a continual and imoderate casting
off of an evil humor, with great perturbation and violence, both through the
upper and lower parts, arising from the violent irritation of the expulsive
faculty.

The signs are, often voiding of choleric humors, a great pain in the belly
and bowels, pain at the heart, thirst, a pulse small and frequent, to which do
oftentimes succeed, faintings, and coldness in the extreme parts.

The Cause is a sharp and corrupt matter, whether arising from meats bad in
themselves, as the eggs of the barbel fish, mushrums, melons, cowcumbers,
plums, fat things, herbs, leeks, onions etc. or bred elsewhere and sent to the
stomach, as shall be said in the differences.

The cure must be bastend by reason of the acuteness of the disease; yet there
are some, in whom this choleric passion and a lask at certain periods, does
empty all the superfluities of their bodies. It respects, 1. The furthering of
either of the evacuations, if one be too much, the other to little. 2.
Atempring of the humors. 3. Astrengthning of the part. 4. A restoring of the
strength and spirits, too which end wine is good, if there be no fever. 5. A
mitigation of the Symptoms, of which in the differences.


As for the differences.

There is one, when the matter that irritates is contained in the Stomach,
which is known by this, that there is present, nauseousness, a straitness,
knawing and pain of the stomach; It arises, from strong purging medicines.
Concerning the Cure observe. 1. That the flux must not be stopped, if the
evacuation be plentiful, and the strength be not impaired. 2. Where the
irritation is great, and the evacuation small, vomiting must be furthered by
gentle vomiters, and purging by benign purgers and laxatives. 3. Where the
evacuation is great, and irritation small, we must use astringents and
strengtheners together, 4. If vomiting be excessive, we must move by stool, if
a looseness be too much, we must act with vomits composed of whey with syrup of
roses, 5. Inwardly crocus martis rightly prepared does stop it best of al.
The decoction of Cloves, Mastich, and Red Roses, made in red wine, Laudanum
opiate: the sponge that is wont to grow on sawallows given four grains weight
in red wine. Outwardly a Sea sponge boy led strongly in vinegar, and laid upon
the stomach.

Another is, when the matter flows from elsewhere, as from the liver, pancreas,
gutts, mesentery, into the stomach. It Is known by this, that for the most part
there is present a malignant fever, and convulsins trouble them: the matter
offending then is, Choler like yolks of eggs, yellow, adust, or salt, nitrous,
and corrupt. In the Cure, 1. The course of the matter flowing thither is not
presently to be stopped. 2. If it flow too much, it must be diverted by
medicines either to the skin, or to the passages of urine, or it must be called
to the outward parts, by frictions, ligatures and the like. 3. It must be
qualified and the parts strengthened.
Inwardly Crystal is good, given half a dram weight. Outwardly epithems made
of the juice of Endive, Purslane, with barley flower. In course of diet bread
dipped in the juice pomegranates is good, etc.

II. Dry choler, which also is the bastard, is a voiding of a flatulent spirit
through the upper and lower parts, with a puffing up of the belly, with noise,
and a pain of the loins and sides.

The SIGNS and immediate cause, are expressed in the definition.

The CURE, which also must be hastened, does respect. 1. The bringing forth and
discussing that flatulent spirit where Clysters and carminative decoctions take
place. 2. A Removal of the Cause from which it arises, of which in the
differences.


As concerning the Differences.

One is From the fiery heat of the stomach corrupting the meats, and converting
them into a nidorous matter and sharp vapors, in which the cure must be turned
against a hot distemper, and outwardly the boiling hot hypochondries must be
cooled.

Another is from sharp and windy nourishments, as Raddish, Rocket Seed, fried
Eggs, and the like: and then the matter must be emptyed, and give diartion
Piperion.

Another is from Black-choler and other adust and Salt Humors lurking about the
Hypochondries, and growing hot by the mixture of another Humor; as we see Salts
and saline spirits being mixed with acrid spirits, do yield a great quantity of
spirits.

Title, III. Of the Affects of the Guts.
Chap. 1. Of the Diseases of the Guts.
THe Diseases of the Guts are Chiefly, Inflammation, Straitness, Worms,
Rupture, Wounds, Ulcers, and the affects of the right Gut.

Article, I. Of the Inflammation of the Guts.
An inflammation of the Guts is a swelling of them arising from blood out of its
vessels falling into them and putrefying.

The SIGNS are a fixed and distending pain, the perceiving of a Tumor, that the
Guts may be perceived to be rolled up like the strings of an instrument,
costiveness of body, a stoppage of the Urin, a Fever present.

The CAUSE is explained in the definition. In the Autum the blood chiefly flows
thither, by reason of its thinness, because the thin and moveable Humors
generated in the Summer, by the inequal cold of the Autum, are driven to the
center of the body.

The CURE must be ordered according to the rule of other inflammations, and that
quickly, because the evil is acute, and oftentimes turns to a gangrene, and
mortification. The cooling Medicines, which are administered for it, ought to be
without astriction; we must wholly abstain from Purgers, lest the place affected
be exasperated.

It Is divided according to the place and Causes.

I. One is of it self, of which we have now treated; another from the Navel
Rupture, of which in its place. Another from the Rupture of the guts, in which
the Guts ought presently to be put back into their place. Another from a
contusion, in which, to those things which are applied for the inflammation must
be added somewhat lenifying and concocting.

II. One is in the small guts, which is most common, in which a distention of
the stomach, straitness of breathing, daily vomitings, do molest, that they are
not able to contain their drink, the pain and Torture tends most to the upward
parts. Another in the great Guts, in which the pain reaches more to the
Hypochondries, there is a heaviness in the Loins, and vomiting is not so
continual.

Article, II. Of the Straitness of the Guts.
The Straitness of the Guts is known chiefly by this, that the Excrements of
the Belly are not rightly cast forth by stool.

It has its Differences according to the Nature of the Causes.

I. One is from External things that are astringent and drying, as quinces, and
other things, which is known by the relation of the Patient and standers by. In
the Cure are required things moistening and mollifying, fat things, etc.

II. Another is from the Excrements hardened, obstructing them, which is known
by this, that there is no Tumor, pain, yet the Excrements are not cast forth.
It arises at that place especially where the small and great Guts end, either
from too dry matter, and drink to much diluted, or from the heat of the
neighboring parts sucking up the moisture.

It Is Cured by Mollifiers, by a bath of sweet Water with emollient Herbs, by
the Grease of a roasted Goose cast in by a Clyster, by blowing up the Guts with
a Pair of bellows, which must be followed with a strong Clyster with half a
dram of Sal gema.

III. Another is from Inflammation, of which we spoke in the former Chapter.

IV. Another from the growing together of the Guts which is incurable.

V. Another from a Rupture or worms, of which shall be spoken hereafter.

VI. Another from thick Phlegm, which is known by this, that Causes generating
that went before; crudities, flowness of the belly to stood, and much wind
abound. It arises from the fault of the Dier, and the feeble heat of the Guts:
and if it stick there long, it grows so thick that it wholly stops up the Guts.
It is Cured by things that cut phlegm, and sharp Clysters, concerning which
consult with the Chapter of the Cholick.

Article, III. Of Worms.
Worms and small creatures wholly preternatural, generated in the guts out of a
thick clammy and viscous Humor, having in it the principal of life in its kind,
by a vivid heat raised up by putrefaction, which do hinder the actions of the
Guts.

The common signs are many, to wit, a stink in the mouth, disturbed sleep, with
skipping, trembling, noise and gnashing of the Teeth, Itching and often rubbing
of the nose; a pale face, sometimes by fits ruddy, hollow and dark Eyes, the
white of which is changed into a Saffron or Pale, running of drivel from the
Mouth more than usual, a distension and puffing up of the belly with murmurs, a
knawing in the belly, and that exasperated in the time of hunger, sometimes a
looseness, vomiting, falling sickness. If in the morning while Children are
fasting, cold water be sprinkled on the Mouth of the stomach, they will al
gather together, and this sign has most weight with it, if the Age of the
Child will bear with it.

The CAUSE is a viscous and Phlegmatic Humor which arises from much eating,
meats that easily corrupt, and generate a thick juice, as cheese, Milk, pulse,
decaying fruits, sweet things, sugard things, honyed things, etc. It has
something analogous to seed endued with a formative faculty, and a vivifying
discretion, which does dispose the matter to receive this, and no other form of
worm, and being disposed does Cloth it with that from, as we see peculiar
worms do proceed out of wormwood, Sea Salt, a Horse, a calfe, Mulberry leaves,
Cheese, Honey.

The CURE, which is Difficult, if there be many, great ones, red and of diverse
colors, living; if in the beginning of Fevers and acute Diseases, as also in
the augment, by the malignity of the Disease they be Symptomatically voided, Is
Performed, I. By things that kill them, those which are bitter, acrid, Salt, or
enemies by their whole propriety, ought to be given upwards, but always mixed
with sweet things, downwards premising sweet things, then when they are in the
lowest places or in the right Gut: with them Oil ought to be mixed, that they
may be stifled in it, with cheese butter, which they exceedingly fear. The
chief things that kill them are hot, as Coralline given in powder one dram,
Wormseed, centory the less, peach flowers, Myrrh, Aloes, Zedoary, the Juice of
Rhadish, and cresses, Cold, hearts horn burnt, Purslane Water, juice of
Endive, Grass Water, with a little Vinegar and Sugar. Of Internal Compositions
the Powder of Dr. Mencelius my wives Granfather, excels; it is compounded of the
Flowers of Centory the less, tansie, St. John's wort, each two drams; of the
flowers of Wormwood, Savine, Peaches, of each one dram and an half; of the
Roots of white dittander, gentian, asarabacca, of each one dram; of red Corals
prepared, burnt hearts born prepared, of each two scruples; Seeds of Artichoke,
Purslane, citron, cummin, Seseli, Coleworts, Coriander prepared, Sorrel, of
each half a dram; Choice Rhubarbe one dram; Myrrh, Saffron, of each half a
dram; Scammony prepared, Trochiskes of Alhandal, of each two scruples; Salt of
Wormwood half a scruple, Coralline half an ounce: Of which you may give from
one scruple to one dram in Cows Milk upon an empty Stomach two hours before
meat. Outwardly is commended the cerote compounded of Myrrb, Saffron, Liver
colord Aloes, of each as much as is sufficient, with Rose Vinegar and an Ox
Gal, and applied both to the Mouth of the Stomach, and to the back; see more
amongst Authors. II. By things that drive them forth, which are, melted butter,
great quantity of Oil, a Bath of sweet Milk fuming hot, if the Worms be yet
alive Diaturbith with Rhubarb, Ruffus Pills, and de Tribus Solutivis if they be
dead.


The Difference is taken from their figure.

I. Some are smooth or round, in which the knawing of the Belly is more
vehement, a dry cough more frequent, the hickops, nauseousness, loathing of
meat, faintings of the heart, troubled dreams with trembling, rising up, crying
out, motion of the Jaws, etc. Clysters are not convenient for these, unless
they be dead. II. Others are broad, in which the Excrements are not unlike to
gourd Seeds, there is an insatiable desire of meat, and a quick casting forth
of the Body of that which is taken, a greater leanness and wasting of the Body,
a pain sometimes in the right side, sometimes in the left. Fearn, or its water is
good against them, Walnuts, Treacle, with Vinegar or the Juice of Lemons.
Concerning the broad worm, see Tulpius in his observations. III. Others are
called Ascarides, in which there is a continual pain, a most troublesome
itching about the Fundament, as if it were full of Aunts, with a heaviness in
the back, continual Motions to stool, moth-like worms are every where mixed with
the Excrements of the Belly, which smell very strong, etc.
Article, IV. Of the Rupture of the Guts.
A Rupture of the Guts, is a falling down of the Guts out of their place.

It Is called by the Greeks Kele, by the Latins otherwise, Ramix and Ruptura.

The SIGNS are a Tumor which sometimes increases, sometimes decreaseth,
according as a greater part of it it falls down, or is filled with wind or
Excrement, there is no pain, unless by chance the Excrements be fallen thither.
The Patient being pressed down or laid on his back the guts slide back into the
belly, and that with a murmur, etc.

The CAUSES are those things which can Relax or break the process derived from
the Peritonaeurn, as shall be said in the Differences.

The CURE is not to be neglected, both because that thin and Nervous Membrane
cannot easily be united, and because sometimes the Patient his Guts being
inflamed is brought into danger of his life, and the Guts inflamed do mortefie.
It respects, 1. The Replacing of the Guts, which if they be swelled with wind,
as the rumbling in the Guts and breaking of wind do declare, it must be done by
discussives: if they swel with Excrements hardened, then both with Emollient
Clysters and Cataplasmes and Fomentations. If with Phlegmatic matter it must by
little and little be emptyed by Clysters and suppositories, and be attenuated
by internal incisive means: if there avail nothing, we must fly to Surgery
(concerning which consult with Authors.) 2. The retaining of them in their
place; here are proper, Horse Tongue, which is most excellent, the powder of
Mouse-Eare given with meats, Through wax, Rupture wort. The Ashes of a sucking
hare given to drink in red Wine. The Seed of Flix weed, the plant fern pouderd
and given, each half a dram,


The Differences are taken from the Causes and places into which they fall.

1. One is from a Rupture of the Peritonaeum, which is known by this, that a
Tumor is suddenly raised, and also is quickly increased; the Gut falls down to
the very bottom. It arises from violent Causes, falls, straining to cast forth
the Child, or the Excrements of the Belly, holding of the breath, straining of
the voice, wounds of the Peritonaeum, etc. In the Cure a Ligature being
applied, shall be given inwardly one spoonful of the essence of the greater
comfrey, with two drops of the balsome of Sal Gemmae. Outwardly must be applied
Villanovanus his Plaster of a Rams Skin. Mynsichtus Armam. p. 364. And the
same Authors Unguent against a Rupture. p. 352. The fat of a Hedg-Hog,
concerning which see Hartman. If these do no good, seek for help from
Surgery, (of which see Platerus)

Another is from the Relaxation of the Peritonaeum, which is known by this,
that the Tumor grows by little and little, and the Gut does not descend to the
very bottom. It arises both from the moisture of the Peritonaeum, whence
Children often fall into a rupture: and from those things which break it, if by
degrees and often they assail the Peritonaeum, though not so violently.

II. There is another called Oskeocele, when the Guts descend into the very
God, it is known by seeing. Another Bubonocele, when they fall down no lower than
the groin: This sometimes does very much distend the Skin, and is stretched out
under it, and Causes a great Tumor. Both of them is either Enterocele, when
the Ileon Gut chiefly fall down, or Epiplocele, when some part of the Call. See
Geigerus in his Kelegraphy. Hither belongs Exomphalos or Omphalocele; when the
Navel either Relaxt or broke struts forth sometimes the bigness of a nut,
sometimes of an Apple; nay sometimes there is a Tumor raised like a Bag. If it be
lately, first of al foment it with a Decoction of tree Moss, self Heal, made
in astringent Wine; afterward lay a Cataplasme of Plantane and Lentils. If it
be Old, after the like Fomentations, it is Cured with the Ointment of Mushrums,
of Nuts outwardly applied with convenient ligature, inwardly with the essence
of the greater comfrey with the Arcanum of Sal Gemmae.

Article, V. Of the falling down of the Fundament, and of the wounds and Vicers
of the Guts.
1. The falling down of the Fundament, is a hanging forth of the outer part of
the right Gut.

There is no need of SIGNS. The CAUSES shall be spoke of in the Differences.

The CURE requires. I. A putting up of the Fundament fallen down, which is
performed gently with the Hand, premising a Fomentation of emollient and
moistning things if it be swelled. II. The retaining of it being reduced to its
place, either by astringent Decoctions, or by pouders, of Frankincense,
mastick, etc.
Inwardly is commended the Decoction of the Root of wild self-heal being drunk.
Outwardly the Ashes of beetles, of sheeps dung strowed upon the Gut.

The Differences are taken from the Causes. 1. Either it is from great
straining, which is Either in forcing out the Excrements, and then the Belly
must be kept loose, or in labor. 2. Or it is from a great irritation, which
afflicts either in a dysentery or tenesmus, against which the Cure must be
directed; or from the weakness of the Muscles, which are wont to draw back the
Fundament thrust forth, after the emptying of the Belly; or by reason of the
often falling down of the Fundament, or by reason of some cold, and then the
Nerves must be strengthened and the cold distemper be corrected. 3. Or from a
Resolution either by reason of a contusion of the Nerves about the Region of
the Os Sacrum or Rump bone, where things consolidating take place: or by reason
of some Extraordinary refrigeration of them, of which we spoke even now: or by
reason of some impostumation or fistula arising about the sphincter Muscles.


II. The wounds of the Guts (I pass by the Perforations made by worms, wind,
etc.) are either of the small Guts, in which the meat and drink comes forth,
Choler is cast up by vomiting, there are great pains with a Fever, and these
because the Guts have a Nervous Coat, and full of many Vessels, are by no means
or very difficultly Cured. Or of the great Guts, in which the Excrement comes
forth, the body is bound, the which if they be long ways, and small, they are
the easier Cured; if they be large and Cross the Guts, the harder no; ways
Cured if they become blackish. See their cure in Practitioners.

III. Concerning Ulcers we shall treat in a dysentery. Mortification is wont
sometimes to follow a Rupture, the Iliack Passion, and an Inflammation: it
happens also in wounds if the Guts falling out of the Belly, be alterd by the
Air, and become blackish.

Chap. 2. Of the Symptoms of the Guts.
Article, I. Of the Iliack Passion.
The Symptoms of the Guts are, The Iliack Passion, the Colic, costiveness of
Body, and a lask.

The Iliack passion is a sharp pain in the small Guts, arising from a violent
solution of continuity, with a Tumor of the belly rolled up like a bundle of
strings, and so great an obstruction of the Belly, that nothing goes downward,
but the Humors and Excrements are sometimes violently cast up by vomiting.

The part affected is the Ileon Gut, and the other small Guts, for though
sometimes the great Guts also may be affected; yet there is no such vehemence
and danger in them, because they are looser and more ignoble.

The SIGNS are, a sense of pain in the upper guts, rouled up above the navel,
most sharp, extending it self upwards chiefly to the right side, a puffing up
and vehement distension, an eminent swelling of the upper part of the belly and
small guts, a perfect restraint of dung and wind, vain belchings bringing no
ease, murmurings of the small guts, and cheifty of the upper; if the evil do
increase, al things are carried upwards. Hence follow vomitings, swellings
under the ears, a coldness of the extreme parts and whole body, with a great
difficulty of breathing and stoppage of urine, etc.

The conjunct cause is a violent solution of continuity, proceeding from
obstruction, corrosion, and other things (of which shall be treated in the
differences) for then the expulsive faculty of the guts, rising up to expel
that which is troublesome to them, and whenas it cannot move its natural way
downwards, because the passages leading to the fundament are possessed with a
strong obstruction; or because the part pained or inflamed cannot bear the
weight or acrimony of the humors or excrements, by a converted and peristattick
motion, contracting the fibers of the guts it thrusts upwards first of al,
things hurtful, afterward by the violence of the motion, al things contained
in the guts.

The Cure is more hopeful if the guts be affected but in part, if it befall
children, because they have a strong innate heat, and humors ^ess sharp and
biting. It Is doubtful if it afflict ^ld people, if a strangury succeed, unless
a fever happening and dissolving the matter, plenty of urine flow forth; If
the hickops, or vomiting, or convulsion, or dotage succeed. Of little hopes, if
upon vomiting up of the excrements either deafness or an acute fever, or with
the same an elevated hypochondry, swellings under the ears do follow. It
Respects. 1. The causes, of which in the differences. 2. The Pain which must be
mitigated by things emollient and anodyne. The Blood of a bat anointed on the
hypochondries is confirmed to be of force by wonderful experience.


The Differences are taken from the causes.

I. One is from external things, as from the ^yr, either too hot and drying, or
cold binding up the passages, from deadly medicines and p^^^ons, from the use
of pease, services, quinces, medlars, etc. then the business must be done by
vom^ting.

Another is from internal things, of which in the following Difference.

II. One is from diseases of the neighboring bowels which will appear by their
proper signs. '2. From a rupture, of which we spoke formerly. 3. From an
inflammation, which is common, and chiefly happens in the autumn, which forces
to the center the thin and movable humors that were bred in the summer, it is
known and cured as was said formerly. 4. from an ulcer and other tumors, to
wit, a schirrus with a continual hardness, and a cancer, which are scarce
curable.
They reside either in the inward parts, and then the tumor it self is visible.

Another is from the obstruction of humors, which are. 1. Excrements hardened,
and in this al things are more mild, a long continued obstruction of the belly
went before it; the cure is ordered by things mollifying, and fat things
inwardly and outwardly applied: a suffumigation of a calves Call and guts boiled
in broth is commended; inwardly cream or tartar given one dram and an half
weight in broth. 2. Humors either thick and viscous, or sharp and biting, which
if possible are to be cast forth.


Another is from wind, in which glisters of sulfurious and salt things are
commended.

Article. II. Of the Chollick.
The Colic is a pain of the Colic gut, arising from things that does
dissolve its continuity.

The Signs are a piercing and boring sense of pain in the great guts,
especially in the left groine, where the colic gut is narrower, carried most
of al from the navel downwards, a puffing up and distension of the lower part
of the belly, a suppression of excrements and wind, a nauseousness, belching,
vomiting, difficulty of urine, al which will become more certain by the
remembrance of things going before, and the demonstration of things consequent.
It Is distinguished from the pain of the stone in the kidneys because it pricks
more, possesses a greater space, is increased after meat by reason of the
compression of the stomach, it does less afflict the back and the thighs, it is
wandering, and there appears no Gravil in the urine. From that of the womb,
because this seizes for the most part upon the stoppage of the courses, is
communicated only to the hipps and Groins.

The cure must be hastened, because the pain dissolves the strength and
spirits, and draws the principal parts into consent. There is little hope if
they vomit often, and cannot keep their drink, and little or nothing is voided:
if it be changed into an impostumation of the Colic gut. If the matter which
was contained in the hypochondries be poured forth and carried to the spina and
pass into pains of the back, and by a malignity contracted do produce a
falling sickness. It Is performed. 1. By taking away of the Causes (of which we
shall treat in the defference) 2. By mittigating of the pain if it be too
vehement, where note that we act most commodiously with anodine glisters, the
frequent use of outward applications may be, if some evacuation have preceded
that narcoticks or stupefying means must not be used, neither where the
strength is dejected, nor in a cold cause.
That Compounds are more safely used than simples, and that the same are more
securely cast up into the belly, than taken by the mouth. That we never be
unmindful of things appropriate, as are the guts of a wolf dried and poudered,
the stones of a horse, Quercetans powder compounded of the inward coat of a
hens mawe, and the white dunge of the same each half an ounce; the powder of
the inward skin which is found in eg-shels, two drams and an half; of rupture
wort, cinnamon, each four scruples; of medlar kernels two drams; of an is and
fennel seeds each one dram: the dose is from half a dram to a dram at the most
with white wine, etc. Crato prescribes for preservation. 1. A glister made of
one pound of the decoction of speedwel in hen broth, adding half a pound of
mallego wine, and half a dram of mirrh. 2. Outwardly, oil of mirrh. 3. Three
hours after supper one scruple of Zedoary sliced. 4. Every month in the morning
before meat one scruple of treacle.
See more in Practitioners.

The diffences are taken either from the part it self, or from the causes.

I. One is of the whole gut, in which the pain is about both the loins, and
below the region of the stomach near to the navel, which is very dangerous.
Another is of part of the Gut, in which if the beginning of it be oppressed the
pain afflicts in the right loyn. If the middle of it, the pain shows it self
in the left. If the end of it, the region of the navel next to the left is
pained. There is less danger arises because glysters may have access; but
note, that sometimes the loyn is affected with a pain above the navel in the
hypochondries.

II. Another is from diseases, as, 1. Worms, whose signs and cure see in its
place, 2. An inflammation of the Guts, which was formerly described, and is
increased by meats and drinks that are hot. 3. From Stones; of the cure of
which elsewhere.


Another is from humors, I. Thick and viscous sticking between the coats of the
gutts, which is known by this, that the pain is, as if a stake were driven
through them, by reason of the violent distension of the coats in that place,
neither is it assuaged by belching or breaking of wind, and the gut it self is
corroded, which proceeds from glassy flame. They arise chiefly in them who are
given to drunkenness and idleness, and in whom choler, which is the spur of
the expulsive faculty, flows not to those places. In the Cure observe. 1. That
strong glisters cast in at first and often repeated do more hurt than good,
because they stir the matter but bring it not forth, 2. That we use not for
attenuation things eminently hot, lest the matter being suddenly resolved,
wind be multiplied. 3. To attenuate and discuss, the oil of Zedoary often
given from three grains to one scruple is good. White whorebound, the decoction
of Speedwel, the Oil of Orange pills given four grains with wine, 4. If the
pain continue, we must proceed to dry fomentations, by which that which was
melted and attenuated, may be dried up and discussed. 5. We must abstain from
Agrick for fear of vomiting, which at that time is in no wise safe. 6. Where
gentle purgers do not good, the essence of the trochisks of alhandal extracted
with distilled mallegoe sack, and Rulandus his golden spirit of life, must be
given from half an ounce to an ounce and half at the most. 7. we must wholly
abstain from opiates.
II. From sharp and choleric humors sticking in the coats and vessels, which
are known by the accute pain, thirst, bitterness of the mouth, watchings;
though by the first glister some excrements be brought forth, yet afterward
nothing almost is emptied. There are oftentimes joined with it tertain Fevers,
double tertians, bastard tertians. In the Cure note, 1. That the colic from
those causes is of long continuance, and is wont to afflict the patient with
many relapses. 2. That those humors transmitted to the joints do cause an
arthritis, to the back, pains of the back, to the nerves, a palsy. 3. That
they are best of al cast forth with the extract of Rhubarb or Hiera picra mixed
with cooling things lest they offend by their heat. 4. If the pains continue
after evacuation, Mallego wine may well be administered with oil of sweet
almonds, 5. That warm milk may also be given in glysters with honey of
mercury, 6. In diet, the fruit of the guord by a certain natural propiety does
oppose the disease.



III. Another is from the retention of hard excrements, of which formerly, and
in which we must at the beginning abstain from giveing any purging medicines
by the upward parts lest they move the excrements.

Another is from wind contained in the cavity which cannot get passage, which
is known by the distension of the belly, a rumbling, murmuring, which show
themselves in the bowing of the left side. It arises chiefly from meats apt to
produce a fermentation of the humors, as are corruptible-fruits, Grapes, new
wine, new and thick drink, etc. In the Cure observe, 1. That the cure must be
begun with anodyne and emollient glysters. 2. If these profit not, Some
laxative must be given in fat broth, of manna, Oil of sweet almonds, and other
things. 3. Afterward we must use discussives. Inwardly are commended a glister
made of Mallego wine and oil of Nuts, each three ounces; aqua vitae one ounce;
the distilled oils of Juniper and Rue, each two drams: apply it very hot.
A mixiture of Spirits of wine and Spirits of niter, each half a dram or two
scrupels given in common water warm. One spoonful of the tincture of orange
peels extracted with spirits of wine. Sperma ceti with oil of sweet almonds.
Outwardly gum taccamahac and Caranna applied to the Navel. The antiapoplectical
balsome with one or two grains of Zivet etc.

IV. One is exquisite, of which we have hitherto spoken.

Another Spurious, whose cause sticks either in the peritoneum, or in the
membranes which are spread over the abdomen and parts of the belly. It Is known
by this, that the pain is most grievous, and very lasting, and cannot be
mitigated neither by glysters nor medicines, nor fomentations, nor by those
remedies, by which the true colic pains are abated; and yet it succeeds to
long continued fevers, and other choleric diseases, whose solution is
difficult. For nature endeavoring a crisis, and the expulsion of the hurtful
humor by the stool, when she can no where find a ready and clear way to empty
it, does often cast it out of the veins and bowels into the membranes, whence
do arise pains more grievous than the former disease. It Is observed by
Fernelius that both continual fevers, and tertians, and more frequently
quartans are terminated with these pains, which a long time had their
exacerbations at certain circuits, and retained the like order of fits. See
concerning this Mattheus Martinus on the diseases of the Mesentery.

V. Another is which tends to a particular palsy, which Palmarius was wont to
cure with a syrup compounded of white wine six ounces; Rose water two ounces;
powder of Alarbazi or antimony prepared one dram; choice cinnamon one dram and
an half; infused al night and strained by gentle pouring it off adding of Sugar
eight ounces. The dose is from half an ounce to an ounce, after a draft of
chicken broth.

Article, 3. Of Costiveness of body.
Costiveness of body is no casting forth of excrements, or very little in
proportion to the nourishment received.

There is no need of signs. The causes shall be explained in the differences.
The cure is not to be neglected: for from thence the head is assaulted with
vapors, the whole body grows heavy, the concoction of the stomach is hindered,
the appetite destroyed, the loins grow weak (to wit the veins being burthend,
and a preternatural heat caused in them.) Sometimes the belly is moved by
sneezing and coughing, sometimes if the diseased walk on the ground bare
sooted, etc.

The difference is taken from the excrements and guts.

I. One is by default of the excrements, which either are not by reason of
fasting, and the use of meats of good juice. Or do not stimulate, either by
reason they are small in quantity, or by reason of the want of choler, which
either is carried to other parts as in the jaundice or is not produced out of
cold meats. Or they are hard, either by fasting and a hot habit of body, or by
a continued restraint there, by which it comes to pass, that they forthwith
grow dry, and the veins of the mesentery do suck forth somewhat of their juice.
Or by reason of gross, tough, astringent meat eaten at first, and not moistened
by reason of the too great heat of the liver and kidneys; and then there must
be care taken of those parts; we must act by mollefyers. Solenanders liniment
is approved of, if the navil be anointed therewith, it is compounded of new
oil, of sweet almonds, goose grease, May butter, dialthea, each two drams;
Coloquintida sixteen grains, Salt one scruple and half; the powder of Simple
hiera one scruple diagridium four grains.

II. Another is by fault of the guts, which either do not feel, either by
reason of their long custom, or by their stupidity, such as is caused by the
drowsy disease, palsy, apoplexy; or by reason of phlegm adhering to their
coats; of which in the chollick. Or do not cast it forth, either by reason of
the narrowness of the passages from the obstruction of the guts, of which
formerly; or of some tumor of the mesentery or bowels pressing the guts; or
from the fault of the muscles of the belly; or from the strength of the
retentive faculty from the moderate dryness.

Article, 4. Of a Looseness.
Point 1. Of a Lientery, and Coeliaca.
Fluxes of the belly are, A Lientery, Coeliaca, Diarrhy, Dysentery, and
Hepatick flux. A Lientery is too sudden a voiding by the stool, the nourishment
in that form in which it was received, proceeding from the fault of the
retentive and expulsive faculty of the stomach and guts.

The SIGNS are evident, whether you consider the consistence, or the color,
smell, and other qualities of the aliments taken.

The CAUSE we have laid in the definition on the faults of the retentive and
explusive faculty; of which hereafter in the differences.

The CURE must be hastened, because this symptom proceeds from a great
prostration of the natural heat, and a weakness of the tone of the stomach.
It Is difficult if it be supervenient to acute and chronical diseases, because
the strength is impaired. It respects, 1. The cause, which must be taken away.
2. The symptom, which must be stayed by astringent means and things that
stregthen the stomach and guts.


The Diffence is taken from the causes.

One is by default of the retentive faculty which is hurt, 1. By the
refrigeration of the guts, which is caused. I. By immoderate drinking of cold
water, especially when the body is hot, by a southern wind over moist and
excessive cold, especially in bodies of a fine texture, etc. 2. A cold
distemper, which arises from phlegm either generated there, or sent from some
other part covering over the wrinkles of the guts, does make them laxe and
slippery, duls their heat, and closes up the mouths of the mesaraick veins.
In this for the most part a Celiaca was precedent. If sour belching which was
not before, be supervenient to this of long continuance, it is a good sign.
The Cure requires a casting forth of the matter either by vomit or stool, to
which end serve, Myrobalans Chebul. Citrini tamarinds, Rbubarb. A restraint of
the same and strengthening of the stomach by the distilled oils of masticke,
wormwood, mint, etc. order of diet, in which wine takes place. II. by a laxness
from the continual use of things oily, fat, and emollient, from whence is too
great a mollification of the Mouth of the stomach, whether also belongs the
resolution of the nerve of the sixth pair that contracts the fibers of the
inward coat. III. By a strange quality inured, and that either from an evil
constitution of the air, as happens in a popular lientery, or from the
unseasonable eating of mushrums, melons, cowcumbers etc. IV. By a thick and
smooth scar, such as is wont to follow a great disentery, and a deep
ulceration, which by its thickness stopping the Mesaraicks, hinders the
distribution, by its smoothness the Retention. This must be rubbed off, and
wiped away as it were by eating of sharp things, attenuating and strong
abstersive, as musterd Seed, Onions, Garlicks, honey of Roses, Oxymel of
Squils, with a Mixture of things a little astringent.

Another is by default of the Expulsive Faculty, which is provoked, 1. By an
ulcerous Disposition, residing in the Superficies of the Guts and Stomach like
pustles. It Is known from hence, that there was no Coeliaca going before, and
there is a sense of knawing and pain in the stomach. In the cure if the Stomach
be in fault, eschew vomits, let the Belly be loosned with lenitives, having
some astriction, avoid Fat things. If the Guts be affected, vomiting is good.
2. By sharp humors, whether generated there, or falling from some other part,
especially the Liver. It is known, as the former disposition. The cure is hard
if it be of long continuance, because it passes into a dysentery: if it be
with difficulty of breathing; and a pricking in the side, and the humor fall
down from the brain, so that part of it fall upon the breast, because it ends
in a consumption. If it be long with gripings, worms, and pains, because
these being over it has a swelling follows. The sharpness is abated with the
decoction of ba^ley, succory and other cooling things: if it continue long,
rhubarb prepared in rose water is effectual. 3. From the taking of poison, and
then things alexipharmacal must be mixed, the juice of dittander with syrup of
pomegranates, is commended.


II. A Coeliaca is a sudden passing of drink and meats out of the stomach
into the gutts, in which they flow forth like unto chyle, or a milky substance.

The Signs are evident. This passage is completed within six or eight hours
after meat, so that the thinner and subtler parts of the nourishment are alterd
and concocted, and so pass into the nourishment of the body, yet the body
because it is not sufficiently nourisht, wastes a way. The pulse is frequent,
and heat afflicts as if there were a fever; when they are going to stool some
light fainting seize on them. Before it break forth the belly is distended and
struts out.

The CAUSE of it is chiefly the il distribution of the chyle, which is bred by
the obstruction either of the mesentery, spleen, or liver, and then the chyle
is voided white, the obstructions must be opened. Or the weakness of the
attractive faculty in the liver, and then the chyle is somewhat dyed with a
little reddish color, the liver must be strengthened. Or the immoderate
Quantity or corruptible nourishments and drink; for hence there is much filth
heaped up in process of time; being increased in those parts it is corrupted, and
by its quantity or quality provokes the expulsive faculty.

The CURE Respects the Causes, as we have said, all the superfluous humor being
emptied the flux stays of it self, sometimes on the same day it began,
sometimes on the next.

Point 2. Of the Diarrby.
A Diarrhy is an immoderate, frequent, and continual going to stool, in which
excrementitious and sincere humors, by their quantity or quallity stiring up
the expulsive facculty of the stomach and guts, do flow forth without an
inflammation, lientery, exulceration, Tenesmus, or vehement sense of pain.

There is no need to touch upon the Signs, for they are explaned in the
definition.

The Cause is all that which does preternaturally irritate and increase the
expulsive faculty of the stomach and guts: on the contrary does debilitate and
destroy the retentive, whether it be done by it self, or by consent.

The Cure is difficult if it befall a great bellied woman, because it withdraws
the nourishment from the child, by moving, relaxes the ligaments and by raising
up of filthy vapors causes abortion. It Is easier if vomiting succeed, because
there is a revulsion of the matter from the lower parts to the lower. If it
happen after an ophthalmy, because the matter is revelled from the upper parts
to the lower. If it be supervenient to one sick of a dropsy, though it be
violent, at the beginning of the disease, in full strength and the bowels sound,
because there is an evacuation made of the matter causing the disease from the
whole habit of the body by the stool. It must not presantly be attempted if
such matter be purged as ought to be, if it do good, and they bear it easily,
if there be no fever. For oftentimes to have a flux for one day or more is
healthful, if it stop within seven days, if it be presumed from the
circmstances to be critical. It Is accomplished. 1. By Emptying of the matter it
self, By rhubarb in substance, mechoacan, tamarinds, myrobalanes, and syrup of
roses solutive. 2. By revulsion, which is done by bleeding, vomiting,
frictions, ligatures, urine, sweats. 3. By the use of astringents, of which if
we consider the simples the chief are, tormentil roots, Plantane, avens,
sloes. The leaves of plantan, loosestrife. shepherds pouch. The seeds of
Purslane, of cresses torrified. The flowers of roses, pomegranates. Woods, red
Saunders. Spices, Nutmegs. Minerals, terra sigilata, bole arminicke, Crystal,
etc. If the compounds, they are, Tragaea of Elder berries, Quercetan in his
pharmacopoea, c. 21. the bones of a man calcined, terra dulcis vitrioli, crocus
martis, burnt hartshorn, new treacle, old conserve of roses, diascordium,
sperniolae compositum, and if the flux be too vehement, Philonium Romanum, and
laudanum opiate. 4. The diet, in which steel water takes place; an immulsion
of sweet almonds in tormentil water, or the decoction of Oak leaves, the
powder of diatragacanthum in rear eggs, etc.


The Differences of a Diarrhy are Various.

I. One is from things external, as purging medicines causing a
super-purgation, which is stopped with the root of dropwort given in wine, by
steeled milk given by glyster, by laudanum opiate. From poisons, against which
alexipharmaca must be opposed, especially some grains of an emrald praepared
in a convenient water. Another is from things internal, of which hereafter.

II. One is from the whole Body, which is either with a Fever, or without a
Fever, as shall be said in the following Difference. Another is from some part,
which see in the fifth Difference.

III. One is with a Fever, the matter causing the Flux being transmitted from
the whole Body, which is known by this, that things very crude, moist and watery,
are cast forth with a noise, either often and little at a time, or much and
altogether, and there are present the Signs of a Fever. It Is hardly Cured, if
in a disease of long continuance with lothing of meat, stools be sincere, that
is, such as have no watery moisture mixed with them because they show a burning
up of the native moisture by a weak heat: if they be voided with often noise,
and too much, because that argues a crude stool from vicious humors, this
because the often labor of going to stool causes deliriums, and these have
danger of fainting depending on them: If the stools be thick, white, green,
yellowish, frothy, because they demonstrate crudities, a disturbed flux, plenty
of yellow choler in the guts, a mixture of a windy spirit with the humor.
Sometimes by no means if the stools be black, fat, lived, like the rust of
brass and stinking. The cure is undertaken by the same means as before, having
respect unto the Fever. It is divided twofold. 1. Either it is Critical, which
is to be stayed and promoted; or, Symptomatical for a time, which nature
stimulated by the quantity or quality of the matter, does order before
concoction, but with strength of its faculty, which is neither to be stopped
nor promoted, nor sometimes to be left to nature, but the matter to be emptyed
must be revelled, altered. Or plainly Symptomatical, which is from the
irritation of the cause of the disease, nature being unwilling as it were,
which must be opposed by the remedies before rehearsed. 2. Or it is
colliquative, or not, of which see the following difference.


Another is without a fever, which is known by this, that the humor is seldom
voided under its p^^per form, but changed, and that it is sig^^yed by no signs
that it does proceed from the too much heaping in of corrupt meats, or other
causes; there are no signs present of any particular part affected. It is
caused sometimes when serous humors the cause of a dropsy are voided by the
stool, or when in sound men, whose veins abound with very much serum, the
night or morning cold of the autum peircing deep into their bodies does repel
the serous humors from the outward vessels toward the inward, and into the
greater passages of the vena Cava, which at last being carried to the bowels,
and to the creeping branches of the mesentery, flow into the cavity of the
gutts. Concerning the cure, note, That medicines are best given in a solid
form; That Oil must not be mixed with vomiters; that we must act with things
incrassating and abstersive together; that the Serosities are best of all
dispersed by sweaters.

IV. Another is colliquative, which otherwise is called a colliquative flux,
which is known by this, that the excrements are for the most part endewed with
diverse colors, commonly very stinking, Sometimes fat and viscous, that there is
a fever present, either burning or malignant, or hectic, the body suddenly
is wasted beyond measure, etc. It happens in burning fevers, a hectic,
ptisick, inflammations, in which by the great heat, not only the humors in the
veins, but the next aliment of the parts is melted, and if it be thinner it is
dissipated, if thicker it flows to the belly. The cure is for the most part in
vain, especially in hectic bodies and ptisical, whose hair falls off: we must
act with coolers, moistners, and somewhat astringent, which are not so much to
be applied outwardly as inwardly, least the flowing forth of the preternatural
heat be hindered.

Another is not colliquative, of which in the third difference.

V. Another is from the guts when the matter causing the diarrhy resides in
them, and then the causes are, 1. Sometimes Worms, whose signs will be ready, and
they must be driven away with their proper remedies. 2. The obstruction of the
mesaraick veins that they attract not the chyle, which being collected there,
does by its plenty stimulate the guts; and then the chyle is voided white; a
consumption follows if the flux last long we must act chiefly with openers,
and truly with such, which also are good for the liver, and do not provoke to
stool.


Another from the brain, which sends an inspid or salt phlegm into the Guts,
chiefly in the night, the patient sleeping on his back, which either makes the
coat of the stomach and guts slippery, or mixed with the meat weakens the
concoction. It Is known by this, that there are present the signs of an infirm
brain, and it is most familliar with stutterers, by reason of their moisture. In
the cure, Gargarisms and masticatories must be avoided, least the matter of the
catarrh be drawn into the stomach. Vesicatories may be applied to the first and
second vertebra of the neck.

Another from the stomach, which is known by the signs of the stomach affected.
It arises either from corrupt meats, either of themselves then because nature
is very much irritated, the other humors in the body are stirred up, an evil
disposition is brought into the stomach, and this diarrhy is dangerous; or from
the manner of taking them, and then there is less danger. Or from
excrementitious humors heaped there by reason of depraved concoction; which
sometimes also are sent from elsewhere, by reason of their evilness are not
attracted by the liver, and do stir up the expulsive faculty to excretion.

The Cure has nothing Singular.

Another is from the Liver which is obstructed either in the hollow part, where
we must act with openers; or in the Gibbous part, and then diuretics do good.
Or abounds too much with Choler, and then there will be the signs of a
distempered Liver. In the Cure is commended for its astriction; Old Cheese
broken small, washed with some cooling and astringent water, and fried in a Pan.
The Diuretics must not be sharp.

Another from the Spleen, which Casts off a Melancholy Humor collected there,
or derived from some other part, so that the stool is sometimes black as Pitch,
by reason of blood from some vessel opened in the hypochondries and poured into
the Guts, and there burnt to a blackness, and then there are signs of the
Spleen affected. Blood falling out of the Vessels and concreting, if it be
stopped, causes swounings and other grievous evils. Sometimes the Scurvy
concurs. Least the biting Humor exulcerate the Guts, detersive and tempering
Clysters ought often to be cast in.

Another from the womb, when the Humors and Courses being stopped are carried to
the Liver, from thence to the Guts. Then sometimes periods of time are observed;
in the Cure regard must be had to the Courses.

Point, III. Of a Dysentery.
A Dysentery is a frequent, bloody, and Purulent going to stool, with a Pain in
the Belly, and Exulceration of the Guts, from a sharp corroding matter
peculiarly offensive to the Guts.

The Name of Dysentery is attributed also to a diarrhy, in which the Humors
which are voided do Cause torments, although there be no Exulceration: and with
this if blood sometimes be voided, that comes rather from an opening of the
Vessels, than an Exulceration of the Guts.

The SIGNS are an often going to stool, because the Guts are stimulated by the
acrimony of the Humor; sometimes continually if the matter be sufficient,
sometimes it returns periodically every third day. The pain and torments of the
Belly are especially at going to stool, and a little before the excretion.
Those things that are voided are, sometimes Choleric, and of diverse kinds,
sometimes mucous and bloody, sometimes wholly different from the natural kind of
excrements. A Fever sometimes when the Disease has lasted for some days, by
reason of restlessness and putrefaction. See the difference from an Hepatick
flux in the Chapter of that; It differs from an impostumation, at whose
breaking there follow eliquations as it were of matter, because in that a
beating pain does precede near the affected place, and there is neither biting
nor looseness, etc.

The CAUSES are sharp Humors corroding the Guts, and peculiarly offensive to
them, containing I know not what Antimonial, Helleborine, or somewhat like unto
the Sea Lungs, offensive to the Lungs, and like to Cantharides inimicous to the
bladder. These infected by a Dysenterical Contagion, peircing into the Veins
and arteries do cause a Fermentation and imprint a disposition like unto it
self, by a stain on the whole mass of blood, and stir it up with the other
Humors as purgers do: they fix also an evil disposition on the Guts, so that
the chyle passing by is changed into a vicious Humor, and the Excrements of the
Belly receive not a natural Elaboration and quality. Sometimes in human bodies
they are rendered such by the occult influences of the stars; hence sucking
children, who never came into the open air, and were only nourisht with their
Mothers Milk, are sometimes taken with a Dysentery. But they have their Original
from Waters carried through Leaden and Old condites; from the spring Air,
rainy and southerly after a dry and northerly winter, both by reason that the
drying up of the Humors is hindered, and by the strong puttefying power in
moisture: from a hot and dry Air, thence at the beginning of the autum, and end
of the Summer this Disease is raised, and Reigns chiefly in the hottest
Countries. From evil and unaccustomary Meats, hence in Egypt and India it is
common because they feed on the flesh of beasts which are nourisht by Cassia
Fistula. From autum, Fruits, both because they easily putrefie, and because by
their astriction they retain those which are putrefied. The use of Grapes and
new Wine, because they make a Fermentation, and are easily tainted with
foulness, Blasting, dews.

The CURE is Difficult in women by reason of their tenderness and weakness; in
Children by reason their Guts are moister, and therefore subject to
Putrefaction; in Old people by reason of the greatness of the cause that is the
acrimony of the humors in a body indisposed, and Feebleness of strength. It Is
doubtful if the stools be sincere, that is, mixed with no waterish moisture. If
the effusion of pure blood be joined with it, for it shows that the greater
veins are corroded. If loathing of meat afflict with a fever, because the
stomach being drawn into consent, the concoction is weakened, and there is some
ulcerous putrefaction in the guts. If choleric vomitings seize at the
beginning, because it argues a great power of boiling choler which troubles the
upper and lower belly. If the stools be continual, or that stopping a new
dilute flux, bloody like to an hepatick flux; or a filty diarrhy do follow. If
it invade with a fever or with diverse colored stools, or an inflammation of the
liver. If it happen to a woman great with child, and bate not after the
delivery of the child and voiding of the secundine. Of some hopes, if the
excrements be changed, unless the change be to worse, if belching or farting
succeed because it is a sign that nature does begin to concoct. If it befall
the splenitick, because the melancholy humors are carried away, where we must
well distinguish between the melancholy blood concrete in the guts, and black
choler. If it follow madness, because it betokens that the matter is
translated from the head to the lower parts. Of little hopes, if black choler
be voided of its own accord, no fever going before, nor good concoction
appearing, because it differs nothing from an ulcerated cancer. If convulsions
and ravings Succeed, because they show the matter is carried to the head and
nerves. If pieces of flesh be voided, because the substance of the guts cannot
be regenerated, nor a scarre be drawn over so great an exuleration. If any one
releeved from an acute disease be taken with it, because his strength is not
able to undergo it. If in process of the disease the hickops follow, if a
black pustle like to a vetch appear behind the left ear with a great thirst,
because it signifies death on the twentieth day.

The Cure is accomplished. 1. By revulsion and derivation of the humors rushing
to the guts, where Bleeding takes place if there be plenty of blood: if it rush
violently with the humors to the guts; if there be an inflammation, or if it be
feared. If the Fever be continual. If a hot liver minister matter. Yet note it
must be emptyed by little and little, timely and at the first days, least the
strength be dejected, the median or liver vain must be opened with a small
orifice: the vein of the ancle if some accustomary evaccuation be stopped. 2. By
emptying the corroding humors, so that the stronger be avoided, because they
move the humors to the guts. Let the purging be at the beginning, before there
follow too great exulceration; and that very often that the humor may be taken
away. The syrup made of the infusion of damask Roses is commended, Myrobalans,
Tamarinds, the infusion of Rhubarb first of al not torrefied, afterward
torrified if we would bind a little. Mechoacan, by whose frequent use the
belly is dried. The decoction of myrobalans, which see in Sennertus. 3. By the
abstersion of the same humors by glysters made of barley, the yelks of eggs,
honey of roses, Sugar and other things, according as the exulceration is
greater or less. 4. By mitigation of the pain, for which serve cows milk, so
that the body be purged, and if there be a Fever. Let it be mixed with plantane
water; or let it be boiled with flints, with yelks of eggs, and the mucilage of
quince seeds and cast in by glister. Mulein, goats suit mixed with the same; a
clyster described by Sennertus of a weathers head. 5. By stopping of the flux,
by the medicines rehearsed in a diarrhy, to which ad raw services, if the flux
be most desperate a Nutmeg roasted in the embers if there be no fever; the
decoction of the clay of the furnace in steeled milk, new treacle if there be
no inflammation, the powder of a dogs-turd fed three days with bones, drank
with goats milk, Laudanum opiate: but these ought so to be administered, that
sometimes hot, sometimes cold things be given. To cooling things let hot things
be mixed that help concoction; al in a small quantity least the flux be stopped
suddenly, and let them be given often, because they stay not long in the guts.
6. By the use of mundefiers and things that fill up the hollow ulcer, etc. in
which observe that when as the pain is exasperated by the use of detersivnes,
the glyster being voided, another must be given made of milk. 7. By the
application of topics, concerning which, note that astringents are of force
rather in lean bodies than in fat, when as in these they cannot penetrate.
Things very cold, neither vertually nor actually must not be chosen: vinegar or
thin white wine must be mixed with them.
Cataplasmes are of no force in a dysentery from sharp choler, when as they
leave a biting quality behind them. 8. By diet, in which biskit bread, milk of
sweet almond, sthe flower of sugar, etc. take place.

The Differences of a Dysentery are Diverse.

I. One is in making, when the exulceration begins only in the superficies of
the guts, and there from them suffering an inflamatory disposition, their
temper being destroyed.

Another is already made, when the corrosion peirces deeper, and either fibers
and small skins of the inward coat are voided with blood, or pieces of the
fleshy substance cut off from the proper substance of the guts are voided with
membranous shavings and much blood and purulency, which is the utmost degree of
malignity.

II Another is of the small guts, in which the pain is most acute by reason that
they are membranous; the stool is longer after the torments, the blood is
exquisitely mixed with the excrement by reason of the longer passage, the blood
is blacker. Purging medicines must be given by the mouth: it is almost incurable.

Another of the great guts, in which the pain is less by reason of their
fleshiness, it is chiefly perceived about the navel, by reason of their
situation; the stools are quickly after the torments; the blood and purulent
matter swims upon the excrements of the belly. Note that for the most part the
great guts are tainted, and being tainted medicines are best administered by
glisters. Sometimes the stomach and neighboring parts are drawn into consent,
sometimes the belly over against the ulcer and hole is perforated, by reason of
the putrefaction communicated to it.

III. Another is from things external, viz. either from poisons, whose cure is
performed by vomits; by things that dull them whiles they tear, as milk, rice,
fat broths; by antidotes, chiefly six grains of an emrald prepared; but they
must abstain ten hours from meat, and sweat. Or by purging medicines that are
very strong, and then if you consider the cure, after abstersives it is good to
drink warm milk, new treacle, etc.

Another is from things internal, of which hereafter.

IIII. Another is epidemical and malignant, in which we must act with things
alexipharmacal, amongst which are hartshorn, terra sigilata, Corals, sapphires,
water germander, pulvis Bezoardicus aureus. The same may be mixed with purgers.

Another is simple, to which those things above may be applied.

V. One is from Yellow choler, from which for the most part it begins, the
which sometimes is generated in the stomach, sometimes in the guts, sometimes is
cast from the bladder of gall, the meseraick veins, the whole body.

Another from Black choler, which if it be voided by reason of a crisis in
feverish diseases it may be cured. It ought not to be purged before it be
tempered, and then with Lenitives.

Another is from Choler of a leek color, and the rust of Brass, which though by
Nature collecting it self it may be cast off, yet not presently.

Another is from Salt Phlegm, which sometimes is produced in the head from a
great heat, sometimes in the stomach; being carried to the Guts, and by its
clamminess sticking long to them, it troubles them, and at length Exulcerates.
It Is hardly Cured. It Is well rooted out with Agarick and Mechoacan.

Point, 4. Of the Bloody and Hepatick flux.
I. The bloody Flux is known both by the sight, and by this, that it is voided
without pain and exulceration. It arises. 1, By reason of plenty of Blood
proceeding either from a hot distemper of the Liver, and then there will be
signs of fullness. It Is voided without pain and wasting of the Body; the Urin is
thin, of a Goldish color. Thirst oppresses both by reason of the wasting of
the moist substance, and the heat of the Liver. In the Cure the diet must be
abated, the Liver must be corrected by succories and other proper coolers,
steeled milk, etc. If Choler be mixed with it, it must be emptyed. Or from the
cutting off of some member, and then blood must be let according to Course. Or
from the suppression of some accust omary Evacuation, and then we must act by
frictions, the stoppage must be opened. 2. by reason of a vein broke or opened,
which is known by this, that it is cast up also by vomiting. Some vehement fall
has happened before. Fainting is Caused by reason of the putrefaction in the
stomach. The cure is difficult.

II. An Hepatick flux is either Exquisite, which is known by this, that that
which is voided does look thinly red, as the washing of the flesh of a beast
newly killed, does not clod together, does flow more frequently, yet not so often
as in a dysentery; without any knawing, but yet not without a Heavy pain; the
Eyelids are swelled and the Feet, the excrements are crude. It arises from a
weakness of the Liver, and the defect of natural heat in it, from causes that
do dissipate, or choke it up. The Cure must be hastened because this Disease
Leads to an ill habit of Body, a dropsy, and Consumption. It Is hard when it is
beginning, and in young men. Almost incurable when its inveterate and in old
men, and in them also whose spittle is bloody, somewhat pale, or clearly
choleric. It excludes Purgers, and is perfected only with altering and
strengthening medicines mixed with the meats (Hens Livers Chickens and Geese
stones, are commended.) Or Spurious, in which the blood is either acrid by the
mixture of Choler, or thick by its long stay in the Liver, or elsewhere, or
faeculent by reason of the foulness of the Liver because the Spleen does not
attract the feculent parts.

Title, IV. Of the Affects of the right Gut.
Chap. 1. Of the Diseases of the right Gut.
THe Diseases of the right Gut are, Inflammation, warts, Clefts, and Fistulaes.

I. Inflammation comes either from violent Causes, or from Medicines, and
corroding cauteries. It is known by the sharp Launcing pain, fixed in one and
the same place, by a vain desire of going to stool, in which by reason of the
greatness of the Tumor obstructing, nothing or very little is voided. The cure
is difficult both because the part is endewed with an acute sense, and because
the Excrements of the Belly hinder Applications, and because by reason of the
heat and moisture of the place, the Disease degenerates into Ulcers.

II. Warts are either Condylomata, or swellings of the Skin of the Anus, viz.
Hard and callous bunchings, growing out from a Melancholy humor more troublesome
than painful. Or Thymi or the rougher warts, having a narrow basis and large
superficies, which do easily pour forth blood into the same; which if they grow
out much are called Ficus; If they bleed, they are worst of al, especially if a
disposition to a Cancer draw near. Or Crista, or excerescences of flesh arising
from preposterous Venery. They are taken away either with the Ashes of Mouse
dung boiled with Wine and applied: or with the oblong shells of Fishes found by
the Sea side, calcined and boiled the same way and applied. That they grow not
again they must be anointed with Vinegar, and the Ashes of the Twigs of a Vine.

III. Rhagades or Clests are oblong Ulcers of the Anus without a tumor, and
those superficial or deep, Callous or without a Callus, moist and pouring forth
filth, or dry and Cancrous: they arise. 1. From the too much hardness of the
Excrements, which in their passage do break the Skin. 2. From a dry distemper,
having joined with it sharp Humors and sometimes malignant, where moistners take
place. 3. from flowing of sharp corroding humors that have a certain
clamminess, by reason of which they stick to the part, and then an itching and
most sharp pain with burning troubles them. The Purgers ought to be gentle and
moistning. Care is to be taken of the Virulency which discovers it self by the
filthy smell and evil matter. A Clyster of the Mucilage of Tragacanth, the Seeds
of Fleawort, of each one ounce and an half; Fresh Butter, three ounces; Red
Sugar, one ounce; Oil of Violets, five ounces; is commended.


IV. Fistulaes do follow inflammations, Tumors and Ulcers of the Anus ill Cured.
They are known by their narrow Orifice, but a bosom lurking within. There is
voided thence matter sometimes watery, sometimes virulent. They are divided into
those which do not penetrate either into the right Gut, or into the bladder,
which is discoverd by putting in a Probe; which if they bring no great
discommodity are only to be Mundefied with the Decoction of Agrimony and a
little Alum: and the Orifice if it be too narrow must be dilated with Elder
Pith that the matter be not retained: but if they ought to be Cured, universals
premised, they must be washed, dilated, and cut. And those which do Penetrat
either to the Right Gut, and then the Excrements of the Belly are voided
through them, and liquor injected comes out through the Gut: or to the Bladder,
and then the Water is made through them. Or to them both, and then a Fart is
let from the Privities as well as from the Arse. All these are seldom Cured.
Amongst things consolidating, Joel commends the powder of Mercury Precipitate
strowed on, laying over it a common Plaster. Ursenick prepared, or reduced to
an Oil laid on, and the same Plaster over it. If the Fistula be in the
Sphincter muscle, the Excrements of the Belly issue forth of their own accord.
See Hippocrates concerning them.

V. Hither belongs also an Intertrigo, which is an Excoriation of the Parts
near to the Anus arising from vehement motion. It Is Cured with Deers and Goats
Suet.

Chap. 2. Of the Symptoms of the right Gut.
THe Symptoms of the right Gut are; Itching of the Anus, Tenesmus, the flux of
the Hemorrhoids, and the stopping of them.

Article, I. Of Itching and the Tenesmus.
The I-ching of the Anus is a Certain painful tickling of the same.

T^e^e is no need of Signs. The Differences are taken from the Causes. I. One
is from sharp, Salt, and Viscous Humors sticking to the ^phinter, which must be
emptyed: but the Arse must be washed with the Decoction of the Leaves of
Mallows, Violets, Roses with P^an^ane water and a little Alum. 2. Another is
from the Excrements left there, which are well washed off with the Decoction of
Mullein. 3. Another from Worms, of which in the^r Chapter. 4. Another from an
ulcer, to the which the Cure must be directed.


II. A Tenesmus is a continual desire of going to stool, with pain, in which
either no^^^ng, or a few Mucous things are voi^^d.

I here is no need to add any Signs; sometimes the right Gut falls forth, and a
dropping or difficulty of Urin happens, by reason of the ^^wee^ness and consent
of their Parts.

The CAUSE is whatsoever is fixed to the ex^^eam part of the right Gut, and can
stimula^e its Expulsive Faculty: but what that is, shall be explained in the
Differences.

The CURE must not be neglected, because from neglect of it oftentimes a sordid
Ulcer remains, which sometimes passes into a Fistu^a. It respects the Causes
and the pain which must be mitigated.

The Differences are taken from the Causes.

I. From the too great cooling, of the right Gut, which is taken away with the
Decoction of ^he Flowers of mullein, chamomel, Mel^lo^, Dill, with the Seeds of
Flax, Fenugre^k, Bran. II. From the Stone or worms, concerning which see in
their places. III. From the cause producing a Dysentery, and then the manner of
Cure is the same almost with that of a Dysentery. Let the quantity of the
Clyster be but little, the Ulcee be washed and healed. The Mucilage of th-Seeds
of quinces and Fleawort extracted liquid with Water or Plantane, Nightshade is
good, adding Bole armenick or washed aloes and cast in by Clyster. IV. From
Choleric humors, or Phlegmatic and Salt sticking to the same, where a Clyster
of the broth of weathers Flesh with a few drops of Oil of Wax being given takes
place, etc.
Article, II. Of the Flux and stoppage of the Hemorrhoids.
The Flux of the Hemorrhoids is too great a casting forth of blood by the
Hemorrboidal Veins.

This Disease has no need of SIGNS: First of al there flows black blood,
feculent and thick, and it comes forth as it were by drops whiles they wipe
their brich, afterward good and ruddy, at last yellowish and pale. From thence
the thighs grow weak, the Hips feel a heavy pain, the color of the Face is
depraved. Sometimes it observes its Periods, sometimes it neglects them.

The CAUSE is whatsoever does either Irritate the Expulsive faculty of the
Veins and arteries of the Liver or Spleen; or hurts their retentive.

The CURE shows it must be suppressed, which is performed by Revulsion, by
opening a Vein, and by the external and internal use of astringents. Outwardly
are good by a propriety, a girdle of the Leaves of Black Hellebor bruised,
fresh, and girt about the naked body; upon the use of which, if pimples be
raised the pain must be taken away by its remedies. Spunges which grow under
the seats of hot Houses in baths, if they be burnt to powder in a new pot, and
strewed on. Colcothar or that thick Feces which is left at the distilling of
Oil of Vitriol, if they be touched with it, one only being left. Inwardly is
commended Essentia Martis, of which see Hartman. A Confection of the refuse of
Iron. The Old Conserve of Roses with Bole armenick, etc.

The Differences are taken from the Part^ and Causes.

I. One is of the internal, which arises from a branch of the Spleen, extended
through the Mesentery about the Colon and right Gut, in the Muscles of the Anus
and inward part of the Gut, having an Artery joined with it, that alone is
there terminated. It is known by a weight about the Fundament, difficulty of
going to stool, by Clysters, Suppositories, or an instrument. And also if a
Cupping-Glass be applied, as Zacutus has done.

Another is of the External, which proceed from the Epigastrical branch of the
Vena Cava, and are disseminated to the external parts of the right Gut, viz.
The Muscles of the Anus, but they are two, having an Artery joined with them
from the Hypogastrical Artery. Yet they seem al to have communion one with
another. It is known by the sight, and because it is greater, it is also more
dangerous. In the Cure external things have a convenient Application.

II. One is by default of the blood, which either is too much, and then there
are signs of fullness, we must revel by bleeding in the Arm, or if strength will
not bear it, by fixing Cupping-Glasses to the Loins or Hypochondries. Or sharp
and thin, and then it happens most to Southern people, especially to men that
are Sanguine. Serous Humors if strength will bear it, ought to be emptyed: if
not, we must use coolers and things that thicken the blood; amongst which,
Purslane, Trochiskes of burnt Ivory, and Amber do excel. Or it flows from the
Liver, and then it is like to Water in which flesh new killed is washed. The
Syrup of corals is good. Or from the upper Parts, and then the blood is black
and burnt. Or from the Mesentery, and then it is little, somewhat white and
Serous. Or from the Guts, and then it is mixed with the Excrements.

Another is by default of the Veins, which either are opened, in which Cause we
must use Agglutinatives, as the Mushrum, which is called the Wolfes Fart, etc.
Burning and cutting, the which are dangerous, especially in those that are
inveterate and of long continuance. Or Eaten through and broke, and this
Evacuation Casts a man into a Dropsy and other Diseases.

II. The Suppression of the Hemerhoids is an interception of the blood
endeavoring to get forth through the Veins of the Anus, from whence they are
raised up into a Tumor with pain.

The Signs are a tumor and bunchings out in the heads of the veins of the Anus,
sometimes hard and like unto warts, sometimes soft caled like to mulberries,
sometimes of a purple color, and like to grape stones; the pricking pain, is
sometimes milder, sometimes more grievous, the Veins being distended whose Mouths
hangs as it were out of their heads, and the membrane which covers the orifices
of the Veins, stretched and pressed.

The CAUSE is Faeculent and thick blood desiring to get forth.

The CURE must be hastened, both because it threatens a dropsy if the blood
run back to the liver, and because unless it be seasonably remedied, by reason
of the great attraction, and flux of humors it causes inflammation,
impostumation or a fistula. It is performed, 1. By mitigation of the pain,
which is assuaged by the crum of Barley bread steeped in woman's milk, adding the
yolk of eggs and saffron. It Is taken away with laudanum dissolved in women's
milk, and applied with honey, but most of al with Butter, Sugar or anima
Satur^^, with flies of sheeps dung boiled in oil of flax to the consumption of
the creatures, with the ashes of cork burnt, and boiled with capons grease,
with the ointment of road-flax, concerning which see Hartman. 2. By opening
them, universals premised, by application of leeches: or before that be done by
an ointment of the Pulp of Coloqintida and oil of sweet almonds; by the juice
of onions mixed with aloes applied, rubbing first the part with a course cloth.
Sharp glisters do hurt the guts more, then they provoke the hemorrhoids. Unless
they swel very much and be very painful, they ought to be left to nature.


In the differences of the internal end external veins we must have a care. The
suppression of those is perceived by the squeezing of the Anus, and thrusting
up a probe. Of these is obvious to the sight.

Title. V. Of the affects of the Mesentery.
Chap. 1. Of the distemper and obstruction of the Mesentery.
THe affects of the mesentary are, distemper, obstruction, inflammation,
impostumation and pain.

I. The distemper of the Mesentery for the most part is hot and dry, which
arises from the like matter, which either is collected there, of sent thither
from some other part. It is collected either in its veins and arteries, and
then because the breast has the greatest consent with the hemorrhoidal artery,
because the trunk from whence the artery arises descending from the heart,
presently at its first rise, does propagate the intercostal branches, there are
continual pains felt in the breast: or also in its glandules by their laxness
easily drinking up the matter. The cure must not be neglected, because it is
wont to fore-run a dry dropsy. But it has nothing singular, except this, that
by those arteries not only the first passages, but also the whole body might be
purged, whether you give purging medicines, or inject glysters: and this
perhaps is the cause, that purging medicines laid to the navil do move to stool.

II. The obstruction of the mesentery is twofold, one when the milky veins are
obstructed, which is known by this, that a chylous and white flux of the belly
does molest, and a consumption follows, the matter necessary for the
nourishment of the body being denied. That arises either from a thick, crude,
clammy, viscous chyle, generated of the like meats, or from a tumor of the
glandules compressing them. Another is when the mesaraick veins are stopped,
which is known by this; that the matter restrained, causes a sense of
distension and heaviness, beatings of the arteries about the back are
troublsome, after taking of meat the evil grows more fierce, and the stomach is
comprest, etc. That arises either from vaporous and thick winds, or from sharp
humors, and then the pain is more vehement, sometimes while the evaporation
lasts, the evil possesses the whole cavity of the breast, that somewhat is at
hand like unto a suffocation; sometimes there is a tumor raised about the mouth
of the stomach, and vain belchings are produced, those things being suppressed
that should be voided by the lower parts. The cure is perfected, 1. By openers,
and those indeedgentle. That give strength to the liver and Stomach,
penetrating incisive, drying, lesning putrefaction, and a little while
astringent: not by sweet things but bitter reduced into the form of
electuaries or pills, but that liquor be drunk after them. By tartarous things
unless the saltness or sharpness of the humors do hinder, by things that savor
of Oxymel. 2. By purgers, unless windiness do hinder, and those gentle, not
constant, after the same manner, given by little and little, liquid. 3. By
vomiters, but not violent, Platerus his essence of broom is commended. 4. By
diuriticks that make thick humors fluid etc. the liver is strengthened by
Leonius his pills of the refuce of Iron. By Mercatus his antidote of steel. By
Penotus his arcanum of vitriol, sulphur, and sallows, etc.


Chap. 2. Of the inflammation and impostumations of the mesentery.
AN inflammation of the mesentery is a tumor of the same arising from humors
poured forth with the nourishing blood into its spaces, or deeply impacted in
its glandules, and putrefying by the accession of external heat.

The signs are a slow fever, for the most part a semitertian, a pain in the
Loins, sometimes on both sides, sometimes in the right, which extends it self
to the fore part of the belly, above and about the Stomach; costiveness of
body, chylous stools, which for the most part a thin matter does follow,
sometimes sincere and yellowish, sometimes mixed with the excrements. It differs
from the pains of the stomach, of the womb, Chollick and Stone, by the signs
expressed in them. From the Fatness of the Belly, because this may be al
comprehended in the hand, because it cleaves to the upper skin, and may be
separated from the muscles of the belly. From a tumor of the muscles of the
belly, because that where it is pressed causes pain, and does not so much bind
the body.

The Cause is explained in the definition; the blood is poured forth thither,
because the way for it to the guts is stopped, either by astringent things, which
happens in a dysentery ill cured, or by plenty of thick, clammy humors,
suddenly rushing to the guts.

The Cure must not be neglected, for it is dangerous both by reason of the
fever with which the patient wastes, and by reason of the putrefaction, by
which the mesentery is corrupted. But it is extended sometimes to the fortieth
day, sometimes to the eighty, sometimes it lasts all the life time, a fever and
colic pains sometimes returning, sometimes ceasing. It Is performed as in other
inflammations, only note, that the coolers ought to be more benign least the
matter be more impacted. The purgers must be none or gentle, nor in the
beginning lest more be attracted, but when the inflammation tends to concoction.
Neither is Cassia safe enough in the undertaking of the Cure.

As concerning the Differences, sometimes the Guts also are inflamed, and then
al things are worse. Sometimes the Inflammation sticks about the glandules, and
then they are lighter. Sometimes the neighboring Liver is drawn into consent,
and then a burning Fever for the most part goes before, the evil afterward
tending to suppuration, a slow Fever follows.

II. Impostumations that do molest the Mesentery are various; for, 1. If you
consider the place, either they are above the Navel, or beneath it, or about
it. 2. If the Constitution, sometimes the Mesentery is found made up of many
great Schirrous Tumors.
Sometimes Stones are found in it. Sometimes it has infinite Impostumations
without sense and pain, included in their proper bagg, and containing, a
Gypseous, glutinous or liquid matter. But they are hardly known, and sometimes
not till after death; yet if the Belly be swelled, and the Symptoms present,
and there are no signs at hand, neither of a dropsy, nor of some other
Disease of affinity with it, we ought to suspect them. But they are voided
prodigiously. Sometimes of its own accord this filth breaks forth by the stool,
and oftentimes fetching a circuit it returns again. Sometimes being copiously
poured forth between the Peritoneum and Muscles of the Belly, it either falls
into the Cavity of the belly breaking the Peritoneum, or breaks outwardly by an
impostumation, etc. Sometimes this happens, the patient bearing it well, sometimes
it hastens his death. Concerning their Cure these things in general must be
noted. 1. That the belly ought always to be loose. 2. We must make have with
resolving materials, but light, that have an aromatic virtue, mildly
astringent. 3. Amongst detersives Mercatus his Syrup of Steel, bears the Palm.
4. To Consolidate, Cypres Turpentine any way prepared is to be preferred before
al, especially if the matter offending lurks in the Loins, and about the
Kidneys. 5. For the speedier ripening of the impostumation a Bath of sweet
water must be often used. 6. That the strength is exceedingly confirmed with
the essence of Arsmart, and Oil of vitriol. 7. Sharp things ought to be
avoided, because by their penetrating and abstersive Faculty they corrode the
Ulcers, and destroy the temper.


Chap. 3. Of the Pain of the Mesentery, and the affects of the Caul, and
Pancreas.
THe pain of the Mesentery is a said sense of it, which arises from a hot and
sharp matter thrust into the menbranes of it, afflicting with a perpetual Pain
of the belly and Loins by intervals, especially the time of Autum drawing near,
and sometimes is dispersed into the head and whole body.

The Signs of that to come are a Jaundice disposition conspicuous in the eyes,
and every where about the temples, the appetite lost, a heaviness increasing in
the Hypochondries, seldom going to stool, ruddy Urin. Of that present, a
strong suppression of Wind and Excrement, a vehement Pain of the Belly and
Loins, a casting up of Medicines by vomit, little success of Clysters, etc. The
strength is not to be Judged by the Pulls, for that is small in all great pains.
Of that Increasing, the sick cast off al Hopes, the stone for the most part
gathers strength, the neighboring Muscles of the Belly and the Peritoneum from
the internal putrefaction gather Corruption, the pains diffuse themselves into
the whole compass of the belly, nay they pass to the utmost joints, yet chiefly
to those of the shoulder and Feet, at last Convulsive motions possess them. It
is distinguished from the pains of the Womb, Kidneys, Ileon, Sciatica, by the
signs which are delivered there.

The CAUSES are sharp putrid Humors, endewed with a quality immicous to all the
bowels, especially the liver and stomach, which after Nature has in vain tried
to empty by stool, are cast into the Mesentery, which is nothing else than the
peritonaeum doubled and fastend to the Loins.

The CURE is doubtful if the pains be low, because they are the stronger. If
they be felt above the navel, and are not dissolved by any Medicines, because
they end in a dry dropsy. If pains of the Kidneys succeed by reason of the
neerness of the mine of corruption. If new obstructions succeeding, the evil
from thence grows more fierce. Of little or no hopes if vomitings molest, cold
sweats, and often hickops. If they last long, the patients be feverish and
loath meat; because it is to be feared, least the pain proceeding to the head,
do suddenly kill them after the manner of convulsions if watchings preserve and
be vehement. If an inverted course of nature draw near. If a hectic arise, or
a suppuration of the peritoneum and neighboring parts. It Is performed, I. By
taking away of the Causes, where do take place, 1. Glysters, which to mollefy
ought to be made of Goats milk with cassia and oil of violets. To cleanse we
must ad a little hiera picra, and honey of violets, 2. Purgers by intervalls
repeated, if you perceive obstructions by the ruddy water, gentle, from which
notwithstanding we must exclude manna by reason it is abundantly windy, 3.
Preparatives and openers of the decoction of Scorzonera, grass, strawberries,
with the cordial flowers, to which we must premise anointing of the belly with
Oil of Violets, dil, Chamomel, a little butter in which a Snakes Skin ought
first to be boiled.
2. By mitigation of the pain by cataplasmes, unctious, fomentations, baths of
sweet water, narcoticks also mixed with purgers, etc.


II. The Pancreas does chiefly labor of obstructions, whence the stomach by
reason of its neerness is affected, pains and the sense of a weight are caused
about the region of the stomach, and pulsations in the back, by the compression
of the celiacal artery, and also a difficulty of breathing molests them by the
consent of the midriffe. The cure is perfected by the same remedies, as the
obstructions of the spleen.

III. The Caul by twiggs from the spleen branch, does oftentimes receive
feculent humors from the spleen, in that part especially, which is between the
spleen, the midrif, and the stomach, in its cavity in the left hypochondry
under the diaphragma, arising from the connection of the stomach, Caul, colon
and bowels, and having no passage out. Oftentimes from thence the belly in the
left part toward the navel is raised up into a tumor, oftentimes the belly
being pressed, a sound and noise is heard. They cannot be emptyed unless they
vanish by the continued drinking of bath or sharp waters. If it putrefy or
suffer an impostumation the cure is in vain.

Titile VI. Of the affects of the Liver.
Chap. 1. Of the diseases of the Liver.
Article, 1. Of the Distemper of the Liver.
THe diseases of the Liver are, distemper, obstruction, inflammation, a
schirrus, wounds and ulcers.

The distemper of the liver, is a swarving of the same from its natural
temperament by reason of external and internal causes.

The Signs are fetched from the hurt of its action, and others (of which in the
differences.)

The Causes are either not natural and external, or the neighboring parts, as
the stomach, heart; and that either by contact, or by communication of matter:
or the collection of matter in the vessels or parenchyma, by reason of some
fault of the liver, either innate, or acquired.

The Cure varies according to the nature of the differences. Internal remedies,
because the liver is situate in a lower place, ought to be the more
efficacious. It Is performed, by alteration, and removing the matter offending.

As concerning the Differences, the distemper is fourfold.

I. One is hot, and that either simple or without matter, which is known by
this, that there is a loathing of meat, and most of al of flesh, and
nevertheless fastings does hurt, a vehement thirst troubles them, the whole
body is hot, especially the palms of the hands, and soles of the feet, and
either they are moist or dry, the belly is somewhat dry by reason of the
extraction of the moisture from the chyle. It is cured by coolers, amongst
which the chief are, the roots of Dandelion and Strawberries, the leaves of
Succory, Endive, the seeds of Sorrel, the greater and lesser cold seeds, the
wood of Saunders, fruits of Cherries, Currants, Strawberries. Of compounds,
syrup, of Corals, Strawberries, Sorrel, Citrons, Succory. The Salt of
Corralls. Pouders, Diatrion Santalon, diarrhodon Abbatis, Diamargartium
Fridgidum. Mynsichtus his mter vitriolate. Amongst external things, Saccarum
Saturni, a Cerote of Saunders, oil of green olives. The mixture compounded of
the Water Lillies, henbane, the flowers of white lillies, plantane, Red Roses,
each one ounce and an half. Salt of Saturn, Camphure dissolved in spirits of
wine, each one scruple: Sal Prunella half a scruple, adding a little of
Tragacanth, and applied to the right hypochondry, etc. Or with matter, which is
known by this, that a bitterness of the mouth, a loathing of meat, and a
vehement thirst does trouble them, and a fever either an intermitting tertian,
or a slow fever, or erratick, does vex them, by which the body by degrees is
dried up. That choler does break forth by vomiting and stool, first of al thin
and pale, afterward thick, truly yellow and stinking. It arises from choler,
either generated in it, or sent from the bladder of gal laboring of
obstruction, or from some other part. It is cured, 1. By revulsion, by opening
a vein in the arm, by scarifying, or friction, if the humors flow from some
other part. 2. By attraction, by Succories chiefly, if the humors be already
flowed thither. 3. By evacuation, either by the stool, where syrup of Roses, of
the Leaves of Rubarb and tamarinds take place, or by urine, where whey, grass
roots, barley take place. 4. By strengthening of the liver that it collect no
more.


II. Another is cold, and that either is simple and without matter, which is
known by this, that there is a greater desire of meat, no thirst, a voiding of
phlegmatic, crude, and oftentimes of liquid matter, there is generated a warry
and crude blood. It Is hardly cured because it is more repugnant to the nature
and office of the liver; and it is cured by things that alter, amongst which the
chief are. The roots of burnet, the true acorus. The leaves of Wormwood,
Agrimony, Centaury the less, Betony, Maidenhair, Raisons, Cloves, Nutmeg,
Cinnamon, Agallochus of compounds, Mynsichtus his tincture of Cassia lignea,
treacle, mithridate, Mynsichtus his aromatical rowles. Cratoes confection of
Rhubarb. The pouders of Diamargartium calidum. Or with matter, which is known
from the foregoing of the like causes, the white color of the face and whole
body, a soft habit of body, phlegmatic stools, a heaviness in the right
hypochondry. The rise and cure do follow other distempers. The essence of Mars
is good, the preparation of which see in Hartman.

III. Another is moist, which is known by the soft pulse, watery blood, liquid
excrement, thick urine. The cure is performed by dryers.

IV. Another is dry, which possesses in a contrary manner, neither is there any
things singular concerning its cure; for the most part it troubles in
composition.

Article, 2. Of the obstruction of the Liver.
The obstruction of the Liver, is a narrowness of the vessels in the liver,
caused by a matter filling up their cavities, and hindering the distribution of
the nourishment.

The signs are heavy and obtuse pain in the right part of the hypochondries,
which after the taking of meat is increased, especially if soon after meat,
some violent exercise be undertaken. The excrements varying from their natural
manner, oftentimes more liquid and copious, because the chyle is not received.
A change of the color especially in the face, by reason that the sanguification
and distribution are hurt, etc. But it is frequent that a vein from the porta
dispersed through the substance of the liver in most fine branches is
obliterated; and it has others no less small from the Vena Cava, through al
which the nourishment ought to be produced and carried.

The Cause, is the matter filling up the cavities of the vessels, or also the
very substance of the liver, whether it be generated there, its action being
hurt, either by a distemper, or by some external error: or whether it flow from
elsewhere, either by reason of its attraction, or reception.

The Cure is difficult, both by reason of the narrowness of the veins in the
liver, and because more diseases do follow upon this. It is performed by things
that open obstructions, amongst which are commended, Riverius his extract of
pills of amoniacum, made of gum amoniacum, dissolved in Vinegar of squills,
three drams; the species of biera picra one dram and half; crude aloes four
scruples; Myrrh one scruple; Saffron six grains; With Syrup of Wormwood,
Quercetans Pilulae tartareae, reformed by Sennertus. Tinctura Martis whose
description is in Petreus, from one ounce to two three and more; Deodates
powder compounded of the species of diarrhodon, Diatragacanth, each two drams;
Agrimony, Madder Roots, Fern poudred, Sorrel, Purslane seeds, each one dram;
Magistral of pearls, Corralls, Crocus Martis made without corrosives, Crocus
Martis prepared by oil of sulfer, each four scruples, with sugar candy as much
as is sufficint given one dram, the former tincture being drank after it. Pills
of steel. The decoction of the whitest tartar mundefied and poudered one
pound, made with four ounces of crude steel and two gallons of spring water,
and given two ounces in opening broth. Penotus his opening spirit etc. In the
cure these things come worth observation. 1. That universals must be premised
before particulars and topics. 2. That medicines ought not to be given to
drink but a long while after meat, least they carry with them crude humors to
the liver. 3. Astringents must be added to mollifiers, as spicknard, burnt
Ivory, that the tone of the liver may be preserved. 4. That things attenuating,
discussing and resolving ought to be moderate, least the thinner parts
discussed, the thicker does remain. 5. That we use sweet things, not as meats
but as sauces. 6. The medicines must be given liquid, or finely poudered. 7.
Topics must never be applied actually cold. 8. After the use of
steel-medecines the body must be stirred; unless black excrements do follow we
must abstain from them.


The Differences of this obstruction are various.

I. One is lately, which is the easier cleared. Another inveterate, which
causes putrefaction and a Fever, and produces a jaundice, schirus, and
dropsy.

II. One is in the hollow part of the liver, which is known from hence, that
nothing is perceived outwardly by reason that the part lurketh deep, the
stomach is drawn into consent, from whence is loathing of meat, nauseousness,
vomiting, thirst, liquid excrements. It must be cured by things that empty by
the stool.

Another in the gibbous part, which is known from hence, that the belly pressed
on that place does resist the midrif, especially because the liver is joined to
it; the excrements of the belly appear bloody by reason of the light change of
the chyle into blood. The Cure is the easier, by reason of the penetration of
medicines, and the emptying of the obstructing matter by a larger passage, we
must act chiefly by things that move urine.

III. One is from Blood either pure, which is remedyed only by the opening of
the basilica in the right arm; or choleric hot and which is joined with
pain, being a long time preternaturally imprisoned in the liver, and not
timely purged it grows wonderfully thick. Or phlegmatic, viscous, and thick,
which arises from gross meats, viscous, too much by baths, or motion, forced
or carried into the small veins: sometimes it falls from the brain into the
stomach, by and by passing through, by degrees it penetrates with the
nourishment into the small veins of the Liver.

Another from Wind that is gross, imprisoned under its coat, or sticking in
the veins, which is known from hence, that the pain is greater, but not
continual, there is such a great tumor of the right hypochondry, that it fills
up the whole hypochondry, so that the ends of the ribs cannot be perceived: yet
it is without heaviness, and being pressed it yields, it makes no murmuring, and
gives no suspicion of an impostumation lurking there. It arises either from
windy meats, from which they must beware; or from the weakness of the liver not
able to overcome the matter; and then the matter prepared must be emptied; or
it is sent from the neighboring parts and the whole body, especially in
phlegmatic Fevers. The Cure in general requires carminatives, of which in the
dropsy.

Article. III. Of an inflammation of the Liver.
An inflammation of the liver, is a hot tumor of the same arising from blood
impacted and putrefying in the substance of the Liver, afflicting with a
continual fever, a heavy pain, and sense of a weight in theright hypochondry.

The CIGNS are a sense of heaviness in the right hypochondry, from the
membranes, with which the liver is joined in some to the bastard ribbs. A tumor
in the same, which appears greater the sick lying on his left side, less the
body being bowed to the right, and the liver sliding under the bastard ribbs: A
pain reaching from the throat to the bastard ribbs, by reason of the heap of
matter restrained, which pulls the membrane that lines the Breast. A Fever
whose vehemence follows the greatness of the inflammation, and at night is
exasperated the inflammation growing hot. A dry cough by intervals by reason of
the vapors raised up to the lungs, and afflicting the midriffe by compression.
A Difficulty of breathing because the fever brings a greater necessity of
cooling, uneasy lying, both on the right side, because the liver is pressed by
the stomach and guts, and on the left, because the liver hanging the membranes
are retcht. A swift and unequal pulse, by reason of the necessity of cooling
increased by the hot distemper, etc. It is distinguished from an inflammation of
the muscles of the belly, and pleura, by the signs mentioned there.

The CAUSE is blood impacted and putrefied, which either is attracted, or
transmitted, or flows thither; either by default of its quallity, viz. its
thinness, heat, and accrimony; or by reason of its quantity and abundance; or
by the impulse of external causes, as while hot medicines are applied to the
stomach.

The CURE is difficult because a principal part is affected, and by occasion of
it, there is iminent the fear of a dropsy or consumption. Of little or no
hope, if the hickops follow, because it is a sign that the liver is come to
the highest inflammation, and so by communion of the nerves the mouth of the
stomach is drawn into consent. If a looseness follow, because this voiding of
crude matter proceeds from the weakness of the faculty. If a burning and
continual fever accompany it, because it signifies that bowel is exceedingly
inflamed. If it come to Superation, which is known by this, because that
happens after the twentieth day if nature be not weak; pains and fevers with
other symptoms grow strong, yet most by night: shakings assail in no order,
and with no reason, which are attended mith an exacerbation of heat: because
from the impostumation there arises a sordid ulcer, because it is perpetually
washed with the nourishment, and filth of humors; and whereas the solid
substance of the liver as being spermatical cannot be repaired, it is incurable
if it tend to induration, which is known by this, because after forty days the
fever and pain do falsely vanish, without any sensible evaccuation, the
tumor and hardness remains in its place with dejection of appetite, and a daily
wasting of the body. Of some hopes, if there be ground it will resolve, which
happens from the first moment of its invasion, to about the fourteenth day, and
is known by the abating of the symptoms, and color of the urine. It is
performed by the same means with which other inflammations are cured. Yet
Observe. 1. That the basilica or median of the right arm, be presently opened
the first or second day. 2. That the repellers ought to be gentle, least that
the passages of the liver being too much straightened an obstruction be caused, or
a schirrous be produced by things too much cooling, or the quit or breathing
from the inflammation be cast back into the Liver. 3. That the same ought to be
gently astringent, corrected with those things which are moderatly opening and
abstersive. 4. That things actually cold must not be applied, unless there be
an erisipelas, and eminent heat. 5. The impostumation breaking to the kidneys,
Goats whey must be drank with the immulsion of the four seeds. 6. The
substance of the liver being cleft and eaten into, if the matter fall into the
cavity of the belly, we must proceed to burning and incision of the belly;
concerning which see authors.
For discussion it is thought will serve well, a Cerote made of oil of Mercury
one dram; dulcedinis Saturni two drams and half; oil of Galbanum half an ounce;
red wax of cinnaber as much as is sufficient, and mix with mistleto of juniper,
with the juice of Colts-foote or Galbanum, and laid on.

The Differences of this inflammation are some.

I. One is Great, in which al things are more vehement. Another Small and
obscure, in which the liver is beset with small swellings and impostumations
like to felons, with no tumor or pain of the hypochondry, there is a fever
but not much burning, with thirst and loathing. It is dissolved by a flux of
blood of the same side issuing from the right nostril, on the first seven
days, sometimes on the ninth, eleventh, very seldom on the fifteenth,
especially if the patient be under five and twenty years of age.

II. Another is in the gibbous part in difficulty of breathing, which Paulus
called suspirium irruptum, a cough and heavy pain pressing the throat are
more troublesome, lying on the right side is more difficult, as by which the
part affected is pressed; the pain by touching and pressing grows sharper. The
urine is slow, which if it be also with content like vetches it signifies a
colliquation. The Tumor is readily perceived. Sometimes it is prominent and
conspicuous to the Eyes. It Is dissolved by bleeding at the Nose if it be of the
same side, with good sweats, and plenty of Urine. Things that move Vrin, are
far more profitable than purging Medicines.

Another is in the Hollow Part, in which nauseousness, Thirst, loathing of
meat, the Hickops, Choleric vomitings or stools are more urgent, lying down
on the left side is grievous and painful. The Tumor is not readily obvious to
the touch. It Is dissolved by stools Choleric, bloody, by sweats and vomiting.
Gentle Clysters may be administered, we must beware of Purgers given by the
Mouth.

III. Another is from pure Blood, which is called Exquisite, and in which al
things are more mild. Another from mixed, which is Spurious, and that either
Choleric, and then there is a burning Fever, fear of a Consumption perplexes,
vomiting of sincere Choler affects them, and sometimes voiding it by stool,
which either inflicts a Diarrhy or a Dysentery. Or Phlegmatic, which is
seldom, and in which we must add to Topic Medicines, Mastick, spikenard,
Wormwood, and the Oils made of them, etc.

Article, IV. Of a Shcirrus of the Liver.
A Schirrus of the Liver, is a hard Tumor of the same without pain, generated
of a thick Humor, impacted in the substance of the Bowel, and hardened.

The SIGNS are a Tumor of the left Hypochondry, which is discoverd by the
touch, if the Belly be slender and void of Fat, and is easier observed the
Patient standing upright, or bowing to the right side, than lying on his back;
but it is bounded by the Situation and Figure of the Liver, and lying on the
left side, with its bulk it lies on the Stomach and midriffe. An obscure pain,
because the neighboring parts endewed with sense are comprest by the Tumor of
the Liver, etc.

The CAUSE is explained in the definition, but it does not suddenly Cause a
Tumor but by little and little, for first it stuffs up the small Veins of the
Liver, then being increased it redounds to the whole substance of the bowel,
afterward being much more fully heaped up, it distends the Liver into a vast
bulk, that it appears swelled, least of al being dried, and the thin part
dissipated by force of the heat, all the rest grows hard.

The CURE which is of little Hopes, is orderd. 1. By Lenitive preparatives and
emptyers, as was said in obstruction. 2. By things Emollient and discussive,
with moderate astringents, lest from those alone there may arise putrefaction
and a Cancer, from these alone the danger of a greater induration. There are
commended, Labdanum with Indian Balsome and Wax, the Plaster of Hemlock and
mandrakes with Ammoniacum. Fabricius Hildanus his Ointment of Hemlock, etc. 3.
By things that open obstructions, among which excels Tartar Vitriolate with
Raisons, Cinnamon, and the Leaves of Agrimony.
Barcoletus his Tartar Tartarized, which moves by Urin, etc.

As Concerning the Differences.

I. One is Beginning joynd with pain, which is called Spurious, and it yields
to cure. Another Confirmed, Exquisite without pain, which causes a Dropsy,
and cannot be Cured.

II. One is from a Choleric matter, which is known by this, that Causes
heaping up a Choleric juice went before, the signs of Choler abounding and a
hot liver are present. It follows a Jaundice, and has a slow Fever its
Companion, and precipitates into a dropsy which is called Ascites.

Another is from a Phlegmatic matter, in which Causes heaping up a thick Juice
went before, there are present the signs of a Liver cooled, a Cachexy and
universal Dropsy is Caused. The disease lasts long without any discommodity,
and if it be turned to a dropsy, first of al it passes into a Cachexy, then
into a universal dropsy.

Another is from a Melancholy matter, the signs of which also will be present.

III. One is in the Gibbous part, where some good is done by Topic means.
Another in the hollow part, in which also internal remedies ought to be
administered.

Hither belongs A Tumor of the Liver, without a Schirrus, which is known by
this, that it grows in a short time, is less resisting, the Fingers cannot be
thrust under the ends of the Ribs. It possesses only the Membrane that
compasses the Liver, yet sometimes it fills up the whole Hypochondry. It arises
either from a viscous Humor, either sprung from meats of that Nature, or made
such by cold alteratives given about the time of Evacuation. Or from a thin
crudity arising from meats, drink, and other things inducing cold: or from a
thin wind. The Cure is perfected by things opening and emptying.

Article, V. Of the Wounds and Ulcers of the Liver.
The Wounds of the Liver, which in Aged and ill habited bodies, are very
dangerous, but by reason of the long effusion of blood are deadly, are either
from external causes, which are Cured by things astringent and agglutinative,
(red Roses dried are commended) or from a Contusion, which has Joined with it
a vomiting or dejections by stool or Urin with blood, it is more dangerous than
a wound, and degenerates into an impostumation. In the Cure it requires. 1. The
opening of a Vein in the Arm. 2. Potions Compounded of astringent things. 3.
The Flux of blood being stopped, the dissolution of congealed blood by its
Medicines.


An Ulcer of the Liver is a corrosion of the same from matter or juice.

The SIGNS are an ulcerous pain in the right Hypochondry, a Cough, a Jaundice
color of the Face, a voiding of putrid, sanious and bloody things by the stool
or Urin, an Atrophy, because there is neither blood made, nor the man nourisht.

The CAUSES are, whatsoever things corrode the substance of the Liver, of which
shall be treated in the Differences.

The CURE must not be neglected, although it be of little Hopes, for it grows
foul by a perpetual filth, because it is continually washed with the nourishment;
it is ordered as in other Ulcers.

The Differences of the Ulcers of the Liver are various.

I. One is in the Superficies, which is less dangerous; another in the
Substance, which is deadly, because a spermatical part cannot be Regenerated.
II. One is in the Gibbous Part, which is known by purulent Urins without the
signs of an exulceration in the bladder, and Kidneys, by difficult breathing,
by pain of the midriff. Another in the hollow part, which is known by the
bloody and sometimes purulent stools, by the pain of the Guts by reason of the
acrimony of the matter, by the sense of pricking and heaviness about the Liver.
III. One is which follows an inflammation, which has ended in an impostumation,
and this is dangerous, especially if the matter be contained in the substance
of the Liver. Another is, which arises from sharp and corroding Juyces, which
is known from hence, that it creeps on by degrees, the strength not impaired, a
Fever arises in the progress, observing no type, which at length ends in a
Hectic. Loathing of meat afflicts them, especially of flesh, etc. It arises
from the default of corrupt or putrefying nourishments, generous Wine heats the
bowel, and dries it, and heaps up a certain putrid clamminess and matter.
Chap. 4. Of the Symptoms of the Liver.
Title, I. Of the weakness of the Liver.
THe Symptoms of the Liver are, Weakness, Cachexy, a Dropsy, Jaundice, and
atrophy.

The weakness of the Liver, or atonia, is a hurt of the faculties of the same
induced by its Causes.

The SIGNS ought to be taken from the consideration of the Excrements of the
Belly, of the urin, and color of the whole body; as shall be manifest in the
differences.

The Causes hurting the faculties of the liver, are diseases of distemper,
whether it be hot or cold; to which is added an external error. viz. when
either the chyle is not rightly elaborated in the stomach, or being well
elaborated, somewhat vicious is mixed with it, etc.

The Cure, ought to be perfected with things that strengthen the liver, and are
appropriate to it, as are the liver of a wolf, a calfe, of hens, snailes,
raisons etc.

As concerning the Differences.

One is by reason of the Sanguifying faculty, which either is hurt by a cold
distemper, or the defect of natural heat; and then the excrements of the belly
are like to the washings of meat new killed, which the cold growing more
intense do cease: crudities arise, with which the feet first, and then the
other parts abound, because the veins do suffer with the liver ill affected, as
being their original. For the cure of this serves, Rupert Cranesbil bruised, a
lie of the pruning of vines with wine, etc. Or from a hot distemper, in which
the chyle is burnt as it were, the excrements are like to the dreggs of blood
etc.

Another is by reason of the attractive faculty, and then moist things flow
down by the stool like cream, although there be no fault in the stomach, no
obstruction of the mesentery.

Another is by reason of the retentive faculty, and then is rendered by stool
things like to the washing of flesh new killed, yet seldom moist and mattery.
etc.

Article, 2. Of a Cachexy.
A Cachexy is a diffusion of the whole body into a watery and swelled softness by
default of nourishment.

The Subject is the whole body, but those parts especially which are obvious to
the eyes, as the skin and the muscles.

The signs are a color, by reason of the flegmatickness of the blood, sometimes
white, by reason of the mixture of cholor or melancholy, sometimes livid or
leaden. A tumor with heaviness and sluggishness, especially in the feet and
hands, by reason of the descent of serous humors, and their distance from the
heart: and also about the eyes in the face, cheeks, eybrows, because those
parts by their laxness do easily receive serous humors.

The Cause is the fault of nutrition. For though that which is put to the
parts, does concrete and adhere, yet by reason of the too great plenty of
crudities it is not assimilated. To wit, the blood is phlegmatic, crude and
serous; and that is generated such, either by reason of impure nourishments,
corrupt, and producing abundance of serum. Or by reason of the bowels, which
either are impure, either from a Scrirhus as has been said, or from the
effusion of a corrupt humor, as has been observed in a suppression of the
courses, that purulent matter from the obstruction of the ureters, returning
into the veins, the blood being infected, has infected the whole habit of the
body. Or from their corrupt substance; for so vicious and corrupt blood is
brought forth, and carried out to every part, and there concreting. It leaves a
vitiated substance instead of a good; hence the Cachexy is various according to
the nature of the blood; The phlegmatic affects virgins, and threatens a
universal dropsy. Or they are weak, because they have been hurt either by the
continuance of diseases, or by too much evacuations, or by long imprisonment,
etc.

In the Cure we must diligently observe, 1. That regard be had to those
diseases from which the cachexy proceeds, 2. If humors abound they must be
emptyed especially with things that purge water, 3. To open obstructions is
commended the cachectick powder of steel prepared one part, Cassia lignea
three parts, of the whitest sugar four, the powder of young geese turds. 4.
Sweats are happily moved with antimony diaphoretick, 5. The Cachexy of virgins
is driven away by the distilled water of Walnutts fresh cut into thin slices,
steeped in white wine twenty four hours, sweetened with Canary sack, and
exposed some few days to the sun, and taken three ounces weight, using exercise
after it.


Article. 3. Of the dropsy in general.
The dropsy is considerd either in General, or in special.

The dropsy considered in general, is a tumor of the body, or of part of it,
preternatural, arising from a watrish and serous humor, or a collection of
wind.

The Signs of it are, a swelling and puffing up of the body, a heaviness,
difficulty of breathing, an extensive pain in the right or left hypochondry, a
filthy color of the face betwixt green and whitish, or declining to a yellowish
or lead color; little urine and deep dyed, continual thirst, partly from the
defect of natural and alimental moisture, partly from the ascent of hot salt
vapors drying up the mouth of the stomach, partly by reason of the little air
drawn in, whence the heart and lungs also boil with thirst. But concerning the
tumor of the feet, we must note, 1. That they chiefly swel after exercise of
the body and in the eveining, because the waterish humor by its own weight
tends downwards. 2. In the night concoction being finished the swelling bates,
by reason of the increase of the heat, the heat of the bed helping somewhat too.
3. They do often swel in those that are recovering either from acute diseases,
or of long continuance, because the languishing heat cannot concoct so much, as
the patient receives, and the crude and serous part which arises from thence,
flies to the feet without any eminent danger, if it be timely taken care of.


The Cause, is the fault of nutrition, proceeding from a cold distemper of the
liver, which is induced either by the extention of heat either immediately by
the six non natural things or mediately, by diseases of the whole, or of other
parts. Or by the dissolution or dissipation of it either from too much heat, or
from other causes.

The cure is not difficult, if the dropsy be of late. Difficult if after
another disease it seize upon a body weakened. If it be inveterate. We must
observe in it. 1. That we begin with gentle things. 2. Because the disease is
chronical, remedies must be used the longer time, 3. Least nature be accustomed
to them, they must be varied. 4. Sometimes for a while we must forbear, least
nature be oppressed. See the manner in the species.


Article, 4. Of an Ascites.
The dropsy considered in Specy is either an Ascites, or Tympany, or Anasarca.

An Ascites is a distension of the belly from a watery, serous, and Salt Humor,
poured forth into its Capacity, by default of the Liver, Spleen and Kidneys,
with a Tumor of the ^e^t, Thighs, and sometimes of the God.

The SIGNS are a swelling of the Belly, which begins from the lower parts as
being most distant from the heart the fountain of heat, a slenderness of the
upper parts, the belly being struck a hoarse sound as from a bladder half full:
the sick turning from side to side a ^^ife like the Murmuring or waving of
Water. The Disease growing strong there follows a difficulty of breathing by
reason of the abundance of water lying on the midriffe. A Cough sometimes either
from the compression of the midriffe, or from the peircing of the Water into
the breast, from whence suffocation in a short time ensues, the impression of
the Fingers Leaves behind it a manifest mark in the flesh.

The CAUSE is a watery and serous Humor, whence Dropsy people piss little;
they that piss much after great draufts, are not taken with a Dropsy. And
some by abstinence from drink have been restored to health. That humor is
collected if you consider the place between the stomach and kidnyes, through
which otherwise naturally the serum is wont to be emptyed: especially in the
spleen vein, the mesaraick, and perhaps in the branches of the spleen artery,
and the roots of those veins about the hollow parts of the bowels, gastrical
and epiploical. Whence after quartanes and long continued fevers whose cause
is in the mesaraick veins, a dropsy follows. If the cause, it is collected from
too much drink and moist meats, by the accession of the fault of the bowels
which either attract, or contein the serum, by which it comes to pass, that it
stays in the belly, and afterward is poured forth into its cavity. But it is
poured forth into the capacity of the belly, or that space which is between the
peritoneum, the caul and the guts, chiefly by the epiploick and gastro
epiploick branches: yet so as neither the caul, which has veins only from the
vena porta, and can easily receive the burden of the mesentary and spleen; nor
the pancreas, which in its middle has a splenicke vein passing to the spleen
with the left branch of the celiacal artery, are free from fault. The humor
poured forth, although it be cold, yet because it contains many salt parts, and
borrows heat from the neighboring parts, it is hot also, but by continuance of
time it putrefies, from whence is raised a corruption of the bowels, a Fever,
thirst, whiles the vapors strike the mouth of the stomach.

The Cure is of better hopes if the patient be young and strong. If a slave who
is able to endure hunger, thirst, and other troubles, if more moisture be
voided by urine, than is taken; if the water which is in the veins flow to the
belly or stool, the bowels unhurt. Of none almost if it come from an acute
disease, because the bowels, the radical moisture being waisted do contract a
cold and hectic distemper which cannot be corrected. If the water break forth
into the caul, and that be corrupted. If it happen to the splenetick after a
long dysentery, because by the passing of the evil humor, the symmetry of the
innate heat is perished in the guts and bowels. If a cough come upon it because
it shows that the watery moisture is so much increased, that it penetrates into
the breast, and does already possess the rough arteries. If impostumations or
spots break forth in the thighs, if being eased by remedies it is wholly renewed
again, because it signifies the bowels are corrupt, and possessed either with a
schirrus, or consumption and hectic distemper. If it arise from a
colliquation, because all the strength is dissolved, and the body languisheth.
It Is perfected, 1. By the emptying of the water poured into the belly,
premising a preparation of thick humors, if they intervene. But it is emptyed,
1. By the Stool, by medicines that purge water; the gentler, as mechoacan,
Jallop, which may be given to one scruple and an half; the Juice of
Flowerdeluce clarified, which may be given to three drams with syrup of endive
six drams; Parsley water half an ounce; and the powder of diarrhodon Abbatis one
scruple; With peach flowers dried and boiled in wine. The stronger, as gambugia
which is given from six grains to fifteen (see Reudenius concerning it.)
Rulandus his extract of esula, trochiskes of Alhandal, or the same authors
Spiritus vite aureus. The extract of elaterium most commended by Massaria, from
one grain to three grains. The magistral, or Crystal Lunae of Tentzelius, given
chiefly at the Wain of the Moon from four grains to five. Mercurius vitae fixed
by long digestion, Crocus Metallorum Absinthiacus of Mynsichtus, the same
authors Tartarus Emeticus, etc. All which must be given on even days, not too
often nor the bowels too much corrupted, after the use of them we must see
whether they bear it well, and the bowels must always be strengthened.
Concerning a Paracenthesis or tapping, see Authors. 2. By diuretics, which
ought to follow purgers of water, amongst which bear the palm, the powder of
earth worms given one dram weightwth the decoction of asparagus or fennel. The
salt of ash salinated as Billichius delivers. Wine twice or thrice strained
through the ashes of bean straw burnt, six handfuls, the tops of broom,
Juniper, each two handfulls and a half, woodbine one handful and a half, and
given six ounces weight. 3. By swaeters and dryers, as are the Root of swallow
wort steept and boiled in Wine. Antimony Diaphoretick, the decoction of
Sassafras wood. Treacle in wine the quantity of a small Walnut with a few drops
of Oil of Sulphur, Lapis Serpentis, concerning which see Joel. Outwardly,
Mynsichtus his Plaster de Cineribus.
2. By strengthening of the parts, that the Water be not collected again; here
are good, the Trochiskes of Wormwood, Paracelsus his Diacubebae, etc. 3. by
diet, which see in Anthors.


The Differences are taken from the parts, by whose default the serum is
collected.

One is by default of the Kidneys that do not attract the serum, either because
they are Exulcerated, and then some matter appears in the urin, the piss is
much less than in other Causes: or because the Vreters are broken, and then it
arises suddenly. That comes to pass for the most part in expelling the stone.

Another is by default of the Spleen, which when as it is as it were spungy, it
ought to draw the water from the stomach by the vas breve, that office being
delegated to it by Nature; which may be carried from hence by the splenick
Artery into the Coeliacal, by and by from the trunk of the Aorta by the
emulgent Arteries to the veins: It does that either too greedily by reason of
an inflammation risen in the Veins, which is known by a pertinatious flux of the
belly, which does neither take away the swelling of the belly, nor the pain by
reason of a Hectical distemper, and either from the weakness of the veins not
attracting the nourishment, or from the corruption of the same and continual
voiding of Choleric Excrements, it afflicts with a heat in the jejunum gut and
mesentery. Or it neglects it altogether, either by reason of the obstruction of
the passages tending to it, caused by thick humors. Or by reason of the
dissipation of heat, from a schirrous, too much emptying, the use of hot
things, the distemper of the neighboring parts, acute Diseases. Or by reason
of the suffocation of heat by the too much use of cold things, from the
suppression of the Courses, from superfluous Evacuations, etc.

Another is by default of the Liver, either for the same causes not attracting
the serum, or retaining it: or by reason of the same inflammation too much
attracting; and then there is a desire of coughing; the Excrements are few and
dry, by reason the serous Humor is sent into the belly, and the rest is burnt
up by the heat of the Liver.

Article, V. Of a Tympany, and Anasarca.
A Tympany is a distension of the belly from much wind, raised up either by a
weak, or burning heat, contained within its Capacity.

It is called also a dry dropsy, although for the most part it is joined with
Water.

The SIGNS are these, the Skin appears retcht like the skin of a drum, and
struck upon gives the sound of a Drum, the Navel hangs forth much. The puffing
up of the belly is greater, but the heaviness less. Compressing of it does not
leave behind it so conspicuous a mark, but the hollow print is presently
filled up, belching and Farts often break out, noise and rumblings Obmurmurate.
It must be distinguished from the distension of the breast after wounds, which
does possess the breast, back, Loins, Cod, Arms, Neck, nay sometimes the whole
habit. It proceeds from hence, that the Air which ought to pass streit through
the mouth to the Lungs, and from the Lungs again to be breathed forth through
the mouth, a way being open between two Muscles, or the Muscles and the skin,
it is blown from the wound as from a pair of bellows into the space between the
skin and muscles: and hence furthermore it penetrates into the neighboring
parts.

The CAUSE is wind, which if you consider its rise springs either from a weak
heat, or from too much and torrefying, which resolves into Vapors that which is
subtle being violently stirred, as is seen in black choler lying under the
stomach. If the place, it is neither in the stomach, because it would be cast
forth by belching, nor in the Guts, because it would be voided by stool, but
for the most part it is generated between the coats of the mesentery and Guts.
For in the dry Dropsy, the torments afflict about the Navel, greifes and pains
of the Loins: but the mesentery forward is united to the small Guts, backward to
the vertebres of the Loins from which it springs, from whence is this
distention; yet it is found also in the Cavity of the Guts, and it insinuates
it self thither through the Orifices of the Mesaraick Veins.

The CURE requires. I. The bringing forth of the matter producing the Wind,
where takes place, Fardinandus his Antipneumatical wine, concerning which in
the History, 38. The Coagulated Spirit of Salt, with Wormwood water, and spirit
of Elder. 2. The Discussion of the wind, outwardly by a great Cupping-Glass
applied to the Belly; by frictions with Garlic bruised and boiled in generous
wine; by a fomentation of a Boys Vrin, and Lapis Prunellae, concerning which
see Hartman. Inwardly by the Decoction of Ebony wood, the spirit of Guajcum,
the Arcanum of Cummin and Carrawais, the liquor of the flowers of Mullein, etc.
3. The correcting of the hot distemper of the Bowels if there be any; the
strengthening, if it be weak.


II. An Anasarca or Hyposarkidion, and Leucophlegmaty, is an equal increase of
the bulk of the Body preternaturally throughout ^^e whole body, arising from
default of the nourishment.

The SIGNS are an increase of the Corporal bulk, greater than in a Cachexy,
equal through the whole body, so that the feet and Legs swel in the beginning, a
softness of the body, a Laxness, Paleness, and weakness upon the least labor, a
continual Fever, slow, with a pulls small, often, and unequal, the Urine white,
thin crude, etc.

The CAUSE is the fault of the nourishment, which by reason of the immoderate
coldness of the Liver and Veins (of which we spoke in distempers) is Phlegmatic
and crude; nay the body is spread over with a clammy and congealed water, and
though the nourishment does both concrete, and adhere to the part that is to be
nourshed, yet it is not assimilated.

The CURE is Easter than in others, because a Phlegmatic Humor, comes nearer to
the Nature of blood, than a serous; besides a strong diarrhy coming at the
beginning while the strength is firm, the Disease is Cured. It Is Performed. 1.
By emptying the watery matter, dispersed throughout the body, both by things
that Evacuate by the lower Parts, amongst which is commended the extract or
Salt of Hedge Hyssop mixed with Rhubarb. And by vomiters, which see else where:
and by bleeding, if it arise from a Plethorick Cause or retaining the blood,
least by the plenty of the cold Humor the heat be overwhelmed, which must be
done at the beginning. And by sweaters, as the Decoction of swallow wort used,
especially in a Laconick Bath, before you enter into it, some of Weckerus his
water is well administered, (concerning which see Hartman) 2. By strengthening of
the Bowels, the Liver especially and stomach, of which in their places.
Fardinandus commends the covering of the Patient in a heap of Wheat for to dry
up the matter.


Article, VI. Of the Jaundice.
The Jaundice is either Yellow, or Black, of which shall be spoken in the
Symptoms of the Spleen.

The Yellow Jaundice is an effusion of a Yellow or greenish Humor into the
habit of the Body proceeding from its Causes.

It Is called also from the Name of a small bird Galgulus, from the variety of
colors in the Rainbow, Arquatus, and because it is tenderly handled at Court,
Regius, or because it is believed to be Cured with Honey and wine a Princely
drink.

The SIGNS of it are, a yellowness of the whole body, a Citron or pale green,
which is observed in the white of the Eye, and at its inner Angle, where the
great Veins are. A distension of the Veins under the Tongue; a pain of the
right Hypochondry, or a hardness too. Bitterness of the spittle, with Choleric
Vomiting, the Hickops, and pain in the Head.

The CAUSE is a Humor of the same color, which is poured forth into the habit
of the Body, for the Causes to be mentioned in the Differences.

The CURE varies according of the Nature of the Differences. Yet it respects
two things. 1. The Cause, which must be removed. 2. The Symptoms, which must
be taken away, after universals have been premised.
For the Face and Eyes is commended, the fume from hot Vinegar in which
Rosemary has been boiled. The Specisicks are, the extract of Columbine, and
Celandine, which with a little Bezoar is given to the rich. An Emulsion of
Columbine Seeds with the distilled Water of the same, for the poorer sort, the
powder of Earth worms, three or four live Lice in a poched Eg, if we believe
Zacutus, which is a most sordid medicine. A live Moth laid on the Navel til it
die. A live Spider, in a Nut shel hung about the Neck, placed to the pit of the
heart, til it die. Amongst Magic things are reckoned the Patients bepissing of
Nettles, Cloths dipped in his Urin and exposed to the Air, and many other
things; concerning which see Petraeus.

The Differences are taken from the Causes.

One is from those things that generate plenty of choler, which are either
External, as sweet things, hot meats and drinks. Poisons especially, as the Gal
of a Leopard, the biting of Vipers and venenate things; and then we must act
with things Alexipharmacal, peculiarly opposite to the Nature of the Poison, in
which also we must have regard to the manifest qualities. Or Internal, as are.
1. A hot and dry distemper of the Liver, and then the Urine is vehemently
colord and thick, the Excrements of the Belly are dyed of a Saffron color, the
Feet and hands are hot. 2. An Inflammation and Impostumation of the same; of
which formerly.


Another is from those things which do hinder the puresying of the blood and
the separation and Exclusion of Choler, as are, 1. The compression of the
bladder of Gal by a Schirrus of the Liver, or some other Tumor, which see
above. 2. The Obstruction of the same from thick phlegm, plenty of Choler,
stones and other Causes, which is either in the passage reaching to the Liver
by which it is attracted, and then the Excrements are dyed, or in that tending
to the Duodenum, by which it is cast forth, and then the Excrements are white;
or it comes to pass by default of the Liver, and then the right Hypochondry is
distended; if it become hard it foretells a Dropsy, or by default of the
bladder it self, and then it invades suddenly, the belly is slow to stool, the
Excrements because they are not dyed, look white.
It is cured, 1. With things that open obstructions, amongst which prevails,
Dodder of Vetches, the Decoction of the Strawberry Plant with horehound and
Raysons, the Juice of Nettle Roots bruised in wine with Saffron, Young Geese
Dung gathered in the Spring, dried and given one dram weight. Cremor Tartar
diluted with steeled Wine, spirit of Tartar, etc. 2. With Purgers given by
course with openers; amongst which Rhubarb and Hiera Picra are the best.


Another is from those things which do suddenly expel choler from the inward
parts to the Circumference of the Body, which chiefly comes to pass in acute
Fevers, in which either it is cast forth critically, and then there went
before Signs of coction, and the Disease is Cured. Or Symptomatically, by
reason of its plenty and Acrimony, and then it happens before the seventh day.
If it be without a coldness, it is thought to be either from a weakness of
Nature, or from an Inflammation: if with a coldness the Feverish matter is cast
forth from the Bowels and veins to the Skin. In the Cure we must have respect
both to the Fever, and the Liver.

Article, VII. Of an Atrophy.
An Atrophy is a drying and wasting of the whole body arising from the
disappointment of its nourishment.

The Subject is the whole body, especially in relation to the soft Parts, the
Fat and Flesh; the harder Parts indeed may be dried; but they cannot be so
diminisht, that from thence the whole body should decrease.

There is no need of SIGNS, whenas the affect is apparent to the Eye.

The CAUSE is the disappointing of nourishment, which proceeds either by
default of the nourishment, when that either fails, that it is not taken, not
attracted, not put to, is discussed, etc. Or is Vicious. Or by default of the
nourishing Faculty, when the Native heat, or radical moisture fails.

The CURE respects. 1. The Symptom it self, where take place, a Bath of the
Decoction of the Head and Feet of a Weather, of red sallow. Of sweet water in
which have boiled the ashes of Hazel, Flax Seed, the bones of a Weather
bruised. A moistning Diet, of the Emulsion of sweet Almonds, of the four
greater cold Seeds, with Goats Milk, etc. The magnetic Cure, concerning which
see Hartmans Chymiatry. Anoyntings with Amatus Lusitanus his Unguent, in
Sebastianus Austrius de Morbis puerorum, p. 555. 2. The Causes of which in the
Differences.


The Differences of an Atrophy, are Various.

I. One is Universal, of the whole body, of which we have now spoken; another
Particular, which proceeds from a peculiar fault of a part. In the Cure take
place, fomentations, dropaces, pications, and percussions, by which the dryness
of the part is corrected, the obtuse heat is roused up, and the nourishment is
attracted.

II. Another is from worms which vex Children.

Another from the Stomach that does not well elaborate the Chyle.

Another from the Liver, when that is either troubled with a hot and dry
distemper, and wasnt with much Choler, or is very much obstructed, that the
nourishment does penetrate with difficulty.

Another from the Spleen, to which the same things may happen.

Another from the obstruction of the Mesentery, which is familiar in the East
Indies, and for the most part has Joynd with it a bulimy with a Lientery: but
it turns also to an impostumation, (which so washes the whole mesentery, that
the Guts confused without any order do stick together only by thin Skins.) In
the Cure is commended the Cross grass, of which see Alpinus concerning
Egyptian plants. cap. 40. See also concerning these things Bontius in medicina
Indorum. p. 156.

Another is from the Heart, which is in a Hectic.

Another from an Ulcer of the Lungs, which happens in the Ptissick.

[Read more of this subject in the Guide to Physic and Chyrurgery, Riverius
Practice of Physic, and his Observations; and the London Dispensatory. Al of
the last Editions, Englished by me.]

Title, V. Of the Affects of the Spleen.
Chap. 1. Of the Diseases of the spleen.
Article, I. Of the obstructions of the Spleen.
THe Diseases of the Spleen are, Obstruction, puffing up, Inflammation, a
Schirrus, Ulcers, and wounds.

The Obstruction of the Spleen, is a stuffing up of the thick Humors.

The Part Affected is the Spleen, either according to its Veins and Arteries,
or according to its whole substance.

The SIGNS are these, at the beginning there is Caused a heaviness of the
Hypochondry, and a pain of the spleen, from hence a humor mixed with the blood,
and diffused into the whole body dies it of a Livid color, makes a difficulty of
breathing after exercise. Poured into the Stomach Causes nauseousness and
vomiting; into the Guts, a diarrhy. Sometimes by reason of its dryness it binds
the Body.

The CAUSE is an earthy and thick Humor, which oftentimes is collected from a
Fenny Air, and gross meats, and by reason of the weakness of the Spleen, and
interception of the Passages cannot be expelled. Sometimes it is heaped up by
reason of a hot distemper of the Spleen, and the attraction of the Chyle
unconcocted, which happens after often lying down on the left side, and too
much exerise. Sometimes it stopps there by reason of an accustomary flux of the
Hemrods intercepted, or the suppression of the Courses.

The CURE is ordered as in other obstructions, yet note, we must have a care of
the Causes from which it comes; the vomits do good, when as there is a strait
way from the Spleen to the stomach by the vas breve. Of Purgers, Poly pody and
dodder of time, with Raysons, senny with cremor Tartar are of Force. Of
openers, the Flowers of Broom and Saxonia his electuary of steel are commended.
A Plaster of Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar of Squils may rightly be applied,
Premising some convenient Fomentation. See Solenanders strengthening electuary
in Hartman.

II. The Inflation of the Spleen is a puffing up of the same into a Tumor by
wind.

The SIGNS are these, a Tumor and distension is perceived with some pain, but
without the sense of heaviness and a weight. A murmuring and sound is made. The
Spleen being pressed does yield.

The Causes are either too large drinking of cold water, or windy meats, as
pease, chestnuts, beans, scallions. Or thick and viscous humors, which may be
overcome by the weak heat and are resolved into vapors, which do easily puff
up the spleen, because it is spungy.

The Cure is as in others. The Chemists applaud the burning Spirit of saturn in
the extract of fern, and anoint the region of the spleen with the same thrice
a day, purging in an external cause is disallowed, anointing with oil of rue,
cappers, etc. is sufficient.

Article. II. Of an inflammation of the spleen, and schirrus.
An inflammation of the spleen, is the lifting up of the same into a tumor, by
blood poured forth into its substance.

Sometimes the whole spleen is affected, sometimes not.

The Signs are a tumor in the left hypochondry, bunching out as it were toward
the fore parts, and as it were girting a man in the middle, so it is
distinguished from the pain and inflammation of the left kidney which is higher
than the right: there is a pulsation and palpitation of that side, by reason of
the arteries with which it abounds, a continual fever observing the periods of
a quartan, difficulty of breathing by reason of the compression of the midriffe.

The Cause is blood poured forth and putrefying, which is either pure or mixed,
and discovers its self by its signs.

The Cure ought to follow the method of other inflammations, so that larger
drinking after purging be avoided, least the humor be carried to the substance
of the liver.

II. Aschirrus of the spleen is a hard tumor of the same proceeding from a
thick, glutinous and a hardened humor.

The SIGNS are a resisting tumor with an ablong hardness in the left side, and
that without pain; to which are added a difficulty of breathing, a dryness of
the mouth, a swelling of the feet, uneasy lying on the left side, troubelsome
swears, etc.

The CAUSE is a thick and glutinous humor, which either presently was such,
arising from meats of a thick juice, from labors, watchings which do waste that
which is spirituous in the humors. Or afterward, when being thin of it self,
it is hardened either by the force of heat, or by medicines too much discussing,
or by its tartarous nature tending to induration. This diffused into the whole
body with the blood, makes it livid and colored; and leads to a consumption,
because the spleen oppressed is not able to discharge its office of
sanguification.

The CURE is more difficult if the patient have a diarrhy ensue, and a
lientery, or water betwixt the skin follow it. It respects the same things as a
schirrus of the liver. Amongst things that digest in wardly, are commended,
the root of fern, the powder of dead nettle in meats, the wood of tamariske
boiled in steel water to a third part. The composition of fern roots one
ounce; dodder of vetches two drams, boiled in eight ounces of strong wine to
the consumption of a third part. Outwarly amongst emollient things Fabricius
unguent is of force, compounded of Gum ammoniacum one ounce; oil of sweet
almonds, white lillies, bens grease, each two ounces; the juice of hemlock
four ounces; vinegar of squils two ounces.

The Differences are the same as of a schirrus of the liver.

I. One is new come, which afflicts with pain extending it self to the very
throat. Another inveterate, which is void of al pain, neither does it easily
kill a man, unless the liver be drawn into consent. II. One affects the spleen
only according to its substance, which also is bounded with the figure of the
spleen; though this do sometimes according to its longitude appear as round,
sometimes according to its latitude, sometimes swells according to al its
dimentions. Another is poured forth into other neighboring parts also, that
for the most part it comprehends all the left region of the belly.
Article. III. Of an Ulcer and wound of the spleen.
Concerning an Ulcer, there is nothing to be observed, but that it follows
inflammations and tumors, and casts forth its matter sometimes by urine,
vomiting, or stool. It must be purged, cleansed, headed.

A wound is either in its superficies, which is less deadly: or in its
substance, which by reason of the effusion of blood is deadly; wheresoever it
is it pours forth black blood, for the most part also it affects the stomach,
causes thirst and pain to the throat; the matter sometimes is voided by the
urine, carried through the caeliacal artery, to the trunk of the great artery,
and hence to the emulgents. It Is cured also with vulnerary potions.

Chap. 2. Of the Symptoms of the spleen.
Article, I. Of the pain of the spleen, and black Jaundice.
The Symptoms of the spleen, are, a pain of the Spleen, The black Jaundice,
the hypochondriacal affection, and the scurvy.

I. The pain of the Spleen arises from the solution of its continuity, and
distension of its membrane. This is caused both from things external, as blows,
falls, etc. and internal, viz. ^^^ammation, inflation, tumors, ulcers, etc. But
it must diligently be distinguished both from those pains which are felt in the
left side, especially after meat or riding which proceed either from wind, or
from serous humors, which flowing into the spaces of the peritoneum that sticks
close to the coats in that place, do distend them from the muscles: and from
the pain of the muscles, which is felt if they be pressed a little. The Cure
requires no narcoticks, for when as it is clothed only with a thin coat the
pain is not exquisite.

II The black Jaundice is a change of the skin of the whole body into black.

It Is known by the color it self. It arises from the same causes, as the
yellow Jaundice does, except that there the liver, here the spleen is in fault.
But it is harder to cure, because if it be by default of the bladder of gal,
there is a greater corruption of choler, if by default of the spleen, the humor
is more stubborn, and there is a fear of a dropsy. Medicines of steel are
commodious in it, and also a dry bath, after which the body must be cleansed
with an emulsion of hemp seed, the face, with bean flower water mixed with wine.

Article, 2. Of the Hypochondriacal affection.
The Hypochondriacal affection is a filth of vicious humors collected in the
branches of the vena porta, caeliacal and Mesenterical arteries, by reason of
the hurt of the spleens concoction, without putrefaction, and by sending forth
of vapors, causing many Symptoms.

It Is called Hypochondriacal by reason of the place of both Hypochondries, by
which is understood that part of the body, which under the bastard ribbs
reaches as far as the loins on both sides, and comprehends with the muscles the
bowels themselves. It Is called also the windy passion by Diocles and Aetius,
for the familiarity of winds contained in the left hypochondry, and it obtains
the name of Melancholy, when as the brain is affected by consent. As was said
before.

The Signs are fetched from the symptoms, of the natural, vital, and animal
faculties: there is. 1. A crudity of the Stomach by reason that it is ill
nourisht by the vena porta from the Spleen, which is followed with a continual
spitting, Phlegm filling the mouth with moisture, vomiting up of the thicker
parts of the humor, either generated in the stomach, or sent from the spleen,
and sometimes so sour, that the teeth are on edg, there goes before it an
ebullition of the same in the stomach, wind distending the neighboring parts,
that sometimes the patient falls into swouning fitts: a discussion of the
thinner parts of the humor by insensible perspiration, sometimes with a
Feverish shaking, which a certain heat Follows presently vanishing in sweat.
2. Pains in the stomach, which reach even to the back, return upon taking of
meat, when it is concocted or cast forth they cease; they draw the kidneys into
consent by communion of membranes. 3. Costiveness of body both by reason of the
dryness of the vessels in both sides, and because the meat is changed into a
phlegmatic and viscous humor, and so it is not moved forward by the gutts, and
pertinaciously adhering to them, is the cause of astringency, 4. An
inflammatory heat as it were of the Hypochondry, which by motion, meat, drink,
hot things grows more fierce; which is attended sometimes with a redness of the
cheeks and whole face by reason of vapors ascending: a diary Fever vanishing
in sweat, by reason of the dispersing of them through the whole body by large
drinking. 5. A Urine sometimes thin by reason of the passages obstructed, and
the retention of wind, from whence the fit begins; sometimes troubled and thick
by the admistion of humors, with a sediment sometimes of red sand, in which the
tartarous parts of the blood are coagulated. 6. A Flatulency, and waving
especially in the left hypochondry, the wind being imprisoned in the cavity
under the midriffe, arising from the connection of the stomach, caul, cholick
gut, and bowels. 7. Anxiety, both because the meat half concocted is resolved
into wind, and causes a straitness, and because being carried to the
neghbouring vessels affected with a hot distemper, it boyls as it were with
that Fiery heat, and distends the hypochondries, and so causes a straitness in
those parts which have nerves from the sixth conjugation. 8. A Palpitation of
the heart, either by consent of the stomach, or by the contention of the part
it self against the malignity of the vapors, which is more frequent with some
at the increase of the Moon, by reason of the greater plenty of serum than
boiling in the mass of blood. 9. A pulsation in the left Hypochondry, which
either the celiacal branch causes especially after anger and motion, or the
compression of the arteries in the mesentery by the glandules, the great one
especially which is in the center. 10. A dryness of the Palate, mouth, and
tongue, by reason of the ascent of resolved vapors through the gullet and rough
artery. 11. Difficulty of breathing both by reason of the affection of the
nerves dedicated to the muscles of the breast, and of the effusion of the evil
matter into the spaces of the muscles. 12. A perturbation of the brain, for the
vapors resolved if they be acrid cause an epilepsy, if obscure, they darken the
spirits and cause melancholy dotages; if many, they are authors of a vertigo;
if dry, they cause watchings, which are wont to molest most men after midnight,
because the chyle distributed, and carried to the second concoction, the
spleen, and the neighboring vessels, does stir up the humors lurking in them,
and raises up vapors from them. Which are carried toward the brain; if into
the gullet, the muscles of the larynx, and rough artery, they cause a fear of
strangling by reason of the destension of that, and the contraction of these;
if into the nerves of the tongue, the arms, according to the tract of the
nerves, they cause a stupidity, and a formicant pulse, sometimes in one,
sometimes in the other hand.
And these are, the symptoms, yet they do not invade al.

The Cause is the phlegmatic, choleric, and melancholy humors; yet melancholy
chiefly, not only by their first and second quallities, as they are adust,
viscous, fixed; but also according to their highest powers and strength, viz.
hurting by their bitterness, saltness, sharpness and acidity. They are
collected, if you respect the place, in the branches of the vena porta, the
caeliacal and mesenterical arteries, the greater especially, and which do wash
along the left hypochondry: neither the vas breve, nor the arterial nor venal
vessels excepted, nor the caul, which has large veins from the vena porta. If
the cause, they are gathered, 1 by reason of the concoction of the spleen hurt;
and truly either by a hot distemper, by which it attracts crude juice, the
watery first, afterward the thicker; which stopping in the veins being
destitute of a vehicle, is thickened and burnt, and yields matter for the
generation of wind: or by dryness, hardness and scirrosity, its heat debating,
by which the chyle not attracted subsides, and the excrements remain not being
cast off, as happens in a sedentery life; hence about the thirtieth year of
our age the disease for the most part invades, or by an external error, when
the chile is not concocted, either by default of the meats, or of the stomach,
or passions of the mind, which while the meat is concocting do call away the
heat to other parts, mix choler stirred up by anger with the meats, trouble
the spleen in its action, which abounds with many arteries. 2. By reason of
the fault of the glandules, which underprop the vessels of the mesentery,
whiles they either compresse them by a tumor, or being comprest in a sedentary
life, they render them more straight.


The CURE is difficult by reason of the heap of symptoms. The easier if it be
beginning, if it fall neither upon a fulage, nor declining; if the hemrods,
swelling of the veins, courses come upon it. If it affect men rather than
women, the fat and fair, than the swarfie. If a bleeding of the left nostril
happen. If blackish urines be pist freely without a fever. It respects. 1.
Chyrurgery, by virtue of which blood must be let, where note, a vein of the
arm may be opened, if a great part of the matter is communicated to the vena
cava, and any inflammation afflict about the liver; that the external hemrod
veins may very well be opened, because being inserted to the same right gut,
their mouths do communicate with the internal. 2. Physic, by virtue of which.
1. The corrupt humor sticking in the first region of the body must be brought
forth. Where glysters take place, and womits, especially if there be much in
the stomach. 2. The passages must be opened and the humor prepared by things
incessive and attenuating, where note that al things are rather to be used in a
liquid form, but if in a sollid, a drauft of liquor must be drank afterward:
we must begin with the gentler, and end with the stronger. Amongst those things
are, of symples, the roots of scorzonera, male fern, the herbs of fumitory,
spleenwort, the flowers of burrage, buglos. Apples Burstorfian. Of compounds,
the syrup of sweet smelling apples, of fumitory, the pouders of diacurcuma, the
essence of fumitory, gremander, etc. of which formerly in the obstructions of
the spleen and liver. After these, acid waters, baths, steel, must be given
spring and autumn, which premising the evaccuation of the first passages, may
be given in conserve of burrage from too scruples to one dram and half; upon an
empty stomach, first of al every third day, til the twentieth, before they are
accustomed to it, afterward, a drauft of wine must be added, and walking up
and down for two hours if they be able; four hours after taking of it, let them
eat their dinner: if they void not black excrements, we must forbear; but if
they be wholly suppressed, we must move the belly. 3. The humor prepared must be
emptied, by benign purging medicines, corrected with moisteners, by little and
little, given about the last quarter of the moon, interposing baths and
moistening Fomentations, myrobalanes and cassia excluded. In a nidorous crudity
things purging choler are best, in an acid, purgers of phlegm and melancholy,
taking meat two hours after that the medicine ascend not beyond the liver. 4.
The vapors fuming up must be diverted from the head and the heart by frictions,
glysters, cupping-glasses, causticks, and other medicines, as elixer
proprietatis, conserve of roses with spirits of sulphur and vitriol, 5. The
Parts which it offends must be strengthened, and the simptoms taken away, of
which in their places.


The Differences are taken from the parts.

I. One is essential, which we have hitherto explained.

Another by consent of other parts, and this.

II. One is stomachical, which is known by often spitting after feeding, by
sower belchings and savoring somewhat rusty, by pricking of the mouth and jaws,
with which those so affected desire cold drink, by vehement pains of the
stomach, which in some proceed even to the back, the meat being concocted they
cease, by and by upon the taking in of more they return, etc. It is cured by
emptying, by diversion, by bleeding and cupping-Glasses. If great pain
afflict, by abstersives, dryers, strengtheners.

Another hepatical, which is known by the pain of the right hipochondry,
loathing of meats, a slow and erratick fever, the extension of the pain to the
shoulders and cannel bones etc. in the Cure which see in distempers; if it be
hot, whey is good with the juice of lemmons, or of sweet smelling apples newly
expressed.

Another from the womb whose vicious blood does easily regurgitate either from
the veins into the arteries by reason of their anastomosis, or out of the
arteries into the hypogastrick, which gives branches to the stomach, pancreas,
caul, small guts, etc. and by and by into the coeliacal. It is known by those
accidents which are wont to befall those troubled with the mother. In the cure
we must have regard to the affects of the womb.

Another is hemorrhoidal, happening from the suppression of the hemrods, of
which in its place. See Matthaeus Martinus concerning the abstruser diseases of
the mesentery, who handles these things very accurately.

Article. III. Of the Scurvy.
The scurvy is a cachexy arising from a melancholy humor, corrupted in a
peculiar manner, afflicting with a weakness of the thighs, spots, swelling of
the gums, and bleeding of them, looseness of the teeth, and other Symptoms.

The Scurvy was known to the ancients, partly under the name of Oscedo, partly
of Scelotyrbe, and Stomacace, partly of Volvulus Sanguineus, and is familiar to
people inhabiting the Sea, and moarish places.

The SIGNS are put in the definition, and we shall treat of them hereafter. To
these ad the Urine and pulse too much variable, that, for at the beginning it is
thin and yellowish the tartarous matter subsisting in it, by and by thick and
white: the humors being more corrupted it is red, and by the admistion of an
adust saltness shining like a lie; and anon without any mark of putrefaction,
and thirst, red sands oftentimes stick to the chamberpot. Sometimes it is thick
and continues so, sometimes grows clear, and casts to the bottom a red
sediment which resembles flower of Bricks; sometimes many crude and flegmattick
excrements stick above the sediment, as the suspensum: but in those whom the
suppression of the hemrods has occasioned this evil, in them it comes forth by
drops with pain and heat, and conteins a tartarous matter, Mucous, Salt and
blackish. This, because the pulse sometimes is weak, unequal, and often
vermicular, but fainting fits approaching, by Reason of its high necessity, and
because the Heart endeavors to expel the Vapors, it is stronger.

The CAUSE is a Melancholy Humor, and that, 1. Crude, as both the Diet and the
Symptoms show, which do afflict Melancholy people. 2. Serous and Ichorous,
that it is like a Lie, which consists of water and Salt, Feculent, and adust
Parts, which is discovered by the wandering pains and Ulcers. 3. The associate
of Phlegmatic sometimes, and vicious Humors, for a Vein being opened, the blood
in Scorbutic people is covered over with a white Glue waxing Green or Yellow.
4. After a peculiar manner corrupted, after it has remained there a long time;
hence many labor of an obstruction of the Spleen and Melancholy Humors, who
are not affected with the scurvy; and in those Regions where the collection of
a black Humor from the heat of the Air is Familiar, the Scurvy is unknown. 5.
Contagious, which you shall not find in other Melancholy Diseases. 6. Produced
from meats destitute of volatile Salt; and therefore hindering spirituality in
the Concoction from whence things Tartarous and Feculent stop in the first
passages, and afterward flow to the Spleen in such plenty, that they cannot be
separated. Certainly meats hardened with Smoke and Salt, in which there is
either little of volatile Salt, or what there was is wasted by Smoking, so that
nothing but the fixed Salt and Tartarous remains, a thick Air, and maritine
places do conduce to its generation. The medicines which are given bruised and
tasted, send forth a sharp vapor, subtle and quickly vanishing, which proceeds
from volatile Salt, the same dried or boiled work less, fresh and condite do
work more exactly. 7. Primarily, residing in the Mesentery, Caul, first
Passages, and the middle places between the stomach, Liver and Spleen, and
bordering on both Bowels. Secundarily, in the Veins of the whole body.
That, for if the Chyle be less purefied by its spirituality, either by reason
of the weakness of parts, or external error, it stops in them by reason of its
thickness, by the arrival of more it is increased, and infects the same with its
feculency and saltness which it has conceived, it weakens and pollutes the
neighboring Liver, and the parts dedicated to concoction, both by contract,
and sending forth of Fumes, from whence that quality is participated of by the
same meats and Chyle. This, for that filth detained there for some time, by
help of the serous Humor is carried to the Liver, from thence by the Veins and
Arteries is distributed into the whole habit of the Body, the future Cause of so
many Symptoms.

The CURE respects three things. 1. The Diet, which ought to be incisive,
attenuating, abstersive opening obstructions, where note, the eating of wild
Pigeons is commended, that this Disease in some places is Cured by the
exercise of Venery, perhaps by reason of the exsplendency of natural heat.
Things Sugard and Milks must be avoided. 2. Surgery, by Virtue of which the
basilick Vein, the median, Salvatella, or of the Ankles must be opened; but so,
that we forbear if the spots have already appeared: if there be no Hopes of the
Hemrrhoids, and a Fever affect, let it be done. Let the Evacuation be
sparingly least the strength be dejected. 3. Physic, by Virtue of which.
1. The matter offending must be prepared, the first passages being washed, so
that we begin with the gentler; that we act with things more attenuating if the
Disease be now grown strong, or the men live in a thick Air; That those things
be given which work by their whole propriety, and be administered rather in
juyces, essences, conserves, than in Decoctions and extracts, in which the
volatile Salt of medicines does vanish. Things appropriate are English
Scurvy Grass, which is most commended, or Brooklime, which has something of
moisture in it, Horseradish, the lesser Celandine, Pennywort, Mustard, water
Trefoil, etc. Of Compounds are, the Danick electuary made of the berries which
they calmultiber. Forestus his Sceletyrbick Syrup, and Mynsichtus his
Antiscorbutical Syrup. The essence of germander and Fumitory. The Spirit and
conserve of Scurvygrass. Mynsichtus his Tinctura Martis strengthened with
appropriate things, etc. 2. It must be emptyed either by the lower Parts, where
take place Quarcetans Tartarous Pills; or by sweats to discuss the remainder,
which either in a Laconick Bath, or otherwise, are well raised by Mynsichtus his
Theriaca Saxonica, the essence of Fumitory with Salt of Wormwood; or by
Diuretics given with appropriate Waters. 3. The Parts, as the Liver, Stomach,
etc. Must be strengthened.


The Symptoms, which afflict the scorbutical, are various, which affect for
the most part by periods, are not al found in all people; some are more
familiar, others less; but they are as follows.

I. Difficulty of breathing, and a staitness of the breast by fits, which
affects without a noise, hissing and cough; sometimes it has joined with it, a
darkness cast over the Eyes, faintings, and the Patients despairing of health.
It arises from Vapors or Humors Sticking in the Cavity of the Caul, and
compressing the Midriff, which being stirred after vehement exercise make the
Symptom more grievous. It Is Cured with Thoracical and Antiscorbutical means,
to which add somewhat of Eichstadius his Confection of Alchermes, and Saffron.

II. An Itching, Tumor, and Putrefaction of the Gums, for whenas their flesh is
soft and loose it is easily corroded by the thinner and sharper part of the
Humor ascending thither. It chiefly troubles Children, and affects with a
blackness of the Teeth, Putrefaction and looseness, their holes being possessed
with the evil Humor, yet it suddenly vanishes, by reason of the recourse of
the Humor. The Cure of it is helped by appropiate Waters, if the mouth be washed
with them. By the Decoction of astringent plants in austere Wine, adding
Spirits of Vitriol and Alum, which are most effectual.

III. Plenty of spots in the Thighs, which for the most part trouble those of
full Age; first they are ruddy and like flea-bitings, by and by they become
purple and somewhat livid, at last they decline to a black color. When there is
many, Sometimes they invade the breast, the Neck, Arms, and Face: sometimes they
vanish suddenly, sometimes last many years; sometimes they turn to scales; and
by how much the more livid they are, by so much the more dangerous. They arise
from the descending part of the Humor, thrust by Nature to the more ignoble
Parts. They may be Cured by things discussive and mollefying, as Baths of
Juniper berries, cresses, Scurvy Grass, Chamemel, etc. if they be ulcerous they
are hardly cured, whenas the whole thigh is gangrend by them.

IV. A pain of the thighs, which is distensive, dull, breaking the bones, lying
deep, grows Feircer toward night, by reason of the motion of the melancholy
humor about that time. It arises from serous humors, sometimes falling down
from the head, and cleaveing to the membranes, sometimes poured out of the
veins from the seat of the filth by the crural branches of the vena cava, and
insinuated into the muscles of the thighs. It Is mitigated with a cataplasme of
coagulated milk, with flowers of chamemel, water cresses, and Juniper beries
boiled in milk. It Is exasperated by giving of fat things before the spots break
out.

V. A pain of the belly, which sometimes does so goad, that the sick fall into a
rupture of the peritoneum. It troubles by intervalls with a pulse and urine
scorbutical. Sometimes it lasts to the fortieth day, neither is it circumscribed
with the course of the colic gut. And truly with a depression of the belly,
that it is pulled inward with the navel, and this seems as if it were tied to
the loins; with a distension felt according to its longitude, a puiling of the
right gut upwards, that nothing at al is voided. It arises from an effusion of
that matter through the mesaraick veins, which do not open into the gutts,
between the two coats of the guts. Hence is a distension, convulsion, pulling,
drawing of the neghbouring parts into consent, a pregression of Fevers, whose
Fuel is in the vessels of the bowels. It is cured by removing the cause; by
mitigating it by laxatives and glysters, by which excretion ought to be
provoked. The elixir proprietatis is very profitable.

VI. A pain of the feet about the ankles and soles, which is a forerunner of
the spots, and by reason of the thinness of the matter, it does as it were
penetrate the parts. It Is cured by a medicine made of the flowers of elder two
handfuls, boiled in wine, adding two drams of soap, and applied on a cloth to
the part in pain.

VII. Pains of the Hypochondries unbounded, because the wind has no passage
out, Nephritical, either because the Matter descends by the emulgent vessels to
the kidneys: or because being heaped up, and by the accession of an external
cause, thrust to the greater vessels, it flows down to the kidneys. Of the
Loins, which sometimes arise from vicious blood contained there, sometimes by
way of a catarrh falling from the head by the veins upon the spinal marrow;
hence the pains begin from the shoulders, and by degrees creep to the Loins.

VIII. Pains of the head, which trouble about the evening, and are joined with
a certain Feverish heat, which vanish away in the morning sweats; they afflict
those principally who contract this evil from the suppression of the hemrods.
They arise from vapors ascending thither. They require, that brooklime be given
in a greater dose, the quantity of hot things be diminisht, the hypochondries
be anointed with things opening.

IX. A Gout, concerning which note, that it is wandering, especially if cold
topic medicines be applied; that for the most part it is joined, with a light
palsy, with a pain ceasing and returning. That it arises from serous humors,
thin and apt for motion. That it is wonderfully to be observed, that if a live
worm be laid upon the place that is fullest of pain it skipps, winds and
bows it self about, wastes away and dies. Amongst sweaters that is
appropriate, which is prepared of the roots of Devils bit one ounce; round
birthwort three drams; the herbs of Sage, betony, each one handful.
Southernwood, Rue, Perewinkle, Savine, each one pugil; etc. See Horstus
concerning the wandering scorbutical gout, Tom. 1. of his observations.

X. A Palsy which sometimes involves the the thighs, sometimes al one side. It
differs from the palsy of the ancients, because some motion remains, it is
interrupted, it assayles by little and little before it fixes, it follows no
such fixed stupidity, pains of the colon and belly, tumors breaking forth in
any part, and easily vanishing again. It arises from the scorbutical matter
carried to the spinal marrow by that branch which is extended from the Aorta,
not far from the mesenterical branch, and creeps to the back bone and its
vertebraes. It Is Cured if the tendons be not rigid, the body being once or
twice purged, by the use of brooklime and scurvy grass; if they be hardened and
rigid by emollient cataplasmes, premising fomentations of water, in which the
leaves of Sage, Betony, Rosemary, with elder and melilot Flowers have been
boiled.

XI. A Convulsion and contraction, which sometimes grows so strong, that the
sick are not able to extend any joint, and they are drawn as it were round.
It Is joined sometimes with a rigidity of the turning joint of the mouth, on
which the lower jawe under the place of hearing is reversed, so that the mouth
shuts close, that it cannot rightly be opened. It arises from the rigidness of
the tendons, when in that tartarous but serous humor, this being discust that
is left and dried. It Is cured by things mollefying and discussive.

XII. A deep sleep, which sometimes afflicts, with a slow continual Fever,
sometimes with an intermitting; it comes with a fit, and that going away it
cease. It Is cured with watercresses which grows in clear waters.

XIII. A Palpitation of the heart, and swouning. Concerning which we must know
that it serves for the most part, when the patients rise in their bed the
humors being stirred; sometimes. it is so great, that they dye suddenly. It Is a
certain sign of the scurvy, if it afflict in a disease that is small to the
sense. It ought to be opposed by medicines given six or eight times a day with
things antiscorbutical.

XIV. Vomiting, which is rather a vain endeavoring, 1. To vomit, that has no
heaviness or pain of the stomach going before, it is not taken away by
medicines that strengthen the stomach, it is rather quieted with milky things,
that do lenify the humors.

XV. Too much spitting, which arises partly from vapors raised up to the
mouth, from the bordering places of the stomach; partly from meats corrupted in
the stomach, and carried up to the mouth along the course of the membrane
lining the gullet: partly from a serous humor poured forth from the spleen into
the stomach through the Vas breve. It Is prevented by avoiding of sharp and hot
medicines which diffuse the matter.

XVI. A Flux of the belly both diurnal and nocturnal, which brings forth
compacted excrements, but exceeding the meat in quantity, sometimes of a green,
sometimes of an ash color. It arises either because the nourishment not
attracted by the weakness of the liver, is corrupted, or because the serous
humor flows back from the spleen to the gutts; or because the serum which might
have been dissipated thorough the habit of the body in form of a vapor by cold
condensing the pores is driven back to the guts, or the vessels, especially in
the morning time, when the body is open with heat, being bound up by cold, it is
thrust back toward the greater vessels, and carries with it to the guts,
whatsoever it finds in the way: and then in the cure things astringent are
most hurtful. A dry diet must be used; wormwood wine diluted with the decoction
of succory is good, or because whiles the serous humor grows hot with the
Feverish heat, and cannot be exhaled, it is turned thither; and then syrup of
Roses solutive and things of succory are good. It Is sometimes bloody but without
pain, and with other signs of the scurvy. It arises from Feculent blood
abounding in the veins, and poured forth into the guts through the ends of them.

XVII. Fevers, which differ far from other Fevers. For the sense of cold
extends it self to six or seven hours, the pulse is slow, weak, unequal in
the declination, great and hard in the vigor, the urine is as we have said
formerly. Sometimes they trouble thrice, sometimes four times a day; most
commonly they are mixed of the type of a continual and tertian. The continual if
they be exasperated by purging medicines or hot potions do kill.

XVIII. A dropsy which afflicts both with a harder manifest tumor, and
distension of the spleen, liver, or belly, and with a greater difficulty of
breathing, than otherwise, which after the use of purgers does most of al
torment, and because it proceeds from thick vapors, they being discust it
cease.

XIX. An Erysipelas, Which sometimes molests every week, sometimes every month,
it proceeds from ichorus humors corrupted after a peculiarmanner. In the cure
the water of elder flowers with Carduus water is good.

XX. Ulcers which are dry and yield no matter or filth, they trouble those most
that are of a choleric temperament. They possess not only the thighs, but
other parts also: sometimes they become so gangrenous, so that they feel not
iron inflicted on them, they ought to be cured without any biting or pain;
brooklime alone boiled in drink, laid on them twice a day does much good, and
also the ointment of diapompholygos in great putrefaction, some Mercury
precipitate, or spirits of vitriol must be mixed with it.

XXI. Hard bunchings in the whole body, and great tumors which stick in the
groin, the glandulous parts of the body, like unto muscles, they are without
pain while the patients are quiet, with pain when they walk. If they break
forth suddenly, and by and by vanish they presage a palsy. A cataplasme of
the root of the greater comfry, of bryony, wormwood, the crum of white bread
boiled in milk, is commended in the cure.

XXII. An Atrophy which proceeds at first because the faculty is disapointed by
reason of vicious nourishment, in process it arises by reason of a vicious
disposition imprinted on the parts by the defluxion of humors. For the cure is
commended goats milk, if the goat be nourisht with things antiscorbutical. I
omit the rest. See concerning this disease, Sennartus, Horstius and others.

Title, 8. Of the affects of the Kidneys.
Chap. 1. Of the diseases of the kidneys.
Article, 1. Of the Straitness of the Ridneys.
THe diseases of the kidneys are, straitness, inflammation, the stone, wounds
and ulcers.

The straitness is an obstruction or compression of the vessels in the kidneys
induced by its causes.

The Signs of it are, the retention or paucity of urine, and from thence a
sense of distension and heviness about the loins, in one, or both sides, etc.

The Causes shall be explained in the differences, the continent is put in the
definition.

The Cure varies according to the nature of the differences.

The differences are taken from the causes inferring the obstruction or
compression.

I. One is from a tumor, Phlegmon, Scirrus, compressing them, too much dryness
whiles the substance is wrinkled and contracted; which will discover themselves
by their signs; although the last is very hardly known. II. Another from
humors viscous, thick, clammy, which is known by their redundance, the absence
of pain, and a Fever. It Is cured, 1. By emptying by stool or by vomit, 2. By
things detersive, incisive, and diuretic. The waters of parsley, rest-barrow
with Fernelius his syrup of radish are commended. The spirits of salt, tartar
vitriolate with a Julep of violets, etc.
III. Another is from clotted blood which has fallen out of its vessels, and
concreted there. It Is known from hence, that pissing of blood went before, and
causes enducing it, as blows, falls, etc. It Is dissolved with chervil water,
dyers madder, with the seed of cresses, spermaceti, and mummy, made into a
powder. IV. Another is from matter which is generated there, or flows from some
other part. It is known by the signs of an ulcer or impostumation in the
kidneys, and the urine sometimes purulent. It Is cured by abstersives. V. Another
from the stone, of which shall be treated hereafter: in the mean while observe
that gravil does sometimes do it, which either is produced in the proper
substance of the kidneys, which is known from hence, that it is hard and red,
and thence rapt with the violence of the urine running is carried into its
hollow part, afterward is thrust down to the bladder, and when the water is
made it does sink, and is hardly bruised with the fingers. Or does arise from
the adustion of humors in the veins and liver, that which is voided in the
declination of fevers both acute and chronical; It Is known from hence, that it
does not subside, but is mixed with the substance of the urine, cleaves to the
chamber pot like powder, and is easily bruised with the fingers.
Article. II. Of an inflammation of the Kidneys.
An inflammation of the kidneyes, on nephritis, is a swelling of them from blood
poured forth into their substance, and there putrefying, joined with a vehement
pain, fibrous or gravelly, excretions.

The Signs are a heavy and extensive pain about the loins to the first
vertebrae, which differs from the colic in these, because it does not wander
into the middle of the belly or about it with a murmur, does not always grow
gentler the belly being purged, by its cruelty and fe^rceness it pulls the
peritonaeum; it is very thick and frequent. There is a continent inordinate
fever, which sometimes increases, sometimes abateth, and about night is
exasperated: a subvertion of the bowels and stomach. A casting up by vomit
first of al of fl^gmatick things, afterward of colerick; a scarceness,
thinness, waterishness of the urine when the evil begins, sometimes a
suppression, by and by that plenty and thickness with a compulsion to piss from
a certain sense of heat; A stupidity and numness of the next thigh, by reason
of the compression of the nerve. A difficult raising of the body; lying down
upon the sick side mirigates the pain, upon the contrary exasperates it.

The Cause is blood, either pure or mixed, either heaped up in the kidneys by
way of collection or thrust thither by way of fluxion, either from the whole
body, or from a part, as is often said elsewhere.

The firmness and hardness of the kidneys seldom give occasion for a fluxion,
oftentimes diuretic medicines do, which carry the blood to the kidneys.

The CURE is easier if the hemrods come upon it, if the impostume being broke,
a white, smooth, equal matter, not stinking, be voided through the passages of
the urine if it tend to resolution. Very difficult if the Impostum being broke
after suppuration, the matter take its way through the emulgents to the liver
and guts. If it tend to induration. Past hopes almost if there flow a white,
thin, or purulent water, without the remission of the fever and symptoms, and
with a wasting on the legs and thighs. It Is ordered as in other inflammations,
yet we must observe. 1. That things moderately cooling and astringent be used
with things anodyne for repulsion; outwardly indeed, least the humors
subsisting about the external and fieshy parts be struck inward into the
kidneys; but inwardly, least when they begin their astriction about the belly,
or liver and veins, they should either cast down the blood to the kidneys or by
straightening the narrow passages, cause an ischury 2. We must abstain from
purgers because they inflame and trouble the humors, yet gentle and benign
must be given, if choler stick in the mesaraicks and stomach, least it be
carried thither. 3. Diuretics must not be drank unless when the inflammation is
perfectly alaied. Here takes place tartar vetriolate half a scruple, with the
Julep of roses and cinnamon water two drams; and other things.


The Differences are taken from the part affected.

I. One is in the Right kidney, in which the loins on the right side are
payned, the pain ascends more to the liver, the right thigh is benumbed.

Another in the left, in which the pain descends to the bladder.

Another in both, in which the symptoms oppress in both sides.

II. One is in the fleshy part of the kidney, in which a greater heaviness
affects.

Another in the parts in which the arteries are terminated, in which a beating
pain urges.

Article. III. Of the Stone of the Kidneys.
The stone of the Kidneys, is a solid and stony substance, mucilaginous, s^imy,
carterous, endued with a stone making faculty, arising in the kidneys by the
help of heat.

The Signs are principally five, 1. A Pain, which affects in the loins, causes
a sense of heaviness, by reason of the substance of the kidneys void of sense:
in its descent into the ureters it is increased, by reason they which consist of
a cross and thick membrane, are distracted, especially if the stone be great,
craggy, and rough. It Is distinguished from the chollick, because it is neither so
grievous, nor so large, because it is fixed, and is circumscribed with the region
of the kidneys, and if it fall into the bladder, it follows the course of the
ureters, and affects not with wind. 2. Bloody urine by reason of the wounding
of the parts through which it passes, which at first is little and waterish, by
and by suppressed, the stones being removed out of the kidneys, it is turbulent,
and having a sandy sediment. 3. A Numness of the thighs which hapens not in the
pain of the chollick, because the muscle on which the kidney lies, and which
is appointed for bending of the thigh, and is inserted into the inner part of
the thigh, is comprest. 4. A retraction of the testicle of that side, by reason
of the retraction of the neighboring vessels, which lead to the stones, and
are inserted in them. 5. A ^auseousness and vomiting; for the kidneys are knit
to the stomach by the mediation of the peritoneum, whose membran each bowel
participates, and two nerves of the sixth conjugation issuing from the stomach
are implanted into the internal coat of the kidneys. The voiding of gravel is
a sign of the stone in making.


The Cause is not phlegm, for many are troubled with that, who have no commerce
with the stone-growing juice; hence chose that have the stone oftentimes make
water, which is like mucous matter, and presently concretes into a stone. But
this proceeds from the faeculency of the nourishment, which if it be retained,
glues it self to this or that part, by the new arrival of matter is daily
increased, being increased by degrees it is dried, and where it finds a
viscous, thick, earthy matter, it coagulates it, and afterward the internal
spirit of the microcosmical salt coming, the which by reason of its natural
viscousness, or clamminess that Tartar easily receives, and hides within it
self, at last it is Coagulated into a perfect Stone.

The CURE is Difficult if bubbles for some days are perceived to continue in
the Urin, because they show a great quantity of Tartar ous and mucilaginous
Humors, together with wind does abound in the Kidneys. If from Urin remain
subtle, and last so for some time, because it argues a great obstruction. If
the it an Ulcer of the Kidneys ensue. If the Patient be of Nephritical parents.
It respect. I. Prevention that either it be not generated, or do not ^ncreafe,
and then. 1. There must be care had of the Diet, in which meat and drink making
for the stone must be eschewed; the contrary meats made use of amongst these
are commended, asparagus moderately boy led, with Oil of Vinegar and Butter,
taken at first Course, the fruit of Eglantine, the stones of the same boy led
in broths, Chevil, Radish, Oil of Olives and sweet Almonds. 2. The matter
collected must timely be emptyed, that it do not concrete. By vomits given
every month twice or thrice, by lenitive Medicines, especially Cassia,
Turpentine, and chose that purge water. By things that break it, if any thing
be concreted, amongst which are commended the Decoction of the Nephritical
wood, of Alehoof, the Juice of Speedwel with the Water, and other things, of
which hereafter. 3. The Peins must be reduced to their state, and heart bleeding
prevails, if the Liver has raised* hot distemper in them, the administration
of Strawhetry, Purslain, Barley Water and anointing with cold Unguents.
II. The taking away of the stone generated, which is performed, 1. By clensing
of the first Passages by gentle Evacuaters, corrected with things that discuss
wind. 2. By opening a Vein in the Arm, if there be a plenitude in the whole
body, and the pain be great; of the Anckle, or Ham, if it be fallen upon the
affected Part. 3. By Relaxing and making slippery the Passages, in wardly with
the Syrup of Marshmallows, Liquorish, Violets. Outwardly with an Ointment
Compounded of Ointment of Dialthea, two drams; Hens Grease, new Marrow of a
Heart, each one dram; Oil of White Lillies, one dram; of Scorpions, two
scruples; Oil of Wax distilled and spirits of Turpentine, of each one scruple;
Wax, and Saffron a liltle. By a Bath of sweet Water, in which may be taken, Oil
of fresh Almonds, two ounces; Oil of Turpentine, six drops, With a drauft or
Warm wine. 4. By Removing, Breaking and expelling the Stone by Medicines that
will do that: the more Excellent of simples are, the magistral of Tartar
Vitriolate, of Crabs Eyes, of the mandible of a Pike, and the Jewish Stone.
Lapis Prunella, the essence of Crystals, the Nephritical Stone, the Aqua Vitae
of Juniper. Horstius, T. 1. P. 481. Of compounds, Zacutus his Confection or
conserve of the Nephritical Stone. l. 8. c. 16. Mynsichutus, his Nephritical
liquor, Armament. P. 338. The mixture of magistral of Tartar Vitriolate
dissolved, Crabs Eyes, Lapis prunella, the volatile Salt of Amber, and Vntzerus
his Saxafrage Water. The generous Wine of the same Author, in which a sharp
radish with the Rind taken off, and cut into thin slices, was steeped a whole
day, given with the magistral of Crabs Eyes and spirit of Salt. The mixture of
Muffet the English man, Cistae Medicae, p. 34. Of Libavius of white Saxifrage
water, with Sugar of Violets and Roses streined, with a little Spirits of
Vitriol. Zuingerus his expeller of the Stone, Cist. Med. p. 35. 3. The removing
of the pain, which is performed by the Ointments formerly prescribed for
relaxing of the Passages, with a half bath prepared of things anodine, Cratoes
Cataplasme of pellitory of the Wall, Parsley, Onions, etc. 4. The Discussion of
wind, if there be any. See concerning the Stone, the excellent and most
satisfying Treatises of Vntzerus, Franciscus Collutius, and Beverovicius.


Article, IV. Of an Ulcer and Wound of the Kidneys.
Concerning an Ulcer of the Kidneys, Let it suffice to have observed these
things.

I. That it does very seldom happen from an Impostumation of a phlegmon, by the
Acrimony of the matter flowing thither corroding the Kidney, by a blow, or fall
breaking the Veins; yet if it do happen, the Cure does require, that the
falling down of Humors be stopped by Diet, by bleeding and purging; they already
fallen must be temperd with coolers, nephritical means: must be emptyed with
turpentine reduced with the yolk of an Egg into a liquor, or with the powder of
liquorish into a Bolus.

II. That it is always truly Cause by a Stone restrains within it, which
either by its weight does bruise the Kidney, or by fretting diminish and
corrode it. Then the Urin before it begins to be purulent, becomes bloody,
especially after exercise and labor; none or an obscure fever troubles them.
If at any time the matter be stopped by the obstruction of the Head of the
Ureter, that by degrees either redounding by the emulgent into the greater
veins will defile the blood and habit of the body; or heaped up in that place,
will distend the Loins, from which the Skin being opened it wilflow much and a
long while.

III. In the Cure the Decoction of Parsley, discribed by Doringius in his
Mithridatotechina, p. 150. Bears the Palm from al others.

Concerning a Wound of the Kidneys, it shall suffice to have noted these things.

I. That it is known, by the Situation, suppression of Urin, or difficulty of
it, by its bloodiness, by a pain extending to the groins.

II. That it is divided into that which is in the Superficies and fleshy Part,
and then much blood flows forth, the Urine goes not forth; the stronger
agglutinatives may presently be administered: and into that which Penetrates
even to its Cavity, and then the blood goes forth with the Water. In the Cure
the blood must be stopped. This stopping, things agglutinating must be given
inwardly and laid upon it; and here is of force, unguentum Sanctum of Andreas a
Cruce, which see in Sennertus, etc.

Chap. 2. Of the Symptoms of the Kidneys.
COncerning the Symptoms of the Kidneys, Viz. The Separation of the serum
hurt, and Pain, few things present themselves.

I. The separation of the Serum, is hurt by the fault of the emulgent Vessels
and Kidneys, which either labor of a cold distemper, and then the Urine is not
suddenly suppressed. Or of a streitness, of which formerly. In the Cure,
Diuretics must be given an hour or two before meat.

II. The Nature of the Pain may be fetched from the Chapter of inflammation and
stone of the Kidneys. At the seat of the Kidney it is fixed and firm on either
side, unless that sometimes it is extended either to the Hip, or to the Stone of
the same side by the Course of the ureter. They that are accustomed to it, by
reason of the dilatation of the ureters, are not so easily affected, unless
perchance the stone be thick and rough; but they who are not accustomed to it,
or have been seldom and gently troubled with nephritick pains, are tormented
with the least stone, etc.

Title, IX. Of the Affects of the bladder.
Chap. 1. Of the Diseases of the Bladder.
Article, 1. Of the Stone of the Bladder.
THe Diseases of the Bladder are, The Stone, Inflammation, Ulcers, to which
ought to be added, the streitness of the passage for Vrin.

What the Stone of the Bladder is, may be perceived by the definition of the
Stone of the Kidneys.

The SIGNS of it are, an Itching and sharp pain in the Neck of the Bladder,
the Pubes and Perinaeum, which by progression and distention of the Bladder,
torments with great tortures, the Patients are wont to scratch their Privities
and often to distend them, and make Water by drops with exceeding pain, and
that while the Stone is gathering together is thin and clear, of somewhat
whitish color, but being concrete, it is wont to settle like unto Oil, with a
gravelly sediment, white, like to scabs, if the Stone be brittle.

The CAUSE, and CURE, must be fetched from the Chapter of the stone of the
Kidneys. If it cannot be broken and expeled, it must be cut out, concerning
which see Chirurgions. For breaking of it serves the Composition of Salt of
white Tartar, one ounce; and Parsty Water, one pound, mixed together, and
streined through streining paper, dyed of a yellow color with Orange Pills; also
the Powder of Palmer Worms, concerning which consult with the peculiar treatise
of Laurembergius. And also the blood of a Goat, nourisht with Plants that
break the stone, distilled, taking at meat those stuffings which ought to be
made of its Kidneys, and other Bowels and Guts. For mitigation of the Pain a
Bath is good, which must be followed with an unction of the Cod, Pubis, and
perinaeum, with the Compound Oil made of Oil of Scorpions, bitter Almonds, the
Fat of a Cony and Hen, of each one ounce and an half; and the Juice of
Pellitory of the Wall, two drams.

There meet us some Differences of the stone.

I. One is small and light, in which a vagous and wandering tickling afflicts
about the pubes and perinaeum, the which is easier broken.

Another a little bigger, in which there is felt the weight of some heavy thing
lying upon it, so that going through uneven places is difficult and painful,
and dancing much more diffiult, they piss often, and the Urin can hardly be
kept in, which is white, thick, turbid, with a purulent Sediment, or like to
the snivel of the Nose; when they should piss the stone driven in the way, the
flux of Urin is intercepted, there is a most sharp pain toward the latter end
of pissing, when the stone stirred up by the Course of the Urin, as if it were
coming forth, does more violently compress the Sphincter muscle, at other
times it affects the whole passage of the Privity, sometimes the Nut. Striving to
piss is accompanied with a desire to go to stool, because the greatness of the
stone from the perinaeum stimulates the right Gut, as well as the Neck of the
Bladder. This can hardly be Cured any other way than by cutting.

II. One is concrete, which sends no gravel from it in the Urin. Another not
concrete, in which the Urin does cast off some gravel and that either white or
red, which must be distinguished from that of the Kidneys, by other signs of
the stone of the Bladder.

III. One is which grows in the bladder it self, to which that said before
accords. Another which descends from the Kidneys through the Vreters into it,
and then signs of the stone of the Kidneys went before, there was a pain reached
from the Kidneys to the bladder, according to the length of the Ureters, the
Nephritical pain is either ceased, or troubles little. This some do believe may
be broke by the Indian Plant called by Manardus, Payco, and by other things.

IV. One is which does not cleave to the Bladder, and therefore may be taken
forth more safely by cutting. Another which cleaves to the top of the bladder,
and hangs down as it were from it, and then all the symptoms reckoned formerly,
are more obscure, there have been those seen who have carried it without any
pain: nay it can by no means almost be removed without injury to the patient.
Of which see Tulpius observat. l. 2. c. 5.

Article, 2. Of an inflammation, scab, ulcer and fistula of the bladder.
An inflammation of the bladder, does not so much possess the substance of the
bladder, which is thin and bloudless, as the sphincter muscle of the neck of
it.

The signs of it are, a bitter pain in the perinaeum with redness and heat, a
suppression of the urine with a great endeavoring to piss, costiveness of the
body (because the right gut is streitned by the greatness of the inflammation) a
distension of the pubes and pecten to the navel by reason of the abundance of
water.

The cause is the same as of other inflammations.

The cure is difficult, because the affect is deadly for the most part about
the seventh day especially, a Fever coming, and the stoppage of urine, and
stools: yet if it be gentler, and the inflammation being changed into matter,
the impostumation break inwardly, and is emptied by the urine, there is better
hopes: and also, an erysipelas arising about the superficies of the skin, and
plenty of water being made, sometimes it is suddenly dissolved. It Is ordered
after the manner of other inflammations. Repellers must not be applied long
because the bladder is membranous, and is easily bound up, the urine suppressed,
and the nerves hurt.

II. A Scab of the bladder is known by an itching in the pecten, by the strong
smell of the urine, by a branny sediment residing at the bottom. It arises from
sharp and salt humors corroding the internal superficies of it. It Is cured in
old folks hardly, the humors are partly to be emptyed, partly qualifyed by the
four cold seeds, violet flowers, strawberries, either taken inwardly, or
outwardly injected through the urethra.

III. There is no need to say what an ulcer of the bladder is, it appears from
the former.

The signs of it are, scales and matter, which flow forth only with the urine,
and sink in it, and so it is distinguished from an exulceration of the urinary
passage, in which the matter and filth, either goes before the urine, or
appears presently at first coming forth, or also flows forth without urine.
There is a continiual torment about the bladder, pubes, and perenaeum; the
urine also is thick, and sometimes mixed with matter, sometimes with blood, etc.

The causes are diverse, of which in the differences.

The cure is of little hopes, both because the bladder is membranous, and
because the urine which is biting by its continual running down, hinders its
consolidation. It Is ordered after the manner of other ulcers.

The differences are taken chiefly from the causes.

I. One is from cantharides, and then if it be lately, we must give milk
plentifully, by and by consolidate. If it be inveterate, it must be cured as
other ulcers.

Another is from sharp urine, which the use of pure wine and hot meats has
caused, and then we must act with cooling diuretics.

Another from sharp or salt humors, as it were knawing its internal
superficies, and then, 1. We must empty with cassia and turpentine, 2. We must
temper them with water lillies, lettice, endive, etc.


Another from the stone, of which formerly.

II. One is in the bottom, in which the pain is felt about the pubes.

Another by the urinary passage, in which at the time of pissing the pain is
felt more; and especially when they begin, and when they make an end to piss.

IV. The cure of a fistula, see in Langius, l. 3. epist. 5.

Article, 3. Of the straitness of the Vrinary Passage.
The straitness of the urinary passage, is an interception of the same
proceeding from its causes and inducing a stoppage of urine.

The signs, causes, and cure, If you consider this affect in general, have
nothing singular.

The differences are taken from the causes.

I. One is from obstruction, which is caused, 1. Either from the stone, which
is known by this, that signs of the stone were precedent, the urine is sometimes
made freely, sometimes the stone falling from the bottom of the bladder into its
orifice, it is suddenly stopped, the pain urges most at the root of the bladder;
The cure consists in removing of the same, by shaking of the thighs if it be
great that sticks at the orifice: by bringing it out of the extremity of the
urinary passage, if it be small, and can be moved out of its place: by laxative
fomentations, and things that break the stone, if it cannot be moved out of its
place with the fingers. 2. Or from clotted blood, which is known by this, that
a wound or rupture of a vessel went before the blood was poured forth, with the
urine; outwardly common ashes may be applied with honey. 3. Or from matter,
which either was in the kidneys, or bladder, or by the breaking of an
impostumation in the upper parts was carried thither. 4. Or from thick and
viscous phlegm, and then the urine is almost totally suppressed, there are present
signs of phlegm; we must use things incisive and attenuating.
II. Another is from a constipation, by a caruncle, a callosity, a wart,
growing in the passage of the urine, which is known by this, that neither the
urine is pist out freely, nor the seed sent forth, great pains are present; it is
tried by a catheter or wax candle put in. But because the urine always flows
alike from the stone, because it is never almost wholly intercepted by a
phlegmatic obstruction, upon that account it is known. It is cured by things
that wast, and consolidate. Of those is commended, premising universals, oil of
Mercury with a little sugar of saturn and camphure, (amongst which I reckon
the decoctions of China and sassafras) the powder made of mercurius dulcis half
an ounce; crude antimony one ounce; rutty prepared two drams; of the use of
which consult Hartmans Chymiatry. III. Another is from compression, which is
caused, either from the coldness of the right gut; or from the inflammation of
the neighboring parts, or from the swelling of the yard, and neck of the
bladder, or the contorsion of the bladder; or the falling down of the bladder
into the Cod. The Cure must be directed against the diseases.
Chap. 2. Of the symptoms of the bladder.
Article, 1. Of the incontinency of the urine.
THe Symptoms of the bladder are, incontinency of the urine, a diabetes, an
Ischury, a Strangury, dysury, bloody pissing, purulent, etc.

Incontinency of the urine, is a sending forth of the same, by reason of the
resolution of the sphincter muscle, or compression of the bladder, without any
sense of acrimony and pain, beside the will of our command.

There is no need of Signs in an affect so manifest.

The cause is cast upon the resolution of the sphincter (of whose causes in the
differences) and the compression of the bladder; which comes to pass, either
from a convulsion of the muscles of the belly, or from the greatness of the
young one about the last months, or from a tumor placed upon the bladder: of al
which respect must be had in the cure.

The cure varies according to the nature of the Differences.

The Differences are taken from the causes inducing the resolution of the
sphincter, and the time.

I. One is from a palsy of the nerves, which from the loins are inserted into
it, by reason of which it cannot contract it self: and then it is harder to be
cured, if the spinal marrow be affected or the muscle it self wounded. The
causes by reason of which a palsy comes, must be inquired from its chapter, and
as they vary, so the cure must be varied.

Another is only from the laxness and softness of the sphincter, and then the
patients can neither endure the acrimony, nor abundance of urine, when the
animal powers are asleep. For the cure are commended, Diacyminum, Frankincense
drunk in wine; the throat of a cock, roasted and dried, that it may be ground to
a powder, given at night in astringent red wine. The bladder of a goat dried in
an oven and poudered given likewise one dram weight.

II. One also is diurnal, which afflicts the apoplectical and paralytick.

Another Nocturnal, which is wont to happen to children, by reason of the cold
and moist distemper of the muscle, or not thinking of it: in succeeding years,
the muscle of the bladder growing dryer and stronger it ceases. By reason of
continual drinking for the most part it follows those of riper years to their
death.

Article, 3. Of a Diabites.
A Diabetes is a most quick and plentiful pissing of the drink unchanged,
arising from the intense attractive faculty of the kidneys, and afflicting with
a strong perpetual thirst.

The Part affected is the kidneys, yet so, that the bladder also oppressed with
the plenty of urine, consents.

The Signs are plentiful pissing, little or not at al changed, a strong thirst,
nor any satisfaction from the taking in of any liquor, a pain, pracking, and
heaviness about the loins, a coliquation of the whole body, the belly dried and
withered.

The Cause is controverted amongst physicians, we hold it is the intense
attractive faculty of the kidneys, arising from a very hot distemper of them,
which is caused by an afflux of sharp and biting humors, viz. choler and salt
phlegm, impacted in the substance of the kidneys: the too great largeness of
the emulgent vessels and ureters, the heat of the liver, pestilential fevers,
the weakness of the stomachs retentive faculty, do help. Thus when the kidneys
draw plenty of serum from the veins, and cannot contain it by reason of their
weakness, they send it to the bladder, the veins again draw from the liver,
this from the stomach, whence the orifice of this being emptied and dried,
there arises a continual thirst, etc.

The Cure is too difficult, and for the most part passes into a hectic, and
dryness of the whole body. It Is ordered. 1. By things that correct the
distemper of the kidneys, where bleeding also takes place. 2. By things that
dull the acrimony of the humors, and make the blood, and with it the serous
humor flower to motion. The essence of crocus martis described by Crollius,
Baths made of smiths water, drink, but little of the decoction of hartshorn,
salt of corals, etc. are thought to be prevalent.

As Concerning the Differences, it is only one.

One is an exquisite diabetes, of which we have now treated.

Another spurious, which is nothing else but a colliquative flux of urine,
while the juyces in the veins, or in the substance of the body are changed into
a serous matter, which attracted by the kidneys, slides through them, and
descends to the bladder.

Article. III. Of an Ischury.
An Ischury is a suppression of the Urine by reason of the disappointment of
the expulsive faculty, so that none of it can come forth.

There is no need of Signs in an affect so manifest.

The Cause is the disappointment of the expulsive faculty, the causes of which
we shall explain in the differences.

The Cure must be hastened, least it regurgitace into the whole body, oppress
the liver, infect the blood, and cause a danger of suffocation. Oftentimes the
humors putrefie, fevers are kindled, and unless they piss before the seventh
day, they dye. There is no cure if it arise by reason of the deadly concourse
of fits; if it come from a wound of the back bone or luxation of its vertebrae.
If the hickops or a tenesmus come upon it. It respects. 1. The symptom it self,
that the urine be provoked, here meet us, a pressing of the belly with holding
of the breath; putting up of a catheter, unless an inflammation do hinder, or
of a wax candle dipped in oil of sweet almonds; suppositories and sharp glysters,
by reason of the communion of the right gut with the bladder, fomentations of
the pubes and perinaeum with the decoction of pellitory of the wall, melilot,
chamemel. Cataplasms of horse raddish bruised and fried in butter. The juice of
a cray fish baked and strained through hair, given in wine. The salt of bean
cods. The decocti-of buck-thorn in wine; of gillyflowers with their root dried
in the shade with wine of quinces. 2. The Causes of the Symptom, of which in
the differences.


An Ischury is divided twofould.

One from Diseases of the bladder, which is known by this, that a continnual
desire to piss does oppress them, the pubes is distended and pained by the
collection of abundance of urine by putting in a catheter plenty of urine
flows forth with ease. Those diseases are. 1. A stupidity, by reason of which
it feels not its spur, either by reason of a palsy and obstruction of the
nerve, or the aversion of the spirits; and then although the bladder be full,
there is no desire to piss, nor no pain felt. 2. A cold distemper contracted
from cooling causes, and then such causes went before; diuretics must not be
used unless the body be purged first. 3. A streightness, either by reason of a
tumor of the muscle compassing the neck; or by Reason of a stone, and other
things formerly alleged, if from this, it is sometimes cured with an emulsion of
the seeds of purple violets made with speedwel water. 4. Too great an
extention, and then the urine has been retained too long against the will, we
must act with fomentations of pellitory of the wall with oil of sweet almonds.


Another is from the streightness of the urinary passage, which is known from
hence, that the urine is not voided by compressing the bladder, and that a
catheter is difficultly put up. See the Cure in its chapter.

II. One is exquisite, of which we treated even now.

Another Spurious, which is known by this, that the bladder is empty, so that
no water flows forth though a catheter be put up. There is no heaviness or
distention, or pain perceived about the pubes though you press it. It arises
either by default of the Kidneys, which do not attract, or expel the matter of
the urine, either by reason of its own diseases, of which formerly, or by
reason of some external error, viz. because the serum is either consumed, or
converted to some other parts; Or by default of the uriters which either are
bound up, or obstructed, and then the patient was subject to the pain of both
kidneys, there is a great heaviness in the loins, and sometimes a vehement pain
torments every where, there is little or no desire to make water. But the
specificks in this disease are thought to be, earth worms in number five,
drunk with sweet wine. An egg-shel purged, from which a chick in has been
hatched. Goats piss drank warm, 'its caul and guts applied to the belly, etc.

To an Ischury belong, A deminution of the water, which in malignant and acute
fevers is therefore bad, because it is a sign that the nerves are affected.
And the slowness of urine when it is voided at longer distances than it was
wont; because they differ from an ischury only gradually, therefore we will
treat no more of them.

Article. IV. Of a strangury.
A strangury is a voiding of urine by drops, made with or without pain, and a
continual urging to piss, arising from a continual goading of the expulsive
faculty of the bladder, by reason that the sphincter is affected, or from the
weakness of the retentive faculty oppressed with the least burden.

The Signs of an affect so manifest are evident.

The Cause is explained in the definition, viz. the irritation of the
expulsive, or weakness of the retentive facculty, but from whence they are,
shall be expressed in the differences.

The Cure is of little or no Hopes almost, if it come upon an Iliack passion
proceeding from an obstruction of crude and thick Humors, no Fever following
it, which may attenuate the Humors. It Is ordered according to the diversity of
the Causes, of which hereafter.

The Difference is taken from the Causes.

I. One is with pain proceeding from the irritation of the expulsive faculty,
and it arises. 1. From the Acrimony of the Urin, which either is inferd by
external Causes as meat and drink, hot and Salt, new and dreggy drink, which
when it cannot be concocted commodiously, and has a power to ferment the
Humors, and loosen the Belly, if it be quickly carried to the Kidneys, it is
carried crude to the bladder, and stimulates it. Then drinking of spanish or
Mallego wine, does good, Nut-megs, Goats Fat put on the Navel. Or from
internal, Viz. Sharp Humors, either produced there, or sent from elsewhere,
which being viscous do by their clamminess stick to the Orifice of the bladder,
and sometimes by their long continuance exulcerate the same. They are known by
this, that the Urin is red and Yellow, there is a sharp biting felt, with a
heat and thirst. The Cure requires emptying by Cassia and Turpentine. Tempering
by coolers and moistners, and a bath of sweet Water. Promotion of the Vrin, By
Salt of Acorns, of bean stalks, half a scruple; Oil of Wax, three drops; in the
Decoction of red Vetches. By the powder of stones squeezed from the Heads of
Snails, given in Wine. 2. By matter sent from the Liver, Kidneys, or else
where, and then some of it will appear in the Urin; whey with Sugar of Roses is
good. 2. From the Stone, which Excoriates the bladder, to which we must have
respect. 3. From an inflammation, of which was spoke formerly. 4. From the
affects of the neighboring Parts, for upon an Inflammation of the right Gut and
Womb, and purulency of the Kidneys there follows a dropping. Upon the falling
down of the Womb, the Urin comes by drops, and is a little biting.


Another is simple and without pain, which is known by a white, Watery Urin, by
the Age, Complexion, cold course of Diet, pregression of a burning Fever. It
arises either from the refrigeration of the bladder it self, and the Muscle
shutting its neck, and then Diagalanga, Mithridate, etc. are well taken inwardly
Oil of Rue is well outwardly applied. Or from a Compression of the bladder,
which is wont to happen in great Bellied Women.

Article, V. Of a Dysury.
A Dysury is a making of burning Vrin, sometimes little, sometimes much, with
pain, without interruption, arising from Causes both external and internal,
affecting the Vrinary passage.

The SIGNS are evident, for the pain is easily perceived by the Patient.

The CAUSES are whatsoever can dissolve the continuity of the Neck of the
Bladder, or of the urinary Passage, or Cause pain in pissing.

The CURE is Difficult if it fall upon Decreped Old men, if a suppression of the
Urin happen with it. It respects. 1. The Cause, which must be moved by the
aforementioned emptyers, which ought to be followed with essence of Turpentine,
one dram; with Parsley water, and Syrup of Citrons. 2. The Pain, which is
mitigated with warm Milk cast in by a Catheter, by dipping the privities in a
Vessel full of Milk, by a Cataplasme of Pellitory of the Wall with Oil of
Scorpions, etc.

The Causes raising the pain do afford us the Differences.

One is from things external, as Cantharides, and then milk is good; from
Poison, and then we must act with things alexipharmacal.

Another from internal which, are, 1. The Acrimony of the urin, of which
formerly. The water of bean flowers or its fresh Cods given with Syrup of
Liquorish or Poppies, six ounces weight before meat is good. Also Fallopius his
Electuary, in Schenkius in Exoter. Experim. Gent. 4.19. 2. An Inflammation,
whose pain is increased the bladder being contracted to send forth the Urin,
and compressed after the emission, which oftentimes an exulceration follows. 3.
A Stone striking against the Neck of the Bladder in pissing. 4. The Seed moved
in men bu^sticking in the Passage, and by an Acrimony contracted corroding the
Passage, which is wont to happen in the French Pox. 5. A white and milkie
matter, which sometimes is sent forth in such abundance, that when it is setteld
it fills one half of the Chamber Pot.
The which arises from a Vicious Con^^ction, in which the Salt and Tartarous
parts are not separated, but are attracted by the Kidneys. It is Cured,
universals premised, by the use of Hyppocrist or Mallago Wine.

Article, VI. Of Pissing of blood, matter, and Hairs.
Bloody Pissing, is a voiding of Blood together with the Vrin arising from the
heaping up of the same in the Bldder.

The SIGNS are, that the Urin does not shine, and has the Color of Water, in
which the flesh of beasts new killed is washed.

The CAUSE is explained in the definition, and in the Difference more shall be
said.

The CURE must be hastened, if the evil be inveterate, least it lead to a
Consumption or cachexy. If it be cast forth in abundance, least it stop in the
Bladder and putrefie. It must be turned against the Cause. The Symptoms
requires, other things being alike, things astringent, condensing, and
consolidating; amongst which do excel, Yarrow with the white flower, the
Tincture of emralds, the Arcanum of agrimony and Cinquefoil. Mynsichtus his
Decoction, etc.

The Difference is taken from the Parts that pour forth the blood.

One is from The Kidneys, which is known by this, that it is plentiful, is
exquisitely mixed with the whole Urin, that being as it were diluted with it,
it is thin, ruddy, liquid and sertles without clotting together. It arises
either from the Anastomosis of some Vessel in them, and then it is made
plentiful and high colored; or some violence or wound has went before, or
there are signs of Fullness, or the blood is too thin. Or from the corrosion of
a Vessel, and then the blood is voided in a lesser quantity, especially at the
beginning. Or By a Diapedesis, and then the Urin is lightly dyed with a red
color. The Cure also requires opening a Vein in the Arm, which must be followed
with the use of astringent means inwardly and outwardly. The Trochisks of
Gordonius are good.

Another is from the Liver either weakened, or oppressed with blood, or affected
with the same diseases as I said even now; and then there are no signs of the
Kidneys affected; we must consult with the Chapter of the diseases of the
Liver. Hither belong the suppression of the Hemorrhoids, of which in its place;
a wound of the ureters from stones passing through them, from which very little
blood flows forth, etc.

Another from the Sphincter muscle of the neck of the bladder, and then the
Urin is not equally spread over with it, the blood settling goes into clots, the
pain for the most part oppresses in pissing, and burns as it were the Root of
the Yard, other signs either of an Ulcer, or of a Vein broke are present, the
Cure is the same.

Another from the inward Passage of the Yard, and then it oftentimes comes
forth without the Urin; that which comes with the Urin, clotting together
presently sinks.

II. Purulent Pissing, is a voiding of matter with the Vrin heaped up in the
Bladder. It Is heaped up. 1. By default of the bladder it self, either because
that is troubled with an Ulcer, or because the blood contained in the bladder
is turned into matter, and then the matter is voided less mixed with the Urin
with branny Scales. 2. By Default of the ureters, and then a little swims a top
like Hairs. By default of the Vrinary Passage, of the Spermatick Vessels, and
the parastatae, and then in the first place it comes forth sincere. 4. By
default of the Kidneys, Liver, breast, in as much as those parts do transmit
matter through the Veins to the Bladder; and then the matter is accurately mixed
with the Urin, if any thing thicker be a Part, it flows forth toward the end.


III. A Pissing of Hairs or Trichiasis, is when with the Vrin a mucous matter
is voided sometimes like to Hairs, sometimes to thin Leaves. Those Hairs sometimes
equal the length of one or two hands breadths. The Cause of them is a thick and
viscous phlegm, dried and knit together in the Veins by heat, which in its long
passage through the narrow Veins of the Kidneys and ureters is extended to so
great a length. See concerning this Horstius his fifth Section. Epistol.
medica. In the Cure, Spirits of Turpentine with Syrup of Marshmallows is good.

[Read more of this subject in the Guide to Physic and Chyrurgery, Riverius
Practice of Physic, and his Observations; and the London Dispensatory. Al of
the last Editions, Englished by me.]

Title, X. Of the Affects of the Genital Parts in Men.
Chap. 1. Of their Diseases.
Article, I. Of the Diseases of the Stones.
THe Diseases of the genital Parts in men have under them the Diseases of the
stones, Cods, and Yard. The principal Diseases of the Stones, are which follow.

I. A Distemper, and that either hot, which is known by a proneness to Venery,
by too much and hot Seed, by heat of the stones, by swelling of the Veins about
them with blood. It Is Cured by a contrary Diet, and cooling Medicines, of
Littice, Water Lillies, Purslane, but especially by those compounded of Sugar
of Saturn, and sallow Leaves. Or Cold, which is known by little and Watery seed,
by casting it forth with little or no Pleasure, little desire to Venery,
cooling Causes went before, or immoderate and unseasonable Venery. It Is Cured
by a contrary Diet, and taking of medicines, inwardly, Betony, Calamint,
Marjoram, Sage, Nettles, Nutmegs, Diamoschum. Outwardly, Oil of Costus, Spike,
of Aunts. Or moist, which is known by this, that the Seed is cast forth too
soon. Or dry, which yields little and thick. They are Cured by their contraries.

II. A Tumor, which either is an Inflammation, in whose Cure (for of the rest I
have nothing to say) observe. I. That whiles Medicines are applied to them, the
ligature ought always to tend toward the upper parts, that they may not hang
down too much, and the defluxion may be less. 2. To intercept the flux, a
defensive must be laid on the side of the Pubes, where the Veins and Arteries
from the belly tend to the stones and Cod. 3. Other things being a like, the
Decoction of Agrimony with Wine and Vinegar is commended. The Root of wild
Cowcumber likewise boiled. The Herb Paris green, bruised and applied, etc. A
Schirrus or another cold and hard Tumor, which oftentimes arises from an
Inflammation ill Cured. It Is taken away with a Cataplasme, of Littice Roots
boiled in sweet wine with the flowr of Flax, Barley, Faenugreek, Onyons, etc.
Which must be followed with a Liniment of the Balsom of Sulphur, and the
Plaster Diasulfuris. Or an inflation, for the Cure of which serve the Leaves
of Henbane and a drauft of Juniper water, one ounce weight every day with the
Rowls of Diacyminum.


III. Ulcers, which because they are in a moist place are dangerous, and
sometimes turn to a Cancer or Gangreen. They ought to be washed with the
decoction of Roses, Leaves of Speedwel, and Plantan; they may be mundefied with
the Ointment of the Apostles.

IV. A Con^usion, which is joined with a great pain, it corrupts their Oval
Figure, and oftentimes takes away the power of generation. We must timely
oppose the pain, least a Defluxion be Caused.

Article, II. Of the Diseases of the Cod.
The Diseases of the Cod are, Inflammation, Excoriation, Wounds, Ulcers, and
Rupture. Of them there is no need to say any thing. An Excoriation is often
Caused by the Urin, the upper Skin being corroded, and it is Cured by sprinkling
of Pompholyx, or dried Myrtle finely poudered, searced, and mixed with
Frankincense or Myrrh.

A Rupture of the Cod is a Tumor of the same, arising either from the cause
falling down into it, or from wind or water collected there, or a mass of
Flesh generated there.

The Species of it are four, if you consider the Differences.

I. One is windy, or a Pneumatocele, which is known from hence, that the Cod,
sometimes also the stones is very much distended without a weight and heaviness;
the wind is felt if the Cod be pressed with the hands, and is removed from place
to place with a noise. It arises from winds, which are either collected there,
or transmitted from the neighboring Guts and Belly: and it is most familiar
with Children. It Is Cured (premising universals) by things discussing outwardly
and inwardly applied. A Cataplasm of Bay Berries, the flower of Beans and
Fenugreek, with Bran, the powder of Cummin seed, ammoniacum, turpentine,
oxymel, and oil of bays mixed together is good.

II. Another is watery, or a hydrocele, which is known because there is
perceived a waving, the cod appears as it were shining; the tumor always
continues at the same bigness, neither does it go up into the belly by pressing
it. It arises from water, which for the most part flows thither from the
belly, for those causes which are mentioned in the dropsy. It is cured, 1. By
prohibition that the watery humor be not generated, or flow thither, of which
see the differences. 2. By emptying the water fallen thither either insensibly,
to which end the former cataplasme will serve; or sensibly by opening of the
cod, of which see Authors. It Is divided diversely, 1. One is from water only
distending the cod, another also from wind joined with it, in whose cure we
must have regard to both: another from flesh growing together about the stone,
whose cure must be warily handled that it turn not to a cancer. 2. One is with
a dropsy, and then the cure must be directed against the dropsy; Another
without a Dropsy, in which although there is not such great plenty of water,
that it can raise up the belly into a tumor, that there is somewhat of it
collected in the cavity of the belly, by reason of the weakness of the parts,
especially an external cause being added, as striking etc. The tumor either
possesses the whole cod, or only one side; and then the humor sticks in the
erythroidal membrane that conteines the stone. The right stone never, always
the left swells. Or the fault is in the left kidny, through which when the serum
cannot descend, it falls through the seminal vein proceeding from the emulgent
of the left kidny, into the erythroidal coat; from the cure of which we must
either abstain, or the cod must be opened only in the lower part. Or it is
not, and then the cod must be cut in the upper part near the groin, that both
the humor may be emptyed, and the afflux of more through the skar of the
erythroidal coat be hindered. See Frabricius his observations. 3. One is when
the water is contained between the erythroidal coat, and the darton, in which
the tumor is rounder, like an egg, the stone is hidden from the sight and
touch, the cod it self is more white and is distended little or nothing:
another is, when it is out of that betwixt it and the adjacent skins, in which
the stone is to be felt, the cod is more distended.

Another when it is in its proper skin or coat growing over it, in which the
tumor is every where globical, resembles the draft of another stone.

III. Another is a fleshy rupture or a Sarcocele, in which something fleshy is
bred: It is known by a hard tumor, increased by little and little, afflicting
without a tumor of the groine, by which it is distinguished from a rupture of
the guts; it is for the most part in the right stone because nature does most
comodiously cast off the blood to the stones by the seminal vein issuing from
the cava. It arises from an impurer blood flowing to the testicles and cod, by
degrees dropping from the membranes of the vessels, and changed by nature that
is never idle, into a substance like unto flesh. It Is cured, 1. By repression
with repellers and dryers, the powder of the root of Rest-harrow is commended,
2. By cutting, of which see Authors. It Is divided into a scirrous one, in which
there is neither pain nor heat; and a malignant one, in which there is felt a
pricking pain.

IV. Another is various, or a Cirsocele, in which the vessels nourishing the
stones are dilated like to varices. It Is known by this, that the veins are
sweld, and wreathed and rounded like shootes of vines, the tumor is oblique and
rolled up like a grape; spring and autum, the the guts being distended with
wind, or the feet cooled, a pain accompanies it. It arises from a thick
melancholy humor poured into the vessels. It Is hardly cured, things drying, and
hanging the stones in a truss are good. Cutting can scarce be used without
hutting of the stone.

Article, 3. Of the diseases of the Yard.
The diseases of the yard are various.

I. A distortion, which befalls those, who indulge too much to venery, and have
their genitals along while distended; for then the spirit concluded in the
ligaments, acting violence upon some part of another ligament does relax it,
and makes it bunch forth like a bean or glandule, by which means it comes to
pass, that how much is added to the accustomary latitude of the part, so much
is bated of its longitude: It Is cured by abstinence from venery, and by those
things which serve for the cure of a rupture. See Arantius.

II. Inflation and inflammation, of which, that does sometimes arise from lying
with a woman whose womb is unclean, and repleat with sharp humors; we meet
with nothing singular concerning them.

III. Warts and excrescencies, which either are upon the top of the nut, which
degenerate into a canorous Sponginess, or they bunch out about the flesh of the
nut and under the foreskin it self, and they are soft, spongy, always moist,
smell il, and are daily increased, and are familiar with them that are troubled
with the French Pox. They require Surgery.

IV. Ulcers, which are diverse, 1. Some are external, which are apparent to the
sight, yet sometimes when they are about the nut and foreskin, they cannot be
seen by reason of the swelling of the part. If the region of the nut be
exulcerated, all medicines ought to be drying. Others internal, sticking in the
urinary passage, which are known by the pain caused by the urine passing by,
and the matter coming forth before the urine, the yard swelled and distended.
They arise either from an impostumation following an inflammation, or from sharp
urine, or from rough stones, and rough things hurting in their passage. They
are cured as others be. 2. Some penetrate that both external and internal parts
be exulcerated, and the ulcer pierces even to the urinary passage. Others not
so. 3. Some are old, sordid and rotten, which are well washed with hydromel and
wine. Others are virulent, as those that happen in the French Pox, in which we
must use precipitate mixed with a convenient linement, til that which is callous
be wasted away. If a gangrene or mortification follow, it must be cut.


Chap. 2. Of the Symptoms of the genital parts in men.
Article, 5. Of the generation of seed hurt, and the erection of the yard.
THe symptoms of the genital parts in men are, the generation of seed hurt,
the erection of the yard hurt, Lechery, a Priapisme, a Satyryiasis, and the
running of the Reins.

The generation of seed hurt is, when either it is not generated, or not such
as may serve for procreation. It Is twofold; therefore one is when the seed is
not geneted, which comes to pass either by defect of matter, or by the things
^on natural, as hunger, watchings, or by things preternatural drying up and
wasting it, especially the diseases of the heart, or by reason of the
attraction of the same by other parts, which comes to pass both in children,
and fat foll^, in whom all the nourishment is changed into the substance of the
body. Or by reason of a fault of the faculty of the genital Parts, whether it
be innate, or acquired, as a defect of the Vessels generating or carrying the
Seed, bewitchings, enchantments, etc. Another is when it is not generated
fruitful, which comes to pass, either by reason the matter is not commodious,
too hot, moist, or dry. Or by reason of a cold distemper of the genital Parts,
which sometimes is contracted by too much lust in youth, by applying mercurial
Ointments to the genitals, etc. There is no need of Signs. The cure must be
directed against the Causes. But the Seed is increased by the greater Root of
Dogs stones, cubebs, the Yelk of a new laid Eg with Wine and a little Oil of
sweet Almonds. Crollius his essence of Satyrion, Mynsichtu, his Confectio
Magnanimitatis, and de Succulata Inda.

II. The erection of the Yard hurt, or a viril impotency is, when that by no
endeavors can be erected, or extended.

There is no need to treat of the Signs. The Causes and Cure, are expounded in
the Differences.

The Differences are taken from the Causes.

For there is one viril impotency from the defect of Seed, either because it is
not, or because it is but little, or crude, and does not stimulate, of which we
have spoke formerly.

Another is from the defect of vital spirits, either because they are few by
reason of the coldness and dryness of the heart, or because they are called
another way, which happens in medications, fear, bashfulness, etc. Or because
they are not received by the substance of the Yard, either by reason of a
stupidity of the Member, or by enchantments.

Another is from a resolution of the Yard, effected by those Causes, which we
mentioned in a Palsy. See Medicines serving for this Disease in Stockerus, l.
1. c. 55. Where he makes mention of Satyrion, five ounces; which ought to be
mixed with the blood of Sparrows, ten ounces, and be held under the Arms. Some
say that lust is wonderfully provoked, if the great Toe of the right Foot be
anointed with Oil in which Cantharides have been dissolved. And also a simple
washing of the Priv^ties with the Decoction of Columbines, which must be
followed with a Fumigation of a dead man's Tooth poudered, and cast upon the
coals.

Article, II. Of Lechery, a Priapisme, and Satyriasis.
Lechery is too great a proneness to Venery by default of the Seed, sometimes
also so great, that it is turned into madness. The fault of the Seed consists,
1. In the plenty of it, either from the abundance of blood, or from the heat of
the Vessels dedicated to the generation of Seed, by whose means more is
attracted. In the Cure, we must act with things that consume the Seed, amongst
which Mint and Sugar of Saturn excel. But a Vein must be opened also, and the
Patient Purged. 2. In its Acrimony, contracted from hot meats, Medicines and
sharp things, which must be opposed. 3. In its Commotion, whiles seeking a
Passage, it causes an itching.


II. A Priapisme is an erection of the Yard without any desire of Venery,
arising from a windy Spirit filling up the hollow Nerve of the part. That
Vaporous spirits arises either in the Nerve it self from a cold distemper, or
in the Yard and Vessels from a thick and crude Humor by an unproportionate
heat, and here the distilled Oil of Rue takes place. For the most part it is by
Reason of the mouths of the Arteries are too open and dilated, pouring forth
plenty of Spirits, because perhaps the Loins and Kidneys being heated they grow
hot, and are filled with much spirits, which happens to those that abound with
much blood. In the Cure, universals premised, Water Lillies, the Seed of the
Chaiste Tree, and other coolers ought to be applied.

A Satyriasis is a Palpitation of the Yard following an inflamatory disposition
of the spermatick Vessels with a distension. It happens rather to young men,
than to other Ages; the Cure must be hastened least they fall into a resoultion
or Convulsion of the Seminary Vessels. We must have a Care of Purges in it,
unless Perhaps we can make an aversion by Vomits: and from things that move
Urin.

Article, III. Of a running of the Reins.
A Gonorrhea is a too great and involuntary shedding of the Seed, arising from
its own fault and the fault of the Spermatick parts.

The SIGNS are evident, the seed is shed a against their wills, without lust and
dreams of lust, without any stifness of the Yard, with no sense of delight, or
very little, from whence is caused a slenderness of the whole Body, about the
Loins especially, with a paleness and hollowness of the Eyes.

The CAUSE and CURE shall be explained in the Differences. The Flux is stopped by
the magistral of the bone of the fish Sepia, given from six grains to half a
scruple with old conserve of Roses. By fixed Antimony with Plantan Water.

The Difference is taken from the Causes.

One is by default of the Spermatick Parts.

1. Of a cold and moist distemper, which either arises from external Causes
endewed with such a virtue, and weakens their retentive faculty, as too much
Venery, or from an afflux of Humors, in which Case emptying and binding with
heaters mixed takes place. It is the easier Cured, so it be new, the powder of
Turpentine, given with milk for fifteen days does good. 2. by default of their
Laxness when their Bladders containing the seed, and the Vessels that carry it,
are too much enlarged and Relaxt.
Another is by the fault of the Seed it self, which is, 1. Plentiful, by
forbearing from Venery, and by using meats that nourish well, and then bleeding,
Fasting, exercises do good. 2. Sharp and hot stimulating the expulsive faculty,
which proceeds from the like blood, by reason of the heat of the liver and
Kidneys; and then a priapism for the most part is joined with it, external
Causes went before. The Cure must be ordered, by emptying of Choler, by
anointing the back bone, and Loins with cooling Ointments. 3. Crude, watrish,
and thin, and that either by reason of the coldness of the stones, or of things
taken, or the like distemper of the Liver, and then the Seed comes froth even
at the touch of a Woman, there are present the signs of crudity. In the Cure we
must act with driers and strengthners. The essence of Turpentine is commended
given one dram weight in Syrup of Agrimony. Or by reason of the abundance of
Vicious Humors in the body, which are sent to the spermatick Vessels, and then
we must act with emptiers and good Diet. 4. Virulent and Malignant, as is
concracted in the French Pox, which is known from hence, that at first a white
Poison or somewhat Yellowish falls from the spermatick Vessels insensibly, as well
when they wake as sleep, which in time putrefies and gets an Acrimony, eats and
exulcerates the Passage of the Yard, from whence arises a pain, which also
when it is stiff does stretch a string as it were under the Yard, and in pissing
does goad sharper as it were in a dysury; that is sometimes hollowed so deep,
that it breaks outwardly at the upper Skin of the Yard.
It arises from a weakness of the Spermatick Vessels and stones, contracted by
that poisonous Evil, which causes that whatsoever is collected in these
Vessels, turns to a filthy Poison, which by contagion Pollutes any other body.
As concerning the Cure it is difficult in old Men, in all, if it be stopped without
reason. For there is collected for the most part an impostumation within,
sometimes about the stones in the Epididymis, sometimes in the Perinaeum, which
the Skin breaking pours forth the matter. We must abstain from things
astringent, least it being retained does corrode the Parts. Dryers and things
that resist Putrefaction, as are, Sorrel, Treacle, Mithridate, and those things
which are dedicated to the French Pox, do good.

Titile, XI. Of the Diseases of the genital parts in Women.
Chap. 1. Of the Diseases of the Neck of the womb.
Article, 1. Of a Tentigo and Cauda.
THe Diseases of the Womb are either of the Privities or Neck of the Womb, or
of the womb it self. To those belong, Tentigo, Cauda, Straitness, pustles,
condylomato, Hemorrboids, and Ulcers.

I. A Tentigo or great bit, and the woman's Prick, is the growing of the
Clitoris into too great a bulk.

The Subject is the Clitoris, or that Nervous flesh, hard, which in the Neck of
the Womb the Joint wings of the Privities do embrace, and at the Top of which,
that is, the which swells in desires of Venery.

This manifest affect needs no SIGNS; sometimes the bulk is so great, that it
hangs forth through the cleft of the Privity as thick as a goose Neck, and
resembles a man's Yard, they have too great desire of Copulation.

The CAUSE is too great an Afflux either of an Humor, or nourishment, by reason
of its Laxness which is induced by often touching, and it is wont to cause lust
at the least rubbing of the Clothes.

The CURE respects. 1. The abatement of blood, and the bringing forth of other
Humors, for which ends serve a most slender and cooling Diet, and discussives,
especially the leaves of the lentisk and Olive. 2. The taking away of the same
Excrescency, where first must be applied the gentler causticks, As Alum,
Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, the lie of which Soap is wont to be made boiled with
Roman Vitriol, adding toward the end a little Opium, and make Trochiskes of
them, with which powder the flesh must be strowed over; at last the flesh must
be cut off, either by Ligature, or Section, having a care of an Inflammation.

II. A Cauda is a certain fleshy substance arising from the Mouth of the Womb,
which fills up the women's Privity, and sometimes hangs forth like a Tail.

The SIGNS and CAUSES are the same, as in a Tentigo, only that Women fear
Copulation. The CURE is also the same if it must be cut off, it must be done
either with a Horse Hair, or a silken thread dipped in sublimate water, or by Iron.

Article, II. Of the straitness of the Neck of the womb.
The straitness of the Neck of the womb, is either a stopping of the same, or
of the Orifice of the womb, either by compression, or a growing together.

The SIGNS are, the Flux of the Courses denied, in them in whom they were wont
to flow through the Neck, a sense of pain with a weight.

The CAUSE is either natural, when it affects from the birth, or accidental, of
which in the Differences.

The CURE varies according to the Nature of the Differences.

The Differences are taken from the Part, and the Causes.

I. One is of the outward Orifice, which is called of the Pudendum, in which
the Courses, which flow both by the neck and by the womb, are disappointed,
there can be neither Copulation nor Conception, because neither the seed nor
the man is received.

Another of the inward, which is called the Orifice of the Womb, in which the
seed received presently flows forth again, conception can in on wise be.

II. One is by way of Compression, which is Caused, 1. By a Fat Caul lying on
the mouth of the womb. 2. By a stradling of the Thighs. 3. By a stone in the
bladder. 4. By a Tumor in the right Gut, of which in their place.


Another is by way of growing, which is caused. 1. Either from the birth, and
then either flesh stops it, which is red to sight, soft to touch; or a
Membrane, which is white to sight, hard to the touch. In the Cure. 1. The Part
being moistened with warm Fomentations, it must be cut straight up taking Care
that the Neck of the Bladder be not hurt. 2. The humor must be drawn forth, and
a ten^must be applied dipped in a suppurating Medicine. 3. And astringent powder
must be had in readiness for fear of a Flux of blood. 4. The following days
the place must be washed with honey and water, and we must act with things that
Cicatrize.
2. Or after the birth, chiefly from an Ulcer, and then, either the sides of
the Neck are grown together, in which case we must use incision but very
warily; or there is a Callous substance which first must be cut off with a Pen
Knife, or a Spongy and Luxuriant flesh, in which first of al we must use dryers
and discussives as brithwort, Frankincense, Myrrh, Mastick; afterward we must
apply corrosives without pain, at last we must cut it.


Article, III. Of the pustles, Condylomata, and Hemorrhoids of the womb.
Pustles of the womb are, little bunchings arising in the neck of the womb,
which by their Acrimony do Cause itching and pain.

The SIGNS are, Itching, Pain, a folling down of Scales like flower, to which
we must add a Speculum Matricis, that the affect may be the better discovered.

The Cause is choleric, sharp, adust, and thick humors, which emptied into
moist and loose places do insinuate and immerse themselves in them.

The CURE respects the causes, universals being premised, where amongst
preparatives prevail syrup of Fumitory, of succory with the decoction of hops;
topics discussing and mitigating the humor, especially baths and half baths,
which must be followed with washing the part with wine and niter. But these
must be often repeated.

They are divided into benign and malligne or venereal, which are stuborn and
contagious, they ought to be washed with the water made of aloes the quantity of
one vetch, flower of brass the quantity of half a vetch flower of brass the
quantity of half a vetch powdered and mixed with white wine one ounce; plantane
water, and of rose heads each one ounce, and kept in a wide mouthed glass.

II. Condylomata, are swellings of wrinkles in the neck of the womb with heat
and pain.

There is no need of Signs because they appear to the eyes, oftentimes if
there be many they resemble a small bunch of grapes. The wrinkles hang forth
like knobbs, which appear in the fist clutched. But they swel more when the
courses flow.

The CAUSE is Thick and Adust humors.

The Cure in general respects the taking away of the causes and repercussion
and drying.

As concerning the Differences.

Some are with an inflammation, in which the pain and heat is greater, the
condylona is hard. In the Cure we must act with anodyne half baths, and
perfusions.

Others without an inflammation, which if they be new we must repel and dry; if
cold and inveterate, we must first mollefie; then digest and dry. Here take
place the powder of egg-shels burnt, the ointment of trochisks of steel one
dram redeuced into powder, and mixed with oil of roses and wax, adding half an
ounce of the juice of mulein. The ointment of the mad apple, concerning which
see a Castro, l. 2. c. 25. de Morb. Mulier. If the condiloma yield not to these
medecines it must be cut off by an instrument and astringent powder strewed on.

III. The hemrods of the womb, are small swellings like unto the hemrods of the
anus, raised in the neck of the womb, by an afflux of Feculent Blood.

The Subject is the neck of the womb, for there they are, where the veins do
end, as in the hemrods of the anus: and these are lift up by an afflux.

The Signs are manifest; for they are discovered by the sight, if a speculum
matricis be applied, the women look pale, and are troubled with a weariness.

The Cause is Feculent blood, which when sometimes it flows to these veins not
at its due time there stopping it becomes thicker, that it cannot penetrate the
orifices.

The Cure is ordered. 1. By revulsion by opening a vein in the arm. 2. By
derivation by opening another in the ankle.


They are divided twofould.

I. Some are painful, which by the pain it self are distinguished from the
courses, and are cured by things that mitigate the same, especially half baths,
and the Cataplasme of a Castro l. 2. c. 26. de Morb. Mulier. And also with
opium, which notwithstanding is safer in the hemrods of the anus. Other,
without pains to which, what is, and shall be said ought to be applied.

II. Some are open, which flow either moderately, and then the business ought
to be committed to nature. Or too much, so that the strength is dejected, and
there is fear least an evil habit of body be induced, and then for revulsion
blood must be taken from a vein of the arm at several times. For purging,
myrobalanes, tamarinds, and rhubarb serve. At last we must act with things that
stop blood.

Others are blind, from which no blood at al flows forth. The Cure is
perfected, by emptying of blood, by emollition and fomentation of the part,
with mollefiers and things opening the mouths of the veins, and discussing the
matter. By artificially opening the same, concerning which things see the
chapter of the hemrods of the anus.

Article. IV. Of the ulcers of the neck of the womb.
There is no need to define what the ulcers of the neck of the womb are.

Their Signs are, a pain and perpetual biting in the same place, which by
little is increased, especially if any thing abstersive be cast in; a flowing
forth of sanious humors and matter by intervals, sometimes with blood, if the
ulcer be great, or the courses flow. A pissing often and hot, if the otifice of
the bladder be drawn into consent; a pain in the forepart of the head
extending it self to the roots of the eyes, if the head. A small seaver which
in process of time grows slow, with often horrors, etc.

The CAUSES are al external and internal things, which by their acrimony can
dissolve the continuity in that part, of which in the differences.

The CURE is difficult because it is in a place of exquisite sense, moist, and
which has a consent with many parts. It Is Ordered the same manner was spoke in
general in the first book. To inhibit the pain, Steeled milk cast in does
good. For drying, baths.

The Differences are various.

I. Some are from external causes, as medicines, hard labor, violent
copulation. And others from internal, as are the secundine corrupted, the flux
of blood retained, the flux of the womb, a virulent gonorrhaea, the french pox,
Inflammation. Humors flowing thither, either from the whole, or a part, or
generated there; al which must be attended in the cure.

II. Some are superficial, from which little matter flows, and medicines may be
laid upon them. Others profound, which are in a contrary way, and the
medicines ought to be injected.

III. Some are Mild with little matter, thick, not stinking, in which both the
gentler abstersives, as honey of roses with barley water, whey with sugar or the
decoction of lentils, and the more benign astringents take place. Others
sordid with plenty of matter, and flowing forth with pain, in which we must
act with stronger things. The mundifyer of smallage in Castro l. 2. c. 29. is
here commended. Others are eating with a colored matter, green livid, stinking,
flowing forth with pain, in which aloes and wormwood amongst mundifers are the
chief.

IV. Some are called Phagades, which are small and long ulcers, eating the skin
of the neck of the womb. They are known both by the pain and blood caused in
copulation; and by sight, if the neck be looked into; and they are like unto
them, which in winter time are wont to rise in our hands. They arise many
ways. 1. Externally, from a painful labor, violent copulation, and then we
must use an astringent glyster. 2. Internally from an inflammation, condylomata,
an afflux of sharp humors, which must first be taken away by purgers, before
we come to topic medicines. There is commended for them, the fatt which
distills from wooden spoones used to boil in kitchins; if they be a little moved
to the fire and burnt; and also the ointment pomada.
Others which leave behind them a Fystula, which is void of pain, unless it
come to a nervous part, sometimes it passes to the bladder and right gut, and
the excrements are cast forth through it. If it be ancient it ought to be left
to a palliative cure; in which at fit seasons the body is purged, but the
callus which is always joined with it, if that be curable, after drying of the
part, being molefied by vulnerary potions, must be wasted, either by cutting or
burning.

Of a cancer and gangrene, I meet with nothing singular. That is generated by
menstruous blood adust, and when scirrous tumors continue long. This in this
place, arises from an inflammation, cancer, and ulcers there il cured. For
while these parts are moist and abound with excrements, they are easily
corupted and perish.

Chap. 2. Of the diseases of the womb.
Article, 1. Of the distemper of the womb.
The diseases of the womb are, distemper, straitness of the vessels, inflation,
inflamatition, a scirrhus, dropsy, falling down of the womb, wounds and ulcers.

The distemper of the womb is a swarving of the same from its natural temper,
to a preternatural distemper, arising from external and internal causes.

It Is divided twofold.

I. One is hot, which is known by a proness to venery, by the scarceness,
yellowness, blackness, adustion, acrimony of the courses, and by their
difficult and inordinate flux; whence in process of years they become
hypochondriacal, by the early growing of hair in the privities, redness of the
face and dryness of lips, often pains of the head, and abundance of choleric
humors in the body. It arises either from the birth, from whence are viragos,
and barrenness: or after the birth from external causes, amongst which are the
use of hot thing, too much venery, medicines which do move the heat and blood
to the womb. It Is cured, 1. By the contrary diet. 2. By cooling medicines, both
internal and external, which are applied to the loins and back, but they must
be moderate, least the heat necessary for conception be weakened, the cold
substance of the womb because it is membranous, be violated; the vessels which
ought to be open for flux of the courses, be condensed; and the nerves which
are in the loins and back, be hurt. 3. By emptiers, viz. Rhubarb, syrup of
roses solutive, manna etc. The flowers of Vitriol of Venus and Mars, from three
grains to six grains; given in some syrup is an appropriate purger for the womb.


Another is cold, more frequent than the hot, which is known from a less desire
to venery, and the little pleasure in it, by the stopping, mucosity,
flegmatickness of the courses, and their inordinate flux by reason of the
plenty of the like humors collected in the womb; from whence is obstruction; by
the plenty of wind in the womb, by the crudity and watrishness of the seed,
from whence it flows without any pleasure; by the pale color of the face, and
other things opposite to the former. It arises also from causes contrary to
them, It Is cured, 1. By a contrary diet, 2. By hot medicines applied to the
womb, amongst which do excel inwardly, the Roots of Birthwort, avens, angelica,
eringoes; the Leaves of Mercury, balm, dittander of Candy. pennyroyal, Sage,
Rosemary, mugwort. The Flowers of wall Flower, Marigold, Sage, Rosemary,
burrage. Spices, Nutmeggs, Cubebs, Saffron, Cinnamon. Of Compounds, Oil of
Mace, Amber, Myrrh, Cinnamon, Fecula bryone, Aqua vitae Mulierum.
The extract of Zedoary. Outwardly; the same things reduced into their forms.

Another is moist, which for the most part is joined with a cold. It is known
by the plenty, thinness and watrishness of the courses, the moisture of the
privities by reason of the humidity of the excrements, and the passion of the
Flux of the womb, even when the seed is voided, no delight in venery, and an
aptness to miscarry when the young one grows bigg. It arises from the same
causes as yet which is cold, and happens to them chiefly who lead an idle and
sedentary life. It Is cured as the former, yet observe, that the fume of the
shaving of Ivory and Sage boiled in wine and water conveyed through a pipe
before supper, is commended. Sulphurous baths bear the palm away in outward
things; we must have a care of astringent means, least they detain the
excrementitious humors.

Another is dry, which is known by the scarceness of the seed and courses,
slowness to venery, dryness of the mouth of the womb, the color of the lower
lip a blackish red, with continual clefts; It arises sometimes from the very
birth, whence the patient has a dry temper, and slender constitution of body.
Sometimes by reason of age, whence they cease to breed. Sometimes from diseases
themselves, viz. an inflammation etc. sometimes from defect of blood which ought
to moisten it, either because it is not emptyed by it, by reason of the
straitness and obstruction of the veins, or because being emptyed through the
neck, it comes not to the bottom. It Is cured, 1. By a contrary diet, in which
too much labor, watchings, fasting, sadness are very much to be eschewed. 2. By
the use of moistners; amongst which do excel, burrage, bugloss, mercury,
Marshmallows, violets; amongst externals, baths of sweet water, and anointings
with oil of sweet almonds, white lillies, hens grease, the marrow of calves
legs etc. The cure is difficult if the dryness be of long continuance and
hectical.


II. One is simple, to which belongs what has been said before.

Another compound, most commonly cold and moist, which is known by the former
things compared amongst themselves. It arises from phlegmatic humors, whether
derived from the whole, or produced by the whole. It is cured. 1. By preparation
of the matter by hot hysterical means. 2. By emptying, and that universal of
the whole body by things that purge phlegm. By particular of the womb it self;
of which we must have the greatest care, if nothing proceed neither from the
whole, nor the parts. And here pessaries do much; also sulphurous and drying
baths by sweaters which are here very much commended: viz. with the decoction
of Guajacum, china, sarsaparilla; lentisk wood etc. 3. By a contrary diet.


Article, 2. Of the straitness of the vessels of the womb.
The straitness of the vessels of the womb, is an interception of the same from
its causes.

The signs are both a retention of the courses that they cannot flow, and an
hindrance of conception, by reason the falling down of blood is intercepted.

The cause and cure shall be expounded in the differences.

It Is divided twofold.

I. One is from external causes, as medicines and astringent baths, which is
known by the relation of the sick. It Is easily cured, and we must act with
moistne^s and mollefyers.

Another from internal, of which in the following difference.

II. One is from a Skarre, flesh, or membrane growing on the orifices of the
vessels; or from a growing together of the mouths of the veins after a violent
drawing forth of the secundine, which is almost incurable, yet some trial may
be made with things mollefying.

Another from obstruction, which thick, viscous, and plenty of humors do cause,
whether they flow thither from the rest of the body, the heat not being able to
attenuate them; or be heaped up in the womb it self by reason of the weakness
of heat in that. It is known by this, that there are present the signs of a
cold distemper, a moisture like snivel sometimes flows forth from the womb. It
is cured as other obstructions. Revulsion has its place, if the matter flow
thither. Amongst openers of obstructions are commended sharp and bitter
medicines, that move the courses, steeled wine, baths corrected with mollefyers
and openers.

Another from compression, which is caused either by a tumor and scirrus,
consisting in the womb or without it, and then the signs of a tumor are
present. The evil is almost incurable, or by the too much fatt of the
neighboring parts; and then that is wholly manifest to the sense, we must act
with things that do extenuate.

Article, 3. Of an inflation of the Womb.
An inflation of the womb is a distension of the same by wind produced out of a
cold, phlegmatic and flatulent matter, by default of a weak heat.

It Is called also a windy Mola, by reason of the false hopes of a conception.

The signs are a distension of the womb consisting in the region of the belly,
which is sometimes increased, sometimes diminisht; sometimes it is extended to the
sides, sometimes to the navil, loins and midriffe. It is distinguished from a
dropsy by its lesser bulk, want of thirst, by the increasing and decreasing of
the tumor, by a less wasting of the upper parts. From a dropsy of the womb by
the foregoing of causes generating wind, by a noise, less heaviness, greater
distension, by feeling an extensive and pricking pain in the neighboring parts.
From an inflammation of the guts, because here neither are pains, nor
costiveness of body; because the courses are stopped, the feet and hollow of the
eyes do swel, and color of the body is changed because the woman pants, is
greived, and when she wakes out of her sleep, breaths with her neck upright.
From a mola, by the want of heaviness and hardness, in the belly with a weight,
moving it self from side to side, when they move. From a conception by the
sound, and increase and decrease of the tumor, by wanting of motion like to the
moving of the infant, for if the belly be pressed strongly, the wind being driven
to the neighboring parts, a certain beating motion is felt in the whole belly.

The cause is expressed in the definition, the matter it self is either generated
in the womb it self. Either by reason of the suppression of the courses; or by
interception of the purgation after a delivery; or proceeds from elsewhere,
either by the veins, or by the feed vessels. But the weakness of heat arises
for the most part from the external air stopping by its coldness those
impurities in women lying in, which seek a passage forth; from hard labor,
abortion, stoppage of the courses, etc.

The cure if you consider the method, differs not from the cure of other
inflammations, so we have respect to the part. Observe that amongst purgers,
Species hierae and diaphenicon with castor, are commended. For suffumigation,
Nutmeg, of which Hartman in his chymiatry; for plasters, the plaster of bay
berries with treacle; for drinks, nutmeg bruised, boiled with the roots of
feverfew and drank with six ounces of wine, two drams of Sugar.

The Differences are taken from the part it self.

One is when the wind is in the cavity, and then the mouth of the womb is so
closedup, that none of it can get forth, when either the woman is moved or her
belly per^t with the hand, a sound and noise is perceived. But that it may be
contained in the cavity is certain, both because the womb may be distended
though it be thick, as in conception, and be retained there as in a mola; and
because the altering and retentive faculties being never idle, do change the
diseased seed into wind.

Another, when it is in the coats of the same, and then the mouth of the womb
may be open, by reason that the wind is concluded in a narrow place, the sound
goes forth and the pains are greater and extended further: the evil is more
difficult to cure, than that in the cavity.

Article, IV. Of an inflammation of the womb.
An inflammation of the womb is a tumor of the same from the putrefaction of
blood fallen into its substance, troublesome with many symptoms, and sometimes
turning to a scirrbus, sometimes to an impostumation.

The signs, are various, the tumor it self appears in the region of the womb,
with a heat and pain, a shutting up of the womb, drawing of it toward the
inward parts: but the whole neck of it appears ruddy, little veins swelling
every where with blood like to a spiders webb. There is a difficulty of
breathing, which show a pleuresy, because the outward coat of the womb being
extended which arises from the peritoneum and is fastened to it, those parts
also to which it coheres, are distended. The excrements of the belly and
bladder, by reason of the heat and dryness of the belly, and compression of the
passages, are detained. The bulk of the belly sometimes appears empty, and the
belly is filled with water, and the navil strutts forth, and the mouth is
slender, and of a sudden a few and evil courses follow. A continual and
burning Fever afflicts, by reason of the consent of the womb with the heart by
arteries and great vessels, sometimes a lypirias by the motion of the humors
toward the inward parts. There is a pain of the breasts with an inflation of
them by reason of the consent of the groins, the hipps, the midrife, the cannel
bones, the forepart of the head which is extended to the roots of the eyes; and
it arises from vapors of blood putrefying, carried up to the head by the
arteries, which run through the neck from both parts of that called the
infundibulum into the fore part of the head.

The cause is blood, which sometimes is pure, sometimes mixed with choler,
sometimes dyed with black choler. It slides thither or slides forth for common
causes, viz. the detaining of it in the time of the courses, or after a
delivery by the occursion of the cold air. It Is attracted by heat or pain which
is caused, either by abortion, hard labor, violent drawing forth of the
secundine, long walking when the courses are at hand, or by a troublesome
carrying, if the young one be either great, or ill placed.

The cure is difficult, especially if the whole womb be possessed or suppurated;
for a sordid ulcer arising from thence, does at length kill the patient with a
slow Fever. None at al, if there be an erysipelas, because the young one it
self dies by reason of the exceeding heat, whence follows abortion which kills
the mother. If it turn to a deadly gangreen. It Is cured as in other
inflammations, where note that for revulsion we must not open a vein in the
legs, when as these veins draw the blood to the womb, but in the arm, when as
the blood flows from the liver, and the veins adjacent to it. For derivation, a
vein in the ham may be opened, unless the patient be great with child, least
abortion be caused. Topics ought to be applied cooling and moistning without
any astriction. It Is thought that the decoction of mother of time prepared with
steeled water, and outwardly applied with sponges, does stop it by a certain
propriety.

The Differences are taken from the part it self.

I. One is of the whole womb, in which the symptoms before mentiond do evidently
afflict, and few indeed do escape. Another is of the other side, in which the
heat passes to the hipp, by reason of the ligaments of the womb which are
carried thither, the leg of the same side is hardly moved, the groins of that
place are inflamed.

II. One is of the hinder part, in which the belly is bound, the pain does
more afflict the loins and backbone. Another of the fore part, in which because
it coheres to the bladder, the urine is stoppt or made with difficulty, the
pain goes more toward the pubes. Another of its bottom, in which the lower
part of the belly is so pained, that it cannot endure to be touched, and the
pain is extended more to the navel.

III. There is one which turns to a scirrhus, in which al things become milder,
a weight and heaviness is felt in the neighboring parts, the evil is of long
continuance, and is often terminated in a dropsy of the womb. Another to an
imposthumation, in which al things are increased, til suppuration is made:
horrors without order invade them for the most part about the evening; the
impostumation being broke (but it breaks either into the cavity of the womb,
which is safer, or it is poured Forth into other parts) sometimes the urine,
sometimes the belly is stopped, with a swelling of the pubes, and the sense of
something waving.

Article. 5. Of a scirrhus of the womb.
Ascirrhus of the womb is a hard swelling of the same, and resisting without
pain, produced from a thick, earthy, and faeculent humor.

The SIGNS are besides other general ones, to wit the Courses at the beginning
are suppressed, or flow too little; the evil increasing, there is a great flux of
blood by intervals, either the Mouths of the Veins being opened more than is
fit, or the Womb not being able either to receive or retain the accustomary
quantity of blood. It Is distinguished from a Mola, because in this if the
Courses flow, they flow disorderly, and the Breasts also swel with Milk, which
in a Scirrus are extenuated, etc.

The CAUSE is an earthy and feculent humor, to wit a thick blood, sometimes
phlegmatic, sometimes Melancholical, which happens in the declining Age, and
troubles them which have been sick of a Pica, Malacia, or bulimus; oftentimes
from an inflammation ill cured, by reason of the too much use either of coolers,
or discussives.

The CURE is difficult both because things dried a long time cannot be
mollefied, and because the Native heat is exhausted in parts affected with a
Scirrus, and because while the Humor is mollefied, it may easily turn to a
Cancer by taking putrefaction. The proceedings of the cure differs not from
others.

It Is divided in respect to the part affected.

One is in the substance it self, in which the Womb lies upon the Hip and Back,
and there Causes a pain. Another in the Neck, which is discovered by the touch
of the finger, it is easier cured than the former. If it be in the upper part of
the Neck; the Woman is hurt in Copulation, and the bladder is pressed by the
Tumor, if it be in the lower part, the right Gut is offended.

Article, VI. Of a Dropsy of the Womb.
A Dropsy of the Womb is an impotency of the same from water collected in it,
either by its own fault, or the fault of other Parts.

The SIGNS are a loose swelling of the lower part of the belly, extended
according to the figure of the Womb a scarceness and evilness of the Courses,
because they are like to the washings of flesh, their failing before the time,
the thinness and moisture of the mouth of the Womb, softness of the Breasts,
and want of milk, a rigor and oftentimes a Faver. It Is distinguished from an
Inflammation by want of a Fever, and by its softness, by other Symptoms, of
which formerly. From an inflation, by defect of distension and noise. From a
Mola, because in this a greater weight is felt in the bottom of the belly, the
breasts at the time of the birth approaching do swel. From a Conception because
in a Dropsy the Tumor of the Womb is extended according to the largeness of
the womb and belly, inconception it is pointed. In women with Child the Courses
do not flow, here a certain bloody Humor, evil flows forth observing no order,
and is quickly stopped. From a Dropsy of the Belly, by the Patients color in the
Face, unless the Liver be affected, by want of thirst, by the ascent of the
Tumor from the lower part to the upper.

The CAUSE is the water there, either by the fault of the Spleen or Liver, of
which consult with their proper Chapters; or by the weakness of the Womb it
self, by reason of which, it does neither concoct well, nor well expel its
Excrements, the which is, either from often abortions, and hard labor. Or from
too great a Flux of the Courses, dissipating its heat. Or from the suppression
of them choking up the same heat.

The CURE requires the bringing forth of the water, and strengthing of the
Womb, having respect to the Causes, Hartman, commends Antimonial Pills.

The Difference is taken from the Part.

One is when the water is collected in its Cavity, in which the Orifice of the
womb if it be touched, is found shut up, the Tumor is great, and a certain
waving is perceived if it follow conception, that yellowish and stinking water
within two months for the most part kills the Young one, which is then cast
forth with it. Another is when the water resides in its substance and little
bladders growing to it, in which its Orifice being handled it appears
contracted: Greater pains arise, the Cure becomes more difficult.

Article, VII. Of the falling down of the womb.
The falling down of the womb is a hanging forth of the same out of the belly,
proceeding from a solution of the unity of its ligaments.

The general Signs are, a pain of the Loins, of the lower part of the belly, of
the Privities, of the Os Sacrum, to which the Womb is fastened, and this at the
beginning. In process of time the pain is mitigated it being accustomary, and
there is a troublesome sense only of a weight, and a hindrance in walking. The
special Signs, vary according to the nature of a greater or lesser falling
down. In that the Womb descends to the middle of the Hips and Knees, presents a
Tumor like a Goose Egg, in whose lower part there appears a hollowness, in this
a Tumor is perceived as it were of a skin retcht, and as it were a weight of a
great Egg about the Privities.

The CAUSE is whatsoever can dissolve the unity of the ligaments; see in that
which follows.

The CURE is difficult, if it be great, if it afflict those of full Age, if a
Fever, convulsion, or other Symptoms happen. Nay if it be, it is deadly in
those that lie in, and sometimes by the alteration of the ambient Air, or
violent repelling of it, it is corrupted, and taken with a gangreen. It
consists. 1. In replacing of the Womb it self, where note, first of all the
Inflammation must be stopped, if there be any. If a Tumor impressed by the cold Air
on the Womb do urge the part must first be fomented with a Decoction of
Mallows, Marshmallows, chamemel flowers, Bay berries, etc. If there be wind or
Excrements in the Guts we must premise a Clyster. Before it is replaced, it
must be fomented, sprinkled, anointed with things Agglutinative and astringent.
A suffumigation of the Skin of a Salt Eele, dried in the Smoke and poudered is
commended. Seek for an astringent bath out of Guilielmus Rondeletius, his
Cures. The manner of putting it up, see in Authors. 2. In retaining of it, and
then the Woman must be placed in her bed bending downward, with her Thighs
extended, so that one lie upon the other, the belly must be kept neither slow
to stool, least in casting forth the ordure the Womb be forced down, nor loose,
least the Membranes binding the Womb be relaxt.
Agglutinative and astringent Medicines must be applied. To this end serve,
Pessaries, Fomentations, injections by a Syringe, and other things. But have a
care you stop not the Courses with them.

The Differences are taken from the Causes.

I. One is by reason of the Laxness of the ligaments, of which it has four;
which is known by this, that it is generated by degrees, and afflicts with less
pain. It arises either from hard labor, burdensome carrying of the young, or
from the afflux of a Phlegmatic matter. It Is Cured by emptying of the Humors,
by the use of things astringent and strengthening, as are the Decoction of Oak
moss, Hearts horn, Bay Leaves, an astringent Plaster. A Loadstone prepared and
applied.

Another is from the breaking of the Ligaments, which is known by this, that
the evil arises of a sudden, afflicts with greater pain, and sometimes is
followed with a flux of blood. It arises either from the Heavy carriage of the
young one, or from hard labor, or from abortion, or from a violent drawing
forth of the Secundine.

Another from the Corrosion of the ligaments, and then there are signs of an
Ulcer, some matter flows out.

Article, VIII. Of the ascent of the womb, its wounds and Ulcers.
That the womb may ascend out of its place toward the upper Parts as high as
the stomach, is the Opinion of some, but false. For. 1. It Is so tied with four
ligaments, that it cannot be moved upwards at al. 2. Although it have a natural
motion by fibers, yet because it is tied to the right Gut and Privites, if it
had an Animal motion, those parts also must necessarily be distended. 3.
Although it swel with wind as was said formerly, yet it follows not from
thence, that it is moved upwards. But that Women sometimes do feel a body and a
Globe as it were running about the Region of the Navel, we must say, it is
rather the Testicles and that blind Vessel, than the Womb it self. The Cause of
this shall be explained in the suffocation of the Womb.


II. Concerning wounds of the womb, note, 1. That the Womb is hardly wounded,
because it is on every side guarded with bones. 2. If it be wounded, it is known
by the Situation, pain and matter that flows forth. 3. That it may be cured, as
appears by the Caesarean birth, but it is dangerous by reason of the con^^^t of
the part with other members. 4. Or it happens on the bottom of the womb, and
then that pain is less, and easier Cured, or on the Neck, and then the pain is
greater and harder to be Cured, because that is more membranous and continually
abounds with moisture.


III. Concerning Ulcers we meet with nothing of worth, which has not been
touched on formerly, unless perhaps we may add, that it does sometimes so
Putrefie, that it must be cut out, and falls away the woman surviving. For
consolidation do serve, the Balsam of sulphur, and the Plaster of the same,
(concerning which see Hartmans Chymiatry in the Chapter of a Consumption.)

[Read more of this subject in the Guide to Physic and Chyrurgery, Riverius
Practice of Physic, and his Observations; and the London Dispensatory. Al of
the last Editions, Englished by me.]

Title, XII. Of the Symptoms of the Womb.
Chap. 1. Of the Common symptoms.
Article, I. Of the weakness of the womb.
THe Symptoms of the Womb, are either common to Women in all states, or are,
either more familiar to those that live out of wedlock: or proper to the
married.

Those common are, a weakness of the womb, Pain, a stoppage of the Courses, a
dropping of them, too great a flux, a difficulty of them, a discoloring, an
inordinate flux, a woman's flux, a gonorrhea.

A weakness of the womb is a sluggishness or defect of the same, in performing
its actions, induced by the fault of a distemper, occult qualities, and the
native heat.

The SIGNS are, a languishing desire of venery, an inordinate flux of the
Courses, when they are at hand, a pain in the loins and pecten, little or no
pleasure in copulation, often abortions, a breaking forth of wind from the
womb. For the actions of the womb are, a desire of Venery, a voiding of
menstruous blood at due times, the ejection of seed in the act of Venery, and
the retaining of that received from the man, a keeping of the young one
conceived to the due time, and the exclusion of it when it is perfect into the
world.

The Nature of the Causes shall be explained in the Differences.

The Cure must be directed against the Causes (of which there.)

The Differences are taken from the Causes.

One is from the distemper of the womb, which if it be Cold the womb cannot
perfect a mean quantity of nourishment, therefore it heaps not up many
Excrements. If moist, neither the blood, nor seed, nor young one are rightly
contained. See the Cure above.

Another is from occult qualities, which the womb has is apparent from hence,
because it has a singular Sympathy and antipathy with diverse things; desires
man's seed, is delighted with sweet things, etc. And then the affect rises from
no evident Cause. There is found no excess of moisture or coldness. In the cure
Medicines must be applied that are proper by their whole substance.

Another is from the innate heat, either choked, or dissipated, and then the
affect is dangerous, because the heat is difficulty renewed. In the Cure we
must act with restauratives, as are, Cinnamon, Nut-Megs, the Species
Diaxyloaloes, Aromaticum Rosatum, etc.

Article, II. Of the Pain of the womb.
A Pain of the womb is a sad sense of the same proceeding from a solution of
continuity induced by its Causes.

There is no need of Signs when the Woman her self makes known the pain. It
affects both Women that are free, and great with Child, and past labor. It
torments as pains of the colic do in the lower belly, whenas the ligaments of
the Womb are carried to the Hips and Loins, so far also it extends it self.

The Cause is whatsoever can dissolve continuity.

The Cure respect, 1. The mitigation of pain by anodynes. 2. The removal of the
Cause, of which in the Differences.


The Differences are taken from the Causes.

I. One is from corrosion, which chiefly happens in Ulcers, the Woman's flux,
vicious Courses, etc. It offends most of all the Neck of the Womb. The Cure must
be directed against those affects.

Another from distention, which is caused. 1. By a clot of Blood, sticking in
the Cavity of the Womb, and then a plentiful flux of Blood preceded from the
womb, the pain is fixed, and is perceived most of al about the Orifice of the
womb, when as Nature by the continual endeavoring to expel it does draw the
right Gut and bladder into consent, it is joined with a tenasmus and often
pissing. In the Cure we must respect, the dissolving of the clot, for which
Treacle with Wine is commended, and the emptying of it, and if has stayed long
there the Malignity of it. 2. By Menstruous blood, when either the Vessels are
not wide enough, or that is too thick; which also may happen from cold drink,
especially if the woman were hot after exercise, and then the Causes went
before which occasioned it, there are signs of the Courses suppressed or not
flowing rightly. The cure must be directed to the same. 3. By vicious Humors,
sticking in the Cavity or Vessels of the womb; and then we must act with
emptyers and preparatives. 4. By wind which arises from the boiling of the
vicious Humors. Which sometimes copulation causes. And then emptying must be
ordered, we must act with things that discuss wind, of which in the Chollick.
5. by an inflammation of the womb, of which formerly. 6. By seed retained and
corrupted, and then we must look to the suffocation of the womb.


Article, III. Of the suppression of the Courses.
A suppression of the Courses is a retention of the menstruous blood, by reason
of the streitness of the passages, or the fault of the blood.

The SIGNS are afforded from the relation of the woman her self, but if they
will not confess, In Virgins it is known by this, that the blood stopped does
wander up and down in the Veins, and cause obstructions, changes the color of
the body, induces a Fever, etc. In women that it is carried to the womb and
infers Diseases of the womb. It Is distinguished from the retention in childing,
because they with Child are little changed in the affections of their mind,
they retain the Native color of their body, they find the Symptoms daily more
mild, they perceive the motion and situation of the infant the third month.
They have the mouth of their womb shut up and hard.

The CAUSES are a streightness of the veins, and the fault of the blood, of
which in the differences shall be treated more at large.

The Cure must be hastened because that suppression does produce many diseases,
as a fever, a leucophlegmatick, a dropsy, vomiting of blood, etc. It Is
difficult if it be of long continuance, if it has exceeded the sixth month for
the most part it is thought incurable, especially if it happen from a perversion
of the neck of the womb, for then the woman swouneth, and vomits phlegm, the
parts of the belly and pecten are pained, the back bone, and a fever happens.
The excrements of the belly and bladder are suppressed, a weariness possesses the
whole body by reason of the diffusion of the blood retained through the whole,
it most of al detains the thighs and hips by reason of the consent of the veins
of these parts with the veins of the womb. It Is of good success, if it be
emptied through other places, so it be not through the bladder, because the
blood does clot most of al in that. It respects. 1. Bleeding, for the blood
which stops every month, is heaped up in the body, and sticking in the veins it
must be recalled to the womb. Concerning this note a vein must be opened in
the ancle, because, so both the quantity of the blood is diminisht, and its
motion to the womb is procured. If it must be repeated, one day blood must be
taken from one leg, the next from the other. That which is ordered from
emptying, ought to be opened at the beginning, that which is opened in the ham
or ancle, after purging must be done three, four, or five days before the time
of the accustomary evacuation. Cupping-glasses which are deputies of bleeding,
must first of al be applied to the remoter places, viz. the thighs, then to the
nearer, to wit the hips. Hither belong ligatures, frictions, the time of the
courses being at hand, after emptying of the whole body. 2. The preparation of
the matter, and for this serves in phlegmatic bodies, the decoction of guajacum
with ditander of caudy without provoking of sweat. 3. Emptying, which must be
ordered at times, that the matter may be emptyed by little and little. Amongst
evacuating medicines are commended, agarick, Galens hiera with castor, aloes
with the juice of savin. Pills made of aloe socotorina three drams; the best
myrrh one scruple; extract of callamus aromaticus, carduus benedictus saffron,
of each three grains; of the roots of gentian, dittander, each five grain^
with syrup of bay berries, and given one scr^ple weight in the evening before
supper. 4. Opening obstructions by those things that move the courses, the
chief are inwardly given, the decoction of rosemary with the flower of wall
flower in wine. Zacutus his chalybeat wine i. 9. c. 10. his water in the same
place; Pennyroial water twice distiled with cinnamon water. The extract of
Zedoary, angelica, castor. The faecula of bryony, the earth which is found in
iron mines given in the same quantity, order, and form, as steel is. The
spirit of tartar, Hartmans lozinges of Crocus martis. Outwardly, Zacutus his
ointment of steel. l. 3. histor. p. 52. the fat of an eele, of a snake with the
distilled oil of savin. A suffumigation of the refuse of Regulus antimonii, of
which in Hartman. 5. A discussion of the remainders by sweaters, viz. with a
drauft either of Qercetans milium solis in his pharmaco. restituta. Or with a
chalybeate decoction with spirit of tartar, the juice of elder, etc.


The Differences are fetched from the Causes.

I. One is from the obstruction of the veins of the womb, which is caused by
cold and thick blood, viscous and thick humors mixed with the blood; proceeding
either from a hot distemper of the womb, which dissipates, the subtle and sharp
humors, leaves the thick and earthy parts; or from a cold constitution of the
liver and spleen; or from the like nourishments, especially if in the time of
the menstruous flux they be dissipated, when the force of the blood is greater:
and then the time of the purgation being at hand, pains are felt in the loins
and neighboring parts, if any thing flows forth, it is mucous, somewhat white,
and somewhat black: there is a dullness in the whole body, with a white color, a
rare pulse and crude urines.

Let the Cure be fetched from what has been said before.

Another from compression, which is either from external causes, as the
northern air, staying in cold water, and then the relation of the patient will
unfould it. The blood must be drawn to the lower parts by frictions, bandages,
baths. Or from internal causes, to wit the fat of the womb, or tumors of the
neighboring parts, and then, the tumor must be taken away with convenient
remedies. Things that move the courses have no place here.

Another is from a constipation whiles the substance of the womb it self is
hard, which is either from the first birth, and then it is not easily taken
away; or after the birth, from a cold and dry distemper; of which formerly.

Another from a growing together, which is caused. 1. By a skar left after an
ulcer. 2. By flesh or a membrain growing over the vessels of the womb. 3. By
often abortion, after which those veins to which the secundine adheres, do so
grow together, that afterward they cannot be opened.


II. One is from a defect of blood, which either is not generated, either by
reason of external causes, viz. hunger, too much evacuation, issues, etc. or of
internal, as a cold constution of the principal parts, old age, fevers. Or
it is converted to other uses, as before ripe age into the augmentation of the
body, in women with child to the nourishment of the young one, in those that
give suck into milk, in fat folks into fat. Or it is wasted, either by reason
of external causes, to wit, exercise, too much labor, frights, sadness, baths,
hot houses, which by provoking plentious sweats, do both carry the blood to the
circumference of the body, and wast its serous part, which gives fluxibility to
it: or internal, as are hot and dry diseases, too great evacuations made by
other parts, etc.

Another from the dryness of the blood, which is caused by adustion, when in
the winter time women put light coals under their lower belly to drive away
the cold, and then we must act with coolers and moistners.

Article. IV. Of a dropping, and difficulty of the courses.
The dropping of the courses is a breaking forth of the menstruous blood either
for many days, or continually, yet made by drops.

There is no need of Signs when the fault is made known by the relation of the
woman.

The Cause consists either in thing external, or in the blood, or in the
vessels.

The Cure follows the Nature of the Causes.

The Difference is taken from the causes.

One is from external causes; exercise, hot medicines, and other things that
diffuse the blood and open the passages; and then there is a greater pouring
forth of blood.

Another is from the faeculency of the blood, the ways not beng open enough,
and then it happens with pain, in the cure opening a vein in the arm takes
place. Purging by little and little ought to be urged.

Another is from the weakness of the retentive faculty, there coming together
a plenty of blood, a thinness and serosity; and then no pain urges. We must act
with medicines that strengthen the womb with astriction and dryness.

II. A difficulty of the courses is a flowing of them with pain and trouble,
and grievous symptoms, by the default of the veins or blood.

The signs are taken from the relation of the patient; those pains are, of the
head, stomach, loins and lower belly. The flux is either altogether, or only by
the way of dropping, and sometimes when the courses are at hand, sometimes when
they flow, the symptoms happen, and they do more afflict virgins and the
barren, because the veins of their wombes are less open, than those that have
brought forth, because their veins after breeding are dilated.

We shall treat of the causes in the differences.

The cure respects, 1. The Symptoms, which must be mitigated, 2. The causes,
which must be taken away.


The difference is taken from the causes. One is from the straitness of the
veins of which we have said enough in the suppression of the courses.

Another from the faults of the blood, that is* 1. From the thickness and
feculency of it, and then the blood whiles it is emptyed, grows into clots, the
pains grow feircer a long time before the evacuation by reason of the endeavors
of the expulsive Faculty. The cure (premising universals) is perfected by
things attenuating, and that have power to diffuse it. 2. From the acrimony,
proceeding from the mixture of sharp humors, and then the genital parts do
i^ch, the nature of the blo^d voided and manner of the pain discovers the
disease. We must act with things that qualify the acrimony, as are the Four
greater seeds, violets, the flowers of water lillies. 3. From the flatulency,
and then the pain returns by intervalls, and of a sudden grows sharper,
wanders up and down, wind being voided it ceases. It is cured by emptying of
the matter, and discussing of wind.


Article. 5. Of the discoloring of the courses.
The discoloring of the courses is a declining of them, when as they ought to
be ruddy; to a palness, whiteness, greeness, yellowness, or lividness, by
default of blood.

The signs are afforded from beholding the blood it self, there is added a
stinkingness, an inordinate evacuation, and oftentimes erratick Fevers,
accute; horror, loathing of meat, pains of the stomach etc. concerning which
see Hippocrates.

The cause is laid upon the falt of the blood, concerning which; as also of its
causes, see in the differences.

The cure attends the causes, therefore according to the nature of them it
varies.

It Is divided twofold.

I. One is when the blood contracts a fault, either by reason of a distemper of
the whole body, or of some principal part, respect to which must be had in the
cure.

Another, when the blood is in fault, either because it is suppressed and retaind,
and then a stoppage of the courses went before, pains are felt in the breast,
and strong pulsations; if the habit be better, the courses break forth, and the
blood flows forth, and a strong smelling matter, about the eight or ninth day.
Or because it is polluted by the womb abounding with excrements, and then there
are signs of a polluted womb.

Another when the blood is polluted by the mixture of excrementitious humors,
and then if you consider the cure, we must prepare them, but so, that when as
thick humors do want attenuation, and things too much attenuating do melt the
serous humors, and move them to the womb, we must abstain from the stronger*
and beware of vinegar; we must empty etc.

II. One is when the courses decline to a whiteness, which arises either from
phlegm, of which howsoever it be there are signs of a weak stomach; or from
matter, and then either ulcers are raised in the womb and barrenness follows,
or the courses flow forth for seven or eight days and the woman is freed; or
the same break forth at the parts above the groin without a tumor and about the
hypochondries they come forth and the woman seldom survives. Or after some
days a great tumor rises upon the groin, ruddy without a head, because there
the flesh is filled up, and it is hardly opened.

Another is when it declines to yellowness or greenness, which proceeds from
choler.

Another, when to a lividness, which arises from melancholy.

Article 6. Of an inordinate flux of the courses.
An inordinate flux of the courses includes two things, to wit, an anticipation
of the courses before the due time, and their continuance beyond the
accustomary time.

The anticipation of the courses is divided according to the nature of the
causes.

One is from external causes, viz. a fall, a blow, and other things that open
the veins. See the cure below.

Another from the irritation of the expulsive faculty of the womb. 1. By the
plenty of blood, which is known by this, that the blood is sent from the whole
body to the womb, it is fluid and natural; there are signs of a plentitude. It Is
cured, by bleeding, if the plenty be great, by diet and often exercise, if it
be less. 2. By the thinness and acrimony of the blood, which is known by this,
that the temper of the whole body is hot, a course of diet generating such blood
went before, the blood it self is dilute, discolored yellowish. It Is cured by
emptyers, rhubarb especially; by qualefyers, of which formerly.


Another from the weak retentive faculty of the womb, which is known by this,
that the vessels of the womb are loose, the habit of the body also is lax and
moist. The cure forbids things too much astringent. Acid waters and baths that
have the virtue of iron are commended.

II. The continuance of the courses beyond the accustomary time is divided also
according to the nature of the causes.

One is which proceeds from the disappointment of the expulsive faculty, which
is caused, 1. By the scearcity of blood, which is known by this, that the woman
finds no trouble by the protraction of her courses, and that too much exercise
or slender diet went before. 2. By the thickness of the blood, which is known
by this, that there are signs of a cacochyme, the blood is whitish and viscous.
In the cure we must purge before much blood be gathered together, attenuate
when the menstruous purgation is over, calamint and mercury bear the palm;
some days before the monthly purgation, we must open, scarification of the
ankels takes place here.

Another which arises from the weakness of the expulsive faculty, which is
induced, 1. By a cold distemper of the womb, of which formerly, 2. By a
stupidity of the same, which is known by this, that there are present disease
causing stupidity, or too great use of coolers went before, after the due time
of purgation, though there be present abundance of blood, no heaviness is
perceived by the woman.
In the cure we must have respect to the disease and its causes.

Article, 7. Of too much flowing of the courses.
The too much flowing of the courses is either a too plentiful or more
continued purgation of them than is convenient, arising either from the fault
of the blood, or of the womb, or of the veins.

There is not much need of signs, especially if there follow a want of
appitite, crudety, an evil color of the face, a swelling of the feet and the
rest of the body, an atrophy, cachexy etc.

The cause we have laid on the blood, the womb or the veins; but whence these
are in fault, shall be explained in the differences.

The cure is difficult if it be of long continuance. None at al, if it happen
to a woman growing old. It reqiures, 1. A restraint of them by revulsion,
interception, thickning of the blood, stopping up the vessels by astringent
means and other things. Yet it must be stopped by degrees, if there be a great
plenty of blood, and it happen by way of crisis, the which falls out seldom.
Here take place Heurnius his powder, of the seed of white henbane, white poppy,
each one dram; of the bloodstone, red coral, each half a dram; camphure half a
scruple given half a dram weight. The powder of amber, sanguis draconis, the
bloodstone, red corral, purslane seeds, each one dram; pomegranate flowers two
scruples; eastern bole armenick two drams; given from one dram in three ounces
of plantane water. Asses milk with steel. Ferdinandus his aqua mirabilis.
histor. 33. The trochisks de carabe, the benes of a man strongly calcined.
Zacutus his pills, l. 9. prax. histor. p. 185. His plaster there. The plaster
of saxonia made of the sut of a chimney, volatile flower etc. a pessary made of
heggs and asses dung with the juice of plantane and the mucilage of quinse
seeds. Specificks are, inwardly, Forestus his powder of a turtil, l. 28. obs.
10. The salt of the ashes of the same, the thin skin of geese feet dried and
given from one dram, to two scrupels. Outwardly, a girdle of the leaves of
bastard black hellebore bruised. Of which Renealmus, obser, 21.

The differences are diverse, which do chiefly respect the causes.(...)

1. One is from blood, which, 1. either is derived from the bottom of the womb,
in which the blood is blacker and for the most part clotted. Or from the neck,
which is more ruddy and fluid. 2. It Is either plentiful, or sharp, or serous.
Of which in the following difference.


Another from the moistness of the womb, of which see formerly.

Another from the fault of the Veins, concerning which consult with the third
difference.

One is from plenty of blood, which is known by this, that either the vessels
are opened or broke, in women especially, whose courses have stopped a long
while, and afterward do break forth more plentifully. There are signs of a
plentitude, the blood which comes forth, does easily concrete into clots. In
the Cure we must respect. 1. Bleeding, which if it be ordered for evacuation,
it concerns a vein in the arm, the liver vein chiefly. If the strength be
feeble, it is ordered in the salvatella of each hand, if it be for revulsion, it
must be done at several times, because being repeated it revells more
powerfully. 2. Cupping-glasses, which for evacuation may be applied to any
part, if you except the lower, as to the back, shoulders, and that with
scarification; for revulsion they ought to be set to the breasts without
scarification, and upon a difficulty of breathing ensuing they must be removed.
3. Ligatures, frictions of the arms, etc.


Another from sharp blood, which is known by this, that there is a corrosion of
the vessels joined with it, there are signs of choler. The blood is detained
and corrupted in the womb, it slides forth in greater quantity. In the Cure let
purging be administered by syrup of roses solutive and leaves of senny. See
things that thicken it above mentioned.

Another from serous and watery blood, which is known by this, that either the
liver is faulty by its weakness, or the kidneys by reason of their weakness do
not attract the serum. The blood flows forth in less quantity and is not
easily clotted: that which is flowed forth, if it be received on a linnin
cloth, and dried in the shade, discovers it self by the color. The Cure
attends the diseases themselves.

III. One is from an Anastomosis, in the cure of which observe, that hot things
ought to be mixed with cold least the veins be obstructed, the ventilation of
heat be prohibited, and a fever induced; that pessaries may be applied if the
opening be in the vessels of the neck, where oak leaves and unguentum
Commitissae are good; that baths must not be used unless they be somewhat cold,
or whose astringent power overcomes their heat.

Another is from a Diapedis^s, which happens very rare, it presently requires
astringent topics.

Another from a Breaking, which happens either from a plenitude, or from causes
that stir the blood, especially from hard labor, and premising the opening of a
vein if there be need; it is cured by conglutinating medicines.

Another from a corrosion, which is known from hence, that little blood flows,
sometimes purulent, sometimes serous. It arises from a sharp and corrupt blood,
sometimes also from sharp medicines, amongst Astringents is commended the root
of dropwort, or 'its decoction.

Article. VIII. Of the Woman's flux and gonorrhaea.
The woman's flux, which otherwise is expressed by the name of the whites, is an
inordinate voiding from the womb, of an excrementitious humor by its whole
nature differing from blood, collected by the fault either of the whole, or of
some part.

It Is called the woman's, because it affects women, and truly virgins also, when
as the causes take place in them, and there are examples of it. Yet more
commonly those of riper age, especially if they be indewed with a moist and
cold constitution, do lead a delicate and idle life, and feed upon cold and
moist nourishments: old women also, and that unto death, by reason of the
plenty of phlegm, and the weakness of the concocting faculty.

There is no need to enquire the Signs, the affect is made known by the
relation of the patient her self. It differs from a gonorrhaea, because in that
the matter of the seed flows forth, whiter, thicker, and at longer intervals,
and it is voided in less quantity. From a nocturnal polution, because this is
joined with a fancy of a venereal business, and happens only in the sleep.
From the discolored courses, because they observe their periods, though not
always exactly; they do not happen to women with child, and those troubled
with the suppression of the courses, they show a red color. From matter out of
the ulcers of the womb, because then the signs of an ulcer stand forth, the
matter it self is thicker and whiter. It it be sanious it is besmeared with
blood, and voided with pain.

We have laid the Cause upon an Excrementitious Humor, which Sometimes is raised
by purging Medicines, Nature being stirred up by their use to attempt
excretions, sometimes by Baths, Nature casting off by this way those Excrements
which could not be driven forth by sweat.

The cure must be hastened, for it makes women Barren for the most Part, unless
perhap it be emptyed through the Vessels of the Neck of the womb, it casts the
same into an Atrophy, consumption, Melancholy, Dropsy, Falling down of the
womb, swounings and Convulsions. Hence though at the beginning it is scarce
Cured, yet afterward it is more difficult. For the whole body accustomes it self
to cast off the Excrements through that way, and the womb being rendered weaker
collects Excrements. It varies according to the nature of the Causes.

The Differences are taken from the part that sends them, and the color of the
blood.

I. One is from the whole, which is known by this, that there are signs of a
Cacochymy in the whole body, the flux is more plentiful. In the Cure. 1.
Bleeding must be shunned, both because the Humors ought not to be recalled into
the Veins to pollute the blood, and because the strength is dejected by the
long continuance of this affect, and the body wasted. 2. Discussion is very well
performed by Decoctions of Guajacum, China, and lentisk wood, etc. 3. For
drying, the Root of dropwort, is very much commended. For binding, the powder
of man's bones, the ashes of Capons dung in rain water. Zacutus his Plaster. l.
9. c. 11. Prax. History, which ought to be applied to the Kidneys. 4. Sleeping
on the back must be avoided, least by the heat of the Loins, the humors be
carried toward the womb. 5. Frictions of the upper parts are good for aversion.


Another is from some part besides the womb, and then there are signs of the
part affected, in the cure we must have regard unto it.

II. One is from the womb, which is known by this, that there are signs of the
womb affected, the flux is not so plentiful. It arises from the distemper of
it, of which in the Cure we must have a regard. Suffumigations of Frankincense,
Labdanum, Mastick, Saunders are well applied; but from what Cause soever it
arises, baths do most good.

Concerning a Gonorrhaea, if any thing ought to be known, let it be sought from
those things which are said concerning a man's gonorrhaea.

Chap. 2. Of the Symptoms more familiar to those that live out of Wedlock.
Article, I. Of the Virgins Disease.
THe Symptoms more familiar to those that live unmarried are, the Virgins
disease, the suffocation of the womb, the madness of the womb, and the
melancholy of women.

The Virgins disease (otherwise the white, the Virgins, the Pale, the Lovers
Fever) is a change of the natural color in the Face into a greenish and pale,
proceeding from the abundance of crude Humors.

It Is called the Virgins, because it appertains most of al to Virgins, and
truly to the Fairer, endued with a white color, thence the Tincture from crude
Humors is the easier.

The Face it self will afford us the Signs, to which add other Symptoms, as the
pain of the Head, sometimes madness, the Humors and Vapors being carried thither
and mixed with Melancholy; a difficulty of breathing with a palpitation of the
heart, if they stir, with a small and frequent pulse of the Arteries in the
Neck, back, and Temples, by Reason of the lifting up of Vapors from the heating
of the thick blood, inordinate and erratick Fevers by reason of the
Putrefaction of the Humors, manifold affects of the Stomach, amongst which
loathing of meat, by reason of the unhappy distribution of the Chyle. A Pica
from the abundance of evil humors in the coats of the stomach. Vomiting from
the great plenty of crude Humors, both a distension of the Hypochondries, from
the reflux of the Menstruous blood to the greater Vessels and a rumbling from
the tumultuation of wind. A swelling as well of the whole body with a laxness and
softness from the plenty of the Humor, as either of the Eyelids, especially in
the morning after sleep, when in the night the heat has raised more Vapors and
serour Humors than could be discussed; or of the Legs and Feet, especially
about the Ankles from the abundance of serous Humors.

The CAUSE is the crudity and plenty of Humors, arising either from the
suppression of the Courses, or from the Native straitness of the Vessels, or
from that acquired by eating of wheat, Loom, Chalk, earth, Nut-Meg, drinking of
Vinegar, etc. Or from the obstruction of other bowels. For the Menstruous
blood, the Passages not being open, does regurgitate to the greater Veins and
Bowels, obstructs the Vessels, and over whelms the heat. Hence arises evil
concoction in the Bowels, and the Humors are carried to the habit of the body.

The CURE is accomplished. 1. by bleeding, especially in the Ankle if the malady
be new; and the blood is not turned into another humor. If it arises from the
Evacuation of blood suppressed. 2. By Purging, premising Preparatives. 3. By
opening obstructions, in which we must have respect to all the bowels; the
suppression of the Courses must most of al be minded.
There are commended, Steel prepared, Scorzonera Root, Bezoar stone, Oil of
Crystals, etc. In the diet Vinegar must be voided.

Article, II. Of the Suffocation of the womb.
The Suffocation of the womb is a heap of Symptoms opposing sometimes the
natural actions, sometimes the Animal, sometimes and more often the vital, by
periods, joined with a coldness of the whole Body, proceeding from a malignant
Vapor raised from the womb.

It Is called also the Suffocation of women, the strangling from the womb, the
Hysterical passion, etc.

The SIGNS are either of that at hand, a wearinness of the whole body, with a
weakness of the Legs, a paleness of the Face with a sad look, a nauseousness
which is seldom succeeded with vomiting, oftentimes a certain wearisomness,
and loathing of meat, and that sometimes with a murmuring and rumbling of the
belly, sometimes without these. Or of that present, in which a Vapor raised up
to the heart, and stopping the vital spirits, a small fainting away is Caused,
the Pulse is changed a little, the body grows cold, the spirits recurring to
the heart, fear and desperation moves the patients; the same thrust to the Head
and Jaws, sometimes the Jaws are bound up, and the Patient seems to be
suffocated. The motion of the breast and Midriffe is hindered the Animal
spirits being stopped, and breathing is almost intercepted, the sick living in
the mean while by Transpiration; sometimes a madness of the womb is added with
prating, and fury, sometimes other kinds of madness arise. Sometimes sleep and a
drowsy Disease is induced, in which the woman falling as astonished, lies
without motion, without sense, with such small breathing that she seems dead. Or
of the fit declining, and then a certain Humor flows forth from the Privities,
the Guts murmur; by and by the Eyes are lift up, the Cheeks grow red, sense and
motion return. Sometimes a coldness at the time slides from the Head by the Neck
into the shoulder and Arm, which makes motion difficult, but presently it is
discust. Yet al these Signs do not happen in all. There have been those who were
troubled with continual laughing the Vapor insinuating it self into the
Membranes of the Breast; there have been those who seemed to frame the hissing
of Serpents, the croking of Crows, etc. According to the proportion of the
passages and breath breaking forth. It differs from an Epilepsie, because in
this the Convulsive motions are more universal, they have no remembrance of
those things after the fits which happened to them in the fits, the Pulse is
greater than before, a foam flows about their Mouth. From an Apoplexy, because
in this the fit is sudden without any notice; a singular snoaring afflicts
them in breathing, there is so great a resolution of the Parts, that though
they be pricked yet they do not feel. From a Syncope, because there are no
presages in this of the fit to come, the pulse fails to the sense, cold sweats
afflict, it vanishes in a short time, when as the Hysterical passion lasts
sometimes a day or two. From the dead, they are distinguished by Sneezing, Caused
by Sneezers and other means.

The CAUSE is a malignant Vapor, thin and spirituous, in one moment penetrating
the whole body, and raised from the matter corrupted after a peculiar manner in
the womb, and stirred either of it self or by external things, as things
sweet smelling, fear, Anger; and ascending upwards not only by the Veins and
Arteries, but also by occult passages. But what that is shall be said in the
Differences.

The CURE is sometimes of doubtful hopes, If it long afflict old women, because
it infers an impeachment of the strength, and shows a plenty of humors. If it
happen to breeding women, a hard labor or abortion going before; if it assail
great bellied women, because it strikes a fear of abortion; of better hopes,
if breathing be not hurt too much, if the fits do not return often. It
respects. 1. The time of the fit, where care must be had. 1. To intercept it,
by binding of the belly about the navel with a girdle made of the skin of a
heart killed in the act of copulation with the do. 2. To raise her by ligatures
and painful Frictions, by pulling off the hairs especially of the priveties, by
suffumigations made of partridg feathers horses hoofs, and Eel skin. By
applying of assa faetida oil of tartar to the nose, etc. 3. To reveal by
ligatures and frictions of the lower parts, glysters discussing wind,
cupping-glasses without scarrification applied with much phlegm, first to the
ancles and thighs, by and by to the groines, by putting up sweet things into
the privities, as are oil of Civit half a scruple; with oil of nutmeg by
expression one scruple. 5. To discuss, and that outwardly by oil of white amber
with the powder of walnut flowers. By extract of castor, of liver-wort.
Mynsichtus his specificum diajovis. The same Authors Theriaca mulierum.
Hartmans essence granorum Chamaeactes, in pennyroyal water, Treacle water and
others that are appropriate. Outwardly by putting into the navel oleum Jovis,
the salt of the same described by Crollius. By plasters made of the fat of a
black cow fed with utrine plants, clary boyld in butter, adding gum tacamahach,
and carama.
2. The time out of the fit, in which. 1. We must empty by Grulingius his
extract of bryony, of which in his cures, by Agricola his flores virtioli
Veneris et martis. 2. The womb must be strengthened by things internal and
external that do resist the malignity also. The faecula of briony is commended,
Castor, etc. 3. That diet in which odoriferous and sweet things are, which are
wont to move the womb, must be shunned.

For preservation see Zacutus his Hysterical Pills. Prax. Hist. l. 9. c. 12.

The Difference is taken from the causes.

One is from the seed corrupted by the fault of the parts or humors mixed with
it, and sending forth such a vapor, which is known by this, that the courses
are right in the patient. All the Symptoms are more vehement, the fit declining
a humor like to seed flows forth of the privites. It Is Cured (universals
premised) by emptying of the seed by glysters, and utrine pessaries, by
prohibition of the same, by medicines diminishing the seed, or by slender diet.

Another from menstruous blood stopping, and therefore corrupt, which is known
by this, that the menstruous blood is joined with vicious humors, especially a
melancholy one. The symptoms are milder, with the signs of a suppression. The
Cure must be turned against the suppression of the cour^es.

Another from vicious humors, concerning which consult with the chapter of the
distemper of the womb.

Article. III. Of the madness of the womb, and Melancholy of Women.
The Madness of the womb is an immoderate desire of Venery, almost making women
stark mad, arising from the plenty of seed, acrimony, and peculiar quallity of
it.

The subject of this affect are, either well flesht virgins, black, and having
adust blood, or the youthful flourishing widows; or married women that are
barren by the impotency of the husband.

The Signs are various, some wast away in sadness and silence suppressing their
desire; others, reason being overcome do prate, are lascivious, break into
anger, laughter, weeping, wanton and baudy discourses. Some freely prostitute
themselves to men.

The Cause is the plenty, heat, and accrimony of the seed, which arises if you
consider the internal causes, from the heat of the womb, the distemper of the
stones especially, and spermatick vessels; hence many labor of an inflammation
of the womb, and itching, which are not affected with this madness. If the
external, from a diet generating plenty and accrimony of blood by a drauft of
hippocras, in which there was some Borrax, etc. dissolved.

The Cure is accomplished. 1. By bleeding if blood do abound. 2. By purging if
hot and adust humors be mixed with it. 3. By alteration by coolers, as are
Letice, Purslan, waterlilies, Ladies navil, by things that act by an occult
quallity, as are, the chaste tree, rue, hemp, Camphire, hemlock, which are
rather to be used in Nunneries.


The Melancholy of Women is a dotage with sadness, anxiety, weeping, or
laughing by intervals, invading without a fever, arising from a melancholy
vapor, darkning the animal spirits.

The SIGNS are various, the women are sad, complain of a grief at heart, yet
are not able to express the cause of it. The Arteries about the Spleen and back
do beat more vehemently than usual, a pain of the left side against the heart
afflicts, sometimes seazing on the left breast, the Vapors from the intercostal
Arteries being poured forth into those places, and pulling and distending the
Membranes of the Breast: a dryness of the Jaws sometimes troubles them with a
suffocation. But these symptoms affect by intervals, because the Vapor is
dispersed, and the stirring of the blood in the Arteries cease.

The CURE respects. 1. Bleeding, which must be ordered at the beginning, if hot
blood do urge it, it is to be admitted commonly in the Arm, if the Courses be
not stopped, if otherwise, in the Ankle some days before the flux; it is to be
urged, sparingly if the evil be far gone. 2. Preparation, by those things,
which alter the Melancholy Humor, and rejoice the heart, as are the Confection
de Hyacintho and Alkermes. 3. Emptying, by things that Purge Melancholy, with
which, things proper for the womb must always be mixed.


Chap. 3. Of the Symptoms proper to married women.
Article, I. Of the Symptoms about conception.
Point, 1. Of Barrenness.
THe Symptoms proper to married women, do respect, Conception, going with
Child, and the delivery. The Symptoms about conception that meet us are,
barrenness, and a mola.

Barrenness is an impotency to conceive, proceeding from the fault either of
the Genitals, or of the Seed, or of the Womb, or of the menstruous blood.

There is no need of Signs, the Cause and Cure vary according to the Nature of
the differences.

The Differences are taken from the Causes and Parts.

I. One is by fault of the genital parts, whether it be a Closure of the Womb
from the birth, which may be artificially cleft; or a tender Constitution,
either by reason of the Age or structure, for which a man's Yard is not
admitted; or Tumors, Ulcers, and excrescencies in the Neck to which the Cure
must be directed; and this is not properly called barrenness.

Another by the fault of the Seed, of which shall be treated in the following
Difference.

Another by the fault of the womb, of which we will treat in the third
Difference.

Another by the fault of menstruous Blood, when either that is wanting, which
happens either the womb being covered with a star, or the blood turning into
Fat; or it is too Copious, that the Seed is overwhelmed and suffocated.

II. One is from the defect and unfruitfulness of the Seed, which arises. 1.
By reason of tender Age, or too old. 2. by reason of the distemper of the
Vessels dedicated to generate and contein the seed, and then the Woman in
Copulation perceives none, or little and short Pleasure. There are Signs of the
womb affected, or the whole body, or some member has a Vicious Constitution.
The Cure must be turned against the distemper of the womb. 3. By reason of the
Evil Conformation of the same Vessels.


Another is from want of a Proportion between the man's and woman's Seed, which
consists between manifest and occult qualities; but chiefly it arises. 1. From
medicines that extingnish Seed, as are a Goats commodity, Mint, Rue, Camphure,
which either the patient, or standers by will make known. 2. From Enchantments,
and then the man cannot Copulate with his own wife, he can with others, he has
a desire to couple with his own, and if he do couple with her he cannot send
forth his Seed.
In the Cure is commended a drauft of cold water fallen from the mouth of a
stone Horse drinking in a Current, and suddenly received in a Vessel.

III. One is when the womb does not attract the Seed that is cast in, and that
either by reason of a cold and moist distemper, of which formerly; or by reason
of some Organical diseases and solution of Unity. Where note, that very often
too much Fat, especially of the Caul, does compress the mouth of the womb; that
barrenness from Ulcers is hardly Cured, nay though a great Ulcer were Cured,
yet that would remain by reason of the Skar left, for which the blood can
neither adhere to the womb, nor flow thither.

Another is when the womb does not retain the Seed cast in, and that, 1. Either
by reason of a moist distemper, which is known by this, that the Fibers of the
womb are Relaxt, that it cannot contract it self, the Seed by reason of i^s
Mucousness cannot adhere to it. It Is retained for some few days, then cast
forth. The Cure must be turned against the distemper. 2. Or by reason of the
thickness of the womb, for then the blood does not slide thither, from which
the Seed ought to be joined to the womb, and take its increase. The Cure
requires extenuation by a slender diet, exercise, purging, Sweating, and
others. 3. Or by reason of its Slipperiness, and then a woman's Flux or virulent
Gonorrhea has happened; the Seed conceived is extinguished, and Rapt away. The
cure must be fetched from their places. 4. Or by reason of the gaping of its
Orifice, and then either hard labor or abortion went before. The Fibers are so
relaxt, that they cannot contract themselves. In the Cure amongst astringents,
a Fomentation of the Leaves of Lentisk, Myrtle, etc. takes place. 5. Or by
reason of a Cough, Sneezing, which happens after Copulation, etc. By which the
Seed is shaked forth.


Another is when the womb does not alter the Seed injected, and that either by
reason of a distemper, when the womb by an immoderate coldness grow thicker,
the Orifices of the Vessels belonging to them are very streit and narrow,
whence neither the Secundine can be knitted to the Mouths of the Vessels,
neither does the blood flow in sufficient quantity, which is Serous too; or by
reason of organical diseases, as Tumors, Ulcers, etc.

Point, 2. Of a Mola.
A Mola is a mass without bones and bowels from an imperfect conception,
generated by the fault both of the man's and woman's seed, instead of a Young
one.

The SIGNS before the fourth month are not so exact that it can be certainly
known, in process of time it is discovered by four signs. 1. By motion, for that
is trembling and panting, rival to a constriction and dilatation, and it falls
down like a stone with an eminent sense of a weight upon that side the woman
turns. 2. By the figure and bulk of the womb, For in that the Belly is lift up
according to al dimensions, when in a true young one, it is principally raised
toward the Navel, and is gently stretched toward both sides. 3. By want of
milk; for in a mola the breasts swel inde^d, but there is produced in them only
a certain crude matter, from the courses suppressed tending to the breasts, which
in process of time vanishes, when in those with child milk begins to be
generated about the fourth month. 4. By the Symptoms, which are diverse, as
difficulty of breaching, pains of the back and groines etc.


The cause is the fault of the seed, both of the Males and Females jointly,
when the formative faculty is weak, either of it self, or because it is
overwhelmed with blood. Whence molae are wont to be made, if there be
copulation when the courses are at hand, or flowing, or not wholly stopped. And of
the woman's seed severally, joined with blood, and then there are molae
altogether rude, and which being long exposed to the air, being melted are
dissolved into a watery substance. In virgins such a thing cannot happen, both
because their weak seed will not attract blood necessary to its conformation,
and because the blood it self partly by its unaccustomedness, and the
narrowness of its own accord flow thither. In the cure, 1. bleeding bears the
palm, that the nourishment of the mola may be withdrawn, and it must be larger
if the woman be plethorick, more sparingly it not so, in the ankle, or ham. 2.
Strong and often repeated purging. 3. Opening of the courses. 4. Chyrurgery, of
which see Authors. Prevention, requires.
1. That Copulation be not too often, especially in bodies not strong enough,
by reason of the generation of weak seed. 2. That it happen not when the
courses are at hand or flowing, or when the womb labors of a distemper.


See the Differences in physical observations, for this mass is not only
without bones and bowels, but sometimes it is more membranous, viscous, fast
together, not yielding to iron. Sometimes it presents a long form, rhomboidal,
etc. sometimes it is destitute of all life, sometimes it lives the life of a
plant. Sometimes it is voided with a child, without one, after one, and sometimes
a dysentery goes before the voiding of it.

Article 2. Of the Symptoms of women with child.
The symptoms of women with child are in a threefold Difference.

Some happen at the first time of their bearing in the belly, and they are, 1.
A cramp, troubling especially the legs, which is taken away by anointing them
by the fire with oil of bays, putting on afterward hot rowlers. 2. The pain of
the Sciatica, with oil of Venice turpentine anointed on drives away. 3.
Loathing of meat, which arises from the suppression of the courses, the better
part of the blood going to the young one, the worse remaining in the veins,
from whence by agitation vapors are sent to the mouth of the stomach with the
humors, a vicious quality is imprinted on it, and which ceases of its own
accord when the young one is grown greater. 4. A Pica, or a desire to absurd
meats, for taking away of which serves, the water distilled in the month of May
from vine leaves. 5. A nauseousness and vomiting, which if it be easy ought not
to be stopped, if difficult, it is not free from danger. 6. Torments and pains of
the belly, which are raised by the wind from the humors about the womb, and
sometimes do cast women into swouning fitts. 7. A looseness, which must be timely
remedied, least abortion follow. 8. A pain in the teeth from part of the
sharper humor carried thither. 9. A pain of the head and vertigo from the
vapors sent forth, distending and troubling it.


Others trouble in the middle months of their bearing; and are.

I. A cough from a sharp vapor, or the veins of the breast, which by reason of
the concussion of the muscles of the belly, watchings, pain of the head, is
dangerous. 2. A palpitation of the heart, and faintings, which if it arise from
plenty of blood, is a forerunner of abortion, and is cured by bleeding. 3.
Pains of the loins and hipps, either from the blood suppressed falling upon the
vessels of those places, or from the child growing bigg. 4. A flux of blood
from the womb, nose, hemrods, which is caused.
1. From a rupture of the vessels of the womb by evident causes which are known
from the relation of the patient, 2. From plenty of blood, and then the woman
is endued with a good color, she bears the flux well, there is less danger, if
so be the flux be not too much, 3. From the weakness of the young one, not
attracting the blood, and then for the most part, either the birth is
protracted beyond the due time, or is difficult, or abortion follows; there are
signs of the weakness of the child, that is, 1. Either the woman is troubled
with a looseness of body, by which the nourishment is withdrawn from the young,
or her courses flow often when she is with child, or the mother is often or
long sick, whence arises a fault of the nourishment; or the breasts which were
swelled full before, are extenuated, for want of nourishment; in the common
veins of the womb and breasts, or the young one which already had began to
move, or ought to move, either is not moved, or moves weakly. 4. From evil
humors goading the expulsive Faculty; and then sharp things, colored,
stinking, flow forth with pain, there are signs of a cacochymy.
Others happen in the last months, as is, 1. A stoppage of the urine, which
arises from a compression of the neck of the bladder by the womb (it happens
chiefly when they stand) 2. A hardness and slowness of the belly, which arises
either from a compression of the gutts made by the young one it self, or by an
extraction of the moisture caused by the same, in women that have a hot and dry
liver and spleen it is dangerous, because by a violent straining to evacuate, all the parts in the belly being full, some damage may easily ensue. 3. A tumor and
inflation of the veins, either in the legs by reason of the weakness of the
liver, of which in its place; or by the suppression of the more serous blood,
and then the women with child for the most part bring forth girls. We must
forbear from the cure, because the humor is emptyed with the after purgation
after the delivery, unless walking be hindered: or in the hipps that they
become as it were varicous, which proceeds from the same cause. 4. clefts of
the skin of the belly by reason of the distension especially at the first
birth, which are prevented with the anointing of laxative liniments, as are
marrowes, oils. 5. The effusion of water, which in the time of bearing is
collected between the membranes that involve the young one; which wants not
danger, because both the young one perceives some trouble from thence, and a
hard labor follows for want of moisture.


Article, 3. Of the symptoms about the delivery.
The symptoms that happen about the delivery, are also not a few.

I. An untimely flux of blood before the birth, whence is a weakness of
strength and swounings. In the cure of which emptyers must be shunned, the air
forbidden, cordialls and strengthners must be given; when the mouth of the womb
opens it self, the membrane must be broken, and the infant brought forth.

II. Abortion, when the child is born before the lawful time of bringing forth,
which is feared if the breasts be extenuated, because it is a sign that either
the blood does fail in the veins common to the womb and breasts; or that by the
violence of the young one or rupture of some vessels it does rush to the womb.
If plenty of milk flow from them. If the great bellyed woman have often pains
about the belly and loins which end toward the pubes and os sacrum, with a
certain endeavor to cast forth of her womb. If after them, blood either pure,
or ichorous, or warer flow forth. It arises in general from the fault of the
expulsive faculty of the womb, which is irritated either by the young one, or
by other diseases, by which also the retentive faculty of the same is wont to
be weakened. In particular it is caused chiefly. 1. From too much cold, and then
the pain which arises about the Region of the Kidneys descends to the lower
part of the Belly, and afflicts like to Nephritical pains. See a Fomentation in
Ludovicus Burgesia, p. 1. c. 6. 2. From a sudden fright, and then outwardly may
be applied the Fomentation even now mentioned; inwardly, a little Oxycrate. 3.
From a Swouning, where the Confection of Alkermes, and de Hyacintho, take
place. 4. From Anger. 5. From a Flux, and then drying Meats must be
administered, the Patient must be kept in Bed, we must act with Cordials and
Strengtheners.


III. The Birth coming forth not Naturally, where it is a common admonition,
that the navel of the infant, what way soever it comes forth, be thrust back
into the womb again. If it be difficult, and cannot be promoted otherwise, it is
happily furthered by giving three grains of Mercurius vite in wine, as
Billichius witnesses in his observations.

IIII. The stay of waters, al other things being ready for the birth, and then
the membranes must not be broken, least violence be offered either to the navel
or some member; a fomentation ought to be ordered with warm water, which must
be followed with a limiment of fresh butter.

V. An immature falling down of the waters, and then fresh butter is good
amongst moistners, we must have a care of the outward air.

VI. Colic pains, which are taken away by giving oil of sweet almonds with
cinnamon water, or a carminative glyster following.

VII. A weakness of strength by the birth, and then may be administered, water
of Tophies, Hartshorn, Confection of Alkermes, Cinnamon water.

VIII. The slow coming forth of the secundines, either because they are too
thick and tenacious and stick close to the sides; or because they swel by the
long labor of bringing forth; or because the Navel is either broke or cut off
before the Secundine is come forth. There are commended the Secundines
Specific, the Eyes of a hair taken in March, of which in Hartmans Chymiatry,
etc. See Burgesia. l. 1. c. 14.

IX. The Pains after birth, by reason of the too great strainess of the
vessels, which are prevented by giving of the Queens powder after the first
birth, which is compounded of the grearer comfrey, one dram; Peach Kernels,
Nutmeg, of each two scruples; Amber Greese, half a scruple; and one dram weight
is given in broth if there be a Fever, in wine, if not.

X. Too great a flux of blood after the delivery, either by reason of its
plenty, or because she has used hot things, or because of its thinness. In the
cure take place, ligatures, a cloth dipped in Oxycrate, applied to the Loins and
all the back bone, because there the Vena Cava Runs down. Terra Cimolia
dissolved in Vinegar applied to the same.

XI. An insufficient Purgation, by reason of the thickness of the blood,
detained nine Months, induced by heart, which is known from hence, that it was
more in the menstruous Flux. In the Cure takes place, the opening of the
Saphena, but not before the womb is restored to its place. The use of Syrup of
Maidenhair with Hyssop water, Wormwood water, Suffumigations, Fomentations,
etc. But if her Purgation were not more in the Flux of her Courses, nor she did
not abound with blood, we must act by dyer, and meats of good juice.

XII. A Fever,-which is, 1. From the generation of milk, which is free from
danger; it must be committed to nature, observing a government in diet, and
sweats must be promoted in which that is wont to end. 2. From the suppression
of the after purgation, in the cure of which, note.
1. That a vein is most commodiously opened in the ankle; if that cannot be
done cupping glasses with scarification are well applied, to the thighs and
legs 2. The time of the flux being over past, and a fever urging, a vein in
the arm may be opened. 3. From the store of vicious humors, in which we must
diligently consider whether the sick ought to be purged, or not, the time of
the flux being over, only gentle ones must be administered.
Things that alter, which stop the flux, as cold things, sour things, must be
aavoided.

[Read more of this subject in the Guide to Physic and Chyrurgery, Riverius
Practice of Physic, and his Observations; and the London Dispensatory. Al of
the last Editions, Englished by me.]

Title, XIII. Of the Affect of the Belly.
A single Chapter, Of the Rupture of the Navel, and Inflammation of the Muscles
of the Belly.
AMongst the affects of the belly is, A Rupture of the Navel, and Inflammation
of the Muscles of the belly. Omphalocele, which is a swelling of the Navel from
the Guts, Caul, water, wind or a fleshy substance fallen into it, or arising
there.

The Signs, Cause, Cure, do vary according to the Nature of the Differences.

The Differences are taken from the Causes.

One is Intestine or Enteromphalos, when the Guts slide into the Navel, which
is known by this, that the Tumor is not very hard, nor soft; holding the breath
it increases, and the Patient lying on his back it sinks, the Guts going back
into their place with a noise and rumbling. It arises from blows, falls,
jumping, lifting of a heavy weight, hard labor, riding, crying out, Mourning,
Laughing, etc. In the Cure it requires. 1. The putting of the Guts into their
place. 2. The astriction of the peritonaeum relaxt, the consolidation of it if
it be broke, amongst Medicines are, Comfrey, Sanicle, through-wax, Rupture
wort, Boiled in red wine and given.
Incision must be admitted at last, when no other things do good. By Ligature
sometimes we provide against this affect.

Another is of the Caul or Epiplomphalos, when the Caul slides into the Navel,
which is known by this, that the Tumor in one pa^^ is softer, broad at the
Basis, and narrow toward the top, that there is no pain present, and the same
being pressed with the Fingers it sinks, the Caul returning into its place, It
arises from the same Causes. The Cure is the same, but in a soft and young
body it is easier.

Another is watery or Hydrophalos, when the Navel is lift up into a Tumor by
water, which is known by this, that the Tumor is lax, and if it be pressed, it is
neither increased, nor decreased, that it is joined with a waving, and holding a
Candle to it, it appears clear and perspicuous. It arises from water collected
between the Peritonaeum and the Skin of the belly, proceeding from the Causes
mentioned in the Dropsy. In the Cure take place things drying and discussive,
if these succeed not, incision made like a half Moon.

Another is windy, when wind distends the Navel, which is known by this, that
the Tumor is soft, yields to the Finger, gives a sound like a drum, and let the
Patient lie which way he will it is not changed. It Is hardly cured if it have
its Cause lurking in the bowels which nourishes it, in Infants it is easily
taken away with discussives.

Another is fleshy, when a fleshy substance lifts the Navel up into a Tumor,
which is known by this, that the Tumor is hard, and being pressed does not yield,
and is changed by no manner of lying. It Is Cured by cutting of the flesh
performed by a caustic Medicine or Iron, unless it turn to a Cancer, for so
the evil is incurable.

An Inflammation of the Muscles of the belly affects, either the right Muscles
or transverse. If those the Tumor is oblong, and extended al over the belly.
The Skin is not handled without pain, and being laid hold on does not follow.
In every posture the bulk of the Tumor remains the same. If these the deep
parts are more affected, and because those Muscles are Membranous about their
end and have many Nerves, the pain is the greater; it is distinguished from an
Inflammation of the Liver by this, that it follows the Figure of the Muscles,
and is not so round. The Cure is such as in other Inflammations* and so much of
the lower Belly.

An Appendix. Concerning the Gout.
An arthritis is a pain of the parts about the joints, caused by a defluxion of
a serous and sharp humor, poured forth of the veins and arteries into them,
assailing by periods, having joined with it an hinderance of motion.

The subject is the membranous parts, and those endued with sense about the
joints, from which neither are the membranous ligaments excluded. The pain is
caused more in them, both because the humors are thrust thither from the veins
and arteries, and because being carried thither they are in less room.

The SIGNS are almost evident by the relation of the Patient, at first assault
the pain invades the great Toe, and for the most part of the left Foot,
afterward a Tumor, heat and redness is manifestly perceived; there is added an
impotency to move, and in an Arthritis of long continuance hard Knobs, etc.

The CAUSE is a solution of unity induced, by a serous, Salt, and sharp Humor,
this arises from the use of nourishments, as plants, Carpes, unwholsom wines,
by the accession of a vicious constitution of the bowels, as of the Liver and
Spleen, the efficient Cause of that Salt or Tartar. It oftentimes comes near to
the Nature of spirits which have a most biting Salt in them, whence it often
wanders up and down. By reason of the want of sufficient separation it is mixed
with the blood. By the veins and arteries it is sent to the joints, whence when
the fit is at hand, the vessels which lead to the hands and feet, and are
inserted to the utmost joints, do swel, by reason of their weakness, either
natural from their parents, or acquired, by labor, excess of the air, and other
things altering the joints, from whence they become softer and more relaxt,
nature being stimulated by its plenty, disburthening it self, and sometimes
being helped by external causes, as the spring or autumn air, affections of the
mind, the retention of accustomary sweating etc. it is moved to the joints
rather than to other parts, perhaps because the ligaments and tendons are
nourisht with a more terrestrial blood, and that has affinity with the
tartarous humor.

The CURE is in general most difficult, both by reason of the disease it self
in respect of errors in dyer, and other things, and by reason of the fit,
because the humors dispersed through the ligaments, membranes, and nerves, by
reason of thickness and coldness of those parts, are hardly discust. None at al
if any deadly disease be joined with it. If there be a luxation, for though the
joint may be reduced, yet the ligaments remain relaxt; if in the luxation, the
cavity of the joint be filled with a tophous matter, because before that is
taken away, the joint cannot be reduced; that cannot be taken away, if it be
hereditary. It respects, I. The fit, in which, 1. The humors rushing to the
part affected must be taken away, where bleeding takes place, if blood do
abound, and that quickly, because the flux is urgent. Of the basilica if al or
many joints be affected; in the opposite side if one only. No bleeding if
phlegmatic blood predominate, least discussion be protracted. Purging when the
pains are at hand, for which end is thought to serve, hermodactils, Paracelsus
his arthritical powder, Horatius Angenius his electuary cariocostinum, the gum
for the gout in stronger bodies; in the weaker, the matter boiling very much,
Solenander his syrup of buck thorn, mechoacan etc. Sweating, which is very well
caused with the decoction of China, of the root of bur dock, with treacle,
hartshorne prepared, antimonium diaphoreticum, 2. The afflux must be hindered
by repellers, if the pain be increased by a sudden and too great afflux of
humors, but not by them alone, least the motion intended by nature, be stopped
with danger of life, but mixed with things anodyne. The liquor of the flowers of
mullein is commended, and hartshorne burnt steept and boiled in the water of
mullein flowers and applied to the greived part. 3. The pain must be mitigated,
where takes place, Stockerus his oleum raninum, l. 1. c. 58. prax. Rulandus his
antipodagrical water in Hartmans Chymiatry. Lacuna his ointment of dane wort.
The foame of the decoction of china root in Zacutus, l. 3. hist. med. hist. 38.
Anointing with the oil of man's bones. Freitagius his secret of opium and
camphure in his book of opium, Another of the same Authors, there of sugar of
saturn, and the salt of the same etc. A lie sufficiently seasoned with salt,
the powder of oriental Bezoar stone, or hartshorne prepared, mixed with honey of
roses and vinegar by a gentle heat, and laid on by way of cataplasme etc. 4.
The matter which has flowed thither must be discust, where take place the
ointment of castor, Solenander his mushromy of the oak, consil. 24. sect. 4.
The water in which brass and iron are quenched, and afterward mercurius vitae
is steept, the decoction of Nettles, made with wheaten bread, Salt, wine and
water, etc. 5. The Knobs must be dissolved, for which purpose serves, A
Cataplasme of old cheese, dipped in the strong broth of Salt Hogs flesh; and that
which you may find in Hartmans Chymiatry.
2. Prevention, which requires. 1. A convenient diet, in which ought to be
shunned, the Air in excess, meats that do administer matter for it, drinking of
Moravia and Austria wine, etc. too great passions of the mind. 2. Bleeding,
unless the body be cold, some open the Veins of the great Toes every month. 3.
Purging, which ought to be ordered spring and autum, and it requires gentle
ones rather than strong. 4. The use of things good against the Gout, as are
Germander, Ground pin, round Birth-wort, the true Pontick Rhubard, etc. 5. The
strengthening of the Joints, for which end serves, a Lie made of the Ashes of
beech, and often strained, with the like quantity of wine and Alum, two ounces.



As concerning the differences, its species are, the Foot-Gout, the Hand-Gout,
the Knee-Gout, and the Hip-Gout. Concerning them we meet with nothing besides
what has been formerly spoke: Concerning the last we must observe. 1. That it
ought to be distinguished from that pain, which indeed is most vehement, but
neither causes a Tumor, neither consists always about a joint, but in the
middle spaces also between the joints; oftentimes after it has afflicted a man
once or twice it returns not again al his life time. 2. That it has this
property, that it is diffused more largely than in other joints, and often times
to the adjoining parts, both by reason of the largeness of the Hip bone, and
the distribution of the Nerves, which come from the Loins and Os Sacrum, to
that Articulation, to diverse parts. 3. That it is very hardly Cured, as well by
reason of the deepness and largeness of the place, as for the plenty of matter
that is wont to be collected there.
In the Cure for derivation a Vein in the outward Ankle is well opened, if the
pain tend outwardly; the Saphena in the inner Ankle if the pain tend inwardly.
We must act with strong Purgers. The Discussers are Sciatica-cresses, winter
Cresses, dittander, and others, concerning which consult with Practitioners. We
write only an Idea. And let these suffice of the Diseases of the lower belly
and joints.

THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF THE IDEA OF PRACTICAL PHYSIC.
Concerning Poisonous Diseases.
Title I. Concerning the French Pox.
HItherto we have treated of diseases that were not poisonous; to those that
are poisonous belong the pestilence, the leprosy of the Arabians, The French
pox, and poisons. Of the two former we have formerly treated, now we must speak
of the French Pox.

But the French Pox is a virulent and contagious cachexy of the whole body, for
the most part raging with a hot distemper, falling of the hair, spots,
swellings, stubborn ulcers, and cruel pain especially at night, enemy to the
liver and nourishing faculty, arising from an excrement infected with a
malignant and poisonous quality, transferred by contagion, but especially by
copulation, and tyrannizing with many symptoms.

It has diverse names; it is called the French, the Italian, the Neapolitan, the
Spanish, the Indian disease, Syphilis, the gout of the privities, the great
Pox, etc.

The adequate subject is the whole body, but the fuel of the evil is the liver
it self, from which polluted, a crude and corrupt blood is dispersed into the
whole habit of the body, and the nourishment of every part is depraved.

The signs of it beginning are, a light weariness of all the members with a
heaviness of the whole body, because the natural spirits which are the immediate
instrument of the supporting faculty, are infected, a small and wandering pain
through all the parts, which a vapor raised from the liver induces: by the same
the color of the face is changed, and under the eyes there appears a bluish
circle as in menstruous bodies. An exceeding heat arises in the soles of the
feet, and hands, even in the winter. The sleep is interrupted, a moderate
rottenness about the privities, either because the filth of women's secrets has
corroded the skin, or because the liver drives forth to the privities the
contagion communicated to it by the natural spirits. Moderate, small buboes, not
painful, nor increasing much, because the liver drives out evil Exexcrements to
the groines as to its emunctories. A french running of the reins which is
inferd by the weakness of the spirits governing the faculties of the testicles.
Of it confirmed are hard pustles al over the body, especially the head and
beard, arising about the fourth or sixth month, sometimes with a crust, sometimes
not; sometimes with filth, sometimes not, which arises either from a contagious
matter sent from the liver, or from the part heaping up excrements by reason of
the fault of concoction. Callous ulcers in the privities. A softness and
hanging down of the uvula in the throat, which is followed with a boarsness of
the voice; for the nattural spirit being weakened, phlegm arises in the
stomach, snivel in the brain, phlegmatic blood in the veins, and in process of
the disease being adust, it becomes sharp. Tumors of the glandules in the jaws
the matter infected and voided by the emunctories, being communicated to the
head. A Corruption of the palate and teeth, which shows the highest degree of
the disease firm, crying Pains arising before the evening, which proceed
either from a malignant vapor, or from the excrement heaped up about the
periostia of every part. A Corruption of the bones of the head and arms,
before an ulcer does arise. Malignant ulcers besetting the whole body for the
causes now given. A falling of the hair, crusts, callosities, clefts, in the
palms of the hands and soles of the feet, which arise from a phlegmatic matter
very much burnt. A tingling of the ears which is produced, when the hurtful
vapor from the head cannot be expelled by the skin, nor by the mouth, nor nose,
and therefore by the last endeavor is thrust to to the ears. See more in
Practitioners.

The Cause is an excrement polluted with a poisonous mallignity, possessing the
whole body or some parts of it, and corrupting the blood contained in the veins,
and making it unfit for good nourishment; it is communicated by contagion which
is promoted inwardly. 1. By the weak force of the natural spirits, and the
liver it self. 2. By the largeness of the vessels, that a passage lies open for
the vapors and filth. 3. By an easy inflaming of the humors, by which that is
most easily snatched. 4. By the nature and softness of the substance in the
parts. 5. By the affection of the mind, which if it be vehement, they that
couple are not easily infected. Outwardly by contact, by communication of
substance, viz. of the filth, Ichor, or sutty vapors; which is the easier, if
the parts be soft, thin, and be hot; for which makes also, copulation with one
infected, sucking of her milk, besmeering with the spittle, kissing, lying in
bed with her, using the garments of one infected, etc.


The Cure is more difficult, if it seize on those once cured. If it fall upon a
hot and dry distemper, because either things propper cannot be administered, or
if they be, another damage is brought upon the body. If it fall upon a hot and
dry time of the year, because the strength is then most of al exhausted. If a
Fever, consumption, or other grievous symptom be joined with it; if there
appear in the joints, callous, scirrous and hard tumors. If the sick be an
infant, and has sucked in this evil with the milk, because the virulency goes
into the stomach with the milk, which infects the liver and blood. It respects.
1. Preservation, the which can scarce be taught with a good conscience, least
there be a door opened to wandering lusts, unless perhaps you understand that
prevention, by which one infected endeavors to oppose the accustomary symptoms,
that they grow not upon him. 2. The Cure which is accomplished.
1. By the emptying of the blood, and vicious humors well prepared. Where note.
1. That bleeding must not be ordered, if the bubo be suppurated, least the
matter be called to the inward parts; it must be ordered, if blood do abound,
that appropriate medicines hot and dry may more safely be given. If the matter
be not moved to a peculiar part. If the matter tend to the head the cephalic
vein must be opened; if to no part, the basilick vein. If there be a
rottenness in the yard or running of the reins, in the lower parts, if the bubo
tend not to suppuration. 2. Purging must be ordered at the beginning, least
there be hurt done to a foul body by things alexipharmacal; it must be
continued all the time of the cure, if matter be collected that must be omitted,
if the matter stick chiefly in the external parts; mechoacan and jallop, adding
things specifical, are of best use here.
2. By overcomming the malignity and virulency, in hearing as well in the
humors, as parts, and especially imprinted on the liver, which is perfected by
sweaters and salivation. The sweating medicines that are propper here, are
pock-wood, which is better administered in a decoction or spirit, than any other
form, that its oily and rauzeny part may be drawn forth, in which all the
virtue consists, and in a lesser quantity at first, least it bring some damage
by its too much heat, especially when catarrhs are present. Sarsaparilla, the
bark of which root ought chiefly to be taken casting away the pith, but must
not be given where there is present a pain of the eyes. China which being
temperate, and having somewhat nourishing, is most comodiously given when there
is an atrophy. Sassafras that is of an aromatical smell, oak wood, Juniper with
its betries, beach, box. Of which see Renealmus his observations. Bezoarticum
animale mixtura simplex, persicariae orcanum, Hartmans white spirit of mercury,
and his red, etc. the manner of using them, Fallopius and Quercetan in peculiar
tracts of the French pox have evidently described, and Hartman in his
Chymiatry, Senertus in his 6. Book of practice. A flux is raised with Mercury
or quicksilver either taken inwardly where turbith takes place taken from one
grain to three, pills of one scruple; of powder of mastick with a few grains; as
from three to eight of mercurius dulcis sublimate, made up with honey into bals,
and chawed sometimes for thirty days. Or outwardly by anointing, sometimes
applying a greater, sometimes a less quantity of quick silver (two scruples may
be used every time) which the emptying of the body by purging or bleeding ought
to go before. The mixture and mortification of pure mercury and vivified by
cinnabar, with hoggs grease, oil, butter, turpentine, must be followed with the
bringing forth of the mercury out of the body, that none of it be left there,
by sweating, holding of gold in the mouth, drinking of filings of gold, and
other ways. Washing of the mouth and jaws with warm milk. Hindering of
inflammations with the decoction of plantane, self heal, etc. But in general we
must observe that mercury must be applied, when the decoctions of the woods
cannot be admitted, by reason of somewhat forbidding them, or when the disease
cannot be overcome by other remedies, and that not unless the strength be firm.
The body not too foul, not too much wasted; the air not very hot, the patient
before the disease being free from a palsy and trembling. Suffumigations are
too vehement, therefore they are reckoned amongst the last remedies. 3. By
convenient diet, whose exact description see amongst authors.


The chief symptoms we meet with in the French pox, are, 1. A rottenness, which
is in a threefould difference. 1. Either it is caused by contact or touching the
privities of one sex being infected. And then pustles break forth, first small
and white, which exceed not the thickness of the least grain of millet: there
breaking there remains a round ulcer having a white point in the middle:
sometimes the whole nut is compast with them coupled together as with a ring,
without pain, with a light itching. It Is cured with ointment of
diapompholligos, or nightshade water in which a little roch alum is dissolved
laid upon rags. Or by transmissing of a thin excrement from the liver to the
privities, and then there is a round ulcer, without a white specke, livid,
having the lips a little puffed up, purple colored. In the cure repellers must
be shuned, least a bubo be caused. It may be washed only with the decoction of
pockwood with plantan water, etc. or by the heating of the excrements cleaving
to the privities by copulation, putrefaction and infection, and then the ulcer
is malignant, not round, of diverse figures and colors, having callous lips,
creeping, etc. Concerning the cure of it consult with Fallopius, c. 85. 2. Or
it is in the bosom of the womb, the cure of which after washing requiers
Fallopius his pessary. Detersives if the ulcers begin to be suppurated;
causticks, if the putrefaction be strong, a red hot iron, having a care of the
sound part, a daily washing of the privities with the decoction of pockwood
with scabious and tormentil. Or in the channel of the yard, which is known by
the filth flowing forth, and great pain in the time of pissing, and is cured
after the same manner as that which follows. Or in the nut, to which those
things going before and which follow after, ought to be applied. 3. Or it is
with a tumor of the foreskin that the nut cannot be uncovered, or if it be
uncovored, it is done with a great deal of pain, concerning which see Fallopius.
c. 83. Or with a callousness of the foreskin, of which the same author. c. 84.
or with a callous skarre, or with warts or excrescencies, of which. c. 87. and
88.
II. Buboes, which are Distinguished from others that are not gallical, that
either a Rottenness, or a contagious running of the Reins is present, and
Copulation went before, there being no other certain cause existent. But those
Tumors are of two kinds, sometimes the matter is collected about the Glandules
in the membrane that covers the Glandules, or that fills up the Cavity of the
groins. Sometimes the proper substance of a Glandule swells, which Tumor sometimes
rises to so great a bulk, that it is bigger than a loaf. In the Cure bleeding
and purging must be avoided unless the Bubo either decrease, or be at a stay. A
Diachylum Plaster, does molifie and ripen it, being opened Opodeldoch is well
laid upon it. The Black Oil of Tartar is a most excellent discussive. III. A
falling of the Hair, which arises from an evil Humor knawing the Roots of the
Hairs. In the Cure, astringent things must be shunned, gargles and sweats here
do much good; to which may succeed the washing of the Head with Fallopious his
lie. IV. Pains of the Head, in whose cure inwardly takes place, Hartmans
Diaphoretick Oil of Mercury, outwardly Vigoes Magistral Plaster de ranis; and
that of Platerus, Observat. l. 3. V. Pains of the Joints, and especially of the
lower parts between the Joints, which at night grow more feirce, because then
the pores are stopped, and they are taken away by fomentations. VI. Pustles,
Efflorescencies, Scabs, clefts, in the palms of the Hands and soles of the
Feet, the Cure of which see in Hartman. VII. A running of the Reins, in which
the same Hartman commends, green Mercury precipitate, or the Gum of Pockwood,
which being given, Turpentine washed in violet water, and dissolved with the
yelk of an Egg ought to be administered with the Decoction of Sarsaparilla.
It Is distinguished from another by this, that it causes little or no itching,
nor does not so soon cast the Patient into a Consumption. VIII. A tingling of
the Ears, which is very difficultly cured, yet sometimes it vanishes by the use
of the decoction of Pockwood. Septalius commends an Asses water distilled, in
which Pockwood, some castor and a bundle of Horse mint have steeped al night,
and dropped into the Ears, or the fume of it received. IX. Hardnesses, or Knobs
and Gummosities, for the Cure of which Platerus has afforded excellent
Plasters in the third book of his Observation. Hither belong Hartmans Ointment
made of Vnguentum Aureum of the shops, and Mercury sublimate. X. A Consumption,
in the Cure of which Septalius tells me, l. 7. Of his Animadversions, p. 322.
That the Decoction of Sarsaparilla, made with lean Veal, is admirable.


[Read more of this subject in the Guide to Physic and Chyrurgery, Riverius
Practice of Physic, and his Observations; and the London Dispensatory. Al of
the last Editions, Englished by me.]

Title, II. Of Poisons.
Chap. I. Of Poisons dug out of the Earth.
Poisons considered in special are, either dug out of the Earth, or
Vegetables, or Living Creatures.

The chief and most common of those dug out of the Earth, are the following.

I. Aqua Fortis, whose strength is broke by the Mucilage of Quince Seeds,
Flea-wort, Gum Tragacanth, etc. II. Antimony, whose Antidote is bole-Armenick
given with Oil of Cloves and a little Wine. That it hurt not with its Vapors
whiles it is wrought in the fire, we must Eat butter with Rue, or drink Zedoary
water. III. Lapis Lazuli, which if it be taken either ill prepared, or in a
greater quantity, it ought to be cast up by vomit, and be tempered with a
drauft of warm Milk, especially asses Milk. IV. Arsnick, Auripigmentum,
Sandarach, which sometimes infect by their smell; their specificks are, Crystal
dug out of the Earth poudered and drank, one dram weight with new Oil of
sweet Almonds and Oil of Pine Nuts given, three drams weight. V. Burnt brass,
Scales of Brass, the flour of Brass, the rust of Brass, which are weakened by
sheeps Fat taken in broth, are killed by Bole-Armenick given with Honey and
water. VI. Refuse of Iron, and the rust of Iron, whose antidote is thought to
be one dram of a Lodestone made into Pills with the juice of Mercury. VII.
Lead, to which are opposed the Kernels of quinces husked, bruised and given,
two drams weight with sweet wine. VIII. Quicksilver, against whose fume
received we proceed with a drauft of wine in which some Cephalic things have
been boiled. Sublimate is resisted by Oil of Tartar, or Salt of Wormwood.
Chap. 2. Of Vegetable Poisons.
VEgetable Poisons, or those of plants, are as follow.

I. Aconitum, or Monks hood, whose antidote is Andromachus Treacle, or Terra
Lemnia in wine; outwardly the swelled body must be anointed with Oil of St.
John's wort, and Scorpions. II. Spurge, against which a vomit being premised,
Andromachus Treacle is good with Carduus water. III. Mezereon, which is
resisted with water Germander, red Coral, Treacle, and Terra Lemnia. IV. Black
Hellebore, whose antidote is the powder of the flowers or Roots of white water
Lilly, or of Parsnip seed with wine. V. Coloquintida, whose force Treacle does
infringe. VI. Euphorbium, whose force is broke with Citron Seed in wine in
which Elecampane Roots have boiled. VII. Green Coriander, which causes a
furious raving, and has the Root of swallow wort in wine for its antidote.
VIII. Mandrakes which causes a heavy sleep, its Symptoms are resisted by
garden radish taken sometimes with Salt. IX. Henbane, which they that have taken
of it, do sometimes rangle; and dote like drunken men, sometimes think that they
are beaten with rods, by reason of an Itching caused in the whole body, its
antidotes are Pistachoes, castor, Rue, Nettle Seed. X. The Walnut Tree, whose
shade, if any one lie under it, it does hurt, and causes pains of the Head:
they are taken away with a lie of betony, Marjoram, Lavender, etc. XI. Nux
Vomica, whose antidote is Zedoary, two drams weight, Citron Pill or the Juice
of it, Juice of the Myrtle or quinces. XII. Opium, upon the too much use of
which a Heavy sleep seazeth with a Vertigo, and itching of the whole body, whose
antidote is assa Faetida and castor, to which add Rue, and Origanum. XIII.
Mushrums, which if they be taken either in too great quantity, or be not well
concocted do cause Suffocation, raise the hickops, stop the Urin, and
exulcerate the Guts. In the Crew, are commended the ashes of prunings of vines,
with honeyed water; Treacle and other things.
Chap. 3. Of Poisons from live Creatures.
THe chief Poisons which are inferred by living creatures, are those which are
Caused,

I. By an aspe, whose wound is so small, that it can scarce be seen; upon its
biting, there come a heaviness of the Head, sleepiness, paleness of the Face,
often gapings, etc. In the Cure we must provide by ligatures and Scarifications
that the Poison pierce not into the body; Treacle with bruised Rue, must be
laid on the wound. Things alexipharmacal must be given inwardly, amongst which
are commended, the leaves of Mullein, Avens, boiled in Vinegar. II. By a Viper,
at whose stroke first the blood comes forth pure, which is followed by a bloody
and fro thy filth like to the rust of brass, with a notable tumor of the part
and whole body, pustles adust and blackish in the part affected. Its antidote is
costus given from half a dram to one dram; with wormwood wine or the Decoction
of wormwood, an Hares Runnet, Leeks, etc. III. By a Scorpion, at whose stroke
do follow pain, inflammation, a Tumor, pustles about the wound like warts. It Is
resisted by sage, water germander, wormwood, gentian, birth wort, up-right
vervain, wild time etc. One has been freed by frankincense bruised in whom the
scorpion had left its print. IV. By a Lizard, which leaves in the wound for the
most part, its subtle, small black teeth; the teeth must be drawn out with
Cupping-Glasses, a Cataplasme of the crum of wheaten bread made with the
Decoction of Rue, Galick, gentian, must be applied. Inwardly we must act with
things alexipharmacal. By an Hors-leech, which if it be ill applied, that the
wound go not well, a Cataplasme of Agrimony bruised must be laid upon it. If it
have got into the Guts, it is voided by applying to the Anus Ox dung dried
moderately hor, strewed with the powder of woodworms or castor, first casting
in a Clyster only of the juice of Onions. VI. By a Toad, which infects sometimes
by breathing on, sometimes by urin cast upon plants. In the Cure, let Treacle be
given to drink with the Decoction of Rue. Let pure wine be drank liberally,
plenty of sweat be provoked in a bath. VII. By the fish Araneus, which is
either taken inwardly into the Body, or by a blow sends its poison to the Body,
which way soever it be, a swelling of the Belly, involuntary Tears, a desire to
Piss, a distension of the Yard in young men, a relaxation of it in old men does
afflict them. In the Cure, inwardly Treacle is well given after a Vomit;
outwardly, the place bit must be often washed with Salt water. VIII. By Fleys,
Waspes, and Spiders, whose sting must be taken out, and the place afterward
washed with Salt water, and the Creatures bruised must be laid on the wound to
suck out the Poison.
THE TWELFTH BOOK OF THE IDEA OF PRACTICAL PHYSIC.
Of the diseases of Children.
Title. 1. Of the diseases of the Head.
WE might here now stop, and conclude our little work, but that the diseases
of children do hinder us, in which we meet with some things singular.
Concerning them therefore we will speak very briefly in this last book as an
appendix; and we shall not unprofitably divide them into the diseases of the
head, middle, and lower belly.

The diseases of the Head in Children are.

I. A milky crust, achores and favi, or ulcerous bunchings out, arising chiefly
in the head, but sometimes in the whole body, pouring forth of their holes
sometimes mattery. They arise from a humor containing partly thick, partly thin,
serous, salt, and nitrous parts, either collected in the womb, or out of it by
default of the milk. In the cure if no evil be feared, things that drive it out
must be administered, as syrup of fumitory, burnt hartshorn, the nurse must be
purged, the matter offending be qualified by giving syrup of burrage, fumitory
etc. if an eminent putrefaction be feared under the crust, the head must be
washed with an emollient decoction, afterward gentle drying ointments must be
applied; if the skul be hurt we must provide for that.

II. Asiriasis or inflammation of the brain and membranes, which a hollowness
of the forehead and eyes does follow. It Is known by this, that the bones of the
fore part of the head at their upper part, where the coronal and sagittal
future do meet, are as it were membranous, and the lower parts of them al are
hard. It may arise also from the milk if the nurses use spirituous and hot
drinks. As Lucretius is Author that the goats tender young ones, are made with
milk and wine. In the cure we must endeavor that the brain be not hurt with
the too much use of things cooling.

III. A falling sickness, which proceeds, 1. From a fright, all occasions of
which must be avoided. 2. From milk corrupted in the stomach, and then a vomit
is best. 3. From Worms, moving themselves in the Guts, of which Care must be
taken, 4. From hard breeding of Teeth, which must be promoted. 5. From the small
Pox, Meazles, and Fevers, which also must be Cured. 6. From a primary affect
of the Brain, the Cure in general respects both the time of the fit and the
time after the fit.
There is commended the Emrald stone. The Stone found in the stomach of
Horseleeches, opened about the opposition of the Sun and Moon. Elkes Hoof, put
into the left Ear, a vomit here, A Nodulus, of Hartshorn prepared, Salt of
Corals, Crystal prepared, the wood of Missleto of the Oak, put into the drink
and renewed every fifth day, a Plaster made of white Amber, Frankincense,
Mastick of each one dram and an half; Galbanum, Opoponax, of each one scruple;
Misleto of the Oak, two drams; Amber Greese, six grains; Musk, three grains;
Male piony Seeds, half a dram; Labdanum, one dram and an half, with a litte Oil
of Nutmegs, and sprinkled over with the powder of Cubebs. The Forehead and Neck
also may be anointed with Oil of white Amber.

IV. Feats in sleep, which because they arise from impure and filthy Vapors
mixed with the Animal Spirits, and troubling them, raised from the Stomach,
therefore they happen to Infants that do greedily such. In the Cure, we must
see, that the Infants do not too much ingulfe themselves in Milk, or that bad
Milk be not generated, or that the little ones be not carried to bed on a full
stomach. Let the stomach about its Orifice be anointed with Oil of Quinces,
Mastick, with Oil of Nut-megs, before they sleep let a roll of Diamoschum
dissolved in Milk be given, and unless they be very hot, let a little Treacle
be given weekly.

V. A Convulsion, of the joints in the Hands and Feer, which arises from the
plentiful heaping in of thick Milk, and with which they are for the most part
troubled about the time of breeding of teeth. In the Cure we must have a care
of a cold and hot distemper, the Neck and joints must be conveniently anointed.

VI. Too much Watchings, which for the most part do arise From sharp Vapors
raised from the Milk corrupted in the stomach, sometimes they rise from Fevers,
or some painful affect, In the Cure it is better there the soles of the Feet be
anointed with the Marrow of Deers bones, than that strong Hypnoticks be given,
by which they are made more stupid.

VII. A Squinting, which is Cured in the new born if the light be placed on the
contrary part to which the Eyes decline, or a Vizard with holes be put on the
Face, of which See Hartman.

VIII. A Moisture of the Ears, arising from the moisture of the brain heaping
up many Excrements, in which we must not be over hasty in the Cure. The Vrin of
Children distilled dropped into the Ear is commended.

Title, II. Of the Diseases of the middle Belly.
THe Diseases affecting the middle Belly in Children are.

I. Hard breeding of Teeth, which is known by this, that it is the time of
Toothing, which happens about the beginning of the seventh Month; the Infants
often put their fingers in their Mouths, the Nurses feel their Nipples to be
griped stronger; the place where the Teeth endeavor to break forth looks white,
a great pain afflicts them, especially when Dog Teeth are cutting, with
watchings, a looseness, Convulsions. The Cure is of good Hopes, if the Belly be
loose, if an acute Fever happen, because the matter causing the Convulsion
being wasted by the Fever, the convulsion cease. If the Teeth break forth in
the Winter or spring, because in the Winter the strength of the Native heat is
greater. In the spring the Laxness of the Gums. We must have a care in it,
least that if the Belly have been loose, it be not too soon stopped. The Gums
being swelled must be anointed with the brains of a hair boiled, or with the
Fat of it; being inflamed, with the Ointment of Oil of Roses and white Wax
washed with the juice of nightshade. Being Vlcerated, with fresh butter, with a
little Honey and powder of Frankincense.

II. A Cough, with difficulty of breathing, which either arises from matter
falling from the Head, and then there is a Catarrhe and Cough, and in breathing
there is perceived a certain snoaring and sound, whiles the Air does not pass
freely, but through the obstructed bronchies of the Lungs. Or From Phlegmatic
blood ascending out of the Veins to the Lungs. And then there is neither
Catarrhe nor Cough, and the Hypochondries are sweld. In the Cure we must
observe, whether the Cough be cold or hot, whether dry or moist. Washing of the
Feet, in drink in which Cephalic Plants have been boiled, is commended; which
must be followed with anointing of the soals with the Fat of a pike, or Goats
Suet. Outwardly, the Breast may be anointed with Hens grease to make the
breathing more easy.

Title, III. Of the Diseases of the Lower belly.
THe Diseases of the lower Belly in Children, Are, I. Vomiting, which if it
proceed from plenty of Milk, it must be withdrawn; if from corruption of the
Milk, that which is cast up by vomiting must be considered. In the Cure Honey
of Roses solutive given inwardly does good; outwardly the stomach must be
anointed with Oil of Mint or wormwood; if from worms the Cure must be directed
against them. II. Torments of the Belly, which are known by this, that the
Infants are unquiet, heat the Breast. They arise from wind, Humors, Milk
corrupted, worms. The Cure may be fetched from that above. III. A puffing up of
the Hypochondries, in which the Infants labor of a streitness and compression
of the Mouth of the Stomach, a Cardiacal passion, and difficult breathing. It
arises from the greedy eating of Infants, when either they suck Milk
plentifully, or take too much of other meat. Inwardly is commodiously given
against this affect the powder of Orice Root, of piony. Outwardly Fomentations
with the Decoction of Mother wort are good. IV. Costiveness of Body, which
proceed either from some error in the Diet of the Mother or Nurse, or from a
distemper, either cold and dry in the Guts themselves, or hot and dry in some
bowel. There the belly is always almost sluggish, and it must be agitated by
moistures, Viz. Cassia, Laxative raisons, etc. Hence the Signs, and Cure, must
be sought from their places. Or from a Viscous, and Tough Phlegm wrapping up the
Excrements to which incisive and abstersive means are due. The Symptoms
opposed partly by suppositories of Mouse dung with goats suet, partly by
Clysters: partly by use of things to the Navel, which are prepared of Aloes,
Oxgaul, Myrrh, butter, Oil, Quercetans Diacolocinthidos and other things.
Purging Medicines may be given also to the Nurse. V. A Looseness, happens either
out of the time of breeding Teeth, the Reason of which must be fetched from the
sixth Book, or in the time of Toothing, by reason of the corruption of the
nourishment, and concoction troubled, or by a Fever and preternatural heat, or
by too much watching which pain causes, or by pain calling away the heat that
is necessary for action. This ought not to be stopped suddenly, if it be neither
plentiful, nor the Infants bear it not ill; but if it happen otherwise, we must
cleanse first with a Clyster, or Syrup of Roses solutive with astriction. By and
by we must bind, having regard to heat and cold. VI. Worms, of which is
sufficiently spoken in the sixth Book. They may be prevented partly by Diet, in
which sweet Fat things, Milk, Fish, Decaying fruits, figs and other things must
be shund; Hartshorn prepared must be steeped in the drink, partly by Medicines
carrying away the matter fit for the generation of worms, as are the Decoction
of Sebestens, or its elactuary, Rowles of Diaturbith with Rhubarb, etc. VII. A
Rupture, which arises from the Peritonaeum, either Relaxt or broke by crying,
Coughing, a fall, crossing of the Legs, and then the Tumor is for the most part
in one side, the Guts fallen down may be perceived by the touch, see the Cure
in its place. Or from a watrish humor abounding in the belly, and falling into
the Cod, and raising it into a Tumor; and then the Tumor is for the most part
in both sides, the Cod is more puffed up than in a Gut Rupture. In the Cure we
must use Discussives. VIII. An Inflammation of the Navel, which arises when the
blood runs thither from pain, and hurt by the external Air. It is dangerous if
it change to an impostumation, and that being broke the Guts fall down.
Therefore Suppuration may be hindered as much as may be. IX. A Strutting out of
the Navel, which is discerned from an Inflammation by this, that the Navel
yields to the touch, the color of the Skin is not changed, neither is there a
Pulse or pain, unless the Guts be very much fallen down. It arises, 1. From
the ill tying of it, or when a greater part of it than ought to be, is left,
and this is incurable. 2. From the Laxation of the Peritonaeum, and then the
Tumor remains almost equal, the Navel hangs not forth so much; in the Cure we
must have a care of windy Meats, Coughing, Crying. 3. From a Rupture of the
Peritonaeum, and then the Tumor when the Infant lies on his Back, is scarce
perceived, when it walks, Sets, Cries, Calls out, it increases.
In the Cure the moss which grows on the Bullace Tree, is good. Forestus,
commends rounds made of Leather and anointed with Oxycroceum. X. The Stone of
the Bladder, which is known by this, that the Urine is made with pain and by
drops, it is sometimes clear, sometimes like Milk or Whey, sometimes conteins some
blood, the Infants perceive an itching in the yard. It arises either from Milk
generated from meats producing a matter fit to form a stone, or from gravel by
the accession of the weakness of the Stomach or Liver, by reason of which,
things Unprofitable are not separated; or by the hot distemper of the Kidneys,
by reason of which the Chyle is attracted, and sent to the Bladder unaltered.
In the Cure baths take place with anointing, also broths made with the grains
of Eglantine purefied. See above, l. 6. XI. Incontinency of Vrin, which
arises, 1. From Custom, the Muscle appointed to shut the Mouth of the
Bladder, being so disposed, that it is relaxt at the least goad; if it pass to a
habit, for the most part it accompanies til Death. 2. From the Stone of the
bladder, of which formerly. 3. From the weakness of the Sphincter Muscle,
induced by a cold and moist distemper.
Which is taken away partly by the Nurses Diet, partly by convenient Medicines
inwardly and outwardly applied (a Bath of Sulphur, Niter, and Oak Leaves is
commended.) XII. An Intertrigo, when the Scarf Skin in the Hips is separated
from the true Skin. It arises chiefly from the Acrimony of the Urin,
especially in the Corpulent, in which the filth cleaves to their Hips being
wrinkled by reason of their Corpulency. In the Cure after a bath takes place,
Nihilialbum, strowed on the place, or the Ointment of Lytharge laid on. XIII. A
Leanness, which arises, 1. From most small Worms, which are generated in the
Musculous parts of the Arms and back, and consume the nourishment. They break
forth like to ash colored or black Hairs after those parts have been rubbed in
a bath with bread mixed with Honey. They are taken away, if after they have put
themselves forth, they be shaved off with a raizer or crust of bread. 2. From
Milk either little or Bad, which faults are sometimes mended by changing of the
nurse. 3. From bewitching, which is inferred either by touching of bodies
evilly affected, as happens in the Scab, French Pox, etc. Or by diseased
effluxes which break forth either from them or their Parts, the Eyes
especially, and are transferred to them. (Hence if one earnestly look upon
those troubled with an Ophthalmy, he is taken with the same Disease) amongst
the medicines that destroy bewitching, Amber and Coral hanged about the Neck
are highly commended by some. But concerning Childrens diseases, consult with
Sebastianus Austrius, and the notes of Nicolaus Fontanus, upon him.



FINIS.
The Virtues, Use, and variety of Operations of the True and Phylopsohical
AURUM POTABILE, Attained by the Studies of Doctor Freeman, and Dr. Culpeper,
and left with his Widow, and administered by a Physician in her House near
London, on the East side of Spittle-fields, next door to the Red Lion.
The Virtues are as follow:

IT Cures al Agues, whether Quotidian, Tertian, or Quartan: as also it cuted
diverse people of that most horrid putrid Fever, which so violently seized on
men's Bodies (both before and after Michaelmas, 1653.) to the great admiration
of many; and when the parties Diseased have been both senceless and speechless,
for that neither that, nor any other Medicine of Panacaea, though never so
gentle, could safely be administered into the Body, it has beyond al Hopes, by
external Application on the stomach revived them. It cures the Gout of all
sorts perfectly being administered as the Physician shall advise. It causes
Women subject to Abottion, or Miscarriage, to go their time: and yet being
given when the time comes it causes a speedy and easy delivery. It is an
infallible cure for the French Pox, and does it with such case, speed, and
Secretness, that none of the nearest relation shall take notice thereof. It
Cu^es the Green Sickness and al sorts of Jaundce, It provokes the Terms. It is
good for Aches and all afflictions coming of cold. It helps the Bickets. But to
what purpose do I nominate diseases in particular, when it is an universal
Remedy for all Diseases being administered as the Physician shall advise? For its
chief aim is exhilarating the vital Spirits and Heart. It both binds and stops
fluxes, yet Purges; it both Vomits, and stays Vomiting; it causes Sweat, yet
cures preternatural sweatings, and performs al its Operations as Nature it self
would have it, because it only fortifies her in her Center.

To conclude, It is an Universal Fortification for all Complexions and Ages,
against al sorts and degrees of Pestilential and contagious Infection, both
preventing before their possession, and extirpating of them after it.


