A CURE FOR THE Tongue-Evill. OR, A Receipt against VAIN OATHS. Being a plain
and profitable Poem. SHOWING The Hainousness of COMMON SWEARING, with Reasons
against it, and Remedies for it.

By T. I. an hearty Well-wisher to his King, Church, and Country.

LONDON, Printed for Christopher Ecclestone, in St. Dunstans Churchyard in
Fleetstreet, 1662.

A CURE FOR THE Tongue-Evill.
REader take well what I thee here present
To Cure thy Tongue, that wildfire instrument*
As it by Common Oaths does give offense
To all that fear God in a filial sense.
Now what means swearing customarily?
Is It not a strain of hellish poesy?
But stay; who ever heard hells Jailor use
With horrid oath Gods dreadful name to abuse?
Cert's it is a truth, to give devils their due,
They will not swear, as does their cursed crew.
The devils roaring herd both swear and lie,
But this alone is his grand property?
Hells fiend rants not in wine, or ale, or beer
As if with oaths he heaven and earth would tear.
His subtle wit variety affords
Without all nonsense-sauring-swearing-words.
Yet as for oaths, The Causes of vain swearing.
as commonly they are used
The causes vile, by which they are produced,
Are hells provoking powers, St. Matthew. ^.27. Esaias 57.20.
Satan and sin,
Sin unrepented causing rage within;
Want of Gods fear and love, the great neglect
Of daily prayers, want of due respect
To Gods all-seeing eye, his vast essence,
That heaven and earth does fill with his presence;
Neglect of reading Gods most Holy Law,
Which God has ma^e to keep us in his awe,
The damn'^ abuse of mea^ to great excess,
Of Wine, and other drinks, to drunkenness,
A vayn and light heart, a distempered brain,
And fellowsh^p with those, whom Oaths do stain,
A (...), and hee^less mind, base idleness,
Anger, and gami^g and covetousness*
For were it not for these infectious ills,
No speech would be, that conversation spills.
A mad Sin.
Swearing's a bodge in wild men's poetry,
Who mind not words of ingenuity.
It is a rash fools bolt, that is soon shot,
Did men consider, use it they would not.
It is the rant of debauched Ruffians,
That stare and roar over pots and cups and cans.
It is a mad, uncivil, Bedlam course,
Which graceless people use in their discourse.
It is the silth defiles Gods Attributes,
A Folly which with reason never suites.
The Cognizance it is of Gods Enemy,
Hellish.
The damned men's note in Hellish misery.
St Matthew. 5.27 ^am. 5.12.
It is from Hell a vapor rising so,
That down to Hell again it bends to go.
It is a badge of Satan's followers,
Gives blackness worse than that of Colliers.
It binds the Soul to Satan, Death and Hell.
It is the sign, at which Satan does dwell.
Devilish.
It is the Common and filthy drivell
Psalm. 10.7.
Of a foul in-mate in men* the Devil.
It is the poison of the lips, which makes
Filthy,
The soul to stink worse than the filthiest ^akes.
Terrible.
It is the thunder from Hell that is sent,
For it men quake, if for it they repent.
It is a banefull herb, Banefull.
thht grows apace.
It chokes the seed of the good word of grace.
It is the Common Filth, Common.
whereby's defiled
Both Man and Woman, and the tender Child.
One only day the Sabbath men do break
But every day and hour swear, when they speak.
Oaths are so common, they fly up and down
In every Country, County, City, Town.
At Cards and Dice, at table, bed and board
Men use this plaguey soul-polluting word.
Both Master and Servants in every place
Gods Holy Name do commonly disgrace:
The rich and poor in this are all alike*
At Gods great name with ugly Oaths they strike.
There Is scarce an house, in which there is not one dead
Through wicked oaths, which wound the heart and head.
For other sins there seems some pretense,
That profit or pleasure does flow from thence; Unprofitable,

Such is the way of Drunkards, theevish wights,
And those that violate the Nuptial Rites;
But swearing is so base a foolery,
It brings no pleasure, nor utility.
It wounds more hearts together at one blow, Injurious,

Then any weapon of the deadly'st foe.
A Common oath is like a fatal dart, To a man's self.

Which being shot does wound the shooters heart. Psalm. 109.19. Zach. 5.3. Psalm.
109.17, 18, 19.

An house full of plagues and a tongue of Oaths
Are joined together, as Body and Clothes.
For this the flying roll of cursed woe
That cuts off many, over the earth does go.
As man does not delight to bless, His body and Goods.
but swear
And curse, so shall be woeful curses wear.
This brings the plague on men's houses of clay,
Upon their goods and Chattels in a way.
Of crosses losses and many curses
It breeds a vacuum in men's purses.
Nothing holds well with those, who do'nt refrain,
Their tongues from belching in this bloody strain.
The swearer needs no executioner,
But his vile tongue himself to rent and tear,
To his Soul, Psalm. 64.8.
He needs not any poison, spear or sword,
To kill himself, but his own tongue and word.
To his good name.
A good name is precious in every kind,
But this is worthless in a swearers mind.
It is a truth, against which there is no dispute,
He lyar-like is cracked in his repute.
To Saints,
By oaths Saints hearts are wounded through their ears
They Are words for which the Christian sheddeth tears;
They grieve Gods Spirit in saints, and they make
In little worlds a great and sad earthquake.
Swearing is like the plague it spreads and kills,
To others.
With great infection it many fills.
The swearers plagues company,
Still multiply their base society.
To the King.
Except the Scottish Covenant-sharer,
I dare pronounce the rash common swearer,
The worst of the worst of Subjects, yea more
The millions of common oaths men swore,
Occasioned this damned Covenant,
As being the product of the swearers rant:
God suffered this for these, for cause best known
Unto his dreadful Majesty alone.
To gather rebels against our Sovereign
Our Church and State, to our great woe and pain.
To Kingdoms.
Swearing's a fire, that many places burns,
It is an engine, houses over-turns,
It smites the air into tempests, thunder,
The ground Gods-footstool it tears asunder.
It makes the Land to put on sable weeds, Ier. 23.10.

And in great Kingdoms dismal changes breeds.
This bloody agent both in Church and State, Hosea 4.3.

Does ruin all things in most dreadful fate.
It is a Kingdom-weakning, wasting Sin,
It is a State-confounding cursed gin,
This leading general sin in notions,
Does bring upon them desolations.
This sin which is of a deep stain and die,
On all the world brings grievous misery.
It Is sad to think how many Millions
Do damn their souls by their foul swearing tongues,
It Is sad to think, how many plagues and woes
Are ushered in by Oaths, men's mortal foes.
Swearing's high treason against the King of Kings, To God.

On swearers heads who justly Vengeance brings,
Gods attributes stand all engaged, against all
That commonly to witness God does call.
A swearer is Gods daring Opposite, Psalm. 129.20.

And is abominable in his sight,
As much as in man lies, he wounds Gods soul,
As if vain dust would live without control:
No man Gods honor makes to suffer worse, Gods honor.

Than one, for trifles that does swear and curse.
The Swearers life Gods greatness does defy,
And his Omniscience does vilify,
Gods name with such is common and unclean,
A mark they do to Satan's service lean.
They God Almighties Majesty forsake,
And creatures frail All-judging Gods do make, Law.

Giving them part of Worship that is divine,
Against Gods Law, from which they do decline,
They are the Rabshakehs that blaspheme God, Ier. 5.7.

They clip his mercy and quicken his rod
Of dreadful justice; many of them have
Person.
Lost both their lives and souls, while they did ^rave.
Psalm. 73.9.
They strike at Heaven, yea Deity it self;
And this they do for any trifling pelf.
They slight Gods justice, as if Mercy was
Justice.
The only Attribute of Divine grace.
They to their power out brave the Lord above,
For his great Name have no respect, nor love.
They make the Lord to patronize a lie,
Yea all the filth of vile iniquity,
To want an all-discerning, judging eye,
Or else to be a drowsy Deity.
They spit their venom in Iehovahs face,
The Lords great Majesty they do disgrace.
They mock Gods roaring, thundering voice and note,
Christ's Church, Person, Name, Blood, Body.
They rent a-sunder Christ his seamlesse coat.
There is but one most precious saving name,
The name of Jesus of transcendent fame,
And yet these Swearers most unthankfully,
Abuse this name of names most filthily.
They make no more esteem of Christ his blood,
Than of dumb beasts unclean, that does no good.
Oaths are the nayls that pierce Christ's hands and feet,
They are the thorns that crowned his head most sweet
They are the spear that wound his blessed side,
In's bloody sweat they caused him to abide
God wrongs them not, yea what they are and have,
They have of God, yet his Name they deprave.
A Sin most sin^ull.
Gods person they contemn most gracelesly,
And his Precepts and that most publicly:
And this is it, their sin that aggravates.
Above all other that Jehovah hates.
They are the worst of sinners wronging God,
Provoking him with his most dreadful Rod.
To punish Rulers, Kingdoms, Church and State,
With Sword and Pestilence unfortunate,
Famine and Plagues of all sorts, that may be
Wholly destructive to Felicity*
A man that stares and swears blasphemously,
Becomes brim-full of vile iniquity:
Show me a swearer, Psalm. 59.12.
and I Will show to thee
A liar, show to me one that does lie,
And I Will show thee a theif, Zac 8.17
one in whom lies
A base deformed heap of perjuries. Psalm. 10.7.

Swearing is no single evil, A complicated Evil.
there is none
That ever used it, that used it alone;
It argues hearts profane, Hos. 4.2.
and loose, and vile;
All parts in man it sadly does defile.
By faith men swear, and so turn Infidells,
They swear by truth, till no truth in them dwells;
As they are honest men they swear, and so
To all the points of Knavery they go.
They vainly swear by their Salvations hope,
So yield their necks to the tormentors rope:
They swear by Creatures, which they drink and eat,
Provoking God to curse their drink, their meat;
At table while they swear without control,
Their table's made a snare to catch their soul. Psalm. 69.22.

Oh that vile man, who is dust and ashes,
Did see the stabs, wounds, and bloody gashes
Made in his soul by Oaths, that he might shun
This excrement in Conversation!
Oh that vain swearers saw the work they make,
When they Gods blessed Name in vain do take;
Yea when they tear the Lords most holy Name,
Without all fear and wit, all grace and shame.
Oh that they saw Gods wrath in dreadful might,
Threatening revenge to every banning wight;
For then they would not, could not, dare not swear,
But they would speak of God in holy fear;
Yea they would be for ever rather still,
Then they would croak against their Makers will.
Cast off therefore this poison of the tongue,
With all the filth, that to it does belong;
Cast out this Devil, least it cast thee down
Into the pit of Condemnation.
Let no God-dammees from thy mouth proceed,
Least with damned Spirits thou be numbered.
Ob.
Say not, thou can not help this swearing strain,
Sol.
Help but thy self, Gods help thou shall obtain.
(...)
Now that thou may this Black-mouth Devil shun,
Remedies against rash swearing.
Join Fasting to thy Supplication;
With an Oath-loating heart thy Oaths confess,
Make clean thy heart, this evil to suppress.
As with a Bit thy mouth and lips fast keep,
Whilst for thy Oaths thou heartily do weep.
Str^ve against all thy hearts corruptions,
That grace may deck all thy expressions;
Fear God, and mind his power thee to smite
By sudden death into Hells fearful night;
Hold in thy hand the rugged staff of Hell,
That thou may use thy tongue in all things well.
(...)
King Ioash prosper'd whiles Iehojada
Did Counsel him to keep Gods Holy Law:
So whiles Gods fear does rule the heart of man,
His speech does thrive in praises Christian.
Acquaint thy self with the Lords sacred Laws,
That thou may not take Oaths without a cause;
See there his Oath forbidding, threatening power
Against blasphemous wretches every hour:
Stamp on thy heart Gods awful Majesty,
For then thy lips will shun all blasphemy.
Thus was Saint Austin cured, who before
He feared God, did swear as many more;
He read Gods word and feared, and this fear
Would not permit him any more to swear.
Of God thy Lord think rightly all thy days,
But do not use his Name, but to his Praise,
Use not thy self Gods Holy Name to use,
Least thou by Oaths Gods Holy Name abuse: Psalm. ^5.2^.

Swear not, Eccles. 23.10* 11. and an Oath.
unless Gods Honor to defend,
Swear not, unless to strifes to put an end,
Unless thy Name, Goods, Body, Life to save
From great Reproaches, Losses, Crosses, Grave:
Swear not, Jer. 4.2*
unless in Justice, Judgment, Truth,
Let these be joined in every taken Oath:
Swear not thy self or any man to wrong,
Swear not to show the rashness of thy tongue,
Swear not to fence or underprop a lie,
For this contracts the guilt of perjury.
Would thou not Gods most Holy Name profane?
Observe Gods days most Holy, without blame.
Remember this, remember Holiness,
In reference to all Righteousness.
Keep like a Christian Christ's Sabbath day,
That on the week days thou may keep always
Thy lips from speaking vile blasphemous words,
The language which the scalding lake affords.
Mind Polycarpus, choosing death by fire,
Rather than swear by Caesar's love or ire;
This gracious thought in his good soul did dwell,
To choose sins way is the sure way to Hell.
Rebuke these words of death in all, and cry,
Why do you smite my God, my King on high?
It Is just with God, men swear themselves to death,
When they forbear to check the swearers breath.

And what disgrace thou casts on God thereby.
What if thy Prince did make a Law, that all
That vainly swear, this evil should befall,
That they should suffer seared lips, or tongues,
Bored quite through with burning hot Irons,
Or hanged, beheaded, drowned, or burnt should be,
And should loose all the worlds prosperity?
Would thou not Covenant with thy lips and tongue
To use Gods Name with circumspection?
I dare presume thou would, yet will thou not
Fear God, who threatens swearers with the lot
Of endless, easelesse torments in Hellfire,
Which none, but he, can do in his fierce ire?
Methinks thou should consider well in mind,
That God's thy Maker, and Preserver kind,
That God is Lord and Judge of all, for hence
Thou might learn Gods Name to reverence,
And always stand in greater awe of God,
Than man, who can scourge all men with his Rod.

The Sun, and Moon, and Stars, obey Gods call:
Consider that the Heavens, the Clouds, the Air,
Fire, Earth, and Sea, and all things therein are,
Bespeak us all by their obedience,
Gods Holy Name to have in reverence:
Consider that all things both deaf and dumb,
Do call on us Gods Servants to become;
And b'ing endowed with reasons light, and grace,
To praise Gods sacred Name in every place.

Asks only praise, while mortal mankind lives,
That hon'ring God in this sad vale of tears,
They may him praise in Heaven, free from all fears.
Keep silence or refrain thy lips some days
From Oaths, yea words, to free thy mouth always
From useless fruitless speech; for then thou shall
So keep thy tongue, that it shall never halt.
Resolve for each rash Oath this penalty
To put upon thy self in equity,
Give certain silver pieces to the Poor,
As two or three or four or six or more:
For by their prayers great in Gods esteem,
Thou may thy mouth from all vain Oaths redeem.
Mind praising God, as they in Heaven that dwell,
Angels and Saints, for in it they excel.
And if with them thou think a part to bear,
Thou must on Earth betimes defist to swear.
Gods Saints below foresee Gods love above,
And this their hearts and tongues does strongly move
To praise his holy name, while they do live,
That God to them eternal life may give.
They are not like proud wordlings, who like Swine
Tread under feet the gifts, that are divine,
Through all the gifts they do receive, they see
And do acknowledge God most thankfully.
They wait for life in Heaven free from all shame,
And therefore here they praise Gods holy name.
Mind if thy name men used commonly,
As thou do use Gods dreadful Majesty,
Thou would it take in great and just disdain,
As if thy name they filthily did stain.
And do not thou to others, what thou would hate.
Others should do to thee in name, or state.
That thou may not thy soul in danger bring,
Through Oaths pull out thy raging passions sting;
Let not the worlds great makebate anger make Col. 3.8.

Thee madman-like Gods holy name to take. Psalm 37.8.

Look how unruly dogs their chains that slip,
To do great Mischiefs up and down will skip:
So wrathful men for want of reasons power
Hos. 4.11.
Gods honor seek most wildly to devour.
Now that thou may shun wrath, where Oaths do ^ow,
Remedys against Wrath.
Indang'ring souls (as Wisemen clearly know)
Praise God if once his blessed hand of grace

Of his great Majesty, that thou may still
Find grace to speak according to his will.
Behold Christ Jesus, his sad agony
And bloody sweat enduring quietly,

Spittings, whippings and woeful buffetings,
And last of all a death of pain and shame
For thee, that wrath may never the inflame.
Mind this (vile worm) that thus Christ suffered
That thou by wrath may never be misled.

Psalm. 39.^.
Soon spend it self and vanish quite away
Cato learn to pardon all
Except thy self for failings great and small.

Remedies against swearing.
Take heed of drunkenness whilst thou do breath.
That heart-bewitching, brain-besotting sin,
Marring speech without, spoiling heart within.
Hos. 4.11.
Hence oaths men use when drunk, stick in their teeth
When sober grown, and this the Wise man sees.
God most dear,
Of Wrathful men, as common swearers are,
Avoid the banning company; for why?
Prove. 2^.24.
It binds, betrays, and blindes destructively.
Forbear their presence, or do not forbear
To give them due rebukes, when they do swear,
And that with friendly, loving gentleness,
That they their Oaths with loathing may confess,
That this Goliah-monstrous sin may have
Its wound to death, I do thee humbly crave,
That thou would prudent warning take,
This sin of sins most timely to forsake;
By dreadful Judgments on Blasphemers sent,
That for and from vain Oaths thou may repent.
See stories stuffed with Swearers smitten dumb,
So struck, that mad, blind, dead they did become.
And those examples were, that men might fear
God and themselves by Oaths to rent and tear.
Let Kings therefore be wise, and Magistrates,
So ord'ring all that live within their Gates,
That none do swear by Gods most sacred Name,
Least they themselves do suffer for the same
Shame and dishonor, 1 Samuel 2.30.
for Gods word is true,
Dishonor me, and I Will dishonor you.
Let all be wise, and utter not a word
That may become their soul-destroying sword.
Let all with all their might advance Gods Name,
That God may keep them from eternal shame.
Let all our tongues speak well of God most high,
That God may bless us all Eternally.
Let us all pray, 1 Pet. 3.15.
and do accordingly,
With hearts and tongues, that we may sanctify
Gods holy, Matthew. 6.
dreadful, just, and mighty Name,
That all our speeches may be free from blame;
So shall we use our tongues with sapience,
And shall be blessed, when we go from hence.
Let us not say, Ob.
our words are wind, for why?
This is a truth, Sol.
which wise men cannot deny;
Rash Oaths are such a wind, that hurry men
Into the Devils black and noisome Den.
Ob.
Let us not call our Oaths to speech a grace,
Sol.
For that by them Gods Name we do deface.
Lastly, if we will bear most worthily,
The name of Children dear to God on high,
If we do love our God in Heaven, our King,
Our Goods, our Soul as a most precious thing,
Our Kin, our Countrymen, and Nation,
Angels and Saints, and our Salvation:
Let us not curse or swear as Atheists do,
That ban themselves to Hell, the lake of woe.
Let us be still, or let our speech bring forth
Something, to some that may be something worth.
Let our words be few, wise, and circumspect,
And always to Gods glory have respect,
Psalm. 145.2.
That speaking here like Angels, as we ought,
Hereafter we to Angels may be brought.
(...) FINIS.

