PIETY, AND POESY. Contracted.

By T. J.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wood, 1643.

PIETY, AND POESY.
On the Title, that was fixed upon the Cross of our Blessed Savior: Jesus of
Nazareth King of the Jews.
Imploration.
ALmighty Maker (on whose Power divine
The Seraph and the sacred Cherubin
Attend with holy Anthems) gracious be
To my Defign; Oh make my Poesy
Pure as an Angels Essence, that it may
Sing in thy Quire, when my neglected Clay
Becomes a prostrate Ruin, and is burld
To its first Earth, by the forgetful World;
Oh! may each Line have a celestial Art,
To make the Good prove Constant, Bad Convert:
Then in this Line I may declare my Muse,
Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews.
This was once Pilat's Title, and his Jest John 19.19

When it was fixed on the diviner Crest
Of my Eternal Lord: Oh! I must grudge
At thee false Pilat, Could thou judge thy Judge?
Could thy oblivious Soul so soon expel
The apprehension of each Miracle
His potent Power performed? if he would
Legions of Angels had secured his Blood Matthew. 26.53

From thy insulting Tyranny, for he
That was thy Prisoner, could have captived Thee:
Oh! then how durst thy Rebel heart abuse
Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews.
Why (like a just Judge) did not punish them
Who (in the worst form of malice) Spit on him? Mar. 27.30

Why did thy lewder Laws the Traitor miss
That sealed his Master's Murder with a Kiss? Mar. 14.45

Why did thy black thoughts hold conspiracy
To send him to thy long-vow'd Enemy? Luke 23.7

His death, Pilat's and Heroa's hatred ends,
When True souls suffer, Impious men are Friends.
But why did thy injurious Judgment pass Mar. 27.26

On Jesus clear, for guilty Barrabas?
(A Murderer) that did (like thee) refuse
Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews.
But (Scriptum est) Eternity decreed Mat. 26.24

That on the Cross the King of kings must bleed,
Condemned by Vassals; Pilat, dare thou sit
Upon the Bench for whom the Bar was sit?
Obdurate Judge, could not thy Eyes relent
To see the glory of an Innocent
Brought to thy guilty Session? where the Jury
Instead of Good, and True, are fraught with Fury
Such (as without Examination) cried,
(With voices loud) Let him be crucified,
His Blood be upon us: thus they accuse Matthew. 27.23

Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews
Ye are all guilty, and his blood will be
On all your Generations: yet agree
To call your Verdicts back: No? then go on:
They love no Good, dread no Damnation:
Me thinks the purple purchase Judas sent Matthew. 27.4

Confessing he Betrayed the Innocent
Should give your guilty Sentence an affront,
His words were True, He took his Death upon it:
Though 'twas a desperate one; Could he expect
A better End for such a bloody Act?
Like Ends must fall to all who do refuse
Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews
All that you can allege, is this, He said,
Destroy this Temple, and (without Man's aid)
You shall perceive (in 3 days space) that then Mat. 26.61

(By my own power) it shall be built again:
Where were your Wisdoms then? could not your wise
And learned Rabbis know the Mysteries
This Oracle pronounced? He did foreshew
The Temple of his Bodies overthrow:
This Temple you do ruin, and you should
Pay for the Sacrilege, your guilty Blood:
Although with Stripes and Scorns still you abuse
Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews.
He bears his Cross, toyls till he is out of breath, John 19.17

Oh! cruel, must he Labor for his Death?
But Simon takes his Burden, and goes on Mark 15.21

Under the Tree must bear Salvation:
A Fruit that we should for Souls comfort keep,
Although the first Plantation makes me weep:
Now was their Journey ended, for they saw
The place of Death, Skull-bearing-Golgotha; Mark 15.22

There was the Cross up-reared, and on that,
My Lord was hovsted, nailed, derided at,
This Title placed upon him, which ensues,
Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. Joh. 19.19.

Now does he Pray, and his dread Father woo
To Pardon, cause they know not what they do; Luke 23.34

Now does his Human Nature loudly cry,
Eloi Eloi Lamasabacthanie: Mark 15.34

Now he resigns the Ghost, his Spirit flies, Mar. 15.37

Jerusalem is filled with Prodigies;
The Graves are opened, the cold Dead come out,
Ranging the fatal City round about; Mat. 27.52,53

The Temple rends; how could it stand alone
After the Jews removed the Corner Stone? Ephesians. 2.20

Oh! let this prompt my Soul nere to abuse
Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews.
A Dream of Dooms Day.
DReams are the Stories of our Sleep, they be
The things that best persuade, Security
Is not in beds of softest Down, for they
Disturb by Night, like our Designs by Day:
Yet there be some who have them in election,
To be the Prophets of our next days Action:
I shall hold no opinion, but refer
Them and their Natures to the Interpreter:
But I Will declare my own; The hour of Night,
Nature, and Custom, did at once invite
My weary Brain to Rest. I made my Prayer
To my Preserver, and did straight prepare
To entertain their bounty: Not an hour
Had Sleep possessed me with his passive power,
But such a Dream I had, as made me flow
In my own Sweat and Tears, a greater woe
Nere did engrosse the grieving soul of Man,
Since those black days, Egipts ten plagues began.
The Dream.
ME thought up to a barren Mountains head,
High as ambitious Babel, I was led
By my own gentle Genius, there to fee
What was nere taught me by Cosmography,
The Quarters of the World; Casting my eyes
Full in the East, the glorious Sun began rise
Just in my Face, his Beams had so much power,
They spoiled my prospect; yet before an hour
Was full expired, me thought the Sun began
His Declination, it backwards ran,
Or else my eyes deciev'd me; all the Air
Me thought grew thick, as if it did prepare
To give the Earth a shower; for I could spy
The chanting Birds unto their Nests to fly,
Beasts to their Caves, the Night-bird to begin
Her dismal Note, as when the Day shuts in:
And now the Sun was turned to darkness to,
Night never was so dark, Day did nere show
So opposetly light, so that my Hand
Could scarce declare where my own feet did stand*
My Senses all were numm'd, and did resign
Their Faculties; I wished the Moon would shine,
That, since I was deprived the short Days light,
I might receive some solace from the Night:
The Moon did rise, and yet no sooner shone
In her full Sphere of Glory, but was gone,
And nothing was left to be understood
Where she declined, but an Orb of Blood.
Lord! how I trembled then, so did the Hill
Whereon I stood, as if it were Sensible
Of this prodigious Change, the Stars did sall
As soon as fix, and now, were wandering all:
Where were (thought I) the Astronomers this year,
They did not quote this in the Calendar?
Now down the Hill I creep'd, purposed to see
How the great City took this Prodigy:
I saw't was full of Lights, ere I was there,
I heard the cries of Women, a great fear
Possessed the Poorer sort, and such as those,
Whom, Heaven knows, had naught but Lives to lose:
The Rich were banqueting, ye might have spyed
In such a street a Bridegroom and his Bride
Wedded for Lust, and Riches; here again,
A Crew of costly Drunkards, that had been
Making one Day of seven; there another,
Like cursed Cain, destroying his own Brother:
Yonder a Fourth, who, in as great excess,
Wastes his Soul with an Adulteress:
Ere I could turn to such another sight,
I did behold in Heaven a strange Light,
As if it were burning Brimstone, and, at last,
I could perceive it fall like rain, so fast,
I thought that Heaven would have dropped, I cried
All you that will by Faith be Justified,
Stir not a foot; this is the Fatal Day,
For which our Savior bids you Watch and Pray.
Great Structures were but Bonfires, Turrets swom
In their own Lead, whilst here poor wretches come
Half roasted in the Rain, and Mothers fly
Laden with pretty Children, till they die:
No Dug can still their crying, and each Kiss
The Mother gives, a shower of Sulphur is:
Letchers, Insatiate Strumpets, with their shames,
As they first met in fire, depart in flames;
No flattering Epitaph, or Elegy,
Hangs on the Hearse of proud Nobility.
The Epidemick fires, at once, do fling
Into one Grave, a Vassal, and a King:
Our Judges leave the Senate, throw away
Their reverend Purple, and in Ashes pray
To that great Judge of Heaven, in whose Eyes
Relenting Pity, and Compunction lies:
Husbands embrace their Wives, but ere they part,
Both burn to Cindars, Death had never Dart
That gave such cruel Torments; some do fly
To Rivers to assuage their Misery,
But all in vain; for fire has there more power
Than ever water had, the flaming shower
Is not to be avoided; all do run,
But none know whether, now my Dream is done;
For here I waked, and glad I was to see
'Twas but a Dream; vet Lord, so gracious be
To my request, that this Night's Dream may stay
Still in my thoughts, then shall I Watch and Pray;
Be ever Penitent with holy Sorrow,
For fear thou make my Dream prove true to Morrow.
On Lot's Wife looking back to Sodom.
COuld not the Angels charge (weak woman) turn
Thy longing Eyes from seeing Sodom burn?
What Consolation could thou think to see
In Punishments that were as due to thee?
For it is without dispute, thy only Sin
Had made thee One, had not thy Husband been
His Righteousness preserved thee, who went on
Without desire to see Confusion
Rain on the wretched Citizens, but joy'd
That God decreed Thou should not be destroyed,
Nor thy two Daughters, who did likewise fly
The flaming Plague, without casting an Eye
Toward thc burning Towers, what urged thee then
Since they went on, so to look back again?
But God whose Mercy would not let his Ire
Punish thy Crime, as it did theirs, in fire;
With his divine Compunction did consent
At once to give thee Death and Monument*
Where I perceive engraved on thy stone
Are lines that tend to Exhortation:
Which that by thy Offense, I may take heed,
I shall (with sacred application) Read.
The Inscription.
IN this Pillar do I lie
Buried, where no mortal Eye
Ever could my Bones descry.
When I saw great Sodom burn
To this Pillar I did turn,
Where my Body is my Urn.
You to whom my Corpse I show
Take true warning by my woe,
Look not back when God cries Go.
They that to ward virtue high
If but back they cast an Eye
Twice as far do from it fly.
Council then I give to those
Which the path to bliste have chose,
Turn not back, ye cannot lose.
That way let your whole hearts lie,
If ye let them backward fly
They Will quickly grow as hard as I.
On Eve' tasting the Apple.
THe Fruit was amiable to the Eyes,
'Twas fit for food, 'twas Good, 'twould make one Wise,
The subtle Serpent wanted neither tale,
Nor terms of Art, to set the fruit to sale:
Me thinks the words the Almighty did repeat,
In saying Of this Tree ye shall not eat,
Proposing punishment likewise, that by
The tasting this forbidden fruit, ye die,
Should have sufficient force in ye to fright
The Tempters craft, and your own Appetite:
Could ye conceit, a Serpent (made as you
By the will of God) more than your Maker knew?
But it is in vain my passion thus to vent
Against you that have received your punishment,
Yet give me leave to grieve; for, since your fall,
That fruit has wrought diseases in us all.
On the Children of Israel murmurring at Manna.
BLind Israelites, can ye no sooner boast
Ye are secured from Pharaoh, and the coast
Of cruel Egypt, but (that to obtain
Their Fleshpots) ye would be their Slaves again?
Has great Jehovah made his Servants free,
And are they angry at their liberty?
Are not your Labors ended? or does Care
Perplex your senses for the next days fare?
What is it does cause your murmur and disquiet?
Are ye not fed with Manna? Angels diet:
Are ye not sated every Morn and Even,
With food in pearly viols, sent from Heaven?
Your two first Parents in the Garden, had
No greater store, why will you then be sad?
And call down angry Justice, to exclude
This plenty from you, for Ingratitude?
Are ye not God's Elect? does he not tell,
He will protect his chasen Israel?
And yet ye grieve, and murmur at the food
He sends ye, which is temperately good,
Fit for your Constitutions? and does bless
Your Bodies with it in a Wilderness:
These Acts of wonder, were your Food as base
As it is very precious, might breed Grace
In your ungrateful souls; you should consent
Together to be thankfully Content,
For these high Favors, which he nere did show
Since Adams fall, to any but to you:
It is content, and thankefulness that makes
Course Fare appear as fine as Costly Cakes:
Then pray for those two Virtues, you that have
More then a useful plenty, yet still crave,
Whilst the profusest Banqueter shall sit
TO invent strange Dishes, 'til he wastes his wit,
And starves his body to. It is not Meat
Only, that makes the body show repleat;
But it is the grace of God that must attend
Our Meals in their beginning and their end.
That feeds the poor man when his Table's spread
With a Course cloth, the Rich man's refused bread,
And his own dear-got pennyworth, which (eat)
He neither does repine, or wish for meat;
This is a life of Peace, Content, and Good,
It cherishes as well the Soul, as blood;
The dis-contented stomachs when they spy
A dish they like, often surfeit, or else die;
So did the Israelites when Quails were sent,
Their plenty did become their punishment:
But let me crave, Oh! thou Omnipotent,
That can, and do allow Food and Content,
Thou Savior, that did the thousands feed
With two poor Fishes, and five loves of Bread;
That did the Tempters rude Request deny,
When as thou said, Man not by Bread only
Must live, but by the precious words that do
Proceed from thee, Grant me those Dishes too:
For then I know Want never can control
My repleat Body or inspired soul,
Let me with joy thy Benefits embrace
And, when thou send'st me Manna, give me Grace.
On Mary Magdalen's coming to the Tomb of our Savior.
Whilst the sad night was dark, and silent, then
To the Sepulcher comes Mary Magdalen,
She fears no idle Fancies af the Night,
Faith in the deepest Darkness, shines most bright,
The Temples rending, nor the Prodigies,
That came to grace the Worlds great Sacrifice,
Frighted not her, but all alone, to the Tomb
Of her dead Lord is poor Maria come,
No Apparition could her terror be
An Apparition, 'twas she came to see.
On Peter called to be a Fisher of Men.
WHen Simon Peter from his Fishers trade
By Christ was called, and a Man-fisher made,
The World soon scorned him, and would not be
Like Fish, by Peter, nor by Jesus Bought;
Yet there is no great wonder in it, for when caught
Have ye known Fish affect the Fishermen,
On Peter's Imprisonment and Release.
IS the Great Shepherd, whom our Savior called
To feed his Sheep and Lambs, like them, installed
Now by a wolvish Tyrant? Or did he
Envy our Peter's office? and would be
Himself in that high place? Badmen (we know)
Desire a Good-man's Title, though they show
No virtue of their Calling, Thieves would be
Termed True men, though their Trade be Felony,
It Is a strange governed Kingdom, where they keep
Shepherds in hold, and Wolves to feed their Sheep:
Must Heavens mighty Keeper now obey
The wretched bondage of a Jazlors Key?
Must Fetters cling about his sacred Bones?
And, for his Guard, four bold Quaternions
Of Lift-depriving Soldiers, such as fly
All acts that tend not unto Tyranny?
What is the Saint accused of? Can your Laws
Inflict a punishment without a Cause?
Was he too Holy for your vicious Time?
Too just? or, was his Innocence his Crime?
It Is a hard case where virtue must entreat
For right, when Guilt sits on the Judgment seat:
Peter this case is thine; yet (thou do know)
Not thine alone, 'twas our great Masters too,
Then since his Neck unto that Yoke did come
There is no Majesty, like Martyrdom:
Observe the Sequel: In the dead of Night,
When Silence ruled the sleepy World, and Light.
Was quite extinguished, (for the Lord did make
It darker sure, for his loved Peter's sake)
For whose abuse Herod and's impious Men
Might well despair of seeing day again:
In prison 'twixt two stout-arm'd Soldiers, there
Most sweetly slept our holy Prisoner,
Though burdened with his Chains, Naught can immure
Rest from that Soul that is from guilt secure:
A sudden Light more glorious than the Sun
Entered the Prison VValls, which first begun
To strike and awake Peter, it is held
A doubt, whether that Peter first did yield
The motion of his Eyes unto the smite
This glorious body gave him, or his Light,
But now he is commanded to arise,
To shake his Bonds off, which he does, off flies
The Locks, and Bolts of Prison-Doors, and He
Follows this Light that leads to Liberty:
Thus, in one Minute, does the Jailor leese
(Spite of his care) his Prisoner, and his Fees.
Imploration.
LOrd fill my Soul with Innocence, and then
I care not though I be in Daniels denn,
In The fiery Furnace naught can me assail;
Were I locked up in Jonah's water Goal;
Just Joseph's pit, or Peter's prison, all
If I remain in Innocence are small:
And, as thou said to Peter, say to me
Shake of thy Bonds, I Will do it, and Follow thee.
On the Penitent Thief upon the Cross.
'TWas time to cry Remember, 'twas an hour
Fit to invoke thy dying Savior
For an eternal life, yet it is strange
To see this blessed, un-expected, Change
In thee, a Thief, how could thou hope to be
Preserved by him, that was condemned like thee?
Or if thou did conceit his power could give
A Life to thee, Why did not ask to live?
As did thy Partner, whose desire was thus,
If thou be Christ, save thou thy self and Us:
Then might ye hope after your strange Reprieves
To rob again, be more notorious Thieves,
Resolve to keep the Passenger in aw,
To steal in spite of Conscience, or Law;
Why did thou ask his Kingdom, there is no place
Fit for thy Trade, No Mask to hide thy face
From the known Traveller; the Wealth he gives
Can never be devoured by Rust, or Thieves:
But this was not thy Aim, thy Lord could see;
'Twas not for this thou cri'dst Remember me:
For thou were Fenitent, and from cach Eye
True drops did fall to purge thy Felony;
What ever thou did force from any one
Thy Tears distilled a Restitution;
But what did cause all this? sure'twas that Eye
That looked and made forgetful Peter cry
After his Third Denial, whose bles'd Sight
Can give a Thief Repentance, blind men, light;
Thence came that Faith, which made thee to believe
This Jesus had a Kingdom for to give:
That taught thee to obtain it, that did show
How by Repentance thou must thither go;
That made thee to cry out undauntly,
When thou come thither, Lord, Remember me:
Let me Sweet Savior take this Thief's advice,
And I shall be with thee in Paradise:
No Faggot, Gibbet, Rack, or Ax shall fear me,
If on my Cross, I have a Cure so near me.
Charity begins at home.
WHen Christ (to save Believers from all evils)
Gave his Disciples power to cast out Devils,
Judas (who did his Master's life betray)
It is supposed, had no less power than they;
And yet we cannot read amongst the many
Great Acts they did, that ere he cast out any
The Obstacle is found, for Judas fins
In the first Rule, where Charity begins,
It was not strange, he dis-possessed none
From others, that could not first cast out': own:
Learn here ye Teachers, ere ye go about
To clear men's Eyes, first take your own beams out:
That then those beams of darkness being gone
Men may behold in you the Beams oth' Son.
On holy Fasting, and on holy hunger.
AN holy Fasting may be called a Feast,
It feeds the fainting Soul, and gives it rest,
He that would gain a life for Everlasting
By God's account, is only full with fasting,
A holy Hunger does suppress all Evil,
That kind of Hunger famisheth the Devil.
On our Savior paying Tribute.
IT was decreed the King of Kings must pay
Exacted Tribute, to a King of Clay:
Caesar must have his Image, and his birth
May well exact it, it is but Earth to Earth:
We are Christ's Image, our Souls only easer,
Why should not he have's due as well as Caesar?
On Paul's healing the Creeple at Lystra.
WHen Christ to Paul his Curing power revealed
And he at Lystra had a Creeple healed,
The astonished People, with hands heaved on high,
Adore him by the name of Mercury,
The God of Eloquence, and well they might
Whose Tongue could make a Creeple walk upright.
On the holy Ghost descending like a Dove.
WHen John (unwilling cause unworthy) lead
Christ into Jordan, ore his glorious head
Hovers a Dove, whose bright wings would not cease
Till they were spread over the Prince of peace;
Well may our Turtles grieve their sad estates,
When Doves from Heaven come to seek their Mates.
Sapiens Dominabitur Astris.
GAve the star light to th'three Wise men from far?
No 'twas their Faith gave light unto the star.
On the Pharisees requiring of a Sign.
YE faithless Pharisees, what would ye more
To show the Coming of our Savior
Then ye have seen? has not his power, and might,
Given Creeples legs? and to the blind their sight?
Restored to life, and health, a Corpse that dyed,
Was shrouded, coffined, engraved, and putrified?
Fed many souls, turned Water into Wine?
Yet (for all this) ye still require a Sign;
Our Savior still, some greater Sign must give;
It is a sign (vain men) you will not believe.
On our Savior's receiving of Children.
EXcept we be converted, and become
As little Children we shall have no room
In God's eternal Kingdom, and who ere
Can be so humble, shall be greatest there,
Or he that will receive so sweet a flower
Into his bosom, hugs his Savior:
But he that shall offend such little Ones
That are believing, better 'twere Millstones
Were hung about his fatal neck; and he
Rendered a prey to the devouring sea:
If Children Lord, are acceptable then
Make me a Child, Let me be born again.
On our Savior's saying, he brought a Sword.
OUr Savior said, he came to bring a Sword
Into the World, it is true, that was his Word,
Lord, strike our hearts with that, and so assure us,
That way of wounding is the means to cure us.
On Readiness Conversion in his Journey to Damascus.
WHen Saul was called to be a Convertite,
God's glorious presence struck him blind with light:
What strange Enygmaes Heaven can devise,
Saul then saw clearest, when he lost his Eyes.
The luster struck him to the Earth, and he
At that rebound rise to Eternity;
Look here Ambition, learn this of Saul,
The only way to rise high, is to fall.
On the words, Scriptum est.
OUr Savior gives the perfect Revelation
To his Disciples of his Death, and Passion,
When Wisemen see known Dangers they prevent um;
Yet Christ foresaw his Wrongs, but under-went um:
He did expect no quiet, ease, or rest,
Until he had performed Quod scriptumest.
An Eclogue betwixt Saul, the Witch of Endor, and the Ghost of Samuel.
The Introduction.
WHen as the proud Philistines did prepare
Their Bands in frightfull order to make War
Against the Israelites, Saul (their wished King)
Marched forth, and unto Gilboa did bring
All Israel, where (till the sad Events
The threatening War had brought) they pitched their Tents:
But when the Host of the proud Foe appeared
To Saul so infinite, he greatly feared;
The rather'cause he did no more inherit
The Divine Power of a Prophetic Spirit:
For now the Power of God had left him so,
That he by Prophecy nor Dream could know
His future fate, from him all power went
That does support Kings just, and innocent:
And now a fearful rage usurpeth all
His nobler thoughts, he does begin to call
For Wizards, Witches, and his Fate refers
No more to Prophets but to Sorcerers:
A Woman must be found, whose breast inherits
The damned Delusions of predictive Spirits:
So in my younger observation
Of this vile World, I have cast my Eyes upon
A fawning Parasite who for some Boon
His Patron had to grant, would beg, fall down
Before him for it; which being denied,
His Humbleness converts to its old Pride,
He grows Malicious, what he did desire
Before with Meekness, now he will win with Ire:
If Cruelty and Murder can prefer
His long-wish'd Ends, he will be a Murderer,
Or any thing of horror, yet will pray
And beg, at first, to have it the safest way;
Though it is not Love, or Service, he extends,
But Flattery to purchase his own Ends:
So Readiness resolved, since Heaven denies to tell
What he would know, makes his next means to Hell:
To Endor goes accompanied by No man;
And, with these words, invokes the Inferual Woman.
Saul and the Witch,
Saul. THou learned Mother of mysterious Arts,
I come to know what thy deep skill imparts
By Neeromancie: Thou whose awful power
Can raise winds, thunder, lightnings, can deflower
The Spring of her new Crop: Of thee I crave
That thou will raise some spirit from the grave,
Who may divine unto me, whether Fate
Will make me happy, or unfortunate
In my next Enterprise.

Witch. Strange Man forbear;
Whose Craft instructed thee to set a snare
For my most wretched Life? Do thou not know
King Saul proclaims himself a mortal foe
To our black College? Has not his Command
Ruined the great'st Magicians of the Land?
Is It not enough, I am confined to dwell
In the dark building of an unknown Cell,
Where I converse with naught, but Batts and Owls,
Ravens and night-Crows, who, from dismal holes,
I send to sick-mens windows, to declare
Death's Embassy, to the offended Ear
Of the declining Patient: Wherefore (pray)
Seek ye this horrid Mansion, to betray
The hapless Owner?

Sau. Woman do not fear,
I do not seek thee out, or set a snare
To get thy Life; for, finish my intent,
As the Lord lives, there is no punishment
Shall be inflicted on thee; I will be
A grateful debtor to thy Art and Thee:
Be speedy then. Oh! how I long to hear
The Message of my Fate!

Wit. Whom shall I rear?

Sau. Old Samuel.

Wit. It Is done. Ye Fiends below,
That wait upon our will, one of you go,
Assume the shape of Samuel, and appear,
With such a Voice, and Likeness: or declare
The Reason why you cannot; for I fear,
Ye dare not do it.

Spirit. Dare not? I am here.

Wit. Oh! I am lost; the unknown Fates decree
Have set a period to my Art and Me.
Why did thou thus thy Royalty obscure,
To take me Acting my Designs impure;
In the midst of them for to contrive my fall;
So sure my Death is, as thy Name is Saul.

Sau. Though thou divin'st me right, yet do not fear,
But let me understand, what did appear
After'thy Incantations?

Wit. You shall know:
I saw immortal Gods rise from below,
And after them, a Reverend aged Man,
Out of the Deep (with speedy passage) ran,
Lapt in a Mantle, his white gentle Hairs
Expressed a Brief of many well-spent years:
Within whose Cheeks, bright Innocence did move,
His Eyes reverted to the Joys above,
(Like holy men in prayer) and now appears
To hear your will, and terminate your fears.

Samuel, Saul, and the Witch of Endor.
Sam. Why from the cold bed of my quiet Grave
Am I thus summoned Saul? what would thou have?
Why must thy Incantations call up me
From secure sleep? are men in Graves not free?

Saul Divinest Spirit of blessed Samuel,
The Causes that by Necromantick Spell
I am induced to raise thee from thy Grave
Are these, within my restless Soul I have
A thousand Torments, The Philistims are
Prepared against me with a dreadful War
And the Almighty who has stood my Friend
In many Battles, given victorious End
To all my Actions, and (in Dreams) would show
Whether I should be Conqueror or no,
All things so near unto my Wishes brought
I knew the Battles End, ere it was Fought,
But now no Invocations can desire
The all-disposing Power to inspire
My Ionging Soul with so much Augury
As serves to prophecy my Misery;
These are the Causes make me thus return
To thee, though sleeping in thy peaceful Urn.

Sam. Com'ft thou to me to know thy Enterprise?
Can Man make manifest what God denies?
Yet I shall ease thy doubt; and now prepare
To hear the fatal passage of thy War,
So sad a Sonnet to thy Soul I Will sing,
Thou Wilt say it is a Curse to be a King;
That all his Pomp, Titles, and Dignity,
Are glorious Woes, and Royal Misery:
As good Kings are called Gods that suppress Evils,
So bad Kings (worse than Men) grow worse than Devils.
But these are exhortations fit for those
That have a Crown and People to dispose;
Alas! thou'st none, but what adds to thy Cross,
Thou have it, to be ruined with the loss;
Thy Diadem, upon thy Head long worn
In Majesty, shall from thy front be torn,
So shall thy Kingdom from thy power be rent,
And given to David as his Tenement;
Before the sun has once his journey gone
Unto the West, thou shall be overthrown
By the Philistines, all this shall thou see,
And then thou and thy sons shall be with me.
But all these sorrows would have been Delights,
Had thou against the Cursed Amalekites
Obeyed the Almighties will. But it is too late
Now to exhort; farewell, attend thy Fate,

Sau. Oh! dismal Doom, more than my Soul can bear
A thousand Furies in a Band appear,
To execute their charge; a Ghost do does bring
News that does make a shadow of a King.
Oh! wretched Dignity! what is thy end?
That men should so their fond Affections bend
To compass their Frail Glory? half these woes
That I have on me, would confound my Foes:
Must these mysterious Miseries begin
With me, the small'st of the Tribe of Benjamin?
It could not else be styled a perfect Thrall;
The highest Riser, has the lowest fall.
Would I had still kept on my weary way,
To seek my Fathers Asses, then to stray
This Princely path of passions; I had then,
As now most cursed, been happiest among men.
Ye Princes, that successefully shall Reign
After my hapless End, with care and pain,
Peruse my pitied Story, do not be
Too confident of your frail Sov'reignty;
If Titularity could safety bring,
Why was it not mine (a Prophet and a King?)
And (for a Friend) what Mortal can excel
The Knowledge of Seraphick Samuel?
Who had he lived, and I his Counsel taken,
I had not (as I am) been thus forsaken:
But now I shake thee off, vain World, Farewell;
Here lies entombed the King of Israel.
All you that stand, be wary lest you fall,
And when ye think you're sure, Remember Saul.

LET US PRAY.
AFter the Creed, our holy Pastors say
Unto their Congregations Let us pray.
The Custom is divine, it argues, they
That are Believers must not cease to Pray.
Sure those three words contain a charm that may
Protect Believers, therefore Let us pray.
Would we resist temptation, the broad way
That leads to black Damnation? Let us pray.
Would we have Names and Honors nere decay,
But flourish like the Springtime? Let us pray.
Would we live long and happy, have each day
Crowned with a thousand blessings? Let us pray.
Would we have Jesus Christ the only stay
Of our sick souls and bodies? Let us pray.
Are we with Judas ready to betray
Our Friends for fatal treasure? Let us pray.
Are we grown proudly wise, will know no way
To Heaven but our own? pray Let us pray.
Are we so full of wrath, that we could slay
Our nearest, dearest Kindred? Let us pray.
Have we committed Treason, and no way
Is left but desperation? Let us pray.
Do we with Dives let poor Laz'rus stay
Fasting, while we are Feasting? Let us pray.
Lest evil-Angels bear our Souls away,
As they did his, to torment, Let us pray.
Are we in dismal Dungeons doomed to stay,
'Till Death allow enlargement? Let us pray.
Are we so used to swear, that Yea and Nay
Are words of no Assertion? Let us pray.
Does Pestilence possess us? lest Delay
Consume us in a moment, Let us pray.
Are we in wrathful War, where Tyrants sway
The sword of black injustice? Let us pray.
Would we return victorious? win the day
From our red Adversaries? Let us pray.
Does Famine vex our Nation, and decay
Our (once too pampered) bodies? Let us pray.
Does Causeless Care oppress us, that to day
We cast for food to Morrow? Let us pray,
Are we despised? contemned? made to obey
The wrath of other Nations? Let us pray.
Are we in sickness, and would gladly play
The sanctified Physicians? Let us pray.
Does Death approach us? lest too long Delay
Lose both our Souls and Bodies, Let us pray.
Would we be ready for Dooms dreadful day?
Let us (like Ninevites) Fast, Watch, and Pray.
Sure sinful Sodom had been saved, had they
With one entire consent said, Let us pray.
And put those words in practice; what we may
Obtain by Faith and Prayer, who can say,
But those blessed Souls in Heaven? If Despair
Poison the Soul, no Antidote like Prayer.
If, in the stead of Disputatious, we
These seven years, had put our Piety
Into the Act of Prayer, we might have bin
Free from those Mischiefs past, or now begin:
Prayer is the Key of Heaven, way to quiet,
The Lands preservative, the Angels diet:
It breaks the rage of Thunder, calms the Ocean,
It is the sweetest Issue of Devotion;
The Soul put into Language, a Design
That (by just claim) does make Gods Kingdom thine
The Princes Treasury, the Earths increase,
The Christian's Sacrifice, the Path to Peace,
If we would have more bliss than Men can say,
Pens write, or Angels tell us, Let us pray.
An Acrostick containing the Ten COMMANDMENTS.
EXODUS XX.
Thy God of Gods I am, whose hand Has Ransomed thee from Egypt's Land, Oh!
then no other Gods implore. I Make no carved Statues to adore. II Almighty God
speak not in vain. III See that his Sabbath thou maintain. IV Jn honor let thy
Parents be. V Oppose thy Wrath, from Murder fly. VI Reject Adulteries, faint
pleasure. VII Do not steal in any Measure. VIII Abandon all false Witness,
never love it. IX Nor let thy Soul thy Neighbors Riches covet. X
Intemperance.
A Fancy upon Words.
HE that is devoted to the GLASS,
The Dice, or a Lascivious LASS,
At his own price is made an ASS,
He that is greedy of the GRAPE,
On Reason does commit a RAPE,
And changes habit with an APE.
The Lover whose Devotion FLIES
Up to the Sphere where Beauty LIES,
Makes burning-glasses of his EYES.
If long he to that IdoI PRAY
His Sight, by Loves inflaming RAY,
Is lost Rob. Wisdom,
For ever and for AY.
Elegiack Poems.
An Elegy on the Death of Mr. John Steward.
IF a sad Stranger may presume to mourn,
And build (in Verse) an Altar ore an Urn,
If Tears that com from Heart-instructed Eyes
Appear no despicable Sacrifice;
If you will conceive Sorrow can keep her Court
In Souls that have the Cause but by Report,
Or if the loss of virtue you believe
Can make its Lover (though a Stranger) grieve:
Admit my Wet Oblation which imparts
Something that shows the effects of mourning Hearts.
You who have had no Tears for your own Crimes,
And cannot vent a Sigh for these sad Times,
Within whose juiccless Eyes was never seen,
Drops but proceeding from a tickled Spleen:
And you who (valor-harden'd) never could
Bestow one stream to see a Sea of Blood,
Though of your Sons, or Brothers; Come to me
I Will teach you true grief in this Elegy,
Steward is dead, a man whom Truth, and Fame
With Virtue, ever shall imbalm his Name;
Crave although Young, who in his heart did prize
Learning, and yet not wittier than wise;
Religious without Faction, and could be
Courteous without the Court Hypocrisy,
Just to his Friends, not Hateful to his Foes,
For he had none, though Virtue seldom goes
By Envy unattended; He was one
In whom appeared much of Perfection,
But Death (the due of Nature) must be paid,
Beauty, and Strength must in a Grave be laid:
So hasty and unwilling to defer
The time, is our great grim, Commissioner;
Then let us mourn, let our true Sorrow swim,
That he is not with us, or we with him:
It Is Good to mourn for Good, as to Regard,
Or pity, is a kind of a Reward:
His latest precious Breathings, had respect
To nothing more than divine Dialect,
Which he committed to his mourning Friends;
In Exhortations for their better Ends
Unlocks his breast, which only could express
Aspiring Prayers, and pious pensiveness;
Thus like a Traveller (that will not stray
To any talk, but's journey, and his way)
Our Peregrine discourses, till at last
As Tapers, near their end give greatest blast,
He dies, and all the Duty I can do
Is on his Hearse to fix a Line or two.
The Epitaph.
UNderneath this Marble lies
Youth's decay, that Merchants prize,
Who trades for what is just and wise.
On this Urn let no man laugh,
Reader, if thou keep him safe,
His Name shall be thy Epitaph.
Let no one here presume to Read
Unless he be by sorrow lead,
To drop a Tear upon the dead.
It shall be but lent, for when
Thou come to the period of all Men,
His Friends shall pay thy Drops again.
On the Death of the most worthily honored Mr. John Sidney, who dyed sull of
the Small Pox.
SIdney is dead, a Man whose name makes furrows
In his Friends Cheeks, channel'd with Tears for Sorrows,
Within whose Microcosm was combined
All Ornaments of Body, and of Mind:
In whose good Acts, you might such vollumes see,
As did exceed the extent of Heraldry;
Whose well-composed Excellencies, wrought
Beyond the largest scope of humane thought.
Indeed, within his Life's short little Span,
Was all could be contracted in one Man;
And He that would write his true Elegy,
Must not Court Muses, but Divinity.
He Is Dead: But Death, I have a Speech, in vain,
Directed unto Thee, where I complain
Upon thy cruel Office, that could find
No way to part his Body and his Mind,
But by a fatal ficknesse, that confounds
The beauteous Patient, with so many wounds;
Sure when thou made his Fabric to shiver,
Thou could not choose but empty all thy Quiver,
What Man (to all odds open) in the Wars,
Dies with such a Solemnity of Scarrs?
Yet his great Spirit gives the Reason why,
Without that Number, Sidney could not die:
And therefore we will Pen it in his Story,
What thou intend'st his Ruin, is his Glory;
So when the Heavenly Globe I Have looked upon,
Have I beheld the Constellation
Of Jupiter, and on all parts descri'd
Th'illuminated Body stellified,
Sprinkled about with Stars, so that you might
Behold his Limbs and Hair, powdered with Light:
This we will apply, that, though we lose him here,
His Soul shall shine in a Caelestial Sphere.
The Epitaph.
IN this sacred Urn there lies,
Till the last Trump make it rise,
A Light that is wanting in the Skies.
A Corpse inveloped with Stars,
Who, though a Stranger to the Wars,
Was marked with many hundred Scars.
Death (at once) spent all his store
Of Darts, which this fair Body bore,
Though fewer, had killed many more.
For him our own salt Tears we quaff.
Whose Virtues shall preserve him safe
Beyond the power of Epitaph.
An Elegy on the lamented Death of the virtuous Mis Anne Phillips, Dedicate to
her Son and Heir Mr. Edmond Philips.
REligious Creature, on thy sacred Hearse
Let my sad Muse ingrave a weeping Verse
In watery Characters, which nere shall dry,
Whilst Men survive to write an Elegy:
Dull Brass, Proud Marble, and Arabian Gold,
(Though they tire Time and Ruin) shall not hold
Their aged Letters half so long, as we
Shall keep thy living worth in Memory:
Obedience was thy study, Truth thy aim,
Wisdom thy worship, Fortitude thy fame,
Patience thy peace, and all good Eyes might see
Thou did retain Faith, Hope, and Charity.
Within the holy treasury of thy Mind,
Were the choice virtues of all Women-kind:
Nothing that had affinity with good,
But lived within thy Spirit or thy Blood;
No costly Marble need on thee be spent,
Thy deathlesse Worth is thine own Monument.
Thoughts of Life and Death, written npon the occasion, ex tempore.
I Never look on Life, but with a loathing,
When it is sterril, and conduces nothing
To my Eternal Being; but when I
Find it devoted to the Deity,
To love my Neighbor, and obey that State
Which God has made next, and immediate,
Under his sacred Power; when I have will
To Forgive him that does me greatest ill;
To calm my Passions, to content my Friends,
And do no Acts that savor of self ends,
Then I love Life; but wanting this, I have
No joy, but to exchange it for a Grave.
An Epitaph on the Death of an Organist.
WIthin this Earth (a place of low condition)
Entombed, here lies, an exquisite Musician:
Living, he thrived by Concord, and agreeing,
Looking from all things, to Eternal being:
In Equal Rule and Space he lead his life;
A constant, honest, Consort to his Wife,
Much troubled Music suffered such derision
By many, that began Points of Division:
He now, without control, no question, sings
Eternal Anthems to the King of Kings.
An Epitaph on Himself.
NAy, Read, and spare not, Passenger,
My sense is now past feeling,
Who to my Grave a Wound did bear
Within, past Phisicks healing.
But do not (if thou mean to Wed)
To read my Story tarry,
Least thou Envy me this cold Bed,
Rather than live to marry.
For a long strife, with a lewd Wife
(Worst of all Ills beside)
Made me grow weary of my Life,
So I fell sick and died.
An Epitaph on a Strumpet, buried at Gravesend, once at my landing there, to go
to Canterbury.
WE read, that Sacred Solomon would have
No nice distinction 'twixt a Whore and Grave:
Since it is so, then now it may be said,
That hear a Grave within a Grave is laid:
She was no Sextons wife, yet now and than
Suspicion said, she buried many a Man;
But now the Grave is dead, why then (my Friend)
The worst is past, You Are Welcome to Graves-end.
An Epitaph on my worthy Friend Mr. John Kirk.
REader, Within this Dormitory, lies
The wet Memento of a Widows Eyes;
A Kirk, though not of Scotland, One in whom
Loyalty lived, and Faction found no room:
No Conventicle Christian, but he Died
A Kirk of England by the Mothers side.
In brief, to let you know what you have lost,
Kirk was a Temple of the Holy Ghost.
FINIS.

