AN HISTORY OF THE Wonderful Things of Nature: Set forth in Ten several
Classes. Wherein are contained I. The Wonders of the Heavens. II. Of the
Elements. III. Of Meteors. IV. Of Minerals. V. Of Plants. VI. Of Birds. VII. Of
Four-footed Beasts. VIII. Of Ins^cts, and things wanting blood. IX. Of Fishes.
X. Of Man.


Written by Johannes Jonstonus. And now Rendered into ENGLISH. BY A Person of
Quality.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, living in Well-Yard near the Hospital of
St. Bartholomew's the Less, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of London,
1657.

TO The most Illustrious Princes and Lords, L. Januszius Radziwilius, the sole
heir of the Illustrious Prince Christopher. L. Boguslaus Radziwilius, the Son
of the most Illustrious Prince Januszius, of most Illustrious Memory. To the
Dukes of Birzae, and Dubink, etc. Princes of S. R. I. D. Boguslaus, Count in
Lesznum, Palatinidae Belzensi, etc. D. Uladislaus Monwid. L. B. in Dorostaie,
High Marshall of the great Dukedom of Lithuania. His most gracious Lords.
Most Illustrious Princes and Lords,
AS all things have their revolutions, so has natural History the same
chance. It was held for a goddess, and much honored in former times; witness
the writings of Aristotle, Pliny, Dioscorides, and other famous men: but now a
days it is so despised, that it is of no esteem at all; this mat^er needs no
proving. I confess the history of Plants is adorned by many, and Mineralls are
made mention of; yet I doubt whether it be entirely professed in any University
or School, (except Bononia, where Aldrovandus was). They that search out the
secrets of Nature, in cursory discourses, fall unfortunatly upon the thorns of
subtilties and snares of questions, and do nothing but weave and unweave them
with a fine thread of controversies. Whence young Scholars suppose themselves
fit to be Masters in Philosophy, when they know how to quote Aristotle for some
things, confusedly and unreasonably for general matters. Most gracious Lords,
how unfit and hurtful that is, I leave to every man to judge. As for me, what
Goudanus the Mr. of great Erasmus speaks of Pliny, I dare to apply to natural
History. That it is such, that who reads it not, is thought to be unlearned; he
that disdaigns to read it, is more ignorant; and he that cannot relish it, is
most ignorant of all: And if there be any consideration had of conversation,
really it is more comely and more convenient for it, and for us to know
wonderful nature, and her motions; to learn the forces and natures of living
creatures, metals, sprouts, plants, to look into the Anatomy of man, and to
contemplate other rare admirable things in nature, than to rest satisfied in a
few general things of motion, of the heavens, of meteors, and of the soul,
(Johannes valent. Andr. in Jnstit. Magica.) and often times to agitate these
things again, till we grow ridiculous. And indeed if the general Principles of
natural Philosophy be looked into, it will appear they cannot consist without
knowledge of History. For being that universalls are built upon particulars,
illustrated, demonstrated, determined, refuted by them, how can he be skilled
in Philosophy, who is ignorant of History? or how can he salve the many defects
thereof, and constitute Axioms that are introductive to action, and search out
the forms, etc? The same will befall him as it befell Ixion, who embraced a
Clowd for Juno the powerful goddess, whom he intended to embrace, and so is
reported to have begotten Centaures and Chimaera's. As for what concerns
action, he shall never change any other metal into Gold, who knows not the
natures of the weight, the yellow color, of the malleablenesse, the
extensivenesse, the fixed and volatile substance of them, and has not
diligently looked into the menstruum, and seeds of minerals. He can never hope
to retard old age, who has not first the knowledge of the nature of dryness,
and of the depredation of the Spirits upon solid bodies; of assimilation, and
alimentation. But the straightning of nature, and daily contesting with her, is
the principal thing whereunto the knowledge of the same is directed. He is to
me a true Son of natural Philosophy who knows how to augment, and multiply the
Winds, to produce new metals, to make mineral Waters; Artificial, of Vitriol,
Brimstone, Alum, etc. and to bring forth new plants and animals. He is a
legitimate enquirer into Nature, who knows how to prolong life, keep back old
age, change statures and complexions, raise the force of imagination upon any
body, cure diseases hitherto uncurable, ease pains, and can hasten the times of
maturity, clarification, putrefaction, concoction, and germination. I will now
say nothing of Natures book, wherein we may behold the supreme power, as the
Sun is seen in the water. For it is certain, that he is comprehended under the
title of natural history, and it is far more easy to find out his goodness
wisdom and power, by the apparition of new Stars, the flowing of the Sea about
Maccareo, the increase of Iron in Ilva, the marriage of palm Trees, the
flowring of Mulberries, the ingenuity of Elephants, the Kingdom of Bees, the
harvest of Pismires, the foresight of Dolphins, and the infinite Sympathies and
Antipathies of things created, than out of those vast discourses of the entity
of materia prima, identity of motion, the measure of time, etc: which are found
in Albertus, Thomas, Scotus, Fonseca, Masius, Ruvius Toletus and others. Who
knows not but that the knowledge of God is the principal end of Sciences? When
I had diligently considered of these things, first induced thereunto by the
writings of that reverend man D. Johannes Andreas, my much honored friend, I
not only conceived a high love of natural History, but I thought my self
obliged to persuade young men that were studious, to do the same. But because I
observed that the Theoreticall part was shut up in huge Volums, and the
practick involved with great difficulties; and I saw that Youth that are given
to idleness, would hate labor; and being addicted to pleasure, would not
endure difficult things; I, imitating the Sons of Aesculapius, (who allure the
sick to use bitter things, use also syrups confections electuaries, etc.) have
culled out the most pleasant things, (and if any be doubtful, it was done to
spur them on) as much as my other occasions would suffer me, which I had in
Poland, being Tutor to the most noble Kurtzbachius de Zwada: as also by my
proper studies in the low Countries, out of the huge volumes of Pliny,
(concerning whom, I like that saying of Lipsius He that calls Pliny his works
Pandects, in my opinion shall not err; for that man read, knew all, and shut up
Greece and Italy in one volume) Agricola, Gesner Aldrovandus, Libavius,
Mathiolus, Scaliger, Cardan, and many more writings, and by these my purpose
was to invite with entreaty the studious youth, that labor so much in the
common principles of natural Philosophy, to a more serious scrutiny of Nature.
But, most illustrious Princes and Lords, when, as the manner is, I sought for a
Patron, I thought this work did of duty belong unto your Name. For If it be
considered; the examples of Solomon, Alexander, Mithridates, Diocletian,
Francis the first King of France, and others, will teach you, that the
knowledge of natural Philosophy belongs also to Princes and to great men. If
you; I confess, the hope of Poland now, and in time may be the Stars, of that
Country, that with the beams of their light, will vouchsafe to illuminate the
Church, the Commonwealth, and schools of learning. If I; I have drawn these
things forth chiefly for the good of my Nation, and I study other things, if
God please to lend me space to perfect my intentions. Yet I deny not, but it
may be I owe more to you already than I can pay. For, most Illustriuos Prince
Janusius, you were pleased at Lipsia to invite me to your Table, and to
discourse with me. And the most illustrious Lord Alexander Przybkowic
Przybkowsky, your high treasurer, thought me worthy, to have the offer of a
place in your illustrious family, if occasion were. Most illustrious Lord, how
great your Nobleness was to me, my conversation at Lesna with the most learned
Lord Michael Henry, a most excellent Chemist, and your hof-master; and with the
reverend Mr. David Ursin, a man of singular fidelity and prudence, who sojourns
with you, may sufficiently witness. Also, most Illustrious Lord Boguslaus,
your letters are sufficient testimonies, whereby you often spoke to me when I
lived in Holland, and the good words you spoke of me being absent, most
lovingly when you departed from Lesna. Wherefore, most illustrious Lords,
whatsoever this small work is, I lay it down at your feet; and you I hope will
receive a small gift of a thankful mind, with that Heroic humanity that is
bred in you; and think, that I owe you much more, but I cannot give you more
than I do. God grant that the Majesty of Arts buried in our minds, may be
recalled and brought to life again by your promoting voice, and be restored to
its former luster. As for me, if I find that you accept of these things, and
that they are useful for our students, I shall endeavor to handle these
things more accurately, and to frame a complete Circle of Arts and Sciences in
a small history, that young students may have the fruit of it, and may more
happily be promoted in the course of their studies. I wish it. In the mean
while, that you most Illustrious Lords, may live long for the glory of God, and
good of your Country. Given at London, May 15 old style, Anno 1631.

Your most Illustrious Highness and Greatness, most bounden Servant, John
Jonston.

The Contents of all the Chapters and Articles contained in this Book.
The Contents of the First Classis.
Chapter 1. OF the World, Page 1 Artic. 1. Of the Creation of the World, Page 1
Artic. 2. Of the parts of the world, and disposing of them, Page 3 Artic. 3. Of
unity, figure, and soul of the World, Page 4 Artic. 4. Of the Duration of the
World, past, and to come. Page 5 Artic. 5. Of the hidden qualities of natural
bodies. Page 6 Artic. 6. Of Gods Providence in the World, Page 7
Chap. 2. Of Heaven, Page 8 Chap. 3. Of the Stars, Page 8 Article 1. Of the
Force and Nutriment of the Stars, Page 8 Artic. 2. Of the Light of the fixed
Stars, their magnitude and motion, Page 10
Chap. 4. Of the Five lesser Planets, Page 17 Chap. 5. Of the Sun, Page 18
Artic. 1. Of the Magnitude and Unity of the Sun, Page 18 Artic. 2. Of the Suns
light, and Eclipse, Page 19 Artic: 3. Of the Suns Motion, Page 20 Artic. 4. Of
the Inequality of Days and Nights. Page 21 Artic. 5. Of the Four Parts of the
Year. Page 22 Artic. 6. Of the Sun's shadow. Page 23 Art. 7. Of the Suns
Influence on Inferior things. Page 24
Chap. 6. Of the Moon. Page 24 Artic. 1. Of the Figures and light of the Moon.
Page 24 Artic. 2. Of the Spots and Eclipse of the Moon. Page 25 Artic. 3. Of
the Moon's Influence on these sublunary things. Page 26
Chap. 7. Of New Stars. Page 27 Chap. 8. Of Astrologicall Praedictions. Page 29
The Contents of the Second Classis.
Chap. 1. Of Fire. Page 33 Artic. 1. Of the Wonderful beginning of Fires. Page
33 Artic. 2. Of Fires in the Waters* Page 34 Artic. 3. Of Fires under the
Earth. Page 35 Artic. 4^ Of the beginning or subterraneall Fire, Page 36 Artic.
5. Of the Miracles of Fires in duration, burning, and quenching, Page 37
Chap. 2. Of the Air. Page 39 Artic. 1. Of the three Regions of the Air. Page
39 Artic. 2. Of the Infection of the Air, Page 40 Artic. 3. Of the Putrefaction
of the Air. Page 41 Artic. 4. Of Attraction, cooling, and penetrating of the
Air. Page 42
Chap. 3. Of the Water. Page 43 Artic. 1. Of the quantity and color of Waters.
Page 43 Artic. 2. Of the Taste of the Water. Page 43 Artic. 3. Of the Smell of
the Water: the first and second qualities. Page 44 Artic. 4. Of the Diverse
running of the Water. Page 44 Artic. 5. Of the change of quantity and of
qualities, in Waters. Page 45 Artic. 6. Of some other things admirable in
Waters. Page 46 Artic. 7. Of some Floods or Waters; and of the Universal
Deluge, Page 48
Chap. 4. Of the Original of Fountains. Page 50 Chap. 5. Of Mineral Baths.
Page 53 Chap. 6. Of the Sea. Page 55 Artic. 2. Of Navigation in the Sea, Page
55 Artic. 3. Of the depth, freesing, and colors of the Sea. Page 57 Artic. 4.
Of the Salt of the Sea, Page 58 Artic. 5. Of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea.
Page 59
Chap. 7. Of the Earth, Page 64 Artic. 1. Of the New World. Page 64 Artic. 2.
Of the Miracles of some Countries* Page 66
Chap. 8. Of Islands. Page 67 Artic. 1. Of the Original and destruction of
Islands. Page 67 Artic. 2. Of the Miracles of some Islands. Page 68
Chap. 9. Of Mountains. Page 69 Artic. 1. Of the Qualities and Quantities of
Mountains. Page 69 Artic. 2. Of Aetna and Hecla Mountains. Page 70

The Contents of the Third Classis.
Chapter OF Subterraneall Exhalations, Page 73 Chap. 2. Of Comets. Page 74
Artic. 1. Of the Nature and quantity of Comets. Page 74 Artic. 2. What Comets
are a sign. Page 75
Chap. 3. Of an Ignis Fatuus, Helena, Castor and Pollux. Page 76 Chap. 4. Of an
Ignis Lambens. Page 76 Chap. 5. Of Lightning, Thunder, and Thunderbolts, Page
78 Chap. 6. Of Winds. Page 80 Artic. 1. Of the Original of Winds. Page 80
Artic. 2. Of the kinds and effects of winds, Page 81
Chap. 7. Of Earthquakes. Page 82 Artic. 1. Of the Cause of Earthquakes. Page
82 Artic. 2. Of the place, time and effects of Earthquakes, Page 83
Chap. 8. Of Rain, Page 85 Chap. 9* Of Snow and Hail, Page 86 Chap. 10. Of Dew,
Manna, and Honey. Page 87 Chap. 11. Of the Rainbow. Page 88 Chap. 12. Of some
wonderful Meteors. Page 89
The Contents of the Fourth Classis.
Chapter 1 Of Mineralls in general. Page 91 2 Of Marle and Potters-Earth. Page
92 3 Of Terra Lemnia, Armenia, and Silesiack. Page 93 4 Of Salt, Page 94 5 Of
Alum and Nitre. Page 95 6 Of Calcanthum or Vitriol. Page 96 7 Of Naphtha,
Petroleum, and Maltha. Page 96 8 Of Pissasphaltum, and the ways of Embalming
dead Corpse. Page 97 9 Of Camphir. Page 98 10 Of Amber or Electrum. Page 99 11
Of Ambergreece, Jet* and Earthy Bitumen. Page 100 12 Of Coral. Page 101 13
Brimstone and Stybium. Page 101 14 Of Juices that grow into stones. Page 102 15
Of the Loadstone. Page 103 16 Of the Stones, Schistos, Galactites, Gip,
Selenites, Amiantus. Page 106 17 Of Stones that represent diverse Forms. Page
107 18 Of the Eagle stone, Enhydros, the Touchstone, and the Pumex stone. Page
108 19 Of the Glasse-makers stone, and the Looking-glass stone, Page 108 20 Of
the Crystal, Iris, and the Diamond. Page 110 21 Of the Opalus, Emerald,
Heliotropion, and Topaz. Page 111 22 Of the Amethyst, Hyacinth, the Sardonix,
and the Onychile. Page 112 23 Of the Jasper, Nephritick stone, and an Agate.
Page 112 24 Of the Ruby, the Carchedonius, Sandastrus, Chrysolite, and some
others. Page 114 25 Of Jewels found in the bodies of living Creatures. Page 114
Artic. 1. Of the Dragon stone, the Chelonia, the Cock stone and Toadstone. Page
114 Artic. 2. Of the Stones Chelidonium, Crabs eyes, Snail Stones, and Bezar.
Page 116
Chap. 26. Of Gold, Page 117 Chap. 27. Of Silver. Page 119 28 Of Quicksilver.
Page 120 29 Brass and Copper, Page 121 30 Of Lead, Page 122 31 Of Iron. Page
123 32 Of Fossil Flesh dug up. Page 124
The Contents of the Fifth Classis.
Chap. 1. Of Plants in general, Page 127 2 Of Wormwood, Wolfsbane, and
Snapdragon. Page 129 3 Of Aloes, Lignum Aloes, and Camomill, Page 129 4 Of
Ammi, Holly, Ceterach, and the Strawberry-Tree. Page 130 5 Of the Cane reed,
Asserall, and Agnacath. Page 130 6 Of the Scythian Lamb, the bashful Plant, and
Amfia. Page 131 7 Of the Balsam Tree, and Betel. Page 132 8 Of Betonie, Birch,
and Box. Page 133 9 Of Batat, Boxera, Brusathaer, and Baaras. Page 133 10 Of
Cachi, Cacavate, Cassia, our Ladies Thistle, and Corallina. Page 134 11 Of
Cinnamon and Cedar. Page 135 12 Of Chamaeleon, Cloves, Gilloflowers, and
Cichory. Page 136 13 Of Saffron, Cherries, Cachi or Ciccata. Page 136 14 Of the
Cornel, Cypress and Cucumbers, Page 137 15 Of Onions, Celandine, Hemp, and
River Sponge. Page 138 16 Of Hemlock, Ciacompalon, and Cocco. Page 138 17 Of
Doronicum, Dragons, Olive-honey, Vipers-Bugloss, Eryngion, Euphorbium. Page 139
18 Of Elaterium, Hellebor, Eupatorium, Emitum and Fennel, Page 140 19 Of Fennel
Giant and the Fig Tree. Page 141 20 Of the Ash, Mushrooms, and the Beech. Page
141 21 Of Guajacum, and Gentian, Page 142 22 Of Broom, Ginger, and St.
Johnswort. Page 142 23 Of Elecampane, Turnsole, and Hiuca. Page 143 24 Of
Impia, Juniper, and Glassewort. Page 144 25 Of the Bay Tree, Mastick-Tree, and
Flax. Page 144 26 Of the Larch-Tree, Lilly, Loos-strife, and the Lote-Tree.
Page 145 27 Of Malabathrum, Punic and Assyrian Apples, and the Tree called
Mangueis. Page 146 28 Of Musk and Moss, Page 147 29 Of Mandragora, Mallows,
and the Mulberry-Tree. Page 148 30 Of Napellus. Page 148 31 Of Nyctegrotus,
Granum Nubiae, Nutmegs, and Olive Trees. Page 149 32 Of the Palm Tree, Page 150
33 Of the Plane-Tree, Apple Trees, and the Tree called Paternoster Page 151 34
Of Pepper, Plantain, Pimpernel, wild Tansie, herb Paris, and Papyr. Page 152 35
Of the Oak, Rhubarb, Rape-root, and Rosa-solis. Page 153 36 Of Crow-foot, Rue,
Rosemary, Rose-root and rose-Tree. Page 154 37 Of Scorzonera, Squills, Sage,
Scordium. Page 155 38 Of Nightshade. Page 156 39 Of Mustard, Satyrium, and the
greater Saxifrage. Page 157 40 Of the Turpentine, and Frankincense Trees. Page
157 41 Of Wheat and Thyme, Page 158 42 Of Tobacco. Page 159 43 Of Trifoly,
Teucrium, Thelyphonon, Yew, Thapsia, and Thauzargent. Page 160 44 Of the Vine.
Page 161 45 Of Xaqua and Zuccaro. Page 163 46 Of other miraculous Trees. Page
163 47 Of the prodigiousnesse of some Trees. Page 165
The Contents of the Sixth Classis.
Chap. 1 Of the Eagle. Page 167 2 Of the Hawke, Page 168 3 Of the Assalon and
Heron. Page 169 4 Of the Horn-Owl and Aluco. Page 169 5 Of the Goose, Page 170
6 Of the Kings Fisher, of Ducks, and the Bird Emme. Page 171 7 Of Barnicles.
Page 172 8 Of the Owl and Cormorant. Page 173 9 Of the Feldifare and
Goat-Sucker. Page 174 10 Of the Cuckoo. Page 174 11 Of the Crow. Page 175 12 Of
the Rook, and Chrysaethos. Page 176 13 Of the Pigeon. Page 176 14 Of the Swan.
Page 177 15 Of the Stork. Page 178 16 Of the Faulcon. Page 179 17 Of the Hen
and Cock. Page 179 18 Of the Crane and the Woodwall. Page 180 19 Of the Chough.
Page 181 20 Of the Swallow. Page 182 21 Of the Osprey, the Ibis, and the
Loxias. Page 183 22 Of the Kite. Page 183 23 Of Manucodita and Gull or
Cormorant. Page 184 24 Of the Owl and Musket, Page 185 25 Of Onocrotalus, and
Rhinoceros. Page 186 26 Of the Parrot. Page 186 27 Of the Phoenix and
Woodpecker. Page 187 28 Of the Pie, Page 188 29 Of the Peacock. Page 189 30 Of
the Pheasant and Sparrow. Page 189 31 Of the Partridge. Page 190 32 Of the
Ostrich. Page 191 33 Of the Scythian Bird, and the Castrel. Page ibid* 34 Of
the Thrush, and Torquilla. Page ibid. 35 Of Urogallus, Page 192 36 Of the Bat.
Page 193 37 Of the Vulture. Page 194
The Contents of the Seventh Classis.
Chap. 1. Of the Elk and Ram Page 206 2 Of the Ass. Page 207 3 Of the Boar,
and the Archopitecus. Page 208 4 Of the Ox. Page 208 5 Of the Buffe, Bugle, and
the Bonasus. Page 209 6 Of the Camel. Page 209 7 Of the Goat. Page 210 8 Of the
Beaver, and Colus. Page 211 9 Of the Cat and Coney. Page ibid. 10 Of the Stag.
Page 212 11 Of the Dog. Page 213 12 Of the Marmaset and the Catoblepas: Page
215 13 Of the Baboon and Chamaeleon. Page 216 14 Of the Crocodile. Page 217 15
Of the Horse. Page 218 16 Of the Urchin. Page 219 17 Of the Elephant. Page
ibid. 18 Of the Dormouse, and the Gulo. Page 221 19 Of the Hyaena, and the
Porcupine. Page ibid. 20 Of the Buck-Goat. Page 222 21 Of the Goat called the
Evick, and the Indiat Rat, Ichneumon. Page ibid. 22 Of the Lion. Page 223 23 Of
the Hare. Page 224 24 Of the Wolf. Page ibid. 25 Of the Lizard, Page 225 26 Of
the Lynx and Lutra or Otter. Page 226 27 Of the Mouse. Page 227 28 Of the
Wesil, and the Sable Wesil. Page 228 29 Of the Sheep. Page 229 30 Of the Wild
Goat called Oryx, and the Panther or Leopard. Page 230 31 Of the Frog. Page 231
32 Of the Rangifer, and Rhinoceros. Page 231 33 Of diverse Serpents. Page 232 34
Of the Squirril, and Ape-Fox. Page 233 35 Of the Ape. Page ibid. 36 Of Su and
Subus. Page 234 37 Of the Sow. Page 234 38 Of the Mole. Page 235 39 Of Tatus
and the Tiger. Page 236 40 Of the Tortoise. Page 236 41 Of the Bear. Page 237
42 Of the Fox, Page 238 43 Of the Unicorn. Page 238
The Contents of the Eighth Classis.
Chap. 1. Of the kinds of things without blood, Page 241 2 Of Bees, Page 244 3
Of Spiders, Page 246 4 Of Silkworms. Page 247 5 Of the Spanish Fly, and the
Glo-worm. Page 248 6 Of the Grasshopper, Page 249 7 Of the Crabfish, and the
Shellfish breeding Pearls. Page 250 8 Of the Snail, Page 251 9 Of the Gnat,
Page 251 10 Of the Sea-Urchin, the Ephemerus, and the Catterpillar, Page 252 11
Of the Pismire. Page 253 12 Of the Horsleech, and Hippocampus. Page 254 13 Of
the Locust, that is an Insect. Page 254 14 Of the Sea-Hare, the Lobster, with
his shell, and the Calamarie. Page 255 15 Of Pearls. Page 255 16 Of the Fly,
Page 256 17 Of the Nautilus or Boat-like Fish, Page 257 18 Of Oysters and fish
with hard shells, Page 258 19 Of the Butterflye, and the Polypus. Page 259 20
Of the Lowse and Flea, Page 260 21 Of the Beetle and the Cuttle. Page 261 22 Of
the Scorpion, Page 262 23 Of Worms in Wood, and the Tarantula. Page 263 24 Of
Worms. Page 263 Article 1. Of Worms in Brute Beasts. Page ibid. Artic. 2. Of
Worms in Men. Page 264 Artic. 3. Of Worms in Plants. Page 264 Artic. 4. Of the
Indian Worms, and the March Worm. Page 266
Chap. 25. Of Wasps. Page 266
The Contents of the Ninth Classis.
Chap. 1. Of Hornback, Sturgeon or Elops, of the Dace or Groundling. Page 289 2
Of the Eele. Page 290 3 Of the Whale, and the Barbel. Page 290 4 Of the Carp,
the Clupaea, and the Conger. Page 291 5 Of the Dogg-fish. Page 292 6 Of
Dracunculus. Page 293 7 Of the Dolphin, Exocaetus and the Fiatola. Page 293 8
Of Glanis and Glaucus. Page 294 9 Of the Herring and Huson. Page ibid. 10 Of
the Pike and Luna. Page 295 11 Of Manaty, and the Whiting. Page 296 12 Of
Mirus, Mola, and Monoceros. Page 297 13 Of the Mullet and the Barbel. Page 298
14 Of the River- Powt, and Lamprey. Page 296 15 Of the Perch and Sea-Calf. Page
296 16 Of the Scale, and the Indian Reversus like an Eele. Page 300 17 Of the
Remora, and the Sea-Scarus. Page 301 18 Of the Sea-Serpent, and the Sturgeon.
Page 302 19 Of the Salmon and Turdus. Page 302 20 Of the Torpedo, and the
Tuni^. Page 303 21 Of the Uranoscopus, and the Sword-fish. Page 304 22 Of some
other Wonders concerning Fishes. Page 305
The Contents of the Tenth Classis.
Chap. 1. Of Man in general, Page 307 2. Of Nourishment, Page 309 Article 1.
Of the harmless feeding on venomous things. Page 309 Article 2. Of the eating
of other unusual Meats. Page 311 Artic. 3. Of great Eaters. Page 311 Article
4. Of monstrous drinkers* Page 312 Artic. 5. Of some Secrets concerning
Drunkenness. Page 313 Artic. 6. Of Bread. Page 315 Artic. 7. Of wonderful
Fasting. Page 315
Chap. 3. Of Concoction. Page 317 Article 1. Of the Liver and Spleen. Page
ibid. Artic, 2. Of Humors in general. Page 317 Article 3. Of blood Page 318
Artic. 4. Of Urine and Reins. Page 320 Artic. 5. Of Marrow. Page 321 Article 6.
Of Sweat. Page 322 Article 7. Of insensible Transpiration. Page 323
Chap. 4. Of Increasing Page 324 Article 1. Of Giants. Page 324 Artic. 2. Of
Pigmies, Page 325
Chap. 5. Of Generation, Page 326 Article 1. Of Seed. Page 326 Artic. 2. Of
menstruous Blood and Milk. Page 327 Artic. 3. Of the Generative parts. Page 329
Artic. 4. Of the Female Sex. Page 329 Artic. 5. Of the noise of the Womb. Page
330 Artic. 6. Of numerous Births. Page 331 Artic. 7. Of monstrous Births. Page
333 Artic. 8. Of the recompense Nature makes to Monsters. Page 334 Artic. 9. Of
Nations of diverse Forms. Page 338 Artic. 10. Of a wonderful Antipathy between
the Father and the Son. Page 339 Artic. 11. Of some Wonders concerning
Generation. Page 339
Chap. 6. Of Vital action. Page 340 Article 1. Of the Heart. Page 340 Article
2. Of the Pulse. Page 342 Artic. 3. Of Life and Death. Page 342 Artic. 4. Of
Venomous infection. Page 344
Chap. 7. Of the internal and external Sense. Page 345 Article 1. Of
Imaginations of melancholy people. Page 345 Article 2. Of the force of
Imagination. Page 346 Artic. 3. Of Sight and Smelling. Page 346 Artic. 4. Of
the Face. Page 347 Artic. 5. Of Dreams. Page 348 Artic. 6. Of Walkers in the
Night* Page 349 Artic. 7. Of some things observable concerning the Head and the
Senses. Page 350
Chap. 8. Of the faculty of moving from place to place. Page 351 Artic. 1. Of
the wonderful strength and agility of some people. Page 351
Chap. 9. Of the rational Soul; and principally of Memory. Page 353, 354
Scalig. l. 1. de Plantis. I Always thought the compass of Wisdom to be, as
it were, the Treasury of our Mind, into which I suppose we ought to bring all
the tribute of our Cogitations and Inventions; yet only such as are honest:
from whence every Man may fetch for his own use without Envy, or Grudging. For
we are all one Body, and there is but one Spirit of this Body, which proceeding
from God, watches for the common Good.

To the Right HONORABLE* Edward Lord Mountague, Baron of Kimbolton, Viscount
Mandevill, and Earl of Manchester.
My Noble Lord,
THis Excellent HISTORY concerning The Wonderful Things of Nature, was written
in Latin; and digested into Ten Classes, by a Native of another Country: who
was himself indeed A Wonder in Nature, and might well make up the Eleventh
Classis with the History of himself, for his general and vast understanding in
the Universe, as will appear to all men that will take the pains (so full of
profit and delight) to read his Writings. In his Lifetime he was much
conversant in England and Scotland, to search out the Wonderful Things in
these Nations. And if Englishmen well weigh and consider it, they cannot but
thankfully make their returns unto Almighty God for it, since there is no
Country of the World that is in all things comparable to Great Britany it
self, being adorned with so many strange and wonderful things. I shall not
need to mention the particulars (which have furnished the Author in several
Classes with some varieties.) For I fear the World will judge that I have said
too much already unto your Honor upon this Subject (who is far better
acquainted with the Wonders and Rarities of these Nations than my self) and
that I have betrayed my own Ignorance, to offer a Translation of mine, unto
your Honor, who is so well versed in the Original, and which cannot be
paralleled when it is made to speak any other Language. But I hope your Honor
will excuse this Attempt, because the Author was a great Lover of our
Country, and therefore it was held convenient to make him a free Denizon, and
to speak English for the public Good, which your Honor has always labored
to advance by your honorable Actions; and I fear not, but your Nobleness will
tenderly Embrace what is undertaken for that end; though this Translation can
add nothing to your Honor, but seeks for honor from your noble Patronage.
Yet since it pleased God to afford me this opportunity to put your Honor in
remembrance of me, who was formerly a Scholar at Eaton College, and
contemporary with your Honor; and that I once had the happiness to be
domestic Servant unto your Honour^ Noble Father, who now rests in God, and who
was then pleased to honor me so much, as to have the review, and commit to the
public view his, Immortal and Pious Work, entitled, Contemplatio Mortis et
Immortalitatis, the fruits whereof he now enjoyes. And that his Honor, for
above 40 years accepted my Father to attend so near his Person to do him
Service for his bodily health; I knowing also how much I owe to the Memory of
your noble Uncles, to that Reverend Prelate of the Garter James Lord Bishop of
Winchester, and Sir Sidney Mountague, who were both my Honored Patrons; I
might be taxed with high ingratitude, if having nothing better to present your
Honor with than this Famous Authors Work, (though in a meaner dress) I had
unadvisedly dedicated it to any other Person, and overpast so fair an occasion,
whereby I now express my due Respects unto your Honored Father's Memory, and
to all your Family, and in particular to your Honor, to whom I and my Fathers
house stand so much obliged. My humble Suit is, that your Honor will let pass
all other Considerations herein, and to regard only the grateful Mind of him,
who shall always pray God to bless your Honor, and your Noble Family, with
all blessings Temporal and Eternal, in Him who is the Fountain of all
blessedness, the Lord Jesus Christ; and shall remain

Your Honors in all obedience, John Rowland.

OF THE DESCRIPTION Of Natural Wonders.
The First Classis. Wherein are contained the Wonders of the Heavens.
ABove there are vast spaces, and the mind is admitted into the possession of
them: But so, if it bring no corporeal thing with it, if it scour off all
sordid matter, and be quick agil, and seem content with what is moderate,
Seneca nature. quaest. l. 1. Praefat.
CHAP. I. Of the World.
Article 1. Of the Creation of the World.
PYthagoras calls this whole Consistence of bodies (...), and the Latins from
its beauty call it Mundus. Ocellus says, it was from eternity, de universo
Aristotel. l. 8. Phys. and some others. We affirm, that it was created at the
beginning by the glorious Trinity; and by faith we understand, that the world
was Made. The History is in the Scripture, but the perfect description in
Moses's Works, Genesis 1. Nor can the censorious rod of Galen, or of the memory of
the Apostles, whereof mention is made by Bishop Turribius, detract any thing
from it. The dictates of the Holy Ghost cannot be false, the knowledge of God
is free from error. The eternity of Cardan drawn from the salt of the Sea,
lib. de subtle. is as easily rejected as propounded. It is a weak proof, that
all pure things were made at first; I add, and a false one. Chrysippus apud
Laertium amongst the Stoics, speaks boldly: If there be any thing, that can do
that, which a man with his reason cannot do, that thing is greater, stronger
and wiser than man; but a man cannot make heavenly things: Therefore he that
made them excells man in Art, Counsel, Prudence and Power. What therefore can
that be but God? All that is, was made of nothing, and by the Word let it be
made. Empedocles is false, concerning the concourse of Atoms; (of matter and
quantity coeternal) also that is false in Plutarch, That the essence and
matter whereof the World was made, was not first created, but was always ready
for the Workmaster, and was fit to be compounded and digested, and made, as far
as possible it might be to his own likeness. But nothing was with God, before
he made it, that was not God himself. He it is, that calls things that are not,
as though they were. Hermes in Pimander, The Workmaster made the whole World,
not by hands, but by his Word. Moses writes, that all things were made in six
days; Some think this was only for order sake, and for our instruction.
Augustine thinks, all things were made together in a moment. Philo writes
acutely of the making of the World. Moses says, The World was made in six
days; not that God the Maker of it needed time to do it, (for God is not only
thought to work by commanding, but by contemplating) but because it was
needful that things should be created in some order: and this is a proper
number for order; and six amongst all numbers is fittest for generation, for it
is the first perfect number after a Unite, consisting of parts whereof it is
made; of three that is one half of it; and two a third part, and one a sixth
part, being of a masculine and feminine nature. As for the time, it is supposed
to be Autumn, as it is collected from the Feast of gathering in of fruits in
the end of the year, and from the month Tisri, which answers to September,
Bartolin. c. ult. gener. Phys. Some say, the Spring: Ambrosius in Hexametro:
Thence it behoved the World to begin, where there was a Spring-like temper fit
for all things. Whence it is that the year sets forth the Image of the World at
first beginning, and after winter cold, and frost and mists, the clearer
brightness of the Spring shines forth more than ordinary. Macianus Scotus puts
the Lords Day on the 15th of the Calends of April. Macrobius describes the
Generation. His words are; In the making of the World, Aries was in the middle
of the Heavens; the Moon in Cancer; the Sun rose with Leo; Virgo with Mercury;
Libra with Venus; Mars with Scorpio; Jupiter was in Sagittarius; Saturn in
Capricorn. We shall say with Firmicus, The Day it was made upon, is uncertain.
For the time is different in places; nor was there any then. For all secular
things began with the World. If you look at the end, it is the glory of God,
and the good of Man. Look which way I will, I see exquisite marks of Gods
Wisdom, Goodness, and Power. Contraries are here parted, and yet coupled by
bands in the mediums. Hence his wisdom appears; The actions have recourse in
order; hence appears unity: there is neither old age, nor change, nor
weariness; thence his power is manifest: every thing had a sufficient
perfection given to it, and is content with it; thence we see his goodness.
They are all from God, and they tend unto God; thence is glory.

Article 2. Of the Parts of the World, and the disposing of them.
We need not be overcurious for the matter of it. It contains the Heaven with
the Stars; the Elements, Meteors in the Air, Fishes in the Waters, Minerals in
the secrets of the Earth, Plants, Animals and Man are in the upper surface.
They are all material and corporeal things, which wise men include in it, and
they are all realities. Heaven is thought to be uncompounded, the Elements
serve for composition, Meteors are imperfectly mixed; Minerals perfectly, but
without life; Plants with life, but without sense; Beasts with life and sense,
but without reason: Man with life, sense and reason, is the compendium of all,
a little world in the great world. The perfection is as great as the matter
could bear; the Workmaster could give more, but the Matter was not capable of
it, Scalig. Exerc. 243. s. 3. The goodness is confirmed by the decree of God:
Genesis 1. verse. ult. He saw, and behold, all things were good. The manner of
ordering them in this great Engine, Zeno in Laertius amongst the Philosophers
has declared; That God at first, whilst he was alone, changed all essence by
Air into Water; and as in the birth the seed is contained; so God who is the
seminal cause of the World, left such a seed in the moisture, that should
afford an easy and fit matter for this work; for the generation of things
afterward. Then he first produced the four Elements, Fire, Water, Air, Earth,
etc. Trismegistus in (...), speaks true; There was, says he, infinite
darkness in the deep, and the water, and an intelligible spirit were by Divine
virtue, existing in the Chaos; wherefore the holy light was taken away, and the
Elements were congealed and fastened beneath of a moist substance, and all these
embraced, and were in love with a seminall nature. And when all things were
undivided, and not set in order; they were parted; and things that were leight,
chose the uppermost place; heavy, the lowest; moist, the dry Land: all of them
being divided by the Fire, and hanging in the Air, and carried by it. And the
Heaven appeared in 7. circles, and the gods appearing in the Aspects of the
Stars, with all their signs, and the whole circumference was distinguished, and
with the gods that are in it was circumscribed with the circumambient Air, and
carried by a moving Divine spirit. And every God by his own virtue produced
what he was commanded, and there were brought forth four-footed beasts,
creeping things, Fishes, Birds, and every seminall plant: and grass and
flowers, and every herb, contained in themselves seeds of regeneration: and the
Generations of men were for the knowledge of Divine things, etc. But Moses sets
it down most truly, Genesis Chap. 1.

Heaven and Earth, and Light, the first day are:
The Firmament dividing Waters second were.
The third, the waters parted, Plants, the Earth:
The fourth to Sun and Moon and Stars gives birth.
The fifth gives Fishes, and all kind of Birds:
The sixth brought Cattle, all made by Gods Words:
Then Man was made; the seventh rest affords.
Danaeus in Phys. Christiana. Artic. 3. Of Unity, Figure, and Soul of the World.
DEmocritus and Empedocles supposed, that other worlds were made successively
of some indivisible small seeds. Hence Alexander complained, that he had not
yet conquered one. Origines, (...), said, they were infinite successively; that
the Elementary world was made every 7 thousand years, and the heavenly once in
4900 years. For the Sabbath for the earth, and the year of Jubilee was wont to
return every 7th year, and every 49, years. Leo Hebraeus touches upon this
opinion, Dialog de Amore; where he says, The inferior world by the opinion of
the old divines is generated corrupted and renewd once in 7000 years. But
because we see nothing moved in it confusedly, nor any thing set without it,
whither shall we go out of it? Our desire is answered. For in the end of our
cogitations, the same question always returns. Wherefore we say, that there is
but one world, and the figure of it is plain, like to a skin stretched forth
very large, says Basilius. But Plato held, that it was like a Circumvex,
pointed with many Angles. Sanchumates Berytius the most ancient writer of the
affairs of Phoenicia, said it was like to an Egg, wherefore at the feasts of
Bacchus they religiously adored an egg, as the emblem of the world. Some
compare it to the greek letter O, in which the outward lineament represents the
Ocean, Dalecham P. ad l. 2. Plin. hist. c. 3. But that it is made like a Globe,
not only the name and consent amongst men that call it so, but every man's eyes
can tell him; for it is unequal, and one half, look upon it which way we will.
Plato. Of which living creatures he would have all other living creatures
contained, he framed that of such a form, that in that one all the rest might
be contained. The Sto^cks would have it to be a living creature, endued with
sense and reason. Hence grew that description by its parts. The Starr, (says
Plutarch of the face of the Moon) are shining eyes in the face of the world,
they run their race; the Sun is in place of the Heart: as this affords blood
and spirit, so that sends forth heat and light; the world uses the Earth and
the Sea, as a living creature does its belly and bladder; The Moon between the
Sun and the Earth is as the Liver between the heart and belly, or some soft
bowel, and attenuating its respirations by some concoction, and purgation,
scatters them about. Elegantly, but not true! For the world has no known soul;
if we ascribe any thing to it, all will be but a diffused force, common to all,
and in proportion we may call it a soul. For what the soul is in bodies, the
same is force diffused in the universe. Combach. in Phys. cap. de Mundo.

Artic. 4. Of the Duration of the World past and to come.
THe duration of the World both past and to come, is sought out by many, but no
certainty is proved. The Egyptians formerly boasted of 48000 years past, in
their History; the Chaldaeans 470000; The East Indies 700000. The Egyptians
are disproved by their disagreement: one of them reported 20000, to Solon that
asked him; another 1300 to Herodotus. The Chaldaeans allege that in 48863
there have been only 832 luminaries: But the doctrine of Astronomy shows these
to be trifles. If this were not, it might be; yet Diodorus in Augustus his
time, searched for the greatest antiquity of the Egyptians, and found scarce
4000. Calisthenes Nephew to Aristotle by his sister, found the Chaldaeans not
to be 2000; Simplicius reports it. Amongst our Chronologers, the Christian
Epoche is uncertain; nor is there any beam so clear, to discuss these Clouds.
Abraham Bucholzerus, with Mirandula and Reusnerus, says, it was created before
the said Epoche 3970 years. Buntingius, 3968; Mercator, 3967; Scaliger, 3947;
Beroaldus, 3929; Broughtonus, 3928; Pareus, 3927; Pavellus, 4022. Hitherto
Scaliger has been preferred, yet it is thought that Pavellus has discovered
his imperfection. The uncertainty concerning its end is greater. Macrobius
defines it by 15000 years. Orpheus by 12000, Cassander counts 30 times 6000000.
Ber^sus, as Seneca says, contends that the earth shall be burnt, when all the
Stars meet in Cancer, and a flood should be in Capricorn. Amongst Christians,
Liborovius will have it to be 1666; Rossinus 1656. ( Libavius in declam. de
comet. anni 1604). Cusanus 1700, or else the space that goes before 1734. That
as after the first Adam, (they are Cusanus hi^ words) the consumption of sin
came in the 34th Jubilee by the waters of the flood, in the days of Noah,
according to Philo; so we conjecture that after the second Adam, in the 34th
Jubilee shall come the consumption of sin by fire. (Nancelius cites it, in
analog. Microcosm. cum Macrocosmo. l. ult.) Augustinus and Lactantius define it
by 6000 years. Alstedius holds the term to be uncertain, but it is certain, it
shall not be before the year of Christ 2694, (in Thesauro Chronolog. c. 6. et
diatrib. de mill annis). A certain friend dreams of some thousands. Napeirus
is of one mind, Copernicus of another. What shall we say to this? It is not in
man to declare these things, or to know them; the Angels know them not, nor
yet the Son of man. God has kept these times in his own power. Thomas speaks
true, All those that undertook to determine the time of the end of the world,
have been found false, and so shall all that shall undertake the same
hereafter. Be the time never so uncertain, yet certain it is, it shall have an
end. The word of God says it; The Heavens and the Earth shall pass away. Luc.
21.23. Christ, in Matthew, 23, foreshews the forerunning signs. The Stoics set
down the manner in the flood, and in the consuming by fire, and the Hebrews
seem to consent. For they affirm that the Sea should ascend above the Mountains
tops 40 cubits (Petrus Comestor in Nancelius). Aristotle and Plato universally
deny it. It is known by the word of God to Christians, that the world perished
by the flood, and the burning of it, is expected. For St. Peter says, c. 2.
and 3. but the Heavens that now are, and the earth are reserved for the fire,
at the day of Judgment. But whether there shall be another world differing
essentially from this, or this shall be renewd wherein we live, is a question.
The Apostle says, The fashion of this world passes away: the holy Fathers,
Basil, Eusebius, do imply an alteration; and Seneca, in his disputes. Every
creature shall be generated anew, and a Man shall be given to the earth, that
knows no wickedness, and bred from better principles: yet he adds, Their
innocence shall not last longer then while they are first bred; for wickedness
will soon break in. He differs from us, because he makes eternal innovations;
which we admit not. The censure of Tatianus against the Gentiles. Does any man
determine God to be a Body? I think, He is without a Body. Does he think the
world incorruptible? I think, It is corruptible. That it shall be burnt by
degrees? I think it shall be but once for ever.

Artic. 5. Of the hidden qualities of natural bodies.
I Said, that natural bodies were containd in the world; now I say that they
are so ordered that they have their peculiar virtues, and in some things they
are partakers. Every one has its nature, they are containd in place, measured
by time, defined by number, they begin, they perish, they move, augment,
diminish, they act, and suffer. Amongst the rest hidden qualities are admirable
according to which there is either consent in things, or jarring and discord;
Philosophers call this sympathy and antipathy. The first and second qualities
are no causes of these things; examples of them are spread through the whole
field of Nature. The raging Elephant grows calm if he see a Ram; and if he
see a Rhinoreros, he is angry. The tender flesh of sheep bitten by a Wolf, and
the wool woven also, will breed Worms. Cattle almost dead, and men faint, are
revived by the smell of bread. Pencerus de divin. sect. de Astrolog. Porphyrio
a bird will dye if it look on a Whore. Woodpeckers will, with grass, drive out
wedges. A Stag draws out Arrows with dittany. The venom of the Tarantula is
driven away by the sound of Music and dancing by measure, Alexander ab Alexan.
l. 2. genial. dier. Many will sweat if a Cat be present. Quercetan in
diaetetica, and make water at the sound of the harp. Scalig. excerc. 344. s. 6.
One was driven from a feast at the sight of Apples, if we credit Quercetan. A
boy's lips swelled by eating of eggs, and his face was spotted with black
spots. Marcel. A Monk, says Lusitanus, swounded at the smell of a Rose.
Another hated bread and flesh, and lived only upon eggs. One espied an old
woman at a feast and could not endure her, and when he was forced to stay, he
was carried forth dead. One swounded with the combing of his hair. Demohon the
builder of Alexandria was cold in the Sun or a hot Bath, and hot in the shade.
The same is said, of a certain Idiot that clothed himself with skins in Summer,
but went naked in Winter. Pontanus his dog would eat no Cocks flesh; but
Scholtzius his, would houl lamentably when the strings of a Lute were wound
higher. But when they were tuned as they should be, and sounded harmoniously,
he was quiet. I say no more. Libavius de Antipathia rerum. The cause of all
these things is hid; But it is certain that the most eminent of them arise from
those qualities, that both agree with their forms, and are moved by the force
of them. The knowledge of secret forces appertain to natural magic, wherein we
had need of a wonderful caution. Alvernius lib. de universo writes that
Turnsoil will make men invisible, and that quicksilver put between two reeds
will hinder witchcraft; That Rue taken away by stealth, and Basil planted with
a feast will grow the more abundantly, says Trievius de Demon. decep. and he
adds that 7 grains of a certain herb cast amongst the guests at a drinking
feast, will make them fight up to the ears in Blood. These are fooleries, and
confuted by propounding them, Delrius l. 1. disquis. Magic. c. 3.

Artic. 6. Of Gods Providence in the World.
GOd was not pleased only to make all these things, but he would have them all
under his Government, and Providence. Hence comes the preservation of the
beings and virtues of things; and the disposing of them all after the freedom
of his will, the wise ordering of all things. In this are the ends set orderly,
the means to these ends are exquisitely disposed, and being disposed, are most
wisely directed. This Providence was so often and forcibly maintained by the
Stoics, that they became a sport and a jest to their adversaries, who called
this, The fatal old Wife of the Stoics that foretold future things. Epictetus
in Arrianus, speaks admirably; What concerns the gods, some deny there is any
God. Some say there is, but an idle careless Deity, that provides for nothing.
There is a third sort, that maintain there is a God, and that his Providence
governs, yet only in great and heavenly matters, but in no earthly thing. A
fourth sort say, That he takes care for heavenly and earthly things, but in
general only, not for particulars, and for every one severally. But there are
a fifth sort, wherein Ulysses and Socrates, who affirm, That I cannot, O God,
be hid or deceive thee in the smallest motion. There is here no place for
fortune, nor for casual and needless violence, That Eternal Light spreads his
beams every way, and at the same instant he pierces into all the windings and
depths of the Heavens, Earth, and Seas; nor is his Divine Nature only
President over all these things, but is in them all.

CHAP. II. Of Heaven.
THe Wisemen ascribed the first place amongst bodies to the Heavens; both
because it is simple, and also is set in the highest place as principal. Some
write, that it is of the same nature with sublunary things, and not amiss; for
the Scripture writes, Psalm. 102. that it shall wax old like a garment. Also the
generation of new Stars seems to intimate as much: All the space in these that
reaches to the fixed Stars, is filled with air; and it is so much the more
pure, light, and hot, as it comes nearer unto them, etc. If you consider the
magnitude, the Heavens are the greatest body; the Earth is but a point in
comparison to it. The number is but one; yet Astronomers have distinguished it
into diverse orbs* Eudoxus into 23. Calippus into 30. Aristotle 47. Ptolomy 31:
Regiomontanus 33. The common opinion is, that there be Ten; to which if you
add the Heaven of heavens, ( Aquiba called it, the marble Table of the World,
Maimon. l. 1. perplex). they will be eleven. The consideration of the Tenth
amongst them is wonderful; For they say, it is ten times greater than the
eighth sphere, and than the earth 1960; and they say, that in 24 hours it goes
469562845 miles, Bodin. l. 5. Theatr. The Miracles of the 9th are not small.
The Ancients say, it proceeded one degree in one hundred years; the Neotericks
have observed 44 minutes. The period of its motion is 49000 years, if we credit
Alphonsus; but Copernicus says, 25816. This period is called, the great and
Platonic year. It is a wonderful Engine, and all the great works of men
compared with it, are less than nothing. Plato l. 10. de Repub. imagined a
certain spindle, as bright as a Diamond, contained in 8 wheels; and he makes
the Heaven to hang by that, lest it should fall. But alas poor man, why so?
There is a God that supports it; who gave it a power to stand fast at first,
when he made it: yet this shall go into smoke, and shows us, that nothing is
stable contained in this World.

CHAP. III. Of the Stars.
Artic. 1. Of the Force of the Stars, and Nutriment of them.
MAhomet said, That the Stars hang in the Air by golden chains: That the
Workmaster set them in the Heavens, bright and round, we religiously
acknowledge; that they were made for signs and seasons; All men know, that they
shine and communicate their virtue to sublunary things; which is done, by
sending forth their beams: the will of man, and works of Artificers, are out of
this account. There is in these no mixture of new qualities; but only an
accidental species is induced to a body ready made. The mind is free from the
Elements; if it suffer any thing, it is by the mediation of the Instruments of
the body, the temperament whereof Men's manners easily follow. Hence you may see
an error; That the characters were formed by a certain position of the
Heavens, and are moved by a stronger power from the Heavens. Plato says false,
That the Souls before they come into the bodies were made subject to some Star.
These are toys, That Stars are appointed for every one of us, bright Stars for
rich men; little ones for poor men; dark ones for defects; and some for every
man's condition, Pliny l. 2. Histor. Nature. c. 8. There is not so great Society
between Heaven and us, that for our destiny the brightness of the Stars should
be mortal. Our chance is in Gods hand: It is false, That Jacob read his sons
destinies in the Tables of the Heavens.

More writes elegantly of one White, in an Epigram: White in the Stars did often
his Wife behold,
That she was chaste and good he all men told;
He looked to find her in the Stars once more,
And then he did proclaim her for a Whore.
But that thy Wife was common, though thou see
Through all the Stars, not one declares to thee.
Cleomedes in lib. de (...), speaks something of the nutriment of the Stars, as
Dalechampius cites it, and the Stoics observed the same. Laertius (in Lipsius
in Manuduct. ad Physiol. Stoicam.) says, That these fiery Stars are fed and
nourished, (the Sun and Moon, and the rest) the Sun by the great Sea, as being
the great Torch, and a kind of burning endued with understanding: But the Moon,
by fresh waters, and such as may be drunk because it is mingled with the Air,
and is near to the Earth. Wherefore Macrobius in Somnium Scipionis ascribes it
to providence, that the Ocean was placed under the torrid Zone. That all that
space which the Sun and the rest of the Planets and the Moon wander up and down
in, on this side and that side of the Eccliptick, may have moisture for their
nourishment. The opinion seems absurd at first; yet Ambrosius l. 2. Hex. c. 3.
thought so; nor does Libavius l. 5. de origin. rerum, seem to deny it. Lucianus
says, there shall be a common bone-fire for the world. Whence shall this
burning be, but that moisture must fail? and that cannot fail, but for
nutriment. Yet see that you make not a combustion amongst the Stars, by
assuming an aetherial spirit into the nature of the Stars.

Artic. 2. Of the light of the fixed Stars, with their magnitude and motion.
THe 8th sphere contains the fixed Stars, and those in number numberless.
Alongtime men observed 1022, which the Phoenicians reduced to constellations.
Braheus added 74, Houtmannus 14, about the Antartick pole. Bartholin. de Coelo.
c. 3. Also they are of diverse magnitudes, yet all greater than the Earth,
except the sixth magnitude. The magnitude will give you the vast distance: we
see them like sparks of fire, yet Astronomers reckon 14000 diameters of the
earth. They have their own natural light which shines to men in the night, not
that it is put out in the day by the Sun beams, but that the medium being
enlightened admits of the more forcible species, the lesser and weaker is
carried through the medium unperceived. Scalig. exerc. 6.2. Historians observe
that they have been seen in the daytime, and not without some token. In
Commodus his times they were seen a whole day, some were drawn forth at length,
as though they were fastened in the Air. The slaughter of the Parthians
followed, civil wars, and the killing of five Emperors in one year. The same
thing was seen in the reign of Constantius, from Sun rising till noon, about
Sun set the Sun first appeared with crooked horns, and then but half, some
suppose it was an Eclipse. Cardanus saw two at Millan, l. 14. de varietat. rer.
c. 70. One Anno 1511, and the French were driven out of Italy: another 1535,
and the death of Francis Sfor^ia followed, and because he died childless, the
Prince was changed, Charles took the Government. Lastly the 9th of June, this
year there was one seen in England before noon, when a solemn thanksgiving was
made to God for the birth of the Prince of Wales. we were certified that some
French men saw the same at Diep the same time. There is a wonderful matter in
their motion. Besides their own, which is made from North to South upon the
poles of Aries and Libra, they are said to be drawn by the 9th sphere from west
to east. Hence it comes that they are all moved from their places. Braheus
says in a hundred years they are drawn back, one degree, 25 minutes. Meto, who
flourished in the 130th year after Thales, observed the Starr of Aries to be in
the Equinoctial. Timochares, that it gained two degrees, Hipparchus four and
nine minutes, Ptolomy 6, and 40 minutes, Albategnius 18, and 12 minutes, Alphonsus
23, and 48 minutes, Vernerus 26, and 54 minutes, Bodinus 28 and 20 minutes; The
bright one in the utmost tail of the little dog, which is for the pole Starr,
Hipparchus observed to be 12 degrees distant from the pole of the world, we see
it but almost three now adays. Cardan says, that the heads of the motions of
this Orb will be not only in contrary places, in the year 1800, but the motion
will be contrary also, and he collects from thence that there will be strange
alterations in the Christian religion, de varietat. rer. l. 2. c. 3.

CHAP. IV. Of the Five Planets.
THe wandering Stars are called Planets. The Ancients accounted them to be
seven; Those of our times have added four about Jupiter, and no fewer about
Saturn. Each of them has its own sphere, its nodes, epicycle, and its aequant.
Their motion is more free than the rest: sometimes they are present with
mortals, sometimes they depart from them. Hence arise the names of Aux, and
Absis, Peregaeum and Apogaeum amongst Astronomers. But so great is the
difference, that Saturn requires 30 years, Jupiter 12, Mars 2, Venus 360 days,
and Mercury as many. Venus is a Planet, by her sirnames that stands in
aemulation with the Sun and Moon. For rising before the Sun, she is called
Lucifer, like another Sun hastening the day; again shining in the West, she is
called Vesper, or the Evening Star, as prolonging the light, and standing in
place of the Moon, Plin. l. 2. c. 9. The cause of their wandering motion, some
ascribe to the Sun, who either by its beams sets them forward, or removes them
on one side, o^ departing from them, lets them remain in their own places.

Extraordinary influences, Medicaments, Baths, Phlebotomy, Plantings, choice of
business, change of the Air, are by some tied to the hour of their position.
It is observed, that the Plague grows fierce about Wittenburg, when Saturn
moves in Leo or Sagittarius, and abate^ by the access of Mars; the same thing
is threatened to them at Norimberg, by the signs of Gemini or Sagittarius. Those
that Mars and Saturn being in the angles, assail with a quartile aspect, are
short-lived; if they pass their Infancy, it will be difficult for them to
attain the flower of youth; their conjunction increases their force.

If Mars and Venus are in conjunction when one is born, the concupiscible
appetite is contaminated; more, if it be in Capricorn, and Mercury be present.
By the concurrence of Mars, Mercury, and the Moon, men have subtle wits,
Peucerus l. de divinat. s. de Astrologia* But this is a lesser conjunction.
That is a great Conjunction, which is made by Saturn and Jupiter; one happened
in the seventy year and 200 days. The signs of the Zodiac are run through,
that at the beginning of the first meeting there may be a conjunction of the
Planets; the Learned called it a revolution, Alsted. in thesauro Chronologico.

There are seven reckoned since the World was made, and constant observation
has proved, that none of them ever came without some notable alteration. All
things were heroical in the first conjunction; at the second, men despised
Noah's preaching; at the third, there were great pressures in Egypt. The fourth
was 17 years after, when Rome began to be built: the fifth was in the 26th year
of Christ. The Bishops of Rome pretended the Donation of Pipin and Constantine,
when the sixth was. The seventh was in the sign of Sagittarius, in the year I
was born in, 1603. the last was in Leo, 1623. what this shall produce, God
knows.

The City of Rome about the 800th year under its fiery sight, was thought to be
renewed. At the beginning of that, happened the dispersing of the Jews; what if
about the end of it, the calling of them again may be?

CHAP. V. Of the Sun.
Artic. 1. Of the Greatness and Unity of the Sun.
EPicurus thought the Sun to be an accidental Globe, and fire, but an earthly
gross Body. Anaximander thought it was red-hot Iron, the Peruvians think it a
GOD; and so did Aurelianus a Prince of old; May the gods do it, and the Sun the
created god, in Vopisco. Porphyry writes, that it was adored in the East under
the name of Mytra, in his Comment. de Nymph. cultu. And Macrobius shows, l. 1.
Saturn. cap. 17. That all the gods of the Gentiles were extended to the Sun.
After him Cluverius Polyhistor, in Germ. antiqua. So great reverence was there
toward it, in the minds of the Gentiles. It is with us the Principal Planet,
and the great Luminary. It is greater than the Earth 167 times; and it is
distant from the Earth in its Apogaeum, 1012868 miles, Kecherm. in his
Astronomy. It is but one, and where is there room for more in so great a
magnitude? yet there are more also. That is but one of which we speak, the rest
are but figures and draughts of this one beautiful Sun. The Philosophers call
them Parelia, they have always some future signification, as we frequently
observe, and find it.

In 1514. there were 3. seen; in each there was a bloody sword. The Reformation
followed. So, many were seen in Helvetia, in 1528: a wonderful Famine was the
sequel of it.

In 1532. at Venice they were seen with two Rainbowes opposed to the Sun; one
presently vanished, but the other was seen for two hours, Cardan. l. 14. de
varietat. Rer. cap. 70. The Suns themselves were transparent, the greater was
Southward, the less Northward, increasing.

In the year 1314. before the War of Lodowick of Bavaria, and Frederick of
Austria, more Suns were seen: they signified the dissentions of the Electors,
and their falling to sides. Peucer. in Meteorol.

Before these troubles we saw it; a Comet with a fatal tail followed. Because
the Empire of Nero had the same beginnings, the future event might easily be
foreknown.

Artic. 2. Of the Suns light, and Eclips.
THe Thalmudists hold that the light of the Sun was seven times greater in the
Creation, but was lost afterward. We see it very great and ruling almost every
where. For the Sunbeams enlighten and enliven all things. Cardan maintains
that by the force of it, the Southern parts are pressed down lower, but whether
it be so, every one may judge. And though at Rhodes or Syracuse there never be
a day that the Sun is not seen in some parts of it; Plin: l. 1. Cap. 62. yet it
is certain that the Suns light is often intercepted. When Constantine was
blind, the Sun did not shine for 17 days. In Plinies time ^e was often 12.
days, in Leo's time 4. days. So never seen that Mariners lost their Course
Maiol, Colloq. 1. But this was only a Clouding. An Eclips is somewhat more, when
the Suns beams are turned away from by interposing of the Moon. Barbarians
understand not this, whence Columbus foretelling the Moons Eclips, won the
favor of the Indians. It was a Capital crime in Plath's days to maintain that
the Moon could hold the Sun beams from us. Alexander Aphrodis. Problem, 46.
Some thought the Devils were the cause, and therefore ran to assist it with
lighted Torches. Archelaus was so ignorant, that the day the Eclips of the Sun
was, he shut up the Court, and shaved his son, as the custom was in time of
adversity and of mourning, Senec. l. 5. de benefic. C. 6.

The Eclipse of the Sun happens in the new Moon, or in the Conjunction, nor
real, but appearing so, when Sun, Moon, and our eyes are in the same right
line. It it be total, it is in a moment in respect of the parts. It was so
when Scipio fought and overcome Hannibal at Carthage, Zonaras, Tom. 2.
Nicephorus says the same happened at Augustus's death, Sometimes in five years
some are seen. Maiolus thinks they produced Wars, Famines, and Deaths of
Popes. It seems to be certain that both of them may be Eclipsed twice in six
Months, and in five Months, either of them: and that the Suns light may be
twice taken from one Country in the period of seven Months, Peucer. in
Astrolog: Some are of opinion their operation begins afterward; I dispute not,
but this is certain they never appear, but they foreshew something. When in
the year 3343, an Eclips was seen, the most corrupt state of the Kingdom of
the Jews appeared. In the year 3350. began the 70 years captivity. In 3360,
the Temple and Jerusalem were destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar. About the Eclips in
1619, Stars were seen at noonday, and the War of Peloponesus began with the
Athenians. In the year 360, the Sun was Eclipsed until noonday, and also in
592. What followed? Phocas confirmed the Popes supremacy, 622, wicked Mahomet,
sowed his mischief. Alsted in Thesaur Chronol: In 812, before the Death of
Charles the great, a Spot of a black had appeared for seven days, witness
Eginbartus. It seems to intimate, say some, the darkning of the Gospel. In 1415
the 7. of June, so horrible was the Eclipse of the Sun, that birds fell to the
Earth, At this time John Hus was burned in the Council of Constance, the 6. of
July, That was supernatural at our Saviors passion. It was a total Eclips at
a full Moon, and lasted three hours. Dionysius said of it, Either the God of
nature suffers, or the frame of the World dissolves. He afterward, consulting
with the Philosophers, built an Altar to the unknown God, and was converted by
St. Paul's Preaching. Tertullian in Apologetico says, it was laid up amongst
the public Acts of Rome, but forbidden to be published. Also there is a
notable use of Eclipses amongst Chronologers, especially of those, which with
certain circumstances of time, Year, Day, Month, Hour, Minutes, and of the
distance from other Eclipses, were exactly taken, such as was the Eclips at
Arbelia in C^rtius; or Peloponesus, in Thucydides; at Cambisia, in Ptolomy.
Powel in his Consilio Chronologico. For there are certain bounds and Characters
of times fastened in the Heavens, hence Calvisius commends Scaligers Chronology,
because he has observed Phainomena, and Eclipses, almost according to the
years of the World, out of the Tables of the Heavenly motions, and are fitted
to the same. Hence the Calyppic period, comprehended in 76, years; in which
time all conjunctions of the Planets, new Moons, and full Moons, and Eclipses
return to the same moment of time. See the famous Chronologer Pavellus,
treating accurately of these things. I hasten to other matters.

Art: 3. Of the Suns Motion.
THe Mahumetans fain that the Sun is carried with Horses, and sets in the Sea,
and well washed rises again. Daily experience shows us a double motion, we
see it rise every day, and set again: and every year it makes an Oval figure,
passing to North and South. Yet so right under the Ecliptic, that it swarves
not a hair from it: The complement of the motion in the Zodiac varieth with
many. Hipparchus assigns to it 365 days. Ours, 6 hours less. Tebitius says
that there want nine minutes of the 6, hours. Henricus Mechiniensis, has
written, that all those shall err perpetually, who observe Eclipses by the
Tables of Ptolomy, or Albategnius. Bodin. 5. Theatri Naturae. It is the vulgar
tenent, to assign 365 days, and 6, hours. In that oblique course, we observe
the Sun to be nearer the earth, whilst he passes through the Southern signs,
and to be further off in the Northern. That is finished in 178, days, 21
hours, and 12 minutes. This requires 186, days, 8 hours, 12, minutes. But
because the distanc^ of the Eccentrick is variable from the center of the
World, therefore Melancthon and Origanus write, that the Sun is nearer to us
now than in Ptolomies days, by 9900 miles, but Copernicus and Stoflerus cast
it to be 26660 miles. Alsted in Theoria Planetarum. Scaliger dislikes this,
Exerc. 99. sect. 2. Nor is it probable, says Bodin. l. 5. Theat. in so great
variety of distance that the knowledge of Eclipses could be so exactly
preserved. The Scripture tells us that the Sun went backward miraculously in
Ezechiahs days, as was known by the shadow on the Dial. The History of Josuah
witnesses that it stood still, and made a day of 36, hours, Justin Martyr, in
Dialog: cum Tryphon. Some think the Sun danceth when it rises on Easter Day,
and honors our Saviors Resurrection in Triumph. If that be so, it is
necessary for it to dance a whole day, because it rises the whole day. What
ever this is, it must be ascribed to the Air, interposed betwixt, which, about
the Sun rising, abounds with Vapors, and if at any time, most in the Spring,
because the pores are open, and it sends forth more Vapors, Camer. Cent. 2.
Memorab. p. 39.

Artic. 4. Of the inequality of Days and Nights.
WHen the Sun comes to the Horizon, the Day rises with us; Night comes when
the Sun departs. But because it moves obliquely, and is girt within the bounds
of both Tropicks, it keeps equality under the Equinoctial; it varies which
side soever it declines: yet the greater it is, the farther the Countries are
distant from the equator.

In Arabia, a Province of the new World, the Days and Nights are always
equal. Geographers have written the same of Peru, Ovetan, in Summa.

In a Country of Africa called Gambra, in the month of July, the Night is no
shorter than 11. hours; The Sun rises suddenly without dawning. The
Troglodites and men of Africa have but 13. hours to their longest day, Strabo,
l. 1. They that live under the Pole of the Stars in the spring-Equinox; see the
Sun rising; but in the Autumnall, setting, Mela. l. 3. c. 2. Hence it is, that
they have half a year day, and then half a year night. The Hollanders, at the
Straights Vaigats, from the 4th. day of November, to the 24. day of January,
have found but one continual Night under the degree of 71. Boethius, in the
description of the Narrow Sea, Vaigats.

In Laponia, one Night lasts 3. months, and there is in that time no more
light, than the Moonshine or clear twilights afford, Zigler. in Laponia. In
the farthest part of Norway the Sun is not hid in the night. In another
Northern Climate, the Nights are very bright, at the Summer Solstice. Saxo
Grammaticus.

The Day and Night with us are equal, when the Sun enters Aries and Libra;
they are longer when he is in the Tropic of Cancer; shorter in Capricorn. The
month of June is said to contain the longest day, the shortest is assigned to
the 25. of December. The more superstitious are persuaded, that strange things
are seen the night before. The Olive Tree, and the white Poplar, and the leaves
of Willowes are said to be driven about. Macrob. l. 9. c. 7. The moisture in
Trees ascends upwards from out of the root. The Apple Tree brings forth
blossoms and unripe fruit. Some strings of Instruments are struck with the
fingers, and the other strings sound. Suetonius l. 1. Ludicra Historia. The
small livers of Mice are increased. The kernells that are shut up in Apples are
turned the contrary way. Cicero, lib. 2. de Divinat.

Artic. 5. Of the Four Parts of the Year.
THe motion of the Sun through the Zodiac makes a Year. Mathematicians make
this to be twofold. The one is the space in which the Sun goes from the Spring
Equinox, and returns to the same again; and it consists of 365 days, five
hours, 49 first minutes, 10 seconds. The other is from the time the Sun departs
from the first Star in Aries, and returns to the same again; and it consists of
365, 6 hours, 9 first minutes, seconds 23. Copernicus appointed this, and he
deserved great thanks for it, Of the former there are four parts, Spring,
Summer, Autumn, Winter: Spring and Autumn make the Equinoxes; this the Winter
Equinox, that the Summer. They both happen, when the Sun passes the Line. The
most certain sign of the Springs approach, is the Butterfly, being a weak
creature. Pliny in histor. Natural. Cancer makes the Summer, when the Sunbeams
are vertical with us. It is inflamed by the rising of the Dog Star, says
Pliny, l. 2. c. 40. yet it were more Philosophical to say, that when the Sun
repeats his Journey, he raises hot blasts and wind; whence our bodies partake
of great heat. Truly, sometimes it is extreme, if we credit Histories. I read
in Livy, l. 4. Histor. That in the year of Rome 322. not only rain from Heaven
was wanting, but the Earth also wanted its inbred moisture, that the Rivers
that run continually were almost dry; that many Fountains and Rivers wanted
water, that the Cattle dyed for thirst.

In the year 1153 the Woods were fired with overgreat heat, the fat Earth took
fire, and could be extinguished with no rain. Mergerius. The German Records
report, That in 1228, the heat was so great, that the Harvest was ended (I will
use their own words) before the Feast of St. John Baptist. Lipsius cites it in
his Epistles.

In the year 1573. the Wood of Bohemia burnt 18. Weeks. The Danube was so dried
up, that in many places one might foord it. And what is wonderful, there was
no loss in the Corn. But in 994. in the end of July, the Lakes and Waters were
so hard frozen, that all the Fishes dyed, and there was great scarsity of
water. Cardan thinks it is a mark of an over-hot Summer, de varietat. rer. l.
15. c. 38. if old sheep are very much given to lust in the Spring. Men write,
that there was so pleasant an Autumn in the year, 1584. that the Roses and
young branches flourished. It is our Winter when the Sun enters Capricorn, then
all things quake, are covered with Snow, and bound up with Ice. The Sun
foreshews a most bitter Winter in the Northern parts, when he hides himself in
a red clowd, as a pillar of fire, and casts out his beams like fiery darts.
That descending, it is turned into black. Cardan. l. 1. Or when things that use
to be moist seem dryer, or drops dripping from houses fall more slowly. And
sometimes the winter has been excessive. Chronicles say, that in 1234. the
winter was most fierce, so that in the Adriatic Sea the Venetian Factors
passed over the Ice with their charge of moneys. Zonaras reports the like to
have happened under Constantine Copronymus: so in the Pontick Sea, and the
Straights adjoining. Marianus Scotus.

In the year 32. of Charles the Great, there was a great and most bitter Frost,
so that the Pontick Sea was frozen 100 miles in the East, where it was 50
cubits from top to bottom. In the year 1525. the winter was so cruel, that in
Brabant* an infinite company of E^l^s by reason of the Ice went forth of the
Lakes, which is a wonderful thing, and hid themselves in Hay-ricks, and
perished there with extremity of cold, Robertus de Monte. The Trees had hardly
any leafs afterward in May. Sometimes the winters are so calm too. In the year
1225. in December the Peach Tree budded* In 1186. in December and January,
Crows and other birds hatched their Eggs with young.

But these diverse parts of the year for length and duration comes from a diverse
position. They that live under the Pole are it is probable in perpetual cold;
and they are more hot that live under the Equinoctial. They under the
Equinoctial have a double most pleasant winter, and a double Spring. He that
would know more of this may read. Mayolus Colloqu. de proprietat: locor.

Artic. 6. Of the Sun's shadow.
TWo things chiefly are observable concerning the Suns shadow, the operation
and the diversity. It can hardly be said how great it is. Men skilled in the
Optics have described it more acurately. It shows the reason of Eclipses, the
Suns magnitude, the variety of Eccentricks, the condition of time has been
demonstrated by it. Men are taught thereby to define the climates and
parallells, to prove the Earth to be round, and that the Earths Globe stands
exactly in the midst of the Universe, to know the Earths magnitude: etc.
Examples show the diversity; Those that dwell Northward between the Tropic of
Cancer and the Arctick Circle, their Noon-shadowes are cast Northward, and to
the Southern people Southward. They of Finmarch and Groenland, and that pass
the degree of elevation 66, see the shadows run round about them: Gauricus in
Geograph.

In Syene a Town above Alexandria, 5000 furlongs, at noonday on the solstice,
there is no shadow at all, and a pit was made to make experiment of it, and the
Sun shined to every part in it. Pliny, l. 2. c. 73. And in India above the
River Hispasis, the same falls out a^ the same time, as Onesicritus has
recorded.

In the Island of Merce, which is the chief of the Ethiopian Country, the
shadows fail twice a year, and in Summer they are cast Southwards; in winter
toward the North. In the same, in the most famous Haven of Patales, the Sun
rises on the right hand, the shadows fly Southward. It is lastly manifest,
that in Berenice a City of the Troglodytes, and from thence for 4820 furlongs
in the same Country, in the Town of Ptolemais, which is built on the brink of
the red Sea* at the first hunting of Elephants, the same thing falls out 45.
days before the Solstice, and as many after it, and during those 90 days, the
shadows are cast into the South. Plin. l. 1.

Art. 7. Of the Suns Influence on the Inferior World.
IT was easy to observe, how powerfully this Eye of the World would work upon
Inferior bodies by his lighter and public motion. There is nothing in the
parts of the year, or days, or nights, or variety of shadows, but must be
ascribed to it. When the Sun arises, all things are enlightened; when it sets,
all are in the dark. Things flourish, when he approaches; fade, when he
departs: These are generals, and if we respect particulars, are not much
less. It is certain, that tempests, and seasonable weather are from the Sun.
About the middle of Sagittarius, and the constellation of Pisces by the help of
Stars that are in them, and rise, it blows warm to those that are under it;
and, the humors that were frozen being melted, and the earth being watered
with them, it produces the fruitful Western blasts, and stirs up the force of
the Pleiades and Hyades in Taurus, and of the Kids from the North, from the
South or Orient that is near unto it; and of Arcturus that lies opposite to it,
which raise up Southern winds, and for some days do water the seed sown with
continual rain. Peucer in Astrol. When the Herbs are grown and want moisture
again for their just magnitude, it affords it and draws it forth by it, coming
up toward the Stars of Cancer. Pliny takes the signs of Tempests from it, l.
18. c. 35. It belongs to motion; for Scaliger says, That men sail faster with
the Sun. Exerc. 86. And Pliny l. 2. Histor. c. 71, writes, That the Currior
Philonides ran from Sicyon to Elis, 1200 furlongs in 9. hours of the day, and
came back again, oft-times, though it were down hill, at 3. a clock at night:
The reason was, because he ran out with the Sun, but returned against the
course of the Sun.

CHAP. VI. Of the Moon.
Artic. 1. Of the Figures and light of the Moon.
THe Stoics thought the Moon to be a dark and hairy light. Cleomedes supposed
it was a ball, white on one side, and blew on the other. We acknowledge it to
be a heavenly body, one of the two great Lights that God made. Sometimes there
have been two, sometimes 3. seen, as when Cn. Domitius, and C. Fannius were
Consuls, whom they called the Night-Suns. Pliny, l. 2. c. 82. She is less than
the Earth, thirty times 9, or 3. times 40, if we follow Copernicus. She is
distant from it, 44916 German miles; or if we credit Schrechenfuchsius, whom
most follow, it is 28359, She borrowes her light from the Sun. Whence it comes
that she has so many Aspects; she is always increasing or decaying, and
sometimes she is crook'd with horns, sometimes she is equally divided;
sometimes she is crooked, sometimes full, sometimes she is suddenly wane, and
the same appears suddenly again. Pliny, l. 2. c. 9. The Ancients adored the
full Moon as a type of beauty.

There is a merry Tale in Plutarch in his Symposiacks of Wiseman concerning the
Moon decreasing, That the Moon asked of her Mother a Coat fit for her; and she
answered, How can I do that? for sometimes thou art a full Moon, sometime a
half Moon, and sometimes with two horns. In Biarmia she is never seen but with
a full circle toward the surface of the Earth, of a fiery color, and like a
cole. Olaus, l. 1.

Artic. 2. Of the Spots and Eclipse of the Moon.
THe substance of the Moon is spotted: if you ask the reason, wise men have
said that the parts of the Moon are unequally compacted. The Poets thought she
carried a Boy with her whom she loved, who covered his face for shame. When she
is deprived of the Suns light, she is Eclipsed. But that is only in a
diametricall opposition, when the Moon has no declination from the Ecliptic,
or that which is less then 67, minutes, and so it either enters the shadow of
the Earth, or cannot avoid it. The ancients thought she might be drawn from
Heaven by Charms, and being thrust down, she might be compelled. That she
powereth forth her venom and force into the herbs that are subject to her,
which may be more succesfully used in Magic arts. Hence it was that they
tinkled in Cymballs, that the Charms might not be heard. There are no Eclipses
of Sun or Moon, but there follow some changes in sublunary things. There was
one in the year, 3459. And Darius at Marathon was overthrown by the Athenians
with wonderful ruin. another was, 3782. and Perseus King of the Macedonians
was conquered by consul Aemilius, and an end was put to the Kingdom of
Macedonia, Alsted. in thesauro Chronolog: Some observe them superstitiously:
for example, Niceas of Athens (Ubbo Emmius Tom. 2. vet. Graec.) being beaten at
Epipolas in Sicilia; when his Country was in danger, he should have marched
away, as Demosthenes and Eurymedon persuaded him: When he did march, the Moon
was Eclipsed. Many took that for an ill Omen: this so moved Niceas, that he
said he would decree nothing, to remove his Tents, until three times 9, days
were over, that the Wizards had foreshewed. Plin: l. 2. C. 12. He did it, and
so wasted the forces of the Athenians.

To this may be referred, the ridiculous opinion of some, who think that an
Ass drank up the Moon: for when the Ass drank, the Moon was seen in the
water, when the Ass went away, she was covered with a Cloud, and could not be
seen. Wherefore they cast the miserable Ass Silenus rod on, into Prison, and
cut up his belly, that they might have the Moon again, and they most cruelly
took out his bowels. Delrius, disquisit: Magic: l. 2. quest. 11. In the year,
1499, about setting, the moon was first changed into black; then she was
divided into two parts, and the one part leapt upon the other backwards, both
parts were sprinkled with red. They united afterward, and set as one Moon.
Many confederacies followed, and the Nobles, who in 1496 were confederate,
opposed themselves against the King of the Romans, Linturius cited by Wolsius
in Memorabil.

Artic. 3. Of the Moon's Influence on these sublunary things.
INnumerable are the operations of the Moon on sublunary things. If you would
run over all the field of nature, Plants, Animals and men's bodies are subject
to the Moons Government. Palladius reports, ( Cardan de varietat: l. 2. c. 13,)
If Garlic be set when the Moon is under the Earth, and be pulled up again when
the Moon is under the Earth, it will lose its strong smell. So they say that
Basil bruised in the new Moon, and put into a new Pot, at the full Moon it will
send forth flowers at one end; and if it be set under the Earth twice as long
time, it ingenders Scorpions. Vines in the day time are nourished by drawing
moisture to them, and in the night they increase, and grow. Lillies and Roses
open their buttons only in the night. Keckerman disp: Phys: 3. coroll: 11. Of
all that bear head, only the Onion is augmented when the moon increases; when
it grows new it fades, as if it hated the course of that Planet. Lucilius.
Wherefore the Egyptians at Pelusium hate to eat it. Gellius, Lib. 20. C. 7.
As for living Creatures, Savanarola writes that in the Leap-yeare, living
Creatures are barren, Cardan, l. c. It is observed that in the full Moon all
Oysters, Perwinkles, and all shell fish increase, and their bodies decrease
with the Moon. Also the more industrious have found out, that the fibers of
Rats answer to the days of the Moon: and that the little Creature, the Ant, is
sensible of this Planets force, and always rests in the Conjunction of the
Moon. Pliny, Lib. 2. Cap. 41. The skins of the Sea-Calves and Sobles are
stiff, and the hairs stand upright, when the Moon increases, and they sink
down when the Moon decreaseth, and grow weak, Keckerman, l. c. As for Mankind,
if the Moon come to the Sun passing through Aries or Scorpio, when any one is
born, it so afflicts the brain of him that is borne, that when he comes to be a
young man, he shall be troubled with melancholy. Things bred in the
Conjunction of the Moon, are frequently dry, and are encumbred with a sharp
heat, and have all their limbs especially affected, Peucerus de divinat. They
that sleep under the Moon-beams, are troubled with heaviness of their heads
and defluxions. Camerar. Memorab. Cap. 9. Art. 85. For by the Moon beams, the
moisture of the brains of those that sleep is melted, which being restrained
in the head, the internal heat being not active enough to expel it outward,
it breeds Catarrhs. The Epileps is exasperated in the full Moon. For the
abundance of moisture hinders the sharpness of Vapors, and the putrefaction
that they cannot breath forth. A smaller quantity does more easily corrupt, and
the heat acting upon it, makes sharper Vapors according to its proportion,
Libavius, tom. 3. Singul, lib. 3. cap. 18. At the same time dropsy people are
grievously tormented, and therefore they all dye almost about the full Moon.
Truly, in March, 1629. when we writ this, it took away that Reverend man, D.
Martin Gratianu^ the superintendent of the Reformed Churches in the greater
Poland, who was the Chariot and Horsemen of Israel. Let his memory be blessed.

When the Moon is opposite to the Sun, madmen rage most. They that are
troubled with a disease of the brain from too much plenty of brain, are choked
in the full Moon. Hence it is that the Britans on the 14. day of the Moon whip
mad folks. Bodin. l. 5. Theatr. Better therefore it is to give a medicament
against the Epilepsie the day after, than in the opposition of the Luminaries.
For in the hour of conjunction the Moon is calm, nor are there propensions to
either side, of advantages; the next time after it, she begins to work in the
humors, and to augment them. Libav. Epist. 15. to S^hnitz^r.

CHAP. VII. Of New Stars.
We have spoken of those things that ordinarily are done by Nature in Heaven.
I will now add some things which the right hand of God has produced above
nature. I mean new Stars, which have appeared, and not being of long
continuance, have shortly disappeared again, and vanished from our sight. The
Star at our Saviors birth is the chief, which ( Fulgentius says) had no place
in the Firmament, nor in the Air. It went forward with an uncertain motion,
sometimes it showed it self, and sometimes it was hid. Damascenus, l. 2.
Orthodox. fidei. Chalcides the Platonist, speaks thus of it, upon Timaeus of
Plato; There is also a more holy and more venerable History that relates, that
by the rising of a Star that was unusual, not Death and Diseases were
foreshewed, but the venerable descending of God, for man's salvation, and in
favor of mortal things, which men testify to have been observed by the
Chaldaeans, who adored God with gifts, who was newly born. Whence they learned
the knowledge of its apparition, is showed in the Books of Balaam the
Southsayer, wherein are many fabulous things.

The other is that which appeared in the year 1572. This is that year, wherein
that Bartholmy-slaughter was acted at Paris, in which (not excluding other
places) 30000 men were slain, 100000 of honest Families were oppressed in three
days, Widows and Orphan Children innumerable being brought to the greatest
beggary or want. Prisbach. in Respons^. ad oration. habitam apud Helvetios. The
sum was so great, that the wiser sort that were no ways addicted to the
Protestant side, when they were come to themselves, and considered the sad
condition of things at that time, and disavowed the Act, and sought out
curiously the causes of it, and excuses for it, they judged that there was no
such Example of cruelty to be found in all Antiquity* should their Chroni^les
be searched into. Thuan. l. 53. Histor. That that appeared the 6th. of the Ides
of November, under the Constellation of Cassiopaea; some men said, it was in
the Firmament it self amongst the heavenly spheres. It had neither Tail nor
hair, but like the other Stars, it sent forth beams equally. The Diameter of it
contained the Diameter of the Earth 7. times and part; and it was greater than
the Earth 361 times and, it was bigger than the Sun twice and 2/^ parts. Tycho
Brache 1. part, Progymnas. Astronom. Yet this Eminency of greatness and light
decreased afterward by degrees, until it vanished quite away. It had no
motion, except that which it had common with the fixed Stars, it always held
the same Position to the neighboring Stars in Cassiopaea. It lasted 16 months.
What was foreshewed by it, is variously determined by diverse men. Gemma Frisius
in Cosmocritica, writes, That since the birth of Christ there was hardly any
apparition to be compared with it, whether we consider the height of the sign,
or the rarity, or the long continuance of it. The Britans ascribed it to the
lamentable death of Mary. An Oxford Astrologer was Author of this opinion, who
by Cassiopaea, the Sister to King Cepheus, said, That some Queen in the North
must be noted out by it; and by its 16 months continuance he foreshewed, (I
know not according to what calculation of the Arabians, and the ascending of
the Star into the upper parts,) That that Northern Queen after 16 years should
ascend up into heaven. The event made good his praediction. Thuan. l. 5* 4
Molerus seemed to expect a new Prophet by it, in the year, 1590, and the
conquest of the Gospel over all through the World.

Liborovius foretold, but falsely, War, in 1619, and the banishment of the chief
Prince in Germany, in 1620; the restoring of him again by the Eastern
Countries, in 1627, and many such like things.

There is extant concerning this Star a godly and excellent Copy of Verses of a
certain famous Writer, which I here set down: Whether that Comet without
blazing tail,
That shines as clear as do the fixed Stars,
Shall in succeeding times so far prevail,
As to raise Dearths or Plagues, or bloody Wars;
God only knows, and aftertimes will show.
But if Man's Wit can any thing foretell,
It Is not amiss to search such signs are new,
And lift our minds above this place we dwell*
This is that Star which did the Wisemen bring
From the East land, to Bethleem, and there
In David's City, born was the great King.
It now foreshewes again, and does declare,
That God is coming: cruel Herod fear!
Good Men rejoice, your Redemption draws near.
The fifth month after the Star disappeared* Charles died of a bloody flux.
The third was seen in the year, 1577. in November, and which the following
year vanished, Jannuary the 26, Mestlinus places this in the sphere of Venus.
Tycho writes that the head was 308 Germain miles diameter. Dantzick was then
besieged, and 1578, the War of Moscovia began. It was supposed to portend the
Death of great Men. In that year ( Thuan. l. 65.) after a desperate sight in
Africa, Sebastian King of Portugal died, and Melchus Chorisius King of Morisco
Trigitana, whom he came to subdue. And Mahomet that caused the War was
drowned. 8000, Christians were slain, and as many taken Captives, almost all
the Nobility of Portugal fell into the hands of the Mores. That was done in one
day. Portingal came ne^t under the Government of Philip. Then in 1604, about
the beginning of October, a fourth new Starr appeared in the 17. degree of
Sagittarius, and was from the Ecliptic, but 37 minutes. Astronomers say, it
was between Saturn and the 8. Sphere; yet that seems absurd. Keckerman in his
consultation concerning the Star in the year, 1604. These. 53. Also because it
had its own proper motion, distinct from the Sphere of Saturn, and the fixed
Stars; and the Stars move in and with their Orbs, but that had none. Crabbius
says directly, that it was from the Center of the Earth 22267636 miles, and
from the superficies of the Earth, 22266777 miles. disput. de Comet: These: And
hence he concludes it was greater than the Earth, 91 times; and hence he proves
it was above Saturn, being from the Earth 1007250 miles. It shined full four
Months: and after that was to be seen from the 28 of November with Saturn, from
the 29. with Sol, and from the 13 of December with Mercury in Conjunctions; and
with Mercury, Mars, Sol, in oppositions, the May following, which was supposed
to p^rtend great consultations, confederacies, and changes in France, Spain,
the Low Countries, England. Thuan. lib. 131. But the opposition that fell out
on the 6, of June, was held to be Ominous, and men conjectured that this Starr
would cause Wars and calamities to many Countries, and chiefly to Germany in
point of Religion. An excellent Mathematician Keplerus writ concerning it, and
who was no whit guilty of Astrologicall superstition, by the testimony of
Thuanus. See him. I call these apparitions Stars, not that I am ignorant, that
they are referred to Comets, but because I find that in the Sky they are
placed amongst the second movables, and are called celestial, which is not
agreeing to Planets: and I think it more fit to call them Stars, than by
naming them Comets, to overthrow the doctrine of Meteors received from the
Ancients.

CHAP. VIII. Of Astrologicall Praedictions.
COncerning Astrologicall Praedictions many men have many minds. Some magnify
them, others reject them as idle vanities. It is certain that natural actions,
as the changes of days; night^, years, seasons, because they have determinate
causes in the position of the Stars, may be foretold by them. Yet because the
matter of the elements is mutable and flitting, many particular causes
overthrow general causes, and many Stars in both motions are yet unknown; and
some of them sometimes are opposite to the others forces: also most experienced
Artists are few: and lastly there is a vast distance in placing the beginning
and ends of the Houses, and proprieties, and therefore it is no wonder if error
creep in. Bartholin de caelo. And if we observe particular and individual
actions, the error will be the greater, for beside the general influence of
the Stars, there is a special influence which arises from the special
complexion. The indisposition of the matter hinders the good influence of
Heaven; and the goodness of the temper derived from the Parents, keeps off the
bad influence. We know that Jacob and Esau were born at the same time, in
respect of the Heavens position, yet was their fortune most different. In civil
actions the Stars have nothing to do. It is an elegant saying of Bodinus. Lib.
4. de Repub. Cap, 3. There is but one Rule, says he, of all Philosophers, even
of those that idly dispute of what is done in the Heavens; that a wiseman is
not under the affection and power of the Stars, but only those who like beasts
are ruled by their appetites and desires, and will not be subject to reason and
good laws, whom Solomon, the Master of wisdom, threatened sharply with
punishment of the rack: yet many have adventured to make trial. The Caldeans
by men's actions collected the day of a man's Birth, and from the day of a man's
Birth, the fortune of his whole life; And that men should not reject them, they
boasted they had spent 470, thousand years in the experience of this Art. And
so bold they were, that they vaunted that it was a thing as necessary to be
known, how the position of the Stars and the force of the Heavens were, when a
man would build a house, or make, sow, or put on his Cloths, as to know how
they were disposed when Children were new born. Lucius Tarutius Firmianus, by
the acts of Romulus, his Life, and Death, found that he was born in the first
year of the second Olympiad, the 23, day of the Month; Peucer de divinat.
sect. de Astrolog: and born in the 21, day of the month Toth, about Sun rising.
And hence he found out the first day that Rome was built, and that it began
when the Moon was in Libra, the Sun with Mercury and Venus in Taurus, Jupiter
in Pisces, and Saturn with Mars in Scorpio. To this purpose we may refer him,
who by the first day of Jannuary, would foretell all events.

If that a Rainbow in the Sky appear,
God is well pleased with man, they need not fear.
If burning Meteors from the Heavens shine,
Of great long during heats they are the sign.
If Thunder Rore, or Rivers overflow,
This foreshews Tempests as all seamen know.
But if the Earth be stird and seem to quake,
This shows Religion will be brought to the stake.
If Rivers freez, it then portends great joy,
Each woman shall conceive and bear a Boy.
Mayol. Colloq. 1. Canicular. Of such, this is true: These Mathematitians by a
false interpretation concerning the Stars, and by their lies, cast a mist
before those that are light and foollish witted, for their own advantage;
Valor. Maxim. l. We have examples of their fraud in Nicetas Chronias, otherwise
a prudent Historiographer. In our times (says he) the Emperors do nothing but
by advice of Astrologers, and they make choice of days and nights to do their
business, as the Stars shall dictate unto them. Therefore Alexius the
Emperor, desired long to know when he might seasonably return to Blacherna; at
last the day and hour were chosen according to the Stars. He returned, and
that so happily, that the Earth opened very deep before him, and he escaped,
but his Son in law Alexius, and many of his Nobles fell into the pit, and were
hurt, and one Eunuchus that was a favorite perished. That of Manuel is more
ridiculous: when he was Emperor, they of Sicily and Italy had possessed
themselves of the Sea near Constantinople; he had sometimes sent out a Fleet,
but with ill success. Wherefore the Mathematicians were consulted to assign a
more prosperous time* Constantinus a famous man prepares himself, but he was
once more called back again; because the Prince had found, that the inquiry was
not so certainly and wisely made as it ought to be, and there had been some
error. The Scheme was therefore set once more, and Constantinus was sent forth
on the day chosen: He was scarce got to Sea, but he and all his forces were
taken; Lips. in monit. polit. A brave art; yet I wonder, since I read of some
that were seldom frustrate of their ends. Nigidius Figulus, foretold to
Augustus, that he should be Emperor, (Xiphilinus). Thrasyllus foresaw the
Empire of Tiberius, and his own danger when he was on the Tower with the
Prince, and should have been cast down headlong; Sueton. in Octavio. Largius
Proculus gave notice of the day that Domitian should dye; Ascletarius foretold
the kind: and being required of him to answer what kind of death, he himself
should dye, he said he should be eaten with Dogs: and so it was. For though
Domitian to disprove him, commanded that he should be burnt, and he was then
burning, yet a tempest rose suddenly, and put out the fire. The spectators ran
away, and the Dogs came and devoured him, Sueton. in Domitian. Josephus that
wrote the Antiquities of the Jews, says, that he foretold to the Emperor
Vespasian, and to his Son Titus, that they should be Emperors. We know it was
so. Petrus Leontius, a Physician of Spoletanum foresaid, that he himself was in
danger of drowning. And he was found afterward drowned in a pit, Jovius, Elog.
35. The Archbishop of Pisa consulted Astrologers concerning his destiny: they
told he should be hanged; Annal. Florentin. It seemed incredible when he was in
so great honor; yet it proved to be true. For in the sedition of Pope Sixtus
the fourth in a sudden uprore he was hanged. Richardus Cervinus had foretold to
his son Marcellus that he should come to great dignity in the Church. Hence he
conceiving hope of it, when he was invited by his Mother Cassandra Benna, to
marry, refused it stoutly; saying, He would not with the bands of Matrimony
bind himself from a greater fortune that the Stars foreshew'd unto him, living
single and unmarried: Thuan. l. 15. It so came to pass. Lucius Gauricus
delivered this in his Book of Nativities. Which Book, (and it is a very
wonderful thing) says Thuan. l. 1. was published at Venice three years by
Curtius Trojanus, before Cervinus was proclaimed Pope. This was that Pope, who
when the Reader, as the manner is, read the Scriptures, or Writings of the
Fathers at dinner time, said, He could not perceive how those that held so high
a Place, could provide for their own salvation.

These are Examples of Predictions made good by the Events, Lipsius, l. 1.
Monitor. ascribes some to inspiration: Delrius refers some to compacts with the
Devil, l. 4. Disquisit. Magic. cap. 3. quaest. 2. Certain it is, that God
sometimes suffers them for a punishment to those that are so bold, and that
they are true but by accident only. See Delrius, who handles this Argument
largely.

The End of the First Classis.
Of the Writings of Wonders in Nature.
The Second Classis. Wherein are contained the Wonders of the Elements.
WHat is the chief thing in humane affairs? Not to fill the Seas with Ships,
nor, to set up standards on the shores of the red Sea; not where Land is
wanting, to wander in the Ocean to injure other men, and seek out unknown
places: but to see all with the mind; and, than which there is no greater
victory, to overcome our vices: Seneca, Nature. quaest. l. 3. Praef.
CHAP. I. Of Fire.
Artic. 1. Of the Wonderful beginning of Fire.
FIre was a long time unknown to the Ancients, especially if you respect them
who in the utmost borders of Egypt dwelt by the Sea side, Plin. histor.
Natural. l. 16. c. 40. When Eudoxus found it, they were so pleased with it,
that they would have put it in their bosoms.

Fire, is not unknown to us. So great is the variety of it, and it is so
manifold, that I know not what order to deliver it in. Pliny says it is from
it self; steel rubbed against steel causes fire. Also the stones we call
fire-stones, stricken against steel or other stones, send forth sparkles.
Therefore the Laplanders begin their Contracts of Marriage with the fire and
flint, Scalig. Exerc. 16. s. 1. For fire with them is the Author of life, and
the flint is eternal, wherein the treasure never fails. It is in vain to try
that in a brittle stone: for the piece falling away, that which should draw
forth the Air is lost. The rubbing of sticks one against another will fetch
fire. The Indians do so; They make two sticks fast together, and put another
stick between them, turning it swift like a wimble, and so they make them take
fire, Ovetan. l. 6. c. 5. In Apulia they wrap a Ca^^^ i^ cords, and draw them
as fast as they can forward and backward, till they fire it by motion, Mayolus
Colloq* 2^. The Vestal Nuns did the same, when their eternal fire went out, if
we credit Festus. In Nympheus, a flame goes out of a Rock, which is kindled by
rain. Aristotle says, in Admirand. it is not perceived until you cast oil
upon it, and then the flame flies upward. We find also in Authors, that in the
Country of the Sabins, and Apulia, there is a stone that will fire if you
anoint it, Plin. l. 2. c. 207. In Aricia, if a live cole fall on arable
ground, the ground will burn. In a Town of Picenum, Egnatia, if wood be laid on
a certain stone, that they account holy there, it will flame presently. Also a
flame goes forth at the waters of Scantia, but it is very weak at the going
forth, and will not last long in any other matter. Also at Gratianopolis in
Dauphin, flame shines out, when you stir the burning Fountain with a staff, so
that straw may be kindled by it; Dalechamp. ad l. c. The fire of the Mountain
Chimer^ is kindled by water, Plin. l. 2. c. 106. If you hold a glass Globe
full of water in the Sun, fire will rise from the repercussion of the light
from the water, in the coldest frost: Lactan. de ira Dei, c. 10. Sometimes also
fire arises so suddenly in houses, that it may be thought wonderful. Cardan.
l. 10. de varietate, c. 49. ascribes the cause to the salt, and Saltpeter that
sticks to the walls of the houses. Which Valerius reports concerning the
Scholar of the vestall Nun, Maxima Aemilia, l. 1. c. 1. that she adoring
Vesta, when she had laid her fine linen veil upon the hearth, the fire that
was out, shined forth again: an old wall being scraped down, he writes, that it
might take fire only by hot Ashes.

If you look in the Bible, you shall find a wonderful original of fire in it,
1 King. c. 18. Elias when he offered sacrifice brought fire down from heaven,
which consumed the sacrifice, wood, stones, dust, and water. In the Book of
Judges, Chapter 6. when Gideon at the command of the Angel had laid flesh and bread
upon a stone, and poured Frankincense upon them, fire came forth of the stone,
and consumed them.

Artic. 2. Of Fires in the Waters.
IF we will credit Histories, it is most certain, that fires have been seen in
the waters. Pliny says, lib. 2. c. 107. That the whole Lake Thrasimenus was on
fire. That the Sea did burn, Live. lib. 33. when Alaricus wasted Italy, and John
Chrysostom was driven from his Bishopric, the Earth quaked, fire fell from
Heaven, and a wind took it, and cast it into the Sea, which took fire by it,
and at last went out again; Niceph. l. 13. c. 36. In the fields of Babylon
there is a Fishpond that burns, which is about an Acre of ground, Plin. lib. 2.
c. 106. A stone cast into a Lake near to Denstadium of Thuringia, when it sinks
to the bottom, it has the form of a burning arrow; Agricol. lib. 4. de not.
affluent. c. 22.

In a City of Comagena, called Samosata, there is a Lake that sends forth
burning mud; Plin. l. 2. c. 104. Posidonius says, that in his time, about the
Summer Solstice, in the morning, that between Suda and the Sea of Evonymus,
fire was seen lifted up to a wonderful height, and to have continued so a
pretty while, carried up with a continued blast and at length it sunk down.
Many days after, Slime appeared, that it swam on the top of the waters, and
that flames brake forth in many places, and smoaks, and soot, and at length
that Slime grew hard, and that the lumps grown hard, were like unto Milstones.
Julius Obsequens adds, that it dispersed a great multitude of fish, which the
Liparenses much feeding on, were spoiled by them, so that the Islands were made
wast with a new plague, Strabo. l. 6. Between, There and Therasia which are in
the Cyclades, flames went out of the Sea, in such abundance, that is was
extreme hot, and seemed to burn; and when it had swelled by degrees, of the
pieces cast out, that were like to Iron, an Island was made, which was called
Hiera and Automate, now it is called Vulcanellus: by a very small arm of the
Sea, it is parted from Vulcanellus. Plin. l. 2. c. 87.

Artic. 3. Of Fire under the Earth.
I Said that fire was also in the waters; now I will show that in the bowels
of the earth fire is generated. When Claudius Nero was Emperor, fire was seen
to come forth of the Earth, in the land of the Town of Colein, and it burnt the
Fields, Villages, Houses; now because the matter of it was bituminous, and
could be quenched neither by rain, nor River waters, nor by any other
moisture, it was extinguished by Stones and old Garments. In Misena a Country
of Germany, a Mountain of Coals burns continually, the trenches falling down by
degrees in the superficies, which if any man behold, they appear to be burning
Furnaces. The fire kindles any thing near to it, at four foot distance, but
not put close to it. Agricol. de nature. effluent. ex terr. Vesuvius, also a
Mountain in Campania, burned, when Titus Vespasianus, and Flavius Domitianus
the seventh, were Consuls. First it cast out Stones from the top broken open;
after that, it cast forth such Flames, that two Towns, Herculaneum, and Pompeti
were set on fire; and it sent forth such thick smoke, that it obscured the Sun;
and lastly it blew forth such a quantity of Ashes, that like snow it covered
the Neighbor Country, which by force of winds was carried into Africa, Egypt,
Syria; Dion. Cass. in Histor. When the Elder Pliny beheld this Fire, (the
Younger in Epistol. ad Tacitum) the smoke so stopped his sharp artery, that his
breath being intercepted, he was choked, There is also a mountain of late in
Campania, full of rises, from the time the fire was bred there, which burns and
rores within, and sends forth smoke in many places, and very hot brooks, the
shore smoaks at the foot of the Mountain, the sand is hot, and the Sea boyles,
Agricol, l. c. In the same place, there are many ditches covered with sand,
into which some that have viewed these things carelessly have sunk in, and were
stifled. This is in Europe. In India, there are no less burnings by fire. In
Ciapotulan, a Province of the Kingdom of Mexico, a Mountain casts forth stones
as big as houses, and those stones cast forth have flames of fire in them, and
seem to burn, and are broke in pieces with a great noise; Petrus Alvarad. ad
Cortesium. In the province Quahutemallan, of the same Country, two Mountains
within two Leagues one of the other, vomit out fire, and tremble, Petrus
Hispalens. p. 5. C. 23. In Peruacum also, out of the Mountain Nanavata, the
Fire flies out at many holes; and out of one, boiling water runs, of which salt
is made. In the same Peruacum in the Town Molaha^o fire is vomited forth, and
ashes is cast out for many days, and covers many Towns. There is an Island
next to great Java, in the middle of which land there burns a perpetual fire
Odoard. Barbosa. In the Island Del Moro, there is a Fire cast forth with such a
noise, that it is equal to the loudest Cannon, and the darkness is like
Night. The Ashes so abound, that houses have sunk down under them, and Trees
have been barren for three years, their boughs being lopt off, all places are
filled with Ashes, and living Creatures destroyed with hunger and pestilence,
also sweet waters have been changed into bitter. Diat. Jesuita. Also there are
concealed Fires, namely there, where the waters run forth, hot, warm, or sower,
or where exhalations break forth, good or bad, and where places seem adust.
Strab. in Geograph: There is a Country in Asia, which is called Adust, which is
500 furlongs long, and 50 broad, whether it should be called Misia or Meonia,
says Strabo. In this there grows no Tree but the Vine that brings forth burnt
Wine, so excellent that none exceeds it. You may not think that those Fires
stay only in one straight place, for they pass many miles under ground;
Agricol. l. 4. de not. Effl. c. 24. in Campania, from Cunae, thorough Baianum,
Puteoli, and Naples. Also out of Campania they seem to come as far as the
Islands, Aenaria, Vulcania, etc. Hence Pindarus elegantly feigned that the
Gigant, Typ^o, being stricken with a Thunderbolt, lay buried under these
places.

Artic. 4. Of the Original of Subterraneall Fire.
We will now search out the original of these Fires, and what it is that
kindles and nourishes them. The Poets speak Fables concerning Aetna, (but of
this, more in the 4th Chapter.) Hyginius Mytholog. cap. 152. Hell, of the Earth
begat Typhon, of a vast magnitude, and a wonderful shape, who had 100 Dragons
heads that sprang from his shoulders; He challenged Jupiter, to strive for his
Kingdom. Jupiter hit him on the breast with a burning Thunderbolt, and having
fired him, he cast Mount Aetna upon him, which is in Sicilia, and from that
time it is said to burn yet. Isidor. l. 14. c. 8. ascribes it to Brimstone that
is kindled by the blasts of winds. Justinus affirms, that it is nourished by
water. Bleskenius relates of Hecla, that no man knows by what fire, or what
matter it burns; but since that brimstone is dug forth of all Islandia, it
should appear, that a brimstony matter was sometimes kindled there. Not far
from Hecla are Pits of brimstone, says Bertius, in Islandia. That is certain,
that brimstone affords nourishment for this fire under ground, and it is such
as will burn in water. For in these Mountains Writers make mention of waters*
and we have showed, that it has sometimes burned in the Sea. But Lydiat, L. de
orig. font. thinks, That in the gulfs of the Sea, a most violent fire is
contained; and he demonstrates this by Earthquakes. Therefore the food of it
cannot be dry, and like to the Earth which we call Dorfa; for that is quickly
consumed by fire, and is quenched by water. Nor is it Marle, for that will not
burn, unless it be sulphurous and bituminous. Brimstone burns indeed, but it
is soon put out with water; therefore it is Bitumen; and this seems to be the
subject of it.

Strabo writes, That there are under this Cave, Fountains of water; and Pliny
adds, l. 2. c. 106. that it burns with water running from Bitumen. Burning
Bitumen sends forth fire in Hecla a Mountain in Islandia, which consumes water:
The stones of Rivers and the sand, burn at Hephestios, a Mountain of Lycia, and
they are bituminous. Naphta is very near akin to fire, and it presently flames,
Pliny, l. c. Wherefore we think Bitumen to be the food for these fires, and
they are kindled by a fiery vapor that takes fire, if but cold thrust it
forth, as the Clouds thrust ou^ lightnings, or drives it into some narrow
places, where rolling it self up and down, and seeking to come forth, it burns
in the conflict, and flames; Agricol. lib. cit.

Artic. 5. Of the Miracles of Fire in duration, burning, and in being
Extinguished.
SOme Fires are perpetual. The stone Asbestos, once lighted, can never be
extinguished; therefore Writers say it was placed in Idol Temples, and the
Sepulchers of the dead; Solinus, c. 12. There was a Monument once dug up,
wherein was a Candle that had burned above 1500 years; when it was touched with
the hands, it went to fine ashes: Vives ad lib. 21. de Civitat. Dei. Vives saw
wicks at Paris, which once lighted, were never consumed. In Britany the Temple
of Minerva had a perpetual fire; when it consumed, it was turned into balls of
stone; Solinus, c. 24. Polyhist. The same thing is written of a certain Wood
near to Urabia in the Newfound World. There are some fires that burn not,
either not at all, or in some certain matter, or else miraculously. In
Pythecusis, says Aristotle admirand. c. 35. there is a fervent and hot fire
that burns not: An Ash that shadows the Waters called Scantiae, is always
green. Plin. lib. 2. c. 107. In the Mountain of Puteoli consisting of
Brimstone, there is a fire comes forth, that is neither kindled nor augmented
by oil, nor wax, or any fat matter, nor is it quenched with water, or kindled,
and it will not burn towe cast into it, nor can any Candle be lighted by it.
Mayolus Colloq. 22. he conceives it is not fire, but fiery water. Near Patara
in Lycia, flame is cast forth of a field, you shall feel the heat if you put
your hands to it, but it will never burn. The parts of the ambient air that are
cold and moist, are said to be the cause of it, that by their thinness entering
into the fire, do hinder the burning of it. Some napkins made of a kind of Flax
will not burn: and being durty, they are never washed; but being cast into the
fire they are made clean; Lemnius in l. 2. de occult. That kind grows in the
deserts of India, where such is the condition of the Air, and the quality of
the Earth, which causes such a temper of the Plants, that they may be spun and
woven into linen Cloth. Wood and Planks, if they be anointed with Alum (I
add, and smeared with Eggs) they will not burn, Plin. l. 29. c. 3. Nor will
posts painted with a green color, so you do it thick, and Allom with the ashes
of white lead be plentifully mingled with the paint: Because the wood is
thickened and hardened, the fire cannot enter. Hence it was, that Sylla could
not fire a Tower that was smeered with Allom. C. Caesar set fire to a Castle
near to Po, that was built of Larch-tree, and it would not burn, Vitruv. l. 2.
c. 9. for the Larch tree is not only free from rottenness, nor will it
resolve into coals. The cause is the compacted matter, Lemnius, l. c. What
shall we say of Pyrrhus, on whose great joint of his right foot, fire could not
prevail? What of Zwinglius, whose heart was not touched after his body was
consumed by fire, Thuan. l. 5. Histor. The Salamander lives safe in the midst
of the flames, if we credit Pliny; And the bottom of the Cauldron is cold, when
it stands in the midst of the fire, and the water boyles, the sides are red
hot. Yet Dioscorid. writes, l. 2. c. 52. That the Cauldron being cold by
nature, does for a while keep off the fire by being so near to it, but at last
it burns and wastes. The reason of this is from the Pyramidall figure of the
fire, which ascends in a point, and the thin parts rise up first; the thicker
are cast to the sides; Keckerm: Disp: 4. Phys: coral: 10.

In the Scriptures we have examples, God appeared to Moses in a flaming bush,
the bush did not burn, Exodus Chapter 3. Elias was taken up into Heaven, with a
fiery Chariot and horses. The three Children, cast into the fiery furnace in
Babylon, had not a hair touched, and they were consumed that came but near, in
the Apocryph: ad c. 3. Daniel is. Eugenius relates what befell an Hebrew Boy at
Constantinople. So much for Burning.

Now for putting it out: A certain fire came forth of Mount Hecla, which is
extinguished with Towe; that which comes forth of the Mount Chimaera, is put
out with Hay, or Earth: At Cullen of the Ubii, with stones, or clothes. But
when Charles Duke of Burgundy had taken the City of Geldria, the ground was
burnt, the grass and roots burned, the fire could be extinguished by no art of
man; it penetrated into Burgundy; Fulgosius, l. 1. To these I shall add those
Chymicall devices of Tritenhemius, whereby he procured everlasting fires, as an
Anonymus reports in Aureo vellere, in the name of Bartholmaeus Korndorferus.
Now there are two Eternal Lights. The first of them is made by mingling
brimstone and calcined Alum, 4. ounces, and by subliming them, they are made
flowrs. He joined 2 ounces and a half, to 1* ounce of (...) Vedetus like
Crystal; and to these (...) bruised, and put into a h^llow glass, he poured
on the spirit of wi^^ four times distilled, and making digestion* and drawing
that off, he poured on new, and he did this twice, thrice, or four times,
until the brimstone made hot upon plates of brass, would run like wax without
smoke. This is the food of it. Afterward the Wick must be thus ordered; The
small shords of the stone Asbestos, about the length of the little finger, and
about half so thick, must be tied together with white silk. The Wick thus made,
is sprinkled with brimstone, of the foresaid matter in a Venice-glasse, and it
is put under ground, and is boiled in hot sand 24 hours, the brimstone always
boiling up. The wick so anointed and wet, is put into a hollow glass, that it
may a little come forth, the prepared Brimstone is heaped on, the glass is set
into hot sand, that the Brimstone may melt and hold fast to the wick, then will
this set on fire, burn with a continual flame: you may see the Lamp in any
place. This is the first eternal Fire.

The latter is made thus: To a pound of decrepit Salt pour on strong Wine
Vinegar; Draw it off to the consistence of oil, put on new* let it steep,
distill it as before, and do this four times. Infuse in this Vinegar glass of
Antimony finely powdered, one pound; set the infusion in hot ashes 6 hours in a
close vessel, and draw out a red tincture; Pour off that vinegar, and pour on
more, and draw it off again, repeating the labor, until all the color be
resolved and drawn forth. Coagulate the extractions to the consistence of oil,
and rectify it in Balneo till it be pure: Then take the powder of Antimony,
out of which the redness was drawn, and make fine flower of it, put it into a
glass, and pour on the rectified oil; draw it off, and pour it on 7 times,
until the body have drank in all its oil, and become dry. Draw out this by the
spirit of wine, changed so often until all the substance be drawn forth;
distill the Menstruums collected in a Venice Viol, covering it with a five
doubled paper, that the spirit coming forth, the incombustible air may remain
in the bottom; which must be used with a Wick, as that of Brimstone before.

CHAP. II. Of the Air.
Artic. 1. Of the three Regions of the Air.
PHilosophers make 3. Regions. The Region in the middle is so cold, that it is
almost ready to freeze the Kite, which is wont to live there in the dog days
from Noon till Night, or his limbs should grow stiff by staying there too long.

And in the Alps there is always so much snow, that in Summer the passage is
dangerous. They that have crept up to the tops of the Mountains of Baldus, in
the Country of Verona, feel no less cold in July and August, than in the
coldest Winter. Aldrov^^^^, Ornith, l. ^. c. 15. Some think the air to be so
thin there, that a man can hardly live. Augustine. de Genes. ad liter, l. 13. c.
2. reports from other men, that such as go to the top of Olympus, either to
sacrifice, or to view the Stars, carry sponges with them wet in water, to
breathe with. But from the History of the flood, and others, we may observe
that some Mountains are so high, that they are above the Clouds, and yet a man
may live in that air* Libav. de orig. rer. l. 6.

There is in the Island Zelainum, a very high Mountain, and most pleasant on
the top. In Arabia Faelix there is an extreme high Mountain, and there is a
Town on the top of it. If we observe the force of the air, it is notable:
Philosophers speak much of it. Cardan says that if it be shut up, it corrupts
living Creatures, and preserves dead things, but the open Air is contrary. But
examples will hardly make that good. In the Navigations of the Portugalls, some
Mariners under the Equinoctial had almost breathed their last, though it
were in the middle of the Sea, and a in a most open air. And when we were
present, says Scaliger, Exercit 31. some Italians of Lipsia in the Stoves were
like to swound; and you may remember from Histories concerning the death of
King Cocal. Wheat in Syria laid close in Mows corrupts not, but is spoild shut
up in Barnes; if the Windows be open, it takes no harm.

Artic. 2. Of the Infection of the Air.
The Air does not allwaies retain its own qualities, it is infected sometimes
with hurtful things. They that go out of the Province of Peru, into Chila
through the Mountains meet with a deadly air, and before the passengers perceive
it, their limbs fall from their bodies, as Apples fall from Trees without any
corruptions, Liburius de Origin rerum. In the Mount of Peru Pariacacca, the
air being singular, brings them that go up, in despair of their lives. It
causes vomit so violent that the blood follows, it afflicts them most that
ascend from the Sea, and not only Man but Beasts are exposed to the danger. It
is held to be the highest, and most full of Snow in the World, and in three or
four hours a man may pass over it. In the Mountains of Chilium, a Boy
sustained himself three days, lying behind a multitude of Carcases, so that at
last he escaped safe from the Venomous blasts. In a Book concerning the proper
causes of the Elements, it is written that a wind killed the people in
Hadramot. The same Author reports that the same thing happened in the time of
King Philip of Macedo, that in a certain way between two Mountains at a set
hour, what horseman soever past, he fell down ready to die. The cause was not
known. The foot were in the same condition, until one Socrates by setting on
high, a steel Looking-glass, beheld in both Mountains two Dragons casting
their venomous breath one at the other; and whatsoever this hit upon, died,
Liban. l. cit. But the true cause of this mischief was a mineral air, stuffed
with nitrous and other metallic Spirits. Such a one is found in some Caves of
Hungary and Sweden, and we know that the Common Saltpeter is full of Spirits;
it is moved dangerously and forcibly if fire be put to it, and cast into water,
it cools them much. But that bodies corrupt not, that we ascribe to cold, but
it may be attributed to the Spirits of cold by mixture, such as are in some
Thunderbolts, for the bodies of living Creatures killed by them do not easily
corrupt, and they last long, unless some more powerful cause coming, drive it
out.

Artic. 3. Of the Putrefaction of the Air.
THe Pestilence comes from putrefaction of the air: which in respect of diverse
constitutions is diverse. It is observed that there never was any at Locris or
Croto: Plin. l. 2.99. So in that part of Ethiopia, which is by the black Sea.
In Mauritania, it ruins all. It lasted so long sometimes at Toulouse, and in
that Province, that it continued seven years. It perseveres so long, and
oftimes, amongst the Northern people, and rages so cruelly, that it
depopulates whole Countries; Scaliger, exercit, 32. It is observed in the
Southern parts, that it goes toward the Sun setting, and scarce ever but in
winter, and lasts but three months at most. In the year 1524, it so raged at
Millan, that new baked bread set into the air but one night, was not only
musty, but was full of Worms, those that were well, died in 6, or 8, hours;
Cardan de rer. varietat. l. 8. c. 45. In the year 1500 it destroyed 30000 at
London, sometimes 300000 at Constantinople; and as many in the Cities of the
Vandalls, all the autumn through. In Petrarchs days, it was so strong in
Italy, that of 1000 Men scarce ten remained. Alsted in Chronolog. But that in
diverse Countries it works so variously on some men and several Creatures, that
proceeds from the force of the active causes, and the disposition of the
passive. Forest. l. 6. observe. de Febre. If the active cause from the
uncleanness of the Earth or water be not strong, it only affects those beasts
that are disposed for such a venom; but if it be violent, it ceazeth on
Mankind; yet so that of its own nature, it would leave neither Country, not
City, nor Village, nor Town free. This lays hold on men in one place only.
But if the active force be from a superior cause, or be from the air,
corrupted below, Mankind alone are endangered by it. But if both a superior
and an inferior cause concur, then may all living Creatures be infected with
the Plague, yet it must be according to the disposition of their bodies.

Artic. 4. Of Attraction, cooling, and penetrating of the Air.
NO man almost is ignorant, but that the Air serves for the Life of man; for
the branches of arteria venosa, drink in blood from the whole Lungs, brought to
them by the arteria venosa, and it is made more pure in them. The Air drawn in
at the mouth is mingled with the blood, and this mixture is carried to the left
ventricle of the heart, to be made spirituous blood; Ludovi: du Gardin Anatom:
c. 40. But being drawn in heaps it strangles, Zwinger, Physiol. l. 2. c. 23.
For if you compass a burning Candle in the open air, with wine from above, you
put it out; because it cannot attract the Air prepared on each side, by reason
the wine is betwixt, and it cannot from below draw the crude and unprepared
Air. The desaphoretick force of it will appear in an Egg; when that is new, a
pure spirit sweats through its shell, whilst it rosts, like unto dew. What
will this do in the body of man? It will make that full of chinks, if it be
touched by a small heat: otherwise it fills and penetrates all things. It
pierces through a brick, and there it inflates the concocted lime, so that the
quantity of it is increased till it break it.

We see that the Air entering by the pores of a baked brick, does swell a stone
that was left there for want of diligence, and is turned into Lime; and so puts
it up, till the brick breaks, Zwinger, Phys. l. 2. c. 25. Farther it is
concluded by certain observation, That a wound is easy or hard to cure by
reason of the Air. In Fenny grounds wounds of the head are soon cured, but
Ulcers of the Legs are long: Hence it is, that wounds of the head are light at
Bonnonia and Paris, but wounds of the Legs are deadly at Avignon and Rome.
There the Air is of a cold constitution, and is an enemy to the brain: here it
is more hot, whereby the humors being melted, run more downwards, Pa^ae^s, l.
10. Chirurg: c. 8. It may be cooled 9 ways, by frequent ventilating of it with
a fan that fresh air may come; if Snow and water be set about the bed; if the
walls be compassed about with Willow leaves, or with linen clothes dipped in
vinegar and Rose Water, if the floor be sprinkled, and fountains made to run in
the chamber; if beds, says Avicenna, be made over a pit of water, If beds be
made of Camels hair, or of linen, laying the skin under them: If the Bed be
strewed with herbs; and lastly, if fragrant fruits be placed near the bed;
Heurn: lib, 2. Medic. c. 18.

CHAP. III. Of the Water.
Artic. 1. Of the quantity and color of Waters.
SO much for Air: Now follows the Element of Water. And first we shall
consider the quantity, and the color of it. In the Country of the great Cham,
near the City Simqui, there is the River Quian, which is 10 miles broad; and
waters 200 Cities, and it is so long, that it cannot be sailed in 100 days.
Polus writes, That he told in the Haven of it 50000 Ships. Also in Moscovia the
Duina is so great by the melting of the Snow, that it cannot be passed over in
a whole day with a well sailing Ship, it is at least 50 miles broad. Jovius, a
Lake of Genebar, the Portingal^s call it January, Thuan. histor. l. 16. is so
large under Capricorn, that men write, who have sailed thither, That all the
Ships in the World may well harbor there. As for Colors, they are different
in many waters. Danubius is white as milk and water, which divides Noricum, and
Windelicia from Germany, Agricol. de Nature. effluent. The Waters of the Mayn,
especially where it has passed the Francks, and is fallen into the Rheyn, are
yellowish. The Fountain Telephus is muddy near Pat^ra, and mingled with blood.
In Ethiopia there are red Waters, that make one mad that drinks them. At
Neusola in the Mountain Carpath^s, waters running out of an old passage under
ground, are green. At Ilza, that which comes forth of the Mountains of Bohemia,
and runs into Danubius, is black.

Artic. 2. Of the Taste of Water.
THere is no less variety of Waters in their tastes: Some are sweet, some
taste like wine: you shall find every where, salt, Allom tasted, sharp bitter
waters every where. The Waters of Eleus, Chocops, Rivers, are sweet: The Kings
of Persia drank of them, and transported them to far Countries. The water of
Cardia in a field called Albus, is sweeter then warm milk. Pausanias. So is
Vinosa near Paphlagonia; whence so many strangers come thither to drink of it.
In the bosom of the Adriatic Sea, where it turns to Aquileia; there are 7.
Fountains, and all of them, except one, are salt, Polyb. in Hist. At Malta
there is one, that the waters running above are very sweet, but the lower
waters are brackish, Aristobul: Cassand. The small River Exampeus is so bitter,
that it taints the great River Hypanis in Pontus. In the Lake Ascanium, and
some Fountains about Chalcis, the upper waters are sweet, and the lower taste
of nitre, Plin. in Hist. The Fountains are sour about Culma; and because the
water, though it be cold, boyls, they seem to be mad, Agricol. lib. cit. In the
same place there is a Mineral water, which they call Furious, because it boyls
and roars like thunder. In Cepusium at Smol^icium, it not only eats iron, but
turns it into brass. But the water about Tempe in Thessaly, of the River Styx,
can be contained in no vessel of silver, brass, iron, but it eats through
them, nothing but a hoof can hold it.

Artic. 3. Of the Smell of Water: and of the first and second qualities.
THe hot Baths that are distant from Rhegium, the Town of Lepidus Aemilius 26
miles, smell of so gallant Bitumen, that they seem to be mingled with Camphir.
There was a Pit in Peloponnesus near the Temple of Diana, whose water mingled
with Bitumen smelt as pleasant as the unguent Cyzicenum. In Hildesham there are
two Fountains; the one flows out of Marble that smells like stinck of rotten
Eggs, and taste sweet: but if any man drinks of it fasting, he will belch, and
smell like the Marble pownded: The other is from Brimstone, and smells like
Gunpowder: The water of this brook, covers with mud the stones that lie in the
channel of it, scrape it off and dry it, and it is Brimstone, Agric. lib. cit.
Arethusa, a Fountain of Sicily, is said to smoke at a certain time. At Visebad,
there is a Spring in the Road-way, the water whereof is so hot, that you may
not only boil Eggs in it, but scall'd chicken, and hoggs; for it will fetch
off feathers or hair, if you dip them in, or pour it upon them.

Ptolomy Comment. lib. 7. affirms, That at Corinth there is a Fountain of
water, which is colder than Snow. Near the Sea-Banks at Cuba, there is a River
so continual, that you may sail in it; yet it is so hot, that you cannot touch
it with your hands, Martyr Sum. Ind. Near the Province Tapala it runs so
hot, that one cannot pass over it, Ramus. tom. 3. At Segesta in Sicily,
Halbesus suddenly grows hot in the middle of the River. Pontus, is a River
that lies between the Country of the Medes and the Scythians, wherein hot
burning stones are rolled, yet the water it self is cold. These, if you move
them up and down, will presently cool, and being sprinkled with water, they
shine the more bright. Lastly, near the City Ethama, there is a River that is
hot, but it is good to cleanse the Lepers, and such as are ulcerated, Leonius.
Also some waters swim above others. Arsanias swims above Tigris that is near
unto it, so often as they both swell and overflow their banks* Peneres
receives the River Eurota, yet it admits it not, but carries it a top of it
like oil for a short space, and then forsakes it, Plin. hist. Natural.

Artic. 4. Of the Diverse running of the Water.
IT is said of Pyramus, a River of Cappadocia, which arises from Fountains
that break forth in the very plain ground, that it presently hides it self in a
deep Cave, and runs many miles under ground, and afterward rises a Navigable
River, with so great violence, that if any man put a sphere into the hole of
the Earth where it breaks forth again, the force of it will cast out the
sphere; Strabo l. 12. Not far from Pompeiopolis in the Town Coricos, in the
bottom of a Den of wonderful depth, a mighty River rises with incredible
force; and when it has ran with a great violence a short way, it sinks into
the Earth again, Mela. l. 1. c. 6. The Water Marsia after it has run along
tract, from the utmost Mountains of the Peligni, passing through Marsius and
the Lake Fucinus, it disemboggs into a Cave, then it opens it self again in
Tiburtina, and is brought 9 miles with Arches built up, into Rome, Plin. l. 31.
c, 3. The Sabbaticall River was wont to be empty every seventh day, and was
dry; but all the six days it was full of water. But that ceased when the
sacrifice ceased, Joseph. l. 7. c. 24. There is a certain River Bocatius speaks
of, every ten years, it makes a mighty noise, by the stones striking together;
and this is suddenly in a moment, and the stones ran downwards for 3. days,
and 3 or 4 times a day, though it be fair weather; and after three days all is
quiet. Strabo writes of the Rivers of Hircania, l. 11. There are in the Sea
high shores that are prominent, and are cut forth of Rocks; but when the Rivers
run out of the Rocks into the Sea with great violence, they pass over a great
space as the fall betwixt the Sea and the Rocks, that Armies may march under
the fall of the waters as under Arches, and receive no hurt* Trochlotes in
North Norway makes such a noise when it runs, that it is heard 20 miles, Olaus,
l. 2. c. 28. Beca in Livonia runs forth of the Rocks with such a fall, that it
makes men deaf, Ortel: in Livon. T^nais, by a very long passage from Scythia,
falling into the Lake Meotis, it makes it so long and broad, that those that
are ignorant of it, take it for a great Mountain, Boccatius. In Solomon's
Temple there ran a Spring, great in Summer, small in Winter; Eusebius. praeparat.
Evangel. l. 9. c. 4. If you ask the cause, it is taken from the Time. All
things are wet in Winter, then are the Channels full; and for want of
evaporation the waters are kept in. But in Summer all things are dry, and the
Suns heat penetrates. Hence it is that they are congregated in their Fountains,
and run out by the Air enforcing them. Maeander is so full of windings and
turnings, that it is often thought to run back again, etc. He that seeks more
concerning Nilus and other Waters, let him read Geographerrs.

Artic. 5. Of the change of quantity and of qualities, in Waters.
THis great variety in Waters that I have set down, is a token of the wisdom
and power of God* and it is no less wonder, that the same waters should be so
diversely changed. It is certain that they are changed. A Fountain in the Island
Tenedos always from 3. at night till 6. after the Summer Solstice, overflowes.
There is another in ^odon, that has its Name from Jupiter, it fails always at
Noonday; And the River Po in Summer, as if it took its rest, grows dry, says
Pliny. In Italy, Tophanus a Fountain of Anagnania is dry when the Lake Fucinus
is frozen; at other times of the year it runs with great quantity of water,
Agricol. l. cit. passim. The Waters of the Lake of Babylon are red in Summer.
Boristhenes at some times of the year seems to be died with Verdigrease. The
water of the Fountain of the Tungri is boiling hot with fire subterraneal, and
is red. The Waters of the River Caria by Neptun^s Temple were sweet, and are
now salt. But in Thrace when Georgius Despota ruled, a sweet Fountain grew to
be bitter intolerably, and whole rivers were changed at Citheron in Beotia, as
Theophrastus writes. Men report, that of the Mineral Waters which run by the
Pangaeus, a Mountain of Thrace, an Athenian cotyle weighs in Summer 64 grains,
and in Winter 96. In the Province of Cyrene, the Fountain of the Sun is hot at
midnight, afterward it cooles by degrees; and at Sunrising it is cold: and
the higher the the Sun rises, the colder it is; so that it is frozen at mid
day: then again by degrees it grows warm, it is hot at Sunset; and the more
the Sun proceeds, the hotter it becomes. The same Fountain every day as it
grows cold at midday, so it is sweet; as it grows hot at midnight, so it
grows bitter.

Artic. 6. Of some other things admirable in Waters.
THey were wonders that are passed, but greater follow. In those, it is easy to
assign a cause, mixture or some such like, if you rightly consider it; but here
it is difficult, for though you may in some, yet commonly we must fly to hidden
qualities. I will briefly rehearse them. Some drops of a Fountain of the Goths
powered upon the Earth, cease to move, and are thickened by the air. The waters
of Cepusia in Pitchers turn into a Stone, those of Rhaetid make people foolish;
they pull out the teeth in two years, and dissolve the ligaments of the sinews,
which Pliny writes to be in Germany by the Seaside. Those of Islandia change
things that are hollow into stones. Tybur covers Wood with stone covers.
Zamenfes in Africa makes clear voices. Soractes when the Sun rises, runs over,
as though it boiled, birds that then drink of it die. He grows temperate, who
drinks of the Lake Clitorius; and he forgets who drinks of a well nere the
River Orchomenus, sacred to the God Trophonius, Philarch. He proves dull of wit
that drinks of a Fountain in the Island Cea. Agricola de reb. (...) terra
effluent. gives a cause for it, as for the former, by reason of the bitumen.
For, says he, the seeds of wild Parsnips wrapped in a linen clout, and put into
Wine, as also the powder of the flowers of Hermodactylus, which the Turks use,
being drunk with it, are the cause that it will make a man sooner and more
drunk, so some kind of Bitumen mixed with water, is wont to make men drunk.

The horses, drinking Sebaris are troubled with sneesing, whatsoever is
sprinkled with it, is colored black. Clitumnus of Umbria drank of, makes
white Oxen, and Cesiphus of Beotia white sheep: but a River in Cappadocia makes
the hair whiter, softer, and longer. In Pontus, Astaces waters the fields, in
which Mares are fed, that feed the whole Country with black milk. The waters
in Gadaris make men bald, and deprive Cattle; of hair, hooffs and horns. Cicero
writes that in the Marshes of Reate, the hoofs of beasts are hardened. The hot
baths at the Fort of New-house, color the Silver Rings of such as wash in them
with a Golden color, and make Gold Rings more beautiful. Aniger that runs out
of Lapithum a Mountain of Arcadia will nourish no fish in it, till it receive
Acidan, and those that go then out of it into Aniger are not edible, but they
in Acidan are, Pausanias. Agrigentinum a Lake of Sicily will bear those things
that do not swim in the waters. In Aethiopia there is one so thin that it will
not carry up leaves that fall from the next Trees. In the lake Asphalti^es a
man bound hand and foot cannot sink. The cause is held to be the great quantity
of Salt. Hieronymus Florentinus, saw a Bankrupt bound and cast headlong from
the Tower into it, and it bore him up all the night. Posidonius observed that
bricks in Spain, made of Earth, with which their Silver plate is rubbed, did
swim in the waters. Cleon and Goon were two Fountains in Phrygia; either of
their waters made men cry. There were two in the fortunate Island; they that
tasted of one laughed till they died, the other was the remedy for them.

Anauros of Thessaly and Boristhenes, send out no vapor, nor exhalation: many
refer the cause of it to its mixture, others seek it other-where. Agricola. l.
2. de effl. ex terr. c. 17. says, In what part of the Rivers, the Channels in
the Fords have no veins and fibers, by that they can breath forth no
exhalations. In the snows of Mount Caucasus, hollow Clods freez, and contain
good water in a membrane: there are Beasts there, that drink this water, which
is very good, and runs forth when the membranes are broken. Strab. in Geograph.
Nilus makes women so fruitful that they will have 4, and 6, at one venture;
Pliny in Histor. There is a Well of water, that makes the inhabitants of the
Alps to have swollen throats. Lang. l. 5. Epist. 43. But in field Rupert near
to Argentina, there is a water said to be, that makes the drinkers of it
troubled with Bronchocele, they seem to be infected with quicksilver: for this
is an enemy to the brain and nervs, for it not only sends back phlegm to the
glandulous parts of the head and neck, but that which is heaped up in the head,
it throws down upon the parts under it, Sebizius de acidul. s. 1. dict. 6.
Corol. 1. these. 12. Diana, a River of Sicily that runs to Camerina, unless a
chaste woman draw its water, it will not mingle with Wine; Solinus, C. 10. Styx
in Arcadia drank of, kills presently, it penetrates and breaks all; yet it may
be contained in the horns of one kind of Ass, Seneca. l. 3. nature, c. 25. Two
Rivers runs into Niger, a River in Africa, one is reddish, the other whitish,
Barrens. Histor. dec. 1. l. 3. c. 8. If any man drink of both, he will be
forced to Vomit both up, but if any man drink but of one, he shall Vomit
leasurely, but when they are both run into Niger, and a man drink them mingled,
he shall have no desire to Vomit. Narvia is a River of Lithuania; so soon as
Serpents taste of the water, they give a hiss, and get away. Cromer. descript.
Polon. l. 1. A Fountain of Sardinia, in the Mediterranean, keeps the length and
shortness of days, and runs accordingly. In the Island of Ferrum, one of the
Canaries, there is no water, the Air is fiery, the ground dry, and man and
beast are sad for want of water. But there is a Tree, the kind is unknown, the
leaves are long, narrow, and allways green. A Clowd allwaies surrounds it,
whereby the leaves are so moystned, that most pure liquour runs continually
from it, which the inhabitants fetch, setting vessels round the Tree, to take
it in. Bertius in descript. Canariar. Sea-waters if they be lukewarm, they
portend tempests before two days be over, and violent Winds. Lemnius de occult.
l. 2. c. 49. In England, nere New Castle there is a lake called Myrtous, part
whereof is frozen in Summer. Thuan. in Histor. But I have done with these.
Authors have more, if any man desire it, especially Claudius Vendilinus, whom
I name for honor sake, if he seek for the wonders of Nilus.

Artic. 7. Of some Floods or Waters; and of the Universal Deluge.
THe Floods were signs of Gods anger, and so much the more as that was greater,
and men's sins more grievous. The greatest was that we call the general Deluge,
which began about the end of the year of the World, 1656. All the bars of the
Channels were broken, and for 40 days a vaste quantity of water was poured
down. Also the Fountains of the great Deep were cut asunder; so that the Waters
increased continually for 150 days, and passed above the highest Mountains 15
Cubits. At length they abated by degrees; for after 70 days the tops began to
appear. The Inhabitants of the New World say, they had it from their
Ancestors. Those of Peru say, that all those Lands lay under waters, and that
men were drowned, except a few, who got into wooden Vessels like Ships; and
having provision sufficient, they continued there, till the waters were gone:
Which they knew by their dogs which they sent forth of doors; and when the dogs
came in wet, they knew they were put to swim; but when they returned dry, that
the waters were gone, August. Carat. But they of Mexico say, that five Suns did
then shine, and that the first of them perished in the waters, and men with it,
and whatsoever was in the earth.

These things they have described in Pictures and Characters from their
Ancestors; giving credit to Plato's Flood, which was said to have happened in the
Island Atlantis. Lupus Gomara. But Lydiat ascribes the cause of that universal
Deluge to a subterraneal fire in a hotter degree, increasing the magnitude by
rarefaction, so long as it could not g^t out of its hollow places. Genesis
seems to demonstrate it. For the Fountains of the great Deep are said to be
broken open; and that a wind was sent forth after 40 days, and the waters were
quieted. We must understand a wind from a dry Exhalation, which a subterraneous
fire much increased, had most abundantly raised out of the deep of the Sea,
which was then thrust forth of them, and did increase the motion of the air
that it laid hold of, together with the revolution of the Heavens, and the
vehemence of the Firmament. But there were other miraculous Deluges besides
this.

(...)

^

CHAP. IV. Of the Original of Fountains.
^

Sea by passages under the Earth. The Sea alone is sufficient to supply all
Springs; and when we see that it no ways increases by the Rivers that run
into it, it is apparent that they run to their Fountains by secret channels.
But the question is, of the manner how they ascend. Socrates ascribes it to the
Tossing of them; Pliny to the wind, l. 21. c. 65. Bodin, l. 2. Theatr. to the
weight of the Earth driving forth the water* Scaliger, to the Bulk of the Sea;
others, to vapors redoubled into themselves. It is a hard matter to define all
things, nor is it our purpose.

But because Thom: Lydiat, an English Man, has written most acutely of this
Subject, we will set down his opinion here, contracted into a few Propositions:

I. The Rolling of the Water is not the cause of its ascending to the
superficies of the Earth. For there is no cause for its tossing, and wherefore
then should it not at length stand level?

II. To be driven with the wind, is not the cause. 1. For it seems not to be
raised in the Sea by a fixed Law of Nature, but by way of Tempest. 2. The
Channels are winding, and should carry it rather to the sides than to the
superficies. 3. If a contrary wind cannot do so much in any water, what then
can the wind do here? Also if there were any receptacles for the waters forced
upwards, Miners, those that dig in mines, would have found them out, as
Vallesius says.

III. The weight of the Earth squeesing out the water is not the Cause. For the
Earth does not lie upon the waters, but contrarily where the Conduits are not
full, the lower part is not empty, but the upper part.

IV. Nor the Bulk of the Sea. Scaliger thinks that the Waters being pressed in
the channels by the Sea lying upon them, do seek to get forth. His Example is
of a stone in a vessel. But two things are here assumed. 1. That the gravity is
every where, the same as in the weight of a stone. 2. That a great part of the
Sea water is out of its place.

V. Nor yet vapors redoubled into themselves, and so drawing; nor the spungy
Nature of the Earth, nor the veins of the Earth, whereby the moisture of the
water may be drawn forth. For 1. attracting forces would be more fit for
Champion ground, than for Mountains. 2. If they should attract, it were for
that purpose that they might have the fruition of it, but from whence are there
such Rivers? 3 The veins of waters are no where found so full, as that reason
requires, whether it be for blood in living creatures, or for squirts.

VI. The water is raised out of the Caves of the Earth, to the Tops of
Mountains, as the Sea is raised above the middle Region of the Air.

VII. But this Elevation is made by the force of heat resolving the water into
vapors. Aristotle himself intimates, that heat is required; but that water may
be made of a vapor, there needs no cold, but a more remiss heat.

VIII. The heat of the Earth proceeds not from the heat of the Sun, namely of
the Earth in its Intralls. For first, it can penetrate but two yards deep, and
therefore the Troglodites make their Caves no deeper. 2. In the hottest Summer
a wooden post, that is but one or two Inches thick is not penetrated. 3. The
entralls of the Earth about 8 or 10 yards deep are found colder in Summer then
in Winter.

IX. The Antiperistasis of the cold Air in the superficies of the Earth, is
nothing to the purpose. 1. It is more weak than the cold of the firm Earth. 2.
What ever of the Suns heat is bred within, passes out by the pores and
vanishes. 3. It perishes being besieged by both colds to which it bears no
proportion.

X. The heat that is in the bowels of the Earth, is from a double cause. For
in the parts nearest the superficies it proceeds from the Sun beams, but in the
bowels of the Earth from other causes. That passes out by the pores of the
Earth in Summer, being opened by the Sun, and therefore it vanishes when as
being removed from its original it is weaker; but in winter it is bound in by
the cold. XI. The heat in the bowels of the Earth, is known by the heat of the
Waters; but these are neither hot by the Sun nor from brimstone, or quicklime
in the conduits, but only from a subterraneal fire.

Not from the Sun. For. 1. That cannot penetrate so far. 2. If it were from
thence it would be most in Summer. Not from brimstone or quick lime, for
brimstone heats not unless it be actually heated, and quicklime, only then
when it is resolved by Water. Also the vast quantity of it would be resolved in
a short time, and would make a change in the Channels. But it may be understood
some ways, how it may be heated by a subterraneal fire. 1. As it is actual,
and so the Channels being solid stone cannot derive it. 2. As it is more
remote, but sends forth Vapors by pipes, as in Baths, so also not; for Vapors
cannot have so great force as to make it boil. 3. That the Water may run
amongst the burning fire, as in bituminous Channels; But here the question may
be; why it does not cast out the Bitumen, as in Samosata a City of Comagenes,
Pliny says, l. 2. c. 104. and 107, that a certain lake cast forth flaming mud,
and fire came out at the Waters of Scantium. 4. The fourth way is the truth.
Art does some ways imitate Nature, but in Stills the water by the force of
heat, is resolved into Vapors, and the Vapors fly upwards, to the heads,
where they stick, and being removed from the violent heat, they return to Water
again, so also in the bowels of the Earth. XII. But Fountains that boil, seem
not to be of those Waters that run, but that stand still: Namely Wells that
have formerly been opened by the quakings of the Earth, which it is no wonder
that they are joined to the Sea. In a small Island against the River Timevu^*
Pliny l. 2. c. 103. writes that there is a hot spring, that ebs and flows with
the Sea. In the Gades it is contrary, Pliny, l. 2. c. ^2. But if any of these
hot springs do run^, we must observe of them, that their Channels are so
situated, that when the Sea flows, it comes unto them, or if it were come
into them before, it powers forth the more. And so the heat of the fire will
be either proportionable, and the exhalation greater, or not, and so less.
XIII, But what Agricola writes of bituminous Waters, and that yield a smell,
must be ascribed to their neernesse, but it vanishes at a farther distance.
The same is observed in artificial distilled waters, that in time the
burntness of them will vanish away. XIV. But because this fire by the shaking
of the Earth can do much in the superficies, it can then do more in the place
it is.

It can therefore stop up old Channels, open new ones, in diverse caves of the
Earth, without sending forth of the matter combustible, or propagation of fire,
or conflict of Vapors, it can raise new fires; from whence new Rivers may be
produced, yet sometimes also it useeth to be extinguished, or sunk so deep, that
it cannot send its force to the superficies. This is the opinion of Lydiat,
which we have set down more amply; that being better known, it might be more
exactly weighed.

CHAP. V. Of hot Baths.
THe heat of hot Baths is diversely spoken of by Authors. Aristotle thought it
proceeded from Thunder, which is false, for the force of Thunder is
pestilentiall, any man may know it, that beholds Wine corrupt by Thunder. It
makes men mad or dead, but these are healthful, as experience daily shows.
Also there are many places that were never touched with Thunder, for that never
descends above five foot. Sennert. Scient. natural. l. 4. c. 10. thinks it
comes from two waters that are cold to be felt, but grow hot in their meeting,
from repugnancy of the Spirits, as we see in oil of Tartar, and Spirit of
Vitrial, and in Aquafortis and Tartar, and of the butter of Antimony and Spirit
of Nitre, all which, though they are cold to the touch, yet if you mingle them,
they grow hot, and so that if you suddenly power oil of Tartar into
Aquafortis, wherein Iron is dissolved, it will not only boil, but the mixture
will flame, which also happens if you pour fast the spirit of Nitre into the
butter of Antimony. Some impute it to the native heat of the earth, or to a
certain hot spirit; so that these natural spirits of exhalations heating not
violently but naturally, in some places the secret channels of the Earth grow
hot: that this heat is communicated to the Walls of those concavities, by
reason whereof a sufficient and continual heat may be communicated to the
Baths, even as in an Oven heated, when all the flame is gone, the bread is
sufficiently baked, Horstius de nature. Thermar: Others ascribe it to
subterraneall fire; but whether it be so, may be known by what proceeded,
Bartholin: de aquis.

Farther it may be showed by an Example: Mingle salt water with Clay, make of
this clay or mud a ball, and hollow it within, then stop the orifice with the
clay, and put in a narrow pipe into it, and put this ball to the fire; the pipe
being from the fire, when the ball waxes hot, out of the ball by the pipe hot
water will run, Sennert. l. 4. scient. natural. c. 10. Baths have a taste by
the mixture of Earths* and so have things in the Earth.

Hippocrates l. de nature. human. says, That there is in the Earth, sweet,
sour, and bitter; and in the bowels of it there are diverse faculties, and many
humors, l. 4. de Morbis. Every thing draws its nourishment from the Earth in
which it is. Hence in Ionia and Peloponnesus, though the heat of the Sun be
very sufficient, yet Silphium grows not, though it be sowed, namely, for want
of such a humor as might nourish it. Yet there are in that earth juices, not
only for the vaporous, but also for the moist and solid substance. Juices
condensed are dissolved by waters, the moist are mingled, Earths are dissolved,
and scrapings of metals are found. The goodness of them differs sometimes;
because those that in Summer are beray'd with the Suns heat, and attenuated,
are the best: In Autumn they are less beat upon by its beams, because he is
nearer to them: so in the spring. For the Earth is opened, the waters are
purified, the healthful light of the Sun approaches: but in the Winter they
are worst: for they are heavier, thicker, and more defiled with earthly
exhalations. That they suffer changes, we may learn by diverse examples.

Fallop. de Therm. c. 11. Savanarola says, That the Bath waters in the Country
of Pisa cause great diseases in those that drink them, and the Inhabitants are
warned of it. For in March, April, and May, when they see the waters look
yellow, and to be troubled, they foresee they are dangerous. Alcardus of
Veroneus, a Physician, who writ of the Cal^erian Baths, says, That the water
of Apponus is sometimes deadly, by the example of one Galeatius a Noble man,
who with his Son in Law drank of it, and dyed.

The sharp waters of Alsatia are sometimes so sharp, that they cause the
dysentery; and sometimes they are feeble, and are deprived of their wonted
vigor, Sebizius de acidulis, diss. 50. s. 1. The causes are diverse; amongst
the ordinary, a rainy, cloudy, dark, Southern constitution of the Air, too
violent flowing of the Sea, inundations, Earthquakes.

It is wonderful that is written concerning some hot Baths in Germany, that
they grew dry when there was a tax set upon them, Camerar. horis subcis. cent.
2. c. 69. Something like this, fell out in shellfish at the Sluice; for when a
kind of tribute was laid upon the collecting of them, they were no more found
there; they returned, when the Tax was taken off, Jacob Mayer. in Annal.
Flandriae.

CHAP. VI. Of the Sea.
Artic. 1. (...)
^

Artic. 2. (...)
^

and Hercules Pillars, about Spain and France, in his days. But the North Sea
for the greatest part was passed over by the happy success of the famous
Augustus.

We find in Velleius, that Germany was surrounded by sailing so far as the
Promontory of the Cimbri, and from thence the vast Ocean was discovered; or
known by relation as far as Scythia, and the parts that were frozen, by the
command of Tiberius. The same Pliny tells us, that Alexander the Great extended
his Victories over the greatest part of the East and Southern Seas, unto the
Arabian shores; whereby afterward when C. Caesar the Son of Augustus managed
the business, the ensigns of ships were known to belong to the Spaniards that
had suffered shipwreck there. But when Carthage flourished, (...) from the
Gades to the furthermost parts of Arabia, and (...) writing that Voyage, and
Hamilco at the same time was sent to discover the outward parts of Europe.
Moreover, Cornelius Nepos is the Author of it, in Pliny, that one Eudoxus in
his time, when he fled from Lathyrus King of Egypt, came from the Arabian
Coasts as far as Gades; and Caelius Antipater long before him affirms the same,
that he saw him, who sailed out of Spain into Aethiopia (...) Merchandise. The
same Author writes, that the King of Sweden gave freely to Quint. Metellus
Celer, Pro Consul of France, those Indians* who sailed out of India for
Traffiqu^, and were by Tempests carried into Germany. That Voyage has been
attempted of late, but with extreme danger of life, men being hindered
continually by Ice, and extreme darkness. If these things be so, then was all
our World sailed about.

It is further questioned whether there be any passage, through the North Sea,
to the Kingdom of Sina, and to the Moluccos. Jovius report^ that he heard it of
Demetrius Moschus, that Duidna with many Rivers entering into it, ran into the
North a wonderful way; and that the Sea was there open, so that stearing the
course toward the right hand shore, (unless the land be betwixt) men might
sail to Cathay. Those of Cathay belong to the furthest parts of the East, and
the parallel of Thracia, and are known to the Portingalls in India, when they,
to buy spices, sailed to the Golden Chersonesus, through the Countries of Sina
and Molucco, and brought with them garments of Sabell skins. Petru^ Bertius, a
man that deserved well for his learning, but ill for divinity, reports, in
descrip. no^* Zembliae, that he saw a Table described (...) the Russes* wherein
the shores of the Russes, Samogetans, and Ting^^eri, with the North Sea, nere
unto them, and some Islands were ^^^ely set forth. In that the Duina River was
farthest West* but others Rivers followed toward the East, and in the first
place, Peisa, Petcho^a, Obi^, Jeneseia, and Peisida. Therefore the passage must
be open from the River Obii, to Peisida. The Histories of ^^e Russes report^,
that when the Moscovites and the Tingesi were curious to search out Countries
farther toward the East, they sent out discoveries over Land, who passed beyond
the River Obii and Jeneseia so far as Peisida ou^ foot* and there they fell
amongst people, that in their habit, manners, and speech were far different
from them. There they heard the found of Bells from the East, the noise of Men,
the neighing of Hortes; they saw say is four square, such as the Indians use.
They saw a place, in April and May, abounding with all sorts of flowers* The
Duke of Moscovia heard of this afterward, and trial was made, but the Duke
died in the interim, and this noble design was hindered. It is supposed that
those places are nere the Indies, and therefore if the River Peisida can be
overpassed, the passage to Cathay and Sinae, were not difficult.

Artic. 3. Of the depth, freesing, and ^olo^ys of the Sea.
COncerning the depth of the Sea, there are many opinions* Burgensis says, it
is deeper than the Earth (...) Plin. l. ^. c. 22. and Solinus; c. 54, that in
many (...) no borrow can be found. But there speak of a certain Sea in the
(...), and they speak according to their days, when navigation was (...) known.
Priscianus, reports that Julius Caesar, found by his Searchers 15 furlongs;
others, give 30. But the English, Portugalls, (...) who now a days use most
Navigation* reckon 2* Italian miles and a time. Olaus Magnus, (l. 2. Histor.
septent. c. 10.) we^^es that at the sho^es of Norway, it is so deep, they not
open can (...), but that is by reason of the hollow shores, and full of cracks
every where. And though there be such a wonderful force of waters in the Sea,
yet certain it is that it is sometimes frozen. Strabo. l. c. Geograph, writes
that in the mouth of Maeotis, so great Ice was seen, that in the place that
King Mithridates General overcame the Enemy in the Ice, the same he passed
over with his Fleet. When (...) four, the Sea of Pontus was so frozen for a
100. ^^les* that it (...) hard as a stone, and was above 30 Cubi^s (...);
Vintent. l. (...) But Olaus, l. 11. c. 25, says that in the North Sea, they
(...) and draw along their Engines for Warts, and ^aires (...) kept. The
condition of the Ice there, is very strange. Being carried on the shore it
presently thawes, no man furthering it, Ziglerus, l. ^. 8. In Islandra, if it
be kept, it vanishes* and he affirms that some will turn to a stone. The Sea
has many colors: Andrea^ Causalius says, that near the Inhabitants of the
East Indies there is a milk (...) that is seen for 300 miles. Martyr also
attests the same in his Sum^l^^. That which washes the Island Cabaque, is
sometimes green, and sometimes of the year, red; for the Shel-fish every where
pour much blood* Petrus Hispan. The red Sea, though it be so called, because
it is rinctured with red waters, yet it is not of that nature (...) for; but
the water is tainted by the shores that are near* and all the land about it is
red, and next to the color of blood: (...). l. 13. c. 1^. The Sea uses
frequently to change its color* Aul^ ^ell, noct. At^^l. 2. c. 30* gives the
cause; It is, faith he, observed by the best Philosophers, that when the South
wind blows, the Sea is bluish, and ^^eyish, but when the North blows, it is
blacker and darker, etc. When the Do^ days are, it is troublesome. Men ascribe
that to the Sun, that pierces the inward parts of the Sea with its beams, and
stirrs the grosse^ parts, but consumes them not. But this is strange that is
said, that the Sea Parium in the New Word, is so entangled with so many green
herbs, that Men cannot fall in it; the long branches of herbs, like n^ts
hindering them. That Sea is so like a Meadow, that as the Waves turn, all the
herbs turn with it also; that the storms are less from the Waves, than from
the grass. This endangers Seamen, and first Columbus, Ovetan. l. 2. c. 2. For
the Ships are held by the bendings of little branches, that they cannot turn.
It is deep enough for Galleys to row in, but the herbs rise from the bottom,
and grow together on the top, and are 15 hand-breadth higher sometimes. Pliny,
l. 13. c. 25. reports that in the red Sea, Woods flourish* chiefly ^he Laurel,
and the Olive, bearing Olives, and if it rain, Mushrom^^ which, when the Sun
shines, are converted into a Pumex-stone. The sprouts themselves, are 3, cubits
great, and are stored with abundance of dog fish, that it is scarce safe to
look out of the Ship, and they will set upon the very oars often times. The
Soldiers of Alexander that sailed from India, reported that the boughs of
Trees in the Sea were green, but taken out of the Sea, were presently changed
by the Sun into dry salt. Also Pol^bius reports, that in the Sea of ^ortingal,
Oaks grow, that the Thynni fishes feeding on their Acorns grow fat. Athenaeus,
l. 7.

Artic. 4. Of the Saltness of the Sea.
THe Works of God are wonderful in Nature, but two are most wonderful, the
saltness of the Sea, and its flowing and ebbing. It is said, that there is an
Island in the Southern Ocean, that is water^d by a sweet Sea; which also
Diodorus Siculus seems to testify and assert, concerning the Scythian Sea,
Pliny l. 6. c. 17. But that is ascribed to the great running of Rivers into it;
and how small is this in respect of the other Sea? Yet Philosophers argue
concerning the saltness of the Sea.

Aristotle l. 2. Meteor. c. 1. calls for the nature of the Sea, and efficacy of
the Sun, to assist him. For the Sea-waters by the mixture of the ground and the
shores is thicker, and the Sun by its heat calls forth thinner parts, and
resolves them into vapors; which being burnt with heat, and mingled with the
water, cause its saltness. Man's body will help us in this, wherein the native
heat dissolves the sweetest meats into the saltest humors; which being
collected in the Reins; is cast forth by urine. Experience confirms it; that
shows us that the Sea is more salt in Summer than in Winter, and more toward
the East and South than elsewhere. Lydiat likes not this opinion, but brings
another; That Youth may more exactly comprehend the sense of this brave man; We
will set it down here in a few Propositions.

I. The vehement heat of the Sun does not boil the Sea to be salt. For, 1. Why
is not the same done in a little water in a basin? 2. The same cause of
saltness should work upon the subject* with less resistance.

II. A hot dry, earthly exhalation carried by rain into the Sea, i^ not the
cause of its saltness. For, 1. Why is not the same done in Fountains^ 2. It is
too little. 3. Why is it not only salt in the superficies, but in the deep.
For though Scaliger, Exercit. 51. denies that* saying, that the ^^^nators have
proved it to be sweet, yet Patricius says it was found otherwise in the (...)
between Crete and Egypt, when it was very calm; Philip (...) witnesses the
same.

III. The Sea is salt by the mixture of something with it. That is clear^
because all tasting is o^ mixed bodies.

IV. That which is mingled with the Sea, has the nature of a hot and dry
exhal^^ion* That is apparent* 1. Because the Sea is such* (...) will hardly
extinguish flames, and it is easily (...) that are washed in it are quickly
dried. 3. (...) as Britanny and France hotter.

V. The Sea is not only salt, but bitter: therefore it is (...) called Mare,
than S^^um.

VI. The salt and bitterness of the Sea i^ from a subterraneal (...) fire. 1.
Bitumen is perceived so bitter in taste, that it may be known to be the first
subject of it. 2. Bitumen has great force to cause i^ salt and bitter taste.
The bituminous Lake of Palestina is so salt and bitter, that no Fish is bred in
it; it scours clothes if one wet them* and shake it well out. 3. Pliny reports,
that a bituminous water tha^ is also salt at Babylon, is cast out of their
Wells into salt Pi^^, and is thickened partly into Bitumen, partly into Salt.

VII. A salt Exhalation proceeding from those De^p^ i^ easily divided by the
body of the Sea. For as fine flower or (...) thing else cas^ into (...) boiling
liquor, is cast from the place that boyls unto other parts (...) on one side to
the other, if in the middle to the circumference* (...) bituminous Exhalation
from thence where it boyleth most, and the Sea is most hot, is cast and
dispelled into the whole body of it* So (...).

Artic. 5. Of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea.
ANother great miracle of Nature is the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, When the
Philosopher sought for the cause of it, h^ grew desperate.

Possidonius in Strabo l. 3. Geograph. makes 3. Circuits of the Sea's motion.
The diurnall, monthly, and yearly. The first is, when the Moon is risen above
the Horizon but one sign of the Zodiac* or is gone down under the Horizon,
then the Sea swells until the Moon comes to the midst of the Heaven, (...) it
above or beneath the Earth. When it declines from thence* the Sea begins to
retire until the Moon is but one sign distant from the East or West, and then
it stops. Pliny assents thus far to him, that the flowing of the Sea begins
about two equinoctial hours after the rising or setting of the Moon, and ends
just so long before its setting or rising. He determines the other to be
monthly, in the conjunction, when he says, That the greatest and quickest
returnings of the Sea do happen about the new* and full Moon; the mean, about
the Quarters of the Moon. And Mariners approve this, when they call it the
Living Sea, by reason of the great ebbings and flowings, in the new and full
Moons; but the dead Sea in the half Moons, because of the lesser and slower
motions of it* Possidonius adds more* That one S^leucus observed a Sea, that
was derived from the red Sea* and was different from it, that kept the monthly
course of returning, namely according to the Lunar month, which men call
periodicall. For he had observed in the Moon being in the Equinoctial signs,
that the Tides were equal, but in the solstices they were unequal both for
quantity and swiftness, and the same inequality held in the rest, so far as
any of them happened ^ear to the foresaid places. Lastly, Possidonius says*
That he learned the yearly motions from the Mariners of Gades. For they say,
that about the summer Solstice, the ebbing and flowing of the Sea increases
much* and that he conjectured the same did diminish as far as the Equinoctial;
and again to increase until Winter^ from (...) to decrease until the spring
Equinox ^ and so increase again until the Summer solstice. Pliny determines
the contra^^ (...) reason of the Equinox. But Patricius witnesses, That i^
Lib^^^ia in January great part of the strand^ are naked, and continue dry for
some days. The same Pliny l. ^. c. 97. observes* That in every eight years, in
the Moons 100 circumvolution, the Tides are called back to their first motions,
and like increasings; that is to say, the Sun and Moon then returning to a
conjunction in the same sign and degree, wherein they were in conjunction eight
years before. But for the daily Tides there is a differe^^e amongst Writers. In
the Sicilian Sea (...) and flowings are twice a day, and twice in the night.
(...) in the Sin^s of Aegeum repeats its motion 7. times a day, and sometimes
is seen thrown down from the highest Mountains, and so steep down, that no
ships can be safe there, Basil i^ Hexaemex.

In England at Bristoll the Ebb is daily twice, and so great, that the ships
that were in the Sea, stand dry, and are twice on dry Land, twice in the Sea.

Pitheas Massiliensis, as Pliny testifies, l. 2. c. 67. writes, that it sw^lls
fourscore cubits higher than Britanny. In the Southern part of the New World,
the Sea rising, flows two Leagues, Ovetan sum. c. 9. But in a certain
Northern Sea there i^ no flowing or ebbing observed by the waves of it, Petrus
Hispan. p. 5. c. 1. Not far from Cuba Promontory, and by the shores of Margaret
Island, and Paria, the Sea flows naturally* nor can ships by any means, though
they have a prosperous gale, sail against the floods, nor make a mile in a
whole day, Petrus Marty^^ ^n sum. Indiae. In the Adriatic Sea formerly there
was wont to be a very great flowing forth, early in the morning, the Sea being
so advanced into the Continent, that it went as far up as a strong man could
run in a day, Procop. l. 1. Belli Gothici, ^ut singular was that Tide, and a
wonder of the World, which (...) in particular, which proceed from whirlepools,
by which the waters are sucked up and spued out again by turns. It is very
probable this happens in Charybdis, the Syrtes, and Chalcydis about Eubaea.
This represents a true flowing, and comes from winds breaking forth of the
Caves of the Earth, and forcing forward the waters, or to the Waves running
back again and sinking down. But the fourth is (...) true ebbing and flowing,
which runs neither Eastward nor Westward, but begins from the Navel of the Sea,
and that boyls up, and as the waters rise thus, they are powered forth toward
the Banks, more or less, as the cause is more or less violent; unless
something hinder, the cause whereof we shall seek last of all. And true it is
that Mariners in the straights of Magellan, where the South Sea is separated
from the North by a notable difference, marking diligently the Tides of both
Seas, have observed what they could not do in the vast Ocean, namely that both
Seas do not begin to flow at the same time. And that it is not moved by any
outward cause, not from the Heavens, nor is it brought in from the East or
West, but comes from the bottom of it, and boyles out from thence; the
superfluity running toward the Land variously, as the swelling is great or
small, the shores high or low, and the cause that moves it from the bottom
upwards, weaker or stronger. This is confirmed by the nature of the water,
which casts up from the bottom whatsoever it sucks in, if it be not too heavy.
Hence it comes to pass that all Seas purge themselves in the full of the Moon.
Not that the attraction of the Moon is the cause of it, but because the wind
that was in the interim collected in the hollow places under ground, strives to
fly upwards, or being heaped up about the putrefactions of the Sea, breaks
forth. Lydia^, de orig* s^ntium, attributes it to subterraneal fire; That you
may know the grounds of his opinion, I will set it down in a few Propositions.

I. The flowing of the Sea is not because of the Moon, by the nearness of her
light, and of that especially which she borrowes, which breeds exhalations,
whereby the waters swell and run over. For in the full Moon her light is thwart
the earth, and yet there is a tide great enough.

II. The Sun and Moon do not by their beams cause the flowing of the Sea. 1.
When it flows in one hemisphear, and both the Luminaries are in the other,
what is the cause of that? For it has not equal forces in both. 2. If Sun and
Moon cause the flowing of the Sea, wherefore elsewhere in the very Ocean, and
that between the torrid Zone, where their power is extreme, are there no Tides
at all, or very small ones?

III. When we enquire concerning the flowing of the Sea, we must suppose: 1.
That there is a wonderful plenty of water in the bosom of the Earth. 2. That
water which is in the bosom of the Earth is not only continued to it self,
but to this we see, in the Sea, and is joined with it by the channels or open
chaps of the Earth. First, it is probable from hence, that it is a part of the
same body. Then, the deeps of the Sea, that were never yet certainly known, are
a token of it. 3. When two most vaste Continents, on this side Asia Africa
Europe; on that America, divide (...) ^

CHAP. VII.
Artic. 1. Of the New World.
^

and Asia, by which the passage was open to other neighboring Islands, and
from the Island to all the continent, which was in sight, and near to the
Ocean; but in the mouth of it there was said to be a Haven with a narrow
entrance, etc: After this, by a wonderful Earthquake* and a continual
inundation for a day and a night, it came to pass that the Earth clave
asunder, and swallowed all those warlike people, and the Island of Atlantis was
drowned in the deep.

But Aristotle, lib. de admirand. c. 8. relates, that in the Sea beyond
Hercul^s Pillars, an Island was found out by the Carthagenians, which had Woods
and Rivers fit for shipping, but it was distant many days Voyage. But when more
Carthagenians, allured by the happiness of the place, came and dwelt amongst
the Inhabitants, they were condemned to death, by the Commanders; he adds, by
those that sailed thither. Let us also hear Seneca, lib. 7. quaest. c. 31. The
people that shall come after us, shall know many things we know not; many
things are reserved for after ages, when we are dead and forgotten. The World
is but a very small matter, unless every age may have something to search for.
And again, quaest. 5. c. ult: Whence do I know, whether there may not be some
Commander of a great Nation, now not known, that may swell with Fortun's
favors, and not contain his forces within his own bounds? Whether he may not
provide ships to attempt places unknown? How do I know whether this or that
wind may bring War? Some suppose Augustus extended his Empire so far. Marianus
Siculus is the Author, that there was found in the new World, old Golden Money
with the Image of Augustus; and that it was sent to Rome to the Pope in token
of fidelity, by Johannes Ruffus, Bishop of Consentia. That is more wonderful,
that the Spaniards write; that there is a Town in the Province of Chili, in the
Valley called Cauten, which they name Imperiola, for this cause, because in
many Houses, and Gates, they found the Spread-Eagle, as we see now a days in
the Arms of the Roman Empire. Animlanus, l. 17. observes something not unlike
it, that in the obeliscks of the Egyptians there were engraven many Pictures
of Birds and Beasts, also of the other World. What shall we say to these
things? We say they knew them, but scarce ever traveled thither. But if those
relations are true that Plato reports, of which Tertullian also speaks, Apolg.
c. 39. and Marcellinus, l. 17. we add farther* That the praediction of Seneca
sounds rather of the British Islands in favor of Claudius. That is false which
is said of Augustus, We have all the Acts of this Noble Prince; if there be any
thing buried in silence, it is some mean matter; But Novelty easily gains the
name of Antiquity, if there be fraud in him that forgeth it.

Artic. 2. Of the miracles of some Countries.
PLiny relates, and we out of him. There is a famous Temple at Paphos dedicated
to Venus, into a Court whereof it never rayns, Pliny, l. 2. c. 96. By Harpasa a
Town of Asia, there stands a hard Rock, which you may move with one finger, but
thrust it with your whole body, and you cannot stir it. There is Earth in the
City Parasinum, within the Peninsula of Tauri, that cures all wounds. In the
Country Ardanum, Corn that is sowed will never grow. At the Altars of Martia in
Veii, and at Tusculanum, and in the Wood Ciminia there are places, where things
fastened into the Earth cannot be drawn forth. Pliny, l. 2. c. 94. In
Crustuminum, Hay that grows there is hurtful, but out of that place it becomes
good. Some Earths tremble at the entrance, as in the Country of the Gabii not
far from Rome, about a 100 Acres, when men ride upon it; and likewise at Reate.
In the Hills of Puteoli the dust is opposed against the Sea Waves, and being
once sunk, it becomes one stone that the waters cannot stir, and daily grows
stronger; also, if it be mingled with the Caement of Cumae. Plin. l. 35. c. 13.
Such is the nature of that Earth, that cut it of what bigness you please, and
sink it into the Sea, it is drawn forth a stone. In a Fountain of Gnidium that
is sweet; in eight Months time the Earth turns to a stone. From Oropus, as far
as Aulis, whatsoever earth is dipped in the Sea, it becomes a stone.

Tilling of the ground was of old, of great esteem amongst the Romans, they
found one sowing, and gave him honors, whence is the surname Serranus. As
Cincinnatus was ploughing his four Acres in the Vatican, which are called
Quintus his Meadows, Viator offered him the Dictator ship, and, as it is
reported, that he was naked, and his whole body full of dust; To whom Viator
said. Put on thy Cloths, that I may deliver to thee, the commands of the Senate
and people of Rome: Whence, Pliny, l. 18. c. 3. answers to this question,
Whence was it then they had so great plenty? The Rulers at that time tilled
their grounds ^ith their own hands (as it is fit to believe). The Earth
enjoying a plow Crowned with Laurel, and a Victorious plowman: whether it were
that they managed their Corn with the same care they did their wars; and
disposed of their fields with the same diligence they did their Camps; or
because by honest labor, all things prosper better, because they are don more
carefully.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Islands.
Artic. 1. Of the Original and destruction of Islands.
ISlands are parts of the Earth, compassed about with the Sea. They have many
causes of their beginnings. Some came forth of the Sea; some were broke off
from the continent; some were made by matters heaped together. One was made in
the Aegaean Sea, whilst Seneca beheld it: Seneca, quaest. l. 6. c. 21. He adds
that another came forth of the Sea in his Forefathers days; The Sea (says he)
fo^^ed continually, and a smoke ascended from the deep* for at last it did
disclose a fire not continual, but shinning by times as light^ings do; as often
as the heat of that was under, had vanquished the weight that lay a top: At
length stones were rolled together* and Rocks partly untouched, which the
vapor had driven forth, before they were transformed, and partly corroded, and
turned to be as light as a pumex-stone, last of all appeared the top of a burnt
Mountain, etc. Strabo l. 6.1. Geograph. writes, that between Thera and
Therasia* flames first brake forth of the Sea for four days together, as if the
Sea burnt, then by little and little came forth an Island that was twelve
furlongs wide, and it was all made of fire-stones. Atalanta, a City of Locris
that was fast and contiguous to it, was out off by a sudden violence of the
Sea, and was made an Island by it self. O^osius, l. 2. c. 18* under Leo the
Emperor, an old Historian* ( Evagriu^ l. 2. c. 14*) has said, that at
Constantinople, and Bithynia, there was such abundance of Rain, that in the
Lake Beana, which is not far from Nicomedia, by the frequent filthy matter cast
into it* Islands were made, thus began the Island Tyberina. For Lucretia being
violated, by Tar^uin* when Brutus had given counsel to plunder the Kings goods,
and to cast them into Tyber, an Island was made. So Livy, l. 2. Histor^ ^* By
(...) some standing Corn was then of Wheat or Barley, that was read^ for the
harvest, which fruit of the field, because it was unlawful to destroy, they
cut the Corn down with the straw by the help of many men coming together* and
powered i^ out of baskets into Tybur, when it ra^ but slowly, as it is (...) to
do in the hot weather, and so the heaps of Corn remained in the foards, wrap^
over with mud, whence by degrees, and by other things cast in by accident, an
Island was made. Also some Islands have ceased to be, as Pliny says, lib. 2.
c. 89. Antissa first an Island was joined to Lesbos, Zephyr^^ to Halicarnassus,
Aethusa to Myndus, Narthecusa to Parthenius Promontory. Hybanda was once an
Island of Ionia, now it is 200 furlongs from the Sea. Ephesus has Syrien in
the Mediterranean.

Artic. 2. Of the Miracles of some Islands.
AS Nature has given Islands, so she has bestowed on some, singular
prerogatives. There is an Island in a certain Lake, about the entering of Nilus,
that has Groves, Woods, and great buildings upon it, yet they flote, and it is
driven every way with the wind, Mela, l. 1. c. 5. In the Lake Vadimonis, and
Cutilia, there is a dark Wood, that is never seen a night and a day in the same
place, Plin. l. 2. c. 95. Of the latter Macrobius speaks; l. 1. Satur. c. 7.
The Pelagi found an Island in the Lake Curilia, for there are large feilds for
grass, whether it were a continent, or the mud of the Lake, it is handsomely
trimmed up, and fitly joined with twigs and Trees like a vaste Wood, and floats
every way with the Sea floods, that from hence we may credit the relation of
Delus, which has high Mountains and large Champion ground, yet floats on the
Sea. The Calaminae so called, in Lydia, are not only driven by the winds, but
by long poles, whither one please, and many Citizens escaped by that means in
Mithridates War, Plin: l. 2. c. 95.

In the great Lake Tarquiniense in Italy, there are two that carry woods,
sometimes they are of a three square figure, sometimes round in compass, when
the winds drive them, but they are never four square. In Garumna a River in
Spain, the Island A^ros is pendulous, and lifted up with the waters increasing,
Mela l. 3. c. 1. Also in Nymphaeum there are small ones called Saltuares,
because in singing of a consort they move at the strokes of the musical paces:
Besides these, in the Fortunatae, Fennel gigant grows as big as a Tree, Solin.
c. 58. In Madera, grapes hang down upon four branches, the skins filled with
juice, want a kernel, they are ready to gather in March. Cadamust^s, when
Columbus found out the Island Hispaniola, he mowed Wheat on the 30 of March,
that was sown in the beginning of February; In this short time the ears grew
so great, that they were as long and a big as a man's Arm: Each of them
contained 2000 grains, Peter Martyr in Sum. Indiae. There are fresh Melons
every quarter of the year, Ovetan. Sum. c. 81. Historiar. l. 11. c. 1. so
great, that one man can hardly carry one upon his shoulders. Grass mowed will
in five days grow a cubit high again. Tyles, two Islands in the Persian Gulf,
the Land of them exceeds all other places for this rarity, that no Tree that
grows there ever wants leaves, Solin. c. 53. In the Island Ormutium no living
creature is found, nor any Fountain Water; Manna falls down with the night dew,
Polus l. 3. c. 4. Dogs will not come into Sigaron an Island of Arabia Foelix;
put them there, and they die running mad, Plin. l. 6. c. 28. In Ithaca, Hares
brought thither from other places cannot live, Aristot. histor. Animal. l. 8.
c. 28. Ebusus, one of the Baleares, has no Serpents at all, Plin. l. 10. c.
29. In Creta there lives no Owl; bring one thither, it will die: and in the
same Island there is no mischievous living Creature besides the Spider
Philangium. Cyprus in former times was so impatient of graves, that it would
cast forth the next night, bodies buried in the day. Ericus the first Danish
King was brought dead to Jerusalem by the winds, who was intended for the same
place, Saxo Gram. l. 12. In the Island Cephalonia there is a River that has on
one side an infinite multitude of Grasshoppers, but none on the other side,
Aristot. histor. Animal. l. 8. c. 28. In Cumana an Island of the New World, the
Cobwebs of Spiders are knit so fast, that they cannot be broken, Hispan. p. 5.
c. 15. Iron that is dug up in Ilva, cannot be melted there, Bertius in
descript. Ilvae. To conclude this, in the Arm of the Sea, by Fortha, there is
the Island Magotia; In this Birds build, like Wild-Geese, in such great
multitudes, that the 100 Garrison Soldiers that defend the Fort Bassus, feed
on no other meat than fresh fish, brought in hourly by these birds; nor do they
use any other wood but the sticks to make fires, which the birds bring to build
their Nests. Bellovadius; and from him, Thuan. in histor.

CHAP. IX. Of Mountains.
Artic. 1. Of the Qualities and Quantities of Mountains.
We must suppose the Mountains to have been created at the beginning in part,
and part of them have been made since: Only one Modern Author in Italy may
confirm this. There are many in the World of wonderful height, and admirable
qualities. Olympus and Athos are so high; that Ashes left on the top of them a
whole year, are neither blown away with winds, nor washed off with rain: And
such as stand on the Top of Vesavius, have observed the Clouds that are near to
be of equal height with the Mountain, and some Clouds to appear under them,
Kepler, l. 1. Astrom. p. 3. What Zabarel writes of the Region of the Air, c. 8.
does make this good, I went (says he) up to the top of Venus hill in Paravium,
and there for the whole day I had a most clear Air; but about the middle of the
Mountain I saw Clouds, which were between my sight and the Valleys, that I
could not see them; but in the Evening when I was come down from that Mountain,
I found that it had rained a great shower that day at the lower part of that
Mountain, yet it rained not at all on the top of it. Piccolomin. de Meteor. c.
11. says, the same thing happened to him traveling over the Alps, and
Apenninus. In Seleucia there is a Mountain next to Antioch, from whose top at
the fourth Watch of the night the Suns body might be seen; and but turning the
body about, the beams dissipating darkness, there was day, here night to be
seen, Solin. c. 37. The Walk about to the top is 19 miles, and 4. miles
upright. In the Country of the New World, some Mountains are above 50 miles
high; some are so high, that you cannot see the valleys in three days coming
down, Martyr in Sum. and Polus l. 2. c. 43. In Tenerif, which is like a
Pyramid, it is 60 Italian miles high, Cadamustus. If you regard the qualities,
some abound with great Lakes, some vomit out fire; others have other rarities
worthy admiration.

In Mount Noha of Arabia Felix, there is a wonderful Cistern seen for
collecting of rain waters, which will serve for 100000 men. At Dossrinium in
Sweden they are covered with such a mass of Snow, even in Summer also, that
the balls falling from tops of houses, grow so much in the foot of them, that
they overthrow the Towns, Olaus l. 3. c. 23. In new Spain, there is a smoke
that always rises out of the top of a certain Mountain, and keeps round like
a Globe; as it ascends no winds disperse it, and it moves as swift as an arrow,
Cortes. relat. 2. In Helvetia near to Lucerna there is a Mountain, and in that
is Pilat's Lake; if you cast a stone into it, you raise tempests, and Pilat is
seen there every year, if you will believe it, in the Habit of a Judge,
Joachimus Vadianus in Mela. In the Alps of Spain there are Mountains of Salt
only: Cato Major says, the more you take from them, so much more will grow to
them, Gellius l. 2. c. 22. In the Province of Cyrene, there is a Rock and
Fountain of the Suns; when you touch it with a man's hand, a Fountain rises,
and it rises as fiercely as the Sea in its fury, Mela l. 1. c. 4. Lastly,
there are two Mountains about the River Indus, the nature of the one is to hold
all Iron, the other to refuse it* therefore if there be nails in your shoes,
the one Rock holds your feet immovable; the other drives them off, Pliny l. 2.
c. 96.

Artic. 2. Of Aetna and Hecla Mountains.
AETna is a Mountain in Sicilie, hanging over the City Catana, and all the
shore there; Pliny, Mela, Ptolomey, Strabo, Solinus mention it. The Inhabitants
call it now vulgarly, Monte Gibello. It has two Caves, whereof the one is
narrow and straight like a pit putting out stones every way like two bed sides;
the stones are burnt, and of many colors, and a stony plain holds it in a
narrow circumference. The other is in circumference 24 furlongs, it goes not to
the bottom of the same largeness, but the belly of it is something narrower
inwardly, so long, till in the middle of it, it is hollowed with a sit mouth to
cast out what the Mountain affords. Smoke comes always forth of those two
holes; when the Sky is clear, it is most white, like a cloud; the fires are not
seen, unless some burning flame rise up, Bembus in dialogo. Cl^verius, Sicil.
Antiq. l. 1. c. 8. found stones cast out from thence 60 miles from it, on both
sides of the City Catana, by the way men go from Leontini to Taurominium, but
especially to Catana it self, at the foot of the banks by Aetnae, which is the
way to Taurominium, where they represent a sad and formidable Spectacle to
Travelers, of great and sharp Rocks. That noise has been sometimes so great,
that they could hear it as far as to the Hills Gemelli; the sparks were so
great, that they slew burning so far as Catana, and wasted the Town with fire:
somewhiles there was such plenty of Ashes driven with the winds, that they
filled all places 100 miles; the smoke was so thick, that it so hindered the
light, that no man could see in two days. At sundry times the burning of this
Mountain has been after a diverse manner. Anno, 1329, on the I^es of July,
about Sun set, from the bottom of the Mountain, suddenly a great Mouth; and a
little after, two more were opened in the same ground, with that force, that
out of four Caves not far asunder one from the other, an infinite quantity of
great stones were cast forth at once, and lifted up the low Valleys, and
Forests, and Woods, to the height of Mountains; For a mighty River ran out of
these four Gulphs, like metals melting in the Furnace, burning not only the
Land, it lighted upon, Trees, stones, but also consuming them; the ground it
self that men before went upon, was on fire, and was sent and dispersed far and
wide as foam of the Sea that beats against Rocks.

But after that this Torrent of fire had passed through many passages of the
Mountain, it divided it self at last into three Channells, two of them ran
Eastward for many days, the third ran toward Catana, which before it entered the
borders of it, the vail of St. Agatha ^ Sacerdotibus being cast before it, by
the walls of the City, did extinguish it; while these things were done in the
lower part of the Mountain, the rage was no less on the top of it; whence
there rose such a shour of Ashes in the Country of Catana, that Fields and
Mountains were hid by it. And the North wind then blowing, plenty of them with
a brimstony smell were brought as far as the Island of Malta, which is a 160
miles distant from the Hole. Amongst the greatest Torrents, that is reckoned,
which happened a little before our days, (they are the words of Bembus in his
dialogue of Aetna) that ran as far as Catana, and wasted great part of the City
by fire, and that Haven, of which Virgil writes, And that great Harbor where
no wind could blow,
Near thundering Aetna lies some thing below.


The torrents of Aetna have so filled up the Haven now, that you would say
VIRGIL committed an error to speak of a great Harbor where is none to be seen
almost. Anno, 1537. on the Calends of May, all Sicily for 12 days together
began to thunder, like Canon shot off frequently. The noise was heard not only
at Catana and neighboring places, but at Palermo, Lylibeum, Sacca, Agrigentum,
and almost in the whole Island, whereby a little Earthquak arose that shook
the houses. When these hideous sounds increased, on the third of the Ides of
May, unusual Caves were opened in Aetna, out of which so great a quantity of
fiery matter was cast forth, that in four days it went 15, miles, and burnt
down all things it met with, and run as far as the Monastery of St. Nicolas,
de. Arenis where, (leaving the Monastery untouched) it invaded Nivolasum, and
Monpelavium two Towns, and almost destroyed them. The upper hole of the
Mountain, shortly after for three days cast out so much black ashes, that as
far as Consentia in Calabria, the Towns were filled with ashes, and they were
so scattered by the winds upon the Seas, that for 300 miles distant from
Sicily, the ships were fowled by the ashes: afterward Aetna began to rore
mightily, and as it did rore the upper top of it was broken off, and swallowed
in the Cave. Though the fire of Aetna be so terrible, yet the land there is so
fruitful that what Pliny speaks of Campania, l. 3. c. 6. we may say the same
of the neighboring parts, From this border begin the hil^s that bear grapes,
the juice whereof is famous in all lands, and the great contest between
Bacchus, noble for drunkenness (as the Ancients said) and Ceres. In that
woody Country there are spacious places, (says Fazellus, rer. sic. dec. 1*
l. 2. c. 4.) that are very fruitful for Corn, and there is so good pasture for
Cattle, that unless you let them often blood in their ears, they are in danger
by plethory moreover the fluent matter that is cast forth of Aetna by this
fire, grows so hard, that for a good depth it changes the surface of the
ground into a stone, and when they would come at the ground they must cut the
stones. For the stone being melted in the Holes or Caves, and cast forth, the
humor that swims on the top, is black mire running down from the Mountain, and
when it grows together, it becomes as hard as a Millstone, holding the same
color, it had when it ran, and ashes are made of the burnt stones, as of burnt
Wood, now as Rue is nourished with Wood-ashes, so it is credible that the Vines
flourish by the ashes of Aetna. And thus far for Aetna. Hecla is a Mountain in
Islandia, not far from the Sea, sometimes it casts forth flame, sometimes fiery
water, after that black ashes and Pumex stones in such abundance, that it
darkneth the Sun, yet sometimes the Mountain is wonderful quiet, especially
when the West wind blows^ An. 1553. the 19, of November, about midnight a flame
appeared in the Sea by Hecla, that lightened the whole Island. An hour after,
the Island shaked, then there followed a terrible noise, that if all the Guns
for War were shot off, they were nothing to this terrible noise. Dithnarus
Bleskenius writes thus, We had thought the frame of the World would now be
dissolved, and that the last day was come ( Camer Horar. subcis. cent. 3. c.
17.). It was found afterward that the Sea was gone back from that place two
miles, and it was all left dry. An. 1580, it vomited out fire with such a
noise, that for 80 miles men thought the great Guns were discharged. The common
people think the souls of the damned, are there tormented. Georgius Bruno in
theatro Mundi.

The End of the Second Classis.
OF Natural Wonders.
The Third Classis. Wherein are the Wonders of the Meteors.
WHat then? Is it better think you to perish by discontent of Mind, or by
Thunder? Therefore rise stronger against the threatenings of Heaven; and when
the World is all on fire, think that thou have nothing to lose in so great a
Mass, Seneca, quaest. nature. l. 2. c. 59.
CHAP. I. Of Subterraneous Exhalations.
MEteors are made of Exhalations, the Sun and the rest of the Stars draw them
forth; and the subterraneall fire is the worker of very many of them. We shall
speak nothing of them. These are some hurtful, some safe, as may be proved by
many Examples. At the foot of the Mountain Tritulum Halveatum, there are waters
you must ascend by 43 degrees; to a place of sweating, It is in length three
miles, the more you are lifted up above them, the hotter you are; the more you
descend into them, the cooler. Those draw phlegm from the parts, and cure
distillations from the head. There is a hot Bath near the hot waters that run
forth of the Lake Agnanum; The ditches are covered with Turves of grass, and
stones being removed, a hot vapor is sent out, that makes them sweat that
receive it. Out of Avernus a Lake of Campania, before Agrippa had cut down the
Woods that covered it, and laid it open, the Exhalations were so thick that
came forth, that the birds were killed that flew over it. At the Lake of
Agnanum in Italy, there is a Mountain, in which there is a narrow Cave, it
declines moderately downwards, being 8 foot long; if you touch the earth of it
with your foot or hand, it feels hotter than the rest, it choaks any living
creature that is cast in by the venomous blast, deprives them of sense and
motion, though you pull it out presently; but cast the same presently into the
next Lake, it is a wonder how it restores their life again, Camer. Cent. 7.
Mirab mem. 50. In the Island Ebusus, Exhalations do so infect the ground, that
if they fall upon places where Serpents are, the pestilent Creatures cannot
endure them. In the great places of refreshment at Baianum there is a ditch,
the water whereof sends forth such hot vapors, that wax Candles will melt, and
be put on^ by them; and they are so pernicious, that men fall down dead
therewith. In Babylon there is a Cave also, out of which rises such a
pestilent vapor, that it kills all that draw it in. Also Plutonium in a little
hill of a Mountainous Country has so moderate a mouth, that it can receive but
one Man, but it is wonderful deep: It is compassed about with square pales,
and that so many as would compass in half an Ac^e, which are so full of clowdy
thick darkness, that the ground can hardly be seen. The Air hurts not those
who come to the outside of the pales, as being clear from that darkness, when
the winds blow not; If a living Creature goes in, he dies immediately. Bulls
brought in fall down, and are drawn forth dead. Lastly, at Hierapolis in Syria,
as Dio in the Life of Trajan writes, there is a den of a filthy and deadly
smell; what living creature sucks it in, is destroyed by it; Only Eunuchs are
free from the venom and hurt of it, Scaliger, Exerc. 277. Sect. 4.

CHAP. II. Of Comets.
Artic. 1. Of the Nature and Magnitude of Comets.
THe original and nature of Comets has diversely troubled wise then; nor yet
was any man found that could decide the question. Some think they are
perpetual, and are carried about the Sun, like Venus and Mercury, and often
times they lie hid; some think they are newly created, and are not in sublunary
but heavenly places. Democritus thought they were the souls of famous men, who
when they had been vigorous many Ages in the earth, make their triumphs when
they die. Bodine confesses his ignorance; yet he to this inclines, and (...)
l^st they become (...) Stars; The cause. The Ancients say they all vanished,
and did not se^. Others said they were of two sorts, false ones in the Air;
true ones, who foreshew'd things to come from the heavenly place. What ever it
be, they are secret things; and because they are in the Heavens, they are so
much the harder. That which shined, Anno 1456. possessed more than two signs in
the Heavens; that which appeared Anno 1472, for a whole mone^h retrog^ade from
Libra, (...) through the whole Zodiac in its motion, at first 40 parts, then
120 parts every day, Sennert. l. 4. Epitom. Cap. 2. Anno 1556. There was one so
great, that not only the most light and dry vapors, but all Woods and Groves,
be they as many as are in the whole Earth, would not serve for to feed it two
months that it shined. They are Bodin's words, l. 2. Theatr. Anno 1543, it had
a very long tail toward the North, a flame flew from it like a Dragon, it drank
up a River, and consumed the fruits of the ground, Sennert. l. c. When Attalus
reigned, there was one so great, that it was stretched out exceedingly, and was
equal to the milky way in the Heavens, Senec. quaest. natural. l. 7. c. 15.
Aristot. 1. Meteorol. c. 7. In the time of Anaxagoras, a huge great one burned
75 days; and so great a Tempest of winds followed, that it brake a stone off
as great as a Chariot, and the whirlwind carried it aloft, and threw it into
the River Aegaeum in Thracia, Niceph. l. 12. c. Again, in the Reign of
Theodosius the elder, an unusual one appeared at midnight, about Lucifer, and
a great multitude of Stars were gathered about it, which by their mutual luster
sent out the greater light; this was resolved into one flame, like to a two
edged sword: The same day in July the Spaniards report they saw it: that was
fatal to them and to their Ships. Cardanus l. 4. de varietat. c. 63. says, it
happened either by reason of the pureness of the Air, or the union of Light,
or by reason of the darkness of the day.

Artic. 2. Of the Comets signification.
MEn say, it is a forerunner of Calamities, if we look upon the Judgment; and
it is found so to be. It foreshew'd Vespasian's death; Romes Captivity by
Alaricus; the miserable end of Mauritius; the destruction of Mahomet; the
destructive diminution of the Emperors of Rome; the end of Charles the Great;
the Excursion of the Tartars into Silesia, and the cutting off of Lugs. Records
say, that Charles the Great when he saw it, was frighted; and reasoning with
Eginhartus, he said it foreshew'd the death of a Prince. And when he, lest he
should be sad at it, said, Be not afraid at the signs in the Heavens; He
replied, We must fear none but him who created us, and the Stars also: but we
are bound to praise his Clemency, who will vouchsafe to admonish our
sluggishnesse with such signs, Alsted* in Chronol. One was held to be
fortunate, which appeared to Augustus, when he prepared Plays for his Genitrix
Venus. These are his words, Pliny l. 2. c. 25. The very same days I had my
pastimes, a hairy Star appeared for seven days in the Region of Heaven, which
is under the North Star. It rose about the 11th hour of the day, and was clear
to be seen in all Lands; The people believed that that Star signified, that
Caesar 's Soul must be received amongst the immortal Gods, upon which account
that Ensign was added to the Image of an head, which presently was consecrated
by us in the public Judicature. In the one side of an old Roman penny,
Caesar's Image was to be seen, with these Letters, Imp: Caes: Divi, 111. Vir:
R.R.C. on the other side the forepart of Venus Temple with a Star, and Caesar's
Statue in his Robes of Inauguration, and the Altar where he was wont to
sacrifice, make his Vows and Controversies, by interpos^ng an Oath, and these
Letters were added to it, Divo Jul. Delchamp. add. 2. Plin. c. 25.

CHAP. III. Of an Ignis Fatuus, Helena, Castor and Pollux.
AN Ignis Fatuus uses to be seen about Sepulchers and Gallowses, for it rises
from a birdlimy fat Exhalation. It is lighted by an Antiperistasis of the air
in the night, and it is carried here and there with the Ayrs motion. It seems
to fly from travelers, coming toward it; and to follow those, that run from
it. The Cause is in the Air; It is driven forward in running, and it draws
them forward; but in flying from it, it follows, and keeps them company: Hence
are strangers traveling in so great danger often times. For they thinking that
it is light from Towns, fall into bogs. These 3. following use to appear at
Sea. Pliny l. 2. c. 37. says, That these lights are dangerous, if they come
alone, and sink the ships, and burn them if they fall to the bottoms of their
Vessels; but two are successeful, and signs of a prosperous Voyage; for they by
their app^oach drive away, say they, that unhappy and threatening Helena.
Wherefore they assign that diety to Castor and Pollux, and call upon them at
Sea, making them the tutelar Captains for their Ships. Act. 28. c. 11. Cardan.
de sub^ilitat. l. 2. of the Star Helena writes thus; The Star of Helena is
almost of the same kind, about the Mast of the Ship, which falling, will melt
brazen Vessels, a certain sign of shipwreck. For it appears only in great
Tempests, and cannot be driven into the ship but by great force of winds, being
a most gross Exhalation; and burn also; whence it signifies imminent danger.

CHAP. IV. Of Ignis Lambens.
IGnis Lambens rises from a thin and fat Exhalation, and cleaves to the hairs
and clothes of living Creatures; and if it be of a hotter temperament, it
kindles by their sweat. Virgil writes some such thing of Ascanius, 2. Aeneid.

Behold a shining Crest, was from Julus head
Seen to give light, and so the harmless flame
Did feel full soft, and on his Temples fed.
Cardanus, l. de varietat. 10. c. 49. relates to a friend of his, when he came
at one a clock at night, laying down his cloak, as he was wont to do, sparks
flew forth behind his Hat; but 15 days after, he being accused of Witchcraft,
at his friends persuasion went into voluntary banishment. Also when Servius
Tullius was a little boy, and was asleep, a flame shined about his head as they
saw it in the house* Which wonder, Tanaquil, Wife to Tarquinius Priscus admired
at, and bred up Servius born of a servant Maid, as if he had been her son, and
he was elevated to be King, by her, Valor. Max. l. 1. c. 6. Livy l. 35. Also
one appeared on the head of L. Martius, Commander of two Armies, as he made an
Oration; the ruin of them, weakened P. and Cn: Scipio in Spain. A Boy of Jena
pulling off his shirr over the hinder part of his head, he wiped many sparks
off with it, Liban. l. 1. de origin. rerum. The Countess of Caumantia; whilst
her hair was kemb'd in the dark, it seemed to vomit forth fire. We had (says
Scaliger, Exerc: 174.) a white War-Horse out of Calabria, he in the dark, when
he was curried, seemed to sparkle. They give the cause to be refraction of
Light in a polished subject; as in the dewy Ayrs, the drops are as so many
Looking-Glasses; so in a hairy head, fat and clammy, and scaly, are hairs and
scales: Also in Insects, some fiery matter is said to appear. In the Island
Solebe, all the flies every night seem to shine so gallantly, that they
represent so many Torches, Libavius l. c. A Worm is found like a Star, that
shines like a Star in the night: (May be it is the Sea-Star the Chemists
promise to extract light from the liquor of it). From the joints of some Worms
in Hispaniola Island, a great light shines forth, and glitters like hoar frost.
There are others that will give light 100 paces, and that not from their whole
body, but only from their joints. In Spain, of the New World, ^here is said to
be a Fly like a Beetle for magnitude, with it wings in a sheath, called
Cocujus, whose Eyes enlighten the night, that it serves for a wax Candle to
give light to those that walk abroad, and for a Lamp in their Chambers to read
and write by; and that not only whilst they live, but after they are dead.
Some make themselves little ropes of those Candles, and tie them to their
necks, to give them light as they travel. The cause is not in Ignis Lambens,
but it lies in the humors of these Creatures, and is done by way of
repurcussion, some are thought to have some light shining within them. Truly,
Gloworms shut up in your fist, give light if you look through a chink in the
darkest night. Reischius says, That Fish in their scales comprehend some fiery
parts, and by that they shine. The Dolphin seems to confirm this; for it seems
gilded in the night, yet is it blew on the back, green on the sides, white on
the belly, Reischius in Margarit. Philoso.

CHAP. V. Of Lightning, Thunder, and Thunderbolts.
He that would nearly understand the breeding of Thunder must consult with
Chemists, for so often as a part of Saltpeter and brimstone (...), there is made
a great noise, and we shall say that thundering Gold is carried with a greater
force. Also it is well known that if a mixture be made of Niter, Brimstone,
Quicklime, and Bitumen, that it will kindle by pouring on any moisture; and so
it is here, for when the brimstony and nitrous Vapors in Summertime, are
carried upwards, by heat of the Sun, especially the Southern wind being quiet,
they are united and condensed by the opposite winds, and are kindled by a
peculiar antiperistasis; hence comes the sound and lightning. Histories write
that it has been heard in a clear Sky. Senec. natural. l. 2. cap. 30. Aetna
sometimes has abounded with great fire, and has cast out a wonderful quantity
of burning Sand, the day was hid in dust, and sudden night frighted the people.
They say that at that time there were great thunder claps and noises in the
Sky, which were made by the concourse of dry things, and not of the Clouds; for
it is likely in so clear weather, that there were none. The Thunderbolt often
times is carried into the Earth, because it is cast forth of the Cloud with
great violence, and is made of a fast and well compacted matter, yet Pliny, l.
2. c. 55. says, that it never strikes above five foot deep into the Earth. The
effects of it are wonderful; vessels of water are drank up, the cover being
untouched, and no other token being left: Gold, Brass, Silver have been melted
within, and the bags no ways burnd, nor so much as the Seal of Wax defaced;
Pliny, l. 2. c. 51. Lucius Scipio proved that, by Gold he had in a Chest of
Osiers. Marcia a Queen of the Romans was Thunder-stricken, when she was great
with Child, she had no hurt at all, only the Child was killed. The cause is put
in rarity and thickness; that penetrates more easy, this because it penetrates
with more difficulty does more harm. Aristotle, 3. Meteorolog. c. 1. The wine
sometimes stands still the vessel being broken, the cause is because the heat of
the thunder, thickneth the outward parts of the Wine, that the wine seems to
stand, as shut up in a skin; Sennert. l. 4. Epitom. c. 2. but this hardness
will not last 3. days, Seneca quaest. natural. l. 2. c. 5. That is most
admirable which Me^rerus in Comment Meteorolog. reports that a certain Minister
was so suddenly taken away out of the sight of Men, in the way that men pass
from Lipsia to Torga, that he was never seen again. Those that shall be
presently stricken, are so stupefied, that they neither hear the Thunder, nor
the greatest claps of it. That, in the German Wars, happened to Severus Master
of the Horse, Julian being Emperor. First he was stiff, and then lither,
death being at hand; Pliny writes that it will not touch the Bay Tree, the Sea
Calf, the Eagle; Rhodiginus adds, the Fig Tree: and says it is by reason of
its bitterness, Rhodig Antig, lect. l. 3. c. 29. Therefore Tiberius Caesar, as
Suetonius says in his life, fearing thunder, when the Skies were troubled,
wore a Crown of Bays upon his head, and for this reason says Columella, when a
Hen sits they put Bay boughs under her. Therefore they were wont to make the
Emperors Tents of Sea Calves Skins. And Suetonius writes that Augustus was so
fearful of Thunder, and Lightning that he allwaies carried the same with him.
Severus the Emperor had a litter made of the same matter for the same purpose:
yet Vicomercatus, ad 3. Meteoror, c. 10. relates that the Bay Tree is sometimes
stricken from Heaven, and Conimbricense thinks this freedom it has to be but
imaginary, but only by an instinct of nature, they foreshew Thunder. I need not
speak much of the Thunderbolt, kept in houses, of herb, and Candles, at the
m^re solemn feasts purged with holy water, and of the ringing of Bells* who
sees not but that these things are superstitious. Some of them say, ( Remig. l.
1. daemonol. c. 26), that ringing of Bells is uneffectuall and useless, if any
one of them when it is purged, bear the name of the Priests Concubine. For if
that sound do rarify the Air, (which yet spoken absolutely is false, for it
neither dissipates the Clouds, that are nearer to us, nor does it fly right
upwards, but in many places it comes forth obliquely by the Windows, nor does
it come to the Cloud) it were better that only the great Guns should be shot
off, and only the greatest Bells Rung. Constant observation shows that Dogs,
Cats, and Goats are most obnoxious to be Thunder struck. Hence it is that if a
Dog be by a man in an open field, he will be frighted and lie between his feet,
Cl. Bortholinus casts the cause of it upon the Vapors breathing forth of these
Creatures bodies, which as a known matter and nutriment, the Vapors for thunder
follow, especially if these Creatures be abroad, that they may be freely
carried into the open Air; Hence it is that Cats are often stricken in the
entry, and who knows not that the Dogs and Goats smell strong? And Cats send
out such Plenty of Vapors by their pores that some men have fainted at their
being present, and the more noble Horses, if they be hid in the Coach, will
sweat extremely, as experience teaches. Thunder seldom happens in the Winter.
For but very few or almost no hot exhalations are lifted up, yet Curtius, l.
8. de Alex, mentions that in the time of Alexander, There was says he
almost a continual Thunder, and the Thunder bolts seemed to fall in diverse
places, then suddenly a shore of hayle was poured forth like a Torrent, and
force of cold froze this shower into Ice, Ola^s, l. ^. c. 6. think that they
are more vehement in Northern Climates, for they kill Men; and in the Kingdom
of Mongall in Tartary they fall mingled with Snow; In Brasile Thunder bolts
fall but seldom, but such lightnings that they seem lighter than the Sun;
Joseph Ac. sta, Anno, 1560. In the time of Marcus Antoninus the Philosopher, we
read that the Enemy was stricken with Thunder at the prayers of the Christian
Soldiers, whence the Christian Legion was called the Thundering Legion,
presently (says the Emperor of them in Epist.) as they lay upon their Faces
and prayed to a God I know not, a cold shower fell upon us; but upon our
Enemies, hail mingled with thunder, that we found immediately that the hand of
the mighty God assisted us.

CHAP. VI. Of the Winds.
Artic. 1. Of the Original of Winds.
ARistot. 2. Meteor. c. 4. says, That the Sun is the cause of the winds, by
drawing up the moisture that is upon the surface of the Earth, and by heating,
does dry the Earth it self. Lydiat likes not this opinion; For the Earth
moystned being dried, affords but little matter for winds. For the Earth drinks
in no more rain than may quench its thirst, and which it may change into a dry
nature, from whence comes no Exhalation of the same allowance, much goes to
rain, which is no small part of it. What then shall be left for the vast winds?
wherefore, inward heat is pleaded for. And truly, in Winter the Earth sends
forth a smoky exhalation. In the Southern parts, Winds arise from Snow; A
breath rises from Lakes and standing Pools; and storms from the Sea, though it
be calm: whence is this, but that the Earth breathes out vapors, which break
forth through the depth of waters. The Chemical Instrument will show this,
which they use for bellows, Sennert. l. 4. Epitom. c. 3. A Globe is made of
Copper, that it may be filled with water, and then shut, a pipe with a small
hole is made of one side, the Glob filled with water is set to the fire, and
the pipe for bellows is set to another. As the Globe grows hot, and the water
rarifies, the Air continually breathes forth, and serves for bellows till all
the water be consumed. Winds are then bred, when heat burns the moist Earth.
The Sun by drying opens the pores, and the Air helps by its motion. If it
rise from the Sea, the Sea at first calm making a muttring noise, signifies
that an exhalation that is matter for wind, is already then bred in the bowels
of it; some fishes sport, some fasten themselves to rocks: then the Sea
swelling a little, shows that the exhalation newly bred, seeks a passage
forth; then when it fails, it shows it is come to the superficies, but in small
quantity; then the blasts breaking forth with all their force, lift up the
waves before them, and cause Winds and Tempests.

Artic. 2. Of the Kinds and Effects of Winds.
THere are many kinds of Winds, which were chiefly found out by Navigation, and
the operations of them according to the difference of their blasts and
properties. The North-East wind draws clouds to it. Circeius a Southern wind,
hinders, that the North wind be not mingled with the smell of plants; and the
force of it is so great, that it will overthrow an armed man, and lift ships up
from the water into the Air, and carry away Windmills with the stones, house
and men, to some other place, Pliny l. 2. c. 47. Gel. l. 2. c. 22. Olaus l. 1.
c. 4. and 2. c. 3. There is a whirlwind that causes such Tempests to those
that sail out of the Country of China to Jupan, that it is a miracle to escape
shipwreck. In the Country of St. Vincent it roots up Woods; in Hispaniola it
will take up men and carry them a furlong. If they arise in the Island of
Ormuth, they kill those they meet, with heat; and they part the flesh of those
that are killed from the bones, as boiling water does. To avoid the danger,
they hide themselves in the water up to the head, Ovetan l. 6. Polus l. 1. c.
5. Women are wonderfully prone to lust when their privities are obvious to the
South wind; but the North wind is said to be fit for generation; whence it is
that some believe it will raise men dying with its blast, Rhodigin l. 54. c. 4.
and l. 15. c. 23.

In Lesbos at Mytilene, when the South wind blows, men are sick; they cough
when the North-west wind blows; the North wind makes them well again. In
Tercera it eats Iron and stones, Bertius in Geograph. Amongst the rest are the
Etesia, that are very moderate winds, every year two days after the rising of
the dog star they are wont to blow 40 days. They temper the heat with their
blast, and cool the Summer, and defend us from the burden of the hot months.
They rise at 3. of the clock of the day, (thence they are called sleepy winds,)
and they cease at night. It is likely they are bred by great heat, melting the
Snow that yet remains in the Northern parts. It is credible, that the Earth
being freed from Snow, and uncovered, they will blow the freer.

The Ancients sacrificed to the winds to please them. Herodotus says, That a
Temple in Ilissum was built to Boreas; They called them at Athens Boreasmi, who
kept the Feasts of Boreas. We believe P. Victor, that at Rome there was a
Temple for Tempest, Rhodigin: l. 20. c. 25.

CHAP. VII. Of the Earthquake.
Artic. 1. Of the rising of an Earthquake.
THe Ancients believed, that the Earth moved by waters fluctuating in the Caves
of the Earth. Whence they called Neptune, Earth-shaker and mover, Gell. l. 2.
c. 28. Others thought, the wind in the surface of the Earth returning into the
hollow caves of it, did shake it. Others again, that the Sun kept the vapors
within the ground, and they seeking passage to come forth, did wander where
they could, when they found none. Reason and Experience are against it. There
is in the West part of Spain a Mountain of wonderful height, with many hollow
Caves, Scalig. Exerc. 38. waters fall down in them with so great noise, that
they are heard five miles, yet there is no Earthquake there; nor yet is the
wind or Air that goes under, very great; it is dispersed in the largeness of
the Channels, and the diverticles it finds, going farther, it is stopped: Mineral
operations show this. For they make mighty bellows to draw the air, lest they
should be choked for want of it. The contest of winds does nothing, for that
rather tends to the sides, or flies upwards by its leightnesse; and at the
first hindrance, they fly from the Earth like a whirlwind. It is uncertain
whether the Sea can stop the passages, there are seldom any such great Caves by
the Sea; nor can that go in at once, but it will be thrust back again: The Sun
cannot more easily exercise its force upon the Earth, and beget an Exhalation,
than he can bring it forth being begotten; for the Sun beams operate no^ but by
resistance. Whilst they heat and dry, they open the same, because exhalations
ascend more strongly to that place which is near; One, in respect of
continuity, follows another; but howsoever they enter in, they easily come out
of the Earth, and more easily than they can shake it; for in Mines where the
powder finds but a chink, when it is fired, it is lost labor.

Wherefore Exhalation bred from fire under the Earth, and shut up in the bowels
of the Earth, causes an Earthquake. And that is apparent by this. For before
an Earthquake, Well-waters will not only boil, but be more troubled, and
brimstony vapors come forth. From whence? The like vapors are tossed in the
bowels of the Earth, Pliny l. 2.

Artic. 2. Of the place time and effects of an Earthquake.
THose places are subject to Earthquakes, which can easily take in wind. Solid
places will not admit it, sandy places mixed with lime do easily discuss it,
they want receptacles for winds* Champion places have no Caves. Yet the whole
Earth is never shaken, for the Vapors included have no proportion to the Globe
of the Earth. If it should happen it must be ascribed to divine power, which
nature would seem to challenge to her self; If you consider the duration, it
differs as the resistance is; few Vapors are sooner discussed, many last
longer, and rage a greater time; Senec. natural^, l. 6. c. 3. Campania trembled
many days; Livy writes that at that time, when L. Cornelia and Q. Minucius
near Consuls* the Earthquakes were so frequent, that men were weary not only
of it, but of all business. The same Author says that an Earthquake lasted
40 days, others say one has lasted two years, and returned again and again,
Livy, l. 44. and l. 45. Aristot. l. 2. Meteor. c. 8. Plin. l. 2. c. 82. Such is
the condition of the effects of it, that those that hear of it, will be
astonished at it, and those that see it dye. Often times it does not devour
Houses, Cities, or whole famelies only, but whole Nations and Countries:
sometimes the Earth falls upon them, sometimes it takes them into its deep jaws
and leaves not so much whereby it may appear, that what is not now, ever was.
Seneca, L. 6. nature c. 1. The ground covers sometimes the most noble Cities,
without leaving any mark of their forme^ being, when as the great hollow Caves
in the Earth are forced and shaken with winds and fall down, often times in the
Sea, a hollow pit opening drinks up the waters, on the Land Rivers, that both
fish and shipping sink into it. On the otherside, the Earth lifted up into a
high tumor, has caused Mountains on land, and Islands at Sea, sometimes the
course of Rivers has been changed, that hilly ground having been removed on
that side that they formerly ran. Histories are full of these calamities. The
last year of Nero, fields and Olive Trees, that the high way passed between,
in the Country of the M^rrucinum were transported to the other side. L.
Marcius, and Sextus Julius being Consuls, in the Country of the Mutinenses, two
Mountains fell together with a mighty noise, Plin. l. 2. and l. 16. c. 40. Many
Villages were then beaten down, and Cattle killed. In Parthia, there is a place
called Ragai from the clifts, where many Towns, and Villages 2000, were
overwhelmed. At Cajeta in Italy, there is a Mountain toward the South, a part
whereof an Earthquake so divided, that one would believe the division was made
by the art of Man, the Sea runs under it with a great noise. Agricol* in reb.
quae efflu* ex terra. The Houses of Helice and Bura two Towns in the Sinus of
Corinth, did appear in the Sea. In the Island Aenania, a Town was so taken in,
that there was no appearance of it left. Not far from Ptolemais, the Waves of
the Sea were carried into the deep, and so lifted up themselves, that they
appeared like a great Mountain, and afterward they were carried to the land,
and drowned the Army of Tryphon. When Cneius Octavius and C. Scribonius were
Consuls, the River at Velia brake down the bridges, and threw the banks of the
River into the waters, drove away the stones that were in the Market place; in
Town and Field it shook the Churches, which a few days after fell down. By an
Earthquake, the City of Lacedemon fell all down, when the Mountain Taygetus was
broken. In the War of Mithridates, at Apamaea a City of Phrygia, new Lakes,
Pools, Fountains and Rivers came forth, many of the old ones being sucked in,
and amongst these one was salt, that put forth an infinite plenty of Fish and
Oysters, and yet Apamaea is far distant from the Sea, Nicolaus Damascenus.
During the second Punick War, there were such great Earthquakes, at Liguria,
and the parts near unto it, so far as the Sea of Tyrrhenum, that the Rivers ran
the contrary ways. The most wonderful Earthquake was in Hereford here in
England, in the year of Grace, after the 15 century, 71, the 12 of the Cal^nds
of March at six a Clock at night the Earth parted in the Eastern part of the
County, and a Mountain with a Rock under it, (first with a wonderful noise and
roaring, that the neighbor parts might hear it) as if it had been raised out
of a long sleep, lifted up it self, and ascended into an upper place, leaving
its deep Chamber, and it carried with it the Trees that gr^w upon it, the folds
and slooks of sheep: some of the Trees lay overwhelmed with the Earth, others
were joined to the Mountain, and grew there as well as if they had been there
planted at first. It left the place from whence it came with a great pit, 40
foot broad, and 80 else long. The whole field was about twenty Acres It
overthrew a Chapel in its way; It carried a Pear Tree that was planted in the
Churchyard from West to East, and with the same force it thrust forward high
ways, Paths, Hedges with Trees that grew in them, It made pasture ground of
arable, and arable again of pasture. It rolled against the upper ground, and
being driven with greater violence, it heaped it up into a high Mountain; so
when it had passed up and down from Saturday evening, till Monday noon, it
rested quiet. This is Cambdens description of it. The Philosophers call this
kind of Earthquake (...). To this may be referred the Earthquake in Apulia,
Anno. 1627, it was open above 200 miles, and overthrow great part of the City,
St. Severus, Sarra, Capreola, Dragonora, Procina of St. Lyander; it laid hold
on, Assolum, Bovinium, Troia, Andria, Tranium, Foggita, Campus Marinus,
Remitium, Itistonium, Franca, Villa, Asanum, Consilinum, etc: Also it killed 17
thousand Men. It is certain that it brings with it not only present mischiefs,
but it is a forerunner of mischiefs to follow, Rome had never any Earthquake
that did not foreshew, some future event^ Pliny, l. 2. c. 64. Socrates says it
foretells of discords in religion: wherefore what the Romans did of former
times by appointing holydays by injunction let us do the same. They might fear
lest by naming one God for an other, they might induce the people to a false
religion: but we know that God, by whose power the Earth is shaken.

CHAP. VIII. Of Rain.
THere is a great difference in respect of the abundance of Rain, in time and
other circumstances; and very wonderful: no less variety than there is in
days; and oft-times greater, if you respect extraordinary things. In Ahab's
days it rained not for 3. years. It never rains in Cyrenica: The harvest there
is only that which for the hasty ripening of things by reason of the Sun, or
Air, or Winds, uses to come to pass. It is reported, that from sowing of Seed
it is but 30 days to the harvest, Maiolus Colloq. 1. About Uraba a City of the
New World; it rains most part of the year, and therefore the drops hang always
on the trees, Hispal. p. 5. c. 26. It never rains in Winter amongst the
Tartars, but often in Summer. But in the Country of Mexico the drops fall with
such force, that they are said to kill men: If you consider the substance, it
is common water, that is the matter of it; yet examples show, that it has been
of another kind often times. It rained blood sometimes in Borussia, Thuan. l. 27.
in the Island Pelagia, gold; in Lucania, iron, before the Parthian War in which
Crassus was slain, Ammian l. 17. It rained Corn in Carinthia for two hours,
above two miles space, of which they made bread, Thuan. l. 5. de Anno 1548.
Stones fell with rain, as big as Hens eggs, wherein were pictures of men's
countenances, and Diadems, Lintur. ad fascic. Anno 1496. Ashes rained in the
time of Leo, which lay a little hands height upon the tyles, Niceph. l. 15. c.
20. In the Wood Neuholen, they say that a great piece of Iron fell out of the
Air, like to the dross, and it weighed many pounds, so that it was too heavy
to carry, and no Cart could carry it, because the ways were unpassible,
Agricola observe. Metal. c. 8. In Egypt it frequently rains very small drops,
Mice breed of them, that use to gnaw and cut the ears of Corn, Aelian l. 6. c.
40. Also in Thebais, when it rains with hail, Mice are said to appear in the
earth, half mud, half flesh, Aelian l. 2. c. 56. But that is most wonderful, if
it be not a Fable, that Ol^us l. 18. and Ziglerus has in Norway, concerning
the Northern Creatures. And from them Scaliger has it, Exerc. 192. Sect. 3.
Lemer bestiolae. There are four-footed Creatures as big as field Mice, of a
diverse colored skin, they fall in tempests and showers; we know not whether
they come from the remote Islands, or from foeculent clouds. As Soon as they
fall, you shall find herbs in their bowels, raw, not digested. These like
Locusts eat up all green things; this plague continues till green herbs come
again. They come together like Swallows departing; they either dye at the set
time, or are devoured by (Lefrat) other little Beasts. We were told by our
Master, the famous Doctor, Menelaus Vinsenius, Doctor of Physic, and Professor
in the University of Frisia, that it rained Frogs in Ameland, which admits of
no Frogs. To conclude, in Velaunium, there rained from Heaven so many
Caterpillars in one night, that they were forced for two days to burn straw to
kill them creeping in their houses; all the men and women there, were hardly
sufficient to perform this work, Dalecha^p, ad l. 2. Pliny, c. 56. Sennertus
thinks, that Creatures that can breed of putrefaction, are bred either of some
matter watered by rain, or else they lying hid in the bowels of the Earth, are
called forth; but more perfect Creatures, and stones come another way: yet he
thinks that many of these ought to be referred to superior Causes.

CHAP. IX. Of Snow and Hail.
IN the Winter there is an infinite abundance of Snow with us, but there is
none in the deep Sea, Pliny l. 2. c. 103. Nor is there any such in Aethiopia,
Alvarez. de reb. Aethiop. But it is greater in the North. Sometimes great Trees
being in the way, it all sticks upon the boughs, and the Air stops it that it
can fall no lower, making as it were a vaulted Gallery. It is said to have
beaten down a City, being on the top of the Mountains of Dofrinium, where it
first was like a ball, but at last like a mighty round Mountain, Olaus l. 59.
c. 15. and l. ^. c. 13. The tops of Mount Caucasus have scarce any less, for
they cannot be come at in Winter; especially in Cambisena the quantity is so
great, that whole Troops of men are overthrown by it, Strabo l. 11. The
Armenians are in the same condition; for those that pass over the Mountains,
are suddenly covered with clots of Snow, that they cannot be seen, and that in
the fierce Winter; Rhodigin. l. 18. c. 29. In Tartary it comes on also in
Summer: mighty cold, vast Snowes, all* are removed by the wind, Hispal. p. 4.
c. 23. In the same, the Champion places of Pamer do sustain so great cold, that
it will put out the fire, for it will give no light, nor can any thing be
boiled with it, Polus l. 2. c. 28. In Moscovia, where water runs out of a high
hill, it is congealed before it touch ground, Surius ad Anno 1501. In Armenia
they are red, which proceeds from the places that abound with Minium, and by
the force of its exhalations they are colored.

Nor is this against reason; for plenty of bloods yields a blood-coloured dew.
Homer shows that, at Troy, (when he speaks of bloody drops of dew) that of it
sprang hairy rough red Creatures; Apollonius calls them Worms; Theophanes,
Mountain worms. There is a liquour in them which the people love to drink,
Eustath: in Homer, Aristot. 5. Anim. Hail is a kin to Snow, whereof we have
nothing to say* except of its greatness; for in the time of Valens it fell
like stones of unusual greatness, at Constantinople, Socrates histor. Eccles.
l. 4. c. 10. When Alaricus took the City, it was greater than stones that can
be handled, and was about 8. pounds in weight, Maiolus in Ca^^cul. In France,
when Paschal was Pope, one piece fell down that was 12 foot long, Bonsinius. At
Augustodanum, one 16 foot long, 7 broad, and 2 foot high, Segebertus. And no
less fell in the time of Bergoma; for it was compared to an Ostrich Egg, and
was 12 inches about, Bonsinius. They say, in the same year at Bommel in
Gelderland there fell one stone was 3 pounds weight, on the 12th of June;
sometimes the forms of it have been wonderful. Anno 1395, it had the Images of
men, with beards, of women with Kerchers and hair. At Cremona, Anno 1240, it
had the sign of the cross. But we are often deceived, and imagine what is not
so. Yet the Works of God are wonderful.

CHAP. X. Of Dew, Manna, and Honey.
DEw comes from a thin vapor, resolved into water by the cold of the night. It
is first found in the light and thick leaves and flowers of plants; and
sometimes it is scarce lift up above two Cubits high. Some say it was the
daughter of Jupiter and the Moon; for as Plutarch says, The full Moon makes
plenty of Dew. And therefore dogs in the full Moons, can sent out things by the
foot worst, because the cold dew takes away the sent, that they cannot smell
them; wherefore it is hard to hunt well in the Spring time. Plutarch says,
that fat women were wont to gather dew with clothes or soft skins which they
used, to make them lean, ((...).) Christophorus Vega writes, That Manna is made
by some little Bees like thick Gnats, from whom sitting by swarms upon Trees,
sweat as it were drops from them. Sennertus l. 4. c. 8. thinks, that they are
rather drawn thither by the sweetness of the Manna, and that they make it not.
The Learned make a question, whether the Jews Manna was the same with ours?
Many things agree, but in this they differ, that theirs, ground in a mill, or
bruised in a mortar, was fit to make wafers. If it be not prevented, it will
melt with any Sun; for an Easterly Sun will melt it. We read that it is used
for Sugar with water alone to drink, and to quench ones thirst; amongst those
Shepherds that frequent the deserts of Targa, Scalig. Exerc. 164. Manna is of
kin to to honey. This comes out of the Air, especially at the rising of the
Stars; it is made especially when the Dog Star shines; nor does it appear
before the Pleia^es shine in the morning, Plin. l. 11. c. 12. Therefore then in
the morning early the leaves of Trees are bedewed with honey; and if any in the
morning be in the open air, they shall perceive their clothes anointed with the
Liquour, and their hair glewed together. This dew is afterward collected by
Bees, it is altered by them in little bladders: It is put up in little Cells,
like pure liquor, in which afterward it grows hot, and is concocted with
natural heat. The 20th day it grows thick, then is it covered with a thin
membrane which grows together by its frothing heat, Pliny l. cit. c. 13. Also
that it is made by Wasps, Pliny teaches out of Aristotle. The Spanish
Navigations confirm, that it is made of some Molucca flies in Trees, which are
less than Ants. Lithuania and Moscovia have great plenty. The story is old,
concerning a Countryman that fell into a hollow Tree of honey, and a Bear drew
him forth. We have heard that concerning honey, that Aristotle speaks of grated
wine, for it grows so thick, that it must be shaved off to drink it. Amongst
the Troglodites at Belgada, honey is as white as Snow, and hard as a stone,
Scaliger, Exerc. 191. S. 1. It is so solid in Calicut, that they carry it it in
baskets. Many things are preserved by honey, and many things die by it; for the
milky humor in it is not weak; wherefore that remaining incorrupt, corrupts
others: Wallnuts keep their nature in it, for by their unctuous quality they
resist their peculiar humidity, but Figs, Peaches, Pears, Apples, corrupt in
it, Scaliger Exerc. 170.

CHAP. XI. Of the Rainbow.
THe Poets feigned the Rainbow to be Daughter of Thaumas. The Ancients thought
that she drew water by her two horns let down toward the Earth. Hence Virgil,
Georgic. ver. 138.

-- and the great Bow
Drank --
But Propertius* L. 3.

Why does the Purple Bow Rainwater drink? The colors are so exact, that no
Painter can equal them. The blew color is said to show that the Flood is past,
but the fiery color shows that which is yet to come Strabo. citant. Rhodigin.
Albertus thinks that 3, and sometimes more may be made in it. When it is made at
noon, we cannot see it, for no man ever saw a Rainbow beyond 3, miles. It is
never made when the Cloud ascends, but allwaies as it goes downward, for so it
causes no dew, but when it falls away Rhodigin, l. 22. l. 12. c. 7. Celius
denies that it can be made by the Moon beams. Scaliger, exerc. 80. s. 12.
approves it. In the Island of St. Thomas, says he, if a shower went before, the
Moon will make a Rainbow, the color of it will be like a whitish Cloud.
Combachius, Anno 1609, in June saw such a one at Oxford. But Anno, 1599, at
Midsummer after mighty Lightning at Wittenburg, Sennertus, l. 4. Epitom. c. 9.
As for the influence, some say that Plants smell the sweeter by the Rainbows
hanging over them, Scaligor, exerc. 81. s. 7. Cardanus condemns this, yet it is
not to be laughed at, for Scaliger saw a Cloud come down as low as the clift of
a hill, and Aristot, affirms it, of those especially that naturally send forth
the sweetest flowers. If it be in the Morning it shows a tempest; but one in
the Evening, fair weather, as Mariners and Husbandmen have observed. The
cause of the latter is by reason of the Cloud that has unloaded it self of
water; the former is because of the plenty that was collected by the moisture
of the night. These things for recreation are alleged by Scaliger, Exerc. 81,
s. 12. But it is no light matter to give certain reasons for things, that are
uncertain.

CHAP. XII. Of some admirable Meteors.
THose things that happen extraordinarily either in the Air near us, or in the
higher Heaven of the Stars, by their continual circumrotations, at Gods
command, are rankt in the number of wonders. Not only of old time, but even of
latter times, variety has been observed. God and the holy Angels make some of
them, and the evil Angels make the rest. Casparus Peucerus in Theratoscopia.
Anno, 1532, not far from Oenipo^s wonderful sights were seen. The first was a
Camel that was compassed round with flame, the other was a Wolf vomiting fire,
and hedged in with a ring of flame; A Lion followed this; and an Armed Man,
standing in the entering of the Mountain, did gently stroke his Mane, and he
seemed again to flatter him. These pictures were forerunners of the death of
John Duke of Saxony and Elector: first there was a Tree withered and
overturned, then there was a Knight on Horseback prepared, carrying the Tree
with the boughs lopt off, then there was a great black Cross in a thick Cloud.
At length a horrible Thunder bolt was seen to be cast out of it, with a
wonderful noise. Anno, 1534, the 3d day of July, in the Town Schleswich, at
noon in a clear Sky, Lions were seen in the Air, coming apace from diverse
parts to fight. An Armed Knight took their parts, shaking his spear. There lay
not far from the Knight a Man's head without a body, wearing an Imperial Crown,
a little while after a Bores bristly head was seen, and two Dragons spitting
fire. Lastly there appeared the Image of one most spacious City situate by a
Lake, and it was beseiged with a Navy and Landforces. On the top of this was a
bloody Cross, by little, and little turned into black. There came forth an
other Knight on Horsback, burning with a fiery color, with an imperial Crown
on his head, a horse followed him that had no Rider. Then in a large plain
there appeared two burning Forts, near to a high Mountain, where there was a
great Eagle, that hid half his body behind the side of the Mountain: there
appeared some young Eagls, very complete of a white color. Also the head of a
sleeping Lion crowned with a Crown, and a dunghill Cock with his bill beaking
and digging his head, till it fell loose from his body, and vanished; the body
remaining lay visible. There were other Lions present, and by the Bores head, a
Unicorn by degrees turning him self against the Dragon; and many other
Creatures of extraordinary figures, and greatness. The Fort upon a high rock
compassed in with two Armies, burned; and the whole Country seemed full of many
Towns, Forts, and Villages. But presently the whole Country where they stood
was consumed with fire, and a most large Lake overwhelmed the ruins of this
vast Country, nothing but the Towers appearing in that place, where that great
City stood before. At the bank of this great Lake stood a Camel as if he drank.

But Anno 1545, the next day after Whitsontide, these Images were seen in
Silesia; A Bear led an Army well appointed from the East; an armed Lion met him
with his Forces; between both Armies a most clear Star appeared, presently they
met and fought stoutly, that blood seemed to drop from their wounds, and their
bodies to fall down dead. As they fought, an Eagle flew from a high rock, and
waved herself over the Forces of the Lion with her wings. The fight being
ended, the Lion shined amongst his Armies; but there was no sign of the Bear;
but they were all dead carcases, where the other Army stood, and very venerable
old men with their gray heads stood by them. The battle ended, the Lion
retreated with his Army to the West; and when he was gone a little forward, a
certain Soldier riding on a white horse very well adorned, returned from the
Forces to the place of the fight; and upon that horse he set a young Soldier
that stood there in Armor; and accompanying him riding toward the East, he
vanished with the rest of the Apparitions. But what speak I of old things? our
Age has seen wonderful things, even this year. For in 1627. two Armies were
seen to fight in Pomerania, the Northern Apparition became Victor. A fiery beam
followed this, Mercurius Gallobelgicus. But Anno 1629, in March, in Misnia two
Armies met in the lower Region of the Air, they were so framed out of the
Clowd, that their faces and countenances might be seen. The lesser Army got the
victory, and put the greater to flight. It may be, these are forerunners of
things hereafter; which that they may happen, we heartily wish; and with this
wish, we will conclude this Third Classis. Oh, oh! that it might be so.

The End of the Third Classis.
THE DESCRIPTION OF Wonders in Nature.
The Fourth Classis. Wherein are contained the Wonders of Minerals.
THis is an Argument of Wealth, and thought to be true Glory, to possess that
which may all presently perish. Nor does this suffice us, that we drink in a
trumpet of Jewels, and we interweave ou^ cups with Emeralds; and we delight to
hold the Indies for our drunkenness, and gold is now but an addition, Plin. l.
33. Histor. natural. in praef.
CHAP. I. Of Things dug up, in general.
HItherto we spoke of things elevated into the Superior world; Now we shall
consider of things under the Earth. Which because they are brought forth by
man's labor, the Philosophers called them Fossilia, or things dug out,
including them under the names of Earths, Juices, Stones, Metals. They think
they are bred by subterraneal heat. Others think, that they were at first
created by God, and do increase by a seminal principle. And indeed, it is not
against Truth, that Metals are made of some vapors.

Avicenna says, That more than once bodies of brass, like to Arrows with
forked heads, have fallen down in clear day, in Persia. But in Spain a Mass of
stone with Veins of metal fell out of the Skys, Lydiat de fontib. 6. c. 6. The
latter is confirmed by the testimony of some Writers. For the Gold of
Corbachium in Westphalia, every four year grows and springs again in heaps. In
Sclavonia a vein of Lead every 40. years is changed into Silver. A dry scale
of Brass into Gold, in one year. Iron in Silesia at Saganum is dug a new,
every tenth year. In Sweden, red f^nny mud, laid one year in the open Sun,
becomes good Iron; The Mountain of Fessula in Hetruria has lead-stones, which
if they be cut out, will in a short time grow again; Caesalpinus, l. 2. de
metal. c. 6. relates of Iron that is dug up in Ilva, an Island of the Tyrrhene
Sea, that all the Earth that wanted Metal, that is dug up with the Iron will
the next time they dig, be turned into good Iron, Lastly in the Indies, there
is the Mountain Oromenus, where salt is cut out, as out of quarries, and it
grows again, Caesalpin, l. 1. de Metal. c. 1. But that is wonderful which
Garzias ab horto writes of the Diamant, Simpl, Indiae, l. 1. c. 47. The
Adama^ts, says he, that lie deep in the bowels of the Earth, and require many
years to their perfection, are bred almost on the surface of the ground, and
are ready in 2 or 3 years: for dig this year but a cubit deep in the quarrie,
and you shall find Diamonds; dig there after two years, and you shall find
Diamonds again. But how that should be, it is hard to say; yet no man can speak
with more care, than Nature can work, when especially she is prodigal, and
sports her self in the variety of things, Pliny, l. 21. praefat. Yet it does
not seem unreasonable that the Vapor should congele with a fit matter, and
that which is not well concocted to put off to another time, and so to
perpetuate the generation. Truly the Flux of Veins has something proportionable
to vegetable nature; and the relation of a Physician of Friberg, that, in the
Lungs of such as use to dig in Mines, their bodies being opened when they are
dead, you shall find the same Metals grown hard, wherein they labored being
alive ( Sennertus lib de consensu et diss. Chymicorum et Galenicorum) seems to
intimate as much.

CHAP. II. Of Marle and Potters-Earth.
MArle is a thick fat Earth, and yet is sometimes so fluxible and white, that it
seems like to marrow in the bones of living Creatures. Of times it is hard, and
being drank it stops the Veins that bleed at the mouth, and has the same force
that Terra Samia has; It is dug up in many places, especially amongst the
Saxons, At Gossaria there are two sorts, one is Ash-colored, and the other is
whiter, of which are made forms, wherein your Image makers make their Pictures
they cast. Sharp cold will divide them both into very thin plates, though the
former, before the cold have seized upon it, consists of thick crusts. Potters
Earth is thick, soft, it is hard to come by: works are made of fat and thick
matter, that the force of fire will not quickly break. Of the same are made
Vessels that will neither drink up, nor consume liquor: wherein water that
parts Gold from Silver is both made and kept. Potters Vessels have ennobled
many Countries: as Asia, by those were made at Pergamus, those that were made
at Tralleis. Terra Coa, and Samia are not unknown; and Aretina is wonderful,
Plin. l. 5. c. 13. Noriberga sends earthen Furnaces, wherein Gare are and
Metals are boiled. Of clay dug up at the Fort of Rottingberg, are made
purging Vessels wherein Alchymy is made. These being cast out of the fire with
the brass do not break, but are drawn and wound like burning Glass. Agricola
de illis quae essodiuntur ex terra.

CHAP. III. Of Terra Lemnia, Armenia, and Siles^ack.
TErra Lemnia, otherwise called sealed Earth; For Diana's Priest, taking it
upon him for the honor of his Country* offering for expiation, wheat and
barley, brought this into the City, soked with water, and making it like clay,
he dried it* that it might be like soft wax, and when it was become so, he
sealed it with the sacred seal of Diana, Gal. l. 9. Simpl. Now it is dug up
yearly, not without superstition, the sixth day of August only. They that dig
are Greeks, the pit sends forth a sweet smell. It is dug after Sunrising
for 6. hours, and it is laid up in one lump, and it must see no light till a
year be expired. Then it is taken out and washed, being washed it is put into a
bag; it is mingled with hands, it is made into round Cakes, and marked with the
Emperors seal. Then it is dried and put into a sealed Cabinet* and sent away
to the Emperor to Constantinople, Stephanus Albacarius in Epist. ad
Busbequium. It is good against deadly poisons. Galen tried it against the Sea
hare, and Cantharides, and found it good. The same Author writes of it, that
in a certain hill by the City of the Ephestii, where no plant lives, it is dug
up, the ground being as it were burnt. Terra Armenia was wont to be brought
from that part which is adjacent to Cappadocia; Galen says, it helps difficult
breathing, so that they die, whom it cures not. It is drank with Wine in a thin
consistence, moderately allaid, if the party have none, or but an easy fever;
but if a strong one, with water. At this day* there is a Bolus Toccaviensis in
Hungaria, it is like butter, and is good against Catarrhes; so that it is
preferred before the Earth of Armenia; Crato in Epist. Sileciaca Strigensis, is
also preferred before Terra Lemnia; Sennert. Scient. natural. l. 5. c. 1.
Johannes Montanus Silesius was the founder of it, who writ a book of the same;
that it is transmuted gold, by the ordination of God in his providence of
nature, prepared and transmuted into a most excellent remedy, that chiefly
prevails against venom, no less than the Medicaments that are made with great
cost out of the best gold of Hungary.

CHAP. IV. Of Salt.
SAlt is either made, or else it grows; It is made of salt Fountains, the
water whereof boiled long, at length is turned to salt. It breeds many ways.
It is dried in the Lake Tarentinum, by the Summer Suns, and the whole Lake
turns to salt; in some places it is moderated, not above knee deep. In Bactria
two Lak^s very large, one toward the Scythians; the other toward the Arii, boil
with salt: Also the tops of some Rivers, and condensed into salt, the rest of
the River running as it were under the Ice, as at the Caspian mouth, that are
called Rivers of Salt. Amongst the Bactrians the Rivers Ochus and Oxus carry
out of the opposite Mountains sholes of Salt. There are also natural salt
Mountains, as Oxomenus in India, where it is cut out of quarries, and grows
again; and the Custom of it is more to their Kings, than from gold and pearls.
In Cappadocia it is dug out of the earth, the humor being condensed: there
it is cut out like Tal^um glass. King Ptolomy found some about Pelusium, when
he pitched his Tents. By this example, afterward between Egypt and Arabia, it
began to be found under the sands, as in the deserts of Africa, so far as the
Oracle of Ammon. It increases with Moon-nights, Pliny. A thin salt is bred by
the Sea; for when the Sea flows, it froths, and drives that froth against the
shores and Rocks. These are cut off, and laid upon them to dry, and in some
places are turned into salt, Dioscor. There is a Lake of Salt in Sicily so
bright, that, as Pliny writes, you may see your face in it. That of Colomeum
tastes like roasted eggs* when it is hard, it cracks in the fire and leaps out;
but melted, it does not so: nor yet that which breeds in Lakes that is dried by
the heat of the Sun. Salt of Agrigentum will leap out of water, says Pliny;
torrified, it loses little or nothing of its magnitude; but moystned, it
loses. Heaps of Salt that in Africa are made by Utica, and like hills for
height, they grow so hard by the Suns heat, that no rain will melt them, and
they can hardly be cut with Iron. It is observed, that such who are much
disposed to putrid Fevers, are preserved from them by eating of salt freely
with their meat, Math. de sebr^ pestil. Also fields where it is sprinkled,
become fruitful by it, as experience makes good. Fat women, by the moderate use
of it for to season their meats, grow fruitful: for it wipes away the moisture,
and dryes the Matrix that is over-moyst, that the seed may stick. Also it stirs
up the loins in men, and causes Erection, Lemnius de occult. l. 2. c. 36.
Hence the Egyptians used no salt. That it helps to fruitfulness, Mice
abounding in ships, and the continual lusting of women that use much salt, is a
sufficient argument. Libavius tom. 3. singul. l. 5. thinks it nourishes, and
is changed into ones substance with other things: for we see that there is no
body but that Salt may be extracted from it. The generating of the most
precious Pearls in the Sea, and of Coral, that comes forth of Rocks with
boughs and branches like a Tree divided, is ascribed to salt, Quercetan de
medic. Prisc. Phil. 2. Farther* being put to the mouths of such as are
Epileptick, it raises them. In swoonings, either by resolution of the spirits,
or by oppression of them, do but rub the Lips with it, and it is a present
remedy. Held in the mouth or swallowed, it hinders Worms from ascending into
the stomach. Lastly, that it is an Antidote both for hunger and thirst, the
Army of Charles the Fifth made good, at the siege of Tunetum: They had dyed,
had no^ every one of them held a grain or two under their Tongues, Bicker. in
Praes. lib. de f^nit. constable.

CHAP. V. Of Alum and Nitre.
THere are many figures of congealed Alum; Alum called Seissum, is the flowr
of Alum in clods, and is pressed together like planks; or it flourishes
severally like gray hairs: round Alum swells like bubbles, or is like a
sponge, by reason of the holes in it. The liquid Alum sends out of it self
such a vapor that smells like fire, as stones do when they are rubbed together
to cause fire. When it is put upon burning coals, or else put into a pot and is
torrified with fire burning under it, it swells into bubbles, and loses
something of its substance, Plin. l. 31. c. 10.

Nitre in the Clytae of Macedonia is the best* they call it Calastricum, it is
white, and next to Salt. There is a nitrous Lake, where a sweet little Fountain
comes forth of the middle of it, there Nitre is made about the rising of the
Dog star for 9. days, and then it cease as long; then it swims upon it
again, and then cease. This is the wonder, that, the Spring of water always
running, the Lake does neither increase, nor run over. Those days wherein it
is made, if there fall any rain, they make the salter Nitre. The Northern
showers make the worst, because they stir the mud too violently. It is made
also of the urine of living Creatures, that falls always upon good and shadowy
ground, Ang: Salic: Vinc: S. 1. aph. 28. It looks white, feels cold; it has in
it self a most red spirit, most hot and taking fire, Sennert. l. 5. Epitom.
Scient. nature. c. 2. When it is burnt, it sends out alone no savor, that sense
can perceive; but mingled with quick lime, it has a most vehement smell. The
Egyptians strewed their Radishes with their Nitre, as we do with Salt. The
Macedonians add some of the Calastraeum to their Meal, and mould them together
to make bread. The fine sands of Nilus, which as it seems were nitrous, were
carried by Patrobius, a Freeman of Neson, to white their bodies with. Also
Nitre, of which is made Halinitre, is at Servesta, and Bernbergum, Georg.
Agricola. That Land will receive no Rain above a cubit. Like unto this, is
that, where stone Walls, both in Wine-Cellars and shady places that are free
from showers, that use to wash it off, do so sweat* as if they were sprinkled
with flowr.

CHAP. VI. Of Calcanthum or Vitriol.
THe best is the Roman, and Hungarian, the goodness is tried by rubbing your
knife against it; for if it make it look like Copper, it is the best,
Quercetan. de capit. affect. c. 30. It is apparent, that in its secret
qualities, it contains Copper. The Ancients took one dram inwardly, and killed
their Worms, and cured the venom of Mushromes, Sennert. l. 5. Epit. Scient.
natural. c. 2. A little piece of the white dissolved in water, is happily used
for the itching and redness of the eyes, Platerus de dol. p. 313. Riolanus
says, That the spirit of it is a caustic, that it will eat glass wherein it
is made. It has Antipathy with the oil of Tartar, they are both most acute and
sharp. If you mingle them, the acrimony of both is lost, and the liquor becomes
insipid, Boethius l. 2. de lapid. Joined with Nitre, it makes water sit to
dissolve silver, Minder. de Vitriol. c. 9.

CHAP. VII. Of Naphtha, Petroleum, and Maltha.
NAphtha, is the percolation of Bitumen of Babylon, so near akin to fire, that
it will take fire at a distance, and easily be inflamed by the Sunbeams.
Plutarch relates, That in the hollow Caves of Echatana, by the heat of fire,
that it ^low'd as it were into a pond; so ready to take fire, that before it
came at it, it would take fire with the light of a Torch, and fire the Air that
was between. The Barbarians to show this to Alexander, strewn a Village with
it, that was in the way to the Kings Lodging; and at last putting a firebrand
near it, it flamed as if it had been all on fire. Hence he adds, that Naptha
by some was called Medea's medicament, wherewith she anointed the Crown and
Garment of Creon's daughter, and burnt her by this art. Of this in Persia is
made a Physical oil, wherewith a dart anointed, if it be shot slowly by a weak
Bow, (for with swift flying it is extinguished) wheresoever it sticks fast, it
burns; and if any would put it out with water, it burns the more; and there is
no means to put it out, but by casting dust upon it. It is thus made: They
season common oil tainted with a certain herb: By experience of these things,
and by continuance, a certain kind is made by the Persians, that congealing
from a matter very natural, is like to thick oil, and they call it Naptha, a
barbarous name, Libav. Tom. 3. singul. l. 2. c. 7. Petroleum is more liquid
than Naphtha; In Italy and the Country of Matina it distills out of a Rock,
white and red of a strong smell. In Sicilia it swims upon Fountains, which they
call Sicilian oil, and they burn it for Lamp oil; Pliny commends it against the
Scabs of Cattle. In the Country of Parma it runs forth white, at the Village
Meiana; There are 3. Fountains there; they gather it every, or every other day,
thus; They shake the water with brooms, and foroing the oil into a corner, they
take it with vessels. Every day half a pound in the most hot and dry time of
the year, Baubin^n^^ l. 1. Dioscor. c. 85. Of the red, at the Mount Zibethum,
in the Winter, they collect 15. ounces, in Summer 45 ounces. In the Village
Allense, it is collected black, with a fleece and a scoop. The more water is
drawn forth, the more oil they take; sometimes 240 ounces. It varies as the
place does. The Italian burns not in its Fountain, the Babylonian does. That is
wonderful which Mathiolus reports, in l. 1. Dioscorid. c. 82. Hercules of
Ferrara ^ Contrariis, had in his possession a pit, into which Petroleum
distilled; He hired a Plaisterer to stop it; and because he could not do it
without light, he let down a Candle, and the Petroleum took fire by it, and
threw forth the Plaisterer, and brake down the sides of his pit. Maltha, is the
straining of Bitumen, mingled with mud, that is like clay. Pliny speaks of it,
l. ^. c. 104. In the City Samosata (says he) of Comagena, there is a Lake that
sends forth burning mud, it sticks to any solid thing it touches, and it
follows, when you draw from it. In joining of walls it serves for lime, And
the Babylonians used it to build their walls with, Vitruvius l. 1. c. 5.

CHAP. VIII. Of Pissaphaltum, and the ways of Embalming dead Corpse.
PIssaphaltum is Bitumen that Pitch is boiled with. Bauhinus thinks, it is
Mummy of the Arabians. But this is of two sorts, natural, and artificial,
that they embalmed with, consisting of Myrrh and Aloes. But of the materials,
and the manner how to embalm, we shall speak of them here, as we come to fall
upon them: Diodorus Siculus, and Herodotus l. 3. are large concerning it. Three
men perform this work. The first is called a Grammarian, who as the body lies
on the ground, appoints how great the incision shall be about the small guts on
the left side. The other is the Cutter, and he opens the side with an
Ethiopian stone, and then suddenly runs away; for those that stand by
detesting the fact, pursue him with stones. Then follow the Embalmers. One of
these draws his incision through the inside of the body, besides the Heart and
Kidneys; Another washes it with Phoenician wine mingled with spices. Lastly,
they anoint the body washed with Unguents of Cedar, and other precious things
for 30. days. Then it is delivered to the kindred that mourn for him; the
hairs of his eyelids and eyebrows being preserved, that he may seem to be
asleep. Herodotus speaks of three kinds of embalming; The first was by pulling
the brains through the Nostrills with a hook, and the bowels taken forth with
an Ethiopian stone, they cleanse it with Phoenician wine, and stuff it with
spices, then they fill the fat pannicle with Myrrh, Cassia and sweet odours
beaten, without Frankincense, and sew them in, then they salt it for 70 days;
then they wash the Corpse, and wrap it in a linen cloth, and smeer it with Gum,
and lay it into the fashion of a Man made of wood. The other is, by salting it
70 days, which draws forth the inward filth. The third way is, the poor
cleanse the belly with washing, then for 70 days they dry it with salt, and
then they lay it up. And not only men have been so honored, but beasts also.
For some beasts were sacred to the Egyptians; and when they were dead, they
covered them with a linen cloth, and spread them with salt, striking their
breasts, and howling. And to preserve the body the longer, they anointed it
with oil of Ceder, and kept it in hallowed places. Also they put diverse Idols
into the breast of it. Rondeletius found in the breast of one of them 20 leaves
of ancient Paper, written with Arabian letters, Bauhin. ad l. 1. Dioscor. c.
85. Moreover, the French commend Mummy so much, that the Nobility will never be
without it. They say, that Francis the 1. always carried it in his purse,
fearing no accident, if he had but a little of that by him.

CHAP. IX. Of Camphir.
THe Moors write, that Camphir is a Gum of a Tree, that spreads out its boughs
so far, that 100 men may stand under the shadow of it. They add, that the wood
is white, reedy, and has the Camphir in its spungy pith. That Is uncertain, but
it is more certain, that it is made of a kind of Bitumen; thus, The Indian
Bitumen, which springs from the native Camphir, is boiled in a vessel with fire
under it, the thinner parts turn into a white color, and are carried to the
cover, which gives them the form we see, when they are collected. Merchants
say, there is native Camphir in the Indies. It is so near to fire, that once
fired, it will burn all out. The flame that comes from it, is bright and smells
sweet. Hanged in the air, it evaporates by degrees, the most thin parts are the
cause. Hence Apothecaries put it in a close vessel with Milium or Linseed, and
cover it, Plater. de l. f. p. 165. The smell of it hinders lust; drank, or
smelled to, and carried about, it extinguisheth the seed. And because it flies
to the head; if it carry up with it cold humors, it may cause sleep, and make
men hoary before they be old. If to women, sick of the Mother, or fainting of
heart pains, a small cup of water be exhibited, wherein so much Camphir is
burned as a hazel-nut, it presently helps, Heurnius l. 2. Medic. The Neotericks
hold it is cold, and that it is mitigated by Ambergreece; and that the dryness
may do no hurt, oil of Violets is poured upon it. Garzias ab Horto says, he
learned by experience, that in inflammations of the eyes it was as cold as Snow.
But Mindererus l. de Peste writes; That when he went to visit sick persons, and
had swallowed a small piece of it, he perceived nothing within him, but like a
very small fire.

CHAP. X. Of Amber or Electrum.
SOme think it to be the juice of Trees; but amiss. There stand no Trees by
the Sea, that Gums drop from them, falling into the Sea, of which Amber is
made. It is more certain, that it is a thick juice of the Earth. The most part
is found in Borussia, also in Curlandia, on the part of Sarmatia, but not so
plentiful. It is taken in nets like fish. When the North-west or West wind
blows hard at Sea, they all run to the shore, with casting nets of yarn in
their hands, Agricol. in l. de Fossil. The winds being allayed, but the Sea
flowing, when the waves return back, they draw the Amber from the bottom; and
an herb like pennyroyall, that grows in it. When they have taken it, they
carry it to the Magistrates, who give them the weight of it in salt. Every
Month it is said to be sold for ten thousand German Crowns. At Buchania in
Schetland, a mass came to shore greater than a horse. The ignorant Clowns used
it for Frankincense, Hector Boethius in histor. Scot. Precious figures are made
of it; the Romans were so taken with it, that a little picture of it was more
than the price of a living man, Plin. Histor. natural. Rubbed, it draws
straws, if it be not smeared with oil or water. Some seek the cause in a dry
spirit: But, Scaliger Exerc. 104. s. 12. saw it draw a green Lettice* some in
the super elementary quality: others think it comes by accident, Fernel. l. 3.
Med. c. 4. For it has piercing and sharp spirits, and withal glutinous and
fat. Being attenuated by rubbing, they wax hot, and they easily pierce into
light things, as they break forth, Libavius in lib. singular. When they meet
with cold things, they congele; congealed, they return toward their beginning;
for the heat is driven back by its contrary. If you make a fine powder of
chaff, and iron, the Amber draws forth the chaff, the Loadstone the iron. In
the shore at Puceca, of former times, they dug up some of ash color; which
when it was broken with iron, it drew unto it leaves that were upon the ground,
and two foot from it, when they were blown up into the Air: The white smells
the best; Because of the Plague, Chambers are perfumed with the scrapings of
it, the sent lasts for 3. days; every thin piece of it burnt in fire, flames
away.

CHAP. XI. Of Ambergreece, Jet, and Earthy Bitumen.
AMbergreece is a Juice in Asia amongst the Moors. Some think it grows like
Mushrooms, out of the Earth under the Sea: Others say, that the Cod-fish does
greedily follow after it, and kills it self by devouring it: which the Fishe^s
knowing, taking him in their Nets when he is dead, they unbowel him, Ma^hiolus
in Dioscor. l. 1. The truth is, it runs out of the Fountains into the Sea, and
being hardened, there it is cast upon the shore. It is good for the brain, that
is cold, Libav. l. 3. Singul. It may hurt the heart, unless the cause be cold
that molests it; namely, if the spirits be hot, and too much attenuated, Heurn.
l. 2. Medic. A Plaster of Amber is good for bald and weak heads from a cold
cause. He that carries it, after a little use perceives it not. The weaker a
woman is, and the Matrix moveable, the more easily is it disquieted by Musk and
Amber, and her head will ache. Infused in wine, it will make men drunk. Black
Bitumen hardened in the Sea is called Jet: which the floods use to cast upon the
shores of the Aestyi with Amber. Earthen vessels that are glazed with it are
not defaced, Plin. l. 36. c. 19. When it is burned, it smells like brimstone.
It is a wonder, that it kindles with water, but is extinguished with oil. It
discovers the Falling Sickness and Virginity by the smell of it: drank by a
Virgin fasting, it causes her to make water, Dalechamp. in Notis ad l. c.
Nicander in his Theriacks calls it, (...); the Interpreter expounds that, Jet;
which is found great, and of a pale color o^ the shore at the Town of Ganges
in Lycia. Strabo says, That creeping things fly from the sent of Jet. It is
called Earthy Bitumen, otherwise burning stone, because it will flame, and is
good for Iron-Smiths Furnaces. It is called Ampelitis, because it kills little
Worms called Caipas; Also Pharmacitis, because it is good in Physic: I saw it
dug up in Scotland. So in the Jurisdiction of Leids, where if it be hard, they
make Chapelets of it to say their prayers upon. Hitherto belong the bituminous
Furrs, that being dried, make the Dutch fuel: Also the^ are dug forth in
Collaum, a Province of Peru, which Monardus describes in these words: In
Collaum, a Province of Peru, there is a place all bare; no Tree nor plant
grows upon it, because the Earth is bituminous, out of which the Indians
extract a liquour good for many diseases. The way to extract it, is this, They
cut the ground into Turfs, and in an open place they lay it upon rods or
greater ^eeds, putting vessels under it to receive it; for by the heat of the
Sun this Bitumen melts, then the dry turfs remain without liquor, fit to make
fires. Moreover, on the left hand in the shore of the Sinus Pucicus, not far
from the Monastery, there are found clots of congealed Bitumen, very hard,
about the bigness of Eggs. They all burn, being kindled, Agricol. in l. de
Fossil. Near these there grow pale-coloured shrubs that smell like fish, they
are 3 or 4 hands breadths high. They have no roots, and are like little dishes;
the Greeks call them Lepadas, they stick to the clods.

CHAP. XII. Of Coral.
Coral, otherwise Stone-tree. It comes from a juice that is stony when it
grows, under the Sea water: it is a small Tree green and soft, bearing
Berries, like the Cornus Tree; in shape and magnitude, but soft and white: it
presently grows hard before it is cut; it appears all green. Sometimes also
the stalks of one Coral Tree are partly red, partly white, and partly black.
In the Mediterranean, they gather great quantity of it; and those of Massilia
go yearly to fish for it, and draw it from the bottom of the Sea with Nets,
Dispens. Chymic. l. 2* c. 49. Linschot. part 3. orient Ind. c. 1. At the Cape
Bon Esperance, he says, there are Rocks, on which Coral grows of all colors.
The Indians wear it because Southsayers think it avoids dangers. The vulgar
thinks it can preserve their Children from Witches. This is superstitious, but
certain it is, it will quench thirst, being extreme cold. Mercurial. l. 3. de
curand. affect. Tied to the neck, it drives away troublesome dreams, and stills
the nightly fears of Children. Pansa de prorog. vitae l. 4. If a Man wear it,
it will be very red: but pale, if a woman use it. Lemn, l. de occult. c. 22.
The fuliginous Spirits in a woman are the cause of it, and the faint heat in
Coral. In men the natural heat is strong and evaporates. Hence if Coral be
covered with Mustard seed it waxes red. There are other Plants in the Sea that
come from a juice that grows into a stone. About Hercules Pillars, and in the
outland Sea, Trees grow like Bay Trees. In the Indian Sea, there are
Bull-rushes and Reeds; in the red Sea, Mushrooms; all which being cast forth,
are changed into stones. Theophrastus and Pliny confirm these; To this
appertains Syringites, that is like a joynted straw, and the reed hollow.

CHAP. XIII. Of Brimstone and Stybium.
BRimstone is dug up in Islandia by the Mountain Hecla, and that without fire.
It is yellow that is dug out of a Plain of Brimstone, which in Campania they
call Virgin-Brimstone, because women paint their faces with it. It is so
friendly to fire, that pieces of it laid about the wood will draw the fire to
them. The Greeks and Romans did purify houses with the fume of it; put into
the fire, it will by the sent discover the Falling Sickness. Anaxilaus made
sport with it, carrying it about in a red hot cup with fire under it, which by
repercussion made the guests look pale as if they had been dead; Plin. l. 35.
c. 15. The Chemists make such an effectual oil of Balsome of Brimstone, that it
will suffer neither live or dead bodies to corrupt; but keeps them so safe, that
no impression from the Heavens, or corruption of the Elements, or from their
own original, can hurt them Weck* Antidot, Spec. l. 1. I shall say something of
Stybium. It has an exceeding purgative quality, as we see by experience.
Mathiol. ad Dioscorid, l. 5. c. 59. Andreas Gallus, a Physician of Trent fell
into an inflammation of the Lungs, Heart and Stomach, with a wonderful thirst,
swelling of the Throat, beating of the heart, and a strangling distillation
almost from the head. He took three grains of Stybium with Sugar rosat: first
he cast up yellow choler 4, ounces weight, and afterward 2 pound weight,
symptoms ceased, and he recovered his former health. Georgius Hendschius
writes, that the same thing happened to him in the pestilence; Also Lucas
Contilis. Senensis: taking 4, grains of Stybium vomited up 12, bits of
Turpentine Rosin, that he had swallowed 15. days before. But a Parish Priest
of Prague that was mad of melancholy, taking 12 grains of the same, purged
choler downwards, that had like scrapings of flesh mingled with it, and they
appeared as great melancholy Veins called varices cut into pieces.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Juices that grow into stones.
I had almost forgot juyces that harden like stones. Nature has wonderfully
spo^ted herself in them, sometimes it hardens before it touch the ground, and
sometimes when it is fallen down. Both these ways are seen at Amberga, where
there are white pillars made by it. Agricol. l. de effl. ex terra. What ever
drinks it in, is made a stone, if it be but porous. Hence you shall find stony
Fountains* and Wood and Bones that are dug up. When the workmen in time of
War fled into the Mines of Lydia, about Pergamus, the entrance being shut up,
they were strangled, the den was afterward made clean, and there were found
Vessels of stone filled with a stony juice. About the Coast of Elbog, there are
great-firr Trees, with their barks, in the cracks whereof a fire stone of a
Golden color grows. About Cracovia in Bohemia, there are Trees with boughs,
out of which there are Whet-stones with corners; which was a Present* sent from
the Lords of Columbratium, to Ferdinand the first. Hildesham has beams laid
upon heaps; the heads of these sometimes stick forth, these being stricken with
Iron or with another stone, not unlike the marble at Hildesham, they smell like
the sent of burnt horn. There is also Wood changed into a stone, and in the
cracks of it there is Ebony dug forth, which T^eophrastus was not ignorant of,
that it lay hid scattered in the hollow o^ other stones. Looking Glasses,
rubbing Cloths, Garments, Shoos, being brought into a quarrey in Assus of Troas
become stones, Mucianus. But stones that congele from juice are commonly soft
and brittle. In the hot Baths of Charles the 4th, many stones together are
found, hollow like Hives, half Globe figured, so great as pea^e, they grow from
the drops of the hot waters falling down. But those earthen Vessels that are
found in the Earth; were Pi^chers for dead men's bones, because in all of them
covered with lids, there were ashes, and in some Rings were found, we saw such
a one in the Library Thoruniense. It was the fashion of the Ancients, as all
know, to burn and lay up their ashes. In Italy also some urns were found of
glass. Caesar Carduinus had four found in the fields of Naples: but what
happened at Verona, see Bertius in desc^i. agri Veronen.

CHAP. XV. Of the Loadstone.
THe Loadstone is well known: The effects of it are admirable, two are special,
its turning to the poles of the World, and its dawing of another Loadstone and
Iron. As for the first, in many places it does nor exactly respect the poles,
the Declination is sometimes more or less. This age observes, that for 10
degrees beyond the fortunate Islands, where Cosmographers have set the
beginning of Longitude, it concurs with the poles of the World; toward the East
it varies more: About Norimberg, they count 10 degrees, in Norway 16, in Zembla
17, as the Dutch observed; but one Gilbertus has found out 23 degrees
variation. Whence we collect the greatest variation to be 23 degrees. If we ask
the cause, the learned are of diverse opinions, some say there are certain
Mountains of Loadstones under the poles, and they say the Loadstone moves by
sympathy. Others write that it turns to certain Stars. Others say there are in
it two opposite points, whereof the one turns to the North, the other to the
South. Others think, that it moves toward the South, because the operation of
all the Planets is Southward. They all seem to be deceived. How great and what
kind of Mountains these are, is yet unknown, and there are many Mines of it in
Egypt. It does not directly point at the Pole, unless it stand in the
Meridian. The point that is toward the South, is held the stronger. The
work-Masters gives us a notable Maxim, when in the finger of the Mariners
Chart, they rub that part of the neidle with the Loadstone, wherewith it turns
to the South. Lastly there are opposite places, wherein the Eccliptick declines
from the Equator toward the North, and the Planets from the East make their
motions by the North. It seems most probable, Sennert, l. 5. scient. natural.
c. 4. that the Loadstone moves toward the South pole, either only, or if it
has two motions, the greatest is Southward. Let it suffice what Scaliger
writes Exerc. 131. Nature, says he, is at concord, and agrees with her self,
she unites by an admirable order, all things above and below, that it may be
one by a perpetual necessity. So that there are in things separated not only
steps, entrances, and retreats, but also minglings of those things which seem
to be wholly parted. Bodinus pronounces that all the 4, parts of the world are
equally respected by the Loadstone Theatr. nature. l. 2. For (says he) the
steel needle easily rubbed upon the Loadstone, from that part of the Loadstone
that pointed North before it was cut out of the rock, if the needle be equally
balanced, the end rubbed with the Loadstone will turn to the North. The same
force there is to the South part, if he needle be rubbed on the South part of
the Loadstone. Nor is the force less for the East or West part of the
Loadstone* though the stone cannot turn it self to the Poles of the world, but
only the steel needle that is touched with it. But this I have said cannot be
understood, but by experience: for if you put a piece of Loadstone upon a piece
of Wood swimming in the water, and you apply that side of the Loadstone that
looked Southward before it was cut out of the Rock to the side of another
Lodstone that looked Southward also, before it was hewn forth, the stone that
swims will fly unto the opposite part of the Vessel with water; but if you turn
the Northern part of the Loadstone, to the Southern part of another Loadstone
swimming in the water, the Loadstone that swims presently comes and joins with
it, so that th^^ both unite by an admirable harmony of nature; though the Wood
or the Vessel of water be between. The same will be done, if you put only an
iron Needle, thrust through a quil into a Vessel of water, and hold in your
hand a piece of a Loadstone, one side of the Loadstone will drive off the
needle, the other will draw it. So says Bodin. What concerns drawing: that the
Loadstone does draw, is maintained of the Ethiopian Loadstone; Plin. l. 36. c.
16. experience has proved it; Libavius. I, says he, when I proved this, wiped
off all dust from the Loadstone, and then I scraped away some powder of its own
substance, this was laid upon a paper or plank of wood, and the powder scraped
from it was laid under it, the Loadstone moved and attracted. The Loadstone
draws the Loadstone, by a certain line, because there is a spirit in it like to
the other, and nature enclines and is carried to its like, as much as may be.
It is as certain, that it draws Iron also. The hardness of Iron gives way, and
obeys; and that matter which tames all things, runs to I know not what empty
thing, and as it comes nearer it stands still, and is held and sticks in
imbraceings, Plin. l. 36. c. 26. The virtue of it was found out, when the nails
of his shoos and top of his crook stuck fast, for the first inventor was a
Heyward. Nor does it draw Iron on each part with the same force. The rule seems
to be a right line. Therefore where the virtue comes not, the ends are turned,
and whilst one of them inclines to the needle, the other accidentally turns
from it, and seems to reject it. The same reason serves for diverse Loadstones.
In the Midland Seas of Sardinia, at the foot of the Mountains that part, they
bend Eastward; they say there is a Loadstone that draws Iron, but on the
opposite part, one that drives it off, and therefore it is called Theamedes,
Plin. l. 2. Wherefore do we go to Mountains? We may see it in every
laboratory, if we will believe Libavius, Syntagm, Art. Chymic. Tract. 1. l. 1.
c. 19. There are opposite parts in one and the same stone contrary to the rest:
and it has an example of sympathy and antipathy in it self; as Vipers,
Scorpions and venomous Creatures have in themselves both their friends and
their enemies. I shall set down some examples of attraction. Severus
Milevitanus saw, when Bathanarius, heretofore governor of Africa, put Silver
under between the Stone and the Iron; the Iron on the top moved, and the Silver
was in the middle, and suffered nothing but with a most swift retrait, the Man
drew the stone downward, and the stone drew the Iron upward. August de civitat.
Dei lib. 21. cap. In Alexandria in Egypt, at the roof of the Temple of
Serapus, there was a Loadstone fastened in, which held an Idol that had an Iron
in the head so fast, that it hung between the roof and the ground; Eusebius in
Histor. Eccles. Agricola said, he saw a round looking glass, that was three
hands breadth broad, and two high; in the concave part whereof there was a
Loadstone, included above, ( Agricola de subter^^n) that drew an Iron boul
placed at the bottom of the glass unto it self, so that the thick body of the
glass could not hinder the force of it; the Iron Globe that uses to fall
down, was carried up. Let us come to the cause, and inquire whence comes this
force in the Loadstone. Each man speaks diversely, and so many men almost so
many opinions. Libav. l. 1. de Bitum* c. 12, says that there is a bituminous
nature in the Loadstone, reduced to the disposition of Iron, by a similitude of
sympathy and mixture, whereby the same principles grow in Iron. And he adds,
that there is an Iron bituminous spirit common to them both, but it flows not
out continually, and as strong from Iron as from the Loadstone, by reason of
the diversity of coagulation or commis^ion; Others attribute that to the hidden
form: Others allege a mutual harmony of natural things. There are in the
great world, says Langius, l. 2. Epist. 55, under the concave of the Moon,
some things that by a secret consent agree wonderfully together. The truth is,
the Loadstone is some kind of vein of Iron, and Iron may be generated of it:
Sennert. l. 8. Epit. c. 4. But the Loadstone loses its attractive force, if
you work it in the fire: For whilst it burns, the brimstony spirit of it flies
forth, as Libav. l. 2. singul. thinks. We saw, says Porta (Mag. nature. l. 7.
c. 7.) with great delight, the Loadstone buried in burning Coals, to cast forth
a blew brimstony Iron kind of flame, which being dispersed, the quality of its
life departed, and it lost its power to attract. It yields to the injuries of
the weather, and dies with old age. The expiring of it, is hindered by ointments
rubbed upon it, and the tenacious juice of Leeks; others add, oil of Bricks.
Lem. l. 4. c. 10. de occult. But Cardanus l. 7. de subtle: denies this. It
will not lay hold on rusty Iron, and much less on rust, Scaliger Exerc. 112.
Otherwise if Iron-filings were buried in dust, or the Iron be on the other side
of the Table, the spirit, as was said, is not hindered.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Stones, Schistos, Galactites, Gip, Selenites, Amiantos.
SChistos the more it shines like Iron, the harder it is. In Missena there are
bred some knobs about the bigness of a Wallnut, so hard, that laid on an anvil,
they resist the strokes. Agricola saw one of Missena, that weighed 14 pounds.
Galactites at Hildesham is dug forth of a Sand-pit; yearly it increases from a
milky and lutinous juice so that some are found as big as ones head; they say
it makes Nurses full of milk that drink it in powder with water or sweet wine.
All Gin is hard: In Saxony in the Land of Hildesham, it is found like to Sugar;
The Inhabitants of Hercinium, and Thuringum, burn that which is hard, and grind
that which is burnt; and wetting it with water, they use it for Lime: what
color soever it be, it grows white by burning. Lysistratus of Sy^e, Brother
to Lysippus, was the first that made a Man's picture with a face in Gyp, and
then poured Wax melted into that form, trying thereby to make it better. A wall
was made of Gyp, in pieces of Ash Color, at Northusia in Thuringia, and the
Port of Alg^^s, a Town of Mauritania Caesariensis. Selenites is a stone that is
wont to be found at dark night when the Moon increases; and it represents the
Moon by shining in the night, and it increases and diminishes with it daily.
It not only shows your face, but it will represent the image of a thing behind
your back. It endures the Suns heat, and Winters cold, but it cannot away with
rain; for it will corrupt, if great pieces of it be exposed to rain. Amianthus
is made of an appropriate juice; the fire is so far from polluting its luster,
that if it be cast in, it will shine the brighter. Once lighted, it never goes
out, if oil fail not. Hence it is called Asbestos; and because it is like to
women's full hair, and to men's hoarinesse, it is called Bostrychitis and
Corsoides. We saw (says Pliny) in banqueting places, napkins made of it, that
when the filth was burnt out of them, were cleansed more with fire, than they
would have been with water. It was found at the siege of Athens, that things
anointed with it would not burn; under L. Sylla. This stone is kembed, spun and
wove, though with difficulty, because it is short: and they make not only
Napkins, but Table-cloaths of it* and Towels. Also of old time they made the
Funeral Coats for Kings, which were put upon them, when they were put into
great fires to be burnt, that so the ashes of their bodies being parted from
the wood-ashes, might be laid up in their Sepulchers. Pliny says, that this
Linen has been found to equal the price of the best pearls; but now it is
sold at mean rates.

CHAP. XVII. Of Stones that represent diverse Forms.
THere are many stones representing diverse forms. We will mention some here,
namely, Trochites, Eutrochos, Encrinos, Enorchis, and others. Trochites, is
like the round head of a pillar: the round part is smooth, but each broad part
has, as it were, a kind of conveyance, from whence are lines unto the extreme
part of the Circle. Put into vinegar, it raises bubbles, and some are found
that move from place to place. Eutrochos is made of Trochites not yet
separated. Whose Trochites have eminent lines; in that part where two of them
meet, there seems to be a girdle twisted round within it. But the Trochitae are
so joined, that the lines of the one enter into the furrows of the other.
Encrinos, is like Lillies, for when one part with corners is parted from the
other, both show like five Lillies. Enorchis in the shards is like testicles.
In the Diocese of Trevirs, when Cements are dug up to repair buildings,
they meet with blackish stones that represent the secrets of women, Diphyis by
an intercurrent line represents the Genitals of both Sexes. The D^ctyli of Ida,
in Crete, of an iron color, are like a man's thumb. There is also a stone found
like a new Moon, clothed with Armor of a golden color. Haephestites,
represents the nature of a glass, and in the Sun it will fire dry matter. At
Salfelda in Thuringia, there is a stone dug forth of a pit 20 fathom deep; it
is like a firm breast, a foot and half long, three hands breadth; on the former
part where the ribs end, it is six fingers thick, on the hinder part where the
whirlbones are pierced through the middle, but three; the backbone was empty,
where it should represent the marrow. The outside of this stone was either
black, or some rare color, and the inside was like to the Lapis Arabicus* It
is supposed to be of great virtue. Belemnites, is like an Arrow, with a large
head, and a sharp point: There is in it a kind of rift, it is clothed with
golden colored lines, and it shines naturally like a Looking-glass: It smells
like filed or burnt horn, if it be rubbed.

The Saxons name it by a name compounded of Ephialtes, and an Arrow; and they
say, if one drink it, that it is good against suppressions, and such hags in
the night.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Eagle stone, Enhydros, the Touchstone, and the Pumex
stone.
THe Eagle stone is found in diverse Countries; In the Country of Misenus, then
especially, when great rains fall. It smells like a Violet, by the Moss
sticking upon it. It has in it little stones, that being loose and shaken,
make a noise: They commonly stick to Misenus; some have earth with them, as at
Hildesham, and some gold, as those of Cyprus. That which has a little stone in
its belly, as the Greeks say, if it be bound to the left arm of a woman great
with Child, through which an Artery runs from the Heart, toward the
ring-finger, next to the little finger, it will hold the Child in the womb that
is ready to miscarry; bound to the left thigh of one in labor, it will so help
her, that she shall be delivered without pain: but so soon as she is delivered,
it must be taken off, that the Matrix follow not. As it fell out with the Wife
of a Citizen of Valencia, Francis. valeriola l. 1. observe. 10. It helped her,
tied on, to be delivered; but not taken away, it was her death.

Enhydros has water within it; It is perfectly round, it is white and smooth,
but it flotes when it is shaken. There is liquour in it like as in an Egg. Also
liquid Bitumen, sometimes that smells sweet, is found in stones shut up as in
vessels.

The Touchstone is that stone they prove gold by: In Theophrastus's days they
were only found in Tmolus; but at this day in the Rivers of Hildesham, and
Gosselar. The parts of them that are found looking toward the Sun, are the best
for trial; the worst look toward the Earth, those are the dryest: but these
are hindered by their moisture that they cannot take the color of gold or
silver.

The Pumex stone is found in places that have been burnt, baked out of the
earth, or stone: because it has holes, in which the light air flotes; and
because it is without moisture, it burns not. They that have charge of Wines
put it into a vessel of boiling new Wine, and it presently gives off boiling.
Drunkards that strive for mastery in drinking, arm themselves with the powder
of it; but unless they drink abundantly, they are in danger, says
Theophrastus.

CHAP. XIX. Of Lapis Vitrarius and Specularis.
THere are three kinds of stones that will run in a burning furnace. The one is
like to transparent Jewels. It has their color, but is not so hard. Of this
kind is Alabandicus, which melts in the fire, and is melted for glass; The
second kind is not much unlike it, but has not so many colors, the third kind
is lapis Vitrarius. This has its proper Veins also. At A^nebe^gum, in a Silver
Mine it was found in the form of a Cross; at Priberg like to an Ape; pieces
of it are found also out of the Earth: but by the running of the waters, they
are polished by rubbing against some stones of their own, or of some other
kind. The white stone is burnt, beaten to powder, searsed; of that they make
sand, of these they blow glasses. The River Belu^ at the foot of the Mount
Carmel, rising in Phoenicia, between the Coloney of Ptolemais and the City
Tire, brings those kind of Sands fit for glass to the Sea side, which being
tumbled with the Waves of the Sea, shine, their foulness being washed off.
Plin. l. 6. c. 26. The report is that a ship came loaded with Nitre, the
Merchants provided their Victuals as they were dispersed here and there on the
Sea shore, and when they found no stones to make them Tables of, these took
fire, and the Sea shore^sand mingled with them, thence those transparent Rivers
of this noble liquor began to run; and this was the beginning of Glass. But we
must not think that Glass is made of this Sand only. To three parts of that
they add one part of Nitre, and of these melted comes Amm^-^itre. If Nitre be
wanting, mineral salt will supply the defect. If this, then either Sea salt, or
the Ashes of the herb Anthyllis burnt. But when that the matter of glass
melts in the fire, it froths, and the froth is taken off with a drag: when they
are forthwith hardened, they are made into white loafs, in which there is a mixed
taste more salt than bitter. Men report that in Tiberius's days, there was a way
invented to make glass malleable, and that his whole shop was ruined, that the
price of Gold, Silver, Brass and other mettles should not be brought down; but
the fame of it is more constant than certain. In our time, especially at
Venice, is glass of high esteem; we have seen some that have framed diverse
works of it, as bright as a Candle. When Nero reigned, by the art of making
glass, was found out to make small Cups with two ears, they called them
Pinnati or Pterota: one of them was sold for 6000 Denarit. I refer the
lapides speculares to these, because they were of a bright substance, as
Basilius writes, it was transparent like the Air. The Ancients used it for
Windows, as we do glass. Nero made a Temple for Fortune of these stones, so
that whosoever stood without was seen, though the doors were shut, the light
appeared though not sent through. Pancirolla, l. 1. de veter. deperd.

CHAP. XX. Of Crystal, Iris, and the Diamond.
COncerning the Original of Crystal, writers differ. Pliny, l 37. c. 2,
says, that it is made by the most violent frost from Snow or Ice. Agricola, l.
6. fossill. says, it is some sap congealed by cold in the bowels of the Earth.
The former opinion seems to be true. For not only the name confirms it, but the
place also where it is bred, for it is found in those places where the Winter
Snows are, in such unaccessible places of the Alps, that often times they are
fain to be let down with ropes to draw it to them. In Asia and Cyprus it is
Plowed up, and carried along with the torrents. Scalig. exe^c. 119. From the
Percinian Rocks, which are in the extreme parts of Noricum, it is pulled off
from the tops of Mountains there, that are covered with no earth. Sometimes
there is a kind of coorse Silver in it, of the color of lead Ore, and of
diverse weights. In India it is found so great that they make a Vessel of it
sometimes that will hold four Sextaryes. Livia Augusta dedicated one in the
Capitol, that made a Vessel that held 50, pounds. They are seldom found
single, many of them often times stick upon one root, sometimes rising together,
and sometimes a part. They lie sometimes so fast, that it is a hard matter to pull
them off. Every Crystal point, and the whole body of it, is with 6 Angles. It
cannot be melted by heat of the Sun. The extreme cold has so frozen it, that
it is not a small thing can melt it, yet can it not endure heat, Bodin. l. 2.
Theatr Nature. For in the hottest furnaces and great flames, it will run by
continuance; being melted, it will harden again; and if you pour hot liquour
into a Crystal cup, it will break. It is thought, worn about one, to cure the
Vertigo; and for that cause, Men drink out of Venice Glasses, Plater, l. 1. de.
l. f. There are made of it, both Glasses and Chamber pots, such a one as Pliny
writes was bough by a Matron that was not very rich, for H. S. C. L. M. or
150000 sestertii. Pancirolla had one of so pure matter, and so transparent,
that it seemed almost to be air, the outsides only being opposed to the view.
It had an adder in it, with open mouth ready to devour a young Lamb, but he
was hindered by the opposite Cross. Pancirol. de veter. deperd. l. 1. Also Iris
is a white Jewel: if it have a sexangular form, held against the Sun beams
entering in at the Windows, it casts the colors of the Rainbow on the wall
that is over against it. The Diamond is found in many Mines. The Indian Diamond
exceeds not the kernel of a small nut, that of Cenchros is no bigger than a
millet seed, Agricola l. 6. de fossil. The Ancients speak much of it, namely
that it cannot be broken by hammers, that it takes all virtue from the
Loadstone; and so resists fire, that it will never wax hot. Those of our days
have found the contrary. Camer. memorab. med. c. 8. M. 42. For a hammer will
break it, and an iron pestle will bring it to powder. It yields to fire, and
may be calcined with a long continued flame; yet though in an hour by the fire
it will lose its luster, it will recover it again by polishing with some defect
in the luster. It has been found, that rubbing one against the other, they
have been so glew'd, that they could not easily be parted, Bodin. Theatr.
Nature. l. 2. It has been seen to draw strawes when it has been hot, Garzias
ab Horto l. 1. arom. c. 47. It was hitherto believed, that the powder of it
drank, would breed the Dysentery; but that has been disproved. Slaves have
swallowed down some to hide their theft; they sent them forth by stool whole,
without any hurt to their health. Cardan. (2. Tract. 5. Contrad. 9.) says,
That one dram weight drank in powder, did no more harm than a piece of bread.
The Turkish Emperor gave 50000 Crowns for one.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Opalus, Emerald, Heliotrop, and Topaz.
OPalus is a Jewel, which when you hold it downward, it has the clear fire of
the Carbuncle, the shining purple of the Amethyst the green Sea of the Emrald,
and all things else shining with an incredible mixture. An Emerald does so
change the air about it with its own tincture, that it will yield neither to
candles, Sun light, nor shade. Hence in the water it seems greater. Those that
are not perfectly green, of them, are made better by wine and oil. They are
seldom so great, as that you may grave a seal upon them. Yet there is one not
very small at Lions in a Monastery, and that which* was seen at Prague in the
Chapel of St. Vencessius, it is above 9 parts of 12, greater than that, Bodin.
l. 2. Theatr. There is one longer at Magdeburg, which is contained in part of
the spire fashioned Cabinet, wherein the Host is carried; some say it was the
handle of the knife of Otho the first. There was a Jewel once found in Cyprus,
the one half of it was an Emerald, and half a Jaspir. The Emerald has
wonderful virtue; It is an Enemy to poisons and bitings of venomous beasts; and
it breaks, if they overcome it. It is said, to further women's labor, tied to
the hips; and to hinder it, laid to the belly, Sennert. l. 5. Epitom. Scient.
natural. c. 5. Shut in a ring, or hanged about the neck, if it touch the naked
flesh, it preserves from the Apoplex, Plat. l. 1. del f. It has been known to
break off from the fingers of the Master of it that wore it, when he was dead.
It cannot endure venery; for if it touch ones body in the act, it will break*
Albertus, the King of Hungary had one that brake at that time in 3. pieces.
Heliotropium is a Jewel marked with bloody veins; cast into a vessel of water,
it changes the Sun beams falling on it, by reflection, into blood color. Out
of the water it receives the Sun, like a burning Glass, and you may perceive
the Suns Eclipses by it, how the Moon moves under. A Topaz is not only
transparent, but also shines wonderfully; and the brightness goes forth like
gold: it is greater than other Jewels: for thence it was, that a Statue was
made for Arsinoa Wife to Ptolomaeus, Philadelphus, of 4 cubits high, and was
consecrated in the Temple that was called the golden Temple.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Amethyst, Hyacinth, the Sardonix, and the Onychite.
IT is called an Amethyst, because it comes near the color of wine, and before
it comes to it, it ends in a Violet color, Plin. l. 21. c. 8. Laid to the
Navel, first it draws the vapors of Wine to it self, and then it discusseth
them; wherefore it keeps him sober that wears it, Aristotle. The Hyacinth in
clear weather shines the brighter; in clowdy weather the darker. By its fast
cold, it condenses, and refreshes bodies, and preserves one that wears it, from
the fierce pestilence. Sardonix is a Jewel compounded of a Sardonius and an
Onyx. It shows inverted like a nayl of a man's hand: the most generous roots are
from a certain blackish ground, and first represent Onyxes, then they are
compassed with a reddish circle, from thence a round line goes about them, then
at a greater distance the circle grows larger; lastly, to all those girdles
another kind of basis is placed under them. The Graecians made great account of
this Jewel. Polycrates the King of Samos esteemed it so highly, that when as
fortune had always favored him, that he might try the contrary fortune, he
cast his ring into the Sea, wherein this stone was set. An Onychites at
Colonia, in the Temple of the 3. Kings is broader than ones hand, Agricola. The
milky veins of it so run forth, that they represent two young men's heads; the
black veins so, that they represent a Serpent descending from the forehead of
the lower head, and a black-Moors head with a black beard: But that was placed
upon the mandible of the white head. Two Onyxes rubbed under a Table, will so
burn, that you cannot hold them in your hands.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Jasper, Nephritick stone, and an Agat.
A Jasper bound to the thigh, will stop the menstrual flux of blood, and all
bleedings, which admit of no help otherwise. It stops bleeding at the Nose,
being hanged about the Neck, Sennert. l. 5. Epitom. Scient. natural. Bound to
the mouth of the stomach, and so carried all day for the Falling Sickness; if
sweat follow, it frees from the fit, or else the sick fall, Baccius de gem.
Pliny says, he saw one of eleven ounces, and of that was made the picture of
Nero in Armor, Plin. l. 37. c. 9. There is found in Silis one of a blew
color, that goes 9 foot deep, and then comes a dark sandy stone, about 12.
foot long, that has no Jasper in it, Agricola l. 6. de Fossil. From the
authority of Thaetilis the Jew, There are found some strange kinds of it. There
was a man seen in one, that had a Buckler on his neck, a Spear in his hand, a
Serpent under his feet; It had virtue against all enemies: In another, there
was a man with a bundle on his neck. It had virtue to discover all diseases,
and to stop blood, Lemnius de gemmis Biblicis. The report is, that Galen wore
it on his finger. There is a green one found signed with the cross, good to
keep one from drowning. The Nephritick stone is referred to the Jasper, it is
found only in Hispaniola, Sennert. l. 7. Inst. l. 5. p. 1. S. 1. c. 17. The
superficies of it is always fat, as if it were anointed with oil. The
Spaniards wear them cut in diverse forms. Many things confirm the wonderful
virtue of it, Unzer. de Nephritid. l. 1. c. 7. Hanged about the neck, it so
breaks the stones, that they will seek for passage out of the body at both the
Eyes, and where they can find way. A certain Merchant of Lipsick testifies
this, who had such things happened to him; and both his eyes grew red, by the
salt and sharpness of the same. It will cure all distillations that fall from
the head on the Chest, says the same Merchants Wife. For when she had carried
one 3 weeks, she was cured; but the Physicians could not cure her. It will
cause one to make water that is stopped, as we find in the same place: but this
is singular, that born about one awhile, it will cause a great tickling; yet it
cease in 2. or 3. days space; but it returns, if it be applied again. Also it
causes hollow places under the skin; which if you break, then they send forth
a very great quantity of sand. It is prepared by a singular and secret art, and
one dram and a half for a dose of it so prepared, is given in Parsley and
Juniper water: But the gravel does hurt, if it find the stomach full. Libavius
1. Synt. Art. Chym. l. 1. c. 14. doubts of it, whether it does these things by
its own force, or another. His words are; Sometimes it happens, that nature is
stimulated, by mere persuasion and belief, from some conception of the mind,
which we ascribe to the Object, the Fancy moving first by that. But the
efficacy is not alike in all, nor is their assent and belief alike, unless you
would say, that not only the Patient is troubled with the gravel, but he must
be of such a disposition also, as may admit the force of that stone. And it is
found, that the Nephritick stone is uneffectual to many. An Agat out of a River
of Sicilia, has its name from it. Veins and spots do so run up and down in it,
that sometime it represents a Turtle; sometimes a horn; sometimes one small
Tree, 2, 3, or 4; appearing like a Wood. Camillus of Pisdura, saw once one that
had as it were 7. Trees in a Plain. I^ the Agat of King Pyrrhus there were the
9. Muses naturally with Apollo; and the Muses had their several badges. That
which is of one color, being boiled in an earthen pot full of oil with several
paints, and in two hours being made somewhat hot, will make one color like red
Lead out of them all, Dalechamp in Plin. l. 37. Agricola l. 6. Fossil. Plin. l.
37. c. 1.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Ruby, the Carchedonius, Sandastrus, Chrysolite, and some
others.
A Rubie is of an exceeding red color; Sometime it is so great, that vessels
are made of it, containing a Sextarius. A Carchedonius is so called, because it
was found amongst the Garamantes and Nasamones, amongst the gravel, and was
brought to Carthage. It is otherwise called a Granate. It is said, that when
they sealed, though in the shade, the wax would melt, Archelaus. It will not
burn in the fire. Sandastrus has red with a golden color, golden spots shine
within, as Stars in a transparent body; the more they are, the more costly is
the Jewel. But because commonly it is marked with the 5. Stars called Hyades,
both in their nmber and disposition, the Chaldaeans were superstitious about
it. The Chrysolite differs in the plurality of its Stars. Bochus writes, he saw
a Spanish one of 12 pounds weight. Agricola saw a clod dug out of the Mines in
Germany, that was made of more than 60 Chrysolites, all of them four square.
The greatest was an inch broad, and 2 fingers in length, it was too soft to
polish: Asyctos, made hot in the fire, contains the heat for 7 days; it is
black and ponderous with red veins distinguishing it. Calcophnes is black, but
struck upon, it sounds like brass; it is said to be good for Tragaedians to
carry with them. Catochites is a stone of Corsica, wonderful, if report be
true; it holds, your hand laid upon it, like Gum. The Medes send Gasidanes, it
grows in Arbelis. They say it conceives, and being shaken, you may hear the
noise of the Infant; it conceives in 3. months space.

CHAP. XXV. Of Jewels found in the bodies of living Creatures.
Artic. 1. Of the Draconite, the Chelonia, the Cock stone and Toadstone.
MAny Jewels are found in the bodies of living Creatures. I will only set down
some. For too reckon them all is to much for an Epitomist. Draconites of
Dracontia is made out of Dragons brains, but unless you cut it out whilst they
are alive, it will never grow hard, by reason of the malice of the Creature,
finding it self ready to dye. Therefore Men cut them out when they are asleep.
Sotacus, who writ, that he saw that Jewel with a King, says, that those that
seek it* ride in Chariots, and when they spy the Dragon they scatter sleepy
medicaments, and so they come to cut it out. Plin. l. 37. c. 10. They are
transparent white, and admit of no art to polish them. Cinediae are found in
the brain of a fish of the same name; they are white and somewhat long and
wonderful in effects, if it be so as men write. They foreshew the face of the
Sea, by their troubled or peaceable color. Chelonia is the eye of an Indian
Tortis, most wonderful by the invented lies of Conjurers: for they promise,
that if you lay it upon your tongue with liquid honey, it will foreshew future
events at the full and new Moon for all day; but when the Moon decreaseth,
before the Sun is up, at other times from one a Clock till six. Moreover of
Draconitis, Philostratus writ; and ascribes to it as much virtue as Gyges ring
had; Rhodig. c. 11. l. 6. antiq. lection. Alectorius is cut out of the gizard
of a Cock with a Comb, being included with a thin skin or membrane, 4, years
after he has been gelded; Lemn. de occult. It may, be it is congealed from the
excrement of seed, by force of his imbred heat, as milk grows hard in the
breasts. It procures Men favor, and makes them lusty. Toads produce a stone;
with their own Image sometimes. It never grows but in those that are very old.
Libav. l. 3. singul. In the family of Lemnius there is one kept that is greater
then a Hazel nut. Lemnius de occult. l. 2. c. 30. It is proved to dissolve
tumors that rise from bitings of venomous beasts, if you rub it on often. The
Lapis Bufonius, called Grateriano, the Swedes Chronicles write of it, it
weighed 5, Physical pounds, and 3, Ounces, 2, drams less; Crasius annal,
Suevit. l. 12. p. 3. c. 37. The words are these. After the joyful birth of our
Lord Jesus Christ, of the Virgin Mary, the mother of God. Anno, 1473; after the
birth of St. John, the 27 of June, Berchtholdus Gratterus dwelling then at
Hopstach, in the afternoon went into a Wood, which they call the Vale of
Dipachia, to cut poles to make hoops for Vessels. In that place he heard a
hissing and a great noise by a River in that Valley, and when he stood a far
off to see what the matter was, he saw an incredible heap of Serpents and
Vipers, and Toads lying twined together. As nere as he could conjecture, it was
a greater quantity than a great washing Tub could contain. He was frighted and
durst go no nearer, yet he cut a bough, and marked the place there in the
confines; that day he came twice back, and beheld that conventicle of Serpents,
and he found them all, almost together upon a heap: wherefore he left them and
went home, concealing the matter for three days; when he returned to the Wood,
he found that these water Snakes were gone, and none ^f these venomous Creatures
were left, but only one Toad that was killed, and a Snake in a white glutenous
humor, and thick, shining like to frog-Spawn, and near to it, that Toadstone
Bufonius, which he caught up, and wiped it, and carried it with him home,
keeping it for some farther profit. But after that Gratterus came into the Town
(about a 100 years since) the stone was used successully, for Man and Beast,
as it follows. The eldest Son of the house of Gratterians keeps this
Toadstone, and he will not lend it especially to strangers, under a pawn of 50,
or a 100, Livers. Amongst the other virtues it is observed that it has very
great force against malignant tumors, that are Venomous, Choleric or
Erisipelas, Apostems, and Bubos; and for Cattle that are bewitched. They are
used to heat it in a bag, and to lay it hot without any thing between to the
naked body, and to rub the affected place with it. They say it prevails against
Enchantments of Witches, especially for great bellied Women and Children
bewitched. So soon as you apply it to one bewitched, it sweats many drops. In
the Plague it is laid to the heart to strengthen it. It draws Poison out of the
heart, and out of Carbuncles and Pestilent sores. It consumes, dissipates and
softens all hardness, Tumors, and Varices.

Artic. 2. Of the Stones Chelidonium, Crabs eyes, Snail Stones, and Bezar.
CHelidonius is so called as if it came from Swallows: Yet it is formed of a
yellow Gold colored Jasper. Bound to the right arm, it is good against
fantastic thoughts, from melancholy: It cures such as are Lunatic and mad,
and has a peculiar virtue against diseases of the eyes, Plater. Also in the
heads of River Crabs, there are stones which steeped in most sharp Vinegar,
they will seem to move. Quercet. in dial. s. 3. c. 7. With their powder to half
a dram in White Wine, the Stones of the Kidneys are happily driven out. Henric.
a Bra. de calc. The Snail-Stone, put under the tongue, has a great force to
cause salivation. It makes the tongue moist, and the humor fluent, and
stencheth thirst, and represseth heat. Bound on, it helps Children to breed
teeth, Plin. l. 30. c. 5. A water Snake casts up by vomit, a stone into the
water under her, if you bind a cord to her tail. Holler. l. 1. de morb. inter.
c. 39. This has such force to consume water, that it presently drinks it up.
Wherefore, laid to the belly of an hydropick person, it consumes the water by
degrees, Plater. l. de vita. The Bezar Stone is found in the Stomach of a he
Goat (rather of a she Goat) in the Indian Mountains. Sennert l. 5. Epitom,
scient. natural. c. 4. Something which has a kind of bark, and is, as I may so
say, Chamford (says Sennertus) proceeds from a small beginning, that is often
times, straw, to which some moisture sticks like glue, and hence it is that
that stone is made up as it were of many thin plates. It is great in an old,
less in a young she Goat; and all those plates both inward and outward are
smooth and shining. Rasis by experiment commends it against all Venom. Not
only drank says Mathiol. on Diascorid. l. 5. c. 75. but also bound on, so
that, it may touch the naked skin of the left side, it excells all other
things. Abdalnarchus adds farther, The stone they call Bezoar, we have now
seen, with the Sons of Almirama keeper of the Law of God: for which stone at
Cardubahee, at the beginning of the Wars, parted with a magnificent, and
almost Kings Palace.

Some say, that the Bezar stone is nothing but the Tears of the Stag; for they
say, that the old ones, overgrown with Age, do eat Serpents, and grow young
again: and for to conquer the venom, they drench themselves in a River, only
their head forth^; and, as they stay so, a clammy humor falls from their eyes;
and being congealed by the Suns heat, it becomes a Stone there. It is like an
Acorn, and being fallen from their eyes, it is gathered up by such as attend
for it. Yet they are thought to be diverse, Scalig. Exerc. 112. writes thus
concerning the Stags tears, which he held to be the dearest thing to him in his
Treasure of the Muses; Before 100 years a Stag has none; after that age it
grows at the corner of the eye, and thrusting forth like a bone, it grows
harder than horn. The prominent part is round, very shining of a gold yellow
color, with prints of other veins. It is so smooth, that you can scarce feel
it; and it so draws it self away, that it even seems to move. It is an
excellent remedy against poisons. To those infected with the Plague, it is
given with a little wine, and they will sweat so, as if their whole body would
melt. Thus far Scaliger. He that would be fully instructed, let him read
Bauhinus of the Bezar stone.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Gold.
We have done with Minerals thus far. Now follow Metals. First, Gold: This is
found in its proper vein, and in stones that are of shining white; also in the
true Pyrite, and sometimes in stones of iron. In Spain some pieces have been
found weighing above ten pound weight. It is plough'd up in Galitia, Justin. l.
44. Dubravius writes, that in the Mountains of the Gelovienses, a mass of ten
pounds was taken out of a Rock; and he says, it was presented to King
Wenceslaus. In India the Pismires (which in Egypt are as great as Wolves) do
carry it and keep it. In the Islands of the Sea of Aethiopia, the plenty of it
is so great, that the Inhabitants have bartered a Talent for horses, Plin. l.
6. c. 36. This one thing loses nothing by fire, but the more it burns, it
grows the better. Yet the juice of Lemmons will abate from its weight, Lemnius
occult. l. 2. c. 36. and if hens limbs be mingled with melted gold, they
consume it, Plin. l. 29. c. 4. The heat of living Creatures may work upon it,
as Wendlerus witnesses in Prognostic. Anni 1619. A Senator of Gorlicum had a
fat Hen, she had eaten about 4. books of leaf-gold beaten out with the hammer.
When she was killed, it was found pure within her. In her breast 3. golden
streaks were seen, some Artificer was thought to have drawn them, Schnitzerus
Epistol. 50. writes, that in the stomach of another, that was killed, some
moneys were found half consumed. To this add what Zacharias a P^teo affirms in
his Clavis Medica Spagyrica, and Chirurgica; When, says he, I studied at
Padua, it happened, that one of our Hens, flew upon the Table; there were upon
it some ornaments for women: amongst the rest a precious pearl, which hung to
an ear Jewel curiously made by an Artificer, and it had some golden covers
drawn about it, the Hen swallowed this pearl with the ear-jewel; when 4. or 5.
hours were past, the Pearl and Jewel were mist. A certain Maid thought the Hen
had swallowed it; because some days before the said Hen had swallowed one, the
Italians call Gazetta. Wherefore, the hen was killed, and presently her Gisard
being parted and cut, we found the pearel with the earing not yet passed into
the cavity of the stomach, but contained in the orifice thereof; extreme hot,
and yielding to the touch like wax, and the ornaments of it almost consumed by
the heat thereof, which Jewel in a short space, when it grew cold, and the heat
was gone, became hard, as it was before; the form was spoiled, and when it was
weighed with another caring like it, it wanted a third part in weight. But to
return to Gold. No Metal is drawn out further, or can be more divided: for one
ounce of it will be hammered into 750 and more leaves, of 4. fingers broad and
long, Plin. l. 33. c. 3. That it may be wire-drawn, and spun without silk, I
need not approve of; The Luxury of the Age is well known. Pliny lived, when
Agrippina, as Claudius, made a show of a Sea-sight, sat by him, clothed in a
robe of woven gold, without any other addition. Now though it consumes not in
the fire, yet it is resolved Chymically, and becomes so aerial, that if it be
but stirred with an iron Spatula, or grow hot any other way, it will presently
take fire and make a great noise; and one scruple of it shall work more
forcibly than half a pound of Gunpowder, Crollius cited by Sennert. c. 18. de
Consens. et dissens. Chymicor. A few grains of it if they fly down
perpendicularly, can strike through a Table of wood, Quercetan. The cause is,
the contrariety of the spirit of Nitre, and the brimstone of gold: for when as
oil or salt of Tartar is poured into the solution of gold, the salt of Tartar
unites it self with common salt, and also with Alum, and Ammoniac; and hence
it is, that gold left to it self sinks to the bottom; and if any of these salts
is left with the gold, it is washed off with hot water, Sennertus de consens.
et dissens. Chymic, et Galen. c. 19. only the spirit of Nitre is left, which
perfectly unites with the Gold. If that therefore grow hot, so soon as it
perceives that the Sulphur of gold is there present, it opposes it self
against its Enemy, and breaks forth with a mighty noise, in flame. It has been
long disputed, whether it can be made potable; experience shows that it may.
For that famous man Dr. Francis Antony, Physician of London, brought it into a
consistence like honey, and sent certain portions of it to the Physicians of
Germany to try it, Johan. Vincent. Finckius in Enchiridio dogmatico Hermetico.

Yet Heurn. l. 1. Aph. 24, thinks it has no nutritive faculty, because between
potable and solid Gold, there is no difference but the liquefaction; and if a
man cannot be nourished by the pure Elements he can hardly be fed with things
inanimate and distilled: Also it may be made, nay it was made. Kelleius an
English man converted one pound of Quicksilver with one drop of a liquor of a
deep red color, into Gold, that with one grain, he tainted 5000, and with one
he extracted about ten Ounces of pure Gold, Sennert. de consens et diss. cap.
2. And what Theophrastus did, is known out of Neander; it is known out of
Oporinus, Neander in Geographia, Oporinus in Epistolis. Nicolaus Mirandulanus,
made an Ingot of Gold out of Brass, he did it also at Jerusalem, and there are
so many witnesses, that it were impudence to deny it. Picus Mirandula
Apollinaris did aver sincerely that he had above 20 ways to make Gold. Hence
was made that Epitaph at Rome, To the collector of Gold out of Lead. Some think
they may be changed in shape but not in substance, I see not what hinders. The
form of Lead is not turned into Gold; but, that departing, this succeeds.
Where there is community of matter, there must be symbolization of necessity.
Plants have a perfect form in their kind, yet are they turned into Chylus, and
it is no sophistication; The forms of things are unknown to us, we know them
but by their properties; and, when as they all inhere in that, what place is
there for doubting? Yet that is difficult, and to be attempted warily. Penotus
was an excellent Chemist; learned men know how miserably he was deceived in his
old age. His words were, If there were any man whom he could not hurt by open
violence, he would persuade him to turn Chemist. Sennert. lib. cit. It is known
to all Men, that diverse works are made out of Gold. Heliogabalus unloaded his
belly in Golden Vessels. Xerxes had a Golden Tree, under which he was wont to
sit. A King of Egypt buried his daughter in a Coat of Coffin. Agricola in
observe. Metal. In lower Germany, on Danubius, there were Vines that had
tendrels and sometimes white leaves of pure Gold, Alexander. The cause is
assigned, That (there) are Gold Mines, and that Gold grows about their roots,
and being bred with it, and hardened by a secret Original, whilst Vines send out
their branches, by a wonderful work of nature or decree of the Stars, the
Gold grows out with them. Alexander ab Alexandro, l. 4. Genial. dier.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Silver.
PUre Silver is dug up in many places, but especially out of two places in
Germany. So much was dug forth of the Mine at Sueberg, that it was worth
1000000 Rhenish Nobles. That of Abertham afforded 150000 Nobles. About some
hundreds of years since, the Mine at Friberg yielded enough to buy all the
Kingdom of Bohemia: Agricola in praefat. in decemfossil libros ad Henricum
Principem M^senae. Wherefore Prince Henry, near Northusa set a great Tree of
Silver, that he might bestow some of the leaves of it, (which were partly Silver
and partly Gold) on those Noble Men that had gallantly discharged themselves in
fighting on horsback. Sometimes great lumps are dug forth. In the time of
Albertus the Saxon, the pieces were so great, that he used them in the Mines
for a Table, saying; Frederick the Emperor is powerful and rich, yet he has
not at this time such a Table* In the Valley Joachim, they report that there
was a Lump dug forth that weighed ten Attick Talents. Nature makes it of many
fashions; sometimes like Trees, sometimes like hairs. It is white, yet some
has been found green. Put rude suddenly into the fire, it will leap forth:
When black Lead is mingled with it, it is melted in a great vessel, and part is
turned into Lead ore, part into Lytharg: but when it burns long, it loses
something, sharp things corrode it; Diverse works are made of it. Amongst the
Tectosages there are made silver Mills. An Historian writes, that the Buckler
of Barchinus Asarubal weighed 138 pounds. The History of the Passion was made
in pure silver; so were Hercules's 12 labors, brought to King Ferdinand. To
Charles the Emperor a Pillar made of silver. Cortesius himself brought it from
Mexico. The price was 49000 Crowns, Maiolus de metallis. I saw Diana with a
Stag and Hounds made of silver, with a Dial on the back-part, and there were
many kinds of Insects about it cast very exactly. That it stood upon, was like
a Table with many wheels. It ran, and their heads seemed to shake as they were
turned back. India is chiefly fruitful of silver. The Mines of Potossum are
known. Geographers will direct you, Bertius in Geograph. Also the Treasures of
Spain are known. They that are acquainted with it, have written, that 9 times a
hundred 45 millions of Crowns have been brought thence, Boterus in Hispan.
descript. If there be a fifth part of silver to five of gold, it makes
Electrum; of which formerly they made Calices, because it would discover venom.
For bows like the Rainbows will run up and down in these cups with a fiery
crashing, and so foreshew it two ways. By the light it is clearer than silver,
Plin. l. 33. c. 4.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Quicksilver.
IT is found pure in the Trenches, when Cenoble is washed with waters dropping
from the veins; for so it is collected and turned into Quicksilver. The same
dried turns again to be like Vermilion, very plentiful Fountains run in the
veins of it, and the grass grows very green upon it, Vitruvius l. 8. c. 3.
For they that search for the veins of it, in a clear morning in May, they
observe the clouds coming forth of the Tops of the Mountains, and hanging like
wool upon the grass. It has a mavelous sympathy with gold, Plater. l. 2.
del. f. c. 3. If it be in the body, it is drawn forth by drinking of gold.
Silver cannot be gilded without Mercury. It is a wonder, that if one be
anointed for the French Pox, let him have a gold ring in his mouth, and with
his tongue roll it up and down, the Quicksilver in the body falls to the ring,
it is taken out like silver, it is recovered by putting it into the fire,
Lemnius l. 2. de occult. c. 35. When all other things swim upon it, only Gold
sinks into it. It so flies the fire, that if it cannot go downward, it will fly
upwards: and being shut in, it breaks the cover, Unzer. l. de Merc. c. 1. Put
into a rin^, and put to the fire, it makes it leap. Bread in the Oven, Pease in
the Pot, Eggs at the fire, if they be touched with a drop of it, will make men
laugh by their dancing. The fire will make it fly into a vaporous smoke, but it
is not dissipated. For, received and kept in a vessel, it shortly returns to
Quicksilver again, and loses nothing of its weight. Powered on a a plain body*
it moystneth not, and therefore men think it is dry. That is false; for nature
makes it round, and it is hindered from sti^king by the lead Ore that surrounds
it, Palm. Constant. de morb: Contag. l. 3. c. 4. It always moves. The
terrestrial part is excellently well concocted, the air and spirits are the
cause of it, for they are so shut in, that they cannot get forth; because they
strive to get out* they are moved, Marc. l. 4. c. 6. The use of it, is diverse.
The Moons, when as all things are burnt by the heat of the Sun, pour that into
a Vessel, and casting a skin upon it, they lie down upon that and cool
themselves: Put into the ear, and so into the brain, it causes the
Falling Sickness. For it dissipates the animal spirits, Heurn. de cap: aff. c.
^^. Water wherein some Quicksilver has been infused, if it be strained and
drank, wonderfully drives forth Worms. Midwives when women have been long in
labor, for the last remedy give them a scruple of Quicksilver. Put into a
hazel nut-shell by a hole, and so fastened in, and tied about ones neck with a
red silk, it preserves one from the Plague, Quercet. l. 2. pest. alex. 5. There
have been so many experiments of it, that we must needs commend it before other
remedies. If it hang down to touch the belly, it is singular against the
Cholick, Plater. de dol. c. 13.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Brass and Alchimy.
PUre Brass is found both in its own Mines, and amongst silver Mines. The
lumps are dug forth of diverse fashions, like Ic^^ sickles, globes, rods. In
shops where they separate brass from silver, it is yellow and red, which they
call regular* duskish red they call Cauldrons mettle, Agric. in lib. Fossil.
That is softer, and may be dilated and not melted only; this will melt, but
not be drawn: with the tincture of Cadmia it will look like gold, and is called
Alchymy. It melts and runs in the fire, but in a great crucible it will not
endure the force of the fire, nor yet put alteraati^ with things that purge
silver and gold, but will be consumed wholly. It will not corrupt, and keeps
other things from corruption. Hence says Horace, (A Monument more lasting than
brass) and therefore the Egyptians seem to have put plates of brass into the
Carcases of dead bodies. Pierius in Hieroglyph. testifies, that they were wont
to stick sharp Spears of Brass into dead bodies. Camerar. ho^. subcis. cent.
1. c. 14. saw such Images at Venice with Lauredanus. The son of Lawredanus
affirmed, that they were taken out of the bodies of men that were embalmed.
There are diverse works made of Brass. The hundred gates of Babylon are
celebrated in records: and that brazen cup of 900 Gallons which the
Lacedaemonians gave to Cro^sus. At Florence the Chapel of St. John Baptist,
which they call the Font, has three brazen doors gilded. The Colossus of
Rhodes was made of the same metal, it was 70 cubits high. Fifty years after it
was thrown down by an Earthquake, and lay many years for a miracle, Plin. l.
34. c. 7. Few could fathom the thumb of it, the fingers were longer than most
Statues. Vast Caves were seen when the limbs were broken. There were within it
mighty great stones: by the weight of them he that made it, made it stand fast.
They say it was 12 years making of 300 Talents. It was one of the Seven Wonders
of the World.

CHAP. XXX. Of Lead.
LEad is of 3. sorts, white, ash-colored, and black. The first is not found of
its own color, but the stones are whitish of which it is made. Ceruss is made
of it corroded by the steam of vinegar. The ash-colored is dug up at Sneberg.
When silver is boiled out of it, the fire consumes it all. Of the black are
made square vessels, in which salt is boiled from salt water; from nitrous
water, Nitre, Agricol. in observat. These filled with liquor, and set in the
Air, foreshew rain, if there be drops on the outside. There is nothing hotter
than it, yet if you anoint your hands with the juice of Mallows or Mercury,
you may wash your hands in melted lead, so you do it quickly with swift motion,
Lemnius l. 2. de occult. c. 34. It is heavier than silver, yet will swim upon
it being melted. It may be, the volatile parts of evaporating Lead fly away by
the fire; but the silver not evaporating, sinks down, Libavius l. 2. Epist.
Chym. Ep. 98* It is said to increase in weight and magnitude, if it be hid in
C^llars, where the Air is troubled, so that what is put there, presently
gathers rust. The Leaden bands of Statues that bind their feet, are sometimes
found to grow, and to swell sometimes so much, that they will hang like Crystal
out of the stones. Experience has proved it to be unfit for Medicament,
Fernel. lib. de lue Vener. c. 7. For when as one by the advice of an Emperick,
had eaten half a pound of the powder of it with his meat in 15 days, to cure
the joint Gout, those things that were taken in, had a nidorous taste of Lead,
and what was voided by stool, looked of Lead color. Yet it is found also to be
for external medicinal use. For it cools. Wherefore both Mortars and Pessels
are wont to be made of it, in which if Liquors are beaten, what comes by the
mixture of both is very cooling. The plates are good to lay to the loins
over-heat with venery, and against nocturnal pollutions in dreaming. Calvus the
Orator, did prevent lust therewith, that he might preserve his strength for his
study, Pliny. Musicians were wont to lay them upon their breasts, to sing the
louder, Isidorus. Nero had a plate of Lead to lay upon his breast when he
slept, to preserve his voice, Suetonius in Nerone.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Iron.
THe Mine of Iron is the greatest of all Metals. On that part of Cantabria
which the Sea passes by, there is a Mountain, high and cragged, it is
incredible to speak it, it is all of Iron Ore; Plin. l. 34. c. 14. It is rare
in India. Hence they write that 14, pounds of Iron, at the Island of Zabur have
been bartred for 250, pounds of Gold. Pegaffetta. It was formerly found in
China, called Azzalum Indicum, of such an excellent temper in the edg that it
would cut any Iron, Pancirol, l. de novis repertis. Dug up in Sicilie, and
Lusatia, it grows again, and the earth and stocks of Trees, as it grows, become
Iron. First it is like a thick liquor, and by degrees it grows hard, Agricola
in observat. metal. When it is boiled, it becomes moist like water, afterward
it is broken into Spunges. The more tender Iron instruments, are steeped in
oil to quench them, lest they should grow too hard and brittle with water.
Plin. lib. citat.

But in the Island Palmosa, it cannot be melted, and also in Aethalia, Strabo.
l. 15. Bertius in Descript Ilvae. Smeared with Alum and Vinegar it becomes like
brass. At Smolnicium (it is a Town of the Mount Carpathum) water is drawn out
of a pit, and it is powered into Pipes laid in a threefold order, and that
pieces of Iron in them, turn into brass. Agricol de metal. But the piece of
Iron that is put into the end of the Pipes, is eaten by this water, that it
becomes like mud; that, afterward boiled in a furnace becomes good Brass. It
is most agreeing with all Copper, that it will mingle with it in melting. The
Poets call these Mars and Venus in their Fables, Minder. de Vitriolo. c. 1.
Aristonides, when he would express the fury of Athamas who would throw down
headlong his Son Clearchus, and when he had don so, the manner of his sorrow;
he mingled Brass and Iron, that the rust of it shining through the brighter
Brass, might express his shame and bashfullnesse, Plin. lib. citat. Plunged
fiery* hot in water, it becomes Steel; in Vinegar, it will endure no hammering,
but will sooner break than draw. Hence the Lacaedonians who were wont to make
their coin of Iron Rods, steeped them red hot in Vinegar; that, being brittle,
they might never be put to any other use. Plutarch in Lycurgo. If you seek a
reason, we say that Vinegar goes into the heart of the Iron; Bodin, l. 2.
Theatr: In Furnaces where they make it into bars, there rise such Vapors from
it, when it is hammerd, that a certain powder increases sensibly, and
multiplyes sticking to the walls. Albert. Mag, in lib. de Animal. It is so
strong that it can never be consumed by fire. In the new World there is an herb
called Cabuja or Hentquen; of the leaves of it, there is a reddish string, that
with sand will cut Iron. Ovetan. Histor. l. 7. c. 10. Iron scales are very
drying, they put it in their shoos that have sweating feet. The best Iron is
most white and light, and has little branches, sometimes like to Coral,
sometimes bound together with very fine strings. They make bullets of it, for
great Guns.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Fossil Flesh.
ANdreas Libavius, a Man exceedingly deserving in Philosophy and Physic,
says, that it was reported on the credit of the Jevenses Schroterori, that at
the rampire of Erfurd, by the port of St. Andrews, upon occasion of raising the
Bulwark higher, that great pieces of raw flesh were dug out of ground, and that
it was brawny; much like to Oxe-flesh, (only it had no bones): Hubnerus affirms
this in Epistol. ad Libavium. But because those that dug it up prated that they
could find it only upon Thursdays, wise men began to suspect the matter, and
having discovered the fraud, the deceivers were cast into Prison. Though fraud
here may be objected; yet it is not against reason to say with Libavius, that
there may be fossil flesh. Most true it is that the Earth, (I add the water
also) is the Mother of some living Creatures, and of those imperfect ones that
came by aequivocall generation; and by the mixture of both these, Clay may be
made fit for the breeding of an animal principle, which sometimes becomes a
perfect Creature, and sometimes is deficient. As in the kinds of perfect
Creatures, sometimes rude lumps are bred, sometimes provided with that supplies
their defect. If that be first, and yet, helps being present, it is not
frustrated of its motion, it is likely that a Mole of clotted blood or something
like flesh should be made: no otherwise than as matter disposed with it for a
bone, becomes a bone, which is called Fossil Horn. So Histories relate, that
shell fish have been found in the tops of the highest Mountains of sand, from
Marle and Marble putrified: which though some think they are the relics of
the General flood, yet is it not probable, that they could last so long, by
reason of the injury of time. For Marble it self will at last dissolve. And if
you think it absurd that a Creature with blood should proceed from matter that
is without blood; I could by examples show your absurdity. When Nilus sinks
down, living Creatures are bred of the mud by heat of the Sun, some perfect,
some half perfect, sticking to the Clods, Diodor. Sicul. A Venomous frog is
bred deep within the Earth, where you can see no holes, when as the futures of
stones are broken with wedges, Agricola. Of the rayning of blood and flesh
there are many Histories, and that came not by the Sun, drawing blood from
Carkeises, but by changing the humor so disposed. In a ditch of the Town
Beichelstein beneath out of a Willow, stinking blood ran. At Spira they say it
came forth of bread. At Suidnicium, a bloody Fleece of Snow fell down like
hail. What shall I say more? The Chemists say that of Satyrium, great Comfrey,
Tutsan, Bread and Wine, a juice may be made that is perfectly blood, which by
due digestions may be made into substantial flesh. Of Brimstone boiled in
Linseed Oil, they make a Mass like a Liver. Lastly the fowls in the Orcades
are said to be fruits of Trees. You shall see it proved in the appendix of the
sixth Classis. Wherefore we conclude with Libavius, that there may be Fossil
Flesh; and with this discourse we will shut up this Classis. Setting aside
those things that may be said concerning Devil in Mettalls, which we shall
speak of in our Thaumatographia Pneumatica, which if God pleases, we intend to
publish.

I add one thing that I had forgot. When Henry the 2. King of France was at
Bononia, there was brought to him from the East Indies by an unknown person,
but, as it appeared by his gesture, a Barbarous fellow, a stone of a wonderful
shape and nature, for it shone with light and clearness exceedingly, and it
seemed as if it were all on fire, and turn it which way you would, the luster
of it so enlightened the air with its beams, that they could hardly endure to
look upon it: And this was strange in it, that it could endure no earth upon
it, but if it were covered with it, it would break forth with violence of its
own accord: no art of man could hold it in a narrow place, for it delighted in
the spacious Air, it was exceedingly pure and bright, no filth was upon it, it
had no certain figure, but was inconstant, and changed in a moment; and being
so beautiful to behold, yet it was not safe to touch it, and those that dealt
roughly with it to hold it, felt the inconvenience, as many that stod by can
testify. If any part were broken off from it, by contending with it, for it was
not very hard, yet the virtue of it was very useful for many things, and the
Stranger said it was needful chiefly for Kings. He boasted much of the
miracle, but refused to discover it, unless he might first receive a mighty
reward. Thuan says, that he delivered these things as they were in Leters of
John Pipin an eye witness of it: who in the Family of A. Mamorantius, M. E.
professed Physic, and sent his Leters to Antony Mizaldus a famous Physician;
also, to Bononia, on the day before Ascension day, and says, he leaves the
matter to Philosophers to discuss farther. For Pipinus in his Letters, neither
said that the Ancient knew any such stone, nor do I affirm it. Thuan, l. 5.
Histor.

The End of the Fourth Classis.
OF Natural Wonders.
The Fifth Classis. Wherein are the Wonders of Plants.
NAture, daily breeds Flowers and Sents: it is evident, that men are much
admonished thereby, that those things that flourish most delightfully, do
soonest wither, Plin. l. 21. histor. Natural. c. 1.
CHAP. I. Of Plants in general.
We have seen the Wonders of things without life; Now let us see the Wonders
of living Creatures* Plants are first in order; not that they are the chief,
but because they have that degree in common to all living Creatures. They have
a vegetative soul, producing the nutritive, augmenting, and generative
faculties, with all things subordinate to them. And besides, each has a
specificall form of its own being, works by it, and is distinguished from
others. Nature has made up their bodies of certain parts, which Philosophers
call the kernel, the pith, the bark of the root, the stock, the boughs, the
branches, the flowers, the fruit. As these vary, so is there very great
difference in Plants. The Earth is their Mother, their faculty was given by
creation; and because qualities are different, it is found very various in
Plants also. Moses speaks expressly, Let the Earth bring forth grass, the herb
yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after its kind, whose seed is
in it self upon the Earth. But Porta (l. 2. Phytogn. c. 1.) when he had heaped
up much ground together, which was cast forth from the foundations of houses,
and laid it open to the Air; a few days after, from the diverse qualities of
the Earth, diverse sorts of herbs sprang forth. He saw these things familiarly
in Naples climat and grounds, some of them must needs marry. The principles of
Male and Female are mingled in them. But that which Pliny writes is false, that
they are begot by the West wind. They wither that fructify most, for their
nourishment is consumed; and beyond St. Thomas Island, the South wind only is
said to blow, elsewhere only two winds by courses: And it is certain, that all
kinds of Plants do not grow in all places. For near Rome Chestnuts will hardly
grow: and about Cimmerian Bosphorus, in the City Particapaeum. King Mithridates
and the rest of the Inhabitants wanted the Bay and Myrtill Tree in their
solemnities. Some new Plants are found in newfound places, as Tobacco lately
in America, wild Tobacco was found in the Woods of Thuringia, Libavius l. 4. de
orig. rerum. Anaxagoras ascribes it to the air that has in it the seeds of all
things, and sends them down in showrs, and they become Plants. Diogenes, to the
waters putrefying and mingled with the earth. Others to the winds, bringing
them. We ascribe them, to Divine providence, which did not produce each
individual plant, but disposed of the best in Paradise, and left the rest
without, endowing some with virtues to come forth into the light at their set
times. As for their Life, they live by heat in the earth, and dye with cold.
Theophrastus l. 2. de Plant. c. 4. testifies, that some of them will spring
again; if an Olive Tree be burned to the root, it will grow again: Some will
live without the ground, as Onions and Garlic, which being many months from
the Earth, grow without any nutriment from thence, being fortified by much
gross humor of their own, Marcel. l. 4. histor. medic. mir. c. 12. The forces
of Plants are wonderful. It has been observed, that if men with wands travel
where ill Plants grow, the Ulcers will be inflamed, and cured where the Plants
are healthful, Mathiol. in Dioscor. Praefat. By touching of Spleenwort,
Splenetick people have been helped; and Jaundy-sick, by putting Celandine to
their naked feet in their shoes. No man shall be troubled with blear-eyes, so
long as he keeps very clean by him the root of the wild sour Dock. He shall not
be troubled with the Strangury any more, who quenches in his urine the burning
root of Tamarisk. Physicians do diversely dispose them; the Chemists teach us to
know them by their signatures; and Porta of Naples thinks, that it is certain,
that what part of Man they resemble that they are good for, Sennert. de cons.
Chym. c. 18. But of these, more hereafter if God please. Now let us see Nature
prodigal in Plants, and opening her Treasures, let us admire with thanksgiving.

CHAP. II. Of Wormwood, Woolfsbane, and Snapdragon.
WOrmwood is in many things a wonderful Plant, it is very bitter, yet the
distilled water of it is sweet. Hence the Commentators on Mesues think, that
the intrinsecal parts are sweet: but the matter must be ascribed to the
thinness of the outward parts; for these being soluble into a vapor, being
more attenuated by heat of the fire, are easily resolved, and abate of their
bitterness, Mathiolus in Dioscor. c. 24. The Lie out of which the salt of it
is prepared, will so benum the hands, that they almost lose their feeling,
Mathiol. de febrib. pest. It is credible, that if Infants before they be 12
weeks old, be anointed with the juice of Wormwood on their hands and feet, that
neither heat nor cold will ever trouble them during their life: and if the
whole body be anointed, they shall never be scabby, Guerth. in Append. ad
memorab. Mizaldi. Wolfsbane is the quickest of all venomous things; for if it
touch but the secrets of a woman, it kills her the same day. This was the
poison, that Mar: Coecilius objected, that Calphurnius Bestia killed his Wives
with, when they were asleep: hence it is that he so sharply declamed against
him, that they dyed by his hand. Yet experience teaches, that this may be made
use of for man's good, and against the bitings of Scorpions, given in hot wine,
the nature of it is to kill Man, unless it find some venom in him to be
destroyed. Scorpions are stunned by the touch of it; and being astonished, show
by their palenesse that they are subdued. White Hellebore helps them by its
resolving touch, and Wolfsbane yields to two evils, to that which is evil to it
self, and to all others, Pliny. But Snapdragon is so contrary to them, that the
sight of it stuns them: but whilst some by this Amulet hope to procure Princes
favors, they are deceived, Mathiol: in l. 4. Dioscor. c. 128.

CHAP. III. Of Aloes, Agallochum, and Camomill.
SCaliger had found by above 40 years trial, that Aloes hurts the Liver, Exerc.
160. Sect. 3. They whose veins swell, or are opened, if they take never so
little of it, it will certainly go thither; for it will add something of its
own to open these vessels. But Agallo^^um is Aloes wood so excellent, that cast
into water, it will not swim at all, but sinks presently; When it is cut from
the Tree, the Inhabitants bury it a whole year, that the bark may wither under
ground, and the wood lose nothing: and they think it will never be so sweet,
unless it first be worm-eaten, Simeon Sethi citante Mathi^lo. Camomil is so
like to May-weed, that you cannot know them asunder by sight, but only by
smell. This stinks, and bound on will presently blister the skin. The flowers
of Camomil taken without the leaves, and beat in a Mortar, and made with oil
into balls, if they be dissolved in the same oil, and those that have Fevers
be anointed therewith from the crown of the head, to the soles of the feet, and
be presently covered with blankets to sweat; if they sweat plentifully, it
cures them of their Agues. This is Nictessius Aegyptius his receipt, Mathiol.
in Dioscorid. l. 3. c. 1 37.

CHAP. IV. Of Ammi, Holly, Ceterach, and the Strawberry-Tree.
AMmi, if it be the right seed that comes from Alexandria, it cherishes Women's
fruitfulness: if you drink of it a dram weight in the morning every other day,
3. hours before meat. Yet in those days they must not lie with their husbands,
as Mathiol. in 3. Dioscor. c. 61. With the flowers of Holly, water congealeth;
and a stick made of it, thrown at any living creature, though it fell short by
the weakness of him that threw it; yet of it self it will fall nearer to him,
Plin. l. 22. Ceterach grows in Crete, by the River Potereus, that runs between
two Cities Enosa and Cortina: it destroys the Spleen in Cattle, that eat it;
thence it has its name Spleenwort* In a certain place that lies toward
Cortina, this Spleenwort is found in great abundance; but it is otherwise
toward Enosa, for there grows none. In the wrong side of the leave of it,
there is found a precious powder, which being given one dram weight, with half
a dram of the powder of white Amber, in the juice of Purslane, cures the
Gonorrhaea. The Strawberry Tree flowers in July; the buds by a singular hanging
together, are joined in clusters at the utmost end, each of them like a long
formed Myrtil berry, and as great, without leaves; hollow, as an Egg made so,
with the mouth open; when it fades, what hindered is perforated, Theophrast. l.
3. c. 16. de Plantis.

CHAP. V. Of the Cane reed, Asserall, and Agnacath.
IN Zeilam the Reeds are so large, that they make boats of them severally; also
they make Javelius of them: As in the Kingdom of Pegu, they make Masts and Oars
of the Myoparones: Certain it is, that they are some of them 7 foot about,
Scaliger Exerc. 166.

Mathiolus writes, that in India they grow so great, that between every knot,
they serve for Boats to sail in Lakes and Rivers, for three Men to sit in them.
Mathiol. in Dioscorid. l. 1. c. 97. Between the Reed and the Fern there is a
deadly feud, and they say that a Reed tied to the Plough destroys all the Fern
that grows there. It agrees with Sparagus; for if they be sowed in Reedy
grounds, they increase wonderfully. Mathiol, l. citat. The Turks, going to
battle, devour Asseral, and by that they grow merry and bold against dangers.
Juglers use this often on their Scaffolds. They mingle a Medicament with Wine,
that will draw their mouths together: and whom they would put a trick upon,
they bid him dip his finger in and suck it; he putting this into his mouth,
cannot for pain suck it. The Juglers, as if they pitied him in this case,
anoint the arteries of his wrists and temples with some peculiar Ointment.
When he is recovered, like one that comes from Sea after Shipwreck, he winds
his hair and garments as if they were wet, and wrings them out, he wipes his
Arms, blows his Nose. Scaliger. Exerc. 159. Agnacath is a Tree like a Pear
Tree, and as great, always with green leaves, and very clear in the outside.
It makes men so lusty that it is miraculous. Kin to this, is a root in the
Western Hills of Allas, the Inhabitants call that part Surnaga. The eating of
it gives wonderful strength for Venus* they say if a Man make water on it, he
is presently provoked. If Virgins do but sit on them in the fields; or Urine
upon them, the Hymen is presently broken, as if they had known a Man. Scalig.
Exerc. 175. s. 1.

CHAP. VI. Of the Scythian Lamb, the bashful Plant, and Amfi^.
THe Scythian Lamb is a Plant that come (...) seed like a Kernel, but not so
long. The Tartars call it (...). It g^^ws like a Lamb about three foot high,
and is like a Lamb in his feet, claws, ears, the whole head, except the Horns.
For Horns; it has h^ire: is is singular like a Horn, and a very thin Horn
covers it, the inhabitants take it off, and use it for clothing. It is of a
wonderful sweetness; Blood runs forth of the wound. As long as other herbs
grow about it, so long it will live. It dies, when these are gone. Wolves desire
it, but other beasts that feed on flesh, do not. Scali^^r exerc, 181, sect. 2.
The Bashfull-Tree draws back, if you but touch the leaves with your hand.
Apollodorus, Scholar to Democritus, discovered that Amfia is a medicament
amongst the Iridi, of wonderful use. They that are not used to it from their
Childhood, if they eat it afterward, it kills them: also it kills those that
are used to it, and then (...) it; but hurts not those if they continue it. The
women of Cambaya* when they would avoid punishment feed of it; and dye without
pain. The King of Province fed with this from his young years grew so
Venomous, that the very flies that but sucked his skin swelled and died with it.
It is thought to be Opium, and the Turks Maslach. Tthough Turnheuserus herbar.
l. 1. c. 29. says, that by the secret relation of the Turks, he learned that
this was made of the juice of Leopards bane, yet it is nothing else, but Opum,
as Scaliger, Poterius, and Johannes Baptista Sylvagius, interpreter for the
Venetians with the Turkish Emperor, do testify. He being demanded by
Bucretius, reported that the Turks have two medicaments, to make them merry,
Afra and Bongelie; That prepared of Opium: this with Honey, and the leaves and
seeds of hemp powdered and used frequently, This will make them undergo any
dangers, for it makes them frantic; and if they sleep, they dream of the
fighting of Giants, and fires, and Cities burning.

CHAP. VII. Of Balsome Tree, and Betel.
BEfore these times, in Judaea the Balsom Tree yielded great profit, and there
was an Orchard of it in two Kings dominions, one of 20 Acres, the other not so
many; but now there is none to be found. It is probable that the Kings of
Egypt transplanted it into their own Gardens, as being jealous of their
greatness, Plin. l. 12. c. 25. In grand Cairo there is a Garden of Balsom
Trees, the leaf is like Rue leaves always green. The Gum of it is gathered in
the Trunk of it, making incision at the upper part, with Iron; When the Sun is
hottest, that which remains is not much. For a man can hardly fill a Cockle
shell in a whole day. Theophrastus, l. 9. c. 6. de plantis. Pliny writes, if it
be cut with an Iron, it presently dies, and therefore they that gather Balsome,
use Glass, Stone, and Bone-Knives to cut the Bark, and taking the juice in
wool, they collect it in little Horns. That which is Indian or Occidental, is
brought out of the West Indies into Spain. It is the liquor of a Tree called
Xilon; the bark of it, which is thin being cut, a clammy whitish liquor in
small quantity flows forth, which the Inhabitants preserve. Also the boughs and
roots cut into pieces, very small like Chips, and boiled in a Cauldron with
water, when it is cold, yields the same. From Shellfish they collect an Oil
that swims at top, that is red from black, of a most sweet smell, a sharp taste
and somewhat bitter. A pound of it in Spain is sold for three Dudats, whereas an
ounce was wont to be sold for 10 or 20. Bauhin. in Dioscorid* Be^^l a lease
called so from the River, which runs not far from Gamba^a, it grows from a
Plant that is wrapped with others and wants propping^ it has neither flower nor
juice. The Indians feed daily on it, when they are at leisure: for they think
when it is green that it promotes venery; It makes their lips red, and their
teeth black. Mathiol. l. 4. Dioscorid. c. 2. It troubles their minds if they
eat of it too freely, therefore the women of Tarnassarum, to lament for their
Husbands, eat it till they grow mad, and so they run into the fire, and are
burnt with them. It is sprinkled with water made of lime, from Shells of
Fishes, and then they eat it, Scaliger, Exerc. 1.46. s. 2.

CHAP. VIII. Of Betonie, Birch and Box.
BEtonie is said to defend consecrated places and graves from fearful
apparitions; and is so forcible, that it will draw forth broken bones; bruised
with a little salt, and put into the nose, it stops the bleeding of it,
Mathiol. in 5, Dioscorid, c. 1. Birch loves to grow in a cold and Snowy
Country. The stalk pierced with a piercer sends forth abundance of most clear
water, it is good to break stones in the Reins and Bladder, if it be long
drank. Mathiol. l. 1. c. 93. The Ananii take of the bark of it, and wreath it,
and make Candles of it to burn at night, which because they abound with a
Pitchy fat, they burn like Torches, and give the color of Rosin like Pitch. In
the Boxwood there is a kind of narcotick force, and a sleepy sulphurous
matter. That is apparent from the stinking smell of it, and the ground it
delights to grow in. For it bree^^ in Mountains and stony grounds, and
prospers there, and drinks in a most stinking Brimstone. From the rasping of
it, a water is distilled like the spirit of Vitriol. The greatest Toothache is
allayed, if you dip a Tooth-picker into it, and thrust it into the root of the
a^ing Tooth, and that so suddenly, that by miracle almost, and by way of a
Charms, the pain is presently gon^ Que^^ et. Tetrad. c. 1^. The flowers (...)
said so to purge the blood, that if one drain thereof be giv^^ with field Poppy
water, and blood be drawn a^ hour after, it will run clear; Petreius in Nosol.
Harm. discurs. 14.

CHAP. IX. Of Batat, Baxera, Brusathaer, and Baara^.
BAtat is a root like a Turnep, with a black rind, it spreads underneath, as it
were by Arms; The color of the (...), and so it is divided into diverse kinds,
but the worst is the yellow. It is planted wonderfully, for it is Se^mo^ with
the root* but (...) the Olive, by a Slip* the twig, being cut into several
parts, is (...) yet some of the rind must be left. They set it like the Vine
and prop it up, for the fibers of it, run about like hops* In the fifth month
it is ripe, Scaliger, exerc. 181. s. 17. Baxera^ (...) a Tree in the Kingdom of
Belus, which is near to the Tartars of Cathay. The root of it (...) kills one
presently. The fruit of Nira^und is a remedy for the mischief of it. It drives
away any Poison whatsoever, Scaliger. Exerc. 153. s. 6. B^u^ath^er are
Sea-Trees in the S^^us of China* So great are they, that birds of wonderful
bigness do lodge in them. They are so vast, says Scaliger, that the greatest
Creatures may be born up by them, and taken above ground. Scalig. exerc. 181.
s. 10. Josephus writ of Baaras. In a valley, says he, where the City is
conpassed on the North side, there is a certain Lake called Baaras, where there
is a root called by the same name. It is of a flame color, and about the
evening, it shines like the Suns beams. Those that come to it, and would pull it
up, cannot easily do it, but it draws from them; nor will it st^y, until some
body power the urine of the menstrual blood of a woman upon it. Also, then if
any one touch it, it is certain death, unless he carry the same root hanging
in his hand. It is taken an other way without danger, which is this; They dig
round about it, so that very little of the root be covered with the Earth, then
they tie a dog to it, and he striving to follow him that tied him, pulls the
root out very easily, but the dog allwaies dies, as in place of him, that
should take it up: for after that, there is no fear for any man to take it up.
It seems to be a Fable, unless there be some other meaning in it.

CHAP. X. Of Cachi, Cacavate, Cassia, our Ladies Thistle, and Corallina.
CAchi is a prickly Tree in Malabar, they call the fruit of it Ciccara; It is
like the Pine-nut; for within, the several divisions are distinguished by
Membranes, as in the Pomegranate. The Apples are like figs in shape, and
sweetness, without any rind: there are 250, and sometimes 300 upon them;
Scalig. exerc. 181, s. 12. Amongst these small fruits, there is another like a
Chestnut, and cracks like it, when it is roasted. The fruit grows forth of the
stock, as it does on the Mulberry Fig Tree, between the prickles and the
leaves. Sometimes, which is the greater wonder, it comes forth of the root under
ground, and it brings forth but one Apple, but so great that it will load a
strong Man, Maiol. col. de Plant. Cacavate is a Tree in the Province of America
Nicaragna, which so abhors the Sun, that it must be kept allwaies in the shade,
and must be covered with the shadow of some higher Tree: In Woody places that
are wet, if it come to the Sun, it perishes. Libavius de orig. rerum. Cassia
often times is changeed into Cinnamon. Galen saw some boughs that were exceeding
good and altogether like it, and some twigs of Cinnamon like to Cassia: hence
grew his opinion that for one part of Cinnamon, two parts of choice Cassia
might be substituted in physical compositions. Galen de Antid. l. 1. The twigs
of it were cut in pieces, and sowed up in green Oxe-hides, least the wood
should grow unprofitable, by Worms that will breed in it. Plin. l. 12. c. 29.
Of solutive Cassia men say, that he that shall daily swallow three drams of the
pulp of it before dinner, shall never be troubled with the stone nor colic,
Mathiol in Dioscor. l. 1. The flowers of the milky Thistle, which they call
Carduus Mariae. Platerus de vit. says, they cured a Soldier of the Strangury,
only by looking upon them. Corallina is of so great force against Worms, that
it drives them forth the same day it is taken. There was a Boy that took it,
and voided 70 Worms. The Ancients knew it hot, now they use it all over Greece,
Lemn. occult l. 3. c. 9.

CHAP. XI. Of Cinnamon and Cedar.
CInnamon grows in Zeilam, and in one of the Molucco Islands, Mutir. It bears
no fruit. In the heat, the rind cleavs and comes off, it is pulled off twice a
year, Scalig. Exerc. 144. First it grows sweet, and the next month it comes
to perfection. In Galen's days it was so scarce, that no man had any but the
Emperor, Galen l. 1. de Antid. But even at this day there is scarce any such
as Galen describes, Scalig. loc. cit. It holds not good for 30 years; for it is
false, that others write, that it never grows old. I (says Galen, loc. cit.)
observed some change in Cinnamon, not that was 200 years old, but far younger,
in comparison: For at the time that I made Theriac for the Emperor Antoninus,
I saw many wooden vessels wherein such Cinnamon was, some were laid up in the
time of Trajan; others of Adrian; some in Antoninus his time; and all these in
taste and smell did exceed or fall short one of another, so much as they
differed in age. Cedar does bring spungy flesh to putrefaction without pain,
because it is dry; and preserves dead bodies from corruption; for it drinks up
the superfluous moys^ure in them, not meddling with what is firm, Mathiol. l* 1.
Dioscor* c. ^9. It kills Nits, Lice; Moaths and Worms bred in the ears; said
on, it kills the Child that is living, and drives forth the dead, Theophrast.
l. 5. c. 8. It corrupts the seed in copulation, and hinders procreation. It
grew formerly abundantly in Libanus; now adays it is very little there, (
Rhanwolsius reckoned but 24 Trees). It is wonderful for height and thickness.
The body is so great, that three Men cannot fathom it. It is far greater in
Orchards, if it be let alone and not cut down. At Utica there was the Temple of
Apollo, where the beams of the Numidian Cedars lasted; for they were laid there
at the first founding of that City, that was 1188 years, Plin. l. 16. c. 40.

CHAP. XII. Of Chamaeleon, Cloves, and Cichory.
THe root of black Chamaeleon is venomous in Greece and Pontus: Mathiolus
ascribes it to the goodness of the climate, where it is not so. For the Peach
Tree was formerly deadly to the Persians, but safe to the Egyptians; and
Cuckowpint was so mild amongst them of Cyrene, that they eat it for meat like
Rape roots. In Greece and Italy they cannot eat it boiled nor raw. It kills
both Dogs and Sows, Dogs, when it is kneaded with barley meal, oil, and water;
Sows, with Coleworts. If you would try whether a sick man shall live, some say
he must be washed with that root for 3. days; if he can endure it, they think
he will not die. The clammy substance growing at the roots of it, is present
venom; but taken moderately, it makes sleepy persons wakeful, Theophrast. l. 9.
de Plant. c. 23. Hence the women of Crete, that they may not sleep at their
work, eat a little of it after Supper. The Clove-Tree grows in the Indies in
some Islands of the Indian Sea, it is like a Bay Tree, with narrower and most
sweet smelling leaves. Cloves proceed from them, that are nothing but the
beginning of the fruit. It grows of its own accord when the Cloves fall down,
Mathiol. in l. 2. Dioscorid. c. 253. It grows to perfection in 8. years, and
lasts a hundred years. It bears fruit only in the Molucco Islands. The keepers
of it beat the Tree with Canes, covering the Earth before with Palm Tree
coverings. For 3. years it yields fruit, then it grows barren, and
degenerates, Scalig. Exerc. 146. s. 1. Cichory, called Wart-Succory, kills
Warts. Many by once eating one Sallet of the leaves of it, have been freed. The
seed does the like, taken one dram for three days after Supper, Mathiol. in l.
2. c. 125.

CHAP. XIII. Of Saffron and Cherries.
SAffron flowrs almost for a month; After the flowers, by and by come forth
the leaves, that are green all the Winter, not caring for the cold; they grow
dry, and fall off in the Spring; they never appear in Summer, Mathiol. ad l. 1.
Dioscorid. c. 25. It flowers when the Pleiades set; and presently with the leaf
it drives out the flower. The root loves Lime, it comes up by perishing; whence
those Verses were made: Saffron that is bruised grows fairer; be not sad,
To suffer, for at last 'twill make thee glad.
Minder. Aloed. c. 4. It is good for shortness of breath, Cardanus de spirat.
diffic. It recovered the Mother in law of Caesar de Comitibus, who for 2.
months was so short-winded, that she was next to deaths-door. Given to women
in labor, it presently flies to the Matrix, so that one woman was delivered
with a child, died in Saffron, Heurn. l. 2. medic. c. 14. It is hurtful to the
brain, and with much using of it, it will cause one to laugh: we have an
example of a Merchant who fell into such a laughter after meat, when he had
eaten overmuch of it, that he was ready to die. A Mule-driver at Pisanta,
sleeping upon two little bags of Saffron, dyed that night, Lusitan. Com. ad c.
25. l. 1. Dioscor. Cherry-Trees cannot away with dung; if therefore you dung
their roots, they degenerate; they prosper well if you cut off the branches of
them, and bury them by the roots, that they may corrupt there. They grow
without stones, if you cut the Tree off when it is young, about 2. foot from
the ground, and pick out the pith of it with an iron, clearing the stock, and
bind both parts together again, Mathiol. ad l. 1. Dioscor. c. 129.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Dog-Tree, Cypresse-Tree, and Cucumbers.
THe Inhabitants of Ida by Troy say, that the male Dog-Tree is barren. In
Macedonia they are both fruitful; but the Male brings ripe berries in Summer,
the Female in Autumn. These Berries are not so good as those; for they can
hardly be eaten. Bees that taste of its flower, die by a dysentery. The
Cypresse-Tree grows naturally only in Candie; for in what place soever the
earth is dug, unless it be planted as it should be, it will come forth
again of it self. In Mount Ida it grows very well and numerous, in ground that
is not forced, Plin. l. 16. c. 33. Set in watery grounds it presently decays,
and it is killed by laying dung to it. The seed is as small as Atoms. The
Pismires desire it, which is the greater wonder, that so small Creatures can
devour it all; the leaves are always green, and the substance is never rotten,
nor breeds Worms, Rhodigin. l. 25. c. 2. Plin. l. 26. c. 40. The Image of
Vejovis made of this wood, remained in the fortress from the year the City was
built, 551. even to the days of Rhodiginus. In Arcadia at Phophis there were
some so tall, that they overshadowed the Mountain that was next to them,
Dalechamp. ad loc. cit. Plin. Cucumbers are sometimes wonderful great, that in
India one man cannot carry one of them. Scaliger saw one was 7. foot and a half
long. He says also, Exerc. 171. That he had a dry Gourd, which a man that
carried it in sport, seemed to have a great Log on his back; It was 13 hands
breadth. Eaten, they remain in the stomach till the next day; for they are of a
clammy and cold substance, Plin. l. 19. c. 5. They so hate oil, that if a
vessel of oil be put under them when they hang on the stalk* they will turn
from it, and grow crooked: They grow very tender, if the seed be steeped in
milk before they be set.

CHAP. XV. Of Onions, Celandine, Hemp, and River Sponge.
THe Onions of the Ascalonitae are of a peculiar nature; they only are cleft
from the root and barren; nor will they grow from that part, Theophr. l. 7. c.
4. Therefore they are not set, but sowed with their seed, and in the Spring
they are transplanted with their branches. In Candie also, there is a kind of
them that grows thick in the root, sowed in seed; but set, it spreads into
stalks and seed; it is sweet in taste, but has no head. Seed of Elinus being
put into Onions, there will spring up an herb, with leaves like flax, of a
sharp taste, they call it Dragons. Yet Scaliger was deceived when he sowed it,
and thought to try this miracle, Scalig. Exerc. 169. s. 2. They say of
Celandine, that Swallows lay it on the Eyes of their young ones, and restore
their lost sight, Dioscor. l. 2. c. 186. Hence, Aristotle 4. de generat.
Animal. c. 6. says, prick the young Swallows eyes, and they will see again:
Worn next the soles of the feet, it cures the Jaundies: laid to women's breasts,
is will stop the too great abundance of their Terms, Mathiol. ad Dioscor. loc.
cit. Garden Hemp Seed will make Hens lay, and it extinguisheth man's nature
eaten too largely, Mathiol. ad l. 3. Dioscor. c. 48. The decoction of new Hemp
if you press it out strongly, and pour it on the ground, it will force the
Worms out of their holes, and kills Worms in the ears, Plin. l. 20. c. 23.
River Sponge is proper especially to the Rivers by the Alps. A pruner of Trees
was cured by it, that fell from a Tree, and brake almost all his bones. They
laid it round his body, and as often as it grew dry, they sprinkled it with
water. Though they did this but seldom, yet he was quickly restored, Mathiol.
ad l. 4. Dioscor. c. 94.

CHAP. XVI. Of Hemlock, Ciacompalon, and Cocco.
HEmlock is a kind of poison, that makes men mad, and kills them. Franciscus
Trapollinus dyed mad with it, when his Maid had put it into his Pottage instead
of Parsley. It has made some Creatures lie for dead, and when they stood up
again, they were astonished a long time, and afterward they ran wildly up and
down. Scaliger writes, he never saw any man that was killed by it. Starlings
feed on it. From Plato we collect, that the force of it may be abated, if one
be moderately hot before he take the juice of it: Therefore Scaliger, Exerc.
152. s. 1. says, That the Executioner that was to give this most deadly
Poison, warned Crito, that he should not suffer Socrates to dispute too much,
because by that agitation of the mind, he would grow hot. Ciocompalon is a kind
of Tree in Camalonga, which sends forth only 4, or 5, branches from a long
stalk: the leaves are very great, for the inhabitants wear them for a Cloak,
against the heat of the Sun and rayn. In the top of the Tree it puts forth
flowers like Bean flowers, about 200, from whence grow fruit abundantly, as big
as ones hand breath. It is a yearly Plant. It withers after it has brought
forth. Coccus is the same with Tenga. It is a Tree with a leaf like the
Palm Tree: they cover their houses with them, for they make mats of them to
serve for six months, (in China and Malabar) Scalig. exerc. 25. s. 13. It
brings fruit in clusters, as the Palm Tree does, each has ^00 nuts. When its
comes forth, there is water bred in it; it is filled with it, when it is
perfect. The end of this increase is the beginning of the Pith, for it grows by
the thickning of it. The quantity is full three Cyathi. It is very sweet. When
the Tree is come to the full growth, in August, they cut some of the boughs of
it in the middle* and leave the rest; they cut off the top also a little. They
hang a cu^ to each of them, four great jugs are filled in one day. It brings
fruit that continually follow one the other; it lives, 30, or 40, years.

CHAP. XVII. Of Doronicum, Dragons, Olive-honey, Vipers, Bugloss, Eryngion,
Euphorhium.
DOronicum is Poison, that kills dogs suddenly. Matthiolus gave some to his
dog, and the dog fawned on him all the time he lived; in seven hours he died,
as of a falling sickness. There is a (...) of Tree in the West Indies near
Carthagena, the fruit whereof is perfectly like a Dragon, with a long neck,
open mouth, nostrills lifted up, a long tail, standing on its feet, so that
who sees it would think it to be a Dragon. Monarel. In Palmyra of Syria there
runs forth oil from a stock of a Tree, that tastes sweet; it is called
Etaeo-meli, Mathiol. in l. 4. c. 73. It purges choler and crudities, exhibited
one sextarius of it, with one Hemina of water. They that take it grow stupid,
but they receive no harm if they be often rowsed, that they may not sleep.
Dioscor. l. 1. c. 32. Echion or Vipers Buglosse, was found by one Alcibius.
Sleeping on the ground, a Viper bit him, Mathiol in l. 4. c. 25. When he rose
up; he pressed out the juice o^ the herb with his teeth* and drank it down,
the rest he laid to the wound, and it cured him. Nature has made the herb
with hairs like Vipers, that Men might know the use of it. Eryngion, if a Goat
take it in the mouth, the whole heard will stand still, and cannot move till
you take it out. Plutarch in lib. quod maxin^ cum princip. disp. si philos. The
smell of it passes so quick, that it spreads like fire to what is next, and
exercises its force upon it. Suphorbium, if we believe the Africans, is a
prickly Plant, out of the root of it the fruit comes forth of a long form like
to Cucumbers, sometimes two foot long, when it is ripe it is pricked with an
Iron, and a clammy white liqu^r comes forth of it, which they let run into a
bottle, and they keep that. Scalig, exer. 181. s. 2. It purges the belly, but
the patient will faint and sweat with a cold sweat. Given, the weight of two
O^boli, it cures the dropsy; it kills one if he take three drams weight. For in
3, days it will corrode the Stomach and the Guts. Mathiol. in l. 3. c. 80.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Elaterium, Hellebour, Eupatorium, Emitum and Fennel.
ELaterium lasts longest of all Physics. One had of it that was 200 years
old. The moisture is said to be the cause of it. For though it be cut moist and
laid in the ashes, yet for 50 years it will put out a Candle, if it be put to
it. Theophil, l. 9. c. 14. With the infusion of Hellebour in the midst of
Winter, when the cold is greatest, many have been cured of a Quartane Ague.
Matthiolus ad l. 4. c. 146, Never says he as I remember, did we give our
infusion to those had quartane Agues, but at once or twice taking, by Gods
assistance they were cured. By the smell of dried Eupatorium, venomous
Creatures are driven away. Hearts wounded are cured by eating this; Matthiol.
ad loc cit, c. 37. Emitus is a Tree in Trachimia; if Serpents come near, and
but touch it, they dye. Aelian, l. 9. c. 27. Also Strabo saw one l. 15. that I
will here mention, it was like a Bay Tree; beasts that taste of it, grow mad,
some at the mouth, and fall into an Epilopse. In the Kingdom of Tombut which
is the wild of West Aethiopia^, Fennel grows so big, that they make bows of
it. Scalig. exerc. 166. In Spain, whilst it is green, the Country people mow
down the stalks of it for firing. Dalecamp. ad Plin. l. 20 c. ult.

CHAP. XIX. Of Fennel Giant and the Fig Tree.
FEnnel Giant grows in hot Countries. Out of the first shoots of it Shepherds
take out a little pith, like to the the yolk of an ege that is hard. That wrapped
in a wet paper and roasted under the embers and then sprinkled with Salt and
Pepper, tastes exceeding well and makes them busy. Mathiol. ad l. 3. c. 76. They
are by nature of great antipathy to Lampreyes, for if they but touch them, they
dye, Plin. l. 20. c. 33. Also they are present Poison to other Beasts; yet very
pleasant food for Asses. The Indian Fig Tree is wonderful great. Scaliger
briefly describes it out of Theophrastus. The Fig Tree, says he, bears small
fruit* it plants it self, and is spread forth with vast boughs, by the weight
whereof they are so bended to the earth, that in a years space, they stick in
and grow up with new branches, round about their parents like to Arbouts: so
that seven Shepherds may summer under it, being shaded and fenced about with
the fence of the Tree. It is pleasant to behold, and from far it seems, an
arched circumference. The upper boughs of it put forth very high, and in
abundance like a wood from the huge bulk of the Tree, that many of them make a
round of 60 paces, and they will cast a shade two furlongs. The broad leaves
are like an Amazonian Target: wherefore covering the fruit, it will not let it
grow; It is very rare, and no bigger than a bean. Scalig. exerc. 166. Moreover
Carthage was destroyed by the Fig Tree. For Cato beareing a deadly ^ate against
Carthage, and being careful to secure his posperity; when he had cried out at
every meeting of the Senate, that Carthage must be destroyed, he brought one
day into the Court, a early ripe Figg, that was fetched from Carthage, and
showing it to the Son a tours; he asked them, whence they thought that Fig was
taken from the Tree* And when they all granted it was newly gathered, he
replied, 3, days since was this pulled at Carthage; so near to our walls is
the enemy. They presently began the 3d* Punick War* wherein Carthage was
rooted out. In Hyrcania there are some that each of them will bear 260
Bushells. Plin. l. 15. c. 18.

CHAP. XX. Of the Ash, Mushrooms, and the Beech.
THe Ash is an Enemy to Serpents, none of them can ^ndure the shade of it,
though it be late at night, Plin. l. 16. c. 13. Pliny says, he proved it, that
if a Serpent be compassed in, with Ashwood and fire, he will leap into the
fire, before he will pass over the Ash wood. This is the great bounty of
Nature, that it flowers before the Serpents come forth; nor do the leaves fall,
till the Serpents be gone to hide themselves. Vessels made of the wood of it
for use of meat and drink, help the Spl^^^ and the Stone wonderfully, Dom.
Zean. l. 1. pract. At the waters (...) out of which fire breaks forth, it did
once prosper, Pliny hist. l. 2. c. 107. Mushrooms gro^ so great in Namidia,
that they are thicker than Quindes. In the Kingdom of Nanles the crust of the
ground is thick, and like Marble, that being covered with earth a span deep,
and sprinkled with warm water, in 4. days sends forth Mushromes, Scalig.
Exerc. 181. S. 1. It is of necessity that there be some seminary virtue, out of
whose bosom they may proceed; for the water that is sprinkled on affords
matter and nutriment, and also a procatarctical cause, Libav. l. 1. Epist.
Chym. 30. If they be boiled, or the juice be pressed forth and poured at the
roots of Trees, (especially Beech-Trees) Mushroms will grow from thence in
great abundance, Sennert. de cons. et disp. Chym. c. 12. In the Northern parts
under the Pole, Beech-Trees are frequent of a magnetic virtue, and the
Mushroms that grow to them are changed into Loadstones, says Olaus l. 12. c. 1.

CHAP. XXI. Of Guaicum and Gentian.
GUaicum is of great virtue against the French Pox; In Italy at first they were
fearful to drink it. Bread and Raisins were prescribed with a moderate diet,
and to live 40 days in a dark Chamber, and that so curiously, that they admit
not of the least Air, Mathiol. in l. 1. c. 3: The error was observed
afterward, and Hens flesh was allowed, but not a drop of Wine. Mathiolus was
the first that tried it with success, and others followed him, Gentian, called
also Cruciata, is the herb of S. Ladistaus a King. The report is, that the
Tartars drove him out of Hungary, and that he fled to Claudiopolis a City of
Da^ia* There he grew acquainted with a rich man, and became his Godfather. He
helped him to drive out the Tartars. They as they fled, threw down moneys of
Gold that they had plundered in the field of Aradium, as a means to hinder
those that pursued them. The King prayed unto God, that they might be changed
into stones; and it was so. Hence it is, that there are so many stones there.
After this Hungary being afflicted with a grievous Plague, He obtained of God,
that what plant an Arrow shot into the Air should fall down upon, might be a
remedy for that disease. It fell upon Cruciata, and by the use of that the
Plague was driven out of that Country, Camerar. Centur. 3. Memorab: s. 23.

CHAP. XXII. Of Broom, Ginger, and St. John's Wort.
IN stony and sandy grounds, 3. foot from Broom, one month before and after
the Calends of June, there is a kind of Broomrape found that is a cubit high;
if this be bruised, and the juice pressed forth, which is like to clear wine,
and be kept in a glass bottle stopped all the year, it is an excellent remedy
against the Plague. Ginger is a root that creeps along with knots and joints,
the leaves are like reed leaves that wax green anew twice or thrice a year,
Mathiol. l. 2. c. 154. There is some difference in the taste when it is dug
forth before its time to be ripe. The fit time to gather it is, when the root
grows dry, otherwise it is subject to Worms and rottenness. St. John's Wort
both feed and flower is wonderful to heal all wounds; besides those in the
head. Some write, that the Devils hate it so much, that the very smell of it
drives them away. I think this superstitious. The same is reported of
Pellitary, especially for green wounds. If it be bruised green and bound to a
wound, and taken off the third day, there will need no other Medicament,
Mathiol. in l. 4. c. 81.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Elecampane, Turnsole, and Hiuoa.
ELecampane is a yearly Plant, that grows higher than a man* Sometimes 24 foot
in height: it grows up in 6. months after the seed is sown; on the top of the
stalk there grows a head like an Artichoke, but it is rounder and broader, and
it extends it self with a flower as big as a great Dish, Bauhin. ad lib. 4.
Dioscor. c. 182. Sometimes the diameter of the dish is more than a foot and
half; and it is compassed about with long leaves of a golden color, or as it
were Sunbeams, and the plain of it in the middle is purple color. The seed is
disposed of in the holes of the dish; it has a black rind and sweet substance
within: so great is the abundance of it, that sometimes you shall find above a
thousand in one dish: Some there are, that take the tender stalks of the
leaves; and scraping away the Down, they boil them on a grid-iron, and season
them with Salt, Oil, and Spices, and they are better tasted than Artichokes. It
is a wonder, that it turns with the Sun East and West; for when the Sun rises,
as if it did adore the Sun, it bows down the head, and it rises with it,
always pointing toward the Sun, and opening it self very much at the root of
it, till the Sun sets. Turnsole kills Pismires, if you stop their holes with
it. If a Scorpions hole be compassed about with the juice of it, he will never
come forth; but if you put in the herb, he dies, Mathiol. ad l. 4. c. 186.
Hiuca is as great as a man's thigh, it goes about with the Sun, though it be a
clowdy day, and at night it is contracted as sad for the Suns absence, Plin. l.
22. c. 21. They break it into fine meal by rubbing it with Pumex stones or
whetstones; then they put it into an Hippocras bag, and pour water to it, and
press forth the juice: The Liquor is deadly, but the meal that is left, is set
in the Sun, as they do Sugar Candy; when the meal is dry they temper it with
water, and make bread of it, Scalig. Ex^rc. 153. l. 8.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Impia, Juniper. and Glasse-wort.
IMpia is thought to be a plant that no Creature will taste of, and from thence
it has its name: yet bruised between two stones, it will grow hot; and the
juice of it mingled with Wine and milk, is excellent against the Quinsie,
Mathiol. in l. 3. c. 115. They that shall taste of it will never be troubled
with that disease. Some think that part of this herb is put into birds nests,
and that keeps their young ones from being strangled when they eat so greedily.
Juniper is hard; hence it is, that the wood will not corrupt in an hudnred
years. Therefore Annibal commanded to build the Temple of Diana at Ephesus with
Juniper beams, Plin. l. 15. c. 40. A light cole of it covered with its own
ashes, will keep fire a whole year, if we will credit the Chemists. An
admirable Bath is made of it for the Gowt thus: Take 12. pound of Juniper wood
cut in pieces, boil it in water in a great Cauldron, till but a third part
remain; then pour forth the decoction with the wood into a Fat: let the sick go
into it, and sit there up to the navel* and bathe his limbs, but he must first
purge, Mathiol* l. 1. Dioscor. c. 87. Many Gouty people have been made whole by
this Bath, that were forced to keep their beds before. The pith of it in
Numidia is white; in Aethiopia, black; in Lybia, purple colored, Scalig.
Exerc. 181. s. 9. Also the African Physicians raspir and use it successefully
for Guaicum, against the Indian disease. I say by the by, that this disease was
carried by the Jews out of Spain into Africa, and cannot there be cured without
a remedy. But if the Patients go into Numidia, or Aethiopia by Nigris, there
the Climate only will cure them. Of the Ashes of Kaly, Salt is made this is
dissolved, with powder of stones, and a kind of clammy substance swims a top to
make glass: when it is cold, it grows hard, and is called commonly Axungia
Vitri; being powdered, it makes the teeth wonderful clean, Plater. l. 2. de Vit.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Bay Tree, Mastick-Tree, and Flax.
THe Bay Tree will yield fire of it self; and if you rub the dried boughs
often together, strewing powder of brimstone thereon, it will take fire,
Mathiol. in l. 1. c. 90. It is always with green leaves* and so great is the
force of it, that but stick some of the boughs in the fields, and the corn will
never be hurt with smut, which is the plague of Corn; for it will take hold of
the leaves. At Rome they held antienly, that Jupiter sent it from heaven, Plin.
l. 15. c. 30. For an Eagle from aloft let fall a white hen, into the lap of
Livia Drusilla, (who afterward was called Augusta, being married to Caesar,
whom she was espoused to) she wondered at it, but was not afraid; the miracle
was, that she had in her beak a Bay^bough that was full of Bayberries. The
Southsayers commanded to keep the Hen, and her Chickens, and to set the Bay
bough, and take care of it, which was done in the Manor of the Caesar's, that
was by the River Tibur, about 9 miles from Rome, in the way Flaminia; and
therefore is called, ad Gallinas, and it grew into a great wood. Caesar
afterward in triumph held a Bay-bough in his hand, and had a Crown of bays on
his head. Amongst all Trees this only is never stricken with thunder, unless
it be for a sign of future calamity; no houses are thunder-stricken, as they
say, where the boughs are; Therefore Tiberius fearing thunder, when it did
thunder, put on his Laurel Crown. Theophrastus writes, 4. de Pl^nt. c. 8. that
they are stony in the red Sea. The Mastick-Tree beats little bladders bowed in
like to horns, wherein there is contained a clear liquor, which with age is
turned into little Creatures, like to those that fly out of Elm and Turpentine
bladders. In the Island Chios, of the Egean Sea, from the Mastick Tree cut,
runs forth Mastick: it grows in ground that is ram^d fast together, and paved,
Mathiol. l. 1. c. 45. If you oft-times distill Linseed oil, says Bapt. Porta.
l. 10. mag. c. 9. it will be so ready to take fire, that you can scarce shut it
up in a Vessel, but it will draw fire to it, and if the vessel be open, it is
so thin, that it will fly into the Air and evaporate, and if the light of a
candle or fire touch it, the air will kindle, and the oil will flame so
violently at a great distance, that it is almost impossible to put it out. In
the Deserts of India it grows red, that will endure the fire, and be purified
by it. It grows out of stones, springing, and rising upward, the hair is
short; and is therefore hard to be spun, Libav. l. 2. c. 7. de Bomby^.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Larch-Tree, Lilly, Loostrife, and the Lote-Tree.
SOme of the best Writers say, That the Larch-Tree will not burn, and we
alleged it before out of Lemnius; but that is found to be false. In the
Mountains of Trent Iron is made, and the Furnaces are heat with Larch-wood; and
no wood will better melt metals. And if stones will burn that have a
Bituminous matter in them, what shall we conclude of a Ros^^ous kind of wood?
Lillies will hold green all the year, if when they are shut, and have not
opened themselves, they be crop^, and put into new unglased pots, and kept
close covered, Mathiol. ex Anatolio in l. 3. Dioscor. c. 99. When in the mean
time you take them out for your use, bring them to the Sun, and by warmth of it
they will open themselves. Loosstrife is a notable remedy against the Plague;
the Country people found this Plant amongst the Coenomani; bound something high
upon a man, it will drive the poison of the plague downwards, and keeping it
there, will not let it rise up any more, Ruel de nature. stirp. l. 3. c. 78. If
Oxen disagree, lay this on their yokes, and they will be quiet. The Lote-Tree
is a va^t spreading Tree full of large boughs. Domitius valued 6. of them at a
thousand Sestertia, Plin. l. 17. c. 1. They lasted until such time as Nero
burnt the City, 180 years. There is also an herb in Egypt called by ^^i' Name,
that when the waters of Nilus go back that watered the ground, it comes up like
a bean, Plin. l. 13. c. 17. The fruit of it is like a Poppy head dented in, and
the seeds are in it. The Inhabitants putrefie the heads in heaps, then they
wash them apart; when they are dry, they bruise them, and eat them for bread.
When the Sun sets, these Poppy heads close and are covered in leafes* when the
Sun rises they open, till they grow ripe, and the white flower fall off; That
bread is Physical, Plin. l. 22. c. 21. They that feed on it are never troubled
with a Dysentery nor Tenasmus, nor any diseases of the belly. When it is hot,
it is the most easy of digestion; but cold, it is harder for the stomach.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Malabathrum, Punic and Assyrian Apples, and the Tree called
Mangueis.
MAlabathrum is a leaf of its own kind that the Lakes of India produce,
swimming like Duckweed on the waters without any root: they gather it and
stitch it through, and hang it up to dry, Diosc. l. 1. c. 11. They say, that
when the Summer heat dryes up the waters, the dry sprigs do burn on the ground,
and if this come not to pass, it grows there no more. Dioscor. divides
Pomgranates into 3. heads, some are sweet, some sharp and sour; others are
between both. They say that sharp ones will grow sweet, if hogs or man's dung be
laid to the roots of the Trees, and to water them often with old urine, Mathiol.
l. 1. Dioscor. c. 127. They are kept from corrupting a whole year, if when they
are almost ripe, the branches they hang by, be woond about the Tree; or after
that they are gathered, they be smeered all over with Clay resolved in water,
and laid some days in the Sun. Also they are dipped into scalding water, and are
presently taken forth again, and laid 8. days in the Sun to dry. The Assyrian
Apple Tree bears fruit always, some fall off, others coming in their places,
ripening one after the other. Pliny, l. 12. c. 3. says, That people tried to
transport them for themselves, because they are so good for health, and to
carry them in earthen vessels, giving place for their roots to take air by
holes in the vessels, as all such things that must be carried far to be set and
transplanted must be used, which you must remember that we may not say one
thing twice. But they will not grow but amongst the Medes and Persians. Do^dius
writes, as Libav. de orig. rerum. reports, than an Assyrian Apple, when it was
cut, was found great with a young one in it, that lay in it as in the Womb, and
was fastened to its stalk. The question was how it grew so, and it seems there
were may Apples on that twig placed close together; and the first growing but
slowly, that which grew over it by abundance of matter coming to it, grew
faster, and pressing with its weight on the lesser, took it into it, and so
grew about it. Mangueis is a Tree in the Country Temistitan; out of whose stock
peirced, there flows a watery juice. If any Man drink too much of it, he grows
drunk and stupid. The bark is good for thread, the wood for niedles, the leaves
to cure diseases, and to cover houses. Matol. in Colloqu. de Plant.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Musk and Moss.
MUsk is bred in the Navel of a certain Creature; two kinds of this Creature
are described: one is like a Goat with one Horn; and a great body. This when it
is prone to venery, with the vehemence of Lust, the Navel swells, and the
impostume grows great by the thicker blood heaped together, R^ell. ex Aetio.
Then it will neither eat nor drink, and roles it self often on the ground, by
which rolling it presses forth the blood that swells in the Navell; The matter
pressed out, in a short time grows wonderful sweet. Scaliger writes of the
other, that is in the Kingdom of Pegu, like a roe busk, white, from whose
lower Mandible, the teeth put forth equally on both sides. Under the belly of
it (I set down the story out of Scaliger Exerc. 21) the Navel swells. They
catch the beast, and cut off that part with the skin: and all the drops of
blood that run out, when it is cut, and fall down, they are either caught, or
gathered up for good Musk. When they have cut it, they set leeches on, so many
and so long, till they kill it by drawing blood from it: that blood so drawn
forth, being dried and made into powder, they mingle with the former in small
quantities, that is very strong. One hundred part is sufficient. The
sophistication is discovered, if you smell to it. That which is unmixt, will
draw blood from your nose if you put it near. There is another kind of Musk
called Civet, it is bred in a little Bladder in the testicles of a certain
Creature. Mathiol ad l. 5. c. 20. And growing like sweat in the testicles, is
of quality moist and hot: that put into the Navel hole wonderfully cures the
strangling of the Matrix. There is one kind of Cranes-bill that smells like
Musk; especially Evening and morning. The hairy Moss of the Larch-Tree, if it
be set on fire, burns so violently, that it exceeds Gunpowder. Mathiol loc.
cit. For they flame with a World of sparks in a darknight, and fly up toward
the Stars, leaving a sweet smell behind them. Gathered new, and steeped with
Oil of Roses, it wonderfully abates pains of the head that come from a hot
cause; it stops blood, laid upon wounds.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Mandragora, Mallows, and the Mulberry-Tree.
MAndragora is a sleepy medicament, as experience proves, Lemnius in explic.
herb. biblic. c. 2. For when as he had negligently laid the fair and amiable
fruit of it in his study, he was oppressed with drowsinesse; but when he
removed it, he grew wakefull again. The same thing happened to the Afcicans in
their War against the Carthagenians. For Hamilcar corrupted the Wine in the
Vessels, and let the Africans take it for spoil: when they had drank, they all
fell asleep, and the Carthagenians became Conquerors. Potyan, l. 5. Phythagoras
calls it (...), For the roots from the middle to the bottom come forth with two
forks, that it seems to have legs like Men. The fruit is like an Apple, not far
from the root, upon the leaves lying on the ground. Heidfeld. in sphing.
Philosoph. Wherefore if it be dug up at that time, that it bears fruit, it
represents a Man without Arms. There are also some Counterfeits made of reeds,
Mandragora, and Bryonie roots. Matthiol l. 4. Dioscor. c. 7. shows the way an
impostor used to make one. They carve (says he) in these the Images of both
men and women, sticking the grains of Barley and millet in the places, where
they will have hair come forth; then making a hole in the ground, they cover
it with thin sand, so long till those grains shoot forth, which will be in 20
days at least. Then they take them up again, and cut the roots where the
grains grow to them, with a very sharp Knife, and they sit them so, that they
may represent the hair of the head, the beard, and other parts that are hairy.
Mallows are so venereous, that the seed of that which has but one stalk
strewed on the privities, is said by Xenocrates to increase lust infinitely in
women. Also three roots bound together are thrust up with great success for
the tenesmus and the Dysentery. But it is a wonder, that water should in the
open air grow thick by it, and white as Milk. Plin. l. 10. c. 21. The Mulberry
Tree will not bud till the cold be over, yet it brings forth fruit with the
first; when it begins to bud, it buds so violently, that in one night it buds
all over with a noise, so that the whole Tree will be covered with flowers.
Pliny, l. 16. c. 25.

CHAP. XXX. Of Napellus:
NApellus kills with every part, but chiefly the root. For held in the hand
till it wax hot, it will destroy you. It is certain, that some shepherds that
used the stalk for a spit to roast birds, dyed of it. Mathiolus. (Com. in l. 4.
Dioscor. c. 73.) confirms this venomous quality of it by many examples. I shall
add one. One dram of Napellus was given to a Thief that was 27 years old: He
drank it down, and said it tasted like pepper. Most grievous symptoms followed:
for he vomited often something green, as Leeks. He felt a thing like a ball
about his Navell, it came upwards, and sent a cold vapor to his head: then he
became stupefied as if he had a palsy that laid hold on his left arm, and leg,
that he could scarce stir the top of his hand, all motion being lost in the
other parts. By and by, this force of the disease forsook his left side, which
became sound, and seized on his right side, and wrought the like effects there.
He said, That all the veins of his body were grown cold. He had giddiness in
his head, and his brain was so often disturbed, that he said it seemed to him
like boiling water. He had Convulsions in his Eyes and Mouth, and a very sharp
pain in his Mandibles; wherefore he often held those parts with his hands,
fearing they would fall off. His eyes appeared outwardly swollen, his face wan,
lips black, and his belly was seen to swell, like a Tympany: His Arteries beat
strongly, and his mind was diversely troubled, as the symptoms increased. For
sometimes he thought he should die, and presently he hoped to live; sometimes
he spoke rationally, and sometimes he doted; sometimes he wept, and sometimes
he sang. He affirmed, that in all this time he was thrice blind, and thrice in
an agony of death, but his tongue was firm, never troubled with any symptom.
Thus far Mathiolus. But all these symptoms by giving him Bezars stone,
vanished in seven hours.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Nyctegretum, Granum Nubiae, Nutmegs, and Olive Trees.
NYctegretum was admired by Democritus, amongst a few things; it is hot as
fire, and has thorny leafs, nor does it rise from the ground. It must be dug
up after the vernal Equinoctial, and dried by the Moonlight for 30 days, and
then it will shine in the night, Plin. l. 21. c. 11. It is also called
Chenomychon, because Geese are afraid at the sight of it. In Nubia, which is
Aethiopia by Egypt, there is a grain that swallowed will kill living
Creatures. A tenth part of it will kill them in a quarter of an hour, Scalig.
Exerc. 153. s. 11. In Banda an Island of the Molucco's the Nutmeg grows, and
it is covered with a cup for a shell, when it is ripe it is all covered over.
Under the first covering the shell is not presently that covers the kernel, but
a thick skin which the Arabians call Macin. The Olive Tree if it be cropped at
the first budding by a Goat, grows so barren, that it will never bear by any
means; but if there be any other cause, the certain cure is, to lay open their
roots to the Winter cold, Plin. l. 7. c. 14. The Olive and the Oak so disagree,
that one planted by the other will shortly die. The Lees of oil mingled with
Lime, if walls be plaistered with it, and the roofs, they not only drop down
all adventitious humors that they contract, but neither Moth nor Spiders will
endure them, Mathiol. in Dioscor. It flowereth in July, the flowers coming
forth by clusters. From whence grow first green berries, and they are pale as
they grow ripe; then they become a full purple color, and lastly black. They
are pulled in November and December, then are they laid in pavements till they
become wrinkled, then are they put in under a millstone, and are pressed out
with presses, pouring scalding water on, and so they yield their oil. The wood
of the Tree burns as well green as dry. At Megoris a wild Olive Tree stood long
in the Marketplace, to which they had fastened the Arms of a valiant man; but
the bark grew over it, and hid them for many years. That Tree was fatal to the
Cities ruin, as the Oracle foretold, when a Tree should bear arms: for it so
fell out when the Tree was cut down, spurs and helmets being found within it,
Plin. l. 16. c. 29. The Olive Tree lasts 200 years, Plin. l. 16. c. 44.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Palm Tree.
THey say that the female Palm Trees will bring forth nothing without the
Males, which is confirmed when a wood grows up of its own accord; so about the
Males, many females will grow enclining toward them, and wagging their boughs.
But the male with branches standing up as it were hairy, does marry them, by
the blowing on them, and by standing near them on the same ground, Plin. l. 13.
c. 4. When the Male is cut up, the females are in widowhood, and are barren.
Hence in Egypt they so plant them, that the wind may carry the dust from the
Male to the Female, but if they be far off, they bind them together with a cord
Pontanus reports, that two Palm Trees, one set at Brundusium, the other at
Hydruntum were barren, till they were grown up to look one upon the other, and
though it were so great a distance, yet they both did bear fruit. Dalechamp. ad
lib. cit. Poets write thus of them: A Tree there grew in large Brundusium Land,
A Tree in Idumaea much desired,
And in Hydruntum Woods one rare did stand,
Like Male and Female, it is to be admired:
On the same ground they did not grow, but wide
Asunder, and they both unfruitful stood.
They many leaves did bear, nothing beside;
At last they grew so high, above the wood,
That of each other they enjoyed the light.
Then they grew fruitful, like to Man and Wife,
Each in the other seemed to take delight,
And to be partners each of the others life.


Cardanus reports, that in Data a City of Numidia, there was a Palm Tree, the
fruit whereof, unless the boughs of the flourishing male were mingled with
the boughs of the female, the fruit was never ripe, but were lean with a great
stone in them, and by no help could they be kept from consuming; but if any
leaf or rind of the male were present, then they would grow ripe. Philo. l. 1.
de vita Mosis says, that the vital force of it is not in the roots, but in the
top of the stock, as in the heart, and in the middle of the boughs, that it is
guarded about with all, as with Halberdiers. There is a kind of Palm Tree
grows in India, out of the stock whereof, the boughs being for that purpose
cut in the month of August, a liquor like wine runs forth, that the
Inhabitants receive in vessels: unless it be boiled, it grows sour after 3.
days, Mathiol. ad l. 1. c. 126. Boiled, it is converted into most sweet honey,
which afterward is resolved in water, in 20 days it is strained forth
artificially, and so clarified it will last. But the Palm Trees which
Dioscorides calls Thebaicae, in time grow so dry in the Sun, that they are
ground to make bread of them. Thevet speaks of a Palm Tree that yields wine in
the promontory of Aethiopia, which is the fairest sort of Palm Trees for
height, and for being always green. They cut it 2. foot above the ground to
draw forth the juice. They let it run into Earthen vessels for their daily
drink; and to make it keep, they cast in a little salt. It is like white Wine
of Campania in color and substance. Linschottus l. 4. America novae c. 26.
reports; That in a place of the West Indies, called St. John de portu divite,
there grows a Palm Tree that every month brings new leaves, and is loaded
with Cocker-nuts. Pierius in Hieroglyph. says it is an Emblem of the year,
because this Tree alone at every new Moon sends forth several branches.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Plane-Tree, Apple Trees, and the Tree called Paternoster.
OF old they gave so much honor to the Plane-Tree at Rome, that they infused
the roots in Wine a long time to preserve them. In the Island of Candie there
is one that never loses its leafs, Plin. l. 1. c. 1. But there is a noted one
in Lycia, by the way side, that is hollow like a house, the hollow cave in it
is 81 foot wide, it has a woody top, and vast boughs, like great Trees; it
overshadowes the fields with its far casting shadow; and that nothing may be
wanting to the likeness of a Cave, there is a stony circumference within, that
is full of mossy Pumex stones: the miracle is so great, that L. Matianus that
was thrice Consul, thought fit to divulge it to posterity, that he and 18. more
feasted in it. If Apples in winter be kept amongst Grapes, they so corrupt the
Grapes, that they presently wither and corrupt. It is reported, that if a woman
with Child eat Quinces, she shall be delivered of an industrious and witty
child. Citron Apples keep garments from Moths and Worms; how good they are
against poison, you may know by examples out of Athenaeus. A Citron Apple has
cured some that were stung by Vipers. They keep longer uncorrupted, if they be
put into a heap of Barley or Millet. They cure Scabs, if they be cut in the
middle, and powder of Brimstone be finely strewed upon them, and they be roasted
in hot Embers, and so the Patient be rubbed therewith. Apples of Sodom are
fair to sight; but touched, they fall to ashes, Solin. c. 36. In Hispaniola
there is a Tree called Pater noster, the fruit is as great as a Hasel nut: put
this in boiling water, and dip a linen or woollen Cloth in it, it will be died
gallantly with diversity of spots, but it corrodes with its overgreat force,
Ovetan. l. 9. c. 1.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Pepper, Plantain, Pimpernel, wild Tansie, herb Paris, and
Paper.
ROund black Pepper grows upon some weak branches like tendrels, that creep up
to the tops of Trees by them, clinging about them. It grows like the fruit of
the wild Vine in clusters, flourishing close together of a green color till it
become dry; which when it does, (as it does in October) it is gathered, and
laid upon Palm Tree coverlids in the open Sun to torrifie, and so it becomes
black and shrivelled, Mathiol. l. 2. Diosc. c. 153. The root of the greater
Plantain put in a little bag and bound with a thread near the Region of the
heart, preserves a man from the Plague. Scholtius relates it for a certain
remedy out of Monavius, Epist. 268. Pimpernel was found out by Prince Chaba,
for with this alone were cured 5000 wounded Hungarians, after the battle, Clus.
in Nomen. Pannon. steeped in hot water it is approved for to cure a continual
Fever. It has so great force against the disease called Hydrophobia, that
whosoever shall use it betimes in the morning for some days, in Sallets, or
otherwise, after he has been bitten, shall find no harm, Fernelius. Wild
Tansey applied to the palms of the hands, and soles of the feet, abates the
heat of any Feavert, Mathiol. in l. 5. c. 37. In the berries of Herb Paris,
there is found seed, that has great virtue against Witchcraft. Some grow
sottish by Chronicle diseases; others by Witchcraft. If these drink the seed,
one dram, for 20. days they are cured. Paper reed grows in the Lakes of
Egypt, or where the waters of Nilus have run over, and stand still, and are
not above two Cubits high: the crooked root is as thick as ones arm, it has
triangular sides, it is not above ten Cubits in length, it runs up spire wise,
like a Javelin. Plin. l. 13. c. 12. The Egyptians made matter to join their
Ships together with the inside of this bulrush, cutting off the tops of the
reed; also they made Sails and shoes of it. Herodot, l. 2. Only the Priests
wore those shoos, as Arist. writes. They were wont to sell, and to eat the
lower part, of about a Cubit in length, and they were exceeding sweet, when
they were torrified in an Oven. This was the chief meat of the Egyptians,
hence was the original of Paper. Dalechamp. ad l. 13. Plin. c. 11.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Oak, Rhubarb, Rape-root, and Rosa-solis.
IN Maritania, Oaks bear a long Acorn that tastes sweeter and more delicate
than Chestnuts. Scaliger Exerc. 181. s. 26.

The land of the shore of Sinus Pucicus is Rocky, and the Clods of Earth are
bituminous: there grow upon them pale shrubs, scarce a foot high. They have a
kind of Oaks, and Box-Trees, but they have no root. Scaliger saw one that was
without knots and straight, 75, foot long. There were 30 Crowns offered for it.
Scalig. Exerc. 166. A little above the Cauchi, Pliny, lib. 16. c. 1. writes
that there were mighty ones, by the banks of two Lakes, which being either
undermined by the waters, or blown down with the wind, pulled up great Islands
with them that they grew upon with their roots, and so standing equally
balanced, they sailed, being furnished with huge boughs. They often terrified
the Roman Navy, when as they were driven by the Waves as it were of purpose,
and seen by those that kept watch on the decks. There was one in the Country of
Thurirum that never cast its leaves, yet never budded till midsummer. Rheubarb
grows only in China, and is brought by Usebech into Turkey, and so to Venice;
The virtues of it are said to be notable, and they bring an example of an
hydropick person, who having been in exceeding great danger, by the use of
Rhubarb he was cured, and lived to be a very old man. Adolph. Occo in Scholtii
Epist. The same man received a mortal wound by his Servant, after his disease,
and the Chyrurgians expected he would dye in four days, or seven at farthest:
he recovered, by Rhubarb, next under God. One writes thus of it, Camerar. Cent.
8. in 51.

Rhubarb is hot and dry; the belly binds;
And opens Children, Women great with Child
May safely use it, it is good for all kinds.
Opens Obstructions, and gives purges mild,
Both Phlegm and Choler, it is for'th stomach good,
And helps the Liver, serves to cleanse the blood.
Stops spitting blood, and ruptures, and we prise
This root for weak folk, and dysenteries.
From the small seed of Rhubarb in 3^ months, so great a root grows that in
some places it weighs 100 pound weight, Mathiol. in l. 2. c. 104. Mathiolus saw
Turnips in the Country of Anamum, that one of them weighed 30 pounds. Those
that are sowed in Summer, are free from Worms, mingling sutt with the seed when
it is sowed; or else steep the seed a night in the juice of the greater housleek.
It has been proved, Columella. By Harlem, Anno 1585. there was one dug up like
a Man's hand with nails and fingers exactly. I saw the picture of it at Leyden
with Cl. Bundarcius. Ros solis, or Sun dew, which shines under the Sun like a
Starr with his beams, has its name from its admirable nature for, though the
Sun in summer shine long and hot upon it, yet the leaves of it are almost
always wet, and the down of them is always full of drops. And which is
admirable, that moisture that is contained in the cups of the leaves, so soon
as you touch it with your fingers, while it yet grows on the ground, or else
is pulled up presently, and held in the Sun beams, is drawn forth by and by
into white threads like Silk, which harden immediately, and so continue ever
after, Camerar. cent. 8. memorab. 98.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Crow-foot, Rue, Rose-mary, Rose-root and rose-Tree.
CRowfoot, if Men eat it, will cause Convulsions, and draw their mouths awry.
They seem to laugh that dye with it, Pausan. Also Salustius speaks of it: In
Sardinia, says he, there grows an herb called Sardea, like wild Smallage: this
contracts the Mouths and Jaws of Men with pain, and kills them, as it were,
laughing. Rue resists Venom, therefore a Weasel will carry it, when he fights
with a Serpent. It is of a mighty greatness at Macheruntum, Joseph. l. 7. de
bell, Juddic. c. 25. It was as high as any Fig Tree, and had remained from the
time of Herod. It is a singular remedy for the Epilepsy, as a Country man found
by accident. Camerar, Cent. 3. Memorab. 36. He bruised it; and with the smell
of the Rue he stopped the nose of this Epileptick person fallen, and presently he
rose up.

Rosemary grows so plentifully in France that they burn it, so thick that they
make Tables of it. It flowers both spring and fall* Mathiol. l. 3. c. 37.
Barclay, in his Icon animarum. c. 4. writes thus of it in England: Rosemary in
many Countries is costly ^y the very pains is used about it to cherish it;
here it is common, and sometimes serves to make hedges for Gardens. Rhodium root
is the most lively of all roots; for dug out of the earth, unless it be laid
up in very dry places, if it be planted again after many Months, it will grow.
It grows on the highest Rocks where it has scarce so much earth as to stick
by. Mathiol. l. 4. c. 41. The Rosebush at Carthage in Spain is always full of
Roses in Winter, and was always honored by the Romans; for they were wont to
strew the leaves on their dishes of meat, and to besmear their Citron Tables
with the juice of them, that they might by reason of their bitterness be free
from Worms. Heliogabalus commanded to throw Roses on his Banqueting guests from
the top of the Room, as if it rayned Roses. Dalechamp in l. 21. c. 4. That is
wonderful that is related concerning revification. There was a famous
Physician at Cracovia, who could so curiously prepare the ashes of every part
of a Plant, that he would exactly preserve all the Spirits of them. The ashes
waxing a little hot by putting a Candle to the Glass, represented a Rose wide
open, which you might behold growing by degrees* to augment, and to be like a
stalk, with leaves, flowers, and at last a double Rose appeared in its full
proportion; when the Candle was taken away it fell again to ashes. Rosenberg
Rhodolog, c. ult. The same thing almost was done with a Nettle, as Quercetan
testifies in his History of the Plague. For when one would appoint a remedy
against the stone, at the end of Autumn he pulled a great many Nettles up by
the roots, of these Nettles he made a lie the common way with hot water, and by
strayning and filtring, he purified this lixivium, that he might at last
produce salt artificially as he intended: but when he had set the lixivium all
night to cool in an Earthen Vessel, the next day when he thought to Evaporate
to extract the Salt; it happened that night, that the air was so cold, that all
the Lixivium was over frozen. When therefore in the Morning he purposed to cast
that Lixivium out at the Window, besides his expectation he saw that all the
water of the Lixivium was frozen, and a thousand figures there of Nettles were
in it, so perfect with roots leaves and stocks, and showing so exactly, that no
Painter could paint them better.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Scorzonera, Squills, Sage, and Scordium.
SCorzonera is no ancient Plant, Mathiolus first described it, l. ^. c. 137. It
was found in Catalonia by an African servant: he that found it, showed that it
was a present remedy against the bitings of Adders; he that will escape, must
drink the juice. Of Squills, vinegar is made, of an admirable quality, says
Mathiolus, if one daily drink a little; his jaws and Mouth will never be ill,
his stomach will be well, he will breathe well, see well, he will be troubled
with no wind in his belly, and will be well colored and long winded. He that
uses this vinegar will digest his meat well, though he eat much: There will be
no crudities in his body, not wind, nor choler, no dr^gs, nor will the urine or
ordure pass away with over looseness, Mathiol. in l. 2. c. 168. Of Sage they
say, that it stops the flowing of the courses, if one smell to it; and eaten by
one with Child, it will retain the child, and keep it lusty, Mathiol. in l. 3.
c. 34. Hence it is that Agrippa calls it, sacred. If a woman drink a Hemina of
the juice of it with a little salt the fourth day she has abstained, and layn
alone, and then lie with her husband, she will conceive. It is reported, that
in Coptus of Egypt, after a great plague, that the women drank it, and did bear
many children. In many places of Asia they bear Apples; In Calabria of
Consentia, Scaliger says, Exerc, 168, that one did bring forth a gall of an
Ash Color, and that he saw it. Dead bodies are preserved by touching Scordium,
Galen. l. 1. Antidot. For the dead bodies of those that fell upon the Scordium
of Crete after they were slain in the War, did corrupt least, especially on
that part whence the Scordium had touched them. It if it be boiled in wine, it
is good to drink against stinging of Serpents, Constable. de Febr. pest. c. 18.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Nightshade.
THere are many kinds of Nightshade: amongst these are Winter Cherries, the
sleepy Nightshade, the greater and the spungy Nightshade; they seem to have
some strange things in them. Halicacabum is such an enemy to Vipers, that if
the root be near them they die with deep sleep. Vesicarium has long leafs,
white flowers, out of which come forth green round bladders, with six divisions
long ways, the seed within is murry color, as great as Orobus; in the side of
it is the figure as it were of a man's heart, with a white color. Nature framed
it so, that we might know it was good for the diseases of it. Sleepy
Nightshade, tasted causes sleep: the Danes found that, by their example. For
when by Sueno King of Norway besieged Duncanus King of Scotland in the Town of
Perth; He calling forth Maccabaeus his Cousin-german, began to treat of
surrendering up the place, and provision, Hector. Boet. l. 12. Scot. hist. The
Danes accepted the conditions, and took what provision they had; but so soon as
they had tasted of it, they were all so oppressed with sleep, (for their wine
and beer were infected with Nightshade) that Macchabaeus vanquished them. Ten
of them suspecting the gifts of Enemies were safe. These carried King Sueno
like one that was dead, in a Fishers Boat to the mouth of Thais, and so home.
The root of the greater Nightshade dried, if half a dram of it be steeped in
wine seven days, it will so infect it, that if any one shall drink it
strained, he can eat nothing; let him drink vinegar and it is presently gone,
but if you take it too largely, it will strangle you. Franciscus Calce^larius
of Verona was the first discovered this secret, and revealed it to others,
Mathiol. in l. 4. c. cit. Of the tuberous Nightshade, the root is spungy,
sometimes as great as ones fist, as long as ones hand; where the stalk rises,
many fibrous roots come forth, that are spread on the ground; from these at the
beginnining of the Spring, come up other stalks, and other bulbous roots grow
with them; and it will propagate so many roots, that for one plant dug up in
the Winter time, Bauhinus (ad loc. cit. Dioscor.) observed, that there were
above 40 bunches belonging to it.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Mustard, Satyrium, and the greater Saxifrage.
MUstard seed covered with Sugar, or eat with honey for junckates is a safe
experiment; for stupidity proceeding from moisture, Horst. l. 2. de sanit.
tenend. c. 1. Where the Uvula is fallen, this sauce will draw it up presently.
Pythagoras esteemed of it, because besides preserving ones health, it ascends
high, into the closet of reason where the mind resides. Pansa. Theor. spu. de
pror. vit. c. 51. says thus; I commend the infusion of this in sweet wine to
all Scholars, chiefly in winter time. For it heats all the body, opens the
mesaraick veins, and promotes the Chylus toward the Liver: For there is nothing
better than to have a loose belly, and that helps it self. Satyrion is very
good for venery, only touched. Theophrastus says, it was proved 70 times in an
Indian that brought it, and 12 times in others that touched it. Cynosorchis is
like to this, whose greater root is full of flatulent matter, and causes lust,
the lesser restrains it. Great Saxifrage grows in Mount Baldus coming forth of
a firm hard stone, and old walls of Cities, Mathiol. ad l. 4. c. 15. The root
sticks so fast in rocks, that it cannot be pulled out but by sharp Irons: It is
good to drive out stones; by the drinking thereof abundance of stones were
driven forth at once, and they were as great as Beans.

CHAP. XL. Of the Turpentine, and Frankincense Trees.
TUrpentine Trees, are one male, the other female, Theophrast. l. 3. c. 25. The
Male is barren, the female brings forth a red fruit, as big as a Lentil, which
cannot be digested; Another kind of female brings forth green fruit, and it
grows red afterward; And last of all, like the grape, as it grows ripe, it
becomes black, and is as great as a Bean. Egisippus l. 4. c. 3. de excid.
Hierosol. writes, that in Memphis there was a Turpentine-Tree, that was set at
the making of the World; and it was there in his days. Frankincense is bred in
Arabia in a private place almost in the middle of the Country, beyond the
Aramites in the Land of the Sabaeans. The Minaei were the first that found it
out; and it is reported, that only 300 Families have interest in it, and they
keep it by succession. The people that are their Neighbors call them sacred.
For when they cut the Tree, where the liquor runs forth, or when they gather
it, they neither come at Funerals nor their Wives. They were wont to gather it,
by cutting the bark of the Tree, at the rising of the Dog Star, because then it
was most full of humors; that which dropped out of the Tree was received in a
Palm Tree covering, Scaliger Exerc. 49. It is there so cheap, that they carine
ships with it instead of Pitch. But of Frankincense is made the best Medicament
for blear and red eyes. It is said to cure in one night, Mathiol. ad l. 1. c.
73. Dioscor. A piece of Frankincense is put on a sharp point and burned, in a
wax candle, then it is quenched in 4. ounces of Rose water; this is often done
even to 30 times, then the water must be strained with a clean cloth, and the
corners of the eyes must be anointed with a feather dipped in it, when the sick
go to bed. If redness and tears increase with great pain, breast-milk will
cure them, if you wash them therewith.

CHAP. XLI. Of Wheat and Thyme.
THere is nothing more fruitful than Wheat; for of one bushel if the ground be
good, as in the Country of Bizacum in Africa, there will come 150 bushells,
Plin. l. 18. c. 7. says, That the Provider sent to Augustus, that grew from
one grain ('it is hardly credible) 400 ears near upon: also he sent to Nero 340
strawes that sprang from one corn. The Fields of Leontini in Sicily yield 100
increase. In the Country of the Senones by the Sea side, one root has born 24
ears, and one bushel has sometimes afforded an hundred, Mathiol. in l. 1.
Dioscor. c. 78. In Asia beyond Bactra, in a certain place Theophrastus writes
it grows so great, that every grain is as great as an Olive stone, Theophrast.
l. 8. c. 4. But he adds, that in Pissoris it is so strong, that he that eats
too much will burst. The Indian Wheat has a stalk like a Cane, that has a
white pith in it, like to Sugarcanes, in the top whereof it puts forth
branches divided and empty. The fruit wherein the Corn is shut up in thin
covers, come forth of the sides of the stalk. The Ear is as great as the apple
of the Pitch-Tree, there are round about it, clear white grains within as great
as Pease, disposed of in 8. or 10. right lines on all sides. From the Top of
the Cod, hang long shoots of the same color with the corn, the Indians call it
Malitz. It is steeped 2 days in water before they sow it; nor do they trust
it, until it be wet with rain. They reap it in 4 months: but that which grows
in Eubaea is ripe in 40 days, Theophrast. lib. cit. Thyme begins about the
Summer Solstice; and honey from thence is successful for Bees and
Bee-masters, Theophrast. l. 6. c. ^. If it put forth, its flowers; otherwise,
the making of honey does not succeed well, the flower perishes if a shower
fall. There runs oil from it of a golden color, when the herb is distilled
through a bath of hot water, when it is green. It tastes like a pome Citron,
Mathiol. in l. 3. Dioscor. c. 37.

CHAP. XLII. Of Tobacco.
TObacco, or Nicotiana from the finder of it, is called also the holy Herb, the
Queens herb; the herb of the holy Cross, and Petum. It is well known to them
that know the Indian Merchandise, and those that have smelt the fume of it in
Britany, France, and the Low Countries. It is sowed when the Moon increases,
and cut down when she decreaseth. There is one kind called the Male, with a
broad leaf; and another called the female, with a narrower leaf, but a longer
stalk. The least seed of it falling of its own accord, lies safe in the coldest
winter; and the next Summer, being carried into many grounds with the wind,
comes up of itself, Camerar. in hort. Nea^der in Tobaccolog. From the seed of
the male, they say the female will spring, if it fall into a ground where
Tobacco grew before, and that so fruitfully, that it will yearly grow up of it
self. But it will not endure the cold; but if it be well preserved, it will
like Citron Trees continue all the year, and remain 4 years without damage,
Monardus de simpl. medicam. As for the forces of it, it will cause thirst, has
an acrimonious taste, it troubles the mind, and makes headache, Neander. They
that drink it too greedily, have fallen down dead, and stupefied for a whole
day, Benzon. l. 1. c. 26. hist. nov. orb. Hence it was that King James of
famous memory King of England writ Misocapnos. For he supposed it weakened the
bodies of his Subjects. Yet many famous men have written high commendations of
it. The Spaniards say, it resists poison. For when the Cannibals had wounded
them with poisoned darts, they cured themselves with the juice of Tobacco,
laying on the bruised leafs, Monard. loc. cit. The Catholic King made trial of
it on a Dog, wounded with a venom^^ weapon, and it cured him. Heurnius writes,
that it ours perfectly the pain of the teeth, and takes away all the dolor.
His words are; When I was vehemently pained with Toothache about a year since,
I boiled Tobacco in water with some Camomil flowers, and I held a spoonful of
the warm decoction in my mouth. I spit it forth, and used this for two hours*
the pain abated: The next day (says he) I went to my Garden in the Subburbs as
I was wont to do, and bending down with my head to pull up some grass, there
ran a moisture out of my nostrills; yellow as Saffron, it smelt like Tobacco,
and all the pain of my teeth was gone. Never did blood, nor any thing but a
phlegmatic matter run forth of my nose in all my life, and I never saw any
deeper yellow, than what ran now out of my nostrills. That it restores the
sight, see Wiburgius ad Schnitz. Epist. 209. A certain Maid had the pupil of
her eye covered; he with the juice of the best Tobacco boiled to an unguent
with May butter, and anointing the Eye outwardly with it, the eye being shut,
effected so much, that none could discern it but those that stood close by.
Clusius says, That the Indians use to make pills with the juice of it and
Cockle-shells bruised, that will stop their hunger for 3. days. It is no
wonder; for by resolving of slime that falls upon the stomachs mouth, it abates
the appetite. Castor Durantes in an Epigram describes the virtues of it, thus:
An herb called Holy Cross does help the sight,
It cures both Wounds and Scabs, and has great might
Against Scrophulous and Cancerous Tumors,
Burnings, and Wild-fires, repressing humors;
It heats, it binds, resolves, and also dries,
Asswages pains, diseases mundisies.
Pains of the Belly, Head or Teeth with ease
It helps, old Coughs, and many a sad disease
Of Spleen and Reins, and Stomach, and more parts,
As Womb, sore Gums, and Wounds with venomed darts
Are cured thereby, with sleep it does refresh,
And covers naked bones with perfect flesh:
For Breast and Lungs, when that we stand in need,
All other herbs Tobacco does exceed.


CHAP. XLIII. Of Trifoly, Teucrium, Thelyphonon, Yew, Thapsia, and Thauzargent.
TRifoly foreshews a tempest at hand, for when it is coming it will rise up
against it. It has been observed that when this herb has plenty of flowers,
it portends many showers and frequent inundations that year; and a few flowers,
show dryness. Fuchs. in herb. It is called Cuccow bread, either because she
feeds of it, or because it comes forth about the time the Cuccow sings; seven
times in a day it has a sweet smell, and seven times in the day it loses it
But pulled up it always holds it, and when a shower is coming, it will smell so
sweet that it will fill all the houses. Teucrion otherwise Hermion neither
bears flowers nor seed. It cures the Spleen, and they say it was so found out
Plin. l. 25. c. 5. when the entralls were thrown upon it, they report, it stuck
to the Spleen, and drew it empty, It is said that swine that feed on the root
of it, dye without a Spleen. Thelyphonum has a root like to a Scorpion, and
put to them it kills them; but if you strew white Hellebour upon them, they
will revive again; it is scarce credible. Theophrast, l. 9. c. 19. The Yew
brings forth berries that are red, and like red Wine; they that eat them fall
into Fevers and Dysenteries. Cattle will dye if they eat the leaves of it, and
do drivel. Theophrastus writes it l. 3. c. 10. but Pliny confutes it, l. 16. c.
10. It is so Venomous in Arcadia, that it kills such as sleep under its
shadows, Ovetan. Sum, c. 78. In India it makes the eyes and mouth of such as
sleep under it to swell. Thapsia grows in the Athenian land* Cattle bred there
will not touch it, but strange Cattle will feed on it, and there follows either
a scowring or death. Theophrastus, l. 9. c. 22. It grew famous by Nero: For he,
when he had his face bruised by his revellings in the night, he anointed it
with Thapsia, wax, and Frankincense, and beyond expectation it was whole the
next day. For it wonderfully takes away bruised marks. Plin. l. 13. c. 22.
Thauzangent is a root in the Western Mauritania of so good smell, that a small
quantity hanged about the roof of the house will make a gallant perfume.
Scalig. Exerc. 142. s. 6.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the Vine.
VInes are sometimes infinite great. For in Campania, those that grow near the
tall Poplar Trees, run up by the boughs of them, with their joints, till they
come to the top, so that he that is bound to gather their grapes, is in danger
of his life. Plin. l. 4. c. 1. Pliny says, they will not easily corrupt. For
the Image of Jupiter in the City Populonia, remained there many years
uncorrupted, and the Temple of Diana of Ephesus, had stairs to go up to the
top, made of one Vine of Cyprus. Some of them do yield fruit thrice a year.
Dalechampius saw it in many places; at Lions especially, in the Garden of
Guilet Caulius. They are called mad Vines. Dalechamp, ad c. 27. s. 16. Plin. At
the end of the Spring they send forth small flowers like Stars, set about with
round scrapings like Silver, of a subspiceous color; These being fallen off
like to a little Star, presently appear the clusters of Grapes, Lemnius in
herb. bibl. c. 2 The smell of them drives away Venomous Beasts; the water that
runs from the Vine, when it is pruned, heals Scabs. Some catch it in a glass
bottle, and set it in the Sun a whole year, in the open air free from rayn.
At last a honey substance congeles, which is of as great virtue as balsome. For
it cleanses, fills with flesh, conglutinates, takes away spots. Water
distilled from the tender leaves of the Vine in May, is good for women that
long; They suffer no harm, though they want it. Sennert. l. 4. p. 2. c. 2. From
Grapes, Wine is pressed that we drink. The virtues of it are diverse as the
Wines are; Lemn. de occult. l. 1. c. 16. The Wines of Poictou make men peevish
and froward (for the Vapors of it prick the brain) but your Rhenish Wines are
more gentle. In the Country of Goritium the Wine is highly commended, and next
to that, is the Wine of Pucinum and Vipacum. Mathiolus, when he had a long time
pains of the Stomach, by experience found the force of it. Livia Augusta, owed
her 82 years of her life to the Wine at Pucinum. Plin. l. 14. c. 6. The
Country people that inhabit Japidia, because they drink Wines near Pucinum
are seldom sick. Galen de Theriaca, says, that the best never grows sour; and
Pliny writes that some have lasted 200 years: when it is corrupted it becomes
Vinegar, the natural heat being resolved. It is of an excellent virtue. For it
hinders tempests, and the ruin of Sailers, and dissipates the ^aul^y air,
suffering no humors to corrupt, Plin. l. 2. c. 48. Pearls are tu^^'d into
Powder by it, as we have an example from Cleopatra, who objected to Antony that
she alone would spend at one supper a hundred thousand Sestertii: and she took
a Pearl out of her ear, the like was not found in the East Indies, and put it
into a saw^^r of Vinegar, and when it was dissolved she drank it up; Plin. l.
9. c. 35. Aqua vitae is also made of it, which is otherwise called Elixir, the
Golden water, the Heaven of the Philosophers, the quintessence, the Soul of
Wine, the Divine water, and the Philosophers Key. Canonher. de admirand. vini.
l. 1. c. 5. Physicians write wonders of it, which are impossible for ignorant
people. It is thin, and the best part of it will fly into the air, that you
would wonder at it. For the heat of it, kept inwardly by help of the motion of
the Air, resolves the thin substance into a Vapor. Cardan. de Aethere. Things
steeped in it, in 24 hours lose their virtues, Heurn. l. 1. prax. Medic. It is
an Antidote for all things, Mathiol. in Dioscor. l. 6. and not only drank but
spurted out of ones mouth into another face, it recalls Epileptick and
hystericall persons, restoring lost speech, Antonius della Scarparia, when he
was 80 years old, said, O Aquavitae for 22 years I owe my life to thee.
Savanarola of the art of making Aquavitae simple and compound. Francis the
first, Duke of Mantua was much delighted with it: for having a cold Stomach he
was troubled with wind. His words are these, That he had tried all remedies,
and found none so good as Aquavitae, Canonher loc. cit. Quercetan shows an
unusual way of trying Wine, in Diaetetica in these words: All the Gascony
Wines that must be transported by Sea, are brought to Bordeaux, there they are
laid in Wine-Cellers for public use, that are wonderful long and broad, so
that they may be truly called the Wine-Market, without the City a little way:
and there they are set in close order, only a place is left between the ranks
to draw Wine at. The Merchants that come to buy Wines and are cunning, care not
so much to taste the Wines that are good, but they will go over all the
Wine-Vessels, and so they can tell by treading on them which are the most
spiritful Wines, and lightest, and those they seal* For they go lighter and
nimbler on the best Wines, than on the grosser and more earthly Wines, for they
make their passage more heavy. There be wonders of it in Pliny l. 14. c. 18. In
Arcadia it makes women barren, and men mad. Theophrast. l. 6. c. 19. In Achaia
it causes abortion; if Bitches, eat Grapes they cast their whelps, Victor l.
7. c. 23. They that drink Traezenium, lose their generative faculty. In Thasias
one kind causes sleep, another makes men wake. In Egypt, the Grape is sweet
and purges the belly, in Lycia it binds it.

CHAP. XLV. Of Xaqua and Zuccarum, or Sugar.
XAqua is a Tree in Hispaniola; The fruit is like to Poppie, and a clear white
water runs forth of it, and whatsoever is sprinkled with it, grows like black,
so that no washing will make it clean. In 20 days it parts from the rind, of
it self. Ovetan Sum. c. 77. There are two kinds of Zuccarum, one from Canes,
another from an herb; There is another kind from an Indian Tree, called
Haeoscer, Scalig. Exerc. 164. But this is scarce Sugar, but the thinner part of
milk compacted by heat, which falling forth of the buds and roots of the
leaves, thickneth into a gum. They say the fruit is like to Camels Testicles;
Out of any part of the Tree cut, Milk runs forth so hot, that it is held for
the best means to take off hair. The Inhabitants make their skins smooth with
this. There are two kinds of the true one is got out of Canes two ways, for
either it is pressed out and boiled to the whiteness of Sugar; or it comes
forth of it self from the reeds, like tears. From the Indies formerly they
sent it, so gathered with their other Merchandise. That which is called
Sugar Candy was carried about, in reeds. Histories testify, it was made
naturally. For at Dathecala in the Indies, it is sold for Merchandise. In St.
Thomas Island, the reeds yield it every Month. In the fifth Month they are
ripe, and are cut down, and are grund and pressed for the juice: what remains
is given to Foul and Hogs, and it will fat them wonderfully, and it will make
them so tender and delicate, that no hens flesh can be better, for those that
are sick, to feed on. Another kind of Sugar, sweats-out wonderful strangely.
The Arabians and Egyptians call it Tigala. They say a little Worm does eat
the herb; whence Sugar swells forth, and grows together in little pieces. It
quenches thirst, is good for the Chest, and takes away a Cough.

CHAP. XLVI. Of other Miracles of some Trees.
NAture is rich; and her riches are so various, that they not only delight our
understanding but exercise our industry. Truly besides what we have said, there
are many wonderful things. In the Island Tylos, there are Trees that bear
Wool, and their fruit is guords, as big as Quinces: these breaking when they
are ripe, show balls of Down or Cotton, of which they make precious linen
garments, Plin. l. 12. c. 10 In great Java they say there is a rare Tree, whose
pith is Iron: it is very small, yet runs from the top to the bottom of the
Plant. The fruit that grows on it, is not to be pierced with Iron. Scaliger
calls it, Exerc. 181. s. 27. (...), In the Island Cimbubon there is another
whose leaves, fallen down upon the earth, do move and creep. It has leaves
like the Mulberry-Tree. They have on both sides like two little feet; pressed,
they yield no liquor. If you touch them, they fly from you. One of them kept
8, days in a dish lived, and moved so often as one touched it; Scalig. Exerc.
112, in Malavar there is a plant that contracts it self, if any one puts his
hand to it; and if you pull back your hand, it recovers it self again. Garzias
ab horto. That which he described from Costa, under the name of Mimosa
hortensis, put your hand to it, it withers; take it away, it grows green again.
The same Author says that there is a certain Tree that is full of fair sweet
flowers all night, but so soon as the Sun rises, it withers: yet whatsoever
this is, it may be ascribed to the tenuity of the Spirits of it. But Linschot
says, there is one that is contrary to this. In Virginia there is an herb
that the leaves are good Silk, and they take it off like a thin shining
Membrane. It is two foot and a half high, the leaves are two foot long, and
half a foot broad. In England, there was made a trial of this in weaving. For
of this plant the whole Web made, was silk and approoved for good. Arioth. in
Verginia, In America there is the flower of Granadilla, in which may be seen
the instruments of Christ's passion, the Nails, the Rod, the Pillar, the Crown,
the Wounds. Mejer de Annat. Scoticis. That Libav. l. 4. de orig. rer. ascribes
to Imagination, And, says he, a friend of mine has a Cherry-stone, upon which
may be seen 120 faces. In the Northern Island there are Rocks of Loadstone. If
Beeches grow upon them, they are turned into Loadstone, Olaus, l. 2. c. 1.
There is also in Musicanum an Indian Tree extreme high, the boughs of it are
above 12 Cubits long, and it not only grows downwards of it self, but it
fastneth in the ground of its own accord, and roots anew, and from thence arise
new Trees; the boughs do thus bow down also, and cause more Trees, and thus
they will grow in ranks, that they will make an Arbor for 400 men to walk
under. Not far from Malacca there is another, that has many roots, and as they
divide severally into parts, so are they of different virtues. For those parts
that look toward the East are an Antidote against poison, but the parts toward
the West are poison. Senar, res, p. 4. c. 17. A certain fiery root cut in
pieces, if it be set right over against a burning Candle, at first it makes it
blink, and at last it puts it out, and that has been often proved. Biker in.
proph. s. 2. There was a firr Tree very admirable, seen in a Ship, which
brought it from Egypt by the command of Caius the Emperor. There was a
foursquare obelisk set up in the Vatican, and he brought four blocks of the
same stone to support it. The thickness of that Tree was as much as four men
could fathom. Plin. l. 16. c. 40. The root of the herb Aproxis takes fire a
great way off, Plin. l. 24. c. 17.

From Trees in India, as high as Cedars or Cypress Trees, and with leaves
broader then Palm Tree leaves, (they are called Carpi^n) an oil distills that
is taken with wool pressed against the Trees, and you may smell it five
furlongs off. In the same Author we read of the Tree Parebo that grows only in
Kings Gardens; it is as great as an Olive Tree, without flower or fruit; but
under the earth the roots are as thick as a man's arm. Nine inches of it will
draw Gold, Silver, Brass, Stones, or any thing but Amber; but an ell of it
will draw Sheep and Lambs. The weight of an Obolus cast into water, will make
it congeal; and wine also, that you may work it in your hands like wax, yet the
day after it will resolve again, Libav. l. 2. debitum c. 6. this seems to be a
stinking ly, if it be not well interpreted; but surely a Philosopher cannot
want that interpretation: you shall find it loc. cit.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Wonders of Trees.
SOme are found that bear no leafs; And Pliny l. 17. c. 25. tells us of a Vine
and Pomegranate Tree, that did bear fruit on the body or stem, not on the
branches or boughs; and of a Vine that had fruit without leafs; and of Olive
Trees, that the berries remained when the leafs were fallen. We said, that an
Olive Tree burned down quite, will grow again; and in Boeotia Fig Trees eaten
with Worms will bud again, At Pausania in Arcadia, the Oak and Olive Tree will
grow both upon one root, Dalechamp. ad loc. cit. The same at Corinth, called
Hercules Club, from a wild Olive Tree, took root and grew again: When Xerxes
came to Laodicea, a Plane-Tree became an Olive Tree. A Tree sank into the
ground at Cumanum, a strange thing, a little before the Civil Wars of Pompey;
only a few boughs were to be seen. At Cyzicum before Mithridate's siege, a
Fig Tree grew out of a Bay Tree, when he with 100000 men, and many horse;
fought against that City, Strabo l. 12. A green Palm Tree was seen to grow up
amongst the Tralles in the Temple of Victory under Caesar's Statue, where the
stones joined, and it was of a great bigness, Valor. l. 1. c. 6. Also at Rome,
in the Capitol, in the head, (some explain that to be the top of the house)
twice in the War with Perseus did a Palm Tree spring forth, presaging Victory
and Triumph. When this was thrown down with Tempests, in the same place a
Fig Tree grew up. When M. Messalus, and C. Cassius were Censors, A. P.
Sulpicius being Pro-Consul, Letters were brought from Macedonia with news, That
a Bay Tree grew up in the stern of a Galley. Lastly, the year before this, in
Silesia a little Tree in the battlements of the walls of the Church was changed
into a Palm Tree: Religion was changed after that. Not without being revenged;
for the change of the Species gives us hope of it.

The End of the Fifth Classis.
OF Miracles of Nature.
The Sixth Classis. In which are contained the Wonders of Birds.
Seneca Nature. quaest. l. 2. c. 32. ALso those things are not out of our power,
which are immovable, or for their swiftness, equal to all the World, are
like to things without motion.
CHAP. 1. Of the Eagle.
THe Eagle challenges the first place; nor that it is the best dish at the
Table, for none will eat it; but because it is the King of Birds. It is of the
kind of birds of prey. The right foot of it is greater than the left; the brain
is so hot, that mingled with Hemlock juice, and drank in powder, it will make
one mad. It drinks not, because it seems the blood of what it preys upon,
suffices it. But in old age, when the Beak is crooked with dryness, it
preserves it self by drinking, Aelian. They have been seen a cubit in
largeness, and some young one, whose wings stretched out would reach 7. else.
The Claws were bigger than a great man's fingers, and the thighs greater than a
Lions. Gesner says, that was seen at a place between Dreson and Mysnia: when
it lies down it takes a stone called Ae^ites, which because they grow so hot
as if they boiled, does temper their heat. When the young ones are hatched, she
holds them in her Talons against the Sun; and having proved them to be
legitimate, she takes them on her wings and carries them; the strongest of
them, when she has them aloft, she lets them fall, and then she flies and
meets them, and takes them up again. When they are old enough, she drives them
forth of her nest and quarter. The female is so falacious, that being trod 30
times in a day, if the male come to her again, she will run to him. It is so
quick-sighted, that flying over the Sea, out of man's view, it will discern the
smallest fish: And as for its smell, it will fly to carcases 500 miles
distant. It roars like a Bull; but the young ones are mute, because their
tongue is hindered by moisture. It is an enemy to the Cranes: therefore when
they fly over Mount Taurus from Cilicia, they take stones in their mouths, and
stop their clarying, and fly over it in the night. When the sight, bill, and
wings fail her, she flies above the Clouds, and there by the Suns heat she
recovers her sight. She when she is become extreme hot, plunges into the water,
then she flies to her nest, grows feavorish, casts her feathers, is fed by her
young ones, and renews her self; but sooner, if she can find Serpents to feed
on.

CHAP. II. Of the Hawke.
THe Hawke is of diverse magnitudes according to its Sex and Country. The
females are the greater, because their heat is less, Calent. in Epist. It has
a great heart that enclines toward the breast with a blunt point; the Milt is
so small, that it can hardly be seen, Aristot. de part. animal. c. 38. It is
full of feathers, which when it is young it casts 4. times. It is not very
generative, for the over great heat thickneth the seed; also the moisture of it
is sent to the feathers, the Tallens, and legs: yet it is so venereous, that
the female will return 30 times a day, if she be required, Alb. l. 10. c. 8.
She flies from Carrion, and if it come to a man's carcass, it will not feed
thereon. She drinks, when she can light on no prey for blood. She flies
sometimes so high, that she cannot be seen. In the Air she will turn on her
back, and stretches out her tail, back, and wings, and lies upon them, Aelian.
It has wonderful ingenuity; The bird she takes in the Evening she holds under
her feet, and when the Sun rises she lets it fly away, and if she meets it
again, she will never pursue it. When her eyes grow dim, she seeks for
Hawkwort, and rubs it, and with the juice of it she anoints her eyes, Aelian l.
2. de anim. c. 43. She seems to lament the death of Man, and will cast the
earth on his eyes, and if he be not buried, she will throw Earth to bury him.
The thigh bone of it put toward gold, does draw it to it with delight, Aelian.
l. 4. c. 43. Pigeons so soon as they hear its noise fly away; hens eggs, if
they sit, will be spoiled; small birds are so frighted at the sight of her,
that you may take them off the hedges with your hands. The chief disease she
has is the molting of her feathers. It happens, before Nilus overflowes the
fields, that is, in August. When the South wind blows they stretch forth their
wings, and grow hot with the heat of the wind; when this is wanting, they fan
themselves with their wings in the warm Sun. By this warmth the pores are
opened, the old feathers fall, and new grow up. The Egyptians thought they
lived 700 years.

CHAP. III. Of the Assalon and Heron.
ASsalon, is called Smerillus and Merillus. It will so pursue Larks, that it
will follow them into a hot Furnace, or pit of water, or to men's clothes,
Cressent. l. 10. c. 13. It fights with the Crows and Foxes, breaking the eggs
of the one, and killing the Cubs of the other. To kill Herons, in England is a
capital Crime, wherefore there are many of them in that place. They are so
continent, that they are sad 40 days when they are upon venereous actions,
Glycas l. 1. Animal. If they dung upon a Hawk, they corrupt and burn its
feathers. When a showring is coming, they fly above the Clouds. They swallow
shellfish, shells and all; but when they think their heat has opened them,
they cast them up again, and eat the fish. They lie in wait for fish very
cunningly; for they stand so against the Suns beams, that their shadow may not
be seen to drive them away: But the Country men of Colen say they have such
force, that if they put but a foot into the water, they will draw the fish to
them as with a bait. Gesner writes, that he read in a German Manuscript, that
if their feet be distilled by descent, and a man's hands be anointed with the
oil, they will come to ones hands that they may be taken. Franciscus Vallesius
the first, King of France kept them so tame, that though they be wild by
nature, they would come home of themselves; some say, they sweat blood in
Treading, but Albertus confutes that.

CHAP. IV. Of the Horn-Owl and Aluco.
A Sin, or Otus, and a Night-Crow, makes such a noise, as a man does that is
chilled with cold; they cry hu, hu. With his cry; and the bird Cyncramus, he
leads the Quails when they depart hence. He imitates those things he sees men
do: Also they watch fowlers standing over against them; wherefore they seem to
anoint their eyes with a kind of bird-lime, then they depart and leave it in
the holes; the Otus or Do^rill comes and glews his eyes together, and so is he
taken. There are two kinds of Aluco's, the greater, and the less. The greater
Aluco has this property, that he winks with his eyelid; he has no little
ears like horns, but in place of them he has a kind of Crown-circle made of
feathers that covers his whole face; small feathers rising above his eyes; like
a high ridge of a hair above the eyelids; and on both sides they go about by
the temples, and meet under the chin, like a woman's ketcher. The lesser is
found in the clifts of Oaks that the Worms have eaten hollow. If he take any
living creature he swallows it whole; for his throat is so wide, that he will
swallow bits bigger than eggs; nor does he eat any meat till he have plumed the
feathers and hairs, and cast away the bones.

CHAP. V. Of a Goose.
GEese in the Kingdom of Senega, are of diverse colors. Whiter than Swans, and
with red heads, are bred in Hispaniola, Cadamust. And Odoricus a foro Julii
says, That in the Kingdom of Mancum in India the superior, they have a bone
above their head as big as an Egg, of a blood red color, and a skin hanging
half way under the throat. Aldrovandus thinks, it is of the kinds of
Onocrotalus. Strabo l. 6. Geograph. says, there are none in the South part of
Arabia. They live many years, Albertus says 60, Gratalorus 200 years. But
Aldrovandus writes, he should not take his oath for it. Gardanus thinks it not
fabulous, because their flesh is so sound. For it is known, that a Wild-Goose
hung up for 3. days continually, would not grow tender, and cast to the dogs
they would not eat it. But amongst all kind of Geese, that is the most
wonderful, which in Scotland they call the Soland Goose. In Descriptione
Scotiae, Boethius writes thus of it; Above other Islands, Maya of D. Hadrian is
noble, for the relics of him and his fellows, who suffered Martyrdom for
Christ's sake. A Fountain of most sweet water runs forth of a very high rock in
the midst of the Sea, a wonderful miracle of Nature. The Fort Bass that is
invincible to man's forces stands upon it, and exceeds all the rest in
strangeness. Also there is a Rock situate in an arm of the Sea, that has a
narrow entrance, a Fisherman's Boat can scarce pass into it; that has no
houses made in it by art of man; yet is it hollow, and has habitations as
convenient in it, as if men had built them. But they are by this means the more
forcible; whatsoever is in it, is full of wonderful things; For those Birds
which in our Mother Tongue we call Soland Geese, not unlike to those which
Pliny calls Water-Eagles, dwell here in abundance, and hardly any where else.
These so soon as they come at the beginning of the Spring, they do bring so
much wood with them to build their nests, that the Inhabitants that dwell there
(nor do they repine at it) carry away as much as serves them for fuel a whole
year. They feed their young ones with the most choice fish. For if they have
caught one, and they see a better swimming at the bottom of the Sea, they let
that fall and plunge themselves vio^^ntly into the waters to catch the other.
When they have brought (...) fish to their young ones, they let men take away
what they please ^^llingly, and fly again to catch more. Also they let the
people (...) their young ones without resistance; whence there accrues to (...)
Governor of the Castle a mighty revenue yearly: for pulling off their skins
with the fat, they make an oil of them of great worth. Also they have a small
gut that is full of oil of great virtue, for it cures the hip and joint Gouts;
so that this Bird serving for all men's use, is inferior to none, but that he
is not common to be had: So far Boethius. When I was in Scotland, I smelt of
them, and they smelt like Herrings.

CHAP. VI. Of the Kings Fisher, of Ducks, and the Bird Emme.
IT is reported, that the Kings-Fishers build their nests of the hardest fish
bones, and the sharpest thorns, and are seldom seen but at Sea, where the
waters are salt. They breed about the middle of winter. Wherefore when it is a
calm Winter, they call it Halcyon days, 7. days before the midst of winter,
and 7. days after the midst of winter. In the first he makes his nest, in
these last he breeds, Plin. l. 5. c. 8. The nest is made like a Pineapple, or
a glass with a long neck, Albert. It is so artificially made, that it cannot
be easily cut with a sword. But Aristotle says, that if you break and bruise
it with your hands, and then break it with an Iron, you may easily destroy it:
That the Sea may not enter into it, she makes her hole of a spungy matter that
will swell, and the swelling shuts up the entrance; Those that go in, do press
against it, and so press out the water and find passage. The She of them so
loves the He, that she is always with him, and in old age carries him on her
back; and they both die in copulation, Plutarch. de solert. animal. House Ducks
are known almost to all men; those of Lybia are of a middle stature, between a
Goose and a Duck. Their genitall member is so great as a finger is thick, and
five times as long, and is red as blood, Bellon. Look on their eyes by the Sun,
and you shall see a black spot on the top, which is in the Beaks of them,
Scalig. They make no noise, though they have both Lungs and Windpipe. When our
Country People would keep abundance of them, let them keep two of our Ducks for
each of those Drakes, and so they will lay abundance of Eggs. But the young
Ducks so bred, will never procreate again, as other living Creatures that are
bred of diverse kinds. In Ancyra there are some that blow like a Horn, as those
that sound when horsemen march in orders, Auger. They love their liberty so
well, that being kept 3. years in a Cage, and fed, if they can find opportunity
they will fly away. There is such plenty of the wild ones, that they cover all
the waters; but they live no where but in warm Countries. In the Winter, that
they may not be Frozen in, by an instinct of nature, they swim circularly and
on one side, they keep the waters open, and cry so loud that they may be heard.
When the cold grows too violent they fly aloft to the Sea, Olaus, l. 19. c. 6.

The Hollanders brought the Bird Emme from Java; it is twice as great as a
Swan, black and with black wings. But out of two originalls there proceed two
more, as it is with the Ostrich. It wants wings and a tongue; on the top of the
head, it has a buckler as hard as a Tortesse-shell, like a Target. It would
swallow Apples as big as ones fist, and lumps of Ice; also burning Coals, and
all without any hurt. Aldrovand.

CHAP. VII. Of Barnacles.
THere is a bird in Britanny that the English call, Barnacles, and Brant Geese,
the Scotch call them Clakguse; It is less than a wild Goose, the breast is
somewhat black, the rest As^-colour. It flies as wild Geese do, cries, and
haunts Lakes, and spoils the Corn. The learned question the original of it
very much. For some say it breeds from rotten wood, some from Apples, some of
fruit that is like to heaps of leaves; which when, at the time appointed, it
falls into the water that is under it, it revives and becomes a living
Creature. It grows in the Isle Pomonia in Scotland toward the North. And of
this opinion is Isidore, Alexander ab Alexandro, Olaus Magnus, Gesner, Boethius,
and others; contrarily Albertus, and those that are of his mind, hold that they
breed by copulation. The Hollanders from their own experience in Greenland,
affirm they found some Barnacles sitting on eggs, and had young ones. But these
things may agree together, for things bred of corruption may have eggs, and
that seems also most clear that Boethius has written concerning them. That
every man may perceive they are not fabulous, I shall set it down. Now it
remains that we speak of those Geese which they call Clak-Geese; and which
commonly they think amiss, to be bred upon Trees in these Islands, of which we
were for a long time very inquisitive, and have found by experience. For I
think the Sea between, is the greater cause of their generation than any thing
else. For things are bred in the Sea variously; as we have observed. For if you
throw wood into the Sea, in time Worms breed in it, that by degrees have a
head, feet, wings; and lastly, feathers. Lastly they are as great as Geese,
when they are full grown, they fly upward as other birds do, using their wings
to carry them through the air, which is as clear as day, and was seen in the
year from the Virgins conception, 1490, Many looking on. For when some of this
wood was carried by the Waves to the Castle, Pethschl^ge, in great quantity;
they that first espied it, wondered, and ran to the Governor and tell him this
strange news. The Governor came, and bid them Saw the Log in sunder; then they
saw an infinite sort of living Creatures that were partly Worms, some not
formed, others were, and were partly birds; and some of them were callow, some
had feathers. Wondering at the miracle, at the Governors command, they carried
that Log into the Church of St. Andrew at Tira where it yet remains full of
Worm holes as it was. The like to this two years after, was brought into Tham
by the tide, to Bruthe Castle; many ran to see it, which again, two years
after at Leith in the Harbor, all Edinburgh came to see. For a great ship,
that had the name and the ensign of Christopher, when it had been 3 whole
years at Anchor in one of the Hebrides* was brought back hither, and drawn on
land: that part of it that was always under the Sea, had the beams eaten
through, and was full of Worms of this kind, partly unformed, not yet like
birds, and partly those that were perfect Birds. But it may be some man will
cavil at it, and say, that there is such a virtue in the boughs and stocks of
Trees that grow in those Islands; and that the Christopher it self was made of
the wood, growing in those Hebrides: wherefore I shall willingly declare what I
saw 7, years since. Alexander Gallovidianus Pastor of the Church of Kil^y (a
man besides his great integrity; incomparable for his care in study of wonders)
when he had pulled forth some Sea weeds, from the stalks and boughs, and
likewise from the root, that grew up to the top where they joynd, he perceived
some shell fish-breed: he frighted with the novelty of the matter; presently
opened them to know farther, and then he wondered far more than before. For, he
saw no flesh shut up in the shells, but (which is wonderful) a bird: Wherefore
he ran presently to me whom he a long time knew, desirous to know such new
things, and showed it me, who was not more astonished at the sight of it as I
rejoiced at the occasion to see a thing so rare, and unheard of. By this, I
think it is evident enough, that these are not the seeds of breeding of Birds
in fruits of roots of Trees, but in the Sea it self, which Virgil and Homer
rightly term the Father of all things. But because they saw that come to pass
when the Apples fell from the Trees that grevv on the shore into the waters,
that by continuance of time Birds appeared in them, they were of that opinion,
that they believed the Apples were turned into Birds, etc. Thus far Boethius.
Reader thou may judge of it: for my part I admire at Gods providence, and at
the end of this Classis by way of Appendix, I shall add some thing out of the
discourse of Majerus concerning the Tree-Bird.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Owl and Catarrhacta.
THe Owl builds in the highest Rocks, that sometimes it is hard to find her
eggs; for its young, Pliny says, comes forth by the tail out of the egg,
because the eggs being reversed by weight of their heads, brings the hinder
part to be fostered by the dam. It is said, That in Churches she drinks up the
oil; she not only kills Birds, but Hares also. A Duck has been found in one
cut open. The brain of it with Goose-grease does wonderfully join wounds. The
Catarrhacta has a wonderful way of sitting on her eggs, if that be true that
Oppianus has written. She lays Sea-weed upon her eggs on a rock, and so
leaves them open to the winds. Hence the male catches those eggs he thinks sit
to breed the males, and the female does the like for the females; then they
carry them up on high with their Talons, and so let them fall into the Sea;
doing this often, they grow hot by motion, and the young ones are hatched.

CHAP. IX. Of the Feldifare and Goat-Sucker.
THe Feldifare makes her nest in the thickets; the walls are moss, wool,
downy herbs; the groundwork is heath. They have six young ones, and they are
so unlike their old ones, that they have scarce any mark like them; Because he
flies, he does a little imitate the other Birds notes, he catches those that
fly to him, and is easily taken himself; for when he sees a bird shut up in a
cage, he flies upon it to invade it. The Caprimulgus goes into the folds of
shepherds, and sucks the Goats teats for milk; the udder loses its force by
this injury, and the Goats that are so sucked grow blind, Pliny l. 10. c. 40. He
sees little in the day, but is quick-sighted at night, Arist. histor. l. 9. c.
30. In Candie it makes such an horrible noise, that it will fright the
Inhabitants, Bellonius.

CHAP. X. Of the Cuckoo.
THe Cuckoo is a Bird of a very cold constitution of body, whence she is so
fearful, that all the birds offend her, Plin. l. 10. c. 9. she breeds in other
birds nests; especially, the Woodculver's, the hedge-Sparrow's, the Lark, the
Red-breast and the Nightingall. If their nests be empty, she will not turn in
there, but if there be eggs, she breaks some and sucks them, and lays her own
in the room; in some nests they say she breaks them all, Arist. l. 6. c. 7. The
young ones hatched and known by the bird, are said to be beaten, and to fly away
to their own dam. Note the goodness of nature! they say she lays in those
Birds nests that feed on common meats; she feeds on Worms, Insects, and Corn.
The Grasshoppers before the dog-dayes when they hear the Cuckoo sing, run upon
her in troops, and they get under her wings and kill her, Isidor. l. 12. c. 8.
They are said to be bred of Cuckoo spittle. In winter she casts her feathers,
and changes her color, Arist. 9. histor. c. 43. In a Mountain of Greece where
many Cuckowes breed, it is said that a Holly Tree grows there, that what
living Creature soever sits upon it, is glewed fast as with birdlime, except
the Cuckoo, Plin. l. 30. c. 10. In what place soever you first hear the Cuckoo
sing, if you make a circle about your right foot, and dig up that compass of
earth, no fleas will breed, wheresoever that is spread.

CHAP. XI. Of the Crow.
IT is certain, that in the New World the Crows are white; and Alphonsus King
of Cicily had one. They say they grow white if the eyes be anointed with the
brain or fat of a Cat, and be put under a white (...) in a cold place. They
flock together to a fruitful field; but two at once, where the field is not
fruitful. He has many notes, they say 64, the proper note is ^roking, which
he makes, being changed with no passion or variety of weather. He longs for raw
flesh, and corrupt, and that dyed of it self; if he refuse this, it is an ill
omen, as Thucidides observed in the Plague at Athens. Julius Caesar Moderatus
Ariminensis, learned by experience, that he vomits up again the bones and the
small feet. Hyginus denies, that he can drink when he eath eaten figs, because
then his throat is pierced through. He casts off his young ones if they be
white; though they write, that seven days after they are hatched, they become
black. Cassiodorus thinks out of the Psalmist, that they then live upon dew. A
tame Crow at Erfurd took money off of the Table and kept it, and did so exactly
call Conrade the Cook when he was hungry, that you would believe it were a man's
voice; then he pricked holes in a Musick-book that he found, as if he
understood Music, Scalig. E^erc. ^37. Barbarus observed, that he carried fire
in his mouth when Lightning fell. Some think he catches sparks of fire,
instead of pieces of flesh* when exhalations take fire in Lightning. He is said
to live 180 years. Indeed in a City of France, Corvatum, one lived 100 years,
Albertus 9. hist. c. 10. A certain Physician that was famous in Pliny his days,
burnt two Crows to ashes taken out of the nest in the month of March, and
being made into fine powder, gave them to people for the Epilepsie; one dram
weight twice or thrice in a day, with water of the decoction of Castorium.

CHAP. XII. Of the Rook, and Chrysaethos.
IN Britany there is abundance of Rooks, because the Sea washes it on all
sides; and in the grounds that are moist there breed abundance of Worms for
their food, Cardanus. Ludovicus Rhodiginus saw a white one, with a black head,
not far from the walls of Rhodigium, l. 17. Antiq. lect. c. 11. He loves Nuts
chiefly, which if he cannot break, he lets them fall upon stones, Aelian l. 3.
c. 9. They do not inconsiderately couple; for when one dies, the other lives
single always after. When Storks fly beyond Sea, this leads them. It is so
industrious, that Merthes King of Egypt had one that would carry letters
whither he sent him, Porphyr. de abstin. ab animal. When she is slain and
remains dead till she stincks, she draws mice, if you lay her in a place where
you may kill them, Gesner. The Chrysaethus has a tongue like a man's, armed on
both sides toward the roots with two horny hooked appendices. The length is
sometimes from the beak to the claws four hands breadth and a half, the
breadth is eight when the wings are stretched out. It lays but one egg; if it
lay two, one is rotten.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Pigeon.
THe Pigeon when she lays two eggs, the one egg will bring a male, the other a
female; but because the heat is greater in the male, he is said to be first
hatched, Paul. a Castro. When the young ones are brought forth, she thrusts the
salt Earth into their mouths, which she has first fitted in her own, to
prepare them to receive some meat, and to implant fruitfulness into them, and
to raise their appetite, Athen. 9. hist. c. 24. Many things prove them to be
apt to learn. One of them pecked corn out of Mahomet's ear. When Leyden was
besieged, some of them carried Letters, Lipsius. The same was done at the siege
of the Buss. Diverse men use diverse remedies to keep them in the Dove-houses,
and to allure others thither. Some stir Man's blood up and down in an earthen
vessel for a quarter of an hour, with Pease, and then anoint Pigeons with it,
and cast the pease to them to eat, Gesner. Some hang the skull of an old man in
the Dove-house, Albertus. Some hang a piece of the halter that a man was hanged
with, on rheir windows, Pallad. l. 3. c. 44. Pliny (l. 11. c. 37,) writes, That
there is poison in man's teeth that will kill young unfeather'd Pigeons. We have
it from the secrets of the Egyptians, that such as feed on Pigeons flesh will
never be infected with the Plague. Hence in times of pestilence only Princes
feed on them. Cardanus prescribes them with their broth. Their dung is so hot,
that being fired by the Sun, it has fired houses, says Galen. The same Author
uses it for a hearing remedy; and being bruised dry with the seed of Cresses,
some apply instead of Mustard for a rubisicative. Anno 1550. there was one
taken in Germany with 4. feet, and 2. bellies; It was brought to the Emperor,
and Electors; who all wondered at it.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Swan.
THere are abundance of Swans in many places. In Moravia a Province of Scotland
there is a Lake called Spina, it is noted for multitudes of Swans. For therein
there grows a certain herb whose seed they feed greedily on; and therefore it
is called Swans meat. The nature of that herb is, that cast into water it will
never putrify. Hence it is, that though the Lake be extended about five miles,
and was wont, as men remember, to abound with Fish and Salmons; since that
began to spring up, it has increased by degrees, and has made that Lake
fordable, and that men cannot swim in it; nor is there any more any great Fish
therein, Boethius in descript. Scotiae. The internal constitution of Swans is
wonderful, Aldrovandus dissected them. The Intestines were 14. spans and a
hand breadth long; and many of them were covered with fat inwardly, as thick as
ones thumb, which served instead of a caul; which being not intricate with many
windings and turnings, but only by a single revolution are turned back into
themselves inwardly, with a middle rundle, perchance some of the nutriment
might pass by nor distributed; but nature, to help this inconvenience, has
fastened two blind guts; a hands breadth between the anus and their beginning:
the right intestine passing between, which should make amends for the windings
of the guts that are deficient. The gullet is of a wonderful structure. For
the sharp artery that accompanies the wesand under it, descending to the
throat, when it comes there, does not tend directly to the Lungs as in other
Creatures, but is elevated above the chanel bones, and is inserted into a rib
of the breast bone, or Sternon. And this rib is not made of one single bone,
but of two side ones, and a third from above, made for a covering to lie upon
these; and it is like a scabberd or sheath, and serves for the same use. When
the Artery comes to the end of it, it is bent backwards beneath like a Serpent
in fashion of the letter S; and by and by it goes forth again beneath the
foresaid part of this covering that was placed above it, and ascending to the
middle of the channel bones, it leans upon their coupling as on a prop; and
being so upheld, it is again bent backwards like a Trumpet, and going under the
hollow of the Thorax, before it comes to the lungs, it makes as it were another
Larynx, cut athwart, and with a little bone as long as this is broad, and which
is covered with a thin membrane; it represents a hollow pipe, or an Organ pipe,
in figure and composition, which are open in the nether part of them with the
like fissure. Under this Larynx the artery is parted into two channels, each of
which in the middle are stretched out wider, and stick forth, and are
distributed, going directly to the very small Lungs, that are wholly fastened to
the sides behind. This is a wonderful composition, and it serves for the
breathing and voice. For when in the bottom of Lakes she seeks for her food,
she needed a long neck, lest by long continuance she should be in danger to be
suffocated by such an Artery. And indeed whilst for half an hour almost she
thrusts down her head into the water, she takes breath by that part of the
Artery which is open in the sheath we spoke of in the breast. As for its
singing, some say she sings before her death, and some deny it. Oppianus says,
she sings early before Sun rising; but as she is very near her death, she sings
on the Sea-shores, but not so loud in her old age. The West wind, he adds, is
observed by them when they sing, when they are feeble and their strength is
spent. The fashion of their sharp artery seems to make good this opinion.

CHAP. XV. Of the Stork.
THe Storks of old time about Fidena, neither made any nests, nor fed their
young ones. Also at the Lake Larius in Italy beyond Poe, a pleasant place with
small Trees, they are hardly seen, Pliny, The Author of the book of Nature
writes, that they neither come into, nor will inhabit a City in Germany where
no tithes are paid. They are traveling birds; but it is a question whether all
or not. Many as if they were dead, were drawn forth in Fishers nets, and these
were joined together, and had their bills thrust into their anus, together, and
being hot in Mineral waters they lived again. In Lorenge it is certain, that
it so happened, Anno 1467, as Campofulgosus reports, l. 1. memorab. when they
depart, they meet all at a set place of rendevouz, and will leave none of their
company behind. It is observed, that they are seldom seen after the Ides in
August; when they are costive they thrust their bills into their Anus, and give
themselves a Clyster, that brings forth the faeces, and thence Chirurgions
learned that art. They are very chaste and grateful. One of them in upper
Vesalia bade his Host farewell when he departed, and when he returned, he
saluted him again. And not content with a vocal gratitude, he brought him a
root of green Ginger. Another picked out the Eyes of one that lay with his
Hostess when his Host was abroad. Another finding out the adultery of his mate
in his absence, brought more company and tore her to pieces. The Stork carries
his aged Parents upon his shoulders, and feeds them out of his mouth* Whence
the word of gratitude is (...), Gesner. By the ^xample of (...) it is apparent,
that she foreshews things future; for he, as Aeneas Sylvius writes, unless he
had seen Storks from the high Towers in Aquileia, would have departed thence;
and supposing that to be a token of taking the City, he held on his purpose,
and shortly wal^ it, when he had besieged it 3. years. There are none in
England as Cl: Bandarcius says.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Faulcon.
A Faulcon is so strong, that when he strikes a bird, he will ^ut him in two,
from head to tail. A Sea-Swallow called Drepanis, a little Bird about Lakes,
when she hears the Castrel, will rather let men stone her, than she will rise.
She is wont to be sick of a disease the Faulconers call the Filandre. That is,
a kind of worms not far from their reins, near to which they are wrapped up in a
thin and proper membrane: they are as small as hairs, and half an ell long, it
may be from their first original; unless you prevent them, they will eat up
the principal parts and the heart. The Gyrsaulcons are of diverse kinds; They
are some white found in Moscovy, Norway, Ireland. They are bold: If one of them
be let fly at five Cranes, he will follow them all till he have killed them.
The food of it reserved in its Cave, it will take in order. She never wets her
self with water, but only with sand. She loves the cold so well, that she will
always delight to stand upon ice, or upon a cold stone: sometimes untaught she
is sold for 50 Nobles. There is a Faulcon called Ru^eus, because the spots,
that are white in the rest, are red and black in this kind; yet they seem not
to be so, but when she stretches forth her wings. The cause of this redness
is a feeble color infused into the superficies of the body, and inflaming the
smoaky moisture, which is put forth to breed the feathers.

CHAP. XVII. Of a Hen and Cock.
HEns in the Kingdom of Senega are thrice greater than ours; there are many
near to Thessalonica; some lay two eggs, that is with two yolks, which are
parted by a partition, that they may not be confounded. Aristot. in mirabil.
reports, that some have laid ^^ double ones, and to have hatched them; one
chicken was greater than another, and at last it became a Monster. In Macedonia
there was one Hen which once laid 18 eggs, and hatched two young chickens at
once, says Pierius l. 24. Hieroglyph. But their eggs* as also d^uer* birds
eggs, are first conceived above, where the partition is, where first it is seen
to be faint and white, as Aristot. writes; than red and bloody; and as it
increases, it becomes all yellow; but as it more increases, it is
distinguished, so that the yellow part is inward, and the white goes outwardly
about it; when it is perfect, it is finished and comes forth of the shell, soft
at first hatching, but presently it grows hard. The place of its perfection is
the Matrix it self into which they fall, Aldrovand. l. 14. Ornithol. Some
report also, that a Cock lays an egg when he is 9. or 14. years old; and they
suppose it proceeds from seed putrified, or ill humors concurring together. It
is thought to be round, and to be laid about the rising of the Dog Star. For
the expulsive faculty being then weak, is helped in an aged Cock by the outward
heat. With Ferrans Imperatus an Apothecary, one was seen that was long
fashioned, Aldrovand. The Cocks are wonderful falacious, for they will tread
the Hens 50 times a day, and they have been seen to ejaculate their seed when
they but saw the Hen, or heard her note, Aelian. There was an old Law, as
Plutarch says, in Libro, Number bruta ratione careant, That if one Cock trod
another, he should be burnt alive. When he finds he is too full of blood, he
will scratch his comb till he fetch blood. All men know he Crows in the
morning. Some say the cause is, the Love he has to the Sun; some, to his
venery; others to his desire of meat. The Mahumetans say, they answer a Cock
that crows in heaven, Keckerm: in Physicis. The first reason seems something;
for he will crow when he is full also, and after copulation; also he crows
when the Hen is present; but when he is gelt he crows no more, Plin. Yet l.
29. c. 4. he says, That, a circle of Vine-twigs tied about his neck, he will
not sing; Albertus says, if his head and forehead be anointed with oil. He is
at great Amity with the Kings-Fisher, that if they be both in the same house,
and the Kings-Fisher dye, the Cock will dye with hunger. They that have fed on
Fox flesh boiled, are free for two months from their Treachery, Boethius.

As for a Dunghill Cock, Gesner says, he found it in a German Manuscript;
that a Nobleman having tried all remedies for pains of the Colic, and
finding none; at length he drank a small cup of Capons-grease unsalted, boiled
in water. But (says he) you must drink the fat that swims on the top, as hot
as you can.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Crane and the Woodwall.
THe Cranes travel all over the World. Yet Aldrovandus says, he scarce
believes that they will live willingly in all Countries, l. 20. The Aspera
arteria of them is set into the flesh on both sides, at the Breast Bone: whence
you may hear a Crane afar off. They travel, but no time is set; yet how swiftly
they fly, is manifest by the example of Cyrus, who was said so to have disposed
of his Posts at certain stages, that when one was weary, another should proceed
night and day, that they out-went the Cranes that flew. When they fly, they
keep a triangular sharp angled figure, that they may the easier pierce through
the Air that is against them. That Crane that gathers the rest together, will
correct them, as Isidorus says. When one is hoarse, another succeeds. When
they light upon the Earth to feed, the Captain of them holds up his head to
keep watch for the rest, and they feed securely. Before they take rest, they
appoint another Sentinel, who may stand and ward with his neck stretched forth,
whilst the rest are asleep, with their heads under their wings, and standing
upon one leg. The Captain goes about the Camp, and if there be any danger, he
^laries. Lest they should sleep too soundly, they stand upon one foot, and hold
a stone in the other above ground, that if at any time being weary they should
be oppressed with sleep, the stone falling might awaken them. They love their
young ones so much, that they will fight whether shall give them their
breeding. Albertus saw a male^Crane cast down a female and kill her, giving her
eleven wounds with his bill, because she had drawn away his young ones from
following of him. This fell out at Colen, where tame Cranes use to breed. Those
are fables that men relate of the Battles between the Pigmies and the Cranes.
The Woodwall hangs up her nest on the boughs like a Cup, that no four-footed
beast can come at it. The nest is like to the fashion of a Rams-stones, Albert.
Magn. Some say there is Silk ^ound in it, and that the nest is built not far
from the water, made of moss, and the cords it hangs by are horse hairs. She
leaves Italy, when Arcturus arises. As she hangs down, she sleeps upon her
feet, hoping for more safety thereby, Plin. l. 10. c. 32. When she comes into
Germany, there is great hopes that Winter for Snow and Frost is gone.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Chough.
IT is thought that the Choughs feed on Locusts besides Corn, because the
Inhabitants of the Island Lemnos were reported to worship these birds, because
they flew to destroy the Locusts, Plin. l. 10. c. 29. The males will rather
lose their lives than part with their females. They fly at the eyes of him that
holds them. The reason is rendered by Nicolaus Leonicus, because the eyes are
shining and very moveable: and these birds are bred to allure and draw things
to them. For Birds are wont to pick and scratch at ones finger that is often
moved about their bills, or because the eyes are such perfect Looking-glasses,
that the pupil that is so small will represent their image standing over
against it: now when the Birds see their own shape in our eyes, they, it is
likely peck at them, as desirous to come to what they delight.

CHAP. XX. Of the Swallow.
Swallows are found almost in all Countries. Yet Pliny says, they will not
fly right to Thebes, because they are often taken there* Nor are they found in
Bizia in Thracia, by reason of the wickedness of Tereus. They can endure no
cold. Hence Claudian writes, As when cold Snow and Frost, like feathers, fall
On Trees, the Winter-Swallowes die withal.
Where they live in Winter, is diversely described. It is certain, that in
hollow Trees lying many close together, they preserve themselves by mutual
heat. But Olaus Mag. Episcop. Upsalensis, says, That in the Northern parts
where men dye of cold in winter, the Swallows live in the water. Though, says
he, many Writers of Natural Histories affirm, that Swallows change their
stations, that is, do go to hotter Countries in Winter; yet in the Northern
parts, Swallows are often drawn forth by Fishermen by accident, like a
congealed Mass, and they have united themselves together, bill to bill, foot to
foot, wing to wing; after the beginning of Autumn, to go amongst the reeds,
etc. When that mass is drawn forth and put into a hot-house, the Swallows are
thawed by heat coming to them, and so begin to fly; but they last but a very
short time, because they are not made free, but captives, by being taken too
soon. In Egypt their wonderful Industry is seen: For in the mouth of Heraclia
in Egypt they make such an impregnable Mount with their nests continued
together against the overflowing of wandering Nilus, for a furlong in length,
that it is thought no man could do as much, Pliny. In the same Egypt near the
Town Coptus, they say there is an Island consecrated to Isis; which that the
same River may not demolish, they fence by labor, in Springtime, making firm
the mouth of it with straw and stubble, for 3. nights together, laboring so
hard, that many dye of it. Their young ones are bred blind, if we believe the
Philosopher, and Pliny: when they receive their sight but slowly, they hasten
it by putting Celandine upon it. Their copulation is wonderful: For when the
rest of Birds are trod by the old ones, Swallows* couple a contrary way,
Gesner. Jacobus Olivarius says, he heard from Hieronymus Montuus an excellent
Physician, that Swallows hearts being taken with Cinnamon, and Species of
Pills Elephanginae, they will help memory. Hence Johannes Ursinus writes, --
with amomum eat their heart;
And wit and memory will gain their part.


CHAP. XXI. Of the Osprey, the Ibis, and the Loxias.
OF Ospreys, or Sea-Eagles, some are said to have one foot like an Eagle, and
hooked; the other, plain like a Goose, to swim withal; that it has also
costly Fat in the tail, and that he flies in the Air, and hangs there as it
were, and lets drop some of this fat into the water, whereby the fish are
astonished; that they turn upon their backs, and so he catches them, as some
say. Ibis is a Bird so loving to Egypt, that it will live no where else; so
soon as it is hatched, if it be weighed, it weighs two drams. Plutarch. de avib.
l. 4. c. 9. The heart is greater than is proportionable to the body. The Gut is
96 cubits long; and that in the wain of the Moon is pressed together, till the
light of it increases again, says Gaudentius Merula.

The Lakes in Arabia send forth such multitudes of winged Serpents that are of
so sudden a venomous nature, that when they bite, they kill before the wound
can be perceived; these birds by a kind of foresight, are stirred up, and fly
forth in Troops and meet these pestilent multitudes in the Air, before they
wast their Coasts, Marcel. Loxias, in respect of its bill, it differs from all
other Birds. Whence Aristotle thinks it is not known. It is wont to have a red
breast, neck and belly, but in winter it changes its color. It delights in
Hempseed, dead carcases and kernels of the Fir Tree, and it builds in such
Trees in January and February. In Winter when all things are frozen, it sings,
but forbears in Summer.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Kite.
KItes live almost every where, but they change their quarters, especially if
they be near. For otherwhiles they are found in hollow Oaks, cherishing
themselves with the rotten dust. About Pontus near the Sea Euxinum, they are
seen in such abundance in Winter, that if for 15, days so many should fly
thither, as Bellonius saw in one day, they would be more then all Mankind. They
bring the Cuckoo with them on their backs, because he cannot fly so far*
Isidore. The scripture ascribes to them the knowledge of the change of times.
Jerem. c. 8. About the Dog-dayes, she flies up to the middle region of the
Air, because it is cold, and sits there till the evening. Herodot. l. 2. Yet
in Lybia and the Island of St. Dominick, they are always; also at London,
because it is not lawful to kill them. Hence amongst multitudes of people they
will catch up their prey, (any filth that the Inhabitants cast forth into the
City, or into the Thames) Clus, l. 2. c. 36. in observat. Bellon. They will
take meat out of the Shambles, bread out of Childrens hands, and hats off of
men's heads, especially when they make their nests. Aelian, l. 2. c. 47. In the
first year they pursue great birds; when they grow older, little birds; and in
the third year, gnats and flies. Ap^leius speaks much of their sight.
Aristophanes calls them all-eys. They fly so high that sometimes they are out
of sight, so far that they pass through the Air every where, and they fly so
swift that they will catch any garbage thrown forth before it touch the ground.
Bellonius, l. 2. de Avib, c. 26. Sometimes they will balance themselves in the
Air, not stirring their wings in an hour; for, lifting up their wings a little
in part, where the Air goes under them, they receive the Ayrs motion with
their whole body, and so they are held up. It never sits on a Pomegranat Tree,
nor can it endure the sight of it; and it delights to behold an Owl. Burnt
alive in a pot it is said to cure the falling sickness.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Manucodiata and the Cormorant.
ALdrovandus observed five kinds of the Manucodiatae; none of their bodies was
much bigger than a Swallow, and their heads were like to them. They are said to
live always in the Air, and to rest firm without any, but a tonick motion;
for they want feet, and never come to the ground, but when they are dead. This
is a fable; for they could hardly sleep there, when their senses are bound up;
For all their exercise is a tonick motion. It is like to that, That there is a
hole in their back in the muscles, where the Female that has a hollow belly
lays her eggs. Aldrovandus, who saw these Manucodiatae, never found any such
thing. And that is like this, that they feed on dew; because they fly so high,
that they cannot always meet with Dew. But that must always be restored, that
always wastes. Bellonius says that the Janissari, people of India, deck
themselves with their feathers. They think that under their protection they
shall be out of danger in the head of the battle. The Mahumetans Marmin
persuaded their Kings that they came from Paradise, as tokens of the delights
of that place. The Cormorants are taken in the East to catch fish with. In a
certain City, says Odoricus a Foro Julii, situate by the great River in the
East, we went to see our host fish. I saw in his little ships, Cormorants tied
upon a perch, and he had tied their throat with a string, that they should not
swallow the fish they took. In every bark, they set three great panniers, one
in the middle, and at each end one; then they let loose their Cormorants, who
presently caught abundance of fish, which they put into the Panniers, so that
in a short time they filled them all. Then mine ^ost took off the straps from
their necks, and let them fish for themselves: when they were ful^* they came
back to their pearches and were tied up again, Scaliger writes that the same
was done at Venice. They put their heads deep into the water, and perceive the
change of the Air under the waves; and when they perceive any tempest, they
fly to the land, making a (...), Isidore, l. 12. c. 7* Mizaldus says, that
Vapors rise up from the waters that cause rainie Clouds, and they cunningly
observe it. The liver of them boyld, and eaten with Oil and a little Salt, is
so present a remedy against the biting of a mad dog; that the sick will
presently desire water, Aetius. The same continued with Salt, and drank with
Hydromel two spoonfulls, will drive forth the Second (...)* Dioscorides.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Owl and Musket.
OWls were formerly plentiful in Athens; in Gandie, they neither breed, nor
will live, brought thither. Also in Mountain Countries of Helvetia there are
none. They sit close 60 days in Winter. They are not hurt by fasting 9, days.
Plin. l. 10. c. 17. Eustatius says they see in the dark, when the Moon is hid*
but hardly for want of a Medium. Crescent, l. 10. c. 16. yet they cannot see in
the day by reason of too dry and thin substance of the humor which ^s
dissipated by the fiery substance of the light. He makes a double noise, the
one is Tou, Tou, the other noise they call Howling. She is at great enmity
with Crovvs. Pausanias reports, that the Crovvs snatched away the picture of
an Ovvl that was to be sold, and earings of Gold out of ones hand, that were
made like Dates. It is commonly observed that if the Ovvl forsake the Woods, it
signifies a barren year. Ovvls eggs given for three days in Wine to drunkards,
will make them loath it. Plin. The Musket, in Winter sits in Woods that use to
be lopt, and comes not to her place till Sun set. When she looks upon any
thing, the black of the pupil of her eye grovvs greater then ordinary. We read
of this bird in the Salick laws, that he who should steal ou^, if he be
taken, must pay 120 denarii.

CHAP. XXV. Of Onocrotalus, and Rhinoceros.
ONocrotalus is from the tip of his bill, to the bottom of his feet, ten spans
and more in magnitude, Aldrovandus. His vvings stretched forth make ten spans;
under his lower mandibule, there is a receptacle like a bladder, as long as it,
that hangs down at length. And that is so great that a very great man thrust in
his leg as far as his knee, with a boot on, into his Jaws, and pulled it out
again, without harm. Perottus Sanctius reports that a little Blackmore was
found in one. At Mechlin there was one of 80, years old, and for some years
he went before the camp of the Emperor Maximilian, as if he would determine
the place for them. Afterward he was fed by an old woman at the Kings cost,
who was allowed for him 4, Stivers the day, she fed him 56, years, when he was
young he would sometimes fly so high into the Air, that he seemed no greater
than a Swallow, Gesner. Also the cubit bones of his wings were covered with a
membrane, out of which there arose 24, Tendons, that were so firmly set into
them, that there was no way to part them. Gesner writes that he heard, he was
wont to come once a year about Lausanna by the Lake Lemannus. Rhinoceros is a
bird whereof one was killed in the Air flying, at what time the Christians
conquered the Turk in a Sea fight. The head was about two spans, adorned with
black tufts of feathers, very long, and that hung downwards. The Beack is
almost a span long, bent backward like a bow. A horn grows out of its forehead,
and sticks to the upper part of his Bill, of a great magnitude. For about the
forehead it was a hands breadth. Aldrovandus thinks it is, Pliny his
Tragopanada.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Parrot.
THe Ancients knew but one kind of Parrots; but those that have seen the
Indies, have found above a hundred kinds, different in color and magnitude.
Vesputius writes that in a Country above the promontory of good hope, that has
its name from Parrots, they are so high that they are a cubit and half long.
Scalig. exerc. 236, says, he saw one so great, that he almost filled up the
space of the lattice of a Window: Some are no bigger than a Thrush, or Pigeon,
or Sparrow. No man could hitherto paint sufficiently all its colors, they are
so many. In burning Aethiopia, and the farthest Indies, they are all white; in
Brasil, red, in Calecut, they are all Leek green, Watchet, or Purple colored.
Scalig. Exerc. 59. s. 2. The Ancients esteemed the Green best. The head and
beck of it are extreme hard: wherefore, when they teach him to speak, it feels
not, unless you strike i^ with a wand of Iron, wooden rods will do no good,
and it is dangerous to do it with Iron ones. The Parrot alone with the
Crocodile, moves his upper mandible; also his Beck, which is common to no
other, where it is joined to his neck, is open beneath under his chops. His
tongue is broad like to a man's, and represents the form of a gourd seed, the
feet are like Woodpickers feet. In the desert^ of Presbyter John, they are
found with two Claws. He puts his meat in his mouth like as men do. He not only
cuts in sunder the Almonds, but by rolling them in the hollow of his Beck, and
pressing and moving it with his tongue, he breaks them, and chews them as it
were, and then swallows them. Nature gave this bird a crooked bill like half a
circle, it is very strong; Because she is of a clambering disposition, and has
not feathers in her tail that she can fasten into a Tree, she had need of a
strong beck, that she might first cast it in like a hook, and by that she might
raise her body, and then take hold with her feet. They live in hot Countries.
In the Country of Parrots they are so cheap, that one may be bought for two
pence: They always fly by couples, and lest they should hurt their weak feet
when they light upon the ground, they trust to their strong beck, and break the
fall with lighting upon that. They imitate a man, they learn his words and will
pronounce all almost with an articulate voice. One was taught that would say
the Creed to a Cardinal. Scalig. exerc. 238. He will answer questions. Henry
the eight, King of England had one that fell into the Sea, and cried for help,
promising 20, pounds, but when he was pulled forth, he bad, Give a Groat. If
you stroke her gently, she will kiss you, Scalig. exerc. 236. Amongst mourners
she will lament also. Tiraquel says, that the females do never or very seldom
speak like to Men. They are so simple that when a Parrot cries in a Tree, and
the fowler sits close in the boughs of the same Tree, great multitudes of them
will fly thither, and suffer themselves to be easily taken. Pet. Martyr in
Decad. Oceani. They are fed and grow fat on wild saffron seed, that is a
purgative to men. They will hang by the heels with their heads down toward the
water, and their tails upwards. They build in a high Tree. They bind a branch
that hangs down, with small twigs to the top, and they hang their nest upon it
as round as a ball, with a little hole in it. They lay eggs fit for their
bigness. They dye by much rayn. They are sacred amongst the Indians, but not
so in Columbus days.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Phoenix and Woodpecker.
CLaudian describes the Phoenix, thus.

A fiery mouth with sparkling eyes,
A glittring crest like Sun in the Skies;
The legs are of a Tyrian dye,
Lightning the Air as she does fly.
She is reported to inhabit Arabia, and chiefly Heliopolis a City of Egypt,
where she was seen. Her nest is made of spices, namely Cinnamon, and Cassia
near to Nilus; she sits in it, and by waving her wings she kindles a fire,
from her ashes a Worm breeds, from that a young Phoenix. Oppian does not so
much as speak of the Worm. Men write diversely of her age. The common opinion is
500 years; some say, she lives 1461 years. But all this is false. The
Woodpickers have a sharp bill, that is hard round and strong, to pick holes in
Trees with. They have a long tongue that is extended to the hinder part of
their head, and is wrapped up over all the crown of the head like a clue of
yarn, it is exceeding sharp, and the end of it is gristly. They feed on Worms,
and when they seek for them, they will so exceedingly make Trees hollow, that
they will throw them down. Arist. l. 9. hist. c. 9. Their nest is made so
artificially, that the sticks put together they make it of, are better to pull
a sunder with ones hands than to cut in pieces with a sword. Pliny reports that
the young ones come forth of their eggs with the tail first, because the
weight of their heads turns the eggs upside down, and so the dam sits on their
tails. They never sit on stones for fear of hurting their sharp claws. They
climb unto the top like Cats, and that backwards. In what Tree soever they
breed, no nail nor wedge can stick in it, but when it is fastened, it will fall
out with a cracking of the Tree, Plin. l. 10. c. 18. Men suppose that she has
the greater Moonlight, an herb, that increases and diminishes.

CHAP XXVIII. Of the Pie.
THe Pie almost every hour changes her note; she learnes and loves to speak as
men do. One at Rome hearing the Trumpet sound, at first was astonished, but
came to her self, and did perfectly imitate the same, Plutarch. If she be
caught in a Snare, she will move nothing but her beck; lest, moving her body,
she should be more ensnared: when rapes are sowed, then is the time for her to
moult her feathers. Her feathers being pulled off, and her guts taken out, if
she be boiled in White Wine till the Wine be consumed, and the flesh part from
the bones, and then she be brayed with the broth, and so set for three days in
the Sun, and then applied to the eyes with a fine rag, it will cure the
roughness, darkness, and redness of the eyes, The Pie that feeds on moss,
has blew overthwart marks on the sides of her wings, you shall seldom see the
like in any other bird, she has a throat so wide, that she will swallow
Chestnuts. The Pie in Brasil has a bill two hands breadth long, and one almost
in breadth, measured from the bottom of the lower part, to the top of the upper
part. The substance of it is very thin like a parchment; yet bony, shining,
hollow, and most capacious as the Ear; also it is dented and made up as it were
with certain skales; she feeds on pepper, but she presently casts it up again
raw, and indigested.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Peacock.
OF old Peacocks were rare in Europe; when Alexander saw one in India, he
forbad to kill it on pain of death; but afterward in Athenaeus his time they
grew so common, that they were as ordinary as Quails. In the Land Temistana,
they lay sometimes 20 or 30 eggs, Martyr. They are so cleanly, that when they
are young, they will die if they be wet; Albert. When they want cooling, they
spread their wings, and bending them forward, they cover their bodies with
them, and so drive off the force of heat: but if the wind blow on their
back-parts, they will open their wings a little, and so are they cooled by the
wind blowing between. They are said to know when any venomous medicament is
prepared, and they will fly thither and cry. Aelian reports, that a Peacock
will seek out the root of flax as a natural Amulet against Witchcraft, and will
carry it thrust close under one of its wings. The Peacock suffers such
languishing pains as children are wont to suffer when their teeth first come
forth, and they are in great danger when their crest first grows out, Palladius
l. 1. de re rustica c. 20. When in the night they double their clanging note,
it foreshews rains at hand. The cause is said to be, that by doubling of that
troublesome noise, is showed, that with heat that sharp vocal spirit breaks
forth, Mizaldus. Their flesh will not corrupt easily. After a whole year it
will not stink, only it appears drier. Antonius Gigas gave a piece of the
boiled flesh to Aldrovandus in 1598; it was boiled Anno 1592; and it was full
of round holes quite through, like a sieve, out of which, if it were a little
shaked, dust did fall, as rotten powder does out of some Trees; it was salt in
taste, and somewhat bitter, Aldrovand.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Pheasant and Sparrow.
IN the Country of Curium, Pheasants were so common, that the Christians coming
thither, bought them for two little pins apiece, Martyr. l. 8. Decad. Frederick
Duke of Saxony let fly 200 in Saxony, and forbad any man to catch them. In the
places of Scandinavia, they lie under the Snow without meat, Olaus. When they
grow fat they lose their feathers. The Sparrow does so fear the Hawk, that one
that was pursued flew into Xenocrates's arms. It is the lust fullest almost of
all Birds; for it has been seen to tread 20 times in half an hour, Scalig. It
will devour venomous seeds without any hurt. Some ascribe that to the
smallness of its veins. An herb, the name whereof is not known, being put
under ground in 4. corners of a Cornfield, will drive them from the Corn,
Pliny. Others bid carry a red Toad through the field by night, before it be
sowed, and to be buried under ground in the middle of the field, shut up in an
earthen vessel. Yet, lest the corn should grow bitter, it must be dug up again
before harvest. Those of Taprobana, when they are in the deep Sea, let fly
Sparrowes they brought with them for that end; and by their conduct, because
they know not the use of the Loadstone, they find the way home, Acosta.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Partridge.
IN that part of the World that is called the Continent, Partridges have a
double flesh, so apparent, that it may be discerned; so great, that the
greatest glutton cannot eat one at a meal, Gonsal Oviedus. Their testicles in
venery increase wonderfully, but there appear none in Winter, Aristotle, l. 3.
hist. c. 21. They are so salacious, that when the females are wanting, they
will couple amongst themselves, and with their young ones: when they are
present, they are filled by the males with wind they send forth, also by their
cry and flying upward, Plin. l. 10. c. 33. Aristot. l. 5. c. 5. Their fruitful
spirit is thought to perform that, which Ephesius interprets to be a vapor;
which carries the heat arising from the generative seed of the male, and which
being received through the pores of the Partridge, penetrates as far as the
menstruum of her. Their young ones are impatient of delay, and break forth of
themselves before the eggs be opened; and making a passage in the Eggs, so soon
as they can put forth their heads and feet, they run away with the shell on
their backs, and seek for food. Odoricus de foro Julii, shows us their
docilenesse, and says, That in the Countries about Trapezunda, which was
formerly called Pontus, he saw a man that drove 4000 Partridges and more: he
traveled by Land, and they flew in the Air, he brought them to a certain
Castle called Thanega, that is 3. days Journey from Trapezunda. These
Partridges when the man rested, would all rest about him, as Chickens about a
Hen; and then he took of them as many as he pleased, and the rest he brought
home again.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Ostrich.
THe Ostrich, has a small head like a Goose, not covered with feathers, with
cloven feet, Aristot. 4. hist. He is too big to fly, yet sometimes he runs
swiftly, the wind entering under his wings, and extending them like sails. It is
certain he will outrun a man on horseback. He is a fruit-eater. He will
swallow small pieces of bones and stones greedily, but he casts them out again;
also pieces of Iron. How should he digest them, for a Lion that is hotter
cannot? He makes a nest of sand, that is low and hollow, and fenceth it against
the rain. She lays above 80 eggs: yet the young ones are not all hatched at the
same time; The eggs are very great, as big as a young Child's head, weighing
about 15 pounds, they are extreme hard, and the shell is like stone. The young
are bred of them by heat of the Sun; some, because they saw this Bird looking
on them, thought the young ones to be hatched by her eye: She is wonderful
simple; when she hides her neck in a bush, she thinks she is all hid.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Scythian Bird, and the Castrel.
OF the Scythian Bird, Aristotle writes thus: There is (says he) a Bird that
inhabites the Scythian Land, as great as a Bustard, which produces two young
ones; and the eggs she lays, she does not sit upon them, but leaves them wrapped
up in a Hare's or Fo^e'^ skin, and so lays them up on a high Tree. When she
hunts no^, she stays and keeps and defends them.

A Castrell is most loving to Pigeons; wherefore Country men put the young
Castrels in Earthen pots, and fence them with putting on the Cover, and
fastening them with Gip, they place them in some corners of their Dove-coats;
this makes Pigeons love the place: He so frights Hawks, that they fly from the
sight and cry of him, Columel.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Thrush, and Torquilla.
THrushes were amongst the Romans formerly great dainties; for at Rome they
were sold for 3 denarii; that is, 12 pieces of money apiece. Varro, a very
copious Author, says, That out of one Cage 5000 Thrushes were sold at the
said price; says he, In a Farm of my Aunts, in Sabini 24 miles from Rome,
there is a house for to keep Birds, out of which alone I have known 5000
Thrushes sold for 3. denarii apiece, that that part of the Farm yielded one
year 6000 Sestertia, twice as much, says he, (speaking to Axius) as thy ground
of 200 Acres yields really. The Thrush of Agrippina shows they will learn; for
this would imitate all men's speeches. It is a wonder, if it be true, that
Thrushes should be so deaf. Scaliger has a delicate Copy of Verses of the
singing Thrush. We will here set them down: Sweet little Thrush, little Throat,
Abating cares with thy small note,
With thy melody be so kind,
To pacify my troubled mind.
And let thy warmbling breast
With thousand tunes at least
Free me from gulphs of cares,
O Prince of happy Airs.
Little Bird, King of voice,
That makes thy Lord for to rejoice
When he awakes, with thy clear note,
Sweet little Thrush, little Throat.


CHAP. XXXV. Of Urogallus.
URogallus is found in the highest Mountain tops; in Germany, and the Northern
parts, he most delights. Encelius l. 3. de lapid. c. 54. writes of his
wonderful copulation. For the Cock of this kind does spit and vomit out his
seed in the Spring when they couple, and with a loud noise calls the hens, who
gather up the seed was cast forth of his mouth; and they swallow it down, and
so they conceive. Then the Cock treads them, and ratifies as it were the seed
eaten. Those hens that he treads not, do bring eggs that are windy. Olaus
Magnus writes, that in the Winter, in the North, the lesser Urogalli will lie
hard under the Snow two or three months. But in Pontus they say in Winter some
Birds are found, that neither boult their feathers, nor do they feel when their
feathers are plucked out, nor when they are thrust through with a spit, but
only then when they wax hot at the fire. It is hardly true. The greater
Grygallus is so deaf, that he cannot hear the noise of a great Gun.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Batt.
PLato calls the Bat, a bird and no bird. Valla, half a Mouse. He loves Caves
and holes in the earth. In the hollow place^ of Apenni^u^, there were some
thousands that lodged. It brings forth the young ones ready formed; when they
are bred, they are first like young Mice, smooth and naked as young children:
She suckles her young ones with her milk, and she casts them especially between
the hollow places in Tiles or roofs of houses. They stick so fast to her Teats,
that they cannot be pulled off when she is dead. She, the second day after she
has disburden'd her self of them, flies to find food; but in the mean time she
devours the secondines. Sometimes she is bred of putrid matter. Frisius says,
she proceeds from a sickly excretion of the Air; she flies with leather wings;
or, as Isidore says, born up with the membranes of her arms, flying winding up
and down, and not far from the earth. When she is weary she hangs by her claws,
the rudiments whereof they have in the middle of their wings: she will fly also
with two young ones in her bosom. They eat Gnats, Flies, Bacon. They will so
eat a flitch that hangs by a beam, that they will lie in the hollow place. In
hot Countries they will fly at men's faces. In Dariene a Province of the New
World, they troubled the Spaniards in the night: One of them fell upon a Cock
and Hen, and bit the Cock dead, Martyr. Pompilius Azalius says, That in the
East Indies some are so great, that they will strike men, passing by, down with
their wings. The Argument of this, is their carcases that lie all over the
Vale. The Storks eggs grow barren, if a Bat touch them, unless she take ^eed
by laying Plane-tree leaves in her nest: It is killed by the smell and smoke of
Ivy, Aelian de animal. Locusts will not fly over the place, where Bats are
hanged on the Trees that lie open. The biting of it is cured with Seawater, or
other hot water, or with hot ashes, as hot as one can suffer it. Strabo says,
That in Borsippa a City of Babylon, where they are greater than in other
places, they are pickled up for food. So in St. John's Island they are skinned
with hot water, and they are made like chickens with their feathers pulled off
with us; for their flesh is very white. The Inhabitants of the Isle of Catigan
in the Sea del Zur, do eat them. They are as great as Eagles, and as good meat
as Hens, Scalig. Exerc. 236. s. 3.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Vulter.
THe Vulter has filthy and terrible eyes, and a space under his throat as
broad as ones hand, set about with hairs like Calves hairs, Bellonius l. 2.
observe. c. 1. He hunts after Cattle in Chyla a Province of the West Indies,
and that not from Sunrising till Noon, but from Noon till Night, Monard. de
Arom. Some say, that the males are not bred, but the females conceive by the
wind; which is false: for they have been seen between Worms and Augusta of
Trevirs ^o couple, and to lay eggs; Alb. Mag. They are so libidinous, that when
they are kindled, if the male be absent, they will tread one the other, and
conceive by a mutual Imagination of lust; or else drawing dust by force of
desire, they will lay eggs. When he wants his prey, he will draw blood from his
thighs to feed on. Simocatta writes, that they are great with eggs 3. years. He
has an excellent sight, for he will see when the Sun rises from East to West;
and when the Sun sets from West to East. He will smell Carrion 500 miles,
Aldrovand. Avicenna says, That he sees the carcases from aloft; but
Aldrovandu^ writes, That the wind carries the sent of them to him. He has an
exquisite sense to perceive. He lives a hundred years. If you pick your teeth
with his quill, it will make your breath sour. A kernel of a Pomegranate will
kill him, Plin. l. 30. c. 4. Aelian. l. 6. c. 46.

The End of the Sixth Classis.
AN APPENDIX TO The Sixth Classis: Wherein some things are taken out of a
Treatise of Michael Maierus, a most famous Physician, concerning the Bird that
grows on Trees.
WHen one shall read; that there is a place in the World, where Geese grow on
Trees like Apples; perchance he will be doubtful concerning the truth of it,
and question the Author. And if any man shall say, that living Creatures are
bred, not only of one, but of diverse kinds, from Trees and vegetables, that
part will fly; and part will not fly; h^ will have enough to do to make good
what he says, if he would not be accounted a Liar. Yet I think, it may be
easily proved by what we have said already, where we have asserted, from
experience, that Gnats are bred in Oaks, and moss of Oaks; and Worms are bred
in other Trees and Vegetables; which, though they be small creatures, yet are
they reckoned in the number of living creatures, because they feel and move:
Yet I should not affirm the first as the words sound. For Birds make their
nests sometimes in Trees, hedges, briars and other vegetables; but that they
grow there like pears, is incredible. There is one of the Canary Islands called
Ferro, where is a Fountain of sweet water concealed (and there is none besides
in the whole Island) in some Trees by a wonderful Indulgence of Nature; the
leaves do draw abundantly water out of the Earth or Air: which they drop down
for the Inhabitants to drink. For should they want this boon, no men nor
Cattle could live there; for there are no Fountains; but the Ocean or
saltwater runs round about it. The great bounty of God has afforded water to
those, to whom it is denied in other considerations. As in Egypt where there
never falls any rain, Nilus overflowes to supply that defect; and other
Countries have other gifts given them. So also is this bird afforded to the
Isles of the Orcades, and other neighboring places, which is found no where
else. Yet should any man look to find him growing on the Trees, he might wander
all the Woods over and find none, nor yet do Pirates amongst the Ferrenses find
water, but are forced to leave the Country for want of it, nor can they find it
in the Trees Concerning this bird that is no Fable, that very learned Authors
have written, making mention of it also in their other works, as Hieron. Card.
de varietat. rer. c. 36. Du Bartas, in his Weeks, the 6 th day, and 1 day of
his 2 week. But they all do not agree of the places and manner of its
generation. Munster says, the Orcades are full of these birds, Gyraldus speaks
of Ireland, Dubartus of Scotland which he calls Luturnen, as also Mela writes.
Hector Boethius, relates the same things of the Hebrides. A French man
understands it* concerning any part of the Hesperian Sea. He says, a certain
bird i^ bred without Cock or Hen, but only from some vegetable, namely in
Scotland from the Trees of that Country. Also ships made of the same Trees,
when they are in the middle of the Sea, produce the same fowls. The French call
them Marquerolle; it is good to eat. Plutarch makes mention of the same bird,
in a Treatise that begins, Whether an Egg were first or a Hen? The Scotch call
them Klekgues. Others write of them thus. In the Orcades Island, and Scotland,
there is a Tree by the Sea side, and on the banks of Rivers, that bears fruit
not unlike to Ducks, and when it is ripe it falls down into the water, and
swims away alive, and becomes a bird; if it fall on the the ground it corrupts.
Others call them Barnacles. As also in the ^ittle Theater of the World, they
are ascribed to Ireland, and are thus deciphered. There are also here Birds
called Barnacles growing by nature contrary to Natures order, not unlike to
Ducks, but only they are less. For from wood of Masts for Ships, first comes
forth some kind of Gum, then with weed (or Sea grass calld'd Wier) some
shellfish sticks to those kinds of wood together with the pitch, which in time
get wings and become Birds, and fly or fall into the waters, and swim. I have
often seen (says Silvester) abundance of these Tree-Ducks hanging on the Wood,
enclosed in shells till they could fly. They lay no eggs as other Birds do, nor
are they bred of eggs. In some places they eat these Birds for Fish, and not
for Flesh. Hector Boethius tells the same History of a Bird, he calls Cla^is.
For, says he, if you cast Wood into the Sea, about the Hebrides, in time Worms
will breed in it, that eat that Woodhollow, and afterward become Birds, and
are like to Geese, flying. He ascribes the generation of them to the Sea,
called by Homer and Virgil, the Father of all things. But these different
descriptions of Authors do neither agree amongst themselves, nor in all things
with the truth it self. For the place, some say it is the Orchades; others
Ireland; others the Hebrides, others Scotland, and all this may be true, since
in the Ocean between Scotland and the Orcades, and Ireland, and the Hebrides,
they are said to breed in both places. For it is no small extent of place where
they are, but all that compass of the Sea in the outmost bounds of Scotland
and Ireland. For the name, there is no difference; for diverse Nations use
diverse names. But whether that faculty be to be ascribed to the Woods or Trees
of those Countries, or to Worms that breed from those Trees, and are changed
into Shellfish, is worth Enquiry* since the forementioned Authors were of so
various opinions. But we shall consent with none of them. For were this virtue
in the Wood, why should not the same kind of Wood, used for Masts, have the
same faculty in all places; yet that is not so, nor do Ships made of that Woo^
produce such foul in the middle of the Sea. For who ever heard any such thing
done in France, Germany, or England, yet are all their Havens frequented by
Scotch Merchants, and Ships from the Orcades* No^ can this be referred to the
Trees, for they bear not birds but fruit of their own kind. If they be cut
down and turned to other uses, and cast into the Sea, to corrupt and grow
rotten, that is, that they may dye as it were, as to their first being, and be
turned into the common matter of Wood; then begins this new generation of
living Creatures by the influence of the Heavens, and the Suns heat
co^operating. For how should a vegetable, produce a flying Creature like a
Goose? Is not every Tree known by its specifical fruit, whether it be good or
bad* Again does not every kind of fruit, testify what Tree it was bred on ^
Trees do not bear fish; nor the Sea, Trees. Hares use to be found in Woods,
and merry conceits in words, and not the contrary. A vegetable does not couple
with an animal, nor an animal with a vegetable, each keeps its own rank, and
does not exceed it, unless Nature using the help of putrefaction, do produce
some small living Creatures in vegetables* as I said before. They that think
that Worms may become fowls, do not in my Judgment, speak what is probable. For
how should a shellfish come of a Worm, yet understand me so, that what I deny
of each by themselves, I would grant of all together. But because I know this
not by hearsay, but I have seen above 50, (almost hundreds) of these
shellfish, and when they were opened, I have seen little young Birds coming
forth as out of a^^ egg, with all their parts necessary for flight, and I have
had them in my hands, I must not omit here to set down an exact description of
them, and this it is. If perhaps some pieces of Masts of Ships smeer'd with
pitch fall into those Seas in the outmost parts of Scotland, nor far from the
Orcades or Hebrides, and lie there a long time; they not only grow rotten and
full of Worms, but are covered all over with Sea weeds, for of such grass there
is abundance there, which cleaves to any Wood easily, especially if it send
forth a pitchy fatness as Masts that are fi^re or pitch Trees, and are full of
pitchy Rosin; and then for Ships occasions are again besmeerd with the same,
namely that the sayls may suddenly be noised up and pulled down, and stay no
where. Now the Sea breeds those weeds at the bottom near the shore, that are
longer or shorter, and these at certain times swim on the top of the water,
being moved or pulled up, as it were, by the waves. This, bred in the water,
does not easily corrupt, having much of a salt nature in it: wherefore in North
Holland, and many other places they make of those weeds a strong fence against
the violence of the Sea, so that they fetch a remedy from the disease,
wherefore these weeds hanging round about the said pieces of Masts insinuate
themselves into the rotten places; and in time on the other side of each grass
will grow small shellfish, which are whitish or of the color of a Man's nayls,
and in form, hollownesse, and long fashion, like to the nail of a man's little
finger; whereof if two be joined together that they may stick well, the upper
parts being the sharpest, they take hold of the ends of the weeds, and are fast
shut in the broader parts, which afterward open, that the fruit may come out
to fly. Thus a thousand at least of these shell fish are fastened to the weeds
at the ends, which as I said are fastened to the pitched Wood, with the other
end, in such plenty, that the Wood can hardly be seen: yet those weeds do
hardly exceed 12 fingers breadth in length, and are so strong as thongs of
leather: sometimes they are longer, and are some-feet-long. This is the whole
external description; For you can see nothing but a piece of a Mast full of
rotten holes, and Sea Weeds thrust into them, having at the other end
shellfish, like to the nail of a Man's little finger. But if these shells be
opened, those small Birds appear, like chickens in eggs, with a beck, eyes,
feet, wings, down of their feathers beginning, and all the other parts of
callow Birds. As the young Birds grow, so do the shells or covers of them, as
they do in all other Oysters, Muscles, shellfish, snails, and the like
carriers of their houses. It may be asked how they get their food? I answer as
other Z^ophyta do; partly from the sweeter part of the water, or else as shell
fish that breed pearls, and Oysters do, from the dew, and rayn; partly, from
the pitchy fat of the rotten Wood, or the resinous substance of Pitch or Rosin.
For these by the intermediant grass, as by umbilical Veins, do yield nutriment
to these Creatures, so long as that Wood is carried by the ebbing and flowing
of the Sea, hither and thither. For were it on the dry land, it would never
bring forth the said shell fish. An example of this, we have in places near
the Sea, where those shell fish are taken always with black shells, sticking
to Wood put into the water, as also to the wooden foundations of bridges, and
to Ships that have been sunk. And they stick either to the wood, by some threads
like to hayrs, or Moss, or else by Sea Weeds; whence it is evident that some
clammy moisture is afforded to shellfish sticking to any Wood whatsoever,
though it be Oak, but much more to fur Wood, full of Rosin, whereof Masts of
Ships are made: For this Wood is hotter than Oak, and has much aeriall
clamminesse, and therefore takes fire suddenly and when it is wounded, while it
is green, it sends forth an oily Rosin, but when it is dry, it will easily
corrupt under water; but the Oak will not, because it is of a cold and dry
nature. It longer resists corruption, and under water grows almost as hard as a
stone.

If any man will consider the abundance and diversity of fish and living
Creaturs which are bred in the Seas every where, he cannot but confess that
the Element of water is wonderful fer^ill, which breeds, not only the greatest
living Creatures, (as Whales, whereof some, as Pliny writes, l. 32. entered into
a River of Arabia, that were 600 foot long, and 300 foot broad) and that in
such abundance and variety that the same Author reckons up 176. kinds of fish
in the Sea only, besides th^se bred in Rivers. But one would chiefly admire the
great diversity and beauty of Sea shellfish; for I remember that I saw a^
^e^terdam, Anno 1611, with Peter Carpenter a very famous man, above a thousand
several kinds of them, in such plenty that he had a whole Chamber full of
them, which he kept as the precious treasures and miracles of nature. No doubt
but these are the Ensign^ of Natures bounty; for they rather serve for the
ornament of the world, than for man's use, wherein you may see a kind of an
affected curiosity in the variety of the forms of them. Hence we may conclude
the great fruitfulness of the Sea, which does exceed the Land in breeding of
living Creatures, and vegetable animals* which the Ancients observing, they
ascribed to Neptune, who was god of the Sea, great multitudes of Children
begotten from diverse Concubines* called Sea-Nymphs; amongst these, were Tryton
and Protheus* whereof he, sounding a shellfish, is his Father Neptunes
Trumpeter; but this, is changed into various forms, as into fire, a Serpent,
and such like; clearly teaching, that the Sea breeds diverse forms.

These causes seemed to move them who ascribed the generation of these Birds in
the Orcades to the Sea alone, as being the Author of fruitfulness, and of
diversity of Creatures. But how rightly they did that, shall be seen. We deny
not, but that many pretty shell-fishes are bred of the Sea, only from the
influence of omnipotent nature; so that the Ocean affords the place and matter
of them, but not the form and the cause efficient. All the fish, except a few,
are bred of the seed of other fish, naturally; and here can be no question of
these. Yet we may doubt whether so many kinds of shellfish do breed from the
seed of other shellfish. It is manifest of the foresaid Bird, that it breeds
neither from an egg* as other birds do, nor yet from seed. Whence then? From
the Ocean? or must the cause be imputed to the Ocean? Not at all. For though
the place be said to generate the thing placed, yet that is understood of the
matrices that are the cause of generation, sine qua non: but not the efficient
cause, much less the formal material and final, and not concerning every
general thing containing. But to search out more exactly the nature of this
wonderful Bird, we will run over those four kinds of causes, not doubting, but
having searched out these as we ought* what, why, and from whence it is, will
easily be resolved. The Efficient cause therefore of this generation, is
external heat, such as the Sun sends forth into sublunary bodies; as also in
the internal hea^* in the matter corrupting. For without heat nature produces
no generation, but uses heat as her chief Instrument, whereby homogeneous
things are congregated, and heterogeneous are parted; the parts and bowels are
formed in living Creatures, and are disposed in their orders and figures. In
Artificial things that men make, they use diverse Instruments, as their Hands,
which may be called the Instrument of Instruments, Hammers, Anvils, Files,
Sawes, Wimbles, and the like. In natural things, there is only Heat as the
efficien^ cause* and Nature moves it as the Artificer does them* The outward
heat brings the internal into Action: Without which, this would be uneffectual,
and shut up in the matter as dead; as it appears in some living creatures,
which when Winter comes, and the outward heat fails, they are as it were
asleep, and lie as dead, as Swallows, Frogs, Flies, and such like: But so soon
as the Sun beams heat the water and the earth, presently these little Creatures
revive; as owing their lives to the Suns heat. And as the heat is greater, so
is the efficacy thereof, and their flying about and crying; as we see in Flies
and Frogs. As for heat, the Sun, the great light of the World, is the Father of
it; which it sends upon all earthly creatures, enlightening and enlivening them.
Hence men say, that the Sun and Man beget a man; namely, by the intermediate
seed. Otherwise it proceeds of another fashion, when without those mediums, in
things are bred of putrefaction, as we said before. For when the solar or
elemental heat incloseth any mixed body, wherein natural heat is included; this
is raised up by that, is moved and stirred to perform its operations; as
appears in the hatching of eggs by artificial heat of Furnaces, or natural
heat of the hens. For in the yolks there is a hidden natural heat, that is
stirred by the external heat; so that, by circulation of the Elements, Water is
turned to Air; Air into Fire; Fire into Earth; Earth into Water, and the
Chickens limbs and entrals are formed and made by natural heat, which is the
principal internal Agent. The Material cause in the generation of this
Tree-Goose, is that clammy matter of the wood of Fur, or the Rosin and Pitchy
substance of it, upon which the outward Suns heat does work; and the internal
heat increased in the corrupt matter. This matter though it be small, yet may
well afford the first rudiments to this Embryo, which is afterward nourished
by the clammy substance of the Ocean, as Oysters and other shellfish grow and
increase; for neither the hard substance of the wood, nor yet the weeds affords
any matter for it; for the one is observed to be the container, and the other
the conveyer of the true matter. For as in the generation of Man, neither the
Matrix, nor the umbilical vein do afford any matter, but are required as
necessary instruments; so must we judge here, of the wood, and the Sea-weeds.
Some will have it, that from the worm bred in the rotten wood, there should be
made some transmutation, and that the worm does afford the first matter for
this generation; yet that opinion is false, for that Worm cannot come ^orth to
the end of the weeds, nor can it make shellfish, but that must breed at the
end of the weeds; nor does it come thither from any other place, that it can go
from place to place by an animal motion, before it receive its essential form.
Pliny writes, that the Fish Pinnothe^ is so cunning, that he will hide himself
in the Oyster; and as he grows, he will go into such as are greater; but to
imagine any such thing of that Worm that eats into the wood, is against the
nature of it. But it is no doubt, but that the rosinous and pitchy matter may
communicate something to the end of the weeds, which yet nature must do by a
way we cannot perceive; as nature uses in all other generations such ways and
means that we can better think and judge of by reason, than see with our eyes.
For who can see how the heart in the generation of living Creatures is first
formed? What fibers and veins nature uses there for her Instruments; how and
by what means this is done; and when it is done, how she disposes of the other
bowels, and makes them of a seminall and menstruall matter: There was never man
yet found so quick-sighted, that he could see these things whilst they were
doing; but when they are done, reason can discern them. So no man could yet
say, how this matter, that was first radical moisture in the wood, could pass
to the ends of those Sea weeds, and should be formed there; yet it is plain
afterward, that so it was made. Nor will that be so hard, for the matter to
pass through the grass to the end of them, as to pass without any medium.

But the greater difficulty is, and most worthy to know, the Formal or seminall
cause of this wonderful birth; which since it is nor contained in seeds; for
here are none to be found; it must needs enter into the matter, otherwise than
in other kinds of generations. For the seeds of both Sexes in living Creatures
which are mixed together in copulation, are as it were the sheaths and cases of
the forming spermaticall faculty; which forms the prae-existent matter of the
seed or blood into an essential form fit for that kind, that the seeds belong
unto, howsoever they are mingled or drawn forth into act. That force of nature
is a blessing given to her in the creation, in the word increase; which word
was never idle, nor shall be whilst the world endures: God spoke, and all that
God said were made very good, containing in themselves principles to multiply
their own kinds by; because individualls must perish. The Heaven with its Stars
shall last from the beginning to the end, and the entire Elements, Air, Water,
and Earth. But things compounded of them, as they ^y, so they are restored
again by multiplication of seed, not the same in number, but in kind; not by
external form, but by that form which is internal and essential. But since
that God gave this Commission for propagation to the sublunary World, and this
always proceeds by mediums; though in the production of these Barnacles there
are no visible seeds, whereby the matter may receive its form; wherefore it is
consonant to Reason and to Nature, that the form must come from some other
place into the matter, lest any thing should seem since the Creation to be made
of nothing, contrary to Gods will. For nothing is the cause of it self, or
forms it self, but only the eternal and infinite God. All other things indeed
were made by him of nothing, but not by themselves, nor are they propagated of
nothing, nor from themselves, but from means appointed by Nature. Plato sets
universal Ideas of every species of things subject to generation, fixed in a
certain place from whence a formative force descends, to beget and make all
individualls to be made. This opinion is pleasant but not true. For there can
be no universal substances (save in the conceptions of Men's minds) but only
individuals, that cannot give what they have not, and what they do give, they
cannot always hold themselves. Nature is in all things as in individuals,
dispersed all over, which yet operates in each individual according to the
condition that every one of them requires, which is true in all things that
have seeds, for those are the very subjects and vessels that nature works
upon. But the question now is, how that faculty is imprinted on the seeds, and
from whence? whether from nature? If this be true, then of every matter she
makes what she will, when as she can imprint what form she please on any
matter. And then, how can nature in this Barnacle, that has no seed visible
presupposed, proceed to generation; and in other such like things bred of mere
putrefaction. As in man there is an imagination and cogitative force, which is
performed by a subtle Artifice of Images conceived in the brai^* arising first
from the outward senses, and so proceeding to the inward parts of the brain, by
a local motion; yet without any changing of the place, only by calling to
remembrance things at the greatest distance, which were seen long before, or
were done, or thought of* So in the Sun, the Heavens, the fixed Stars, there
is a kind of imaginative virtue; not passive as in animals, but purely active,
which by local motion comes thence into sublutary bodies, and is communicated
to certain subjects, as to seeds of individualls. And this is the form that
first begins and increases all generation, communicating the essence to every
thing, that it shall be such a thing, and not another. This force is the first
moveable, frameing its subject, as an Architect, and one that frames her self a
house, where to dwell, that she governs to that end that Nature the artificer
assigns it. That is the spermatick faculty, that resides in the body of the
seed, without which this is barren and vain, nor does promote any generation.
If this by time vanish, or by breaking the Container of it; there follows no
fructification, as appears in Corn, which if it grow old, or be ground to
meal, it can propagate no more. Or why does this power reside in that body
rather than in another, and perishes presently afterward? I answer, there is
no other reason to be given, than that Nature rejoices in such means, and has
included that virtue that it cannot fly away, if it be obedient unto nature,
which if she would, she could have put into other subjects. It is admirable,
that the animal spirits in men are contained in the nerves (...) do they fly
out of them into the Air; and when those nerves are pressed their passage is
stopped, whence astonishment or a palsy for a time s^aseth on the foot or
arm, which is by and by removed by the Spirits succeeding into the nerves.
After the same manner, that imaginative virtue of the heavenly bodies,
especially of the Sun, if it pass into the individual subjects or seeds of
things* it naturally remains in them at the will and pleasure of nature. But
where there are no seeds, there the same virtue of the Heavens is communicated
to some certain matter immediately: as, in this generation, to this fat and
clammy subject, of which we spoke before, as to the material cause. For there
are two things in all seeds, the Elementary matter, and the celestial form,
the latter whereof may perish, the matter and external form remaining entire,
but nothing of that was generated out of the matter, when the celestial form
is lost. Matter in this generation is in time before the form, and receives it
by influence, though it be not deprived of any form it had. I speak of the
first matter, but the subsequent form, if it do not take away the first form,
yet it perfects it. But it is a question, Wherefore this formal force (as for
example* in making a bird) is not sent into every matter, or into any
whatsomever, when as it is received without certain vessels, or bodies of
seeds? I answer; that matter, so prepared in such wood and not in another, and
in such a place and not in another, supplies the place of a seminal body; whose
qualities not being in another, therefore noe other subject is capable of that
formal and determinate virtue. There are examples every where of this
Imagination, or celestial Influence, namely in some places of the County of
Mansfield, where Mines of Brass in a stone that may be cut, do show forth all
kinds of Fishes; and the forms of such as are in the next Lake, as we may see
Teeth; Horns; and Lions to perfection, formed by nature under ground in hollow
Caves and other places. In Amber also, which by the Sea Waves is cast on the
shores of the Island, now called Sudovia in Borussa; diverse forms of flies
gnats, spiders, butterflies, frogs, lizards, and other Creatures appear; not
really, but only from the imaginative faculty of the Heavens imprinted in it.
For if you should cut the Amber or break it to find them, the places would be
empty, which nature has so sported her self upon; yet are all their parts and
particles so shadowed to the life, that a man would swear, that such Creatures
are really included in that matter, perchance wrapped in when the gum was moist.
But it is no such matter: for there is no earthly matter, and which is not
transparent, that is contained in those concave figures, which yet ought to be
otherwise, since a corporal substance cannot vanish away, and only the form of
it remain. Moreover if any such living Creatures had fallen into the gummy
substance of it* as into Rosin or Turpentine, their wings or feet that are
besmeer'd would be seen so, and not extended entire, and direct, which is not
so here; but all seem entire as through a Crystal glass. Farther, if that
should fall from Trees into the water, those Trees would be known. Pliny l. 37.
c. 2. and 3, writes of Amber thus, Pitheus (says he) discovered to the
Guttones, borderers on Germany, an arm of the Sea called Mentonomon, for the
space of 6000 furlongs; from this the Island Abulus is a days sailing; from
thence Amber is carried by the Waves of the Sea, and it is the purging of the
Sea congealed. The inhabitants use it for wood to burn, and sell it to the
Germans their neighbors. Timoeus believed this, but he called the Island
Baltia. Mithridates says, there is an Island in the shores of Germany, and it
is called Osericta that is full of a kind of Cedar Trees, from thence it runs
to the Rocks. But certain it is, that it breeds in some Islands of the North
Sea, and the Germans call it Glessum; and therefore our Country men call one of
those Islands, Glessaria; When Germanicus Caesar was there with his Navy, the
Barbarians called it Austravia. It is brought by the Germans, especially into
the Country of Pannonia: Thence the Venetians first, whom the Geeeks call
Heneti, spread the fame of it, they receiving that from Pannonia about the
Adriatic Sea. That shore of Germany is about 600 miles from Carnuntum of
Panonia, from whence it is brought, being but lately discovered. A Roman
Knight, sent by Julian to trafique for this, who took care of the fencing
sports of Nero Caesar, passed over all those shores, where these Merchandises
were, and saw such abundance brought in, that the nets that were set to keep
off wild beasts from the Galleries, were full of knots of Amber, but the
weapons, and biers, and the whole provision for one day was made of Amber. He
brought a great weight or clot of it, that weighed 13, pounds. Pliny. In Amber,
as it is transparent, that incorporeal figure does easily appear; but not so
in other dark bodies. Nor yet in the matter of the wood we speak of; In which
not only the figure of a bird, but also a spermatick natural force to form it,
nourish, and augment it, and to preserve it in its vital functions, is
implanted, as in other birds. But since it is not propagated, ex traduce, from
an egg or seed, it neither leaves egg nor seed, nor gives more to another than
nature gave to it. For if it laid eggs, that chickens might proceed from, the
Barnacle had been so bred her self; but neither of these is so. For as a Mule
is not bred of a Mule, but from the mingling of an Ass and Mare together, so
it does not generate a Mule, but continues always Barren, as this bird does.
Bees are bred of Worms, the Worms in the honey combs from honey, by a
wonderful operation of nature, though without any sensible body of seed, yet
not without virtuall seed imprinted on the Honey-Combs by the Bees, which they
first had from Heaven.

Nor is it possible, that these effectual and spiritual qualities should
proceed from the pure Elements, or only by propagation; since the matter of
the seed, which is made of nutriment and blood, could be extended in infinitum
without diminution of it self. For we observe, that the Elements are but like
dead and material receptacles of the formal virtues, and that the matter of
the seed is daily supplied, and heaped up by the Elements. And therefore it is
necessary that the formative force, should daily flow into the formed seeds;
or, where they are wanting, into a matter prepared by Nature from corruption,
or other operations. From whence the form of this wonderful Creature is easily
drawn, namely, that it is an imaginative virtue of the Heavens, or of the Sun,
actively infused into a viscous matter of that wood in those places, so
disposed by corruption, that it may enliven it, and promote it to be a new kind
of living plant, or bird included in a shell; which so soon as it falls into
the waters may swim, and when the wings are grown, fly about. The final cause
is the common ornament of the World, the variety and wonderful works of
Nature, the profit of those that dwell near, and especially the providence,
omnipotence, and clemency of our good and great God, all whose attributes do
appear to mankind as well from this creature, as from the rest, whilst he
crowns the year with his free gifts, and the whole earth with variety of
Creatures. So that he is far more mighty in creating and making different kinds
of living Creatures, than we are able to express them, to nominate or to know
them. Let it suffice us, that we have seen some part of the wonderful works of
God, and taken a view of them* for it is not possible for a mortal Man to be
capable to apprehend them all; yet to consider of none of them, were brutish;
and we should, so, be more like unto Beasts than Men.

OF Natural Wonders.
The Seventh Classis. Wherein are set down the Wonders of Four-footed Creatures.
Seneca l. 3. de ira. c. 30. WE are troubled with frivolous and vain matters. A
red color makes a Bull angry, and a viper is stirred by a shadow. A picture
will make Bears and Lions fiercer. All things that are cruel and ravening by
nature are moved with vain things. The same things happen to unquiet and
foolish spirits; they are stricken with jealousy and suspicion of things.
CHAP. I. Of the Elk, and the Ram.
THe Elk is a four-footed beast commonly found in Scandinavia; in Summer of an
Ash Color almost; in Winter it turns toward black. The horns are fit for
footstools, each of them is 12 pound weight, and two foot long. His upper lip
hangs out so long, that he cannot eat but going backwards. Men write, that he
is subject to the falling sickness; and that the remedy he has is to lift up
the right claw of the hinder foot, and put it to his left Ear. It holds the
same virtue, if you cut it off when he goes to rut in August or September. He
is commended for his swiftness, for he will run as much ground in one day as a
horse shall in three. He is very strong; for a strong blow with his foot will
kill the hunter. The Ram for six Winter months sleeps on his left side; but
after the vernal equinoctial, he rests on his right. Aelianus has discovered
this, but the Butchers deny it. In Camandu a Country of Tartary, they are as
big as Asses, their tails weigh 30 pound weight. One was seen in the Court of
the King of the Arabians, whose tail weighed 40 pound, Vartom. Cardanus
ascribes that to its cold temperament, when the rest of the bones will no more
be extended. Lest he should be choked with his own fat, he sends down the
humor unto his tail.

CHAP. II. Of the Ass.
IN the Kingdom of Persia, Asses are so esteemed, that one of them is sold for
30 pound of gold; amongst the Pigmies they are as big as our R^ms, Paul Venet.
In Egypt they amb^e so swiftly, that one will go 40 miles a day without any
hurt, Scalig. Exerc. 217. s. 1. She does sparingly dip-in her mouth when she
drinks. She is afraid, says Cardanus. For when she beholds the great shadow of
her ears in the water, she is fearful they will be wet. There are some found
in Africa that do not drink: She staleth when she sees another stale* or upon
a dunghill. For Nature does stir them up being slothful, by the acrimony of
the smell. Cardan. l. 10. subtle. Observation proves, that where an Ass has
cropped a vine branch, the vine will grow more fruitful. The monument of this
matter was seen at Nauplia, where an Ass of stone was set up in thankful
remembrance for posterity. Vadimonius writes, that there is a fruitful
Orchard, in the middle whereof she was buried, Aldrovand. l. 1. de quadr. c. 2.
In Hetruria when they have eaten Hemlock they fall asleep, that they seem to be
dead. The Contrymen are deceived by it, for oft-times they rise up and
fright them when they have pulled off their skins almost, Mathiol. in
Dioscorid. Sheep will run into the fold, if you pen them in an Asses stall. If
one be stung by a Scorpion, if he sit upon on Ass with his face toward the
tail, the Ass will endure the pain, and not he. It is a sign of it, because
she will dye farting, Merula. Asses milk is commended. Poppaea, the Wife of
Domitius Nero, that conceived in all 500 times, did wash her body in a Bath of
Asses milk, thinking to stretch her skin thereby, Plin. l. 15. c. 40. (...) of
crete, being in a Consumption, recovered by feeding on Asses flesh. Moreover,
there are some in Scythia whose horn contains Stygian water, for it will pierce
through iron vessels. Some in (...) have one horn in their forehead: Who drinks
out of that, is preserved from a disease; but if any venomous matter be drank,
it is ca^t forth. They are so strong, that they will kill a horse to travel
with them. Also that was a wonderful one, that was sent as a present with
other gifts by the King of Assyria, to Ferdinand of Naples* for the hair was
wonderful, the body was full of streaks, of diverse colors and equal lines,
Pontan. d^ Magnificent.

CHAP. III. Of the Boar, and the Archopitecus.
IN Crete there are no Boars. In a great part of the New World there are some
that are less than ours. Their tails were so short, that the Spaniards thought
they were cut off. The fore-feet are whole, the hinder feet cloven. In some
parts of Scandinavia they are 12 foot long. Scaliger writes, that the petty
King of Salvimons, had a huge one, which would at the sound of the horn go
forth to hunt with his Lord and the dogs. Archopitecus is a creature in America
that is wonderful ill-favored. The Inhabitants call it Ha^^t; He is as great
as a Monky, his belly touches the ground, he has a head and a face like a
child; and when he is taken, he sighs like to a child. Three claws hang to his
hinder feet, and four long ones to his fore-feet, like the great prickly bones
of a Carp, and with these he creeps up upon Trees. His tail is 3. foot long. He
was never found to eat man's flesh, whilst he is alive; and they think he lives
upon nothing but leaves, which in their language they call Amohut. When he is
tame, he will love a man, and run up upon his shoulders. Thevet left him in the
open Air, yet was he never wet.

CHAP. IV. Of the Ox.
IN one of the outermost Provinces of Asia, between the outmost Mountains of
India and Cathay, Oxen are bred white and black, with a horses tail, but more
full of hairs, and reaching down to their feet. The hairs of them are most
fine, like feathers, and as dear, Venet. Brought into Hispaniola they will grow
so much, that they are greater than Elephants, Petr. Martyr in Decad. In these
parts where we write these things, Guickardinus testifies that one of them
weighed above 1600 weight: we saw one at Leyden that weighed 2970, pound But
Ptolomaeus 11, had the horn of one that held 27, gallons. When the Cows are
great with young, men say they carry their young ones on their right side,
though they be great with two. But they that drink of the River Charadrus, not
far from the City of the Patrenses, conceive for the most part only Males: the
same will come to pass if in time of copulation you bind the left testicle of
the male with a band; or let them couple when the North wind blows, Pausan. in
Achaicis: and if the right, or when the South wind blows, the Cows will
conceive a female. The Cows if they be more fruitful in summer, are a Token of
a rainy Winter. For a fruitful Creature cannot abound with generative humor,
unless it be moved by a celestial influence, Albert. Sometimes they are very
fierce. In the year 1551 in Rhoetia, between Duria and Velcuria, some of them,
brought into the fields from two Villages, fought so violently that 24, were
killed before the combat could be ended. Gesner de quadrup. Sometimes they are
puffed up with fulness, for the cure whereof they use a Charm, nameing the
swelling, In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Men say that
Pythagoras, by whispering some words at Tarentum, tamed an Ox, so that he
forsook bean straw, and followed a Country Man, and lived to be very Old at
Tarentum, eating out of men's hands, Coelius. The smok of Oxe-dung will preserve
Bee-hives free from Flies, and Spiders. Bullocks blood powered into a wound,
will stop the bleeding. Also the dry dung burnt, drunk three spoonfulls, will
cure the dropsy.

CHAP. V. Of the Buffe and Bonasus.
A Buff is a Creature greater than an Ox with a bunch on his back, (two or
three men may sit between his Horns) for it has a very large forehead, and
curled with hair that smells like Musk. The flesh of it is most fat in Summer,
but it tastes of Garlic that it feeds on. It is wonderful strong, for he will
take up a Horse and his Rider. The blood of it is redder than purple, so hot
that it will make Iron on the Hunters Spear turn every way, and in the
greatest cold it will corrupt in two hours. In the Scotch woods, they so abhor
the company of men, that they will not touch the shrubs that men have touched,
after many days; and being taken by art, they will dye for grief, Cambd. in
Scotia. Gesner makes the Bonasus to be a kind of Bugle, of whom men write that
he dungs extreme hot when the Hunter follows him; but that happens to living
Creatures by running so fast. The intestines grow hot thereby, and heat raises
winds, which being shut in, they break forth violently through a narrow place,
chiefly if there fall out to be any pressing of the places by motion. Also the
Cuttle fish gives an example, that fear will cause her to cast out her inky
juice. Philip King of Macedon, killed one with a Dart at the foot of Mount
Orbelus, the Horns were 16, handfulls, which were consecrated to Hercules.

CHAP. VI. Of the Camel.
THe Camel has a manifold belly, either because he has a great body: or,
because he eats Thorny and Woody substances, God has provided for the
concoction. Puddle water is sweet to him* nor will he drink River water, till
he have troubled it with his foot. In Africa when they have fasted 50, days,
they will not eat at night, but when they have their burdens taken off, they
will feed on leaves in the fields. Leo Afric. L. 3. He lives a hundred years,
unless the Air agree not with him. Plin. They serve the Indians to travel
with, if we credit Philostratus; nor is it beyond his force, to go a thousand
furlongs in one day. But that kind of Camel, the Africans call Ragnail, will go
a hundred miles a day for 8, days together, with a very little meat. They never
couple with their dams. When as his keeper had admitted him to the dam veiled*
when she was discovered, he was so enraged, that she trampled on him, and threw
her self headlong. Arist. in admirand. Examples show that they are very
docile: when they are longer on their journey than ordinary between Aethiopia
and Barbary, they do not whip them forward, but they sing to them, whereby they
will run so fast that men can hardly follow them. One at Alcair danced at the
sound of a Taber, being taught by a strange art. For when he is young, he is
brought into a stove, the pavement being very hot. One plays on a Tabret at the
door, he because of the heat lifts up one foot: they continue this exercise,
and use him to it a whole year, that coming in public remembering the hot
pavement, when one plays on the Tabret he will lift up his feet, and seem to
dance Leo. Aphric.

In the Land of Giants there is a Creature that has a head, ears, and neck
like to a Mule, a body like a Camel, a tail like a Horse, he is 6, foot high,
and five foot long, his neck is as white as a Swan. There was one brought to
Middleburg in Zeland, Anno. 1558. It was called an Indian Sheep. Scalig. in
exerc, calls it Allo. Camelus.

CHAP. VII. Of the Shee-Goat.
THe report is that Goats see as well by night as by day, wherefore if those
that are blind in the night, eat a Goats Liver they will be cured. They breathe
out of their ears and nostrils, if we will credit the Shepherds. Phi^es gives
the reason, because when their nostrills are stopped, they are not hurt, Aelian.
When the Sun sets, they lie backwards in the fields, and so they do at other
times, but one with another. A Goats horn laid under a sick man's head, will
bring him to rest; scraped with honey, it stops the belly flux; burnt, it will
raise people in a Lethargy. In Egypt they are said to bring 5, young ones. The
cause is the water of Nilus that is drank by such as are Barren and want milk.
They show the revolution of Syrius. For as often as he rises with the Sun,
they turn to the East and gaze upon it, Plutarch. In some part of Africa, they
sheer them, and make Cabels of their hair. Those of Lybia show when rayn
comes, for so soon as they come forth of their stalls, they run to feed, and
presently come back to their stalls again, Ael^an. Those of Giman^a do not
drink in six months; but, turning toward the Sea, they receive the vapors
with open mouth, and so they quench their thirst. The Goat of Mambrey will
endure a saddle and bridle, and a rider; he has ears that hang down to the
ground, and horns twisted below his mouth, Gesner. l. 1. de quadrup. The wild
ones in L^bia are as great as Oxen; so active, that they will leap upon the
highest Mountain tops; and their limbs are so hard, that if they fall, they
neither break their horns, nor hurt their heads, Aelian. l. 14. c. 16.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Beaver and Colus.
THe Beaver is a most strong Creature to bite, he will never let go his teeth
that meet, before he makes the bones crack, Plin. His hinder feet are like a
Gooses, and his fore-feet like an Apes. His fat tail is covered with a scaly
skin, and he uses it for a rudder when he pursues fish. He comes forth of his
holes in the night; and biting off boughs of Trees about the Rivers, he makes
his houses with an upper loft, and when the water rises, he lies there,
Albert. When they are cut asunder, they are very delightsome to see; for one
lies on his back, and has the boughs between his legs, he holds them fast
that they may not fall down, and the others draw him by the tail to their
Cottage. Colus is a four-footed wild Beast, amongst the Scythians and
Sarmatians, he is for greatness between a Stag and a Ram. He is white, and
very swift. He draws his drink by his nostrils into his head, and holds it for
some days; so that he will feed well enough in Pastures where there is no
water, Strabo l. 7. Sometimes they will be 500 together; but about Easter you
may see 2000. In March they dig up an herb, by the sent whereof they stir up
venery; when that is spent, for a day they lie as half dead, but when they
taste of it once more, they are restored, Gesn.

CHAP. IX. Of the Cat and C^ney.
THe Cats eyes are so good, that she will see any thing in the dark, Albert.
The Cat by the Egyptian Sea is observed to change the pupils of his eye, as the
Sun does alter. They are long in the morning, round at noon; when the Sun sets
they are obscured, Gellius. He commonly plays on his back, that he may look
round about. Cut off his ears, he will stay at home more, for he cannot endure
the drops that fall into his ears. If a Cat's hair fall into a man's mouth, it
will stick there. Hence matter is heaped together, that causes a Scr^fulous
diseases. Scaliger says, That in the Province of Malabar, there are wild-Cats
dwelling in Trees, they leap as though they flew, having no wings. They have a
membrane stretched out from their fore-feet to their hinder-feet, when they
rest they contract it up to their belly; when they begin to fly, by moving
their feet and thighs, they are carried and born up by stretching out and
gathering in this membrane, and it is wonderful to see them run as if they ran
in the Air.

Conies are abundant in the Baleares, where they do the Corn and the fields
great harm, Solin. They breed every month, nor are their young ones blind.
They presently take Buck again, so soon as they have bred, though the young
ones do suck, Plin. l. 10. The female has not milk presently so soon as she
has brought forth, before she has been six hours with the Buck, and they have
eaten some Oats, Gesner de quadrup.

CHAP. X. Of the Stag.
IT is certain, that there are white Stags, and Does that have horns.
Apollonius saw them as he passed beyond Paraca a City of the Indies,
Philostrat. l. 3. Sertorius led one about, which he feigned to have received
from Diana, that he took counsel with, that so he might keep his Soldiers in
obedience, Gellius. Lewis King of France took one, and when Anna of Britanny
asked what that was, he said, That they were all such at first, and that God
took them from them for their pride. Their blood has no fibers, as other
creatures have, and therefore it will never grow thick. The Gall is not upon
the Liver, but upon the Intestines, or in the Tail. Hence it is so bitter, that
dogs will not eat it, Plin. In their heads they have live Worms; sometimes 20,
and they are parted, so great as Maggots in flesh. They are said to breed under
the hollow of their tongue, near the Vertebra, where the head joins to the
neck. If you pierce the scull bone in such as are of years, under the eye, you
shall see Wasps fly out, bred of the superfluous humor, if you will credit
Hunters; and then he can live no longer unless he eat a Serpent to renew
himself. Gesner writes, That in the basis of the heart between the lap of the
greater ventricle, and the urinal vein, there is a bone found. He adds, That
it is reddish from the heart blood, and melancholic; some add, that from a
dry vapor it is turned into a bony substance. Some add further, that it is
found at no other time, than between the two Feasts of the blessed Virgin, that
is, from the middle of August to the I^es of September. The Do breeds near the
pathwayes, for she thinks that she is safe from wild beasts, by reason of men
passing up and down. So soon as she is delivered, she first ea^e the gleaning*
hence it is, that the herb Seseli is her medicament in bringing forth, Arist.
in hist. animal. They swim over the Sea like Ships, the Master Buck leads, the
rest follow. They lean their heads one upon the others back; then the first
brings up the rear, when he is weary, and would refresh himself. By nature they
conquer Serpents. For by strong sucking in their breath, they will draw them
out of their holes, and then devour them. After this Banquet they bathe
themselves, and eat Crevish. Then they weep, and their tears are turned to
Bezar stones. They die, if they drink before they have done this, Gesner.

CHAP. XI. Of the Dog.
THere are many wonderful things in a Dog, his manner of birth* quick sent,
biting, docile nature, fidelity and the like. The puppies are borne blind; the
more they suck, the slower they are to see, but commonly in 7; days, if they
see quickly; but 20, days is the longest time. Some say, if one Whelp be
littered, he will see in 9, days; if two in ten, and so it is if there be more*
each adds a day of blindness to the time. Lastly, one bred of the first
litter of a Bitch will see soonest. The best of the puppies is that which sees
last, or which is first puppyed. Albertus writes, that he saw a Mastiff that
first littered 19, then 18, then 13, at one time. He has a sent so quick that
he will never eat Doggs-flesh, be it never so well seasoned to deceive him. In
Scotland there is a kind of them that will pursue a theif, and if he pass over
a River, they will swim over after him, and when they come on the other side*
they will hunt about to find his footsteps, and still follow him, Gesner. A
mad Dogs biting is wonderful Venomous and deadly. (He runs mad about the Dog
days with the Toothache; he is cured if he eat Hellebour with Barley flower,
and Vomit it up again) the piss of a mad Dog trod upon hurts extremely those
rhat have an Ulcer, and it is observed that their wounds will increase by
treading on it, that were ever bitten by any Dog. They will cause Hens eggs to
grow addle, and Cattle to miscarry. A man had a wound in his Arm: that, after
12 years that he was bitten, became sore again, and he died in two days.
Albert. Fear of water first troubles such as are bitten, and, which is the
greater wonder, after 7, years it may show it self; One thought, that he was
cured, being washed with Sea water, yet after some months by touching of the
Dogg-Tree-Wood he fell into a relapse. Gesner. Also in their Urine, Dogs heads
are said to appear. As for their docilenesse and fidelity, there are many
examples. The Dog of Francis, Marquis of Mantua, would call his servants. They
will draw Coaches, carry burdens in Ibissibur a Country of Tartary. Lipsius
Cent. 1. had a Dog at Lovain that would carry letters so far as Brussels, ad
Belg. Epist. 44. and he would bring letters back from thence. A Dog at
Brussels would carry money to the Shambles, and fetch ^ome meat, ^e fought with
other Dogs upon the way, and when he was beaten, he laid hold of a piece. The
Dogs at Rhod^s knew Christians from Barbarians, Gabel^n* Histor.

A certain Mountebank in the time of Justinian the Emperor had a Dog that
would take up many Rings, cast down, and restore every man his own; he would
tell you by pulling them by the clothes which was a Wife, a Widow, or a Maid.
Lastly, in Plutarch, there was one that would represent a Man that was
poisoned. We read of the wonderful fidelity of Dog in Scaliger his
Exercitations, I will set it down in his own words, and upon his own
reputation: A Courtier envying the credit of a certain friend of his, or
carried away with some other malice, came suddenly upon him, and killed him,
and after buried him in a place besides the way. The party slain had at the
same time a Hound with him, who lay a long while upon his Masters grave. Hunger
for that time overcoming love, he returns home, and being seen without his
Master by some other friends, who thought the dog had been strayed from him,
they bade that some meat should be given him. Having let down a few morsels, he
returns to the grave: Which course he continued so often, that the friends of
the dead began to suspect; and at last believed that the Dog sought for his
Master: They follow him, and coming to the place where the earth was cast up,
dig into it, find the body, take it away, and cause it to be buried in another
place. The solemnities ended, the dog keeps with them whom he had led to this
discovery. A good while after, the Murderer comes again to the Court; the Dog
knows him, and begins to run at him with great cries, and so earnestly pursues
his point upon him, that suspicion begins to enter into the minds of a great
many, that there was some evil in the man. The dog continuing still to vex
him, the King was at last advertised of the case, who commanded that the man
should be straightly examined touching the fact. He affirms himself innocent:
The dog, when the Murderer denied that he knew what was become of the Dogs
Master, never left barking and bawling; insomuch, as all that were present took
the same as a disproof, that the dog made against him. Well, the matter
proceeded so far, that the King ordered it should be decided by a Combat
between the man and the dog. To make short, the dog had the day: and the Combat
is painted and finely set forth in the Hall of a certain Castle in France; and
the work wearing out with age has sometimes been renewed by Commandment from
the King. It deserves (says the Lord de la Scale) to be set forth in pictures
of brass, that it may never perish.

But to close up this Discourse, we will add hereunto that which James
Micyllus a learned Poet has written in praise of a Dog, in good Latin Verses,
expressed thus in our Tongue: Of any Beast, none is more faithful found,
Nor yields more pastime in house, plain, or woods;
Nor keeps his Masters person, or his goods
With greater care, than does the Dog or Hound.
Command: he thee obeyes most readily.
Strike him: he whines and falls down at thy feet.
Call him: he leaves his game and comes to thee
With wagging tail, offering his service meek.
In Summers heat, he follows by thy pace:
In Winters cold, he never leaves thee:
In Mountains wild he by thee close does trace;
In all thy fears and dangers true i^ he.
Thy friends he loves; and in thy presence lives
By day: by night he watches faithfully
That thou in peace may sleep: he never gives
Good entertainment to thine enemy.
Course, hunt, in hills, in valleys, or in plains;
He joys to run and stretch out every lim:
To please but thee, he spares for no pains:
His hurt (for thee) is greatest good to him.
Sometimes he does present thee with a Hare,
Sometimes he hunts the Stag, the Fox, the Boar,
Another time he baits the Bull and Bear,
And all to make thee sport, and for no more.
If so thou will, a Collar he will wear;
And when thou list to take it off again,
Unto thy feet he coucheth down most fair,
As if thy will were all his good and gain,
In fields abroad he looks unto thy flocks,
Keeping them safe from Wolves and other Beasts:
And oftentimes he bears away the knocks
Of some odd Thief that many a fold infests.
And as he is thy faithful bodies guard,
So is he good within a Fort or Hold
Against a quick surprise, to watch and ward;
And all his hire is bread musty and old*
Can thou then such a creature hate and spurn?
Or bar him from such poor and simple food?
Being so fit and faithful for thy turn,
As no Beast else can do thee half such good?


CHAP. XII. Of the Ma^mase^ and the Catoblepas*
IN the Country of Prasium, Monkeys are as big as great Dogs. The tail of one
is five cubits long; hair hangs down from their foreheads, and they have long
beards, and an inbred tamenesse, Strabo l. 15. There are others wonderful
great, like to men. For by their legs, face, privities; they look like Country
men, they are elsewhere all-over hairy. They love Children and women, and
desire to embrace them, Cardanus. The common ones are well known, they have
testicles of a blew and green color. When they eat up the ears of Corn, one of
them lies perdue in the field, and makes an outcry when he spies a Country man,
the rest fly. They so hate a Crocodile, that they cannot endure to see his skin
at a great distance. Gyllius made trial of it, and he observed, that they being
tied in chains, yet trembled and scowred, and would have run away through fire
and water to escape. In the borders of Cariai, there is a kind of them that
will leap from bough to bough, as if they flew, they are enemies to Boars; for
it will leap furiously upon him, and twine about him with the tail. Aelian l.
3. says, That the Catoblepas is like the Bull, and is very terrible to behold,
and fierce, and with blood-shot eyes it looks downwards. It feeds on venomous
herbs, and so soon as it looks on them with a countenance like a Bull; it
fears, and lifts up the Mane; having lifted up this, with open lips it roars
terribly, sending such a steam out of the Throat, that the Air over the head
will be infected, and will make others dumb that draw it in, and causes mortal
convulsions. The Soldiers of Marius found it to be so; for they supposing it
had been a wild sheep: they ran at it with drawn-swords several times, but when
they were killed by it, they found their error. This wild beast was slain
afterward by the Nomades that were horsemen, and they brought it to Marius.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Baboon and Chamaeleon.
A Baboon is a Creature with a head like a dog, but in shape like a man, he
will fish cunningly; for he will dive all day, and bring forth abundance of
fish. He takes wonderful delight to wear a garment; he hurts no man. He
understands what the Indians say, he will gently feed sheep for their milks
sake, Plin. l. 7. c. 7. Strabo, l. 15. Two things are most wonderful in him;
that in the two equinoctials, 12 times a day he will make water, once every
hour, and does the same at night, Prec^os. Johan. in Epist. ad R. P. Hence the
Egyptians have the picture of a Baboon pissing upon their Dials. The second is,
that when the Moon has been sometimes in conjunction with the Sun, and loses
her light, the male will not look nor feed, but holds down his face to the
Earth; nor will the female move her eyes any way, casting withal her sperm
forth. Therefore are they held sacred, and fed until this day, that by them
the set time of the Moons conjunction with the Sun may be known by them. Africa
breeds Chamaeleons, but India more frequently* He is said to have five toes of
his feet, which he stands upon opened, but he draws them in when he lies down
upon round young branches. He changes his color oft-times, both in his eyes,
his tail, and his whole body; and he changes like that thing he next touches,
except red and white; when he is dead he is pale, Plin. It is certain, that
sometimes he lives by the Air. For he will suffer hunger a whole year, and
taking in the Air by gaping, and shutting his chaps, he will show forth his
great belly. Some said that he turns to the Sun, and draws in the Suns beams,
and follows them with open mouth. From Zandius we have it, that he will hunt
flies: who says, he dissected the tongue of one that was as long as ones hands
breadth; hollow, and empty, in the top was a hole with snivel in it, with which
he caught his prey, Card. de subtle. Alexander Myndius says, he fenceth
himself against the hungry Serpent, after this manner: He holds a bro^d and
strong stalk, and turning himself under that like a buckler, he encounters the
Serpent. The Serpent, because the stalk is broader than he can take in his
mouth to bite in sunder, and the rest of the Chamaeleons limbs are too hard for
him to do him any harm, he labors in vain.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Crocodile.
THe Crocodiles are bred in Egypt, but not all so dangerous; the furious ones
are toward the Mountains, from Caire to the Sea they are mild; that is because
there is scarsity of fish; but here are men that are rewarded to kill them. For
whosoever kills a great Crocodile, and brings it into the City, has ten crowns
out of the Treasury. Also when Nilus runs back to its channel, the Crocodiles
will lie hid in the mud, watching to satisfy their hunger; and they strike
those that come, and strangle them with their tails. They strike so strongly,
that one of them brake the four legs of a great beast at one blow, Martyr. They
lay one egg as big as a Goose egg, yet from this small beginning they grow to
a vast bigness; sometimes they are more than 18 cubits long. In the time of
Psammeticus 25 cubits; in the time of Amasis 26, Plin. They hold their young
one legitimate, if he catch up something so soon as he is hatched, Aelian.
Their tongue sticks all fast, the reason is given by Aristot. l. 2. de part.
Anim. c. 7. The Trochilus is his guard, and the Tentyritae are his Enemies. He
awakes him when Ichneumon is like to do him hurt, and entering into his wide
Jaws he pulls out flesh from amongst his rows of teeth with his beak; when he
flies away, he is warned to close his upper chap, Plutar. Plin. 8.25. But these
swim in the River, and getting upon their backs, as if they rid, they thrust a
bough into their mouths, and frighting them with their cry alone, they compel
them to vomit up the bodies they had newly devoured, that they may be buried;
hence it is that there are none in their Island, and the very smell of a man
will make them fly away. How he fights, the history of him will show.

CHAP. XV. Of the Horse.
IN Portugal they say, the Mares conceive by the wind, Varro, Pliny, and
Solinus affirm, that the Birth is fruitless, for their Colts live not above 3,
years. Justinus calls these things Fables. In the Island Hispaniola, the foals
conceive in ten months after they are born, and often times they bear twins,
Peter Martyr. A Barren Mare will conceive, says Aldrovandus, if you bruise a
little handful of Leeks in a Mortar, and power upon it a little cup of Wine,
and shall for two days cast in 12. Spanish flies of diverse colors into the
Matrix with water by a Syringe: the next day have your Horse to the Mare that
is lusty; when he has leapt her, wash the privities twice. In the Province of
Belascia their hoofs are so hard, that they are never shod. Amongst the Ambes
they are so swift, that they will run a hundred miles in 24 hours. Ludov. Romans
l. 4. Navig. And Historians relate of such a one that was taken in the Alanick
War by Prince Probus. In Artois the Governor of the Fort, Mellomus, had one
bred, very large, and with Horns: at this day is to be seen the leap he made,
which was 60, foot. Lipsius Cent. 3. ad Belg. Epist 56. They live very long;
some have come to 50, years, and some above 60, years. Albert Solinus and
Niptus say 70, years. The same says, We have observed that, in Opus by name, a
Mare lasted to breed on, for 40, years. They so fear a Camel that they cannot
endure to see him or smell him, wherefore Cyrus when he was to fight against
Craesus, opposed his Camels against the others Horses, Herodot. Pliny writes
that if Horses tread where Wolves have passed, they will be benumbed in their
legs: and Aelian adds, that if they touch the foot step of a Wolf when they
are in a Wagon drawing, they will stop presently as if they were frozen. The
Tartars love to eat their flesh, and the rich men had it roasted in their
feasts in Persia. The Moscovites, of old time Servants to the Tartars, were
wont to pay tribute to them in their journeys, by their Duke when they demanded
it, of Mares milk. Their sweat, causes women with Child to suffer abortion,
and if Knives hot be wet with it, they are so infected that the part they
wound, will bleed till they dye, Albert. They will weep: Caesar's Horse wept 3,
days before he died. Cardan had a Gennet that would weep abundantly, chiefly in
Summer. They are so docile, that Alexanders Bucephalus, nor Caesar's Gennet,
could be ruled by any man, except his Mr. There have been seen in Olandia an
Island of the Gothic Sea, that at the sound of a Tabret would dance. Scalig.
writes of one thus, A certain Mountebank led about a little Horse, which would
do any thing at his word, or beck; amble, trot, run, leap, on four or two feet,
drink Wine, sit on his buttocks, and bring his foreseet to the cup, he would
hold a Basin or Dish, with his Legs, as if he were to be barb'd, he would lie
on the ground at length, and shut his eye lids and nod. He would lift up his
head at his Masters beck, turn on his back, and lie to show how women lay: this
I saw, says he, and we also, says Gaudentius Merula, saw a Horse of a
Physician of Pannonia, that stood at the door untied till his Master came forth
from visiting the sick, if it were a whole day, etc.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Urchin.
A Hedg-Hogg or land Urchin, is a Creature with a Hogs snowt, he has most
stiff bristles on his skin, that a sword can hardly cut them. Volch^rus Coiter,
first observed that he rowls himself up like a ball, by reason of a long and
broad Muscle over his whole back that contracts the skin. He opens, if you
pour water on his belly. For because he cannot breath, he opens and cries with
a shrill note. Rosenbach in Indice. About the time of the Vintage, he goes
under the Vines, and he breaks down clusters of Grapes, and takes them upon his
prickles, Plutarch. When he is taken he pisseth on his back, and it corrupts,
therefore he never uses that mischievous way, but when he is past hopes, for
they hate their imbred Venom, and will not hurt themselves; and will stay till
the very last, that they will first be almost taken.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Elephant.
THe Elephant is a stranger with us, but the Indians and other places have them
common. The King of the Palibroti had 90000, of them; of the Siamenses, 12000;
and 4000 of them were armed against sudden occasions: The great King of Mogor
had 50000 at command. Vartomannus saw herds of them in Mozambica. In Africa
there are plenty. For Appianus Alexandrinus writes that there were 300 stalls
for them at Carthage. Many strange things are spoken of them, and the most part
past belief. Lipsius has collected them in his Epistle; we shall briefly
reduce all to two, that is to their body and soul. As for the first; it is
exceeding great, the greatest of all land creatures, wherefore the Hebrews call
him in the plural number Behemoth. It is certain that of old time they carried
Castles of armed men into the Field, and an Author namelesse writes that he saw
one of their teeth sold for 36 Ducats, it was 14 spans long, and 4, spans
thick: so heavy that he could not take it up from the ground Aldrovandus. In
his heart he has a bone wonderful big, that Aldrovandus writes he saw in one
that was killed. Aristotle maintains that he has three stomachs. There were
two found that weighed 225 pounds, Vartomannus. As for its soul, Writers set
down great endowments that he has. Christophorus Acosta, who searched
diligently the East Indies writes things that are incredible of them. It is
most certain, says he, that in the Kingdom of Malabar they talk together, and
speak with man's voice. There was, says he, in the City Cochin an Elephant, who
carried things to the Haven, and labored in Seafaring matters: When he was
weary the governor of the place did force him to draw a Galley from the Haven
which he had begun to draw, into the Sea: the Elephant refused it, the
Governor gave him good words, and at last entreated him to do it for the King
of Portugal. Hereupon, (it is hardly credible) the Elephant was moved, and
reported these two words clearly, Hoo, Hoo, which in the language of Malabar
is, I will, I will, and he presently drew the ship into the Sea. There was
another example at Rome; when Tiberius was Emperor, 12, Elephants were brought
into the Amphitheatre, in Clothes that Players use, and first their Commander
divided them into several places of the Circuit, as they went they went easily
as if they danced, and again when he spoak, they came together and danced in a
round, and they scattered their flowers and Garlands, and according to the
music, they gently and in order moved their feet, and performed all things as
well as the best sword Players. Then they (which is a mad wonder) as they were
taught, sat down at Table, did eat and drink very modestly as if they had been
men. The beds to sit on were low, covered with Purple, and embroidered work,
the Tables were furnished with diverse kinds of provision in abundance, cups of
Gold and Silver, great and small; were set upon them, in great dishes were
meat, bread, flesh, and fruit. Then came in the Elephants, 6, males, and 6,
females, they in Men's Gowns these in Women's Clothes. They lay themselves very
decently and reverently on the beds, and so sat at Table. Then, when the Mr.
gave the sign, they put forth their snowts to the Table instead of hands, and
take the meat very modestly, and taste of it, no greediness or ravening was
observed in them, none seemd to covet the greater or the better part, nor did
they catch one before the other when boys that waited on them gave them the
cup, and then by means of their trunk drank it jovially off, and they did
sprinkle the remainder of the Wine upon the standers by, and so made a noise as
pot companions do. Lipsius writes this in his own words, and it is the direct
opinion of Aelian. And they learn all these things so eagerly, that Plutarch
and Pliny say, that an Elephant that was something dull, and was often beat for
not learning well, was found acting his part by Moon light, and some say that
Elephants will learn to write and read. For Pliny says plainly from Mucianus,
that one of them learned to describe the Greek letters, and did write in the
same tongue these words. I my self* writ this, and I offered the Celtick spoils.
But what we may judge of them may be collected out of Libavius de Intellectu
bestiarum. They seem also to hold a sympathy with the Moon, for when the Moon
after Conjunction begins to appear again, they crop boughs from Trees, and
hold them up, and looking toward the Moon, they shake them. They may (...) her
diety. But I say no more.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Dormouse, and Gulo.
THe Dormise sleep all the Winter as round as a ball; when they come to the
calm Air they will revive between your hands, by a warm breathing, Gesner. They
are strangely taken in the valley of Pelnig: for the Country men go forth in
the night with Torches, and coming near them, they blind them with the light,
and so take them with their hands. They put Apples on cleft sticks or forks,
which the Dormise love to eat the kernels of, so they can the better take them
out: Amongst the Rhetians that speak Italian, they salt up their flesh, because
it is sweet and fat, and as pleasant as hogs flesh, Gesner. Gulo is a creature
in the North parts, he feeds on Carrion, till he be full like a drum; then he
goes between narrow Trees, and presses his stretched belly till he unload
himself, and then he crams again, Michov. l. 2. descript. Sarmat. Europeae.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Hyaena, and the Porcupine.
THe Hyaena is a Creature as big as a Wolf, and has horses hair, but harder,
and it goes all over his back, Aristot. in admirand. He seems to have the
genitals of both Sexes; but some have only a long line under their Tail,
Aristot. If you take hold of the right, when he is at his venery, he becomes
stupid; but if by the left, it kills him, Gillius in Aelian. A Portupine is
like a Pig at two months old, he has a head like a Hare, ears like a man,
feet like a Bear, a mane that stands up, and the forepart is hollow. Two little
bunches of skin grow on both sides of his mouth; long bristles grow out of
them. In Summer he lies hid, but comes forth in Winter: and when it is great
with young, it is said to follow the Bear in time, Agricola de subterran.
Gisner refers Cardanus Monster to the Porcupine, for he writes thus, l. 10.
subtle. There was a Creature (says he) of a strange kind, which this present
year 1530, January 19, we saw at Papia; It was as great as Fox, but the face
was sowething longer, and the jaws were like to a Hares, with long hair, and
two very long teeth, for they stuck out as long as a man's finger, like to a
Squirrils teeth, the eyes were like to Serpents eyes, black, and without
corners. There was a cap on its head like a Goats beard, but no otherwise than
a Peacocks tuft. The hair was like to a Weasels, very fair, only about the
neck it appeared like white wool; the forefeet were like a Badgers, the ears
and hinder feet like to men's, but that the feet had nails like a Bear. On the
back and hinder part, there were about a hundred thorny quills like a
Porcupine, some of them were crooked at the point; they stuck forth, but were
not moveable, as they say the Porcupine can shoot hers; when it moved they made
a noise by rusling together. The tail was like a Gooses, but the feathers were
pointed like thorns. If you saw nothing else, you would say it were a Goose. He
had feathers white and colored, and a great eye like a Goose. The tone was
obscure and hoarse like the barking of a dog. It was an angry creature, yet the
Mountebank could easily deal with it. It hated dogs extremely, this was a young
one, and a she. It did not drink, but eat bread dipped in water, etc.

CHAP. XX. Of the Hee-Goat.
A Goat sometimes runs so violently at one, that he will run a hole in a board,
or a Target: after he is 7 months old, he begins to couple, Aelian. His blood
is a present remedy for the pains of the stone in the Reins or bladder. For it
dissolves stones that are bred, and will let no more grow, easing the pains
also, Aetius l. 11. c. 12. But great Gesner shows how it must be prepared. When
the Grapes begin to grow ripe, take a new pot, and pour water into it, and boil
it until the pot have been well cleansed, then take a Hee-goat that is of ripe
age, out of the herd, about 4. years old, and kill him, and receive the
middlemost blood in the pot, leaving that blood that came first forth, and that
which comes last: let the middlemost blood thicken, and as it is in the pot,
break it into many pieces with a sharp reed, then expose it to the open Air,
covered with a thick net, or thin linen cloth, or a close sieve, that it may
be prepared by the Sun, and become dewy; wipe off the dew, and after two of the
clock set it in the Sun, taking care that no rain fall upon it. When it is well
dried, put it up diligently in a box for use; and when the pain abates, give a
spoonful of it with Candie wine. This medicament is called Gods-hand.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Goat called the Evick, and the Indiat Rat, Ichneumon.
THe Evicks in the Alps are a kind of wild Goats. They naturally require cold,
otherwise they would grow blind. They have huge weighty horns that are
reclining toward their backs; and the elder they are, so much the greater. The
old horns are with 20 knots grown on them, and then two of them weigh above 16
pounds. There is no rock so steep but they will leap upon it, if they can but
find place to stand; some say they will climb up a steep wall. Hunters say,
that when they are ready to die they will clamber up a very high rock, and
leaning one horn against the rock, they will run round continually, till they
have broken it, and fall down dead, Gesner. Ichneumon is a Creature in Egypt
with a long tail, like to a Serpents, Oppian. Without the Chin he has an
excrescence beset with hair, when it is hot he opens that, his mouth being
shut. The Country men of Alexandria sell the young ones in the Market; for they
bring them up to catch Mice, which they will do like Cats. He is an Enemy to
the Crocodile; for when he observes him sleeping, he rolls himself in clay,
and goes into his mouth, and so into his belly, and eats his Liver, and then
leaps forth again, Gillius in Oppian: but Gesner will not believe it.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Lion.
THere is plenty of Lions in the Province of Gingui, they are so offensive to
the Inhabitants, that they dare not go out of their houses by night, nor come
with Ships into the Haven, Gesner. Lions bones have no marrow in them, and are
so hard, that they will strike fire, Aelian. They have teeth like Sawes. Their
neck is made of one stiff bone, without any vertebra's: they have five claws
on their forefeet, and but four on the hinder feet; the balls of their eyes are
black, Aristot. They are no gluttons, for they eat but once in two days, and
drink in like manner; for when they are crop-sick, they will abstain one day;
and when they have eaten too much, they will thrust in their claws down their
throats, and pull it out again, Aristot. When they have filled themselves with
the flesh of any creature, they will breathe on the remainder with open mouth;
whence it will stink so, that no Creature will touch it, Aelian. They sleep but
little, and when they do sleep, their eyes are half open. They bring forth but
once in their life, and that but one, says Herodot. hist. 3. The Whelps
littered, sleep 3. days; The Males roar, and rouse them, Gellius l. 13. c. 7.
They love their young ones exceedingly. In Pangeum a Mountain of Thrace, a
shee-Bear had killed the Lions Whelps, when the Lions were absent; and she was
gone, and clamberd up a Tree. The old Lions followed, but they could not get up,
so they could not be revenged. The Shee-Lyon stayed, and the He went into the
Mountains, and found a Shepherd with an Ax, the Lion favvnd upon him who was
sore afraid, and makes him take up his ax: and taking hold of his Cloths,
brought him to the Tree: which being cut, the Bear fell down, and they tore her
in pieces. The Lion is mild to them that yield. He will scarce hurt those that
lie down, and when he is not hungry he will seize on men, rather then women,
but not upon Children unless he be extreme hungry. Avicenna writes that if any
man throw a stone or dart at the Lion, and miss him, or hurt him but little he
will rather threaten him than kill him: if he do revenge, he will do no more
hurt, than he received; Crantzius in Saxon, l. 8. c. 24. He says, that
formerly in England a Lion could tell noble blood from base. There are tame
ones: For in a plain Country of the Kingdom of Fez, they will drive them with a
staff, and in another Country of Africa, they gather bones in Villages, Leo
African. Lastly those of India are so gentle, that being used to the place they
will be led on hunting, Aelian. Marcus Antonius first yoked them, they are
frighted with Coach wheels running round, and with the Combs, and Crowing of
Cocks, but chiefly by fire, Plin. In Armenia they are killed with the powder of
deadly fish, Aelian, and some little Worms that are Venomous to Lions, with the
powder whereof they strew flesh for them, Solin.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Hare.
THe Country of Ithaca is dangerous for Hares, for bring them thither they will
dye. But the Baleares is a pleasant place for them: for heretofore they were
there in such abundance, that the inhabitants desired Soldiers to assist them
against them, from Augustus, Pliny. The young ones are white in the Alps in
Winter, Gesn. But Pausanias saw in Arcadia white ones brought from Lybia. He
wakes with his eye lids shut, and sleeps with them unmoved, Xenophon. He sees
but ill, for the eyes are stretched out, the eyelids are cut short, they do not
cover the pupills of the eyes. Albertus denies that there are of both sexes, but
Niptus says, That which Albertus said concerning Hares was always a question
with me, for in hunting I observed that a Hare had both a yard and testicles,
and had young Hares in her belly, also we observed that a Hare had a Matrix,
and young ones in it, and did want both pis^le and testicles. Rondeletius
thinks, they are little bladders full of sanies; and indeed such do hang down
from the beaver, wherein Castoreum is contained. They are said to live with
dew, they use superfaetation, and bring young ones every Month. When they go to
their forms, they lay their young ones at least, an acre of ground asunder,
lest if danger come, they should be all in hazard. Then they, running about
many rounds, at last leap out into their form.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Wolf.
IN Sardinia, Candie, Olympus, there are no Wolves. In Scandia if they go too
far on the frozen Sea, the cold blinds them, Jervand. In the Mountains of
Doffrinium they are white, and go in Troops. They eat Moles, Mice, etc, Olaus.
Their necks are pressed together, so that they cannot stir it, to look about,
but they must move their whole bodies, Aelian. One that is hungry will smell
his prey in the night, though the wind be contrary, for half a mile, Stumpfius.
When they have fasted very long, and have filled themselves again, their
bellies will hang down, their tongues swell, their mouth is stopped, their
ravening is abated, but returns again, when they become lank as they were,
Aelian. They devour hair, and bones and all, and void them as they eat them,
Stumpf. When they are to fight in great herds, they fill their bellies with
earth. When they are to pass over Rivers, they join tails; loaded with that
weight they are not easily thrown down, and the floods can hardly carry them
away, being joined together, Aelian. When they have choice, they will always
spare man; they fight also with hogs, very cunningly. One told me, (says
Albertus) that a Woulf was seen to take a great piece of wood in his mouth of
30 or 40 pound weight, in a Forest, and did use with that to run over a great
stock of a Tree, then when he thought he was skillful enough in that exercise,
he hid himself, and a wild hog coming thither by reason of Oats that were
sowed there, and many hogs young and old with him; he brake forth, and catched
the hog, that was about the bigness of the block, he lept behind the stock of
the Tree and there devoured him. They will not eat Oxen, if you hang his tail
at the Cratch, Albert. Horses will tire under the rider, if they follow on the
Wolves footing; if they tread on his heel, they will stand still, Gillius. The
skins of sheep slain by Wolves, will breed lice; but their flesh is the
sweeter, Aristot. Plutarch ascribes this to his breath. His words are, The
flesh of a sheep that is bitten by a Wolf, is made the sweeter, because the
biting of the Wolf makes it soft and tender; for the breath of the Wolf is so
fiery, that he will melt and consume the hardest bone in his stomach. Examples
show, that when he is shut in, he will do no harm: For in Italy, one going into
a Country-mans house, the Country man ran away; but the Wolf did his Children
no hurt, and falling into the same Cave with a Fox and a Woman, he hurt
neither, Gesner.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Lizzard.
VOlatteranus writes, That there was a Lizzard 8. cubits long brought to Rome
from Aethiopia, by the command of a Cardinal of Lisbone, and the mouth of it
was so wide, that a Child might be put into it. Lerius c. 10. hist. saw one in
Brasil, 7. foot long, as thick as a man's arm. If you strike it on the soal, and
cut it in two pieces with a twig, neither part will dye, but it parts, and
first goes, then joins together, Aelian. The green ones are friends to man,
that they will gaze upon him obliquely, and follow him when he goes; they will
lick up his spittle, and Childrens urine, Erasmus in colloq. de amicitia. Putt
alive into a new earthen vessel, and boiled with 3. Sextaryes of wine to one
Cyathus, it is excellent good for one sick of the P^hisick, if he drink of it
in the morning fasting, Marcell. Seven of them suffocated in half a measure of
oil* and set in the Sun for 3. days, will so alter it, that by anointing
therewith, it will cure the Rose, Gesn. A water Lizzard, if he be angry, and as
it were puffed up, will stand upright on his feet, and look terribly with open
mouth on him that hurt him, and will by degrees send forth a venomous white
swear, till he become all white, Agricola. When he is old and cannot see, he
lies by a hole in the wall, against the East, and looking toward the Sun
rising, he regains his sight, Isidor. To conclude, it is a wonder that Aelian
speaks in his history. There was (says he) a man that caught a great Lizzard,
and with a brazen point he put out the eyes thereof, then he put it into an
Earthen pot full of holes, that it might have breath, yet not come forth; he
put in also de^y earth, and an herb, whose name he mentions not: then with an
Iron ring, wherein the stone Sogates was set, in which was cut the picture of a
Lizzard he made 9 seals, and every day he blotted out one: Lastly, when he took
off the 9 th. seal, and opened the p^t, I saw the Lizzard, and his sight was
restored.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Lynx, and Lutra or Otter.
THe Lynx is said to see so clearly, that he will pierce through solid bodies;
yet too great light offends him. Some say, they only suck the blood of their
prey, and never meddle with the flesh. Erasmus says, he assaults greater
four-footed beasts, leaping upon them from Trees, and catching them by the
crown with his ^alo^s, he will tear their heads, and eat their brains, not
touching the other parts; but he will eat lesser creatures every bit. In Summer
they are weak, in Autumn strong. They hide their piss in heaps of sand, as
Theophrastus says, and it grows as hard as a precious stone. It is like Amber
in color, and draws things to it; it cures pains of the Kidneys, and the
Kings-Evill. We saw one at Lions in the repositary of Cl. Dominus Baudartius.
Men say, that in Carpathus they burn their claws, and their skins for to be
drunk effectually by men in powder, against all obscenenesse, and against too
great lust in women, Plin. The flesh eaten with the broth cures quartan Agues,
and the bones burnt cure Ulcers, Collinus. In the Tower of London there was
once a living Creature that Gesner refers to a Lynx; It was always moving, and
would never stand still, as John Gaius an Englishman writes; but it would stand
still at the voice of a Hickeway* Lutra has a Dogs head, the Beavers ears, a
Foxes legs; but these are somewhat thicker, they are more prevalent in Water
than on Land. The hinder parts are plain with a membrane to fence them. His
Cottage is near the waters, it is made of boughs that it cannot be we^.
Sometimes it is so full of Fish, that they stink. It is so quick-sented, that
he will smell fish by water that comes forth of a ^ivule^ at some miles
distance, and will go to the Fish Ponds and destroy them. In Scandinavia he is
so tame, that he will bring fish out of the water to the Cooks in the Kitchins;
but because he is greedy of his prey, and kills too many, he is seldom used.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Mouse.
AMongst the Allobroges the Mice are white, and the Inhabitants think they live
by Snow, Scaliger. In the Island of Cyprus they will gnaw Iron; and in another
Island, Gold; therefore they are cut in pieces for metal, Aristot. in mirab.
Their generation is wonderful: If they do but lick salt, some think they will
conceive without copulation, Aristot. A she Mouse great with young, staying
some time in a vessel of Millet seed; when the vessel came to be opened, there
were found 120 Mice, Plin. In a part of Persia, she-Mice were opened that had
she-mice with young ones in their bellies. They first perceive when a House
will fall; Helice is an Example of it; for five days before it happened, the
Mice and Serpents were seen to go away in Troops, Aelian ^n variis. When they
fall into a vessel of water, and can hardly come forth, they lay hold one by
the tail of another, and so clamber forth. Elephants cannot endure the smell of
them, for they will not feed on any thing that Mice have touched. They will
^lye away if one be gelded, or let run away with the skin of his head pulled
off. Avicenna, when they cry they foreshew tempests, they cry either because
they perceive the Air cold, or because their skin is fine, and they cannot
endure to tread on the cold earth, and therefore they leap up, Aratus. Some
think they will not be taught, yet Albertus says in upper Germany, he saw a
Mouse hold a Candle at supper time, to give light to those that sat at Table
when his Mr. commanded him. If a Mouse fall into new Wine and be drowned, put
him into hot ashes, and he will recover, Col^mel. 12.31. There are many kinds
of Mice; A rat is four times as big as a Mouse. Agricola saw one taken in the
midst of April, that was white, with red eyes sticking out, and it was all
hairy, and had a beard with very long hairs. Men say that there are none to be
found at Auspurg about the Temple of St. Huldericus, when they are lustful
they are furious, so that i^ they piss on any naked part of a Man* it will rot
to the bones, nor will the Ulcer be cured Albert Aquatic. They will hunt fish,
and diving under water they will find some holes to come to land another way.
The field-Mice that breed of putrefaction have one right gut, and no more. A
Physician that dissected one, observed that, Gesner. When Nilus runs back
again, little Mice are found imperfect, part of their body being alive from the
mixture of earth and water, and part dead earth. In some places they come so
suddedly in abundance, that they will eat up all the Corn, Pliny. The
Wood-Mice steep from the ending of Autumn till the Spring begins, Gesnerus. In
Norway it is called Citellus, it dwells in the Caves of the earth. There are
found sometimes 40, in one hole, with abundance of small nuts. They eat them
fresh, or dried in the Chimney, Agricola. The Cricotus, or Hamester, is
referred to Mice: his hair sticks so fast to his skin, that the skin will
sooner come from the flesh, than the hairs from the skin. He will not easily be
drawn out of his hole, but by scalding water. The male is false; for when there
is meat enough within, he shuts out the female. But she revengeth his
falsenesse with fraud; for possessing her self of some hole, not far from him,
she will gather Corn he knows not of, and live upon that, Agricola. Mice in the
Alps are as big as Hares, or else betwixt a Co^ey and a Hare. It will foreshew
a tempest with a very shrill voice like a pipe, and that not only in the
Mountains, but when he is kept in the House. He has three holes in his cave,
at one he enters and comes out again, in another he rests and dwells, in the
third he ^ays his excrements. When Mountains are covered with snow, he hides
himself in his Cave, and shuts the holes: he stops in the earth so fast, and
rams it in, that it is easier to dig up the earth on either side, than where it
is rammed into the holes.

CHAP XXVIII. Of the Wesil, and the Sable Wesil.
WEesils carried into Baeotia will run away: in a certain Island they will not
be taken out, for if they be, they dye, Albertus. There was a man that affirmed
he saw a Weesil passing over the River Limagus, constantly leaping; so that he
never swam, but leaped upon the surface of it. It is an Egyptian
Hieroglyphick, for they say it ingenders by the ear, and is delivered by the
mouth; this emblem shows the nature of speech. His genitalls are bony; and is a
special remedy against the stone. Yet, that must not, says Albertus, be
understood as if it were so indeed, but only by proportion that it has. The
Germans call the best sort of them Zobella. This skin is of very great price:
for sometimes 2000 Crowns at Constantinople will hardly buy a coat of them.
Jovius. But the nature of them is such, that laid in the Sun to dry, they will
consume more, than if they be worn a whole year. This creature whilst it
lives, always lurks in a shady grove, and watches for Coneys; They are nimble
and use their tail for a helm, as squirrils do, and will leap from Tree to
Tree.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Sheep.
SHeep are creatures known to all. The Arabian Sheep have a very broad tail;
and the fatter it is, the thicker it will be: Some tails weigh ten pounds, some
20, and it naturally grows fa^. Johannes Africanus saw one above 80 pound
weight; some have seen them above 150 pound weight. In Africa, Rams are bred
with Horns presently, and also Sheep, as there are some with Horns in England.
Albertus saw a Ram that had 4, great Horns growing on his head, and two long
ones on his legs, that were like to Goats Horns: yet in Pontus in the Province
of Scythia they have no Horns, Aristot. And they have no gall; But in the
Island Naxus they have two, and men say the Pontic Wormwood is the cause of it.
Plin. In cold Countries when the snow abounds, they lose it, but recover it
again in the Spring, Aelian. Anno, 1547, one was given to the French King that
was very fat in Picardy: one of the claws, namely the inward claw of both feet,
was eight inches long, the extreme part of it turned upwards, and it had a Horn
like to wild Goats, Gesner. In the Country of Prasy, they yield most sweet
milk; for it rayns liquid honey that they feed on, Aelian. The milk is very fat
in the Isle Erythea, for it has no whey, and to make cheese they temper it
with abundance of Fountain water. The cause is the plenty of pasture. It grows
so fat and full that in 30 days the Sheep will be choked, if it be not let
blood, Pliny. About Calimos a Village of India, they smell like fish, for
wanting grass they eat fish* and they that feed on fish give them dry fish to
eat, Arrian. When the North wind blows, males are chiefly conceived; when the
Southwind, females. For such is the force of the North wind, that it will
change those that yean none but females, and cause them to bring males, Plin.
When a noise is made they flock together; and if, when it thundereth, one that
is with lamb be left alone, she will miscarry, Arist. In the Orcades Islands
they all almost yean twins, and often times 3, lambs, Boethius. Though their
bodies be very soft, yet they are free of the plague, Columella. One was seen
to run mad, which a mad Cow had hit with her Horn. In England they rot in their
bowels, if in rainy Summers they feed on moist ground, and lick the dew,
Gesner. In France if they eat the herb, Duva, they breed black Creatures in
their Livers, and this disease is incurable. The French in Normandy call that
herb Duva, that is like to the sharp dock, but the leaves are narrovver, and
stand alvvaies upright, and the middle nerve is almost red, and serves for
Causticks, Gesner. Meadovv water drank, breeds Horseleeches, shut up in
bladders in the same place; they are a finger and half long, and almost half
as broad.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Wild Goat called Oryx, and the Panther or Leopard.
PLiny reckons Oryx amongst wild Goats. When the Moon comes to the East, it
looks upon it and cries; and men say, that for hate thereof, it will dig up
the ground with its forefeet, and will set the very balls of the eyes to the
ground, and cast it up. Some think it does the same when the Sun rises; what
place soever in the desert it finds water in, it will trouble it by drinking at
it, and stirs the mud, and throws dust into it, that it may not be fit to
drink. The Panther smells so sweet, that it will allure all the wild beasts;
but the frowning countenance it has, frights them; wherefore he hides his
head, and so they come and are caught. In the right shoulder they have a mark,
like to the Moon; and as that increases, this increases, and decreaseth,
Albert. It breeds but once in the lifetime, if we credit the Author of the
Book of natural things. When the young ones are grown in the Mothers belly
they will not tarry, but tear out their passage: she with pain is delivered of
them, and so can never after conceive again, the parts being corrupted where
the seed should stay. Demetrius Physicus writes of it, that one of them lay in
the way waiting for a man, and suddenly appeared to him: he was frighted* and
began to run away, but the wild beast came and tumbled before him that was
frighted, and was grieved at it. Which also may be understood of a Panther: For
she had litt^red, and her Whelps were fallen into a pit. First therefore he had
cause to pity her, and not to be afraid; and next to take care: and he was
secure, as he understood the cause of her grief, and followed her, she gently
laying her claws and drawing him by the garments; and he had his life for a
reward for taking out her whelps; and she having got her young ones again, went
along with him, and guarded him out of the desert, and she was jocant and
merry, that it might easily appear how grateful she was, and not to wrong him
for his good deeds; which is a rare thing in a Man. They love wine, and when
they are drunk they are caught. The Holy Ghost likeneth Alexander the Great,
who founded the Grecian Monarchy, to the Leopard. You shall see the
application in Cl: Domino Conrado Grasero, our Master, in his Isagogue of
Universal History, a Work never can be enough commended.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Frog.
FRogs couple in the Spring, and lay their spawn in the spring of the year
following; in the middle of it the frog lies hid, the Frogs being come forth,
show their great heads, Albertus. At Lutavia they catch Bees when they come to
drink at the water; it is observed, that they will eat a dead mole, Albert. In
August their mouth is so shut, that they can neither eat nor drink, nor cry;
and you can hardly open it with your hand, or with a stick, lib. de not. rer.
Their young ones are destroyed by the leaves of Mullens, or Nut-leaves cast
into the water, Aelian. If a candle lighted be set on the bank, they will leave
croking, African. in Geopont. Their spawn is first found in March, wash your
hands in it, and it will cure the Itch. Gesner says it will cure the worms,
whereof a fellon is a kind, if you lay it on your fingers. The Egyptian Frogs
when they light upon a water-Snake, will take a reed in their mouths, and so
they cannot be devoured, Gillius. A Toad burned, will breed again of his own
ashes. But in Dariene a Province of the New World, they breed presently from
the drops that fall from their slaves hands, whilst they water the pavements.
Martyr changes them in Summer into Fleas; he ascribes it to the filthy muddy
Air. If you beat him with a wand, he will first cast forth his venom by his
legs, and then he sweats some drops like milk. Frederick Duke of Saxony gave
one of them to hold till it grew hot; it was first thrust through with a
wooden spit, dried in the shade, and wrapped in Sarsnet; and this was his remedy
to st^nch blood. Gesner makes the reason to be, Cold. Borax is a kind of Toad,
especially of a brown color, and in hot Countries is of a cubital magnitude,
and sometimes carries its young on its back. In the forehead of this Toad is
the stone found, sometimes it is white, sometimes brown, which is best, if it
have a yellow spot in the middle. Some say it is only a bone; some say it is
bred of that bird-limy froth, which Toads meeting together in Springtime, do
breathe into the forehead of one of the chief of them. Gesner l. 2. de
Oviparis, he cannot believe that it is a stone. He that would hear more of
Frogs, shall ^ind it in the books of Libavius, his Battrachiorum, if he reads
them.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Rangifer, and Rhinoceros.
RAngifer breeds in the North, specially in Norway and Swethland; it is like a
Heart, but bigger in body, and exceeding strong. He ^ath three ranks of horns on
his head, so that in each there are two, and his head seems to be set about
with twigs. Of these two are greater than the rest; when they come to
perfection, they are five cubit^, and have 25 branches in them, Albertus. They
are milked, and will go 30 miles a day, Olaus. Rhinoceros is a Beast as big as
an Elephant, he has one horn in his nose, and from thence he has his name. It
is moderately bent, and so sharp, that is will pierce stones and Iron, Aelian.
His skin is very thick with skaly crusts, in color and figure like a Tortoisse
shell; It is so fast, that a Dart can hardly enter it. He is an Elephants
enemy, when he fights with him, he whets his horn on a stone; then putting his
horn under the Elephants belly, where it is softest, he rends him. He that will
see examples, let him read Camerarius in subcisivis horis.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of diverse Serpents.
IN the Province of Caraia, under the King of Tartaria, some Serpents are ten
yards long, and ten hands broad; some want forefeet, but have claws in the
room of them. Their eyes are as great as two small loaves. They are wonderful
good in Physic. For one, bit by a mad dog, if he drink but a penny weight,
presently he will be suddenly cured; and a woman in labor, if she taste never
so little thereof, will be delivered immediately, Paul Venetus. Americus
Vespatius saw some in the Indies that men did eat. They were as big as Kids,
and a yard and half long, their feet were long, armed with strong claws; their
skin was of diverse colors, and nose like a Serpent. From the ears to the end
of the tail, a certain bristle went quite through the back, that you would
think they were Serpents indeed. Calecut breeds the like so great as Boars, and
sometimes with greater heads, four feet, no venom, yet they bite dangerously,
Ludovic. Romans in Navig. In Hispaniola, called Hivana, of the West Indies, there
are some like to these. Their back is with pricks, their heads crested, they
are mute, with four feet, a Lizzards tail, very sharp teeth, they are bigger
than Conies, they live indifferently in Trees, Land, or Water, and will suffer
hunger many days. Anno 1543, there appeared four-footed beasts in the borders
of Germany near to Styria, they were like Lizzards, and had wings, their biting
was incurable. Anno 1551, about St. Margarets day in Hungary near Zischa, about
the River Theisa, they were found in the bodies of many: They killed about 3000
men. Some came out of men's mouths, but they went in again. It is almost
incredible what is reported of those places: That multitudes of them were found
in piles or handfuls of wheat: and when the Country men thought to burn them,
there came a great many more forth, and charged them with man's voice to
forbear, saying, that they were not bred naturally, but sent by God to punish
men for their sins.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Squirril, and Ape-fox.
THe Squirrils have but one blind gut, as great as a stomach, and in dissection
it is always found swollen with excrements, Vesalius. They are said to have a
bony generative part. They foresee a tempest, and opening their holes on the
contrary side, they shut those places where the winds will blow, Albert. When
it would pass over the water for to find food, he takes the bark of a Tree
that is very light, and sets it on the water, sitting in it, and stears it with
his Tail lifted up, and so the wind carries him over, Author. lib. de nature. The
Ape-fox is a Creature in Pariana, a Country of the Indies. Before, he is like a
Fox; behind, an Ape: he has man's feet, and Owls ears: under his common belly
he has another belly like a Wallet; she keeps her young in this, and it comes
not forth but to suck, Gillius. Peter Martyr Decad. 1. l. 9. says, he saw one
dead, amongst such vaste Trees, that 16. men together could not fathom round.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Ape.
THere are in some Countries Apes in abundance. Posidonius saw a wood full of
them in the borders of Lybia. In a word, Alexander saw Mountains full of them
in the Indies. He thought when he espied them by chance, standing upright, that
an Army was ready to besiege him, Aelian. Amongst the Troglodites they have
Manes like Lions, and the greatest are as tall as weathers, Scalig. in Exercit.
In the Indies Mediterranean, they are huge bodies, and they follow civil
Merchandise without any offense. Galen thought them the likest to Mankind,
amongst all creatures, for their Bowels, Muscles, Arteries, and Nerves. But
Vesalius says, they are the most unlike in the Muscles of the Thorax, that
move the arm, cubit and thigh; and those that move the shoulders and toes; and
lastly, for the inward structure of the hand. A Male was seen, whose heart had
two points, Albert. Scaliger saw many without tails, as great as a boy of eight
years old, and a male and female with their young. If the young desire any
thing, the she is admonished by the he clinching his fist, and he will
correct her with a fierce look, as being guilty of ill-using her young ones.
Mutianus says, that those which have such tails, are sad when the Moon is
decaying, and they rejoice and adore the new Moon. He adds, That some were
seen to play at Chesse, for they will imitate a man unluckily; for an Ape saw a
Midwife wash the Child, and bind him up in swathebands, and lay him in the
Cradle, when he spide that the Child was alone, he went in at the window that
was open, and took up the Child and unswathed it, and washed it with scalding
water till he killed it, Aelian. He is very much afraid of a snail. Erasmus
says, At Rome we had an example of this. A man put a snail on his Child's head,
and covered it with a Cap. Then he brought him to the Ape, who was glad and
leaped on the boys shoulder to look lice, taking off his Cap he saw the Snail:
it was strange to see how he was frighted and leapt back, and how fearfully he
looked backward to see if the snail followed him. Another example. We tied a
snail to one end of the cord that the Ape was tied with, that he could not get
away, but he must look upon it; it is wonderful how he was frighted, only he did
not dye for fear; sometimes he strove to drive away the beast that stuck fast
with his hinder feet, at last he pissed and shit all he had in his belly; and
of this fright he fell into a fever, that we were forced to let him loose, and
to give him Wine mingled with Water to refresh him.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Su and Subus.
SU in Patagonia, is a most monstrous beast, she takes her Whelps on her back,
and covers them with her tail, when the hunter follows, and so she escapes.
Wherefore she is caught in a pit, covered with leaves: when she is taken, she
kills her young ones for madness, and cries out so horridly that she frights
the Hunters, Thevet. in descript. Americae. Subus is an Amphibion, with two
Horns: he follows shoals of fish swimming in the Sea: Lobsters, Pagri, and
Oculatae, are fishes that love him; but he cares for none of their love, but
makes them all his prey.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Sow.
We shall contract briefly what is said of the Sow. It is a creature we know,
but it will not live in Arabia, Pliny. Brought into Hispaniola, it grows as
great as a Mule, Martyr. In Aethiopia it has Horns. In England and Sclavonie,
they have none. In Macedonia they are mute, Aelian. A Sows brain is fat: when
the Moon decreaseth, it abateth; the ears are full of a humor like gall. When
she looks upward, she is silent; for, looking commonly down ward, when she
looks upwards, the light dants her, and her sharp artery being straightned
holds in her voice. Aphrodis. Sometimes, she will grow so fat, that it is
miraculous. There were two ribs of a Hogg sent to L. Voluminous being in Spain,
they weighed 23, pound; and from the bone to the skin was a foot and 3,
fingers, Pliny. And Crescentiensis says, that the whole hog weighed 570 pound.
There was one seen in Arcadia, that the Mice and Rats had eaten into it, and
bred there: The same happened at Basil, Gesner. For some Creatures have fat
that is insensible: and we read in Pliny, that the fat was taken away from the
Son of L. Apronius the Consul, and his body was made lighter, of a burden one
man could not carry. As concerning venery, Sows breed often that are homebred;
but wild Sows but seldom: For they have plenty of meat, and do not labor much;
these must seek for it, and wandering over the Mountains, endure trouble,
Plutarch. Both of them are so wearied with copulation, that they fall asleep,
and will grunt and grow so mad, that they will rend those that come near unto
them, Aristotle. They will miscarry. They are friends with the Crocodile, and
will come to the banks of Nilus without offense, Calcagn. They mightily hate
some kind of Barley in Thrace, for they do not only forbear to eat it, but
they refuse all excrements that proceed from it, Aristot. in admirand^ The
Measils is a common disease amongst them, and there is scarce any Hogg that
has not three kernels. The Druides make mention of a famous remedy, an herb
that grows in moist grounds; but because they command us to gather it with the
left hand, and that he that gathers it must not look back, and must lay it no
where but in their trough that they drink, having first bruised it, it is
superstitious.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Mole.
THere is great store of Moles, in Boeotia in the Country Orchomenia, Arist. In
Lebadia that is near unto it, there are none; and brought from other places,
they will not earth. Aristotoles says, they want eyes; but Gesner says, their
eyes are plain, and putting forth, without the skin like black spots, as great
as Millet seed, and fastened to their nerves. Also a Learned man in Gesner
says, That he found young ones in one that he dissected, with great heads, and
they had eyes: They delight in Toads; and Albertus testifies it by his own
example: but he also knew Frogs and Toads to eat a dead Mole. Johan. averlin.
Consul Gedanensis was cured of a Fistula in the corner of his eye, by the
powder of a Mole that was burnt, and given him in powder to drink.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Tatus and the Tiger.
TAtus is a four-footed Creature that is a stranger to us. It has a thick
covering, and a scaly shell, so that his flesh may be easily taken forth of it.
I first saw this Creature at St. Andrews in Scotland (it is an Archiepiscopall
City, and there is a famous University in it) in the place for rarities of the
most noble and most courteous Gentleman John Arnet, Protonotary for the Office
of the Commissary in the Archbishopric of St. Andrews, at whose house I
lodged. But because it draws it self into its shell, it is thought to be a
kind of Brasilian Urchin. It is like to that which in new Spain is called
Avitochli: it is as big as a Cat, having a bill like a Duck, feet like a
Hedgehog, a long neck; and men report, that it grunts like a Sow. I have
little to say of the Tiger, unless I should set down the history of Peter
Martyr, of one in Dariene, an Island of the new World. It did so afflict the
whole Island with killing people, that no man could go safe out of his house,
afterward it fell into a Pit that was dug, and stuck upon sharp stakes that
were fastened in the bottom, and was yet so strong, that it would break Spears
cast upon it, into a thousand pieces; but in the end it was killed with stones.
Ledesma a Spaniard says, they boiled the flesh of it, and he eat part thereof,
and it was as good as Ox-flesh: It is a Creature so swift, that Oppianus
compares it to the West wind.

CHAP. XL. Of the Tortoise.
TOrtoises in Taprobana are so great, that one of them will weigh 300 pound,
Scalig. Pliny says, that some are so great, that men may dwell under them. And
between the Islands, especially of the red Sea, they row in them for Boats.
The Sea- Tortoises have no tongue, nor teeth, they break all things with the
edge of their snow. In Hispaniola at what time they are given to venery, they
come forth of the Sea* Sand being cast into a deep pit, she lays 3. or 400 eggs
there; when she has laid all, she covers her eggs with sand, and returns to
the Sea, taking no more care for her young ones. At the time appointed they
come forth, as out of an Ant-hill, in great multitudes; only by heat of the
Sun, without help of the old ones, Martyr. The eggs are as big as Goose eggs.
When the head of one is cut off* it does not die presently, but sees, and will
shut its eyes, if you put your hands before them; and if you put them near, it
will bite them, Aelian. Bellonius saw a kind of Tortle brought out of Turkey,
that the Ancients knew not of. The shell of it is thin and Transparent, like to
the color of a Chrysolite. The Turks make hafts for knives of them, they are
so precious, that they adorn them with studs of gold. There is an Island in the
Sea found by Jambolus toward the South, that brings forth little Creatures,
that are of admirable virtue for their blood and nature. Their bodies are round
and like to Tortles, with two overthwart lines cutting one the other in the
middle; in the end of each of them there is an ear and an eye, so that they see
with four eyes, and hear with as many ears. It has but one belly without any
gut, and what it eats runs into that. They have many feet round about, and walk
both ways. The blood is said to be of wonderful virtue. For every body that
is wounded will grow together again, if it be smeered with this blood, Johan.
Boemus*

CHAP. XLI. Of the Bear.
IN the farthest part of Arabia they devour flesh, Strabo l. 1^. But in Mysia
it is otherwise; for when they are hunted, they send forth a breath that will
corrupt the flesh of the Hunter; and if they come nearer, they will cast a
phlegm out of their mouths; that kills or blinds dogs and men, Aristot. in
mirab. Sometimes they are very great, five cubits long. There was one brought
to Maximilian that was as great as a large Ox, Vadianus. His head is so weak,
that a sound blow will strike him dead, Pliny. He eats his water when he
drinks, and having tasted of the Apples of Mandragora, he recovers by licking
at an Ant-hill. She is said to bring forth a young one bigger than a Rat, but
less than a Cat, that is both naked and unformed in its parts, Gillius: and
Pliny, a rude mass. But one that was cut forth in Polonia was sent to Gesner,
it was above ones finger long, and as thick as ones thumb; the body had joints,
except the hinder feet, Gesnerus. When he is fa^, he creeps into his den upon
his back* and so takes away his footsteps, that the hunters may not perceive
them. In this den he will grow lean in 40 days; and he will keep himself
alive, lying still and sneking his right foot 14 days. When he perceives that
his (...) is grown so empty, that it cleaves almost together, he comes forth
and feeds on Cuckow-pint, Aelian. Then there is no show of meat left, but only
a little moisture in his belly, and some small drops of blood about his heart.
Theophrastus thought that, during that time, the flesh was digested, and the
Bear grew bigger by it. The Males love women. Amongst the A^^obroges one was
seen, that caught a Maid and carried her to his den; and wooed her venereously,
and fed her with Apples growing in the Woods. Swidrigelus* the Prince of
Lithuania has tried it, that they will grow tame. For he bred up a Shee-Bear,
which he was wont to feed by hand, and she was wont to run into the Woods and
come home again, and would come home into the Prince his Bedchamber, Volater.
l. 7.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Fox.
IN Caspia there is such abundance of Foxes, that they will go into Country
houses, and come into Cities, Aelian: and will be so tame, that they will fawn
like dogs. They are very strong, in Sardinia, for they will kill the fiercest
Rams, and young Calves, Munster. They are white in Muscovy; in Arabia they are
of an ill-favored hair, and exceeding bold. At night they rowze one the other
by barking, and seeking for their prey, they will snatch away men's very shoes,
Scalig. When they are to pass over frozen Rivers in Thracia, they will lay
their ears to the Ice, and so judge whether it be thick enough, Plin. When they
see a flock of birds flying, they will roll themselves in red clay, that they
may appear like blood and they counterfeit themselves dead; but when the birds
come to sit upon them, they catch them, and eat them, Herus. When they are
troubled with fleas, they will take some soft straw, and dip their hinder parts
into the water; the Fleas when they feel the cold water, will creep up toward
their heads, and then they put their heads under water, and the Fleas will leap
into the straw, the Foxes let go the straw, and run away.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the Unicorn.
AUthors ore of diverse opinions concerning the Unicorn. They doubt whether
there be such a creature, some affirm it and some deny it. Garzias, ab Horto.
Physician to the Kings Deputy in India, observed a creature like to the
description of an Unicorn. It had a wonderful Horn, that he would turn
sometimes on one side, sometimes on the other, and sometimes he would lift it up,
and sometimes let it down. Ludovicus Vartomannus says, that he saw two of them
sent to the Sultan at Machae out of Aethiopia, to Mahomets Tomb, they were shut
up in Lattises, and were not fierce. The Horns of this creatures are showed in
many places; At the Monastery of St. Denis there is a whole one in a dark vault
of the Sanctuary, and the end of it stands in water. The water is given to
drink to those that go under that hollow arch; so soon as they have drank that,
they suddenly fall into a great sweat. There is one also seen at Venice, in St.
Marks Church, and another at Rome covered with a Purple covering. Aldrovandus
writes that there was a Jew at Venice that boasted he had a true one, and
proved it by a wonderful example: for he laid a Scorpion and Spider on a
Table, and compassed the place in with the Unicorns Horn, these creatures were
not able to pass out, but were killed either by the shade or the virtue of it.
Cardanus describes it, That it is a rare creature as big as a horse, with hair
like a Weasil, a head like a Stag, that has one Horn growing on it, 3 Cubits
long; it stands in the middle of the forehead, and is right and strait, it is
broad at the bottom; it has a short neck, a thin mane, lying but on one side,
with small feet like a Goat, etc: Pliny says, that it is a most rough
creature* and the rest of the body is like to a horse, the head like a Stags,
the feet like an Elephants, the tail like a Bor^s, with one black Horn,
sticking out of the middle of the forehead two cubits length; what ever it be,
here is cause enough to doubt of it. For first there are many kinds of Unicorns
described, and we know not whether they be of the same kind. In India there be
Oxen that have their hoofs undivided, and they have but one Horn if we credit
Pliny, There are Bulls in Aonia if we believe Aelian and Oppianus. There were
some in the Wood Hercynia, if Caesar be to be believed. Ludovicut Barthema
says, that he saw in Zeilam a City of Aethiopia, a kind of Cows that had but
one Horn in their forehead, that was but a hand breadth long, and turned
backwards. As for the Horns, there is much sophistication in them. There was
one found upon the shore of the River Arula, in Helvetia, nere to Bruga: who
shall certainly make choice of these for the Unicorns Horn. That which Albertus
saw was a hand breadth and a half thick, ten foot long, without any spirall
lines, and like to a Stags Horn? And a Horn so thick and long, seems to
appertain to a living creature as great as a great Ship. Aldrovandus thinks
that the cup which Alvarez Mendosa gave to the great Duke of Hetruria, which he
had from the King of Narsinga, was rather made of one of those creatures Horns
which are seen in Basma and Macinum, Countries of Tartary, that are as big as
Elephants. The Diameter of that cup was as much as both hands could hardly
compass. He that would read more of the Unicorn, let him read Andreas Marinus,
Andreas Baccius, and Casparus Bartholinus. I for a conclusion will add
something, omitted concerning the Mule. The common opinion is that the Mule is
barren, and if they do bring forth, it is held for a monstrous thing. Yet in
some Countries of Africa they are ordinarily with young and do bring them
forth, Varro. It appears by the Monuments of the Athenians that one lived 80,
years. And they took pleasure in it, when they built a Temple in the Fort,
that this old Mule would encourage their Cattle that fell down, with
accompaning them, and laboring with them, wherefore they made a decree, that
no men that cleansed Corn should drive the Mule from their sieves, Plin. Some
write they will not kick if they drink Wine. They have an excellent smell.
Hence those Mules that are out of the way will return into the way when they
smell it, and they easily are infected with the contagious force of the Air,
and fall sick of the Plague, Aldrovandus, l. 4. de Quadrup. There is something
in them that is death to Mice; for the fume of the hoof of a Mule will drive
them from the house. Columella says, That the pain of their guts is abated by
the sight of swimming Ducks. Cardinal Ponzettus bids us to enclose one that is
infected with the Plague, into the belly of a Mule newly slain: and Marantha de
simplicibus says, he must be shut in so long, until all the heat of the Mule
be vanished; and this must be done often times.

The End of the Seventh Classis.
OF THE DESCRIPTION OF Natural Wonders.
The Eighth Classis. Wherein are contained the Wonders of Creatures that want
blood.
Plin. Histor. Natural. l. 11. c. 2. THe Nature of things, is no where more
totally in any Creature, than in the smallest Creatures: And, In the
contemplation of it nothing can seem superfluous.
CHAP. I. Of Living Creatures without blood, in general.
TRuly the nature of bloodlesse Creatures seems to be contemptible; and not to
be compared in the least, with the shoulders of Elephants that carry Castles,
or the necks of Bulls, and their fierce casting up of things into the Air; nor
to the Manes of Lions: yet is there no where a more remarkable piece of
Nature's Workmanship; and Nature is no where total, more than in the least
Creatures. For in great bodies there was a sit place to work in, the matter
being ductile; but in these that are so small, and almost as nothing, what
reason, what force, what unspeakable perfection is there? Where has Nature
placed so many senses in the Gnat? Where has she set her eyes? where her
smelling? Where has she made that horrid and great Voice, considering its
proportion of body? how has she cunningly fastened the wings? lengthned the
legs? has disposed a hollow place instead of a belly? and made it thirsty
after blood, especially man's blood? but by what art has she whe^^ed the snowt
of it to make it penetrate into the skin? And since the smallness of it cannot
be discerned, in comparison with that is very great, nature has helped it by a
twofold art, that it might be sharp to pierce, and hollow to drink with all.
Plin. l. 11. c. 2. Aristotle reckons 4, kinds of bloodlesse creatures; The
soft, the hard crusty, the shell-wearing, and the insect. The soft kinds want
scales, and their skin is not rough, nor with a shell, but soft as it is in
Men. They have no bones, no bowels. If there be any, they are like to fishes
prickles, except only the Polypus. Plin. l. 9. c. 28. Their heads are between
their legs, and their bellies, they have no tongues, nature only has given
them something that is fleshy, to discern the pleasure of that they eat. But
they have a Brain, and they have that is proportionable to that part which is
designed by nature for the principality of feeling. Also they are of both
sexes. The parts of the males are all more rough, and distinguished with
various lines running between, the tail is sharper, the passage under the
throat, comes from the brain to the bottom of the pipe; and the place it is
carried to, is like to the teats. It is double that is set above in the
females, and reddish little bodies are joined to it in both sexes. They refuse
salt water, they can hardly endure cold, for they are naked, and fearful
because they want blood. Their eggs when they are laid increase as Worms do,
but they must needs have their vital force from the seed of the male, as fishes
have. Aristot. de generat. l. 3. c. 8. Of those that are crusty there are two
kinds, for they are all either with tails or round. Their tail is evident and
stretched forth: the cover of this, as it were, covers the end of their belly,
and is so joined to the lower part of their belly that it shows not at all like
a tail; Scalig. exercit. 245. Their parts are as the other parts of bloodlesse
creatures. Their teeth in their mouths are long and round, covered with a
double covering, Aristot. de part 4, c. 3. between which such things are
placed, as are knit between the teeth of Locusts. They want eylids, but their
eyes are placed above their mouth, they are hard, and apt to move inward and
outward, and obliquely. They breathe not, but casting water through a hollow
pipe they are refreshed. The males have small passages for their genital parts,
the females have membranous matrices cut as far as their intestins, and in
them an egg is bred. They copulate after the manner of those creatures that
piss backwards. The female brings forth a red egg covered over with a thin
shelly membrane: they are otherwise called Conchylia, purple shell fish, that
were of old held for great dainties, that they grew into a proverb, to be the
widows delights. Nature has so sported in the variety of them, in so many
figures and colors, that it is hard to number them. Plin. l. 9. c. 33. to
explain the variety of them says thus* They are of so many figures, plain,
hollow, long, like the half Moon, round cut in half circles, rising in the
back, smooth, rugged, dented, streaked, the top wreathed like the Murex, the
borders pointed, outward, or folded inward, sometimes distinguished with little
lines, hairy, curled, like dogs waved like a comb, a tyle, lattice wise, or
like net work, stretched out obliquely or right forth, close thickened together,
open as when men clap their hands, bended backwards like to a Horn. Moreover,
in the red Sea they are of a wonderful greatness, also they are found on the
tops of the highest Mountains, and they sometimes lie hid in the inward parts of
the earth or in stones, Goropius. Becanus in Aldrovandus says, he has seen
some in a flint, that we use to pave the streets with, brought from Bethum:
there were so many shellfish all of stone, and shut up entire in their
coverings, that you would judge that flint to have been framed with great care
and art of them, joined with some cement. In the fields about the suburbs of
Paris, that are fruitful with Corn above, there is underneath a Cave that is
under great part of it, where Chariots may pass. I found there a great many
shells, like Sea perwinkles, in a delicate order, both twisted and adorned with
little knots, and so exact, that there was nothing wanting to their perfection
but the living fish. I saw in England a stone cut out of the highest Mountains,
that was like a living perch, not the least line was wanting to make it
perfect. Insects have incisions either above or beneath, or else on both sides,
and though it be bony or fleshy, yet they have something that is between both.
The differences of them are many, if you note their place the quality of their
body, their quantity, their food, their generation, their motion of their
going. As for the place, (we must speak something) reddish hairy Worms are bred
in Snow; in the fire, Worms called Pyrausta; in the Sea water, the insect
called Micro-rinchotoros, or little nose, the Sea- Scotopendra, and the gnat.
In fresh water there arises, Leeches, Scrophulae, Strumae, Cherodes; in the
earth, Worms, and Juli; in minerals, not a few. In the stumps of Trees, Cossi,
and Teredines. The Fig Tree breeds the Worm Cerastes: if an Olive Tree be
planted where an Oak is dug up, there breed Frogs, and little Worms, in the
Service-Tree there are breed red hairy ones; in the bladders of Elms, Psennes;
in Vines, those that Tully calls Butyri; in the Spindle-Tree, or as
Theophrastus calls it, Tetragonia, there is yearly bred some Catterpillers that
dye so soon as the leaves are wasted. In the apple of a certain shrub called
Coccios there breaks forth a little living creature so soon as the fruit is
ripe. There are Worms found in the gnats, that tied to the neck will retain the
birth, they must be taken off before delivery can be. In the leaves of
Nightshade there is a Worm that is of a green and yellow color, that has a
Horn in the forehead, as long as ones finger. In the Asphodil Worms breed, that
become flies, in the fashion of flowers, for when the stalk fades and withers,
they eat the cover they are in and fly out: you shall find no fewer insects
observable in living creatures. Man's excrements are known sufficiently,
especially when the Sun shines on the excrements of beggarly people. We know
that in Egypt Worms are presently bred in Men's legs. In a Carp the first year
a black Worm is bred near his gills. River perches breed as it were 12 pearls,
so great as tares, and each of them has in it a slender long round worm.
Lastly, it is said, that in Bee-hives a worm is bred. As for the parts, Flies
have open wings, Beetles have sheath wings; some have their belly joined to
their mouth, and the right Intestin revolved from that. Those that leap, have
either their hinder legs longer, or else they lean upon their tails bended
backwards. As for their generation, some are bred from animals of the same
kind; some do generate, but not of their own kind, but only Worms, and those
not from living creatures, but from putrefaction of moisture and dryness.
Amongst those that couple, the females are commonly the biggest, the males have
no feminal passages; nor do they thrust in their member into the females, but
the females into them by the lower part.

This I have spoken more largely of bloodlesse creatures, because I know that
their external habit has made them contemptible. Wherefore the mind of man
ought to be rouzed up contemplate their worth, by the majesty of the internal
nature of them, and to verse it self therein.

CHAP. II. Concerning Bees.
IN Lithuani^ and Podolia there is an infinite company of Bees, that the hollow
parts of the earth that are dry, are filled with honey: Olaus Magnus says,
That great Bears have fallen in and been drowned. The fruitfulness of the
fields causes the plenty of them, the sweet smells, the abundance of flowers,
the pleasant taste of them.

Add to this the mighty Woods of Pine-Trees, which are always green, and keep
the place warm, with high tops, and large boughs; in Summer they shade the
Bees, and in Winter they hide themselves in the coverings of the Pines, Leo.
Nolan. in Problem. Solinus says, That Scotland breeds none; but I know that is
false: for I saw some in my Host's Garden at St. Andrews; and sometimes I have
been much delighted with them. In Africa they are rare. If you ask the cause,
you shall find it is the want of those things that I spoke of in Sarmatia. In
some parts of Egypt, if you bury a Bull to his horns, Bees in time will breed
from it, from its putrefaction. If therefore you would breed Bees so, read
Florentinus. He bids you, as Caesar Constantinus relates, make you a house ten
cubits high, and ten cubits broad, and the other sides equal thereunto; let
there be but one place of entering, and four windows, on each side one; drive an
Ox that is fleshy and 30 months old into this place, he must be very fat;
cause many young men to stand round about him, and beat him sorely, and kill
him with Clubs, breaking his very horns and bones; yet they must take great
heed that no blood follow. For the Bees are not bred of blood: and when they
strike him first, let not them run violently upon him; Then presently stop all
passages in the Ox, with clean pure napkins, dipped in pitch, as the mouth, the
nostrills, the eyes, and all parts Nature has made for Evacuation. Then laying
a great deal of Thyme under, and the Ox upon it, let them come forth of the
house, and presently shut the door and the windows, and daub them with Lime,
that neither Air nor wind may enter or come forth; but the third week you must
set the house wide open, and let in the light and the cold Air, unless it be
on that side where the wind blows very strong. For if it fall so out, you must
stop that side the wind blows strongly on, and daub it with clay. The eleventh
day after, when you open it, you shall find Bees hanging abundantly in clusters
together; and of the Ox that is left you shall find nothing but his horns, his
bones, and his hair. They say the Kings are bred of his brain, the common Bees
of his flesh; Also the King is bred of the spinall marrow; but it is said, that
those which breed of the brain, are the best, for strength beauty and
magnitude. From hence you shall know the first change and transformation of
flesh into living Creatures, and as it were a conception, and generation, thus:
For, opening the place, small white creatures, like to one another, and not yet
perfect, nor yet living, will appear in great numbers about the Ox, all
immovable, but augmenting by degrees. You shall see also the excrescence of
their wings, yet unjoynted; and you shall see Bees in their proper color,
gathering together and flying about the King, but with small short wings,
trembling for want of using to fly, and the weakness of their limbs. They will
come continually, flying violently against the windows, for the desire of
light. But it is best to open and shut the windows every other day, as we said.
For it is to be feared, that they will change the nature of Bees, or else be
stifled for want of Air. If a wing of them, or the sting be pulled off it can
never grow again; for because this is fastened to the Intestine, it pulls that
out also, and so they die. They have a King, who is so much honored by them,
that he never goes forth, but they all attend him; if he ^rre in flying, they
are quick-sented to find him out; and when he cannot fly, they carry him,
Aristotle. They are so chaste, that they will sting those that smell of
copulation, and they stall themselves in Virgins Sepulchers, Plutarch. For
Augustinus, whose surname was Gallus, says, That at Verona they crept into the
Sepulcher of two sisters that were Virgins, they were the Daughters of that
famous Lawyer, Bartholomaeus Vitalis, they went in by the chinks of the wall
next an Orchard, they made abundance of combs in the dead bodies of them both.
The matter two years after their burial was made manifest, by the fall of
thunder, without any hurt to the carcases of the Bees and combs. There were
some found also in the Tomb of Hippocrates, and it is constantly avouched, that
the honey of them anointed on little blisters of Childrens mouths by the
Sepulcher, did miraculously cure them. The Inhabitants of the Country of Cuma
do feed on them. If thou would have thy beard grow quickly, anoint thy chin
with the ashes of burnt Bees, and Mice dung, Aldrovandus.

CHAP. III. Of Spiders.
IN the new world, as Oviedus, l. 15. c. 3, relates, there are green Spiders,
and the Web is of a Golden color, as good as silk. In Cuma they weave it so
strong that it will not break, but holds like silk. In Hispaniola they are as
big as hand-balls, and as hard as nuts. In Brasil there is a very great kind of
them, like to a Crab, yet a fly takes him and draws him into his hold, contrary
to what is used in Europe* Cardan. l. 9. subtle. says, that in the West Indies
they are as big as Sparrows. Some write they couple backwards, and do scatter
eggs in their Webs, for they leap and so lay them. They are perfected in 28,
days. Scaliger, l. 1. de. causis plant. says, that they breed of filth. When I
sometime observed Spiders eggs, I found them to be, many small ones, black and
blew with little spots, divided and parted one from the other: they are soft,
and clammy, and if by chance any be lost, the Spider diligently enquires, and
she carries them back by fastening them on some thing from within, and with her
beck also. I have seen also innumerable young ones come forth of one egg, so
small that they could hardly be discerned; yet so soon as they were come forth
of the egg, they spun such fine Webs that nothing can be more wonderful. Also
I have observed under the belly of a Spider that was taken, a mighty heap of
eggs, so small as Atoms; they were white, and crushed with the finger, they
gave a crack. They have a great faculty of feeling; for sitting in the middle
of their Web, they feel a fly that touches it in the most remote part. Hence
Antonius Ludovicus. l. 1. Problem. s. 5. Problem 13. says, that for that cause
they lie in the middle of their Nets. And being that the lines are equal from
the Center, she sitting in the middle, and holding with her feet the beginnings
of the threads she spun, she can easily know from all parts. They make very fine
nets, and in them gnats and other little weak creatures are ensnared. This is
made from something they have without them, or from their hard skin, which being
by degrees kembed and drawn like to a thread, they diminish, and they eat up
their threads; or else naturally they have a fruitfullnesse of drawing threads;
or else at a set time, the nature of their belly is corrupted, like an
excrement. The woof is fastened within, and from that those fine lengths are
drawn forth: we see the first to happen in Silk Worms, for they draw silken
threads out of their own excrements, and they change their lives for a silken
case, their proper substance being turned into a Fleece, Antonicus Ludovicus,
l. 1. s. 5. problem. 52. And Franciscus Bonzella Cardinal. l. 3. c. 14. de
Venenis writes, that such as are bitten by a house Spider, fall ill of a
Priapisme. And Plin. l. 24. c. 9. says that the same things happen when one is
bitt by the Spider Phalangium. The nature of the poison is said to be the cause
of it. For though it penetrate easily; yet the terrestiall part of it causes
flatulent humors, which being driven to the lower parts, cause erection. When
they hurt the young Lizzards, first they wrap them in their Webs, then they
bite their lips, which is a sight fit for a Theater, when it happens, Plin. l.
11. c. 24. Also the same Author, l. 10. c. 74, says, that the Spider does
balance himself, to come down upon the head of a Serpent that lies under the
shade of a Tree, and he so fiercely bites the Serpents brain; that he makes him
to hiss, yet he can neither break the thread that hangs from aloft, nor yet run
away; and there is no end of it, till he kill him. When houses are like to
fall, the Spiders first fall down with their Webs. Plin. l. 8. c. 28. When the
Rivers are like to rise, they raise their nets higher, and because they weave
not in fair weather, but in foul, many Spiders foreshew rayn, Plin. l. 11. c.
24. The Thebans, as Pausanias witnesses, in Baeoticus, were ignorant of that;
For when the Spiders had woven white Webs about the doors of the Temple of the
Goddess Ceres, about that time that the battle was fought at Leuctra, when the
Macedonians assaulted them, the Spiders spun all black Webs, which was a sign
that signified something far different from the former.

CHAP. IV. Of the Silkworm.
ZOnoras says, that the Italians knew not the Silkworm before the time of
Justinian: in his days it was wittily found out and brought thither,
Procopius. He adds, that two Monks brought Silkworm eggs from India to
Constantinople, and putting them into dung transformed them into Worms. Now
Sera whence they came, is a City in the farthest parts of Persia, wherein there
is made so much Silk work, that ten thousand pounds of Silk are daily given out
to work-folks. Also in Taprobana Silk is gathered from Trees without any
labor, as many Navigations have discovered. Nature has showed so much art in
this Insect, that it is impossible to comprehend it all. Much is written, and
much more may be. First, it is a Worm; shut up in a bladder, it dies without
any form; at length a winged butterfly comes forth of the case: wherefore a
creeping Insect is changeed into a fly by a medium that is vegetable void of
sense and motion, by a strange metamorphosis. The little Worm first shut out,
seeks abundance of nourishment, and eating greedily what she is able, by often
lifting up her head, striving as it were with a Lethargy, she sleeps at length
3, or 2, days, and in the mean while casting her skin, she falls to her wonted
diet again, when she has fed 4, times, slept 4, times, and 4, times changed
her Coat; she will eat no more, but climbs up on high upon the branches, and
twigs, having discharged her belly as it should, she begins to spin some
rudiments of her Silken work upon the boughs, but in disordered turnings, then
she shuts her self into a transparent case, and thrusts forth the fruit of her
indefatigable labor, from the center to the circumference, white Wool,
yellow, and green, of an ovall figure, striving as it were with her fellows, in
9 days she ends her task, and dies within it. From this case laid under
ground, a horned Butterfly comes forth after ten days, but being neither
mindful of its wings nor food, being about to repair the loss of its short
life by its fruitfulness of young ones, put into a soft fleece for 3. days
together, but seldom for 4. days, is the male coupled to the female, and dies;
and shortly after the female widow, leaving behind her about a hundred seeds
like Millet seeds, she dies also. But because Andreas Libavius, a most
deserving Physician, has most accurately described this from his own
observation, I thought fit to join his historical observation, as an Appendix
to the end of this Classis, for the benefit of those that search the Secrets of
Nature.

CHAP. V. Of the Spanish Fly, and the Glo-worm.
CAntharides are bred from a Worm in a spungy substance, especially of the
sweet-brier, but most fruitfully in the Ash. If they breed in Fig Trees, it is
likely that the Tree will die, Plin, l. 29. Their venom is most tart. A
Physician called out of Egypt, killed Cossinus a Roman Knight, whom Nero loved,
with Cantharides in drink, when he was sick of a Tetter, which was a peculiar
disease in Egypt, Plin* l. 1. c. 4. The same thing happened to an Abbot from a
whore, Paraeus l. 20. c. 28. A Glo-worm has a belly with roundles, divided
with many segments, in the end whereof there are two spots very light like to
fire, tending toward a kind of sky-colour. Then is she most conspicuous, when
her belly is pressed, and that transparent humor goes to the end of her belly,
and her breast against the light shines like to fire, Aldrovand. de Insect. l.
4. c. 8. There is something spoken of this, in the Second Classis. Adrianus
Junius, when he was in the Country of Bononia, drew the liquor of them upon
Papers that shined like Stars: what is writ with that in the day, may be read
in the night. Many have showed the way to compound it. Baptista Porta does it
thus: We did cut their tails from their bodies, taking care that nothing should
mingle with the shining parts; we ground it on a Porphyr stone, and 15 days or
longer we buried it in dung, in a glass vessel, and it is best that these
parts should not touch the sides, but hang in it: for these days being over,
the glass being put into a hot oven, or a bath of hot water* and ^itted, you
may by degrees receive that clear distilled liquor in a receiver underneath,
and so putting it into a fine Crystal glass, you may hang this water that
causes light in your private Chamber; and it will so enlighten the Air, that
you may read great letters. Albertus de sensu et sensato shows, why their light
cannot be extinguished by water: For their light cannot be said to be of a
celestial body, because a celestial nature comes not into composition of
bodies generative and corruptible: But the determination of this question and
the like, is fetched from what we determined in our second de Anima; where we
show, That the nature of perspicuity is not proper to any Element, but it is
common to many, and is participated by them per prius et posterius, which is
the more pure, the farther it is from darkness; and this is so, by how much it
is more like to the nature of superior bodies; and the proper act of this is
light, which has to do in that nature. Now this falls out in it, as often as
the parts of it are very noble and clear: and therefore all such things do
shine. Now this composition sometime is in the whole body; sometimes not in the
whole, but in some external parts: the cause whereof is, that when such a
nature is from the Elements that are light; it proceeds more from the internal
parts to the external, because such things will swim. And so it is found in the
heads, and sins, and bones of some Fish, and in the shells of some eggs,
because such parts are less roasted, and heat has wrought in them much nature
of perspicuous bodies condensed: Sometimes this heat acts in the external
parts of some things, when it exhales from them, and that which is subtle
brings with it much perspicuity; so the parts of Oaks corrupted do shine. But
all those things that have but a weak light, are hid when a clearer light
appears.

CHAP. VI. Of the Grasshopper.
ISidore writes, that Grasshoppers breed of Cuccow-spit. Plutarch in Sympos.
says, Out of the Earth. Baldangelus says, they breed out of the earth not
tilled, that looks Eastward toward the Sunrising; and that white ones were dug
up under Oaks, but their form was, as the rest were. Aristotle l. 5. hist. c.
30. says, they breed by copulation. Pliny sets down the manner: First, there
is a Worm bred, then of that Tettigometra, or Mother of the Grasshopper, the
shell of it being broken, about the Solstices they fly forth always in the
night, being first black and hard; but when he strives to come forth of his
Tettigometra; [You may observe, that Grasshoppers and Butterflies breed alike;
for what is in these, at first, a Caterpillar, is in them, first a little worm;
and that case, called Chrysalis or Aurelia, for the Catterpillar; is called
Tettigometra, for the Grasshopper, Yet you shall know that they differ: For a
rude Chrysalis is a lump wherein no parts of the body are distinguished, as we
can discern; but in the Tettigometra you may see the head, eyes, feet, breast,
and all the parts, except the wings; it is whitish in color, and sprinkled
with small lines;] First he gets up a Tree, and sticks to some branch of the
Tree; then at the upper end where a cleft is first seen, he comes forth; his
whole body is then almost green; shortly, his upper part enclines to Chestnut
color, and that in one day becomes of a black color; and because his legs and
wings are weak at first, he sits upon his cast skin till be can fly. In
Cephalenia there is a River where Grasshoppers are on one side, but none on the
other, Plin. l. 11. c. 27. And Antigonus writes, that the same thing happens
in Dulichium, an Island of the Ionian Sea: Ambrosius Nolanus writes the same of
Nola, and the hill Vesuvius. In the Country of Rhegium they are all mute. In
Locris beyond the River, they sing; in Acanthus also they are mute, Pliny l.
12. c. 27. If you ask the reason, Strabo thinks, that at Rhegium the Country is
dark and shady; at Locris the heat is great; and therefore he thinks, that the
dewy skins of their wings are not there extended; but here he thinks they have
dry, and, as it were, horny skins. But because they do that when they fly, and
when they stand, which the others are thought not to do, the heat is the cause
of it: For being hotter by nature, they need more cooling, and move the Air the
stronger: The others do not need so much, either because they are but of a weak
heat, they are not heard to do it, therefore it may be thought they are said
not to do it, Nicolaus Leonicus.

CHAP. VII. Of the Crabfish, and the Shellfish breeding Pearls.
CAmmarus, is a River-Crab; in his head, are two little stones: In the full
Moon they are seen in figure of a Globe divided into two, Agricola. It is said
to eat flesh; It will eat the Pike in a net: And Gesner writes, That in
Danubius, when flesh is tied to their ships, and hanged down into the water,
multitudes of Crabs will hang about it: Some say, that in June they will go
forth to feed in the fields, catch Frogs, and feed on grass. Fed with milk
without water, he will live many days. Gesner kept one alive in water 13 days;
put into distilled wine, burnt, he presently grows red, and may be set on the
Table alive amongst those that are boiled, Georg. Pictorius* The Males are
easily discerned from the females; For they, where their tail is joined to
their body underneath, have four long rods sticking forth, but these have none:
Also their tail is rounder, plainer, and thicker. Leonellus Faventinus commends
the powder of their eyes drank with water of peach leaves, after opening a
vein, against a bastard Pleurisy. The powder of them rubbed on the teeth,
cleanses and whiteneth them. In India a Shellfish that breeds Pearl is
sometimes found so great, as they report, that in the Island Borneus in the
Sea, there was one taken, that the meat within it weighed 47 pound; yet
methinks it is questionable.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Snail.
THe Snails which Dioscorides calls Garden Snails, are found in abundance in
the Mountains of Trent, and they are the best. In Winter they are dug up out of
the Earth, and in Gardens, with some iron hooks, near to the roots of herbs,
the Earth being dug forth. They are covered with a white shell against the
cold, it is like to Gip, so they lie under ground, hid, and afterward they are
more pleasant meat, Matthiolus. They have eyes in the top of their horns, and
they pull them in when any thing comes near to them, and put their horns into
their heads, their heads into their bodies, Albertus. They lay white eggs, as
great as the Pikes eyes; and in May they are found to sit upon them, Gesner.
Albertus says, they are bred of corruption and clammy dew, and that that dew
hardneth into a shell. Porta says the same. Phytol. l. 5. c. 4. Pliny l. 9. c.
5. says, they are bred in Winter. Fulvius Hirpinus made Caves of them, in
Tarquinis, a little before the War with great Pompey, etc. Pliny, l. 9. c. 56.
In the Island Scyathos, the Partridges feed on them; but those that are called
Ariones, deceive them: For going out of their shells, they feed, leaving their
empty houses to the Herns and Partridges, Aelian l. 10. c. 5. Andreas Fulnerus
Gallus relates, That a Remedy is made of them to multiply hair: Take 300 Snails
out of their shells, and boil them in water, and take them out again, and
gather the fat that swims a top, and put that into a glazed vessel, and pour a
Sextarius of water upon it; wherein Bay leaves have been boiled with three
spoonfulls of oil, one spoonful of Honey, Saffron one scruple, and a little
Venice Soap, and a spoonful of common Soap moderately stirred; boil them
altogether. With this liquor anoint your hair often, and wash it with a Lie
made of the Ashes of burnt Colewort stalks, (the place is obscure, or
corrupted) and you shall find your hair increase daily.

CHAP. IX. Of the Gnat.
IN Egypt there are great store of Gnats, whence Herodotus calls it Conopaeam,
and Bellonius, observat. l. 2. c. 35, writes that he was so vexed with them the
first night, that the next day he seemed to have the Measils. In diverse parts
of India, there are kinds of Gnats, whereof some in Summer time especially,
when the fields are cleansed, do lie in the Woods, others lie about the shores.
At Myon a City of Jonia, there was a creek of the Sea not very great, which,
when Maeander a River of that Country running into it, that was very muddy, had
stopped the mouth of it with mud, brought along with it, so that in time it
made a Lake, there bred from thence such abundance of Gnats, that the people of
Myon, left their City, and went to Miletus. When the Northern people would
hinder their biting, they sprinkle a decoction of Wormwood or Nigella on their
heads, and the rest of their body, Olaus. Yet he makes a difference in their
bitings. For they that have their blood pure and not corrupted, bite them they
not. They meddle not with fruit before they grow sharp by corruption, and they
most delight in sour things. Leo^h Ja^hin. But because they chiefly suck man's
blood, they are called the spowts of the blood of Man. It is not proved that
they will suck things that are sweet. For the sweeter part of the blood that is
most pure is consumed for nourishment, and lies inwardly, that which is rawest
comes next to the skin, whence it is that Pushes break forth of the body.

CHAP. X. Of the Urchin, the Ephemera, and the Catterpillar.
SEa-Hedge-hogs, so often as they are tossed with the flowing water, make
themselves heavy with ballast, lest they should be tossed too much being light,
or carried away with a tempest; and so they stick fast to the Rocks. Plutarch.
l. Utr. Animal. The parts of the live ones covered with their shell, and armed
with their prickles, if they be broken and cast into the Sea, they will come
together again, and will know the part that is next to them, and being applied
they will join, and unite by a natural sympathy, Aldrovandus. As for the
Ephemara, the River Hypanis in Cammerius Bosphorus, under the Solstice
produces little bladders greater than grape stones, out of which flying
creatures proceed with four feet. This kind of creature lives till the
afternoon, the same day; when the Sun departs it decays, and presently dies
when the Sun sets, from hence it has the name of Ephemer, or a creature that
lives but one day. Aldrovand. As for Catterpillars; Hieracles testifies, that
if Horses roll themselves upon them, black and blew spots will arise, their
skins will grow hot, their eyes will be distorted, and the cure is to bray
vitriol one quarter of a pound, Vinegar half a pound. They feed on pot herbs;
but if a rocket seed be sowed amongst them, they will not touch them. But that
those herbs may breed no noisome creatures, dry all the seeds you mean to se^,
in a Tortis shell; or sow mint in many places, especially amongst Coleworts.
Prasocurides, says Cardan, are such living Creatures that use to do hurt in
Gardens; Men say, that if you bury the panch of a Wether with the dung in it,
not deep within the earth, in the place where they abound, in two days you
shall find them all in heaps in that place; in twice or thrice so doing, you
may destroy them all. Paulus Aegineta writes that herb rocket anointed with
oil, will preserve men safe from the bitings of Venomous creatures.

CHAP. XI. Of the Pismire.
IN the Kingdom of Senega there are white Pismires, and naturally they build
low houses. For they carry earth in their mouths, and cement it without lime,
you would say that they are like Ovens or little Country houses, Scaliger,
exerc. 367. In the Province of Mangu, they are red, and they eat them with
Pepper. Scalig. exerc. 9.6. Amongst the Brachmans, they are 4, fingers breadth
in greatness; in new Spain they are as big as Beetls. Amongst the Dardae,
which is a mighty Nation in the Mountains of India, there is said to be a hill
of 3000 furlongs in compass, there are Gold Mines under it, that Ants as big
as Foxes do dig into, Plin. I think, as Strabo does, that it is a fable. In
Baia Salvatoris there is an infinite company of them, they have in their mouths
something like pinsers, and with that they so crop the Plants, that they dye
with their biting of them. Aldrovand. In the same West Indies they are called
Comixen, half- Pismires, and half-Worms that creep with a white tail. They eat
into the Wood, and do great harm to houses. When they creep up a wall or house,
they are covered with earth, a finger thick, and they live under this, Ovied.
in sum. Ind. occid. c. 52. In Brasil when they are bruised they smell like
Cedar. Their head is so small that they have no eyes in it, but above it there
are some additionalls like two hairs coming forth. It is a sign that these are
their eyes because when these are cut off, they mistake their way. Albert.
tract. 4. l. 6. c. 1. When this kind grows old, it comes to have wings. They
breed eggs that have Worms in them, in white coverings; these, being exposed to
the Sun, breed Pismires. Alb. l. 2.6. But in the new World it is otherwise; for
when the old one is dead, innumerable Worms breed from the body of it, and they
living after a wonderful fashion, come forth at last out of their subterraneal
habitations in a wonderful manner; Their Ant-hills is made wonderful
artificially, no City is made more curiously. Aldrovand. Lud. describes what he
saw, thus. It seemed like a City with four square sides, four foot almost in
length, and above a fooot broad, and the Ants like Pismires ran up and down
about their business in it, as if they had been Citizens, the sides and angles
were drawn directly, in the length of the City there was a way in the middle, a
fingers breadth and depth, this was cut cross with 3, other ways a fingers
breadth and depth as the former, very directly. In the outmost corners of these
ways, their eggs were laid together as in narrow turnings of the streets. On
the other part of the City were dens filled with Corn, that they abounded so
far as the very ways. All the paths were most clean. Lastly in the middle of
the length of the City, there was one gate right against the West.

CHAP. XII. Of the Horsleech, and Hippocampus.
STrabo writes, That in a River of Mauritania, Horsleeches breed seven cubits
great: Their throat is hollow, that they breathe through; in all of them there
is a little hole in the middle; and from the Mouth to the Belly, there is but
one continued passage. In putrid Fevers they are of great use, for being
applied to the veins of the fundament, and setting on a cupping glass, that
the orifices of the veins may appear, they help much to ease the pains of the
head, and to assist concoction. Some have drunk them down in drink, says
Galen: but the smell of Wiglice will drive them forth. The Hippocampus or
Seahorse is a fish not to be eaten, of a singular form; for it has a head
like a horse, and a snowt and a Mane; the rest of the body is rough with grisly
indentures. On the back, it has a tail with a sin, that is four square and
pliable. It is in length a span; being taken, it shortly dies; and when it is
fresh, it shines in the night.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Locust, that is an Insect.
ABout Brundusium there is an infinite company of Locusts. In the Island
Lemnos, there is a certain measure set for men that shall kill them, and they
must bring it to the Magistrate. In Cyrene thrice a year they are to be killed;
and he that refuses, is punished for his default, Plin. Amongst the Nigretae
every 3. years there are such abundance, that they shadow the sky at least 12
miles. In Hispaniola they want wings, Aloysius Cadamustus. Vincentius reports,
that a woman bred up one; when it grew up, it was found to be with young ones
of it self. Anno 852, when they wasted France 20 miles in one day, they went as
it were in Troops, and pitched their Tents upon the earth. The leaders with a
few more went before the whole Army a days journey, as if they went to take up
quarters, the next day at the same hour they all arrived. They did not march
till Sunrising; when the Sun arose, they marched by bands. In the sixth year
of the Emperor Argyropolus, the Locusts did so much mischief in the Provinces
of the East, that the Inhabitants were forced to sell their Children, and to
pass away into Thrace. The wind afterward cast them into Hellespont, but the
next year they revived again; and having spoiled the Provinces three years,
they perished at Pergamus, Cedrenus.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Sea-Hare, the Lobster, with his shell, and the Calamarie.
THe Sea-Hare has a body all white, you would think it to be a little box, or
congealed phlegm. It is seldom taken but in great heat of weather; for then all
things are troubled by the extreme heat, even those things that lie at the
bottom of the Sea. And though very few water-Creatures are found to be
venomous, because they dwell in moisture, which for the general is contrary to
venom; and some creatures contain their venom in some part only, as the
Spider-fish in its prickles, the Sea-Ray in the radius, yet the Hare is poison
all over. Titus the Emperor was reported to be poisoned with this by his
Brother Domitian. For when the Oracle was consulted concerning the manner of
his death; The answer was, He should perish as Ulysses did, by the Sea. Now
Ulysses was killed by the sting of the Ray. They that die by the venom of it,
will be so many days in dying, as the Hare lived, Licinius Macer, in Pliny, l.
31. c. 2. Lobsters will not breed in the Sea Euripus, if we credit Aristotle
hist. 9. c. 37. but in the Indian Sea, they are 4 cubits long, Pliny l. 9. c.
3. Concerning the Calamaries, Pliny writes out of Trebius Niger, that they fly
sometimes in such multitudes, that they will drown Ships. But Albertus l. 24.
de animal. says, That in Sexus a River of Mauritania, a Calamarie is five
cubits long, and near the Sea he will fly like an arrow. Rondeletius thinks,
that this is nothing incredible, when as they swim many together, holding one
upon the other, and therefore many are taken together.

CHAP. XV. Of Pearls.
PEarls are in some Shellfish like the upper crust; in others like to the
Offspring; in some like hail. There are many in them, and of great weight. In
a bosom of the Sea of the New World, there are some as big as a Bean; in the
Island Solon, bigger than Turtles Eggs. Martyr writes, he took an Oyster there,
that the meat of it weighed above 47 pounds. The King of the Island Eubagna,
had one so big as a Wallnut, it weighed 31. caracts, and it was sold for 1200
pieces of Castile. Gonzalvus Oviedus says, that one was sold at Panama, that
weighed 26 caracts, it was round, and as big as the knob of a Pillar.

It is said that near the Island Borneo, there was one as great a Goose egg;
and so round, that laid on a Table, it will hardly stay in one place. Peter
Martyr, Decad 1. l. 8. says, That in his presence, when he was invited to dine
with the famous Duke of Medina Sidonia, at Baetica, they brought one to sell
unto him, that weighed above a hundred ounces Heaps are cast up of shells in
Summer, some of them have Pearls in them that are ready, others not yet
perfect, out of a River that runs by the Village of Hussin in Bohemia; These
they give their bucks to devour, then they gather up purer, being cleansed in
their Bellies, Gesner. Five or six are sound in one. Vesputius says he found
130, in some Indian Oysters. Sometimes some small ones are found behind, like to
small kernells. But the question is how these are bred. Some think they are
bred of the dewy air; but this opinion seems to be false. For some lie in the
bottom of the deepest waters, and some are black, some yellow, some green, some
blew. Oviedus, hist. Ind. l. 9. c. 8. But they say that the white ones are bred
of pure dew, the pale ones of that which is troubled. Androstenes in Athenaeus
says that as kernells are bred in hogs, so Pearls breed in shellfish. Juba,
as Pliny says, subscribes to this. The Indians, that inhabit the Island
Cabagna, say, they breed as eggs do in them. For the greater of them are next
the orifice, and are first thrust forth, but in the more inward parts of the
Matrix, the lesser Pearls lie hid. Rondeletius and Alexander Benedictus compare
their original to that of stones in some greater living creatures; We saw,
says he, stones voided forth of ones bladder as big as a hens egg, over which
a clammy matter grew by degrees covering them, like to a crust of diverse
colors sometimes, and they were hardened by a fiery heat, and so they are said
to increase by little and little. Pearls in shellfish are reported to grow the
same way, and the Jewellers can discover by a turning instrument diverse coats
in them, as we see in Onions* And Rondeletius says, he thinks that Pearls grow
the same manner in shellfish, as kernells do in hogs, and the stone in the
Reins and the Bladder. The year we writ this, there was one died that had a
Stone in his Reins, that had so many partitions as there were branches of small
Veins in his Reins. The little stone with these partitions, was like the
outmost knob of a round white marble, or like a great Pearl for its figure and
brightness, I think it was compacted of a vitreous phlegm. Therefore it is no
wonder if in Oysters and shellfish, when they grow old, Pearls are to be
found. They may also be dissolved, the Chemists show how. Cardanus says, you
must first wash them being entire, and strain the juice of Lemmons twice or
thrice; then put them in, and set them in the Sun; in five or six days they
will dissolve.

CHAP. XVI. Of Flies.
IN Cyrene there are found many kinds of Flies, distinguished by their forms
and colors. Some have broad foreheads, like to Weasils, others are like to
Vipers. They say that in Sicilie and Italy they bite so sharply, that they will
kill whom they bite. At Toledo in the shambles sometimes one Fly will appear
for a whole year, that is notable for its whiteness. Rhodigin* l. 17. lect.
antiq. c. 11. In Hispaniola, they are green and painted, especially in the City
of St. Domingo; they are as great as Wasps, and dig the earth with their feet,
to make themselves houses under ground. Strabo says, the Spaniards have a fly
peculiar to them, in great numbers, and it always comes with the Plague; that
in Cantrabia the Romans appointed some, to catch these Flies, and gave them a
set reward for it, by number. In Carina a Mountain of Crete, that is 9, miles
about, there are none, Plin. l. 21. c. 14. Nor was there ever any seen at Rome
in Hercules Temple, nor yet in the Island Paphos in Venus Temple, Apollonius.
Lasty Emma the wife of the Duke of lower Saxony promised a fruitful pasture
ground to the Church of Breine, not far from the City, that had this
praerogative, that no Flies should molest the Cattle there, Crantzius, l. 4.
Saxon. l. 29. The Hebrews, says Tostatus, invent old wives tales concerning
them, for they say that David inquired of God why he made Fools, Spiders,
Flies, with other things that seem not only to be superfluous, but dangerous;
and God promised to make it appear to David that these three things were
profitable for some things. For foolishness, it was manifest; for unless he
himself had counterfeited the fool's part before King Achis, he had been taken
captive, and perhaps perished. And the Fly was useful, when he descended from
the hill Hacbilla into Saul's camp, when all were a sleep, and took away Saul's
spear; for then he set his feet between Abner his feet who lay about Saul, and
when he feared least he should be taken, if he should violently draw out his
foot, God sent a Fly who bit Abners legs, and so Abner gave way, and yet did
not wake Abner, so David escaped. Lastly the Spider did him good service,
because she hanged her Web on the mouth of the Cave, wherein David hid himself,
when Saul searched after him. To drive them away many men have invented diverse
means. If a piece of an Onyon be laid upon flesh, some think the Flies will not
come at it; Miraldus cent. 7. Aphor. 72. says, they will not come into a
house, if a Wolfs head be hanged up in it. Dioscorid, l. 4. c. 3. says that
the fume of Loostrife will drive them away. Plin. l. 23. c. 8. says that white
Hellebour bruised with milk, and sprinkled, will drive them away. Those Flies
that live on the branches of Napellus, are good against any venomous bitings,
if we credit Scaliger Exerc. 85.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Boat-fish.
BEllonius gives an exact description of the Boat-fish; The shell of it seems
to consist of 3. pieces, (namely the Keel and the sides, and yet it is but one
entire piece) the side-pieces whereof seem to be joined on both sides as to the
Keel. It is commonly as great as we can clasp in both hands, and as broad as
the space between the thumb and the forefinger: but they all in thickness do
not exceed a piece of parchment, and with ridges drawn to the borders, they are
plaited with indentures, ending in a round form; The hole by which the
Boat-fish is nourished, is very great at the place he comes forth of his shell;
This is very brittle, milk white, shining, polished, altogether representing
the form of a round ship; for it swims on the top of the Sea, arising from the
bottom, and the shell comes the bottom upwards, that it may ascend the better,
and sail with an empty Boat; and when she is come above the water, then she
turns her shell. Moreover, there is a membrane that lies between the forelegs
of the Boat-fish, as there is between the toes of waterfowl; but this is more
thin, like a cobweb, but strong; and by that she sails, when the wind blows;
the many tufts she has on both sides, she uses for rudders; and when she is
afraid, then she presently sinks her shell, full of Sea water. Farther, she
has a Parrots bill, and she goes with her tufts as the Polypus does, and after
the same manner she conceives in hollow partitions.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Oysters and Muscles.
THough Oysters love sweet waters, yet Pliny reports that they are found in
stony places; but Aristotle says, that though they live in water, and cannot
live without it, yet they take in no moisture nor Air. When in the time of the
War with Mithridates, the earth parted at Apumaea a City of Phrygia, Rivers
did suddenly appear, and not only sweet but salt waters brake out of the
bowels of the earth, (though the Sea were far distant) so that they filled all
that Coast with Oysters. Athen. l. 8. The Oysters are of diverse colors. In
Spain they are red, in Sclavonie brown, in the red Sea they are so
distinguished with flaming Circles, that by mixture of diverse colors it is
like the Rainbow. Aelian. l. 10. c. 13. At the beginning of Summer they are
great and full of milk. At Constantinople they cast this wheish matter into the
water, which cleaving to stones, will beget Oysters; Gillius writes it, and it
is very probable. For, of the decoction of Mushroms powered on the ground, it is
certain that Mushroms will grow, the Crabfish does wonderfully desire the meat
of them, but he comes hardly by them because they have a strong shell by
nature, wherefore he uses his cunning. For when in places where the wind blows
not, he sees them taking pleasure in the Sun, and to open their shells against
the Suns beams, he privately casts in a stone, that they cannot shut again, and
so he conquers them.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Butterflye, and the Polypus.
THe Butterflies couple after August, and the male dying after copulation, the
female lays eggs, and dies also. How they are preserved in winter, is hardly
discovered by any man, except by Aldrovandus de Insectis. But he enquired of
Country people, and they hold him, that the leaves were great with the
Butterflies seed; at what time they plowed the ground, they were hid in the
bowels of it, and fostered by its heat, yet he thinks that they only are
preserved, that lie hid in the hollow barks of Trees, but what lies on leaves
is quickened the same year. And Aldrovandus adds, I saw eggs laid under the
leaves of Chamaeficus out of which about the end of August, little
Catterpillars naturally came forth. They were wrapped in a thin down, that the
air might not hurt them, and these little Catterpillars falling did not fall
to the ground, but hung by a small thread like Spiders in the Air. When they
lay under leaves, they fold them so that the rain cannot hurt them, and lay
them up as under a penthouse. I twice observed one Catterpillar, that I took
amongst the Coleworts, first to lay yellow eggs, wrapped up also in fine down,
and when they were laid she turned into a Chrysalis, of the same colors that
she was, that is, yellow, green, and black: and that which seemed strange to
me, out of those eggs, little flying creatures came forth, that I could hardly
see them, such as are wont to be found in the bladders of Elms: when they are
in great abundance they show contagion of the Air. Anno 1562, they flew at
Bannais near the waters, in such multitudes, that they darkened the course of
the River, especially after Sun set; then coming hither about night, they
wandered through the Villages as in Battle array, little differing from Moths.
Cornelius Gemma testifies that that was a tempestuous year. The Polypus in
time grows so great, that it is taken for a kind of Whale. In the bowels of
them, there is a strange thing like a Turbane, that you would say it had the
nature of the Heart, or of the Liver, but it suddenly dissolves and runs away.
They exceedingly love the Olive Tree. For if a bough on which Olives hang, be
let down into the Sea and held there, you may catch abundance of them, hanging
about the bough. Sometimes they are taken sticking to Figg-Trees growing by the
Seaside, and they eat the fruit of them. They also delight wonderfully in
Locusts, of which you shall find a clear Testimony in Petrus Berchorius. I
have heard, says he, that some Fishermen in the Sea of Province, had set
Locusts on the shore to boil over burning coals, and a Polypus smelling the
Locust, came forth of the Sea, and coming to the fire would with his foot have
taken a Locust forth, but he feared the heat of the fire, and so went back to
the Sea, and fil^'d a coat which he had on his head, like a Friars cowle, with
water, and went and came so often with it, and cast it on the fire, that he put
the fire out; and so taking the Locust, he had carried it to the Sea, unless
one of the Fishermen that saw him, had caught him, and broyl'd him to eat,
instead of the Locust.

CHAP. XX. Of a Lowse, and a Flea.
SOme think, that Lice are bred of flesh; others, of blood; but both opinions
are false: For first they breed in the skin of the head, and we know they
abound in the second and third kind of hectic fevers; when as, there, is
little flesh; and, here, they are almost consumed. Again in putrid Fevers they
breed not; and things bred do confirm their principles. Their color shows they
proceed not from blood. Wherefore some think they breed from putrid matter that
is cold and moist, which abounds in the skin, in places where they cannot be
blown away. Experience teaches, that they will leave those that are dead,
either because the blood is cold in the body when the heat is gone; or because
the dead body is cold, and they fly from the cold, Nolanus Problem. 225. They
that eat figs often are thought to be troubled with them. Nolanus makes the
juice of them to be the cause. For, this increasing in the veins heats the
blood, and makes it moist and frothy; which because it naturally tends to the
skin, and retained under that it putrefies, it turns to lice. Truly they, that
feed on figs, have little knots and warts on their skins. A Flea is a small
Creature; yet Africanus a cunning Artificer, tied one with a gold chain, and it
leaped, Scaliger Exerc. 59, and 326. He most commonly bites under the groins:
The tumor begins to grow the fourth day; when it comes to its full growth, its
bigger than a Pease, and it is full of Nits; They are killed with the root of
wild Buglosse: also with Sage bruised, and mingled with oil and vinegar; anoint
with this against them. The best remedy is Silk-yarn put into the bed, for they
will gather together in it. Franciscus Georgius Venetus, of Minoritum, says,
they will trouble one more in linen than in woollen. He gives his reason,
because they both proceed from the same Northern Fountain; for they are both in
Aries and March bred. But Aldrovandus thinks it comes to pass, because linen
is more near to the body than woollen. Wherefore you shall find them hungry in
your shirts and sheets; but in your breeches full, where they lay their eggs.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Beetle and the Cuttle.
IN Chalcida of Thracia, which is next to Olynthus, there is a pretty large
ground, called Cantharoletron. When any living Creature comes thither, it
abhors it, and departs, yet safely; only the Beetle, but going about it, dies
for hunger, Arist. in admirand. The female Beetle is never bred; but the male,
when he has made a round ball of Ox dung, rolls it with his face backwards,
and begets her by sending in his seed, Clem. Alex. l. 5. strom. Yet Aldrovandus
says, That Crabs are begotten by Copulation: for he found, that in May, in two
hours space, the female produced above 40 little white worms, like to Weevells.
They were small Caterpillars coming forth like Silkworms, which in five hours
began to weave balls of very fine thread white, as big as Pompions seed without
the hull, l. 4. de Insectis. Ruellius says, That the New Moon is known by
their breeding, l. 2. de stirp. c. 150. For (says he) they roll little balls
of Ox dung from East to West, and make them as round as a Globe, which they
bury in a hole in the ground 28 days, and conceal it so long, till the Moon
runs through the Zodiac, and returns to its Conjunction and disappears; then
opening the ball that shows the conjunction of the Lights, they let forth the
young one, nor has it any other way of breeding. Cut into two, they will live;
but the smell of Roses kills them. The Cuttles lay eggs like to black Myrtil
berries. They stick together like a bunch of grapes, and cannot be separated:
For the male casts some humor upon them, the clamminesse whereof holds them
together. They breed all the year, and they continue 15 days to lay eggs,
Aristot. histor. 5. c. 12. When she knows that cunning Fishers fish for her,
she casts forth her ink, and being environed with that, the Fishers cannot see
her: she hunts small fish with her promuscides: Whence Oppianus writes; The
cunning Cuttle when she hunts her prey,
With slender branches from her soft head springing,
Like to fine cords, small Fish without delay
She takes, they hold like hooks, when as they clinging,
Lie on the sand, she with her tail makes way.


Anaxilaus in Pliny says, That the ink of her is so strong, that burnt in a
lamp, it will make those that stand by, look like blackamores, the first light
being taken away.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Scorpion.
CEdrenus says, that in the deserts of the Brachmans there are Scorpions of
two cubits. In the place where the Turks sell Christians, Nicolaus a Nicolais,
saw some that were yellow, as long as a man's finger. In Egypt they have wings,
and two stings. Aelian. l. 16. c. 42. In Scythia, if they sting Man or Beast
they kill them. Also hogs, though they feel not other venomous bitings, yet dye
of these, chiefly if they be black; yet each of them dies suddenly, if he come
at the water. Aristot. l. 8. c. 29. In the ancient habitations of the
Scaligers, that are in the coasts of the Alps by Noricum; they are all the
Country over, without doing hurt; and they are in such multitudes that you can
remove no stone, but you shall find one under it. Scalig. Exerc. 189. In barks
of Trees also, they breed without a tail. They will turn themselves so fast in
a circle, as if they were moved with a pair of Compasses. Exerc. 196. In the
Country that lies next to those that feed on Locusts, such abundance of them
bred once of immoderate rayn, that the inhabitants were so stung they were
forced to leave their Country; Diodor. Sicul. l. 3. c. 3. Some say that
Scorpions devour their young ones, leaving only one that is most subtle,
Pliny, This sits fast within the thighs of its dam, and is free from the biting
and tail of it, and this revengeth the death of the rest. Pliny. l. 11. c. 25.
Aristotle thinks the contrary, l. 5. c. 26. His sting is most dangerous in a
dry Country, and when the Dogg-Starr is up. First the place begins to be
inflamed, waxing hard and very red. Sometimes it is very hot, sometimes very
cold, sweat follows, shaking and trembling, the outward parts are cold, the
groins swell, they break wind backwards, the hairs stand an end, the limbs are
pale, Cardan. l. 1. de. venen. c. 23. Many remedies are invented; Those that
live in Africa going to sleep, annoint their beds, and their feet with Garlic.
Strabo, and Alexandrinus, says Jovianus Pontanus does testify, that one was
cured presently by drinking beaten Frankincense, wherein the picture of the
Scorpion was engraven. Also its sting loses the force, if it touch Bezar
Stone. Jacob Hollerius, l. 1. c. 1. de morbis internis, writes, that by the
frequent smelling of an herb of Brasil, an Italian had a Scorpion that bred in
his brain: and Albertus says that Avicenna had a friend that could of rotten
wood make Scorpions when he pleased; and he adds, that from them others did
breed.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Worms in Wood, and the Tarantula.
THe Teredo grows in Wood, and there especially he feeds. And though they are
bred in many Trees, except the Oak and the Tyle-Tree, yet there are other Trees
that they breed not in. For Theophrastus and Pliny write, that the Firr-Tree,
the bark being taken off of the branches, will remain in water without any
hurt, That was apparent, says Theophrastus in Phneum of Arcadia, where the
ground was narrow into a Lake, there were bridges made with firr; when the
water swelled higher, there were other planks laid one upon another: at last
all that stopped being thrust forth, the whole frame was borne away, and was
found uncorrupted, so that this was found out by chance. Vincentius ex authore
libri de Natura rerum, sets it down for a miracle, that Box and white Thorn
which are the hardest Wood will breed Worms: But the nut of Aeubaea will never
putrefie. Lastly in Tylus an Island of Arabia, there is Wood that will never
corrupt in the water: for it has been observed to have lasted 200, years in
the water uncorrupted. The Phrygians, if we will credit Rhodiginus, made their
dainties of white fat Worms with black heads, that bred from rotten Wood,
called Xylophagi. Aelian. writes that the King of the Indies used for his
second course, a certain Worm breeding in Plants, and it was broiled at the
fire. Lastly in an Island called Talacha, there are Worms like to those, that
breed in rotten Wood, and are the chiefest dish of the Table, Johannes
Mandevil. Tarantulae are a kind of Spiders from the City Tarentum. They are
harmless to look upon, but when they bite they cause diverse symptoms; For
those that are stung with the Tarantula, some always sing, some laugh, some
cry, some cry out: for being infected with black Choler, according as their
temper is, they have all these symptoms.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Worms.
Article 1. Of Worms in Brute Beasts.
Rottenness is the mother of Worms, which whence it proceeds, is known by the
general principles of natural Philosophy. Therefore because in Guiney there
are great putrefactions, by the continual distemper of the Air, there are found
abundance of worms. Hence it appears, that a hot and moist distemper is fit to
breed them; that in Summer Months, and when the blasts are warm, Gardens
commonly abound with Snails, and flesh with Worms: They are found in Cattle,
Plants, and in men. Anno 1562, There was a cruel murrain for Cattle, worms
breeding about the region of their Liver, Cornelius Gemma. A worm sticks to the
forked hoofs of sheep and Rams, which unless it be taken out when you eat the
meat, it causes loathing and pain of the stomach. The Mullet fish breeds but
only thrice in its lifetime, and is barren all the rest of the time. For in
the matrix of it little Worms breed, that devour the seed. In others, some
small ones breed, that hinder procreation.

Artic. 2. Of Worms in Men.
WOrms are found in Men. For sometimes the active cause is sufficient, and
there is matter enough in their bodies; and many examples are found every where
in Authors, that confirm this. Anno 1549, There were many men about the River
Thaysa, in whose bodies there were found Creatures called Lutrae, and Lizzards.
Wierus saw a Country man that voided a Worm 8 foot long, it had a mouth and
head like to a Duck, l. 3. c. 15. de praestig. Demon. A Maid at Lovain (says
Cornelius Gemma) voided many prodigious creatures, amongst the rest a living
creature a foot and half long, thicker than a man's thumb, like to an Eagle, but
that the tail of it was hairy. A Maid (says Dodonaeus) cast forth some like to
Caterpillars, with many feet, and they were alive. Hollerius l. 1. says, he
saw a Worm that bred in a man's brain. Beniventus c. 100, exemp. medic. writes,
That he had a friend that was troubled with great pain in his head, raving,
darkness of sight, and other ill symptoms; at last he cast forth a Worm out
of his right nostrill, longer than his hand; when that was gone, all the pain
presently ceased. Theophrast. hist. Plant. l. 9. c. ult. writes thus of Worms
in the belly; Some people have belly worms naturally; for the Egyptians,
Arabians, Armenians, Syrians, Cilicians, are in part troubled with them, but
the Thracians and Phrygians have none. Amongst the Greeks, we know that the
Thebans, that use to live in Schools, and also the Baeotians have a worm bred
in them; but the Athenians have none. A woman in Sclavonia cast out a very
strange worm, described by Amat. Lusitan. curat. medic. Cent. 6.74. It was four
cubits long, but not broad, half so broad as ones nail, of a white color, of
the substance of the guts, having something like an Adders skin: The Head was
warty, and white, out of which the body grew broad, and grew still narrower
toward the tail. This Worm was but one body with many divisions; the parts of
this broad Worm were like to Gourd seeds, that had nothing contained in them by
reason of the compression of its broad body.

Artic. 3. Of Worms in Plants.
ALl Plants, herbs, shrubs and Trees have their worms: a worm in the root is
deadly. For let the Tree be what it will, and flourish, yet this will make it
wither, says Aldrovandus l. 6. de Insect. c. 4. And there are sure witnesses,
that in the roots of Oaks such venomous Worms will breed, that if you should
but tread on them with the sole of your foot, it would fetch off the skin.
There are small white ones found in the sponge of the sweet bryer, which is
outwardly soft and hairy, but inwardly so hard and so solid a substance, that a
sharp instrument will hardly pierce it. In the white Daffodill, some are bred,
which are changed into another flying and beautiful creature, which when the
herb begins to flourish, presently eats through the cover, and flies away.
Pliny, l. 20. c. 6. writes, that some think that Basil chewed and laid in the
Sun will breed Worms. If you bruise the green shells of Wallnuts, and put them
into the water, and then sprinkle them with earth, Worms will breed in
abundance, that are good for Fishers, Carol. Stephan, Agricultur, l. 3. c. 34.
But Theophrastus 5, de cause. Plant. says, that a Worm beed in one Tree, and
put into another, will not live. Joachimus Fortius reports that he saw some who
affirmed that from a hazel nut that had a Worm in it, there grew a Serpent for
magnitude and form. For the nut being opened so far as the Worm, and the Worm
not being hurt, they put the nut into milk, and set the vessel of milk in the
Sun, yet so that the Worm was not beaten upon by the Sun; wherefore, on that
side the Sun shined, they covered the Vessel, and so nourished the Worm many
days. Afterward adding more Milk, they set it to the Sun again. The milk must
be sheeps milk. Also they report, that a Worm is found in the leaves of Rue,
nourished the same way, that lived 20, days. Theophrastus writes of the cause
of them, plainly and fully. His words are these. Ill diseases happen to all
seeds, from nutriment and distemper of the Air, namely when too much or too
little nourishment is afforded, or the Air is immoderately moist or dry, or
else when it does not rain seasonably. For so Worms breed in chiches, vetches,
and pease; and in rocket-seeds, when as hot weather falls upon them before they
be dried; but in Chiches, when the salt is taken from them, and they become
sweet. For nature does every where breed a living creature, if there be heat
and moisture in due proportion. For matter comes from moisture for the heat to
work on, and concoct; as we see it happens in Wheat. Worms will breed in the
root of it, when, after seed time, Southern winds blow often. Then the root
growing moist, and the Air being hot, the heat corrupting the root, ingendreth
Worms. And the Worms bred, eat the roots, continually. For nature has
appointed that everything shall feed where it is bred. Another kind of Worm is
bred within, when the moisture cannot come forth, shut in by the dryness of
the Air about it, then the heat contracts it, when the corruption is made.
Then also food is administered to it, from the same thing. The same thing seems
to happen to Apples and Trees that are Worm-eaten from drought. For the little
moisture that remains in the Tree, causes corruption, whence the Worm
proceeds; but when there is plenty of nutriment it is otherwise, for then the
juice is sent forth to the upper parts, for it conquers by its quantity, and
cannot corrupt. Next to this is that which happens to Vines, for in these
especially when the South wind blows, Worms breed, that are called Ipes, that
is when they are very moist, and the Air causes fruitfullnesse, then do they
presently gnaw the matter that is of the same nature with them. Also Carpae
breed in Olive Trees the same way, and such as breed in other things, both when
they bud, and when they flower, or after that the flowers be over. For the^ all
proceed from the same cause. But this chiefly happens to Vines because (...)
are moist by nature, and their moisture is without taste and watery. (...) a
moisture, may be easily affected. Sometimes Ipes cannot be bred, because the
air it pleasant and not too moist.

Artic. 4. Of the Indian Worm, and the March Worm.
IN Ganges it is miraculous, they report there are blew Worms with two legs,
that are 60 cubits long, and they say they are so strong, that when Elephants
come to drink they will catch hold of them, by their trunk and carry them away.
Aelian speaks of an Indian Worm of seven cubits long, and so thick that a Child
of ten years old can hardly fathom it. It has one tooth in the upper part of
the mouth, and one below; both are four square, and almost a cubit long, and so
strong, that what living creature it lays hold of with them, it will easily
crush them. Sometimes it lies hid in the bottom of a River; in the mud it
delights in. At night it comes on land, and catches whatsoever comes in the
way. The skin of it is 2, fingers thick. The way to catch it is this, they
fasten a strong hook to an iron chain, joining also to it a rope of white broad
flax, and they wrap both the hook and rope in wool, that the Worm may not bite
them off. Then they put a Lamb or a Kid for a bait upon the hook, and so let it
down into the River. Thirty men stand ready with Darts, Leashes, and drawn
Swords, and strong pikes well pointed at the ends, if they should have cause to
strike. When he is caught with the hook, they draw him forth and kill him. They
hang him up against the Sun 30 days, and thick oil distills from it into
earthen pots; every worm will yield 5. Sextarii of oil, the rest of the body is
good for nothing. The virtue of this oil is such, that without any fire, a
measure of this poured on, will fire any stack of wood, Aelian. It is said,
that the King of Persia took Cities from his Enemies with this oil; It cannot
be put out but with abundance of thick clay. The month of March in Germany is
wonderful, that breeds young creatures in stinking filthy waters, that are
like to guts, and feed only on sand. If any man go into that water barefoot,
where this creature swims on the top of the water, he shall have a circle on
his legs, as high as the water came, Card. l. 7. de var. c. 37.

CHAP. XXV. Of Wasps.
WAsps then breed most, when Wolves kill Horses or Oxen. Sometimes they are
found in a Stags head, sometimes in his nostrills. One brought one of these
formed Wasps houses that was wonderfully made, to Pierius Valerianus, at
Bellunum, from some Wood in a desert: Which he describes thus: There were 7.
Concamerations or rounds, one above another, set at two fingers distance,
distinguished by little Pillars between, that every one might have space enough
to go and come to his house. The diameter of the rounds unto the fifth, was
about 12 digits; the others from the fifth, were made narrower, by little and
little, so that the last was 5. or 6. digits. The first round, that is, the
first Chamber, was hanged to a bough of an old Tree, fenced and guarded with a
crust against all injuries of wind and weather; Beneath there were six angled
Cells very close together, so that the other Chambers were all overcast with
the same crust, and made with the like Cells; and all were held up with their
pillars. All these Creatures flew out of the upper stations, and an innumerable
multitude filled the middle Concamerations, a thin skin being drawn for a cover
upon the hole of every one of them; when I had taken some of them away, I saw
the Wasps with their heads downwards, that filled all those houses. But those
that were in the lowest rooms seemed like to Embryo's of like imperfect Worms;
they were also fenced with the same covering, but very thin, as snails in
Winter, kept for a milder time in the Spring. But these all died there, by the
extreme cold Winter, yet none corrupted; and after so many years they keep the
same form and posture. They are most lively; for, part their belly from their
breast, and they will live long, and will sometimes prick one that touches
their sting, an hour after. Aristotle says, That if you take a Wasp by the
legs, and make him to hum, (not those that have a sting, but those that want
one) the rest will fly to help them. If they appear before the end of October,
they foreshew a hard VVinter. If they go in heaps under ground before the 7.
Stars rise in the Evening, they signify the same. A swarm of Wasps is
naturally an ill omen. So Livy thought, when at Capua, a great swarm of them
flew into the Market place, and settled in Mars his Temple. They were collected
carefully, and burnt in the fire. The Decemviri were commanded to their books,
and the Nine-daies sacrifice was appointed, supplications were made, and the
City was purged. If any one touch the skin of a man with the distilled water of
the decoction of Hornets or VVasps, the place will so swell, that it will cause
men to suspect poison, or a Dropsy, or some great sickness; The remedy is
Theriac drank or smeered on it, Mi^aldus Memor. Cent. 7. etc.

The End of the Eighth Classis.
AN APPENDIX TO The Eighth Classis: Wherein there is contained the Observation
of Andreas Libavius, a most famous Physician, concerning Silkworms, a singular
History, Anno 1599, at Rotenburgh.
SInce it is hard to explain the opinions and experiments of all Authors
exactly, and what they observed in diverse places and ^imes, to make a history
thereof, and to condemn or allow, for this or that man's relation, what every
man has found to be true by his own use and observation: Perhaps it may so
fall out, that neither Pliny, nor Pausanias, nor others, who seem to comment
otherwise than we have found it, ought to be condemned; I will add a special
History of Silkworms bred up at hand, which in the year of Man's Redemption,
1599, at Rotenburg at Tubaris, I, by diligent care and attention looking into
their works and natures, set it down into a Calender. If any thing differing
from this, has been observed in Greece, India, Italy, or elsewhere in other
Times, Government and Education, Custom, and the like: though Nature be said to
act always the same way, and to vary only by accidents; yet what they
observed will help, that by many men's observation, the history of Nature may be
augmented and perfected.

The Silkworms eggs that were laid in a clean paper the year before, and which
in Winter I kept in a warm Chamber, I exposed them to the Sun, shining through
the windows, on the 25 day of April. Those which were lead-coloured or black,
they did not all in one day become Caterpillars, yet they all were changed
before the end of that month, the worms creeping forth especially in the
morning, as every one was grown to perfection, leaving an empty shell, or
covering of a white color, the egg being eaten on the side, in which place
the ends were blackish, by reason of the biting. The purple or Citron colored,
or clear, or distinguished with a black point, brought forth nothing; either
because they were not touched with male seed, or the principle was suffocated
in them. These small Catterpillars within the egg obtain their form, and lie
wrapped into a Circle; whence the shell being eaten, they first put forth a black
shining head; then by degrees, they creep forth, with their little mouths, and
little feet, by their striving. Then I observed little threads hanging from
their mouths, and they were so small, that they could not be seen, unless it
were against the light: by these they balance themselves, and hang from the
leaves; or wheresoever they fell from higher places, they creep up by them
again; or wheresoever they were hanged, to try what they would do, they involve
themselves with manifold turnings, and so mount upward, like ordinary
Catterpillars that eat leaves and boughs.

There is a black little worm and hairy, with a white circle near the breast
and head, and with another where the belly joins to the little breast, and yet
by reason of the hairinesse, it is not very plain to be seen at the first. At
the end of the back, where the belly ends, a little grisle comes forth; and as
for the rest of its form, it is the same with the Silkworms, but that the
hairinesse and blackness, by some changes in the skin, pass into smoothness
that shines, and is white; and of a small creature, a worm is made as long as
the middle finger of an ordinary man, with the 3. joints, as thick almost as
the little finger; yet they are not all of one bigness. You shall find some
Caterpillars with a threefold spur in their tails, or a double one; so that
the greater of them rises from the last circle of the back, the lesser ones
rise presently from the coat of the tail that is under it. I saw one great one
that was on both sides fenced with two lesser ones, in the place whereof there
are sometimes only two points that stick forth. Catterpillars go as Silkworms
do: For they stick the props of their tails into the ground, and then by
degrees they go on by circular motion. First drawing up those parts between
their tails and their hinderfeet: then fastening these upon the distance between
their breast and their feet, until they come unto their breast and former
feet; which being fastened, they lift up their tails again, and underprop their
steps. For animal motion is made, when some part stands and underprops the
rest. So soon as they were bred, I gave them the tender leaves of Mulberries, I
put them upon the leaves with a thin knife; or I let them creep upon them of
themselves, and I put them together into a wooden box; They set upon the sides
and smooth parts of the leaves, above and beneath. For the appendixes of their
noses do not hinder them. So I fed them from the end of April, or thereabouts,
until the eighth day of May, whereon I found they cast their first skin, which
was a little black shining mouth, with a slender black skin. They are wont a
little before, to pause on it, and to sleep; it is a renewing sleep, if it be a
sleep properly. So soon as their old skin is cast, they appear greater
presently, smoother, and of a more shining black, for the horny covering of the
head that grows under the old, is greater in proportion. When the skin is off,
the rest of the body swells, as if the narrowness of the skin hindered it to
grow so great before. The same covering or skull of the head, when it is new,
is white; but when it is confirmed, it grows black again, until there be many
changes. But as, before they put off their skin, they abstain from food, so a
little after they seem to grow sluggish. For their mouths are too tender to
feed on leaves. Whilst they run over the leaves, oft-times one goes over
another, and they willingly endure it, if they be not hurt too much. For then
lifting up their little breast, they will shake their heads, moving them here
and there, and the Silkworms do the same. Food is given them once and again,
and the multitude of them remains in a narrow place. When they have eat enough,
they grow sleepy. Then you shall see them like Statues, or such as are taken
with a Catoche, lifting up their mouths and breasts growing stiff upon the
leaves. But if you cast in new food, they wake presently and feed again. They
seem to perceive the new leaves by smelling them. For before they touch them,
they will raise their bodies toward them. Yet you may suppose that is done by
some alteration in the feeling quality. The excrement of their belly is then
small and black like to Gunpowder.

The 16 day of May some of them cast their skins the second time, some slept,
and the days following cast off their skins. They break near the head, and
they stick to the leaves, the Caterpillars coming forth by circles moved in
order. The little mouth also does not fall away presently, but hangs for a time
about the new mouth. Then the black color changes into gray, and the
Caterpillars grow greater; but the breast is white, and so full of juice, that
it is almost transparent. But because they do not all change their skins in one
day, if you please you may part the one that does, from the other that does
not. But I left them together, and only gave the new ones new food, the rest
yet sleeping in their old clothes, and waiting for their change. For you cannot
then cleanse their stall, but you must defer it till they awake, and can be
invited to new leaves. The third change began the 22 of May, when many of them
slept, some of them put off their coats. It was no longer so black, but it was
white, with the little mouth; and the worms came forth whiter, leaving their
old skin: they were more rugged that did not stick to the leaves by threads; and
those less, that did. For these skins were long and triangular hanging so
high. Downward they rise sharp in the middle, which, I conceive, happens, by
the top of the tail drawn thither, and lifting up the skin. The last extremity
of this cast skin is like to a fishes forked tail. The Caterpillars once more
freed, fed till the 25 day, and then I observed them to sleep a renewing sleep,
and some new ones of them the same day. More slept on the 26 day, some on the
27; very few on the 28 and 29th days, that now the difference was greater. But
those that slept on the 27th day, were changed the next day, and fed again
after a little pause.

With this fourth change of Catterpillars were made Silk Worms, smooth and
white, yet with lead colored spots, and a mouth like a white horn. This is the
first month of their life, and their first age. But since in the third and
fourth change of their skin, all things are more easily observed, and known, I
shall something more accurately describe them. Catterpillars near their third
and fourth change, have their skins something more ill favored, and stiffer
than for the breeding of a Worm. Wherefore a soft skin comes up underneath, and
the other falls off by degrees: and because they stick with some nervous bands
on both sides, wherein there are some prints of spots, and these are not easily
broken, they strive more to cast them off, and therefore sleep two days almost,
when therefore they come forth, their old horny mouth is parted from the new
that comes up under it. The Worm it self, when the cast skin sticks to the
leaves, pulls up his feet and little legs, sometimes pulling them up, sometimes
slackning them again, until she has pulled them out of their old covers. In
the mean time the skin on their sides is wrinkled, the skaly divided body being
contracted into it self, and extended again. So the old skin is loosned from
the whole body. By and by the Worm goes foward, and draws the bands on the
sides by degrees, the skales being thrust forward orderly, and then drawn in
again, that at first you would doubt whether the Worm would come forth before
or behind. But this way are the bands broken. First you shall observe it to
move forward near the breast, for there the points depart, and you shall see
two in the cast skin, two in the worm. Moreover whilst the skales are drawn, a
violet colored line as it were is in both sides of the cast skin, both by
reason of the points and of the bands applied to both sides. In the mean while
the tail is wrinkled, the feet are freed, and a new worm creeps forth in half
a quarter of an hour, that has an old mouth joined to its mouth, as a Mule
with a headstal, you shall see also a white string that it draws at the end of
the tail, whereby the skin stuck to the back of it: when they are fast they
strive but easily, but when they are loose, they turn themselves strangely on
their backs, sides, bellies, till they can get loose. Some of their skins cast,
are round; some long. If you take it by both ends, you may draw it out to its
full length, with the points of all the feet and skales, for nothing is wanting
but the little mouth. The fourth skin in this change is far whiter then the
third, as also the covering of the head. These Worms are now Silkworms, if you
take good care to feed them, and govern them rightly; They are fat and white,
but some more than others, for some seem yellowish, some almost lead-coloured.
The feet and mouth at first are soft, wherefore they stay a while from touching
or feeding on leaves. They stick fast to them, and by help of their tails, they
can draw themselves in and out. The hinder feet are thicker and blunter, as it
were with 3, joints, and in the middle a black spot, which I think to be the
instrument they hold by, because she can at pleasure pull it in and out, as
Cats do their claws. The forefeet do not only serve to go with, but to lay hold
on leaves to help their body in passing, to draw the threads, and for other uses.
The parts from head to tail in length, on the back are the head, the bunch or
wrinkled swelling of the breast, eight semicircular scales, and a three forked
tail. The swelling of the breast near the head is white in some, in some it is
distinguished with two black and blew spots, which are divided with a yellow
line, and in several ones it is severally made. For in some the color is more
remiss and watery, and not so visible, in others it is more deep. But where
that bunch rises up, there are seen 4, knots, and the skin that is by them is
wrinkled. The half Circles follow. They are joined with a very thin membrane,
as it were by a green line from blew. But the skales are white though in some
of them there is something of a lead color that shines under, and when the
Silkworms are ready for their Silkwork, they become of a spiceous color, and
all of them are marked with one spot on each side, with a little circle about
it. I said there were bands, which appear also in the Aurelia. Lastly the
eighth scale is either distinguished by two black and blew spots, or moonlike
semicircles, which two half Moons one respecting the other with their horns are
there inscribed. But they are not equal in all, for sometimes they are more
conspicuous, sometimes more fading, fine, thin, lead colored, white. Hence
there are two small Circles, and that which follows these, has two knots,
until that which is next the rump, and raises the tip or point; In the great
ones there are observed bunchings forth in all the skales, but they are more
eminent in the third skale. The skull is horny, but it is divided as it were
into 3. parts, the right and left, which you would take to be marks of the
eyes, and then the setting together of the mouth, which are again distinguished
into the appendices and the jaws, wherein stand the saw-like teeth, The throat
runs through all the length of the back, as far as the props of the tail,
upon which in the last skale is the end of the Belly. Also there are to be seen
in the back, as far as the Plectrum of the tail, some nervs moveable with a
continual pulsation, as the heart and arteries use to move, and these nervs
are yellow from white, and when they are drawn asunder, they discover a green
throat or intestine. They stick to the plectrum, as if there were some passage
for breathing, though they do not breathe. But it is no doubt but there is the
Seat of life, though I discovered in the young ones a kind of red part, as I
shall show underneath, beating by it self alone like the heart, when that
plectrum is cut, a moist yellowish liquour comes forth, and the Worms
themselves do not dye, but they stir the more violently, and roll and turn
themselves that you will judge that they are in great pain, the nervous
principle being hurt. The dung of them represents their meat, for it is dry
with six corners long, as it were set with eyes, whence one may collect the
disposition of the gut or belly. They are green from their food, but because
they are hard, and without moisture, they seem black, as those that are more
moist seem more green. Here if you mark you may distinguish the males from the
females. For the females here, as the Philosopher writes of other females are
greater, fatter, moyster, softer, whiter than the males, which are more rude,
more spotted with wan spots, and more slender. If you handle them you shall
find them all to be cold. They use often to raise themselves on their hinder
feet, and to stand so like statues. When they will feed they fasten on the
sides and swelling veins of leaves, contrary to Catterpillars. I believe the
appendixes of their mouths hinder them, yet they afford some help for their
former feet to hold their meat with. They eat the leaves round, that they leave
a round pit. When they are full they go aside, and they rest many together on a
heap; I think they are delighted with mutual heat; you may discern those that
sleep, from those that cast their skin, by observing the pulsation in their
back. For the motion in those that sleep is equal to those that wake; but when
they cast their skins, it is slower and less, that you would then think they
were sick. Also those that sleep have but one mouth; but such as cast their
skins, show a little mouth besides. But this is not in Silkworms, but whilst
they are yet Catterpillars. Some of them being four times renewed, have a
filthy dark head, and yet they feed on. Some do not increase much, but continue
small.

We said before, that from May 25, to May 29, the fourth change is made in
diverse of them. From this time to June, the 7th, and 8th, 9, 10, 11th, they
feed greedily, and grow fat and great; and I was forced three times a day, and
about the last days, four times a day to give them meat, or oftener. For when
they are almost ripe for Silk work, they eat more greedily, going with great
courage to the leaves and biting off the nervs. You shall note that about 13
days pass between their fourth change, and their abstinence from meat, and
provision to make their Silk. For the times answer one the other, from the 25,
of May to the 7, of June, from 26, to 8, from 27, to 9, from 28, to 10, from
29, to 11, wherein I included the last, except one small male, that fed longer.
About the last days, many begin to grow of a spiceous color, which begins to
appear more evidently on the hinder part, and from thence to enlarge and go
forward to the bunch of the breast, though others are more, and almost all
yellow; some remain white with blew mingled with it. When they must dye, they
go to the sides of the chest, nor will they bite the leaves, though they creep
over them. Some fasten their threads at the corners, as if they were beginning
the entry; others creep by the outsides, and seek here and there for a fit
place to lie hid in. I shut many of them in, with paper-Coffins, which I
disposed of and fastened commodiously in some place, in which by gnawing and
rending the sides, they do make a noise for a while, but afterward by voiding
a dry and moist excrement of their belly, (for they void out both) by their
hinder parts, they fasten them so fast to the paper, that you would think they
were glewed. Afterward for 3, days continually they make a little bladder,
which being absolved they lay aside their fifth skin, with their head and tail
and are transformed into a nympha again. Some I did not shut up in papers, but
disposed them in a wodden chest with boughs, and let them choose a nest for
themselves; you shall observe thence, that they seek chiefly for corners and
hiding places, and often times many of them make their Silk in the same place, if
it may be; some ordering them, right forward, others obliquely, others broad
ways. If the place be too narrow, the wrong end of the skin is pressed together
on the side, nor does it contain perfectly Oval. One of these cases is longer,
thicker, larger than another for the greatness and strength of the Silkworm.
They differ also in color; some are Gold, Silver, Citron colors, and they are
double. For some are greenish, some more yellow, though others call all these
green. The first of them all, as I observed, was white, except some few that
send a yellowish tow before. Some of Gold color have their inward coat white,
nor is the yellow color certain. For when the cases are unfolded in water, the
silk grows white; and in dye, yellow, etc. But it is worth your labor to
contemplate the matter of the silk; and what that is, that yields a thread so
long.

When therefore I saw a great worm to wander, I put a line about his neck, and
dissected him. He lived stoutly when his throat was tied, and felt acutely. For
at every incision of his back, the knife scarce touching him, he would toss
himself violently, as if he would help himself with his mouth and forefeet. His
skin being divided, I saw his long gut, as in a pike, the forepart was swollen
and wide, the hinder part narrower. On that gut did the nerves or beating
arteries lie, with a continual systole and diastole, and they ended on the
plectrum of (...) tail. When I cut off this, not only a yellow clear humor
did break forth, but the heads of the nerves, put themselves forth in the
motion, and their stirring grew weaker. The Intestine has a double coat, one
thick outward coat, and another thin one within. The thick coat feels
accurately, and it is near the throat covered over with much glutinous matter,
which afterward becomes matter for their wings, and of the hairinesse of the
Silkworm, as the external excrementitious moisture becomes the Aurelia, or
outward shell. When the thick coat is pricked, the intestine comes forth, yet
wrapped with a thin coat, and it contains much of the meat they eat the day
before of green leaves. Also you may see, when the skin is cut, and the thick
coat of the Intestine, that moisture will run forth in abundance, that is
transparent, which I think is their blood, and by concoction is changed into
silk, and the parts of the Creature. The head cut off, the beginning of the
throat swells forth, and does represent the blunt head of the Nympha. The gut
being taken out with the foeces contained in the abdomen, there are seen, like
worms, some glutinous clammy concretions, some yellow, some white, two very
great, the rest small, so like worms, that nothing wants but a skin and life.
They are sharp at both ends. They are so placed in the belly, that both their
points are turned toward their tail, and the body of them is doubled; you would
say it were their yarn folded together. If they begin to spin from the points,
it is necessary that they be drawn from the tail to the mouth. I think that the
small whitish pieces make weaker silk and towe; but the greater, the stronger.
I took out these worms, and I found that they dried presently on the paper, and
became hard and brittle, as Ox glue uses to do, and as the Tendons and
Intestines of living creatures. The body of it, is all of one kind and
transparent, that no man can draw it into so fine and small thread; but this
labor must be left to the Silkworm, as webs to the Spiders. The outward skin
was white, mingled with lead color; but within, it was drawn with a little
skin black and blew in part; and partly with a shining gold color as in a
Herring. About the belly where the matter of the silk lay, the substance was
pretty thick, consisting of nervous deductions, and a texture containing a
white fat, infolded with nervous coats; the like is found afterward in the
young Nymphs of Silkworms; and they have a matrix and a genital member. Under
that substance there are lead-colour'd branches let down into their feet like
to tendons or chords. This skin, the matrix and genital member remaining, is
put often in weaving their silk, with all the parts that stick forth: so that the
Nymph, and Butterfly that rises from thence, borrow nothing from the Silkworm
but the belly and gut, and the nervous parts that are in them. There remains in
the gut and genitals a great deal of moisture. From whence afterward grows
the matter of the seed, and excrements of the belly. But the humor that is in
the Intestine is yet raw, and is partly green, partly yellow, something thick,
and elsewhere thin. If one part the fat from the nervous coats of the genitals,
and smeer it on paper, when it is dry it will be like ^ewer, and brittle. You
may compare it with milk in fishes. Therefore it is apparent, that in the
Silkworm these members are outward; Its threefold feet, the skaly joynting of
the belly, the breast, head, mouth, the anus, skin, tail, plectrum: but within
is the Intestine, the vital arteries, or the nerves, the white flesh of the
breast, the genitals, betwixt which and the Intestine, is contained the matter
for Silk; and besides those, the pannicles and nervous membranes, in which the
parts are contained. Whether they have any heart, let others seek out: yet
there must be some such Principle; and that not in the head, nor any where but
near the breast, whence the vital force is sent through the whole body: And
this is manifest chiefly by motion of the nerves or arteries (as I may call
them) in the back of the belly, not of the breast, so far as the hollow of the
tail. I will speak afterward of the nymphs and young silkworms: Now I will
add what I observed in their making of silk.

When they abstain from meat, and, as I said, they seek for a place to make
their case; they have commonly about the end of their belly a green wan mark,
the other part of their body is white with green, or wan, and of a spiceous
color. Then I saw them often make it as they went up and down, and to gape at
the mouth, as it were Cows chewing the cud, when as out of their gorge they
pull back their meat to chew on. Then it is likely, that the Silkworms strive
to turn the matter of the silk toward their mouths, and to draw it out. If you
put them into a paper Coffin, you shall hear them gnawing a whole day, and then
into the bottom of this Coffin like a Friars cowl, they put down their
excrement, first dry, like a black green pill or yellow. The last pill but one
is commonly green, the last is yellow, and sanious. The number of t^is dung is,
as their excrements abound. For I found in one paper, sometimes two little
knobs, sometimes more, to 12, of diverse colors, as black, green, yellow, and
those not with bright spots, but round. When the last yellow pill comes forth,
watery matter comes forth of diverse colors, and a different consistence. For
some part is thicker, some thinner, having some red color with yellow and
green; yet some of the sanies is bloody and blackish; such it appears on a
clean paper, where you may sometimes see green polluted with yellow; sometime
somewhat like chalk. In a glass, it is like to Lie. But that you may not doubt
whether she voids it by her mouth or her belly; know, that she makes her silk
only out of her mouth, and her excrements by her belly. Yet they send forth
moisture also out of their mouth, when they are sick, or strangled, or pressed.
I found a Silkworm that was at liberty, that put forth both these excrements
behind. Some of them void forth much moisture, others but a little. They that
void much seem to be the weaker, and to have gathered less silk. For many of
them make small silk cases, but not all. It is doubtful what color the silk
will be. For I was often deceived by observing their heads, backs, bellies and
feet. All of them do not make silk of the same color; and oft-times the towe
and utmost coat is white, but the middle silk is gold-coloured. I thought the
Silkworms that were of a spiceous color would make yellow; and the white
ones, white silk; but that was false. For both drew white. Once and again I
judged right, that a Citron colored female would make such a thread: yet such
was also drawn by that silkworm, whose belly was Lead-colour with white, and
the spot in the forehead yellow. I saw a female also all white, that made
white silk. In small and narrow papers, yet according to the Worms proportion,
lesser cases are made, but thicker, with less towe; yet I observed little
cases in the larger. They that are not shut up, but choose a place freely, they
consume much thread in towe at random: whence the silk is much lost. For their
cases are less, and not wrought so thick. If you will observe, you may know
exactly the reason of their spinning in these things.

For when they have wandered a time, and have begun here and there to make their
entrance of their work, (which they do by diligent bending of their bodies,
whilst sticking by their hinder feet, they do variously move their head and
their whole breast upwards, downwards, backwards, forwards, and on all sides,
if there be a fit place to fasten their silk threads, which they do not by
sight, but by touching; for they have dull eyes) then they draw forth their
threads, and the foundations of their house, and that simple or manifold, as
they find need of a strong foundation. If it be near the pavement, they stick
to it with their hinder part; and if it be aloft, they hang by the same, or
from boughs, or any other place. For they turn their breast and head freely;
and if there be need, they change the situation of their hinder parts. Thus the
entrance of their first work is made. Now the dry excrements are voided from
their belly; the Entrance being finished, so that now the Silkworm is secure
and free from outward injuries: she voids the last dung with moisture, of which
I spoke before. The towe is often polluted with this, yet it runs off to the
bottom. When her belly is emptied, the spinner cease for a while, and puts
forth her anus, as if she had a Tenasmus. Then she calls back the matter of the
true silk, and continues that to her last breath, and till her silk work is
ended. Then by degrees she thickens her threads from a large to a narrower
compass, so that it becomes an ovall figure, in the hollow whereof she may
turn her self. Her mouth, breast, and forefeet are in a continued motion. The
hinder parts stick, yet are they translated to another place, when she makes
the bottom or the top. They that make their cases in the ground or pavement,
they seem to sit on the naked pavement; but by degrees they weave threads under
them, and in all parts they thicken the whole case alike, except in the point,
to which in straight places they cannot reach. Therefore the frame of this is
made more at first, but the basis more in the end: Though this be not neglected
at the beginning. Wherefore when the threads are unfolded, by untwisting them,
the point is first made plain, and the inward coat is left, like a fingerhood.
So they weave to the third day; and you may see them working the second day, if
you hold the case to the Sun. In paper hoods the base is made upwards, the top
downwards: and in two days it appears but thin. The third day it is thickened:
and then the worm puts off her old skin, and becomes a nymph, which may easily
be observed: for when they weave, yet they stick fast; neither is their dull
falling down yet perceived. But when it becomes a Nymph, as if it were a stone
shut in, shake the case and the Nymph falls down. And this dull falling down
endures until it be changed into a young Worm. For then the empty place is
filled again, and the Worm sticks to the case, seeking to come forth. There was
one Worm I had, that made a case, whose entrance, amongst those were shut in a
Paper, was a solid coat: in those that are at liberty, it consists of threads
disposed and drawn diverse ways to and fro. Some have observed in one case two
or three shut in; but when the place would be too narrow, that case cut was
common to them three, and the Silkworms found within were become close
together, so that they seemed like to 3, fingers joined, when they were all set
at liberty, they worked a little, but it was but a little. It is observable,
that some Silkworms in paper made no Silk, but presently turned to Nymphs; I
think this befell them, because they fed on lettice, (yet not to them all) or
to such as had too little meat given them, or that were sick and could not
gather matter of Silk, which I suppose is made of abundant blood like fat, and
laid apart. Other strange things happen; whereof in their proper place. All
their cases are long and ovall. Y^^ I saw a white one almost exactly round,
that it had a basis sphaericall on both sides without any point. It was small
with its fore-house, but yet thick as it should be. But the silkworm in that
did not go to be a Nymph, nor a perfect young worm, as I shall show by and by.
It seems a question whether they draw forth the silk out of the end of their
belly, or out of their mouth, though they always distribute it with their
mouth and their forefeet. It is no small argument, because that near the props
of their tail at the bottom of their belly, a chink is seen, and both ends of
the silk-matter in the belly lie to that place: Also the voiding of the
Excrements at the beginning of their working, confirms this. For as when a
woman is to be delivered of a child, what faeces there are in the bladder and
the right intestine, that is voided and pressed forth; so we may think the silk
matter striving to come forth in the Silkworm does the like. When she begins
to labor, her belly swells more; from the belly begins the maturity, known by
the yellowness; That comes first out, as being first ready. Also Caterpillars
and Silkworms, stick to the pavement, with a hairy down about their feet. Some
are observed to weave on their backs, that the silk may be drawn out of their
belly, and may the more easily be ordered by their mouths and feet. This may be
alleged for the first opinion. But stronger arguments prove this to be false.
For you may see with your eyes, that when the belly rests, threads are drawn out
of their mouths, and they sticking by their clamminesse, are drawn out by
degrees, by turning back their necks. And therefore Silkworms do not only so
draw their threads lying on their backs, but lying also on their bellies where
yet the whole Worm turns her self freely. Then it cannot come forth by the
tail, nor by the chap under the tail. For from the place of the silk to the
Intestine, there is no passage: and the chap of the tail, that notes out the
genitals of the young worm that shall be, is covered with a skin, Moreover,
before the silk comes forth, oft-times the silkworms do cry and mutter, as if
they were r^a^y to vomit, drawing the matter to their throats. Nor do they
swell about their tails, but about the middle of their bellies; Also in a
Coffin of paper, when no thread appeared on their feet, I saw them draw it forth
with their mouth only, and to fasten it; and the 2d. of June, when I earnestly
observed one making its case, I drew the beginning of the thread out of the
worms mouth, when it was wet, to its full length, the belly and the feet having
no silk upon them. So Caterpillars hang by the mouth, their thread coming out
there. Nor do Spiders and Palmer-worms on trees make their webs otherwise. And
so much for this question.

When the Case is made, the Silkworm is changed into a Nymph, and the fleeces
are taken, first choosing what males and females you please, for preservation
of their kind. Some say you may know their sex by the color of their case;
some by the bigness: And this is some argument. For, because females are
commonly the greater, they make also the greater houses. Yet sometimes we are
deceived; for a strong male may make a greater case than a weak female. I have
seen them both of a bigness, and I have seen females, ^ed in other places, to
make far less houses than my males. Wherefore the signs must also concur,
observed in the silkworms themselves* of which before. The other cases are
cast into scalding water, that the worms may die, or they are choked with the
heat of an oven, after the bread is taken forth, taking care they burn not.
Then taking away the Towe, maidservants or such as can labor, are ready, who
may loosen the beginnings of the threads; which being found out, many of them
are cast into a basin of cold or warm water, and the servant Maid sitting ready
with a drawing instrument, does continually roll down 30 or 40, or more threads
joined together. If the thread break any where, the fellow laborer must seek
for the beginning of it, and give it again to him that unwinds it. That is
continued until they come to the inward coat, which being very difficult to
untwist, it is dried and pulled into towe and kembed. When the threads are thus
untwisted, they send much dust into the Air, and you may see in the bottom of
the vessel some filth that fell from the silk. I tried carefully, whether I
could with one work unwind a whole case not breaking it, taking away the Towe,
which by reason of its various foldings together, weakness, and diverse
principles, cannot be untwisted at once drawing. I obtained my desire only in
the middle of the silk; for that which is before the house is wont to break
easily, but the middle holds best. The last coat, by the weight added to it,
(for then the Nymph falls down) was unfolded by me with great care to the thin
skin, which was scarce equal to the thumbs nail. Those cases are best
untwisted, whose basis and top answer diametrically; but those are harder,
whose top is bound, and they that are crooked or bunched. For here the thread
sticks and is tangled, that it will hardly yield without breaking. First, the
point is made bare, and untwisted all to the middle of the case. -- The thread
of one silk case was as long as this line here drawn, when it was drawn forth
7000 times, and in one it was above 8000 times longer: yet they are not all of
one thickness and greatness; which may be seen, by drawing them asunder into
little skins. For some fleeces I drew into 12, some into 8, more or less coats.

The wild Silkworm has an entrance, a single coat, and something a thicker
case: wherefore the thinner cases easily yield to the fingers pressing them,
but the thicker will resist. When the top has a hole almost to the middle,
that the Nympha may easily fall forth; she falls with her cast skin, wherein
there is both her head and all her feet. Sometimes commonly the head of this old
skin is over against the top of the case, that we may understand that it was
cast off, whilst the Worm when the case was perfected, does bend and turn her
self upwards through narrow streets. The Crown of the Nympha is toward the
basis, the tail toward the top; and being that the Silkworm is above twice as
long, the Nympha is contracted to a small bigness, that it is scarce so long
as the middle joint of the second finger of a man. She is alive, and gives
tokens that she is so, by the moving of her top or tail when she is touched. If
you regard her outward form, you would say she is a scaly Worm, and her head
is covered with a bag. The scales are dark colored, as if they were staind
with smoke, and they are eight in number, as far as the confines of the Crown:
On the sides of each of them there are two round points, out of which the
tendons or bands appertain to the young Silkworm. On the Crown there is a
white spot, as if the mouth of the young Silkworm shined through it, with
three little black spots. After this on the foremost part there are prints of
feet and horns, and on the hinder part toward the sides, are prints of wings,
If you will observe the inward parts, the fourth day before it is changed into
a young Silkworm, after it has lain hid, you may open it, you shall see
nothing else but a common empty place, and in this only three distinct humors.
One of a watery thin substance, of a yellow color; This is equally diffused
through the whole space. The other is red, like blood; This sticks in the upper
part, where the head and breast will be; you would judge it to be the rudiment
of the heart, because I saw the like afterward in the young Silkworm, a
certain Mass that moved of it self, if a heart may be attributed to this
creature. The third humor is white and yellow; and it is like to a hen egg,
cast into a hot water and run about; or like cheese-curds, if you add some
yellow to them. Where you see the prints of wings and feet outwardly, there
lies hid a phlegmatique clammy matter, fit to make the membranes of, you shall
see no distinction of parts; I think the life is in the nervous coat, that is
next under the outward shell. For the Silkworm in that part was exceeding
sensible, and had a motion of the heart and arteries; you would call this a
little bladder filled with humors, which yet compared to the Aurelia, after
the young Silkworm is crept forth, is far thicker, and you would say it were a
shell clothed on the inside with coats and a tenacious glow. After this, is
the down of the young Silkworm, the wings, feet, skin, and the other outward
parts. So the Silkworm passes into throat and belly, for whose sake only it
was detained there. Yet here appears no green color which was much in the
intestine of the Silkworm now ready to spin. Part therefore was voided before
the case was made, and part was changed into some other juice. In the tip of
the tail there was also some clammy matter like to the raw white of an egg. I
thought it to be the rudiment of the genitall parts. For with that the matrix
and spermatical Vessels were cast off, the beginning whereof is seen also in
the belly of the Silkworm. The humors taken on a clean paper and dried, were
stained with black, as if you had mingled ink with them, yet the tallowy
substance remained white, and in some places a red and yellowish spot appeared
with a white spot like chalk: whence we may collect that that blackness was
only from a watery yellow humor, which only shined on the paper where it stuck
thick, like to shining ink. The rest of the Nymphs, partly deprived of all
Silk, and naked partly shut up yet in a single coat, partly safe in the whole
Silken case, I handled with no other care, but I only putt them up in a box,
and set them in my window, yet I distinguished them into diverse Cells, such as
I thought to be females, and such as I thought to be males, and I was not
deceived in more than one only. So from the first shutting them in, until they
came forth, there passed 26, or 27, days, setting them in my study to the
afternoon* Sun in the heat of June, as it was very hot in 99. For the female
that was buried on the 11, of June, came forth a young Silkworm on the 8, of
July. A male that began to spin on the 9, of June, on the fifth of July became
a butterfly. The same day two females came forth out of two greater white
cases, and one male from a less yellow case. On the sixth of July in the
morning (for they all come forth in the morning) a male came out of a white
case, he was dusky colored and rough; and a white female very tender, with a
great belly, and with great wings, came out of a case that was yellow and
greenish. Also before on the second of July, a male crept forth of a Gold
colored case, and a female out of a white one.

These began their Silken case the tenth of June. When young Silkworms are
ready to come forth of whole cases, when you shake it, you shall find no more a
dull weight; and then the aurelia opens about the back of the thorax; after
that a great deal of clear humor that is white is powered out of the mouth,
and the place grows wet, where they will make their passage. This way they came
forth with laboring and striving. I saw a female coming forth on the 8th, of
July; she sent so much moisture before her, that a great drop fell into the
box. Then her head appeared, she striving with her feet within. By degrees,
after her head, she put forth these; and presently she stood upon the pavement
with them, and by striving by little and little, she drew forth the Circles of
her belly; that when the first was drawn forth, and she would draw out the
second, she drew up all her foreparts, that so she mi^ht pull forth the next
roundle; yet it is very like, that by that contracting of her self, the hole
was made wider that her belly at last might come forth with less pain. Her
diverse turning side ways, helps for this also. In the mean while the thicker
young Silkworms and such as have more moisture in their bellies, press
something forth when they strive, and they do besmeer the case where the hole
is, both inside and outside with a plaister-like clammynesse. They that labor
less and are slenderer, leave but little. Then you shall see the whole hoary
case, something wet by the moisture comes forth of their mouths, and made easy
to pass through. Sometimes they are wont to be quiet, and often times to inflate
their bellies, to draw it forth and draw it in again, as if they did set their
disioynted limbs, and put them in their true places. And they do so draw forth
and loosen the circles, that the joints stick up filled with a yellow humor,
as if they were inflated. You shall see the naked Nymphs, when the butterflye
is perfect within, two or three days before to move themselves, as if they
would break the bands by which the young Silkworm is tied to the Aurelia. I
then opened one of them with my knife and nails, that I might see the
congruity of the outward with the inward parts. That I did, the fourth of July,
when as then about 20, days were passed from the time of their making Silk* The
first skale being removed, about the beginning of the little breast on the
backside I saw the tender upper circle of the belly; it was skinny covered with
a moist down, yet so short and made plain that the down could scarce be seen.
Under the place of the side wings, which in the Aurelia you may compare to the
Shoulder blades, two true wings of the young Silkworm did lie hid, joynd
together, and one laid upon the other. They were all short and tender, as not
being yet perfect in quantity. Between the wings of ^he thorax, the latter knob
appeared, fenced on both sides with long hairynesse, but not yet covered over.
The wings and this red part being dispatched, I came to the upper lines bending
downwards; under these were their horns. But under those that followed, the
feet on the breast did lie; being bent obliquely and directed to their belly.
Under the white spot on the Crown of the Nympha, the hairy Crown of the young
Silkworm, and the hinder part of the head are placed; next to which lies the
print of the eyes, like to two black spots, which are divided with a cleft like
a Lions lip, the whole belly is like to white paint. The hairs of it are very
wet, and appear smooth. They have roundells, as well as the Silkworm and the
Nymph. But I did not open the whole young Silkworm, but he by his striving
pulled himself forth of the rest of the Aurelia. I saw with what labor he
unloosed the bands of his belly, which like white cords do hang from the points
of the circles, and are left in the empty Aurelia. The fundament sticks also
fast, wherefore the tip of the Aurelia is contracted toward the breast inwardly.
The male was with hairs and wings imperfect. I left him in the box. He lay
still, till the next day. Then he grew white by degrees, and the downynesse was
seen more exactly. The wings also grew, and then he grew more jocund, and being
admitted, the third day he copulated stoutly. What these young Silkworms are,
appears by what we now say, and did say before: we must add this; that the
belly in the Aurelia is more contracted, and when it comes forth it becomes
greater and longer by a third part, by distending and inflating it. In the
Aurelia, there is a threefold rupture from the Crown through the back of the
thorax, and there the young Silkworm comes forth. The other parts are entire.

All the rest of the young Silkworms being come forth before the 14th of July,
two cases remained whole, as if they would yield nothing, though they were very
thick. One was a small round male; the other a female twice as long, and pretty
large, a little about the back the worm was raised with a little bunch. The
color of the Towe of both was white; but in the Citron-colour'd, the silk was
greenish, though it were a more watery color in that. When I divided the round
Coffin with the edge of my knife, a carcass appeared outwardly, half a
Silkworm, half a Nymph. The forepart was a plain Silkworm, the latter a
Nymph; for it had not put off the whole skin, but only the latter part, which
was next it in the case* The carcass lay crooked, so that the forefeet in the
breast touched almost the first pair of the hinder feet. For here between the
first conjugation of the hinder feet, and the second, the skin was broken; So
that the Nymph was covered with her former skin, wherein was her head and
breast with 6. feet, and part of her belly with the two first. The skin and the
Aurelia being removed, within there lay a perfect male young silkworm, and it
had been living, as appeared; for that striving to come forth two days before
I made Infection, he had wet the case with his moisture; and the 19 of July,
when I perfectly freed him, he showed clear signs of motion in his belly and
feet: The cause why he could not clear himself and come forth was found, in the
close sticking of the Silk-worm's skull, and of the forefeet, the coat being
fastened to it by nature. Therefore though in the back of the Thorax he had made
a gap both in the Aurelia and the cast skin, yet could he not pull forth his
head and feet; so he fainted by degrees.

Here I observed the policy of Nature: For when in putting off the cast skin
the forefeet are plucked off, and the hinder feet depart also; yet there are
prints left, under which afterward others grow up. And the sins of the wings
were inserted into the holes of the old silkworm, and the whole head of the
new silkworm, with the horns of the head were shut in a covering. This was the
male. The Female quite dead, seemed yet more monstrous. The Silk-work being
finished (which was a great silk case, and as long as two joints of ones little
finger, but the males was thinner a great deal;) The silkworm strove to cast
off the skin, that was white, light, and shining within side, but outwardly
hairy and yellowish, and he had drawn forth his whole back, that bunched forth
extremely, his foreparts being contracted circularly; but he could not free
himself of the little mouth that stuck too fast. Wherefore there you might see
the head of the cast skin, the crown of the Nympha, and of the Necydalus joined
together: which conjunction kept the skin upon the belly, that it could not be
totally cast off, and drawn forth. Wherefore it stuck so with the point of the
belly, as if it were shut into a sack, and bound about the head; but a hole
being made on the backside, it might have drawn forth the back, but it would
yet have stuck by the head and fundament, so lying crooked and dead. The cast
skin was thus. Out of this also stuck forth the Aurelia, as concerning the
upper part. Again, out of the Aurelia almost the entire young Silkworm had
wrested it self; breaking the shell on the backside, and in the wonted place,
but the head stuck fast not to be pulled asunder, as also the outmost parts of
the belly. In the belly put forth was seen a great number of yellow eggs. For
the female presently within the Aurelia, perfects her Eggs in her matrix, but
they are unfruitful till the male besprinkled them. I saw one lay eggs that
had coupled with no male. Hence it was clear, how Nature puts off the old skin
with the form of it first, and then passes into a Nymph; the Aurelia whereof
being again put off, out comes the Necydalus. This was a triple formed Monster,
worthy to contemplate of. In this also you might observe the Aurelia, on that
part the wings were marked, to be black and dark, as if it had been in hot
smoke: then how ^uch the female Necydalus had striven to come forth, was plain
by the eyes that stuck out in the distances of the skaly circles. Sometimes the
circles of the belly stick together by contiguitie, a thin skin coming between
them. But in this the circles were so disjoynted, that the girdle of the
juncture was larger than the circle. The top of the belly of the cast skin, and
of the Aurelia were transparent against the light, so that you might exactly
discover all about it. The end of the Necydalus came as far as the middle
capacity of the Aurelia; the Necydalus was hairy about the back, though
imperfectly, as also the wings were not yet of their full bigness. And thus
much for Monsters.

When the Necydalus is lusty, it is full of life, chiefly in the breast. For
when the head and tail are cut off, it will move the wings strongly, and run
with its feet, and that till the next day or longer. The female being cut in
the belly, shows her matrix full of Eggs; that when 400 are laid, there are
more behind. It seemed to be wrapped in a very thin coat. There appeared also
some nervous pipes, like the passages of the guts. In the middle of the belly a
little bladder was seen, containing an earthy juice, that was yellow or russet
color. This bladder of it self had a continual systole and diastole. I thought
the principle of life was there as in the heart. About the neck of the matrix
there was a double white nervous knot, like to the bladder of animals; it was
hard and shining, and that within the belly. I shall speak of the dug-like
processions afterward. There was one little knot that was bigger, and another
that was less. The neck of the matrix is like to a pipe; to which being full
of juice, there are joined without on both sides two yellow knots like to
breasts. About the neck there is a circle with horny reins, that are broad, and
blunter on the top, with which she takes hold of the genital of the male. The
breast is fleshy. The head is membranous and horny. The horns triangular, with
a white back sticking up, but the wings are let down on both sides, to make the
Triangle: If you cut them off whilst they are alive, a kind of transparent
juice comes forth of the back, as out of a pin-feather, and there appears a
hole within. Thus I found the female, which I opened whilst she was living.
When she was dead, there was nothing found in her belly but a notable cavity of
her belly near to her breast; and then that vital humor in the bladder, though
it now was no longer living; after that, the relics of the matrix that was
emptied, which were nervous and membranous. The upper parts of the male agree
with the female. If you op^n his belly, you shall find much red matter within;
and besides that, a tallow matter full of nerves, to which the genital passage
is fastened. He has a peculiar genital, wanting other things that belong to the
female.

The History of it is this; Under the tail environed with a long Down, there is
a notable hole under a membranous circle, as hard as horn, that is divided as
it were into two teeth. In the middle of this compass there is the three
forked neck of the genital part, with the extremities of it that are horny.

About this there are set reddish prickles (all the horny processes are red
going toward black) the two uppermost are like hooks, of bended back like
ankers, or like Goats-horns bent backwards. The single one beneath them is
strait. These prickles are next the neck of the member. A little beyond in the
middle of the compass, there are three other small pricks; with so many bands
he lays hold of the matrix of the female, and draws it to him, and holds it so
fast, that if you would pull them one from the other, you would sooner believe
the joining together of the belly, and the circles should break, than the
copulation should unloose, which I often proved.

Also from hence you may judge of the constancy of their copulation, for I saw
them stick fast together whole Summer days, and at night, I know not at what
hour, it is probable about morning, they parted asunder, and in the morning I
found many Oval little Worms, and them lying quiet one from the other, yet they
will stick together, being cast into cold water. When I sprinkled salt and
pickle on the joining of their tails they held fast; nor were they parted with
water of vitriol added.

I drencht the male into the water, and I let the female stand dry on the brink
of it, casting both vitriol and salt into the water, yet he lived and held his
copulation. Then I left him so all night in the water, in the morning some
hundreds of eggs were in the bottom of the water, and the young Necydali swam
alive. I cut off another males head in copulation, yet he parted not. I divided
his breast from his belly; he stuck fast till I drew him off by force.

The head and breast, as of divided flies, live long, but the breast longest.
This male cut asunder in copulation, had in his belly also a yellow reddish
matter, with some intestinal substance that is yellowish, and skinny. The male
was bred the fourth of July, and died for weakness on the fifth, and being
opened he had nothing else in his belly. Otherwise the Necydale will live 7, or
8, or more days. For, as I said, he is constant, so that when I broak with
four strokes the beginnings of the vvings and the breast, and then the belly
sometimes, yet it lived as not hurt, though the Spirit were dissipated at
length; the next day for the most part, if they be so dealt vvithall, they dye.
The male hotly desires copulation; after a little stay, when he is come forth
of the Aurelia, and that when he has often unburdned his belly, and sometimes
also when he has sent forth no moisture; and this happens also in the female.

The male that is lively after the first days copulation, when he has rested
at night, the next day he seeks for the same female, or any that he can meet
with, so that he will couple three or four times.

The female also admits of the male as often, though she do not always lay
eggs. For she begets no eggs, unless she have some within her, though she
copulate with the male. So soon as they uncouple, she presently lays her eggs in
order one after another, you shall see them thrust forth with striving and
contraction of her belly, and be shut forth from the neck of the matrix put
out, so that it will touch the pavement. I reckoned above 400, from one female,
and almost 400, out of others; and these being dissected, had yet many more in
their matrixes. What therefore Vidas writes of hundreds, that may be understood
of lean little Necydalls, such as I see proceed from want of nourishment,
others were almost three times as great. Some males do void their dung once
before copulation, and again after their second copulation. Sometimes the males,
loosed and not yet satisfied, will hinder the female that is about to lay eggs,
and couple again with her, though the female copulates with him by force, and
desires by contracting her belly, and by striving with her hinder legs, to be
loose. So one before copulation laid 17, after she had once coupled and was
loose again, 194, and then coupling again, after four hours copulation, she
laid 245, then the male having an appetite, she cast moisture as out of a
spout, and coupling again, and being freed, she laid above 20, eggs.

Those Eggs that were laid on the fourth of July of a Citron-colour, on the
7th grew red, and after that, Lead-colour'd. I kept them in a box behind my
Window, exposed to the afternoon-Sun. Those that were barren did never change
their color, but only sank down.

In the Necydalls that are loose, you shall sometimes observe a trembling
motion, like as if they had an Ague. Yet I say not, that they are aguish. But I
think, that shaking comes by the alteration and promotion of the seminall
matter, the vapor exhaling from thence, and rending the nervous parts. The
last Necydale was a small one; and on the 24th of June, weaving a small case
between two Mulberry leafs, he came forth the 13th of July, in which besides
that, he had made a very small Silk case; This also was observable, That he
came not forth of the basis of the case, but made a hole in the top, contrary
to all the rest. Yet he was a male that feared not to copulate with a female
that had thrice been coupled with a male before, and was almost dead. When he
had twice copulated, he afterward fainted. His wings were painted otherwise
than the others were; for whereas the others are distinguished with lines, long
and broad ways, as with welts; this had four such Lead-colour'd lines broad
ways; but between the second and the third, toward the outward borders of the
wings, there was a small circle coming between, not exact, but wan, with a
white spot in the middle.

But indeed Nature is so ingenious in this Insect, that when you have observed
and writ many things, you have more to observe still. Therefore I conclude this
History; and leave the rest to those that are studious in the Secrets of Nature.

OF THE DESCRIPTION Of the Wonders of Nature.
The Ninth Classis. Wherein are set down the Wonders of Fishes.
Plin. l. 9. Nature. Hist. c. 2. THe common opinion is true, That whatsoever
comes forth in any part of Nature, is to be found in the Sea; and there are
many more things, which are to be found no where else.
CHAP. I. Of Hornback, Sturgion or Elops, or the Dace or Groundling.
THe Hornback Fish has a chap under her belly; wherein Rondeletius says, he
saw her eggs ly. For cutting that fish at the beginning of Winter, he found
many eggs in that cleft. Yet after she is delivered, it closes so fast, as if
it grew together; which is no wonder, as may be seen in the English Pikes. It
is covered in so hard a shell, that a sharp sword can hardly cut it. The
Sturgions when they are taken lament their destiny, and seem to entreat; and
leaping in the nets, strive to free themselves. Oviedus and Plutarch say, that
with their sharp backs they will cut the line, and free their captive fellows.
The Dace of Phalera is so soft and fat a fish, that if it be held long in the
hand, it will melt; or if many of them be carried in Ships, they will drop fat,
which is gathered to make Candles with. Apitius, as Suidas reports, set the
pictures of these Fishes, with Rape roots cut into long and slender pieces,
boiled with oil, and strewed with pepper and salt, before Nicomedes the King of
Bithynia.

CHAP. II. Of the Eele.
ALl know, that Eeles are found in many fresh Waters; yet Nauclerus writes,
That in the Danube there are none; but in the Rhein there are. Albertus makes
the cold of Danubius to be the cause thereof; and this proceeds, because it
runs before the mouth of the Alps from West to East, and receives the greatest
part of its water from thence. These only, contrary to other fishes, do not
flote, being dead, Pliny. The reason is given by Aristotle, from the small
belly it has, and little fat. The swimming of Lampreys, Congers, and Muraenas,
that abound with fat, confirm this to be true. They are so lusty, that being
devoured whole by a Cormorant, they will come forth of his guts, nine times one
after another; and when they are grown weak, then he retains them, Gesner. Held
in a man's bosom, especially great eels, will twist about a man's neck and choke
him, Cardanus. On the Land they dye, if the Sun shine on them; otherwise very
hardly, as you may see them living when their skin is pulled off. Athenaeus,
Aelianus, and Plutarch do testify, that in Arethusa of Chalcidon, there are
tame ones, adorned with earrings of gold and silver, that will take their meat
by hand. Nymphodorus reports the same of the River Elorus.

CHAP. III. Of the Whale, and the Barbel.
THe Whale is the greatest and chief of all Fishes. Pliny calls this the
greatest creature in the Indian Sea, which was four Acres in bigness;
Massarius interprets this to be 960 foot long. Nearchus says, that there are
Whales of 23 paces in length, and reports, that in the Island before Euphrates,
he saw a Whale cast forth of the Sea, that was 150 cubits. That Whale which was
taken in the Scald, ten miles from Antwerp, Anno 1577, on the second day of
July, was of a blackish blew color: he had a spout on his head wherewith he
belched up water with great force: he was 58 foot long, and 16 foot high, his
tail was 14 foot broad; from his Eye to the top of his nose the distance was 16
foot. His lower chap was 6 foot, of each side, armed with 25 Teeth, and there
were as many holes in the upper chap where there were no teeth, yet so many
might have stood there. The longest of his Teeth, was not above 6 thumbs long.
A Whale not long since was taken at Sceveling, a Village near the Hague in
Holland, was 60 foot long. His head was about 3. cubits long, I saw him there.
Platina observes, that the Barbels eyes are venomous, chiefly in May. Antonius
Gazius found it so. For when he had eaten but two bits thereof, at Supper time
his belly was so inflated, that he looked as pale as ashes; he was distempered
all over, at last he fell into the choleric passion. Nor did these symptoms
abate, ^ill the eyes were voided upward and downvvard.

CHAP. IV. Of the Carp, the Clupaea, and the Conger.
THe Carp, says Gesner, has a little white hard stone in his head, near his
tongue, and in the middle of his head a thick substance like to a heart, that
is flexible while it is new; but afterward it grows hard. Sometimes it is
found 20 pound weight. Jovius says, That there was one found in the River
Latium two hundred pound weight. When the Female finds her self great with
young, when the time of bringing forth is past, by moving her mouth she rouseth
the male, who casts on his milt, and then she brings forth. In Polonia, broad
Carps being put into a fish pond by one, when the waters were frozen, though he
sought them diligently, he could not find them; when the Spring came, and the
waters were thawed, they all appeared, Gesner.

Clupaea is a great fish. In Sagona a River in France, when the Moon
increases, it is white; but black when it decreaseth. When the body is but a
little augmented, it is destroyed by its own prickles. In the head of it there
is found a stone like a barley corn, which when the Moon decreaseth; some think
it will cure the quartan Ague, if it be bound to the left side, Calisthenes
Sybarita, citante Stobaeo. Congers contain their offspring within them, but it
is not equally so in all places, nor does their increase appear in a fat gross
matrix, but it is contained in it, in a long rank, as in Serpents; which is
manifest by putting it into the fire: For the fat consumes; but the eggs
crackle, and they leap forth, Aristotle 6. Hist. c. 17.

CHAP. V. Of the Dogg-fish.
THe men of Nicea, says Gellius, took a Dogg-fish that weighed 4000 pound; a
whole man was found in the belly of it. Those of Massilia found a man in
Armor. Rondeletius saw o^e on the shore at Xanton, the mouth and throat were
so wide that they would take in a fat man. Bellonius says, that each side of
the mouth had 36, teeth, wherefore some think the Prophet Jonas was swallowed
by this fish: and that this is that they call the Whale, it being so vast a
creature. The same Bellonius writes, that this Fish at diverse times brings
forth 6, or 8, young ones, and sometimes more, each of a foot long, perfect with
all their parts, and often times the young one coming forth there are eggs yet
raw in the matrix, and some hatched, lying in the upper part toward the midriff;
and some of them are contained in the right turning of the matrix some in the
left. In her Whelps, this is chiefly wonderful, that they were covered with no
secondine, and they are fed from some part of the Navell that has Veins. For
since says he, she does not put forth her eggs, and they are tied by certain
bands to the matrix, they seem to need no other coat than the Amnios; whereby
the Whelp being now formed, and by a chink in the sternon, that passes between
the fins that are toward the gills, it receives nourishment from the matrix by
a band, or the middle of it, that is so slender, as a Lute string; But this
nutriment by that slender string is carried into a little bag, which you would
say were the stomach, which is always full of it, like to the yolk of an egg:
the position of it is in the middle of the belly, and under the two laps of the
Liver. And that this is true, if you cut a Whelp taken out of the dams belly,
through the belly, you shall find the true stomach of it to be always empty.
For it takes and devours nothing by the mouth. But you shall see the right
intestine to swell with wan colored excrements. If you take the young Whelp
alive out of the dams belly, and do not hurt him, but cast him into the water,
you shall see him to live and swim presently. Rondeletius observed the eggs to
stick in the middle of the matrix toward the back bone; and when they increase
they are translated into both the Sinus of the matrix. The form of the eggs is
like to pillows we sleep upon under our heads; out of the corners there hang
long and slender passages which Aristotle calls hairy pores, and they are
rolled up like Vine tendrels; if you stretch them out at length, they are two
cubits long. When the shell breaks, the young ones come forth.

CHAP. VI. Of Dracunculus.
DRacunculus is a fish with a great head, a compacted nose sticking forth, a
little mouth without any teeth, without any opening at the gils; but in the
place of this, above the head there is a hole on both sides, wherewith it takes
in and puts forth water. It has great eyes set above the head, the head-bone
ends at the prickles that tend to the tail. The Fins are exceeding long,
considering the body partly Silver, part Gold colored. Those about the Gills,
are Gold-coloured, and Silver colored in the root* These that are in the lower
part, and next to the mouth, are longer than those that are next to the gils.
On the back two stand up; the first is small, Gold colored, distinguished with
Siver lines; the latter is very great on the middle of the back, not much
unlike to butterflies wings, and is made of five bones like to ears of Barley,
and a membrane. The former bones of radii are the longer, the hinder are the
shorter, contrary to what it is in the membrane; which being as it were woven
between all the distances of those radii, increases by degrees. The same also,
is diverse; for it is distinguished with Silver lines set between two black
lines. This is hid in the middle hollow of the back, as in a sheath. There is
also another Golden colored membrane from the tail to the Podex, excepting the
fringes that are black.

CHAP. VII. Of the Dolphin, Exocaetus and the Fiatola.
THe Dolphins see so exactly, that they will see a fish hid, in a hole,
Oppianus. They are so swift that Bellonius observed one of them to swim faster
than a ship could run under sail, before the wind that blew strongly. Some
make their Fins to be the cause of it, others their light body. The famous
Baudarcius thinks the membrane between their foreyards being extended, serves
them for sails. They love one the other so well, that one being taken at Caria
and wounded, a great multitude of them came to the Haven, and departed again
when he was set free. When the Mariners whistle, they will stay the longer
about the ship but when a tempest rises, the credulous Greeks say, if any man
be in the ship that has killed a Dolphin, they will all flock thither to be
revenged. When then play on the calm Sea, they foreshew which way the wind
will blow, and when they cast up water, the Sea being troubled, they foreshew a
calm. Plin. l. 8. c. 35. Thomas thinks that exhalations rising from the bottom
of the Sea, when a storm is at hand in Winter, is the cause of it; and he
thinks that the Dolphins feel heat thereby, and so break forth the oftener. But
since more fishes also perceive a tempest coming, Rondeletius thinks that they
are affected in the water with the motion of the air, as those that are sick
are wont to be, when the South wind begins to blow. Exocaetus lives long on the
dry land. The cause is, the plenty of air; which being he does not draw it in,
too largely, he is not choked by it. Hence it is, that an Eele will live a long
time under ground, Rondelet. Fiatola is a broad plain fish, with a tail like
to a half Moon, a fleshy tongue; contrary to all other fish, he has no sins
under his belly, and he is wholly without them. His Liver has but one lap,
without any Gall, his stomach is made like the Letter V, the lower part of it
ends in a point; and there are so many Appendixes of hairs unto it, that they
cannot be numbered.

CHAP. VIII. Of Glanis and Glaucus.
WRiters report of Glanis, that it is a mighty and terrible fish, especially in
the River Tissa that runs into the Danube. He rises so boldly that he will
not spare a Man. It is publicly said in Hungaria, that there was found in the
belly of one, a hand with rings upon it, and pieces of a Boy that swam in the
Danube, that was devoured by it, Comes Martinengus. Gesner says, he heard it
of a learned Hungarian, that the same was taken in the River Tissa; it was 7,
or 8, cubits long, and was carried in a Cart. This had layn hid in the River
16, years, near the Kitchen of a Noble man; at last it was caught with a
hook, when it had young ones to look to: when she found her self taken, she
leaped forth; the fishers ran after her two miles, at last they wearied and
took her, and carried her to a Town called Nadlac. There was in her belly a
Man's head, with his right hand and three Gold Rings upon it. The Glaucus has a
spongy Liver distinguished into two laps, the left is the larger. From the
right lap there hangs a little Gall bladder, from a thread three fingers long,
so great as a pease; and it has in the bottom of the stomach a kind of
Apophysis, not to be seen almost in other fishes, besides five others in the
Pylorus, that fence the stomach about.

CHAP. IX. Of the Herring and Huso.
THat the Herring lives by water, the Author of the Book of Nature witnesses;
taken out of it, it will not live, as experience testifies. In his belly there
is nothing found, for it has only one hungry gut. They swim together in such
great sholes, that they cannot be taken for multitudes. When they see light,
they swim in flocks, and so they are caught in the autumnal equinoctial. They
shine in the water turning their bellies upward, and they send forth such a
light, that the Sea seems to lighten. It is a miracle that some relate
concerning the Inhabitants of the Island Terra Sancta of the German Ocean,
namely, that in the year 1530, after the Virgins delivery, 2000 men lived by
Herring-fishing there; but when they peevishly whipped one of them, they had
taken with rods, these fishes did so diminish, that afterward scarce 100 could
live by that labor. The Husons have a grisle instead of a back bone, that has
a great empty hole, from head to tail as bored with a piercer. What Aelian, l.
14. c. 25. says of the Autacea, that in time they grow as big as the greatest
Tunie fish in the Danube, and their abdomen is so fat, that you would say their
paps were as great as a Sowes that gave suck, and are covered with a rough skin
that Spears are polished with them, with a membrane so tied from the brain to
the tail, that dried in the Sun, it will serve for a whip, that must be
understood of these Husons: For Vadianus, in Epitome trium terrae partium,
writes, that he saw some of 400 weight: They are so fearful, that the least
fish will fright them. They follow the sound of Trumpets, that they will come
to the bank over against it. Lastly, they are so strong in the water, that if
they strike the fisher with their tail, they will strike him out of the Ship;
so soon as they put their heads above water, they grow weak. They will drink
strong wine, and live many days, being drunk they are carried to strangers,
they will drink 4. Sextarii of Wine.

CHAP. X. Of the Pike and Luna.
ALbertus writes, that the Pike has its stomach so joined to the throat, that
sometime it will cast it up for greediness of meat; but it has many
appendixes wherein the Chylus made is preserved, as Rondeletius observed. There
was a very great one seen that had another great one in the belly; and this
again had a vvater-mouse. Another was seen that had two young Geese in it;
another had a Moor-hen in its stomach. For great hunger it will feed on food at
Land. It has a natural Enmity with a frog. Hence it is that the Frog will often
times dig out his eyes. He cures his wounds by rubbing against a Tench, which
he always keeps company with. His jaw-bones boat into fine powder, given the
quantity of an aureus, will break the stone. In England they cut off the belly
of it two fingers breadth, and if they cannot find a Chapman, they will sew up
the belly and put it into their fish pond again where Tench are. Though the
cause may be attributed to friendship; yet it is better to attribute it to the
clammy matter the Tench abounds with, by which he may heal his wound. A Pike of
Frederick the Emperor was said to have lived 267 years in a Lake, that was
found out by a brass ring that he hid under his skin in his gills, when he put
him into the lake. It had a Greek Inscription on it; which is to this sense; I
am that Fish that was first put into this Lake by Frederick the Second,
Emperor of the World, on the fifth of October. Conradus Celtes says, that
ring was found upon that Pike, taken Anno 1497; as Gesner relates in Epistola
nuncupatoria.

Luna is a fish exceeding beautiful, very small, broad bodied, of a blevvish
color; on the back it has soft fins, which vvhilest it dilates in swimming,
it makes a semicircle like to a half Moon, Aelian. ex Demostrato. Those that
fish for Bream say, that at the full of the Moon it will grow dry and die; and,
put on herbs, it will make them wither.

CHAP. XI. Of Manaty, and the Whiting.
MAnaty is a great Fish taken in the Rivers of Hispaniola; His head is like an
Ox head, or bigger: His eyes in respect of his body are small; he has two
thick feet, like wings in the place of gills, with which he swims, they are set
about his head; he has a thick skin, and no scales. He is so great that there
needs a yoke of Oxen to carry him. Sometimes he is above 14 or 15 foot long,
and eight hands thick; near the tail he is narrower, and as it were girt in,
from which straightness the tail grows longer and thicker. He has two
stones, or rather bones in his head, so great as little handballs, or the
bullet of a Crosse-bowe, and sometimes greater, as the fish is. He wants ears,
but in place of them he has small holes, by which he hears. His skin is like
the skin of a shriveled Ox, a finger thick, ash-colored, and thin set with
hairs. The tail from that straight part unto the end of it, is all nervous.
From that, cut into pieces, and then set five or six days in the Sun and
dried, and then boiled in a Cauldron, or rather fried, much fat comes forth:
for it all resolves into fat. It is good to fry eggs in a drying pan. For it
never grows rank, nor unsavory. He is made tame, and will be taught like a
dog; but Franciscus Lopetius says, he will remember Injuries. The petty King
of Caramatexum, in the Island of Hispaniola, fed one of them 26 years in the
Lake Guaynabo, and made him so tame, though he were grown great, as great as an
old Dolpbin; for he would take meat by hand; and when they called him Mato,
which in their Tongue signifies Magnificent, he would come forth of the Lake,
and creep to the house for meat, and then go back to the Lake again. Boys and
Men going with him, and when they sang, he seemed to be delighted with it: and
he would let them sometimes ride on his back; he would easily carry ten at a
time from one part of the Lake to the other. But when a certain Spaniard would
make trial whether his skin were so hard or no, and threw a dart at him, he
grew so angry, that if he saw any clothed in Christians habit, though he were
called, he would not come forth of the water. After that, the River Haibon
swelled extremely and ran into the Lake Guaynabo: so he found his way to the
Sea; and the people were very sorry that he was gone. The Whiting eats nothing,
unless he see it is dead, Aelian. The male is very jealous. For he stays at
home, and fearing his young ones should be caught, he stays to preserve them.

CHAP. XII. Of Mirus, Mola, and Monoceros.
THe Fish Mirus is briefly described by Ambrosius Pareus. In the Venetian Sea,
says he, between the Venetians and Ravenna, two miles above Clodia, Anno 1550,
there was a flying Fish taken, very terrible and monstrous, four feet long; he
had a very thick head, and two eyes not set one against the other, with two
ears, and a double mouth, a very fleshy nose green colored, with two wings, and
five holes in his throat as Lampreys have; his tail was an ell long, and in the
top of it were two little wings. Also Mola is a Fish, that was taken on the
calends of March, Anno 1552, not far from Venice; at first sight it seemed
rather a piece of Flesh than a Fish. It was round, it had a skin without skales
or hairs. The mouth was so straight, that it was miraculous considering the
greatness of the Creature. The eyes were large, stretching out, and greater
than Ox eyes. The gills were uncovered, fleshy, and beat; the fins on the
sides were a span long. It had a very hard knot. The Jaws on both sides were
fenced with a solid continued bone, the tongue of it stuck fast to the lower
mandible, that he seemed to have no tongue, the tail was about 4, foot long.
There were three fins on the tail, so that the tail with the fins, were 9,
foot long. The Fish was 8, foot long, 5, foot high and more; and turn which way
it would, it was so high: when it was unbowelled, the heart, liver, milt, were
greater than of an Ox; and it had one gut coming to the passage for excrements
placed under the belly. In the bottom of this gut there was a kind of bottom,
made as it were of bruised nervs, like fiddle strings bruised. The Flesh of the
creature was white as milk, and solid, as in a hog that is 5, or 6, fingers
thick with fat, as in Whales. Clusius calls the Monoceros or Unicorn, a Fish;
which the Dutch coming from the East Indies brought along with them. Anno,
1601. A Merchant valewed it so high that hardly any money would buy it. From the
outmost part of the mouth, unto the fins of the tail it was not much more than
three inches, the middle of the body was little above an inch broad; from the
top of the head, where a horn stuck forth between the eyes, unto the lowest
part of the belly, which also ended in a sharp point, it was an inch and half
broad; the body was covered with a dark rough skin, moreover it had a little
narrow mouth sticking out half an inch long, set with two bony little teeth,
which seemed divided into ten above, but beneath into fewer, unless they were
broken out. The eyes that were put out, seemed to have been very great, over
which on the head, a little slender Horn stuck forth, that was four square,
about an inch long, armed with ten pins like hooks tending downward, on both
sides, from which to the fin, which from the middle of the back stretched out
to the tail, there was an inch in length, pressed down like to a furrow, into
which when he swims, he seems to incline his horn, etc. Clusius, l. 6. exotic.
c. 27.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Mullet and the Barbel.
THe Mugil is a most temperate fish, if he light upon another, he will not
touch it, till he move the tail. If it move he leaves it, if it moves not, he
preys upon it, Aelian. l. 1. c. 3. It is so salacious, that in Phoenicia, and
the province of Narbon, at the time of copulation, that the male being taken
out of Fish Ponds, and with a long line drawn through his mouth and fastened to
his gills, cast into the Sea, and drawn back again by the same line, the
females will follow him to the shore, and the Males again will follow the
Females at the time they bring forth, Plin. l. 9. c. 13. They are so fleet that
when they are hungry they will cast themselves over ships in their way. The
Mullet was formerly so noted for luxury amongst the Ancients, that it was sold
for a mighty price; and private Romans would often buy it for the weight in
Silver, says Jovius, if it were above a foot long. Also Pliny writes that
Asinius Cel^r a Consul, was so proud of this Fish, that when Claudius was
Emperor, he Merchandised with one of them for 8000 pieces of money, that is
about, 400 rich Dollers. Macrobius, l. 3. Saturnal, c. 16. adds more, that the
Luxury of that age may be esteemed the greater, because Pliny, says in his
time no Barbel was found, above two pound weight. Scaliger says, exerc. 226,
s. 15, that the Liver of it, lies next the left side, the milt next the right.
But Albertus says, that lust is extinguished by feeding on them, and it is so
strong that it will make a Man that eats of it, to smell like it. Athenaeus
says, that strangled in Wine, it spoils the Wine. Pliny says, that if it be
stale, it will make one vomit.

CHAP. XIV. Of the River- Powt, and Lamprey.
THe River- Powt is so sweet meat, that in Thuringia, the Wife of one of the
Earls of Bichling, is reported to have spent all her Estate, in feeding on
them. They are chiefly commended before Christs-Mas day; but they are not good
when they are with young, for then in some waters they are meazly. Some
Hucksters, cut out their Livers, and turn them into the waters again, having
sewed up the wound. Encelius writes that the stomach of it, with the
appurtenances has a wonderful virtue. Let it be, says he, never so old, in
Saxony, the Women give it in drink, and it will draw out the secondine staying
behind, after Child birth; and is of great concernment for all defects of the
matrix. They say also that oil is collected out of the Liver, hanged in a
glassy Vessel against the Sun, or in an Oven: this is thought to be so
excellent for suffusions of the eyes, and for spots, that Forestus in observat.
says, it will miraculously make a dark sight clear. Nicander says that
Lampreys are wonderful bold; for often coming forth of fish ponds, they will
bite the painful Fishermen, and fly to the Sea, and will cast them headlong
from the ships into the Sea; yet that they may be made tame, is apparent by the
example of that Lamprey, which Macrobius and Aelian, and others do testify,
that L. Crassus who was Censor with Cn. Domitius, did adorn with Gold-earings
and Jewels, and a brave neck-lace. This knew Crassus his voice when he called
her, and being called would swim to him; and when he offered him any thing, she
would leap with delight, and lay hold of it. Crassus wept for her when she was
dead, and buried her honorably. And when Domitius taunted him sharply, saying,
Fool Crassus, thou weptst for a dead Lamprey. He answered, I wept for the death
of my Beast, but thou weepst for none, not when thy three Wives died; thou
buriedst them, but lamentedst them not. Pliny, l. 9. c. 23. says, that it will
grow mad by tasting Vinegar. But that is a wonder that Aelian writes, l. 1. c.
37, That if you give them one stroke they will endure it, and stand senseless;
but if you strike them again, they will be enraged.

CHAP. XV. Of the Perch and Sea-Calf.
FIshermen in the Lake Lemanus have observed, as Gesner says, that Perches
will send forth a little red bladder that hangs out of their mouth, and they
will escape by that means; for it will make them swim over the nets, even
against their wills: But it is thought this proceeds from anger, that they fell
into the nets. This falls out especially when they drag them. But it is
wonderful that this falls out only in Winter. Their young ones do stick so
close together, that the Fishermen in that Lake make them up in ^eaps. All of
them have a measly Liver: Georgius Mangoldas writes it, and Gesner quotes him
for it.

Sea-Calfs, when they sleep, s^ort so much, that you would think they lowed.
Rondeletius says, that the clammy humor that sticks in their sharp artery
being agitated by breathing in and out, is the cause of it. They love the Sea
exceedingly: For when their skins are tanned, if there be any hair left, they
will turn as the Sea lies, by a natural instinct. For if the Sea be troubled
and toss, they will stand upright; but if the Sea be quiet, they lie flat
down. When Pliny would not credit this, he made trial of it in the Indian Sea,
and about the Island Hispaniola, he found it to be no fable, as Cardan says.
Rondeletius says, That by their skin, changes are foreshew'd; for when the
South winds blow, their hair sticks up; but when the wind is in the North they
fall so flat, that you would think they had none. Aldrovandus saw one Calf
taught by a Mountebank, who would rejoice at the name of any Christian Prince,
and would seem to mutter some words; but he was silent when the Turk or an
Heretic was named.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Scales, and the Indian Reversus like an Eele.
THe Scales do bring forth two or three young ones at one time; but at many
times they bring forth more. Their eggs are first seen without a shell, in the
upper part of their matrix. Some of them are as big as Hen eggs, some less,
some scarce so big as chi^h-peasen. Aldrovandus counted above a hundred in one
of them; those that are next to be laid, are put into the lower part of the
matrix, and are covered with a shell, wherein there is contained both the white
and the yelk. When he much admired at this, and sought for the cause of it, he
boiled hen-eggs, in which appeared no white at all, being but newly formed; and
he observed the white severed from the yelk by the heat of the fire. Hence he
found, that at first they lie confused, but are separated by degrees by heat,
and the shell that compasses them, is made of the grosser part grown hard.
Olaus, in tabula Septentrionali, pictures forth a Scale in the Sea, defending a
man from a kennel of Dog-fish, in a place a little beyond the borders of
Denmark.

The Indian Reversus like an Eel, is a Fish of an unusual figure, like to a
great Eel in body, and it has on the hinder part of the head a capacious skin,
like to a great purse. The Inhabitants hold this fish bound at the side of the
ship, with a cord, and only let it down, so far as the fish may stick by the
keel of the ship, for it cannot any ways endure the air; and when it sees any
fish or Tortoise, which are there greater than a great Target, they let loose
the fish; he so soon as he is loose, flies swifter than an arrow on the other
fish or Tortoise, and casting that skin purse upon them, lays hold of his prey
so fast, that no force can unloose it, unless they draw up the cord a little,
and pull him to the brink of the water. For so soon as he sees the light of the
air he forsakes his prey, Martyr. Rondeletius ascribes to him the understanding
of an Elephant, for he will be tame, and know what is said to him.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Remora, and the Sea-Scarus.
THe Ancients believed, that the Remora would stay Ships; and it has been
found true by examples of late. Petrus Melaras of Bononia reports, that the
ship of Francis Cardinal of Troas, when he went by Sea out of France, was held
fast in the swiftness of its course. Many have sought for the cause, but no
man has certainly found it. Some things are always immovable to do their
office, as the Poles; some things in respect of their place, as the Center of
the Earth, which naturally never moves. Contrarily some things are to move
always to do their office, as the Heavens; some things in regard of their
place, as Rivers. So some things have a faculty of moving, as the Loadstone;
some to stop motion, as the Remora. But since no reason can be given, why cold
is an enemy to heat, so not for these things, why such things that have
efficient principles in them of motion, do cause motion; and those that have
principles of resting, should cause rest. Keckermannus seems to ascribe this to
a cold humor that the Remora sends forth, that he freezeth the water about the
rudder, In Disput. Physica.

Aristotle, l. 2. Hist. c. 17. says, That of all Fishes the Scarus only chews
the cud. Ovid testifies, that when it is caught in a net, it breaks not forth
with the head foremost, but turns his tail, and breaks his way forth with that,
often striking the net. They roast them in Candie, thrusting a spit through
their mouth, and there the Fishermen eat greedily their maws, stuffed with more
delicate meat. They mash their Livers, that are very great, and without any
gall, and their excrements also, together, adding to them salt and vinegar,
Bellonius.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Sea-Serpent, and the Sturgeon.
IT is most certain, that there are Serpents in the Sea; and Histories show,
that they are of diverse magnitudes. Aristotle reports, that in Africa they will
overthrow their Galleys, and kill Men. Olaus Magnus writes, that about Norwey,
when the Sea is calm, Serpents will show themselves that are 100 or 200 foot
long, and sometimes they will catch men from the Ships. Schiltbergerus a
Hollander, has described the Combat between the Sea and Land-Serpents. His
words are; In the Kingdom of Genyck, there is a City called Sampson: at what
time I resided with Ureiasita King of the Turks, Water-Snakes, and
Land-Serpents innumerable did surround that City for a mile on all sides. These
came forth of the Woods that are many in the Countries adjoining, and those
forth of the Sea. Whilst these met, for 9. days no man for fear durst stir
forth; yet they hurt neither man, nor any other living Creature. On the tenth
day, these two kinds of Serpents began to fight early in the morning, and
continued till Sunset, and the Water-Serpents yielded to the Land-Serpents;
and the next day 8000 of them were found dead.

Many suppose that the Sturgion will pine away in the Albis. Gesner writes,
that Johannes Fredericus Elector of Saxony, bought a Sturgion that weighed
above 260 pound weight, for so many Franks. He is so strong with his tail, that
he will cut wood in sunder, strike down a strong man, and strike fire out of
hard stones; and the same is done by the rubbing of those little bones that are
prickly all his body over.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Salmon, and the Turdus.
A Salmon about Colen is two cubits long, and they are greater amongst the
Miseni; and at Dessavia, near the River Albis, from 24, to 36, pounds weight.
In Helvetia near Tigurus they are taken sometimes above 36, pound weight.
Albertus says, the intestine of it, is divided into many parts like to
fingers. Gesner writes, that he observed two passages from the very throat of
one that he dissected: they stretched downward, one to the Maw by the Wezand,
and the other was namelesse. In the River Mulda near to Dessavia, if the
Salmon striving to overcome the precipice of the water, be frustrated at the
second or third leap, he swims to the foard, and there he will lie hid under
stones and gravel, and pine away: he is full of brass colored spots, and his
beck is bent like a great hook. In Scotland in Autumn they meet in little
Rivers or places fordable, where they join bellies, and lay eggs, and cover
them in the gravel* at which time the male is so spent, spending his milt and
seed, and the female with her spawn, that they are nothing but bones and
prickels and skin. That leanness is infectious, for they will infect all the
Salmons they come near. It is an argument thereof, that often times they are
taken, and one side is consumed, the other not so. From their eyes covered in
the sand, little fishes breed the next spring that are so soft, that until
they be no bigger than a man's finger, if you press them with your fingers,
they will run as from congeled moisture. Then first, as Nature leads them, they
hasten to the Sea, and in 20, days, or a little more, it is incredible how
great they will grow, when they come from the Sea, against a River that runs
thither, they show a wonder. For the Rivers that are straightned with Rocks,
and Banks, on every side, and therefore run down swiftly, when they fall with a
great fall, the Salmons do not presently swim forth by the Channel, but they
fling themselves up crooked by force of the water, and so are carried in the
Air, before they fall. That they are lively, is seen by their heart taken
forth. Robertus Constantinus testifies that he saw the heart of a Salmon that
was unbowelled, that was wet with a moist sanies, and it lived after it was
taken forth above a day. There are some different kinds of Turdi. Some have as
it were some skiny yellowish Apophyses hanging down from their lower chop*
sometimes they vary, and are all for the most part Gold color, or color of the
Amethyst or blew. Their eyes are extreme great, and a black circle goes about a
Golden Apple* a Golden circle about the black, and lastly a black circle goes
about them all. The fins by the gills are wholly Gold color, but of the breast
they are all blew, except their nervs that are Gold colored. The fin that is
from the anus, and that which is on the back, and tail, where they are joined
to the rump, are Gold colored, but sprinkled with little red blood spots, the
rest are blew.

CHAP. XX. Of the Torpedo, and the Tunie.
I Have nothing to say of the Torpedo, but that he benums the hands; and hence
he has his name. And he does this, so effectually, that before he is taken, he
will do it by the net, or the rod. He uses this cunning, that covering himself
with mud and dirt, he will catch little fish very strangely, Plin. l. 1. utr.
anim. The Tunies though they be caught in many places, yet chiefly about
Constantinople; for when they come to the Islands Cyaneae, and are past by the
shore of Chalcedonia, a certain white rock appears to them, and does so
terrify the Tunies, that immediately they put over to the farther bank; and
being taken away with the swift current of the waters, the natural fitness of
the place turns the course of the Sea to Constantinople, and the winding
thereof, so that being driven thither by force of Nature, it is no wonder, that
they fall into snares. They are also engendered in the Lakes of Maeotis; and
when they are a little grown, they break forth of the mouth of the Lake in
sholes, and run by the Asiatick shore so far as Trapezunda; but because they
cannot endure tempests and cold weather, whereby their eyes grow dim; they stay
in a very deep place of the Thracian Sea, that harbors them, it is called
Melas, and it has hollow and muddy places fit to cherish fish in, and they
grow till the Spring. They seem to understand the blowings of the winds. For
Pliny says, they stay for the North wind, that they may get out of the Pontick
Sea, with the flowing of the water to help them. They enter into Pontus one
way, and go forth another. For Aristotle, l. 8. Histor. c. 13. says, they lie
on their right side next the Earth when they no in, and come forth on the
contrary side; for they turn on the left side; which, says he, they are
therefore said to do, because naturally they see clearest with their right eye,
and duller with the left. The old Oracle of the Prophet Amphyllus in Herodotus,
proves that they go forth in the night. And this is again confirmed by ancient
medalls, such as Bellonius writes that he saw at Paris, on one side was an Ear
of Corn; and on the other side the Tunie; and above this, the Moon with an
Inscription of Phillips. They sleep so soundly, that they may be taken napping.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Uranoscopus, and the Sword-fish.
URanoscopus is a fish that swims alone, and eats flesh; so lively, says
Bellonius, that if you take out all his Entrals, yet he will move still: It is
the greediest eater of all fish, he has an apophysis hanging forth of his
mouth, and with that he ensnares the fish. This shows he is an insatiable
paunch, that if you cast meat to him, he will feed so long, till the meat come
up to his throat.

The Sword-fish has a beck on both chaps, but the lower of them is short and
triangular; the upper is more bony and harder, and far longer, sometimes two
cubits long. In the Indian Sea they grow so great, that they will pierce the
sides of the strongest Ships, a hand and half in thickness sometimes, Jovius.
Gesner writes from the relation of a faithful friend of his, who saw a man
when he sailed into Syria, that swam by the Ship side, and he was cut in the
middle by the beck of this fish. He fears a Whale, and when he sees one, he
claps his sword into the earth, or some place of the Foard that he can, and so
forms himself like to a log; and the Whale neglects him, and swims by him.

CHAP. XXII. Of some other Wonders concerning Fishes.
IN Minerals and Quarreys also fishes are found, especially if the places be
moist, though there be no water. Theophrastus observed this in many places of
Pontus; Eudoxus in Paphlagonia; Agricola at Orterantum, beyond the Albis. There
is a plain by the River Narbon, by this run the Rivers, Iliberis and Roschinus;
there are fossil fish found therein. The earth is tender there, and brings much
grass; about two or three cubits under this, runs the water of the Rivers that
has dilated it self. If at any time they overflow, they fill the plain with
fish from underground, Polyb. in Histor. There are two sorts of them, some
round like to Eels, but they want a tuff skin; they are scaly as Gudgeons,
their flesh is hard, and not well savoured. The great ones are two fingers
thick, the smaller but one. Those are four hands breadth long; these but three:
they make a sharp noise. Apothecaries shut them up in glasses, and hang them
down from a beam, and feed them with bread for a long time. Sometimes they come
forth of Rivers that run in Fenny grounds, and come far into the Land by the
veins of the banks, and sometimes into Cellars. Theophrastus writes, That in
Caves they feel nothing, because their senses are stupefied; but when they are
boiled in a pot, and when they are dug up they will stir.

In a certain River of the East Indies there are fishes called Tuberones; they
are so greedy, that one of them caught at a man standing on the side of the
Ship, and first bit off his foot, and next his hand, Linschotten. in Navigat.
It is almost incredible, that the same man writes, namely, That a Ship coming
from Mozambique, went backward 14 days, though the wind were good for it, and
nothing to hinder it, and that was found by every days observation of the Suns
height. And when the doubtful Mariners enquired for the cause of it, and
thought they had been bewitched, at last a fish was found under the Ship, and
they collected, that this fish carried the Ship on his back the contrary way
against the force of the wind. For so soon as with much ado, they had driven
this fish away, they sailed forward very well. The History is painted in the
Palace of the Deputy-King of Goanum, with the Name of the Pilote, the Year and
the Month.

Blefhenius writes, in his description of Islandia, That in the Island Sea
there is a Monster, the name he knows not, but they take it to be a kind of
Whale; when he puts his head above the Sea, he does so fright men, that they
will fall down almost dead. He has a head is four square, flaming eyes, and it
is fenced about with black horns; His body is black, and set about with black
feathers. If he be seen at Night at any time, his eyes seem fiery, that all his
head that is thrust above the Sea may be seen by it. Olaus, l. 12. makes
mention of it, and says, it is 12 cubits long. So much for Fish.

The End of the Ninth Classis.
OF THE DESCRIPTION Of Natural Wonders.
The Tenth Classis. Wherein are set down the Wonders of MAN.
WHosoever thou art, that do unjustly determine the condition of Man,
consider how great things our Mother Nature has given unto us; how much more
strong Creatures are under our subjection; how we can catch those that are much
more swifter than our selves, that nothing that is mortal is not under our
power. We have received so many Virtues, so many Arts, and lastly a Soul,
swifter than the Stars; for it will outrun them in their motions, that are to
be performed many years after, and in one moment penetrates into whatsoever it
is intent about; Seneca.
CHAP. I. Of Man in general.
HItherto I have described irrational living Creatures; Man follows next, of
whom we shall speak in order, according to his actions, natural, vital, animal,
and rational. And first of his proportion. This is so excellent and admirable,
that it cannot be more. The body of Adam was made out of the Earth, and ours of
3. small drops of seed, and as much blood, poured forth like milk, and framed
like to cruddled chief; of the same matter, are so many and so diverse parts
made. The whole structure consists of above 200 bones to support it, and as
many cartilages; all the joints are smeered with, all are joined together with
many ligaments, and clothed with innumerable membranes: the vast mass of the
members, are watered with above 30, pair of nervs, as with little cords, and
all the parts are sprinkled with as many arteries as with water pipes, filld
with foming blood and vital Spirits; the empty places are filled up, and the
entralls covered, with almost 400, Muscles, and flesh of diverse sorts, as with
flocks: and lastly all is covered about with skin. The Image of God is in it
(his mind represents the same) and it has included in it, the forces and
temperament of all the creatures. You shall find many men that have an Ostrich
stomach, many that have the Lions Heart, not a few have the heart of a Dog,
many of a Sow; and infinite there are, that are like the Ass by nature.
Alexander the Great, had such a symmetry of humors, that his spirits, and
humors, and also his dead body, smelt as sweet as natural balsom; because in
man as in the Center, as in a knot, or little bundle, the original and seminary
cause of all creatures lie bound up. Vegetables are nourished and increased by
the balsom-like Spirits of Mineralls, animals of vegetables, and by them of
mineralls; but man, for whom all things were created, is nourished and
augmented by the balsamic spirits of animals, vegetables, and mineralls;
wherefore there is reason that he should consist of all ^hese. Wherefore in man
there do flowrish, and produce fruit, that are messengers of health or
sickness, both the balm, violets, Germander, namely the Spirits of the Heart,
Brain, and Liver: the Nettle, Wake-Robin, Crowfoot, as Pushes, Scabs, Creeping
sores; Also there are wrought in man mineral separations, that appear in
paroxysms, of Vitriol, Alum, Salt, of Gemma, of the Colcothat, Tartar; as the
Leprosy, Elephantiasis, Morphew, Cancer, discovering themselves in several
Tinctures and Signatures. Nor are aqueal generations wanting, as Gold, Silver,
Tin, Copper, Iron, Lead; the Heart, Brain, Liver, Reins, Stomach. There are
found in our bodies Mines, out of which stones are dug, the stones of the
Bladder and Kidneys, not to build but to destroy the house. The head is the
Fort of man's mind, the seat of reason, the habitation of Wisdom, and the shop
of memory, judgment, and cogitations; possessing the highest place does it not
represent the uppermost and angelical part of the World? You have the middle
and the Caelestial part in the Thorax* and in the middle belly, exactly set
forth. For as when the Sun rises, the upper parts are enlightened, and all the
lower parts are enlivened; but contrarily, when the Sun departs, they grow
cold, and tend to ruin: so by the perpetual motion of the heart, and by the
vital heat thereof, all things flourish, and there is a plentiful harvest of
rejoicing, to be perceived; but when that is darkened by cares, sorrows, fears,
and other Clouds, all the parts are debilitated, and at last dye. Who sees not
the sublunary part of the World, expressed in the lower belly? In it, are
containd the parts that serve for nutrition, concoction, and procreation.
Perhaps you will want the Dukedom of the Planets in this little world. Behold,
the flowing marrow of the brain represents the moystning power of the Moon, the
genital parts serve for Venus, the Instruments of eloquence and comeliness do
the office of witty Mercury; the Sun and the Heart hold the greatest
proportion. Man's Liver, the fountain of good vapors, is compared to
beneficial Jupiter; the bladder of the Gall, contains the fiery fury of Mars;
and the loose spungy flesh of the Milt, which is the receptacle of
melancholique humors, does perfectly represent the cold Planet of Saturn. And
if you please to proceed farther, I can say boldly, that the Elements, Seas,
Winds are here shadowed forth. The spirits of Man's body do set forth Heaven,
the quintessence of all things. The four humors express the four Elements;
Hot dry choler represents the Fire; blood-hot and moist* the Air; phlegm, cold
and moist, the Water: melancholy cold and dry, the Earth. So the belly of Man
is the Earth, fruitful of all fruits: The hollow vein, is the Mediterranean
Sea; the Bladder the Western Sea, into which all the Rivers discharge
themselves, and the superfluous salt which is resolved, is collected. He has
the East in his Mouth, the West in his Fundament; the South in his Navel; the
North in his Back. Europe, Asia, Africa and America may summarily be described
in Man. Wherefore Abdalas the Barbarian said well, that the body of Man is an
admirable thing; and Protagoras called Man, The measure of all things.
Theophrastus, The pattern of the Universe, and Epitome of the World. Synesius,
The horizon of corporeal and incorporeall things. And lastly, we may truly cry
out with Zoroastres, O Man! the Workmanship of most powerful Nature; for it is
the most artificial Masterpiece of Gods hands.

CHAP. II. Of Nutrition.
Article 1. Of the harmless feeding on venomous things.
IF we regard Histories, we can hardly doubt, but that venomous things may by
custom become nutrimental: For many learned men having written thus, they
ought to be of credit. Avicenna, Rufus, and Gentilis speak of a young Maid, who
was fed with poisonous creatures from her tender age; and her breath was venom
to those that stood by her. Albertus writes, That at Colonia Agrippina, there
was a man that held Spiders for his daintiest meat. One Porus* a King of the
Indies, used poison every day, that he might kill other men. There was one who
killed venomous creatures that bit him* Avicenna l. 8. de anim. c. 2. It is a
known History of a young Maid fed with poison, with which the Persian Kings
killed other men. In Hellespont the Ophyogenes feed on Serpents: One that was
delighted with the same food, when he was cast into a vessel filled with
Serpents, received no harm. Pliny and Athenagoras of Greece, could never be
hurt by Scorpions; and the Aethiopians that are Inhabitants by the River
Hyaspis, made brave cheer of Serpents and Vipers. Galen says, That an old
Woman of Athens eat a great quantity of Hemlock, which did her no hurt. Hypoth.
the Empirick writes, that another took 30 drams of it, and received no harm;
and he says further, That one Lysis eat 4* drams of Opium. The Thracian Dame
made gallant victuals of handfulls of Hellebor. Lastly, King Mithridates could
not poisoned be,
He drinking poison often, grew poyson-free.


If you search the cause of it, you shall find diverse. First is, every man's
natural property, by reason of which, Stares feed on Hemlock; Sows on Henbane,
with delight. Then there is a certain proportion of poison; for this changes
the power of the poison, and the disposition of the subject. Again, the
strength or weakness of the body. Conciliator says, he saw four men feeding
on venomous meats, one dyed suddenly, two were dangerously sick, and the fourth
escaped. To this add the force of the composition, and the quantity; the
variety of the time and place wherein they are collected. So Trassius
Mantinensis gathered his Hemlock in the coldest places, that he might sooner
kill men. Theophrastus shows, l. 9. hist. Plant. that at Chios there was a
certain way to compound it, to make it effectual. One stung by a Scorpion, may
live many days; and one stung by Ammodites may live 7 days. Chersydrus kills
in 3. days; a Viper in 3. hours; a Basilisk suddenly. Lastly, the history of a
woman that sought to poison her husband, proves, that poison grows more
effectual by being mingled with poisons of the same kind; and less, by being
mingled with poisons of a contrary kind. Also it is certain, that hot poisons
cannot be conquered; for Sublimate by its extreme corroding cannot be concocted
by nature; and Napellus kills by its extremity of heat.

Article 2. Of the eating of other unusual Meats.
NAncelius l. 3. Analog. writes of a Maid delighted to feed on dung; and he
relates, that a certain Nobleman did greedily sup up the liquid dung of Maids.
Fernelius l. 6. Pathol. c. 3. tells of a Maid that eat quicklime as great as a
man's Fist. Trincavellus tells of one, l. 7. c. 5. that eat threads out of
Garments. Lusitanus c. 3. cur. 86, of one that eat Bombasse and Wool.
Marcellus Histor. mirab. l. 4. c. 1. of one that eat Lizards. A woman that was
fifty years old eat Tartar, Nicolaus sermon. 5. tract. 4. c. 36. Camerarius
speaks of another eat hair; This may happen in a particular disease, which in
women with Child is called, (...), in Virgins and others, (...). For the cause
is a vicious naughty humor, impacted in the coats of the stomach, or bred in
the same by ill diet, or coming thither from the matrix. Hence for the three
first months especially, it happens to women great with Child, when they vomit,
and the Child consumes not much. It troubles maids, when their courses are
stopped. But it is hard to say, how such an appetite should proceed from this
cause, and it is better to ascribe it to a hidden quality than to commit an
absurdity in what is manifest. But what is reported of one Lazarus, that he
would eat glass, stones, Wood, Living creatures, and Live-fish; and we were
told by the famous Winsemius in praelection. anatomic. that a Country man in
Frisland would do the same for money, that seems to proceed from the fault of
the nerves. For in him* when he was dissected, the fourth conjugation of nervs,
that is produced in other men for the benefit of their taste, neither came to
his tongue nor palate, but was turned back to the hinder part of his head, as
Columbus observed, Anatom. l. 15. Some also think a man may be nourished by
smells, and some Histories say, it has been done. Rondeletius de piscib.
says, that one at Rome lived 40, years only by the Air, and Laertius reports
that Democritus the Abderite, a Philosopher lived four days by smelling of
bread steeped in Wine, that he might not profane the feasts of Ceres. Cardanus
l. 8. de varietate rerum. c. 41, says, that men may live longer only by
contemplation. Lastly, Megasthenes writes that at the farthermost part of the
Indies, from the East about the River Ganges, there is a Nation called
Astomores, people that have no mouth, their body is all hairy, and they are
clothed with the moss of boughs: they live only by the Air and sents that
they take in by their nostrills, they take no meat nor drink, but only the
diversity of smells from roots and flowers, and wild Apples, that they carry
with them in long Voyages, that they may not want sweet smells; and if the
sents be too strong a little, they easily are killed thereby, Pliny l. 7. c. 3.
Yet surely sents being but qualities can nourish no man; they may out of all
question refresh and cherish the brain.

Artic. 3. Of prodigious Eaters.
THere was a Woman once at Alexandria, as Athenaeus sets it down; he says, She
eat 12 pound of flesh, four chaevice of bread that is more than 12 pound; and
she drank a gallon of wine and upward. Maximinus the Emperor would drink often
in one day 9. Gallons of Wine of the Capitol measure, he eat 40, pound of
flesh, and as Cordus says, 60 pound, Capitolinus is my Author; now an Amphora
is 8, congii, that is about 9, Gallons. One Phagon in Vopiscus, who was in
great respect with Aurelianus the Emperor, eat so much in one day, that he
devoured a whole Bore, a hundred Loafs, a Wether and a young Hogg; and he drank
more than an Orca of Wine with a tunnel put into it: now an Orca was a Vessel
of Wine greater than an Amphora. What shall I say of Clodius Albinus the
Emperor? He, as Capitolinus writes, devoured so much fruit as is incredible to
speak: for Cordus says, that he eat 500 dried Figs which the Graecians call
Callistruas, for a breakfast; and a hundred Peaches of Campania, and ten Melons
of Ostia, and 20 pounds of Grapes of Lovinium, and a hundred Gnatsappers, and
400 Oysters.

Uguccio Fagiolanus being a banished old man, did glory at the Table before
Scaliger at Verona; that when he was a young man, he eat four fat Capons, and
so many Partridges, and the roasted hinder parts of a Kid, and the breast of a
Calf stuffed, beside salt fish, at one Supper To this appertains that prodigious
man, in the time of Caesar Maximilian, who eat a raw Calf, and a Sheep, at one
meal. Suidrigellus Duke of Lithuania, sat 6. hours at Supper, and fed on 130
dishes, Sylv. l. 2. Comment. in Pannormit. The Epitaph of Thymocreon Rhodius
was this: Here Lies Timocreon Rhodius, who had skill
To eat and drink, and rail, and speak much ill.


Now overgreat appetite, if it proceed from a praeternatural cause, it is
called Bulimos; and if it be with vomiting, it is called dogs appetite. And it
proceeds from some gnawing humor in the stomach, or from a consumption of the
whole body, or by reason of the operation of the cold air; or, lastly, from
Worms. Brutus, when he went from Dyrrachium to Apollonia through the Snow, had
like to have got this disease; and a woman that cast up a Worm of twelve
fingers breadth long, lost her great stomach; and so did another that voided
100 worms. Brasavolus testifies, that this disease was epidemical at Ferrara;
and Anno 1535, it was so in Borussia; Leonellus Faventinus writes it. Gemma
Frisius speaks of a woman not very aged, that could not live one moment without
eating. He gives the cause to be the greatness of her Liver, and the
prodigious peculiar temperament of it. For her fat being increased
unmeasurably, and her heat choked, her belly was opened, and about 20 pounds
of fat were taken out; her Liver was found to be sound, swelling with blood and
spirits, but extreme red, and huge great, that by its very weight it pressed
the vital parts, Frisius l. 1. c. 6. Cosmocrit.

Article 4. Of monstrous drinkers.
IT is no hard matter to find men that sail in drink, and row in their cups.
You see that drunkenness abates in no part of the World, and as if we were
born to consume Wines, and they could not be poured forth, but through the
bodies of Men. What Seneca foretold, That a time should come when drunkenness
should be honored; and to drink abundance of Wine, should be esteemed Virtue,
is come to pass in our days. He is counted best, not he that can speak
knowingly of Philosophy, but he that can drink off many great cups, Galen. And
not only wine and waters, but smokes and fumes are introduced to make men mad*
Yet all go not an equal pace, some will win the garland. In that public
drinking for a wager before Alexander, there was one Promachus that drank four
Congii, that is, 40 pound. We read the same of Proteus of Macedonia in
Athenaeus. Novellius Torquatus of Millan drank 30 pints at one draught,
Tiberius the Emperor standing by to see this wonder, Plin. l. 14. hist. Nature;
And which is more wonderful in him, they are Pliny his words, He wan the glory
of it, that is very rare, for he never failed in his speech; nor did he vomit
or void any thing any way when he drank; nor did he sleep: he drank most at one
draught, and drank many more little draughts: and he was faithful in the
business, not to take his breath when he drank, nor to spit any out; nor did
he cast away any snuff that could be heard dash on the pavement. Cicero the
son, drank two gallons. Bonesus, as the words of Spartianus confirm, drank more
than any man. Aurelianus said often of him, He was not born to live, but to
drink. Yet he long honored him for military affairs. For if any Ambassadors
of barbarous people came from any Country, he drank with them to make them
drunk, and so in their cups he would find out their secrets. He drank what he
pleased, and was always sober; and, as Onesimus the writer of Probus his Life,
He was wiser in his drink. This was farther admirable in him, that so much as
he drank, the like quantity he pissed, and his belly or stomach or bladder were
never burdened. A certain man drank 6 gallons at a marriage of a Nobleman, in
the days of Lipsius. Nicetas l. 3. Histor. writes of Camaterus Logotheta that
drank two gallons.

Article 5. Of some Secrets concerning Drunkenness.
DRunkards differ in their manner of their drunkenness; for some are drunk
before others. And some when they are drunk fall backwards, some forward, some
sing, some quarrel. Writers give many reasons for this: They that are soonest
drunk, are not accustomed to Wine, or they have drank more then their ability,
(for naturally one cannot go from one extreme to another without inconvenience)
or they have narrower veins that are too hot, or have a thicker constitution of
body, or they prate too much when they drink. For speaking out, augmenteth
natural heat that is inflamed by wine, and fills the head with vapors, and
heaps up abundance of them; which being corrupted by continual motion, are
distributed through the whole body, distending the eyes, inflating the temples,
offending the brain. The same reason serves for such who at Feasts eat hot
bread, drink strong wine, and eat abundance of meats that are salt, and talk
continually. For all these things increase thirst exceedingly, and makes men
drink out of measure. Also diverse sorts of men eat bread wherein there is
contained Nigella seed, Darnell, when they eat brown bread, or mingled with
Millet seed. For these cause heaviness, and a passion like to drunkenness by
gross vapors, Canonher. l. 3. de admirand. Vini c. 1. Hitherto appertains
refined wine, poured from the Lees. For this, though it be weaker to preserve
it self, and having no lees, will sooner grow sour, (for the Lees are the root
to preserve the Wine) yet because it is moyster, and pierces into all the
Veins of those that drink it, it sooner inflames the blood, makes men drunk,
and overturns reason. Jason Pratens. de morb. cerebri. But women come not into
this consideration, nor such as drink sharp Wine after sweet, or such as
delight in new Wine. For women are of a very moist body, are often purged, have
very open passages, Macrob. in Saturnal. Yet because they have a weaker brain,
and narrower sutures of their skull, it is better to say with Alphonsus
Lupeius, that they are seldom so drunk that they rave, but they are often
sottish in their drink. Sweet Wine stops the pores, through which the Vapors
of sharp Wines, might ascend to the head.

Lastly sweetness so resists drunkenness, that Physicians cause such that are
too much inflated with Wine, first to vomit much, and then they give them bread
with honey to eat, to repel the fumes that remain of the Wine; Macrob.
Saturnal: What concerns their diverse gestures, that is founded in the diversity
of the parts and humors. Fumes from Wine fly to the forepart of the head, and
fumes of Beer and Ale to the hinder parts. Those that are drunk with this, fall
backwards, but these with Wine fall forwards. Those are clamorus and talkative,
these sleepy and forgetful. Lemnius l. 2. de. occult. c. 19. They see things
less a far off, because the optic Spirits are made more thick. The sanguine
tempers laugh; the choleric prate and are mad; the phlegmatique grow stupid;
the melancholique sad. And because all of them have their optics troubled with
Vapors, they all see a diverse colored circle about the light of the Candle.
Gordon Libro. Medic. part. 2. c. 21. If they weep they delight in so doing.
Rhodig. l. 12. c. 4. Moisture makes them stammer; for by this the tongue is
extended as a sponge with water, and being swollen and thick cannot speak plain.
Jacob Pratens. de natura vini. Moreover experience has found that Coleworts
resist drunkenness exceedingly, chiefly raw, and above all the red Cabbage.
Lemnius l. 2. c. 11. de occult. But Galen says, L. 2. de composit. medicam. c.
5. hot Cabbage macerated, and bound about the head. And so great is the
antipathy between it and Wine, that if one power Wine to it whilst it boyls,
it will not boil much. If you desire a reason, some say, that by eating of it,
gross Vapors ascend, that thicken the Vapors of the Wine. Aristotle says
that it draws the moisture of Wine down to the belly, and cools the body.
Weckerus attributes the same force of the Ivy, and Alexander says that
smallage, nuts, Lupins will do the like. Pumanellus says, powder of
Pumex-stone drank in water will do it. Gratarolus speaks the same of Saffron,
de vini natura c. 5. Africanus, of a Goats Lungs. Amandus de Sancta Sophia. l.
1. de veris secretis, attributes as much to new Milk drank fasting. Platerus
prax. medic. Tom. 1. c. 3. prescribes pap made of Milk and Barley meal taken
with Vinegar. And he describes a certain powder thus: Take Colewort seeds 1,
dram; Coriander seed 5, drams; camphir, 10, grai^s: make a powder, and give one
spoonful in sharp Wine. But the dung of swallows powdered and drank, will maka
a man sober, Pliny. Rue eaten, Merula. The humor that first drops from the
Vines at the beginning of the Spring; bread that is made of darn^l, dried and
made into powder. But that is superstitiously said, That whosoever shall
rehearse this verse, before the first glass of Wine he drinks, Juppiter his
alta sonuit clementer ab Ida. shall never be drunk.

Artic. 6. Of Bread.
THe chief foundation of man's preservation and nutriment* and the staff of
life, is bread, well ordered. Hence some say, Panis, Bread, comes from pasco to
feed: some take it to be so called from Pan, that is, all, because it answers
all meat. It is made of diverse things. The Aethiopians made it of the seed of
Orindium. The Icthyophagi made it of fish dried in the Sun. Plin. l. 7. c. 1.
The Egyptian shepherds made it of the Lote-Tree seed. Pliny, l. 22. c. 21.
Near the Mountain Vogesus, about the Town Burcken, there is a fine white meal
dug forth of a Mountain; the Inhabitants make Bread of it, and all sorts of
Cakes, Claudius Diodatus, l. 2. Panther Hygiastici. c. 4. But I say, that can
be no true meal, but it must be miraculous. I think it is some thick juice that
proceeds out of the earth, and in time is congealed by heat of the Sun, and so
becomes fine meal. Diverse Medicaments are made of bread. Aqua-vitae, the most
noble treasure of life is thus made. Take the best bread cut into thin sippets,
what is sufficient; put them into a hot Furnace, that by degrees they may dry,
like red Bisquit: then bruise it grosely, and put it into a wide cauldron, and
for every pound of this Bread, put in five pound of Fountain Water; flowers of
hops one handful, of anniseeds one ounce: boil them together till one part be
consumed, let them cool a little, and then power them forth, and pass them
through a basket or sieve, then power on some leaven, first dissolved in warm
water; shut this up in a Vessel, and let it ferment and work like new wine:
lastly part it as it grows clear, distill it, and rectify it like Spirit of
Wine. Some distill the crumbs of white bread newly taken forth of the Oven,
putting it into glass Stills* four ounces of it are given successefully
against the Epilepsie. See Deodate how the quintessence may be extracted.

Artic. 7. Of wonderful fasting.
THough nourishment be necessary for our life, yet there have been many, that
have lived along time without it. In Saint Augustine his days, one lived 40,
days without eating any thing. Another, in the time of Olimpiodorus the
Platonist, for so long as he lived, he neither fed nor slept, but only stood in
the Sun to refresh himself. The daughter of the Emperor Clotarius fasted
eleven years. Petrus Aponus saw one fasted 18 years. Rondeletius saw one fasted
ten, and afterward became a fruitful Mother. Hermolaus knew a Priest who
lived in health 40 years without any thing, but by sucking in the Air. Lastly,
one Nicolaus Helvetius under Waldensis, Anno 1460, after that he had five
Children by his Wife, lived a solitary life, and neither ate nor drank in 15
years. Some dare affirm, that he fasted 22 years; and Bocatius says, that this
party, or another, fasted 30 years. Mago Carthaginensis, and Lasyrtas
Lasionensis lived without taking any liquid substance all their lives, Athen.
l. 2. c. 2. One that Coelius speaks of, that was by Country of Tomos, did the
like at Naples; and Aristotle speaks of Andronis of Greece.

I will not speak of Conflana and Bernenses, two Maids, in Quercetanus l. 2.
Diaetetica c. 6. nor the Maid of Colen, in Albertus l. 7. de animal; nor her of
Hay, in Namelius; nor yet of the Aunt of Timon, in Athenaeus l. 2. nor yet of
the Frenchman that came from his Pilgrimage from Jerusalem: Yet there is no
man, I think, but will say, that all these things are preternatural. The cause
is, in what takes away, or augments the appetite; and that is done either when
the meseraique veins do not attract the Chylus, and draw it out of the stomach;
or when their sucking is not perceived in the orifice of the stomach. That, is
caused by stopping of the veins, or by a hot distemper, or want of evacuation
of the excrements that abound; or when the orifice of the stomach is beset with
phlegmatic humors. This, either from the inhibition of the influence of the
animal spirits, and the fainting of them, or from the distraction of the
faculty, or from the distemper of the stomach, and stupidity of it. But because
death does not follow this taking away of the appetite, there must be some
other cause besides. Some make this to be, the relaxation of the nerves in the
orifice of the stomach, as Langius; others think the Air drawn in, feeds the
spirits, as Quercetan. But since they do not show the cause of life, and this
opinion is yet doubtful; and they, which make the cause to be abundance of
flegmatique humors, confess there are plenty of them in cachecticall bodies;
Sennertus his Judgment pleases me best, who says, that such bodies are almost
immortal; and little or nothing exhales from them; because they consist of a
tenacious humor well compacted and growing fast together, and that will not
yield to the action of heat that feeds on nutriment; and their heat is most
mild and gentle, and requires not much nourishment, Instit. l. 2. Part. 3.
Sect. c. 2.

CHAP. III. Of Concoction.
Article 1. Of the Liver and Spleen.
NUtrition has attraction, retention, expulsion, concoction subordinate unto
it. Concoction is either in the Stomach, the Liver, or the Spleen, or in other
parts. In the first the Chylus is made of the meat, the faeces and watery
excrements are cast forth: In the second, blood, yellow choler, whey, and urine
are sent forth: in the third, dew, glue, and that which is called Cambium, some
thicker, some thinner are thrust forth. As for the Liver, there was none found
in Mathias Ortelius, a Merchant of Antwerp. Though it be one entire body in
Man, yet in bruit beasts it is divided into many Laps. In one Maid it was found
with three laps. In Carolus Sabaudus it ha^ four little coats, Francisc.
Puteus, l. 5: Apol. In Colet, the outmost fibers of it were adorned with hairy
tufts sticking forth, Camerar. When the heat of it grows weak, a Dropsy
follows.

I will say a few things of the Spleen; There was a woman at Paris was found to
have none, Holler. in observe. And Pliny l. 1^. says, That in Cawnus, men are
born without it, Nature. Histor. c. 73. Hence the common people think it may
without hurt be cut out of Footmen and Horses. Pallopius observed 3. that lay
one upon another. Posthius observes two at Montpelier: Where it increases, the
body decays. For then it sucks away too much Chylus from the Liver. Hence
Trajan called the Spleen the Treasury: For, as this grows rich, the common
people grow poor: so, as the Milt increases, the body decreaseth. One was seen
so great, that it weighed above 20 pounds, C^lumb. l. 15. Anatom. A Mariner
had a Milt 23 pound weight, and his Liver eleven pounds. In Jacobus Antonellius
it was no bigger than a Pigeons Egg; In one of Spoletum it was empty like a
purse.

Article 2. Of Humors in general.
THere is scarce any question to be made, but that the Humour^ cannot he
defined by the only force of the Elementary qualities. For Man lives upon
Plants, and they contain in them sharp, bitter, and sometimes Mineral juices.
They are altered indeed by that internal Archaeus, which is natural heat; but
when they are unmingled, unfit, and robustous, they cannot be changed.

Hence it is that Urines are made sometimes that will corrode cloth; and
sometimes blood fallen from the nose will do the like. Doring. l. 1: de medicin.
et medic. Sometimes things are cast up so hot by vomit, that they will boil in
the basin, and dye Silver Chargers with a brazen color, that no washing, nor
strong rubbing can take off, Schenk. obs. l. 3. Sometimes things yellow like
Saffron are voided, so sweet; that they taste like liccoris, when as they should
be bitter. Cardan, contra, 9. l. 2. tract. 5. reports that a woman that had
drank Poison, had a vein opened, and no blood would run forth, but a green
juice as from herbs, to 9. ounces in quantity; and a man's blood was, like to
milk. The humors have wonderful conveyances in the body, and certain periods.
The blood does grow vigorous, says Soranus Ephesinus, (which like the
Evangelists, does measure the spaces and course of day and night by equal
hours) from 9 a clock at night, till 3. a clock in the morning, in which time
the blood in Man is concocted and elaborated: Thence is the mind of Man
cheerful at Sunrising. Yellow choler is concocted from 3. in the morning,
until 9 a clock; in which time the natural faculty separates choler from
blood, and sends it to the gall bladder: Thence a man is prone to anger. Black
choler is elaborated from 9. a clock of the day, till 3. at night. In this time
the Liver is purified, and made clean of gross blood; and this, Nature, as
some say, ordains for the Spleen. From hence is the mind of Man darkened. Phlegm
is concocted from 3. at night till nine: For then Supper being ended,
concoction begins to be made in the stomach, and the meat to be liquified. From
hence Phlegm swimming upon the stomach, and carried to the brain, makes a man
sleepy. But if they be overmuch, and joined one with another, then they do not
keep their times. Moreover, the Persians, by reason of their moderate exercises
being children, grew so dry of body, that they neither spit, nor did blow their
noses, nor were their bodies puffed up, Varro in fragment.

Artic. 3. Of Blood.
BLood is stopped by some, wonderfully: Gesner notes, that Frederick Duke of
Saxony, gave a Toad that was thrust through with a wooden spit, and well dried
in the Sun, and wrapped in Sarsnet, for them that bled at the nose, to hold in
their hands till it grew hot, and so the blood was stopped. A hens chicken will
do the same, if the part hurt be thrust into that place where Cocks use to be
gelt, a hole being cut open. Platerus l. 2. de vit. c. 5. proved it, and found
it so. A noble Matron stayed bleeding at the nose, by holding a bit of white
chalk under the ring-finger, on that side the nostrill bled, Forest. l. 13. c.
10. Osorius writes also of Nahodaguca, a Prince in the Kingdom of Malacca, who
was hurt with many wounds and fell down, yet not one drop of blood came forth;
when he was stripped, and a bracelet of gold was taken off, then it began to run.
That stone was said to have power to stop blood, that was set in it. It is
taken out of beasts which the Sinenses call Cabrisias, Osor. l. 7. de reb.
Afric. et Indicis. That it comes forth of a vein cut, the distending of the
vessels is the cause. For the continual motion of the arteries added to the
veins, does press the veins: but if the veins be opened, the blood comes
forth, because there is nothing to hinder it. Hence when a vein is opened, if
one swoond, the blood stops. For the vital spirit does no longer distend the
vessels, Bartholin. Probl. 5. It is observed, that when a man is killed, it
will run forth if the murderer be present; but when a man is drowned, it runs
forth when friends are present. When you ask the cause, it is either motion and
agitation that opens the orifices of the veins, or Sympathy and Antipathy: The
revenge of the person is put for an Argument. He that is grievously wounded,
becomes the Assailer, says Rhodigi^. Thought greedily desires revenge; choler
burns suddenly for it; the blood is presently inflamed with it, and runs with
all its force to the wound, both to foment it, and to revenge. The spirits fly
together, and by an inbred leightnesse do fly about the Author of it, by whose
heat they continue, and remain for some time, Rhodig. 3. Antiq. c. 12. It was
of old thought to be a remedy for the Falling Sickness, to drink man's blood
yet warm. It was the Devil's Invention, who delights in the slaughter of men*
and to do them mischief. The Wife of Marcus Antonius the Philosopher, fell in
love with a Fencer; the Wizards were enquired of, and they gave counsel to kill
him, and that Faustina should drink his blood, the next time she lay with
Caesar. It was so done, and her love was ended, but the boy born was of a
fighting disposition, and destroyed the Commonwealth, Jul. Capitolin. Langius
reports, that the Son of a certain shepherd was faint-hearted for robberies;
but when he had eaten a crust of bread dipped in man's blood, he was fleshed for
all villainy. The Carmani had this custom, that at Feasts they would open a vein
in their face, and mingle the blood that ran forth with wine, and so drink it,
holding it the end of their friendship, to taste one the others blood. (But
these things belong to the description of Wonders in Customs) There is
compounded a Lamp of life and death with man's blood, whereof Ernestus
Burgravius writes thus: This Lamp or Light once lighted, burns continually, so
long as that man, of whose blood it was made, does live, and at the very same
moment that he di^s, it will go out. Know also, that if the flame be bright,
rising high and quiet, that Man feels nothing that troubles his Mind or Body:
But if it be otherwise, and the flame rising, twinckles diversely, or is lower
and clowdy and troubled, it gives thee a sign of great sorrow and other
passions. For perpetually from the celestial influences bred with the
Microcosme, and from the natural inclinations (since that blood is nourished
by the blood of that man, and the body of the same from the substance of this
very blood, from which blood was as it were mutually taken to prepare it) that
flame shines according to the state and habit of that man, in prosperity or
adversity, and so shows it self. Sennertus and Deodate, call this Pyromantia.

Artic. 4. Of Urine and Reins.
MAny things persuade us, that there is something else contained in Urines
beside the watery substance. For in diseases they are made plentifully, though
men have drank nothing. And it is observed that creatures that drink nothing,
will make water. Physicians foretell many things by their colors, thinness,
and thickness. And Chemists find salt in Urine resolved. But whatsoever that
is, it is called Serum, and it is the superfluous salt matter in meats and
drinks, and is not fit for nutriment. Salt is hid in meats, to season them; and
that plants are full of salt, you may find by distilling them. It is very well
known that diverse kinds of salt may be fetched out of Urines. Aegineta says,
that artificial Chrysocolla is made with Urine. Nitre is made of earth,
moystned with the Urine and dung of living creatures. Baccius shows the way:
His words are. Saltpeter is made now a days by industry of a most sharp
Lixivium, that drains forth from old dung, or rotten ordure, from the matter of
Churchyards, and some earths that are rotted together, the sane water being
often powered on in wodden Vessels. This Lixivium is boyld in great Cauldrons,
and Saltpeter is made, long fibers growing hard in the bottom like to salt.
Hence Ruffus Ephesmus said; that Urine was a nitrous humor that falls into the
bladder. de appel. corp human. c. 36. The Arabians write that in the Urine of
those are bit with mad dogs, the pictures of dogs may be seen Abenzoar. But
that seems to be attributed to the force of the Venom, because it changes
exceedingly a man's constitution, and makes it like to a dogs. For the humors
are so corrupted by it, that some little creatures like to puppies are bred in
the body, Sennert. l. 2. p. 2. s. 2. c. 4. Truly we find Worms to breed in the
bladder; for a woman voided one a span long; and a noble maid, voided many as
great as wiglice, Schenck, l. 3. obs. Also Charles Count of Mansfield, voided
one like a Magpie; Duretus, like a Hog-louse. But one that had the stone of the
bladder voided two, with a sharp head, with horns; the back and belly were
crusty, and they were black, and like Tortoises, but that their belly was red,
Pareus l. 19. c. 3. Holler. de morb. intern. Another voided a living Scorpion;
another, shellfish, Schenk. observe. All know the urinary passage, yet sometimes
other things are voided by it. The Son of Boninus made water a little beneath
the glans; and a Maid of a noble family at the Hague, urin'd her Navel. An old
Vine dresser had it coming forth at an Ulcer of his left buttock; a Soldier
Voided it by his hip and thigh; others by their belly. Schenk. in obser.
Fernel. l. 6. Pathal. c. 13. As for the Kidneys, Gemma saw 3, or 4, Lib. 6,
Cyclogn. Wolphius and Columbus, l. 15. Anatom. saw but one. They were seen
fastened to the Liver by Holtzapfelius at Auspurg. The fat of them is sometimes
found so hard and congealed that it is almost as hard as a stone, Eustach. de
Renib. c. 45. Saxonia saw the substance of them resolved into little pieces of
flesh. Stones also are bred in them of a faeculent matter, mingled with a salt
and stony juice. Sometimes they are very great. A Father general of the
Carmelites had a stone in one of his Kidneys, which growing from a large root,
was divided into eight branches, according to the form of the Channels of the
urinary Vessels, and the number of them, this excellently resembled the stock
and branches of Coral; moreover the flesh much contracted and diminished, with
the Veins, stuck so fast to this stone all about, that it had lost its own
form, and seemed to be a thick skin that covered it round. Eustach. ad c. 44.
de Renib.

Artic. 5. Of Marrow.
Pliny writes, that a Serpent is engendered of the Marrow of the backbone of
a man. The truth of this testimony appears by experience, and is made
manifest by an example that we read in Plutarch. For the King of Egypt having
made the dead body of Cleomenes to be hanged up, and they that watched it
having spied a great Serpent winding about his head, and covering the face in
such sort as no bird that preyes upon carrion durst soar thereabouts; the
people of Alexandria running thither (says he) in troops to see this
spectacle, called Cleomenes a demi-god, and the son of the Gods: until such
time as the best in knowledge among them had called to mind, that as of the
putrified flesh of a dead Ox, there grow Bees; of a horse, Wasps; and of an
Ass, Beetles: so likewise, when the matterie substance which invironneth the
Marrow, gathers together and thickneth, Serpents are engendered thereof.
Camerarius says, he has oftentimes seen in a well-known place of Germany a
young gentleman's tomb, who was buried in a Chapel where his predecessors lay:
It is said, that he was the fairest young man of his time; and being troubled
with a grievous sickness in the flower of his age, his friends could never get
so much of him (no more than Agesilaus friends could get of him) as to suffer
himself to be represented in sculpture or picture, to serve for posterity:
only this, through their importunity he agreed unto, that after he should be
dead and some days in the ground, they should open his grave, and cause him to
be represented as they then found him. They kept promise with him, and found
that the Worms had half gnawne his face, and that about the midriffe and the
backbone there were many Serpents. Upon this, they caused the spectacle (such
as they found it) to be cut in stone: which is yet at this present to be seen
among the armed Statues of the Ancestors of this young gentleman. A notable
example of the fragilitie of man's body, how fair and goodly so ever it be; and
that all the splendour and magnificall show that may be seen therein, is nothing
else but rottenness and Wormes-meat: as the Author of Ecclesiasticus says;
When a man dies, he is the heritage of Serpents, Beasts and Worms. Which is
confirmed by a certain inscription graven upon a tomb at Rome in Saint
Saviors Church, where are two Latin Verses to this effect.

When in my bodies prison I was pent,
I was compact of shameful filth and ordure:
Now to this lower dungeon being sent,
To crawling Worms I serve for food and pasture.
Saint Bernard aimed at the same when he said, That man was nothing but
stinking seed, a sack of excrements, and the food of Worms.

Of bodies dead engender Worms, of Worms a rotten stink,
And then as horrible a state as mind of man can think:
This is our very case, for all our pride and hie conceit,
Nor can we stay the stroke of death when he our life does threat.
So then, nature ingendring of the carrion of our bodies, a Serpent, or a
Dragon, it seems to show unto us (as it were with the finger) the author of
our calamities and corruptions; as also the enemy that has an unreconcileable
war with us: to wit, that old dragon and serpent, who not only lays traps
for the living; but besides never leaves rending and devouring those that be
dead and buried.

Article 6. Of Sweat.
ARistotle reports, that some have sweat blood. And Fernel. l. 6. de part.
morb. c. 4. observed, that sometimes blood will run forth of the ends of the
veins that end in the skin, in many places. There was one, that every month
about a pound of blood, run forth of a vein opened, by the skin, near the lower
part of the Liver* when it was voided, none could discern where it came forth,
Beneven. Lastly, the President of Mons Marinus, when he was besieged by
Augustus the base son of the Prince of Salucia, and was called forth as it were
to parley, and then held prisoner, and he was threatened with death, if he
yielded not up the place, was so frighted with this undeserved death, that he
sweat blood all over his body, Thuan. l. 11* Histor. The causes are two, says
Aristotle. The thinness of the blood, the rari^y of the skin, and the opening
of the pores. To this may be added, the weakness of the parts that serve for
nutrition, if the retentive faculty hold not, and the expulsive cast forth
strongly. Anno 1486, there was a kind of disease called the English Sweat; It
first fell out in England, and in Germany Anno 1529, it so spread, that it
brake off the Treaty of Zwinglius and Luther. The force was so great, that it
killed men in 24 hours, or else they recovered if it did breathe forth by
sweat, Thuan. lib. 6. Physical observations show, that one recovered who went
into a very hot oven, and sweat violently. But as many as eat of the bread was
baked in the same oven, were all consumed by a consumption, Riqu. de febre
sudor in Epist. And though Sweat, when other signs are good, be a Token of a
good Crisis, yet a cold sweat is certainly mortal, for it comes from the
decayed heat of the solid parts. When as it breaks forth from a great feavorish
heat within, it is cooled in the External parts that are now void of all heat.
Whence our Hippocrates, l. 4. Aphor. 37. says, If cold Sweats come forth upon
a hot Fever, they signify Death; but if the Fever be mild, a Chronicall
disease.

Article 6. Of insensible Transpiration.
AS in the great World, vapors are drawn forth from moist places by the heat
of the Sun and the Stars: so in Man, the little world, we must grant the same is
caused by force of the inward heat. Yet lest they being united in man's body,
should cause distemper, and make Fevers, God made man's body open and full of
pores, through which the vapors breathe out, and that so finely, that the
senses can scarce perceive them. Yet Sanctor. Sanctorius, did observe and weigh
them as fine as they are. Hence grew, that Physic is called Statica, wherein
amongst other Aphorisms these are contained:

I. Insensible transpiration is far more, than all sensible transpirations put
together.

II. If the weight of the body begins to increase more than usually, without
any greater addition of meat or drink, or retention of sensible excrements,
there is a stopping of the pores.

III. Perspiration that cures the body of a disease, and of that unprofitable
weight, is not that which is made by sweat, but by that invisible breathing
forth, which in Winter in one natural day can send forth above 50 ounces.

IV. After sleep, before he voids any sensible Excrements, a man feels himself
lighter; for he is so, about 3. pounds weight more than ordinary.

V. In one night commonly a man voids 16 ounces of urine, more or less, 4.
ounces of excrements by siege, and above 40 ounces by insensible transpiration.

VI. Many men void more in one natural day by insensible transpiration, than
they do by their belly in 15. days.

VII. If cold fall upon the Air in Summer, and a man drink hard that day, it
will hinder a third part almost of insensible transpiration; and if sensible
transpiration do not help, it will easily dispose a man to corrupt humors or
Cachexia.

VIII. In Summer temperate bodies are lighter than in Winter about three pound
weight.

IX. In Summer if cold fall upon heat, the same day about one pound of
excrements are kept in, and cannot breathe forth.

X. From the Autumnall Equinoctial, to the Summer Solstice, we breathe forth
above one pound weight less every day; and from thence to the Vernall Aequinox
we begin to breathe them forth more freely.

XI. The stomach filled with meat, if it perform the first concoction whilst
we sleep, the perspiration of that night commonly amounts to 40 ounces; but if
it do not end it, it comes to about 18 ounces.

XII. Meats that nourish much, except Wether-Mutton, from Supper to Dinner, use
not to breathe out above 18. ounces.

XIII. Plenty of meats, that nourish but little, in one night may breathe forth
above 40 ounces in most men.

XIV. Wether-Mutton is easily concocted, and will breathe forth; for in one
night it will come forth by insensible transpiration 3. ounces more than other
ordinary meats.

XV. Unquiet rest hinders at least 3. ounces of ordinary transpiration.

XVI. I have found that insensible transpiration in many men will breathe forth
in 7. hours 40 ounces, when they sleep; and 20 when they wake, or thereabouts.

CHAP. IV. Of Increasing.
Article 1. Of Giants.
THere are two sorts of Giants. For they are either people of a Country; or
else Monsters, by error of the matter, or of the Agent. Goropius Becanus
denies that ever there were, or are any of the first kind. But the holy
Scripture gives testimony, and there are evident examples, and modern
experience confirm it. For the Spies, Numb. 13. v. 33. say expressly, We saw
Giants the sons of Anak, which come of the Giants, that we seemed in our eyes
like to Grasshoppers, and so we were in their eyes. And what are the names of
the Emims, and Zamzummims; but titles of Giants? Procopius testifies, that
Justinian wondered at the Goths of old for their vast bodies. Some think they
had their names from Gygas, Bartholin. de Pigmaeis c. 5. Mela. l. 3. c. 4.
writes, That amongst the Indians there were men so tall, that they rid on the
greatest Elephants instead of horses. The Patagones in America are certainly
known to be 12. spans high. Pigafetta says, he saw there amongst the Canibals
a Giant that was taller than other men from the girdle upwards. But about the
straights of Magellan near the Antartick Pole, he saw men whose neck was half
as long as a man's Arm; and he affirms it exceedingly. We may place Goliath, and
such as are spoken of, 2 Samuel 27. in the number of the last kind of Giants.
Augustine saw the grinding tooth of one, that, cut into pieces, would make a
hundred teeth of ours, Lib. 15. de civitat Dei, c. 9. Some were found in
Drepanum in Sicily, each of them weighed 3. pound, Pulgosius l. 1. c. 6. Lucius
Flaccus and Metellus in the Cretian War found some of their bodies that were
30 cubits. In the same place the earth opening by an Earthquake cast up one 40
cubits high, Plin. l. 7. c. 26. In another place amongst the waves there was a
Maid seen 50 cubits long, and she was 4. cubits broad between the shoulders,
she was clothed in a purple garment, Vincentius histor. Nature. l. 31. c. 25.
But what says Bertius of another in his description of Zealand* Our Chronicles
relate, from Gulielmus Bonus, Earl of Holland, unto the Marriage solemnities of
Charles the fair, King of France, a woman was brought, of an unusual stature,
born in Zealand, in respect of whom very tall men seemed but dwarfs; and she
was so strong, that she would carry two barrels full of beer in both hands,
each of them weighing 40 Italian pounds; and a beam that 8 men could not lift,
she would weeld at pleasure. He that desires more, let him read the Book of
Johannes Cassio de Gygantibus: I only mention some of the chief, commonly they
that feed abundantly do not grow so beautiful. The choking of the natural
heat, is the cause, with abundance of moisture. The same happens in diseases,
Lemnius in occult.

Artic. 2. Of Pigmies.
PYgmies have their name from their cubital stature. For (...), is the distance
from the bending of the elbow to the top of the little finger. The Hebrews call
them Gammadim, from Gomed a cubit. There were two sorts of them, some very
little ones brought up in Princes Courts for sport; born by accident as
Monsters are. Some are a people that live some where, or else they did
formerly. I need not prove the former. Under Theodosius there was one so small
in Egypt, that he seemed no bigger than a Partridge; he was very wise, and had
a pleasant voice, and spoke clearly, showing the marks of a generous mind, he
lived 20, years. Nicephor l. 12. Eccles. histor. c. 37. Johannes Cassinon de
Gygant, p. 66, saw two at Lions, one of them had a long beard, and was of a
very beautiful countenance, some of our Chamberfellows saw at Falconburg, a
mile from Leyds the last year, a female a cubit long, There was a Dwarf at the
Marriage of the Duke of Bavaria, who was completely armed, with a short spear,
and his sword girt about him, and he was hid in a Pie that one could not see
him, and he was set upon the Table, and he brake the crust of the Pie and came
forth, and drawing his sword he danced like a Fencer, and made all the people
laugh and admire him, Plater. l. 3. Observe. At Dresda in the Castle of the
Elector of Saxony there is to be seen the Skeleton of a dwarf, not a cubit
high, with so solid and well proportioned bones, that one would think they were
the bones of an Embryo. Bartholin de Pigm. c. 6. In Marchia and Lusatia, there
was an entire skeleton found, with the skull, 2 foot and 3 fingers long,
Leonhardus* Turnheuserus in German Pisone memorat. l. 7. c. 84. Now because
Coffins of the dead were often dug up in those parts, the people think the
Pigmies make them under ground. In Winter they lie 20, foot deep, about
Whitsontide one cubit, it is the opinion of the people. Multitudes of Authors
may persuade us to believe that there was a Country of Pigmies: amongst the
rest C^esias Indicus writes thus: Middle India has blackmen, that are called
Pigmies, and they speak the same language, the rest of the Indians do; they are
very small, for great part of them are but half a cubit high, and the greatest
of them is not above two cubits. Their hair hangs as far and sometime below
their knees, and they wear their beards longer than any men. And so soon as
their long beard is grown, they use no clothing, but they let their hair fall
backwards much below their knees, and their beard covers their foreparts. Then
when they have covered their whole bodies with hair, they girt themselves
about with them instead of garments. Also their Yard is so thick and so great,
that it will come down to their ankles. They are also flat nosed and deformed.
Their sheep are no bigger than our Lambs, their Oxen and Asses are like our
Rams in greatness, their Horses and Mules, and other creatures to carry
burdens are no bigger. The King of the Indies has 3000 of these Pigmies in his
company. For they are most cunning Archers. They are very just, and use the
same Laws the other Indians do. They hunt Hares and Foxes, not with Dogs, but
with Crows, Kites Rooks, and Eagles, There is a lake amongst them that is 800
furlongs about, upon which, when the wind troubles it not, oil swims which
some of these men take away from the middle of it in boats, swimming through it
with little ships, and this they use. They use also oil of Sesama and nuts,
but the best is taken out of that Lake. So far he describes them. Antonius
Pigafetta found some of them in an Island of the Moluccas, but Jovius l. 3. de
rebus Muscovit. says, they are in the Island Caphi, beyond the Laplanders*
Lastly Odericus de reb. Indic. l. 3, says, he saw some but three hands
breadth, and that they begat Children at five years old.

CHAP. V. Of Generation.
Article 1. Of Seed.
THe Seed, the most noble principle in Generation, resists many injuries. That
appears even from this, that the essence of many things can remain entire in
many changes, and under another form. Let a Goat be fed with many purgative
herbs; let the nurse drink the Goats-milk, and it will purge the child that
sucks her: yet in the stomach of the Goat those herbs were changed into Chylus,
and the Chylus was made blood in the Liver, and from blood milk in the Udder;
when the nurse drinks this milk, again Chylus is made of it in the stomach,
blood of this Chylus in the Liver, milk of this blood in her breasts. I
received it from one, says Sennertus, worthy of credit, de consens. et
dissens. that from the froth of a mad dog that stuck upon a cloth, little
creatures were bred like to whelps. It is wont, being retained in Virgins and
lusty Widows, to get a venomous quality, by corrupting in the matrix, and it
will cause strong symptoms. For a malignant vapor flying up, presses the
Intestines, the Liver, and the (...)* and makes the breathing so small, that it
can hardly be perceived. When any thing hangs over the parts of the privities
or Navel toward the Diaphragma, and ascending to the orifice of the stomach is
perceived, there follows presently panting of the heart, aching of the heart,
swimming of the head and palenesse. Whilst this continues* a woman falls
suddenly down, and is deprived of breathing, speech, and sight; (many have layn
so 3 days; others have been buried, as though they had been dead; Vesalius
dissected one to his great dishonor) and sometimes a woman is affected with
the Epilepsie, Convulsion sits, and raving; and, as the malignant vapor fall
on this or that part, so is she disquieted. Sometimes wonderful voices are
heard out of their bellies, crying of frogs, hissing of Serpents, croking of
Crows, crowing of Cocks, barking of dogs; which Gemma Frisius l. 1. c. 6.
Cosmocrit. thinks they do vary as the passages and the spirits that break forth
are proportioned. The Daughters of the President of Roan did always laugh, and
would not cease from it* Holler. de intern. morb. It happens sometimes, that
imagination being hurt, they grow sick of melancholy, and think the Devil is
present; also they fall into the fury of the womb, and wandering melancholy:
this principally is of force in February, and is heaped up in winter. When they
are so affected, they will speak diverse things, and diverse wonders in strange
tongues. Physicians say, they will desire to lie with those they meet; they
will talk in the night, and hide themselves in tombs, Henr. Petreius Nosolog.
Harmon. Discourse. 3. We read, that the Virgins of Miletus affected with this
disease, offered violence to themselves. The order of formation is this; First
of all, the membranes that surround the Infant are made; For in these the
nobler part of the seed is included, and the heat of the spirit and seed is
covered after: After this all the spermatick parts are delineated; and as their
dignity is, so is each of them made in its order. Yet some are perfected
sooner, some later. Hence at the first time of conception there appear 3.
bubbles, as it were, swelling with spirits, which are the rudiments of the
Brain, Heart and Liver, and an innumerable company of threads, that are the
beginnings of veins, nerves and arteries, and, as it were, the foundations of
the solid parts, Sennert. l. 1. Institut. c. 9.

Artic. 2. Of menstruous Blood and Milk.
THe coldness of Women, and generation is the cause that all blood is not
wasted in them, yet because they are not always with Child, it is then
collected in the vessels about the matrix, and is cast forth every month, that
they may not feel the burden of it, wherefore Physicians call them monthly
terms. They begin to be cast forth, when they are young Maids, the bottom or
neck of the matrix determins the manner of the flux. It is observed that a
fresh maid, with great breasts hanging down, which had hair under her armpits,
and on her privities, had her courses five years together without any hurt
Schenk. l. 4. observe. Nature if it cannot find the ordinary way seeks another
passage. A Maid of Saxony had her Terms come forth of her eyes. A Nun had them
came forth of her ears. Pareus his Wife had them by her nostrills: A Maid at
Sturgard vomited them up: A Maid in the Island Chios, spit them up. Amatus
speaks of some that voided them by their Teats: A woman of Trent, voided them
by her Navel; and which is wonderful, a Nun voided them every month by her
little finger, and ring finger of her left hand, Ludovic. Market. l. 1. c. 7.
de Mulierib. affect. All have not this flux uniforme; Those that are of a good
habit have them twice a year without hurt, and some not so much as once. And
Hortensius says they have them before they conceive. Institut. medic. l. 1. c.
28. They that are born from Mothers that were long before they had their Terms,
are commonly sickly. So it was with Francis the 2 d. King of France, who never
had a s^otty nose, and seldom spit, but a great deal of filthy excrements came
toward his ear, and purged his brain that way, and at last the corruption
grew Mortal. Thuan. l. 23. Histor. And Pliny affirms that there is a venomous
quality in it. For l. 7. c. 15. l. 19. c. 1. he writes thus, You shall not
easily find any thing that is more monstrous than the terms of women: new Wine
will grow sour by them, Corn will wither by touching them, plants will dye,
the buds of Trees will be burnt by them, and fall; Looking-glasses grow dark by
their very looks. The edge of Steel and the brightness of Ivory is mad blunt,
swarms of Bees dye, Brass and Iron will presently rust, and a stinking smell
corrupts the air: Dogs run mad that taste them, and bite deadly with venom
incurable. Also it is reported that the Ant, the smallest creature is sensible
of this, and will not eat the Corn has touched them, not come there any more.
Milk has been sometimes found in Men's breasts. For Cardan de subtle. testifies
that Antonius Benzus, being 34, years old, pale, and with a thin beard, fat of
body, had as much Milk in his breasts as would suckle a Child. They that have
seen the new World, affirm that all the men almost have abundance of Milk.
Aristotle saw a he Goat in Lemnus, that afforded so much milk as would suffice
to give a kid suck. l. 3. histor. animal. c. That it will sometimes grow hard as
a stone, see Schenkius observat. Mathaeus Medic. quaest, centur. qu. 14* denies
that Virgins have any. Heurnius ad l. 5. Aphor. 39. affirms it. If Virgins,
says he, abound with this blood, and their terms be stopped, unless this be
voided by letting blood, or vomiting, or bleeding at the nose, or emrods, or a
bloody dysentery; and if their breasts be hotter and rubbed, it may incline
sometimes that way and be turned into milk. Hippocrates in the same Aphoris^m.
If a woman have Milk, and be neither great with Child, nor delivered, her
courses are stopped. Yet we confess, this happens but seldom, since Nature
ordaind the Milk to suckle the Infant.

Artic. 3. Of the Generative parts.
I Shall speak but little of these, and with a mind that is modest, and with
such a mind they ought to be read. Histories relate, that Sylla had but one
testicle; and Philip Landgrave of Hassia had 3. Thuan. l. 41. He adds, he was
so full of juice for venery, that when he used only his Wife, and she could
not suffer him so often, as he would; he being otherwise a chaste man, by
consent of his wife, and relating his mind to the Priests, he was forced to
take a Concubine besides. A Prince of Germany who was emasculated by a Cannon
bullet, made that member of silver, and with that he got many children, Nancel.
Analog. Microcosm. l. 7. A Bull that presently leapt on a Cow, so soon as he
was gelt, got her with Calf, Aristotle. And Albertus relates of an Eunuch that
used copulation. One was born without a genital member, yet with the Scrotum
and testicles; another, without the parts of either Sex, Schenkius in observat*
It is certain, that Virgins have a virginal Cloister. But there is not a
little skin placed a thwart in the middle of the matrix, that makes the neck
thereof impassible: but four Caruncles, placed round, with small fibers coming
between them, till they are broken by force, and they are circularly shrivelled
by course, leaving a hole in the middle of them, that the terms may run forth
from the matrix, Ludovic. de Gardin. Anatom. c. 99. Avicenna l. 3. sen. 21.
makes mention of a part found in the privity of a woman, which he calls the
wand, or Albathara. Albucasis l. 2. c. 7. calls it Tentigo; and sometimes this
has grown so big, that women that have it, could copulate with others like
men, Fa^lopius. Caesarean births show, that the womb may be cut sometimes
without danger. Physical Histories testify, that one had her Matrix cut out
for her Lasciviousness, yet without danger of her life. Rhodiginus says, he
saw a Maid foretell future things by her matrix. Chrysostom says, that one of
Apollo's Nuns did the like.

Article 4. Of the Female Sex.
We all know there are two Sexes: the male the superior; and the female,
inferior almost in all things. God gave the man the Superiority, and commanded
the woman to obey. If we consider her body, she shows by this, her condition
is the lowest; chiefly if we consider her temper and excrements. Hence, because
they send forth sad vapors, by reason of their courses, they will make Nutmegs
and Coral, look foul and black. But if a male carry the first it will grow
fatter, the latter will look more red, Lemnius l. 2. c. 12. de occult. They are
easily angry, and their choler kindled, soon will boil over; and for want of
heat, they are not so ingenious. It is now the common opinion, that this sex is
more lustful than men are. Yet no man will deny, but that there are degrees in
this. For in pale lean people, the genitall parts are filled with a sharp
biting humor, and desire to be moystned. Lemnius l. 2. de occult. c. 37.
conjectures, that they are more venereous than red fat people. Rue makes men
less, women more lustful. Secundus Philosophus, when he was persuaded that
all women were naught, and having made trial, found it so in his own Mother,
not that he lay with her, but found she would give him leave, being asked by
Adrian what a woman was, answered, Man's Confusion; an unsatiable beast; a
continual trouble; a battle without end: the shipwreck of an incontinent Man;
the slave of mankind. Yet be what it will be; This sex is not so much to be
despised: but there are some found above this condition. In the Siege at
Brunswick a woman played the Soldier; another did the like formerly in Caesar's
Camp, Camer. Hor. subcis. c. 76. Cent. 3. Eudoxia the Wife of Theodosius the
younger writ Poems; and there is extant of her making Homers fragments
concerning our Savior. Proba Falconia did the like out of Virgils Verses. Jane
Gray, understood Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. Olympia Fulvia Morata, could make
verses Greek or Latin; and when she turned to the Orthodox Religion, she gave
her self wholly to Divinity. What shall I say of Elizabeth Queen of England?
she by her virtues put all the world into admiration; and she so amazed Pope
Sixtus, that he said, That she only with Henry the Fourth of France was fit to
give counsel concerning the state of the whole Christian World. Examples
testify, that women in time were changed into men. At Antioch a famous Maid
being married after she had born a child, became a man; at Maevan, another also
became a man. At Rome one, the same day she was married, was transformed,
Volat. l. 24. Comm. Urbin. The same happened to Aemilia, after she had been
married 12 years. See more examples in Schenkius.

Artic. 5. Of the noise of the Womb.
SOme have observed, that Children have cried in their mothers wombs, and so
loud, that they could be well heard. In Weinrichius of Monsters, you shall find
Examples. A Poet writes thus: Wonder it is, a Child did sadly cry,
Which was unborn, and in the womb did ly.
The cause was this, it grieved, and with its might
Strove to come forth, to see the Worlds great light.
Or else perhaps, it showed the earnest care
To help its Parents that now weary were.


Some think, that this portends some hurt to the child, or to the mother:
others think, that this is contrary to reason and experience. To Experience,
because there is no certainty that any such thing happened amongst the old
Philosophers. To Reason, because there can be no cry heard without drawing the
air by the mouth, and without the beating at the air by the sharp artery when
we breathe it forth, and without a certain forming of it by the mouth, and the
Palate. For being there is no place for a reciprocal course of the air, in the
veins and arteries, and the Infants urinary passage, that are filled with other
things; nor for so great abundance, that a passage should be made by the heart;
it cannot enter by the navel, by reason of the notable danger of heat, nor can
it be admitted by the matrix: to say nothing, that all are full of an
excrementitious glutinous matter. Libavius supposes all things required for
breathing in the Thorax to be made, and he thinks that the internal aereal
breath made of the humors by the active heat, and shut up within the house
where the child is, and also contained in the capacity of the Lungs, being
pressed forth by the Child, may serve the turn. See disc. de vagitu, etc.

Artic. 6. Of numerous Births.
IN the single faculty of generation, that man has, there happens variety, if
we consider time and number. Some are born in the fifth month, some in the sixth,
some in the 7th, 8th, or 9th, and some in the tenth, 13th. 15th. Paschal. in
Biblio. medica says, one was great with Child 23 months, another 2 years,
Aventinus. l. 5. Annal, This Child was born speaking; One was with Child four
years, Mercurialus. Yet Physicians set the 9th and tenth months for the time
of natural birth, when the Child is grown great and wants plenty of
nourishment, and the place where he lies is grown too narrow. Those that are
born in the fifth month, are very feeble, as a maid was that Valescus de Philos.
sacra c. 18. mentions, who was more slender and thin than women-kind use to be.
Those that are born in the 7th month are weak, and suspected, not to be perfect
in all things; few live in the 8th month, the striving to be born in the 7th
month, has made them weak as some think. For number some will bring two,
three, four, often times; and some will exceed this, that it is miraculous. An
Egyptian, in Gellius l. 10. c. 2. had five at a birth. The Mother of Lamisius
King of Lombardy had 7, Sigebert in Chronic. The Countess of Quenfurt had 9.
Betraff. l. 4. of the Princess of Anhalt. A woman that Albertus speaks of,
miscarried of 22, another of 70, another of a 150. The matter was proved by
cutting the little coats they were wrapped in, Caelinus l. 4. c. 25. The Wife
of Irmentrud Isenbert, Earl of Altorf, was delivered of 12. Margaret the Wife
of the Earl of Viraboslai of 36, Cromer. l. 11. Margaret the daughter of
Florentius Earl of Holland had 365, Ludovicus vives in colloquiis. Maude
Countess of Henneberg under Frederick the second had 1500. Aventin. l. 7.
annal, Cuspinianus says, 350. But if you take them at several times, you
shall find wonderful examples of fruitfullnesse. Priamus by Hecuba had 19,
Children, and 31, by other Women. Artaxerxes had 106, Herotimus, 600. Conradus
Duke of Moscovia had 80. The King of Giloto (it is an Island amongst the
M^luccas) had 600, Pigafetta of Ziamb, 325. another had 650. Martinus Polus l.
3. c. 6. says, he saw these living. Ludovicus Vives saw a Country man in
Spain, whose Children whilst he lived, had filled a Village of above a
hundred households. And in our times an old Wife spoke of her offspring, thus. Ah
my daughter, tell thy daughters daughter to lament for her daughters daughter.
Sphinx. c. 17.

Thomas Fazell writes, that Jane Pancica, who in his time was married to
Bernard Belluard, Sicilian, of the city of Agrigent, was so fruitful, that in
thirty child-beds she was delivered of seventie and three children: which
should not seem (says he) incredible, seeing Aristotle affirms, that one
woman at four births brought forth twenty Children; at every one, five.
Albertus Magnus writes, That a woman of Germany had two and twenty abortive
Children at one time, all having their perfect shapes: and another woman,
seventie. And besides, that another woman delivered into a basin a hundred and
fifty, every one of the length of ones little finger. Erasmus, Vives, and
others, have written of the strange deliverance of the Countess of Henneberg.
Lewis Guicciardin in his description of the Low Countries sets down the same
story, taken out of the ninth book of the Annals of Flanders, composed by
Guido Dominicus Petrus: His words are these; A certain poor woman, brought a
bed of two Children, prayed the Countess to give her some assistance in her
necessity: but the Countess did not only send her away empty-handed, but
charged her that she was of an ill behavior, saying that it was a thing
against nature (in her opinion) for a woman that is honest to conceive by her
husband two Children at one birth; and therefore that this her deliverance had
bewraied, that she had lewdly abandoned her self to some others. The poor
woman moved with this reproach and ignominious repulse, and of the other side
well assured of her honest carriage, made earnest request to God, that for the
proof of her innocence, and of the faith which He knew she had kept inviolably
to her husband, it would please him to grant that this Countess might have so
many Children at one burden, as there were days in the year: which within a
while after came to pass. And he adds, that these Children were as big as
Chickens new hatched, all alive, and sound, and died within a little while
together with their mother: to whom this Epitaph following was erected in the
Monastery of Lodun, where there were Nuns of the order of S. Bernard, and it
is hard by the Hague in Holland.

THE EPITAPH.
The daughter of the right noble Lord Florent Earl of Holland, and of Mawd his
Wife the daughter of Henry Duke of Brabant, sister of William King of Almaine,
named Margaret, of the age of forty two years, was brought a bed upon the
Friday before Easter, in the year 1276, at nine a Clock in the morning, of
three hundred, threescore, and five Children, as well male as female; who
after they had been all baptized in a great basin by the reverend Bishop Don
William, Suffragan, in the presence of some great Lords and notable persons,
the male Children being called by the name of John, the female by the name of
Elizabeth, dyed all of them together with their mother; their souls returning
to God, to live eternally, their bodies resting under this Tomb.

The like story well near is reported of the beginning of the noble race of
the Wolfes. Irmentrudes the Wife of Isenbard Earl of Altorf, having given her
self the reins so far, as to accuse of adultery a woman that had three
Children at one birth, being not able to believe that one man could at one time
get so many Children, adding withal, that she deserved to be sowed in a sack
and thrown into the water, yea, and accusing her in that regard to her husband:
It happened that the next year the Countess felt her self with Child, and the
Earl being from home, she was brought a bed of twelve male Children, but all
very little. She fearing the reproach of adultery (whereof yet she was not
guilty) and the punishment of like-for-like, commanded that eleven of them
should be taken and cast into a River that was not far from the house, and that
one should be saved to be brought up. It so fell out that Isenbard met the
woman that was carrying the little infants to their death, and asking her,
whither she went with her paile? he had this answer, that she was going to
drown a few baggage whelps in the River of Schere. The Earl came unto her, and
(for all the resistance the woman made) would see what was there, and then
discovering the Children, pressed her in such wise, that she told him all the
matter. Then he caused them to be nourished and educated secretly, and so soon
as they were grown great and brought home to him, he set them in an open hall
besides him whom his wife had brought up: and then being all known to be
brethren by their faces, and their other fashions, their mother moved in
conscience confessed all the fact, and obtained pardon for her fault. In
remembrance whereof the honorable race of the Wolfes got that name, which ever
since it has kept.

Article 7. Of monstrous Births.
NAture in working intends her own business; but because diverse obstacles may
happen in respect of the first agent, the seed, the constitution of the
Heavens, the formative virtue, imagination, heat, it is no wonder if she err
sometimes. And though there be Monsters almost in all mixed bodies, yet those
Monsters that happen amongst living creatures are chiefly remarkable. And such
fall out either in quantity or quality. A woman of Troas, Anno 1569, brought
forth twins joined by the heads, Pareus l. 24. oper. c. 2. Valeriola locor.
commun. l. 1. c. 8. saw at Avignon one with two bodies all from the neck.
Munsterus saw two Maids joined together, with their foreheads one against the
other; and when one went forward, the other went backwards. At Florence there
were two boys, one was an entire body, the other was fastened by his shoulders
to the others stomach, that all his head seemed to be thrust into it; and when
the former sucked, he moved as if he sucked also, Benivent. de reb. abdit.
Paraeus l. 24. c. 2. Anno 1530, saw the same at Paris, in a man of 40 years.
About the end of the Empire of Lotharius, a certain woman bore a child like a
man and a dog; their bodies joined entirely, and they were fastened at the
ridge of their backs, Lycost. lib. prodigior. In Scotland there was one that
was a male for the nether parts, but above the navell it had two members,
distinct both for use and in shape. This Monster was taught the Musical Art,
and learned many Languages. It held consultation, and when they differed, they
would chide and quarrel; it lived 28 years. And when one body dyed many days
before the other, the other that lived pined away, half the body being
putrified before, Buchan. in histor. Scotica. Lastly, in former times there was
a child born at Cracovia from noble Parents, that was terrible to behold, with
flaming shining eyes; the mouth and nostrils were like to an Oxes, it had long
horns, and a back hairy like a dogs, and faces of Apes in the breast, where the
teats should stand; it had Cats eyes under the navell fastened to the
hypogastrium, and they looked hideously, and frightfully, and the heads of dogs
of both elbowes; and at the whirlbones of each knee, looking forwards; It was
splay-footed, and splay-handed; the feet were like Swans feet, and it had a
tail turned upwards that was crooked backwards, about half an ell long: It was
born and lived four hours, and then spoke thus; Watch, the Lord your God comes;
and then it dyed, Peucer. in Tetratosc.

To this may be added, the stony birth at Agendicum of the Senones, that was
carried 28 years, and was cut out of the mothers womb, when she was dead. It is
seen to this day at Agendicum, for a miracle, and is not corrupted, Thuan. l.
76. Histor. He that would hear more, let him read Bauhinus de hermaphrodite,
Weinrichius de monstris, and others.

Article 8. Of the recompense Nature makes to Monsters.
IT is commonly said, that those that are deficient naturally, are marked for
some malignant qualities: and this is sometimes found to be true; but it is
most false, that it is always so. For to say nothing of the diversity of
parts, which Lemnius advises us to take notice of: such is the force of
education, that it made Socrates good, that would have been bad. Moreover,
Nature is so indulgent, that, as if she were ashamed of her mistake, she
largely recompenceth her error with other endowments. Count Mansfeld that
failed in sight, could by touching, know white from black, Keckerm. in
Physicis. Hamar, a Captain of a Caravan, would know where he was by only
smelling the same, Leo African. A Preacher in Germany that was blind from his
nativity, chose the fairest of three Sisters, by taking her by the hand, Camer.
Hor. subcis. Cent. 3. c. 80. Cicero says, Homer was blind; we see not him, but
his Poetry. His words are, Tusculan. 5. What Country, what place, what Town of
Greece, what form, what fight, what Army, what rowing, what motion of men or
beasts, is not so represented by him, that what he saw not, he described it so,
that we might see it? Didymus Alexandrinus was also blind from his childhood,
who professed wisdom divine and humane, which he learned, Ruffin. l. 11. c. 7.
Eccles. histor. What shall I say of Thomas Schweikerus? Posthius a Poet, and a
famous Physician writes thus of him, Thomas by nature wanting arms, with his feet
Performs all things, youl'd wonder for to see it;
With His feet he eats and drinks, full well; and then,
With His feet he turns his books, or makes a Pen
With His feet to write, and paint does understand,
No man can do it better with his hand.
Caesar Aemilian, as stories mention,
Admired, maintained him, with a Pension.


Georgius Pictorius Villinganus l. 4. Sermon Convival. testifies, that he saw a
Spaniard born without arms, so cunning with his feet, that he could spin, or
use the neidle curiously, as the cunningst woman could with both her hands. He
could so wield his arms, that no Soldier could match him; and shoot in a bow,
that he would never miss the mark; and with one stroke he would break a thick
log. To conclude, Keckerman speaks of a Scholar, l. 1. Physic. c. 4. that had
but one little finger on each hand, and his feet were triangular without any
toes, and he had more force in one finger, than others had with five; he writ
curiously and swiftly, and stood so firm, that in slippery places he would
seldom slip. Also Pliny may cease to complain of nature, that is a bountiful
mother to all; and recompenseth a defect with more benefit.

Camerarius and some others being once at Combourg, in the house of Erasmus
Neusteter, a wise and virtuous gentleman of Germany, he entertained us with
the greatest kindness that could be devised, and sent to a place not very
far from them for one Thomas Schweiker, a young man of one and thirty years
of age, descended of a worshipful house, and borne without ever an arm, who
did with his feet all that a ready man could do with his hands, so that
himself affirmed he was recompensed with one gift in stead of another. Having
set himself in a place equal with the height of the table whereon the meat
was placed, he took a knife with his feet, begins to cut bread, and to cut
meat, which he carried with his feet to his mouth, and likewise the cup, as
easily as another would have done with his hands. After dinner, ^e begins to
write examples in Latin and German letters, so straight and so fair, as every
one of us desired to have some of them to keep as a special monument. Being
requested, he did with a penknife make penns, very good to write with, which he
gave us. While he was thus a doing, I marked diligently the making of his feet,
and saw that his toes were long, fit to take hold of things; and to behold them
a far off, one would take them for fingers: for his thighs and legs, he kept
them mannerly covered with his Cloak. This sight (which we had never seen
before) was no less pleasing than strange to us; as it was also at another
time to the Emperor Maximilian the second, who passing that way, desired to see
the man, and having noted in him (not without wonderment) the strange
recompense of Nature, he dismissed him with a rich gift. Of late there has
been seen a man without arms going about in Germany, who had learned by
custom turned into art, to handle a sword, and to flourish it about his neck;
to fling halberds, and to do other strange things so nimbly, and so surely
withal, that he would most commonly hit the mark; and all other duties of the
hands, he did them with his feet. But the end of his life showed that he was a
deceiver and a wicked person: for he was broken upon the wheel for his
robberies and murders.

We have at Nuremberg a young Man and a young Maid, borne of one Father and
Mother, of a good House, and well known, that are endued with a singular quick
conceit: for although they be deaf and dumb by nature, yet can both of them
read very well, write, cipher, and cast account. The young man conceives at
first by signs that are made him, what he is required to do. If his pen be
wanting, by his countenance he shows his thoughts, being the quickest and
cunningest at all games both at Cards and Dice, that one can find among the
Germans; although there they use great advisement, and be marveilous ready and
quick. His sister passes all other maids for working with her needle all kinds
of Seamstrie, Tapistrie, Embroiderie, etc. But among all the other wonderful
recompenses of nature, this is remarkable in them, that most commonly as soon
as they see ones lips stir, they understand his meaning. They are oftentimes
at Sermons, and a man would say that they draw and conceive with their eyes the
words of the Preacher, as others use to do with their ears: for, they will
oftentimes (no body ever teaching them, or setting them any Letters or Copies)
write the Lords Prayer and other godly prayers, know by heart the texts of the
Gospels that are read upon holy days, and write them readily. When in the
Sermons the Preacher makes mention of the name of Jesus, the young man is
ready before any of the hearers, to take off his hat, and to bow his knee with
all reverence; So careful is nature, like a good mother, to make amends for a
fault, that none should accuse her to be a stepmother: for, what she takes
away in some of the senses, she allows in the rest, as appears by Didymus
Alexandrinus, of whom ^ussinus writes, that he being blind, after he had
humbly recommended himself to God, spent all his time in hearing, insomuch as
by his diligent attention he attained to that which others obtain by reading;
and by the direction of the holy Spirit, became so skillfull in divine and
humane learning, that he was excellent among the Divines of his time. Moreover,
our Ancestors have seen John Ferdinand, a blind and poor soul, a Spaniards son,
who overcame so happily these two difficulties (very cross to all, especially
to learned men) that he became not only a very learned Poet and Philosopher,
but also so excellent a Musician, that he played upon diverse kinds of
Instruments, to the great pleasure of the hearers; and besides, he made good
songs and full of music, of many parts. Another, named Nicasius of Werd, borne
at Macklin, excelled him: for falling blind when he was three years old, and
not being able before (...) learn any one letter, he so profited in the
knowledge of Philosophy, both humane and divine, that all men were ravished with
him. Having proceeded Master of Arts at Lovain, and afterward being made
Principal of Macklin College, where he discharged his duty passing well; he
ascended a while after to the degree of Licenciat in Theology, and though he
were blind, he read, and preached openly. Furthermore, being made Doctor of the
Laws in the University of Colen, he read there, and expounded the Civil and
Canon Law, repeating by heart the texts which he had never read, and at last
died at Colen in the year 1492.

We will conclude this Chapter with an example of one borne blind, in whom
nature made supply of that defect with a marvelous recompense other ways. The
story is mentioned by Antonius de Palermo, thus: I learnt (says he) of King
Alphonsus, that there was a Sicilian borne blind, living still at that time in
the City Gergento, called in old time Agrigentum, who had followed him
oftentimes a hunting, showing to the Hunts-men (who had their sights well
enough) the retraits and repairing places of the wild beasts. He added further
touching the industry of this blind man, that having by his sparing and
scraping, gotten together about five hundred Crowns, which put him to a great
deal of care, he resolved (at last) to hide them in a field. As he was making
a hole in the ground to that end, a gossip of his being his neighbor, espied
him, who so soon as the blind man was gone, searched in the earth, found the
money, and carried it clean away. Two or three days after, the blind man
returning thither to visit his cash, and finding naught there; like one
altogether forlorn, he frets and torments himself, and after much debating
and discoursing concludes, that no man but his gossip could have played him
such a trick. Whereupon finding him out, he thus began to say unto him; Gossip,
I am come to you to have your opinion: I have a thousand Crowns, and the one
half of them I have hid in a safe place; and for the other half I know not
what to do with them, having not my sight, and being very unfit to keep any
such thing, therefore what think you? might I not hide this other half with
the rest, in the same place of safety? The gossip approved and commended his
resolution, and going speedily to the place, carried back again the five
hundred Crowns that he had taken away before, hoping that he should have all
the whole thousand together. A while after the blind man goes to his hole, and
finding there his Crowns again, took them up, and coming home, calls for
his gossip, saying unto him with a cheerful voice; Gossip, the blind man has
seen better than he that has two eyes.

Article 9. Of Nations of diverse forms.
WHat I said in the 8th Article of Monstrous Births* happens but seldom; yet
some thought, that happened commonly amongst some Nations. Not far from the
Troglodites in Aethiopia, there is a people that have no heads, and their eyes
are in their breasts. Augustine saw them, Sermon. ad Fratr. in Eremo. Solinus
confirms it, c. 53. Pliny l. 5. c. 8. In Peru in the Province of Caraqui,
Hispalensis says, they want the forepart, and hinder part of the head,
Sylvius* p. 5. c. 35. For he adds, That so soon as they are born, they make
their heads level with boards. Rawleigh in his Navigations to Guiana, speaks of
some that are called Epumerocaci. The Circades, a people beyond Taprobana, are
long visaged, with horse heads, if we credit Arrianus, Ramus tom. 1. In the
Mountains of the Indies they have Dogs heads, and claws, and hides like beasts;
they cannot speak, but bark, says Megastenes, Aelian l. 10. c. 26. says, they
are in Egypt, in the way to Ethiopia, and he describes them, that they are
black visaged, having no voice, they make a thrill noise, and their chin is so
far beneath their beards, that it is like to a Serpent. They live by hunting
Oxen and Does. Augustine de civitate Dei, l. 16. c. 6. thinks, that is not
incredible. Amongst the Scythians there are some with such large ears, that
they will cover all their bodies, Isidor. l. 11. c. 3. Some have their feet so
broad, that they can shadow their whole bodies with them, when they lie down,
from the heat. I may here add, that there are Seamen. Anno 1403, a Sea-Woman
was taken in the Lake of Holland, and brought to Harlem, she was ready to learn
some things that women do, but she could not speak. Anno 1526, in Frisland a
Seaman was taken with a beard and hairy, he lived some years, but could never
speak, Libav. l. 6. de universitat. rerum. And not long since, when the Denmark
Ambassadors sailed into Norway, they saw a man in the Sea, that had a swathband
of corn, they took him and put him into the Ship, and he dyed, they cast him
into the Sea again, and he revived. Historians approved do write these things.
We will not here add what we think, only the Devil has many wiles; and great
is the force of Imagination; and sometimes beasts are taken for men, if they be
but like them. We read in the Scotch History, that the Kings Ambassadors were
brought by a storm into Norway, and saw hairy beasts in the Mountains wandering
like to men, they thought they had been men, the Inhabitants told them they
were wild beasts. Let every man think what he please. I may have occasion to
speak more of this elsewhere.

Article 10. Of a wonderful Antipathy betweeen the Father and the Son.
THere was a Father that hated his child as much as some men do Cats; for if he
were present, though he saw him not, he would swoond. Georgius Mylius, a Divine
of Jena, related it. Libavius sought the cause diligently. And if the reason of
antipathy in natural things be worth enquiry, that is most worthy to be
searched out, that is between children and parents. This is certain, that the
cause of this discord cannot be found, nor in the rational nor the sensual
part. For he wished his son no harm, nor can sympathy or antipathy be called
love or hatred in parents. For they are to be found in things that are not
living; and if they be in living creatures, they are not in them as they are
living, but as they are natural, things. Yet because he did not abhor his other
son, nor hate his offspring, for which cause he married, it is certain that
was no hereditary infirmity. It is probable, the son was changed into a
disposition the father could not away with; and that might proceed from the
seminary body ill disposed from the womb, or by the confluence of impure blood,
that had in it some ground for this alteration, or from the blood the Embryo
was nourished with. For this grows diverse from the matter of the nourishment,
or may degenerate from some other inward cause, or from the place: sometimes
the spirits that assist the blood and the whole nature, cause a change.
Therefore either the mother had a great longing for some meat the father hated;
or else she was frighted at something the father could not endure: To say
nothing of the Midwife, or of hidden causes. So a Maid at Uratislavian, drank
Cats blood, and became of a Cats qualities; and Faustina tasting the Fencers
blood, had a son that was most cruel. If any think that a habit cannot be got
by one act, he must know that is false of natural powers; for they that of old
were once taken into Trophonius his den, were wayward ever after; and a woman
that fell into a Wolfs hole, grew hoary the same night.

Artic. 11. Of some Wonders concerning Generation.
I Add these, though I have said much, that nothing might seem to be wanting.
Soranus Ephesinus Isag. 17. writes, that women that are delivered in ships,
have still children; not that they cannot speak, but they will not cry when
they are born. Ausonius speaks of one thus: Thy Father Geno^es, thy Mother
Grecian blood,
Born in a Ship at Sea, can that Son ere be good?
Ligurians vain, Greeks liars, false Sea, these three
Thou do resemble well, they all do meet in thee.
Some are born with marks upon them: Johannes Fredericus, Elector of Saxony had
a golden cross on his back, a sign of his future calamity, Buchol. in Chronol.
James, King of Great Britany, had a Lion, a Sword, and a Crown when he was
born, Camer. hor. subcis. Cent. 3. c. 42. The Kings of the Corzani have the
sign of a black Eagle on their shoulders, Marcus Venetus. It is a report, that
the Princes of Austria, (others do not write so) are born with a golden cross,
that is, that they have white hairs drawn out in the form of a cross, Foelix
Faber histor. Suev. l. 1. c. 15. Some men procreate after 80 years. For
Masanissa begot 6. Children after that age; and a Nobleman of Francony had a
son and a daughter, after that time, Camerar. Women have born children after 50
years. And some have born children being children themselves. Albertus Magn. l.
4. sentent. writes, that one was with child at 9 years old, and was delivered
at ten. And Pliny l. 7. c. 2. says, that some have born children at 7. years
old, and that but once, and they lived not above 40 years, and they were held
to be very old. Rhodig. Antiqu. l. 14. c. 18. says, that a boy of ten years
old got a child. Some have been delivered in the second, third, or fourth month
after their first child, of another living child. Nancelius l. 8. Analog.
writes of one that was brought to bed twice in two months. Others could not be
delivered but by a Chirurgions opening their wombs. Schenkius reports, that one
woman was cut open four times for four several children. Pliny writes, that
Proculus Caesar got 100 Maids with child in 15 days, Pliny l. 7. c. 32. In
Picenum a child was born with 6 teeth, Bonfin. Decad. 3. l. 8. In Prussia the
son of the King of Bythinia, had but* one solid bone in place of teeth, Solin.
c. 3. Some are born, that can sometimes move their ears. Zoroaster was born
laughing. So much for this; we shall proceed to other matters.

CHAP. VI. Of Vital action.
Article 1. Of the Heart.
SOme have wanted a Heart, if we credit Avicenna, and if his writings be not
corrupted, Rhodig. l. 4. c. 6. When Caesar was Dictator, the same day he went
in his purple garment, the Priest found it twice wanting in the bowels, Plin.
l. 11. c. 37. Some have been found with two hearts, as the Partridges in
Paphlagonia; some have wanted the left ventricle; and the midriff in some has
been like a gristle, Columb. l. 15. Anatom. And Gemma found a bone in it in two
men's bodies, l. 2. Cyclog. And Wier. l. ^. de praestig. Demon. c. 16. found
stones as big as pease. Aristomanes Messenius, who killed 300 Lacedaemonians,
and was sometimes taken, and sometimes escaped, had a hairy heart, Valor. Max.
l. 1. c. 8. The same thing Beniventus reports of a certain thief, c. 33. de
abditis. The (...) or purse wherein the heart lies, may be wanting. Columbus l.
15. Anatom. observed a young man that wanted it, and he was troubled with
swoonding fits. A wound may be in the heart that is not mortal; for the Son of
Maryllus the writer of obscene matters, had the pericardium cut, that one might
see his heart, yet he did not die, Galen. l. 7. administr. Anatom. A history of
Groaning tells the same almost that happened upon a wound in the Heart; because
but few know it, I shall set it down.

A wonderful Accident of a wound in the Heart. Nicol. Malerius wishes
happiness to the Reader.
IT has been thought hitherto that a man could not live a moment almost; if
his Heart were wounded. Reason and Experience prove it. For since our life
depends upon the safety of the spirits, the shop and making whereof is in the
Heart; when the heart is wounded, it is necessary that the generation of the
spirits cease. Yet I thought good to set down here a very notable History; a
history of a Soldier that lived 15 days after he was wounded in the heart;
none of the old or new Physicians mention any such thing. Andreas Hasevanger,
who was of the Lifeguard of the most illustrious Count William of Nassaw,
Governor of Frisia, Groaning, and Omland, etc. received a wound in his breast by
his fellow-Souldier, Anno 1607, on the 22 of August about the Evening, he died
September the 8th, at one of the clock after Sunrising, which was the 16 day
after he received the wound. The body of the dead Soldier, by command of the
General of the Army was opened to search for the wound, by me and two
Chirurgions, Caspar and Lucas Hultenus; a noble valiant man, Bernard Hoornkens
looking on, and some other Soldiers that were of note. When we had opened the
cavity of his breast, and a great deal of very stinking matter was run forth;
we found, and wondered, that the wound had entered the right cavity of his heart,
and all that part of his heart was almost all consumed; the left part being
entire, wherein is contained the chief shop of the vital spirits; By the
benefit of this, Andreas lived to the sixteenth day: and left some should not
believe this, the most noble and worthy men signed it with their names
subscribed, to confirm it, etc.

Article 2. Of the Pulse.
THe Pulse is the motion of the heart and arteries, consisting of a systole and
diastole. Platerus thinks it is felt on the left side, by reason of the great
Artery. Yet Cardan says, some have perceived it only on the right side. There
is great inequality in it, from diverse accidents that happen, whence comes the
diversity of pulses amongst Physicians. No man can deny, but that sometimes it
may be intercepted; and not felt when the Arteries lie deep, Balduinus Ronseus.
The Player of Andreas Count of Gorca, had naturally all kind of inequalities of
pulse. But Johannes Brosovius of the Order of the Cross of the blessed Virgin
had it with intermission all the time he lived. Physicians try the motion of
the heart in living creatures. Coiterus observed it in a Cat. Then cutting the
Pericardium, he observed a double and contrary motion in the heart, namely unto
the ears of it. For whilst the heart beat, the ears sank down; when the heart
sank, the ears were lifted up and filled; which in the ears were composed for a
diastole: they seemed to be inflated like a bladder; and when they were
extended, they were red, and continued so a while, before they came to a
systole. The same reason was observed in the space of the diastole. Yet in the
systole they grew white, and became loose, and sank down, and by the force of
the heart, they were drawn a little toward the basis of the heart, etc. In obs.
Anatom.

Artic. 3. Of Life and Death.
I Have little to say of Life, but that men were long lived before the Flood:
after that time none lived to Adam or Methusalems Age. Yet some have lived very
long, Lemnius l. 4. c. 24. Occult. writes, that he saw a Pilote at Stockholm a
100 years old, who married a Wife of 30, years, and had some Children by her.
Laurentius Hethlandius in Buchanan was 140 years old, and yet in the coldest
Winter went a fishing. An Indian of the Nation of the Gandaridae, they call it
now a days, Bengala, lived 335 years, his Son was 90 years old, and though he
knew no letters, yet he could by memory report as true as the Chronicles. His
teeth shed and grew again, and his hoary beard grew black again. Petrus
Maffeius. That is also rare, that Thuan. l. 134 writes. That Emanuel Demetrius,
bred obscurely, lived 103, years, his Wife was 99, and was married to him 75
years, the one supervived the other but three hours, and Anno 1603 they were
both buried at Delph. The years of Man's age that rise by 7 and 9, are decretory
or climactericall, hence Children are endangered about 4, 7, 9, years, etc.
Cells. l. 2. c. 1. The 63 year is most dangerous for old men. Whence that
proceeds it is hard to conjecture. Lemnius l. 2. c. 32. He thinks that at
certain periods of years, a great abundance of humors are heaped up, by the
agitation whereof diseases arise. For when nature comes to immoderate
repletion, and the receptacles cannot receive the plenty of humors, it must
come to a disease. Philo in loc. allegor. l. 1. writes thus of the 7th year.
Nature delights in the 7 th number; there are 7 Planets, the Bear has 7 Stars;
the Moon has some change every week, and those changes in the air proceed
from thence. All humane things, that have a divine principle, are moved
healthfully in the 7 th number; Children born in the 7 th month are safe; in
the 7 th year a man is perfectly a reasonable creature; at 14 he is able to
get his like, at 21 he leaves growing: the part of the brutish soul is divided
into 7, into the five senses, the instrument of voice, and the generative
force. The motion of the body is 7 fold, six according to the parts, the 7 th
round about. There are 7 inward Bowels, the Stomach, Heart, Milt, Liver, Lungs,
the two Kidneys. There are 7 Members of the Body, the Head, Neck, Breast, Hands,
Belly, the Groins, the Feet. The principal part of man has seven holes, two
Eyes, two Ears, Nostrills and Mouth. There are 7 excrements, Tears, S^ot, Seed,
and what comes forth by the two sinks of the body, and Sweat in every part,
etc. What ever it be, live long or little, death is certain to all. Nature at
the same moment gave a law of being born, and to dye, Valor. Max* l. 5. c. 10.
Mourning weeds are put upon conquerours doors, Senec. ad Polyb. But the way is
unknown, and diverse. Baldus was bit by a Cat at Meletum, but lightly, on the
lip; he grew mad four months after, fell into Hydrophobia, and died. Magol. in
Colloqv. Ladislaus King of Naples, when he dwelt at Perusium, died of the Pox.
Colenut. in compend. histor. Neapolitan. Some have died with too much joy, some
with grief. When the Janisary was sent to kill the youngest Son of Bajazet by
Solymans command, and he saw the Child laugh at the halter, and to kiss him,
and to sport; this cruel man was so moved, that he fell down dead. Thuan l. 24.
After death, almost all Carkases corrupt, and are changed into other bodies.
Pliny says, l. 10. c. 66, that Serpents breed of the Marrow, and so they did
of the body of Cleomenes who was hanged, Plutarch. The same was done in a young
Man Camer. cent. 1 horar. subcis. c. 11. For when he was thought to be the
fairest of his time, and fell deadly sick, he could not be persuaded to leave
his picture to posterity; only he granted thus much to their request, that many
days after he was dead and buried, they should open the Monument, and as they
then found his body; so should they picture him. When they opened it, his face
was found half eaten up with Worms, and they saw many Serpents about his
Diaphragma, and Marrow of his back. The Sepulcher of Carolus Martellus, was
found without his body, and a Serpent in the place, Guaguin et Aemil. In Egypt
whole Carkases are found, out of which Mumie is taken, that is a cure for many
diseases. Nor do those bodies corrupt that are seen near Kijovia by Borystenes.

Artic. 4. Of Venomous infection.
BEcause Venoms are most pernicious by a hidden quality, I shall add a few
things concerning the variety of Infections. First I shall speak of the Air
infected. That is seen in the Plague, and might be proved by all in that Cave
near to Naples. And the matter is come so far, that the Air may be infected
by art, that the enemy coming into it may be killed. That was clear in the
Sepulcher of Semiramis, that was placed above the famous gates of the City. For
when Darius, hoping to find treasure, opened this, he found a little Coffer,
which being opened, such a Venomous blast flew out, that it killed a third part
of the men. Some living Creatures kill by sight, and hissing. That was thought
true of the Basilisk, that was seen in the treasure of Maximilian the Emperor.
And Avicenna writes l. 4. sen. tract. 3. c. 22. that a Soldier wounded a
Serpent with his Lance, and by his Lance he and his Horse were poisoned, and
died. Bartholin. Phys. special. part. 3. c. ult. says, that in Cimbria a
Shepherd that leand his arm on a Barn door, had his sense and motion taken
suddenly away on that side he leand, and his beard grew gray on that side, and
there was a brood of Serpents, found under the door. Jambolus says, in Arabia
there is an herb, and if any man sleep upon it, they die in a sweet sleep.
Diodor. Sicul. l. 2. I add tasting to sight. So in India when those of Europe
tasted the beautiful Plants, they died suddenly. Alexanders Army was almost
ruined by a new kind of Apple. A Country man in the Valley of Ana, was bit
unawares by the head of a Serpent cut off, he put his mouth to the wound and
sucked it, to help it; but he grew suddenly speechless and died, Mathiol. What
shall we say for touching? The Turks have Poisons that will kill in one day by
touching. Cardan. l. 1. de venen. c. 15. Otho the 3, Emperor of Rome was
killed by a pair of venomed gloves sent him from the Wife of Crescentius a
Roman Consul, who was frustrated of his marriage. Johan Galeacius was killed by
Venom put into his stirrup when he rid. Dryinus, if any man tread upon it, it
will excoriat his feet, and the hand of the Surgeon that dresseth the sore
will be excoriated by it. Lastly many dye by venomed smells. For Alexander
Magnus his horse-forces in India, died all almost of the smell of a Pestilent
shrub: and Franciscus Ordelaphus, a Captain of Forolivium, had a kind of
Poison, that, cast upon coals, would kill all came near it. Think not that to
be done by the naked quality: some Venomous thing was joined with the smell;
for certain it is, that there are many effluxions of things.

CHAP. VII. Of the internal and external Sense.
Article 1. Of Imaginations of melancholy people.
THose that are sick of melancholy have such strange phantasms presented to
them that sometimes the wisest men are deceived by them. One man thought he was
all Soul; another that he was a Millet seed. One, that he had so great a nose,
that no gates were great enough to let him in, Lemnius l. 2. de complex. c. 6.
Some thought they had no head; some thought their buttocks were made of glass,
Lemnius. One of Sena of noble birth, thought that if he should make water, he
should drown the World, Laurent. l. de melanchol. c. 7. A woman, says
Trallianus, tied the middle finger of her hand, as if she carried the whole
world upon it; she cried, saying, she feared that should she bend it, the whole
World would fall down. A learned man in Quercetan. Diaetet. Polyhist. l. 1. c.
ult. thought, that two evil spirits were put into him by his friend that
brought them out of Italy, and that they oft-times talked with him. A
Burgundian at Paris in the Temple of St. Julian, said, he was dead, and desired
the Physicians to trouble his soul no longer, that was flying out of Purgatory
into Heaven. Then he imitated men dying, Scholiogr. ad. c. 17. l. 1. Holler. de
morb. intern. A certain man in Montan. consil. 75. thought the world was made
of fine glass, and that Serpents lay under it, and that he was in his bed as
in an Island; and should he come forth, he should break the glass and fall
down amongst the Serpents. I say nothing of a Maid, who supposed she was in
Heaven, and that she walked with the sacred Trinity, and Angels, and the Devil
persuaded her to think so. Sometimes such people use to speak strange tongues,
and foretell future events. So Erasmus in Encom. Medicinae, writes, that one of
Spoletum, when he was sick, spoke a strange Language; when he recovered, he
forgot it. Guainerius tract. 15. c. 4. reports, that he saw a Country man that
was sick of melancholy, who always when the Moon was combust, would write
Latin verses; and after a new Moon, about two days, till the next new Moon,
he could not speak one word in Latin. Forestus writes of a melancholy woman
that would sing Latin songs that she had never learned. And Johan. Huartus in
scrutin. Ingenior. makes mention of a Spanish servant, who imagined himself to
be a King, and made learned speeches concerning Government when he was sick.
But we must needs confess, that the Devil is the Author of these things, by a
just Judgment of God. Nor can this be ascribed to the Stars, as Guainerius
thinks; nor to the agreement of the Latin tongue with the rational Soul, as
Huartus would have it; nor to the pure overshadowing of the spirits, or to a
malignant quality, as others suppose. Whether some modern examples appertain to
this matter, I leave it to wise men to judge, and will say no more of it.

Article 2. Of the force of Imagination.
THe force of Imagination may be known by the former Article; but because
melancholique Imaginations are with sickness, they do not so well express it,
as fear and conception do. For when a noble Youth who had ravished a Maid, was
to dye for it, he considered so deeply of it, that his vital heat and spirits
were so extinguished, that all his beauty became despicable, and the roots of
his hair grew dry, for want of moisture, and turned gray, Camer. memorab.
medic. Cent. 2. Mem. 15. The same happened to Franciscus Gonzaga, when he was
imprisoned for a Traitor, Scalig. Exer. 312. And to Lodowick. Bavarus the
Emperor, when he had slain Helica a Virgin of Prenneberg, cut off his Wifes
head, and had cast another Noble woman headlong from a Tower, he fell sick of
it by a vision in the night, Avent. l. 7. Innumerable Examples prove, that in
conception the same may happen. The Wife of Duke Plumbinus having layn with a
Black-moor, was delivered of a Blackmore. Persina an Ethiopian, seeing the
Image of a white child when she lay with a man, had a child with a white face,
Heliodor. When Charles the fourth was Emperor, the Wife of John Baptista,
looking often on a picture, bare a hairy child. A man disguised lying with the
Wife of Bolduck, as if he had been the Devil, got her with child, and the boy
ran about so soon as he was born. You shall find the like Monster in Lemnius in
occult. And he extends Imagination so far, that he thinks, that in more
venereous Virgins, their seed being mingled with their blood by imagination of
venereous things, may cause the rudiments of a living creature. How that may
be, it is hard to explain, nor does it belong to this place.

Artic. 3. Of Sight and Smelling.
AUgustus Caesar had such clear eyes, that whom he looked on intentively, he
would make them to wink, as at the Sun beams. Suetonius says, that Tiberius
could see in the dark like a Cat. It is certain, that Strabo had such acute
eyes, that from Lilybaeum he could discern Ships going forth of the
Carthagenian Haven, Val. l. 1. c. 8. and he could number all the Ships. The
distance was 135 miles. If this be true, that is true also, That a Spaniard,
one Lopes, was in Gades, who from a high Mountain called Calpen, would see over
the Sea against it, and discern out of Europe, the banks of Africa, (the
passage, as Cleonardus in Epistol. ad Jacob. Labocum says, is in a calm Sea, 3
or 4 hours over,) yet he could see what was done there, Camer. hor. subcis. l.
3. c. 81. In the West of Africa there are Blackmores with four eyes, Lycosten.
Also Isigonus and Nymphodorus report, that Some Families in Africa have eyes
that bewitch people: If they praise any things, they perish by it, trees will
wither, Children will die: and Isigonus says, there are such people in
Illirium, and the Triballi, that will bewitch any thing with looking on it, and
kill those they look upon long, especially with angry eyes, and young men
especially are bewitched by them. That is most notable that they have two
Apples in each eye. In Albania there are some that have Owls eyes, and are
hoary from their childhood, who see better by night than day, Pliny l. 7. c. 2.
Anastasius the Emperor had Apples of his eyes of diverse colors, the right eye
was blacker, the left more gray, Zonar. They that dwell near Lakes cannot
endure smells. Strabo l. 16. reports, that such amongst the Sabaeans as are
stupefied by sweet smells, are refreshed by the fume of bitumen, and by the
beard of a Goat burnt. That stinking smells are good sometimes, women that are
cured by them of their hysterical passions, and the plague, thereby removed, do
confirm. At Antwerp a Country man coming into a Perfumers shop, swo^nded, but
came to himself by rubbing his nose with horse dung, Lemn. l. 2. occult. c. 9.

Article 4. Of the Face.
GOd has set Majesty in some men's Faces, chiefly if you regard Princes: some
are of a wonderful form for comeliness; others for ill-favourednesse. They of
Bruges were afraid of the Countenance of Caesar Maximilian, being captive,
Delf* l. 3. in Maximil. vita et Philippi. The Conquerours that beheld the
Countenance of Francis the first King of France, who was worthy of everlasting
renown, when he was taken at Ticinum, they all strove to do him service, seeing
his Kingly Countenance, Forcatul. de Gullor. Imper. l. 3. When the Conspirators
thought to have slain Alphonsus Estensis the First, Duke of Ferrara, he
frighted them with his looks that they durst not do it. The twins Moenechmi in
Plautus were so like, that neither their Nurse nor Mother could know them
asunder. Vives observes the same of two sons, John and Peter, of a Senator of
Mechlin. Antonius Bithynicus was so fair, that Adrian the Emperor built a
Temple to him, in Mantinea, and a City by Nilus, and engraved his Image on the
Coin. The son of Maximinus was so beautiful, that his head that was grown
black after he was dead, and soked with corrupt matter, yet seemed very fair.
Democles an Athenian boy was called so for his comeliness, and he had so much
care of his chastity, that to decline the force of Demetrius, he cast himself
into a Kettle of scalding water, Plutar. in Demetrio. Spurina a young Maid, by
her very looks enticed men and women to lust, Vale^. Max. Lastly, Queen
Suavilda was so delicate of form, that when she was bound with thongs, and
exposed to be trod on by horses, she was a terror to the very beasts, that
they durst not tread on her fair limbs, Saxo Gram. l. 3. histor. Danic.

Artic. 5. Of Dreams.
AS in other things, so Nature sports her self in dreams: for sad people are
merry when they dream sometimes, merry people are sad; Servants are Kings, and
Lords become Servants. And though we must confess that many of them, and what
is then done be natural, yet scarce any can deny, but many of them are
supernatural. God in elder times did teach his Church by dreams, and now adays
many dreams come to pass^. When Lucas Iselius the Son in Law of Zwingerus was
at Vesontio, he foresaw in his dream the death of Huber, a Physician of Basil.
For he seemed to see his bed covered with fresh earth cast upon it, which when
removing the blanket, he thought to cast off, he saw Huber the Physician under
the bed, and in the twinkling of an eye he was changed into the form of a
Child. Nessenus the same day he was drowned in the Albis, dreamt of some hurt
came to the boat, and his own falling out of it. Christopher Rhaumbavius a
Physician of Uratislavium, followed the counsel he had given him in a dream,
concerning the cure of a disease, was to him incurable; and he recovered his
patient. The wonder was, that a few years after he met with that receipt in a
Book newly printed. Doring. de medic. l. 1. part. 2. s. 1. d. 1. c. 3.
Histories report that the same happened to Philip, and to Galen before him. To
this may be added the dream of the Mother of Scanderbeg, concerning a Serpent,
that covered all Epirus, and stretched forth his head into the Turks borders,
devouring them with bloody jaws, but the tail was contained amongst the
Christians, and the government of the Venetians. Barlet. l. 1. de gest.
Scanderbegi, c. 82. That of Scaligers, of a great flame with a mighty noise
passing over the Alps, at Noricum, Rhaetia, and Liguria without any hurt.
Scalig. in com. l. de insomn. Hippocrat. Apotel. 42. Of Hunnius his, of a
Pillar in the Church; These did foreshew the future condition of their Sons,
and that certainly. For Scanderbeg was a hammer to the Turks Scaliger the
bright S^ar of those quarters. And Hunnius a Pillar of the Church he lived in.
What shall I say of Gunthram King of the Francks? It is wonderful what he
dreamt. For when on a time he went through a Wood a hunting, by chance losing
his company, and having but one man left with him, who was more faithful to
him than the rest, he came to a brook of cold water. And when he was heavy with
sleep he laid his head in that Man's bosom and fell a sleep. This servant there
observed a strange thing; For he saw as it were a little Creature creep out of
his mouth whilst he slept, and go strait to the River; and when he strove in
vain to pass over, the Servant laid his drawn sword over the brook, whereby,
when the little beast had easily passed over, he crept into a hole in a
Mountain hard by, and coming back an hour after he passed the same way, and
crept again into the Kings mouth. The King waked and told his Servant, that in
a dream he seemed to be brought to the bank of a great River, and to have
passed over an iron bridge, and so to come to a Mountain where there was great
store of gold hid. When the King had related this to his Servant, and heard
again from him what strange thing happened when he slept, they both went to that
Mountain, and there they found a mighty mass of Gold conceald. Heidfeld in
Sphinge c. 14. Marinus Mersennus in Genesin, calls this a diabolical dream.
That is more wonderful, that he dreamt at Schmalcaldium. He that will have the
relation, let him read Pencerus de Divinatione. And, in place of that, I will
set down the dream of David Pareus, which is thus described by him. I saw a
great Ox that was weary, which extended his head to the East, and behold a Ram
came from the East with three horns, and he ran upon this Ox, and hurt his
hinder legs, and the Ox fastened himself, and stood stronger. And I saw that
the weary Ox set his feet firmer. And there came another Ram from the Mountain
of the Gentiles, and those ways, and breaking one leg between his horns, he ran
upon his fore parts; yet the Ox stood fast again and fell not, but the Rams
grieved exceedingly, and those that adored the Rams wept; because God preserved
him, and sent him food from India that strengthened him. And behold on the
otherside of the River stood an Armenian Tiger, with the Moon upon his Head,
and he said, I will prey on both the conqueror, and the conquered; and the Ram
with three horns was devoured by the Tiger, and conquered him. The other Ram
fled to his Mountain, and the grass withered, but the Oxes horns grew, and the
Tiger fled from him; and the Ram did not escape into the Mountain, and I was
glad that God preserved the Ox.

Artic. 6. Of Walkers in the Night.
THere are many examples of Night-walkers. A certain young man rising out of
his bed, putting on his Cloths, and his Boots and Spurs, got astride above the
window, upon a Wall; and spurd the Wall as if it had been a horse. Another went
down into a Well and came not up again till he had touched the water. Horstius
tells of a Noble Man that went to the top of a Tower, and robbed a birds nest,
and came down again by a rope.

It is reported, that one at Paris, girt with his sword, swam over the Seyn,
and killed one he was minded to kill before; when he had done this villainy, he
returned home, Aleman. comm. ad. libr. Hippocrat. de Aere, etc. As for the
cause, many men are of diverse minds. The best opinion ascribes it to
Imagination: for the sensitive soul in sleep, not only rouzed by an external
object, converts her self to be sensible, and first perceives darkly,
afterward more clearly; but being affected by the inward object represented in
a dream, rouzeth the moving faculty. The Imagination is rouzed by the species
of things reserved; about which whilst it acts intentively, it stirs up the
moving faculty. That this is so, appears by daily experience. For who knows
not but we are troubled in our sleep? That we rise not, is because our
fantasy is not altogether so busy about the Images reserved, as in some
other men. Yet the stronger motion does not always proceed from the same
cause. For some think the same thing may be caused from diurnal cogitation,
especially in younger people, that are more bold, and more lustful. Others
suffer this from an internal affection of their body, yet they are not all of
the same kind. Some have more cheerful, and more fantastic animal spirits;
some seem to do this out of simplicity. That they wake not, is caused by the
stiffnesse of the vapors. For these not suffering them to be easily awaked;
and on the other side, the animal spirits being lively, it falls out that they
are half awake, half asleep: yet it is not likely, that all are of the same
kind. For that boy Libavius speaks of, that went naked to the door, and came
home again, observed a Watchman sitting in the streets. Lastly, the cause they
do those things in their sleep, they cannot do waking, is their ignorance of
the danger; the action of reason is darkened, and they cannot hinder the motions
raised by Fantasy, Libav. in Noctambulis.

Article 7. Of some things observable concerning the Head and the Senses.
THere was one born and grew to be a man, Anno 1516, that put forth another
head at the navel, Lycosthen. Anno 1487, there was a boy at Venice that had his
mouth cut diverse ways, and a genital member growing to his crown. Some of
years have had horns grow on their heads. A Virgin had them about the joints of
her Feet and Arms, like to Calves horns, she was cured afterward, Schenk. l. 1.
observe. The Egyptians had such hard heads, that you could hardly break them
with throwing a stone at them. The Persians heads were so weak, that a little
stone would break them, Herodot. The Indians heads in Hispaniola are so hard,
that they will break swords. Cardan. l. 12. de variet. rer. Beniventus says,
de abdit. c. 10. that a Monk had his forehead bone eaten naked by a sharp
humor. Tyrrhenus Torcon and Cyonus Trojanus, were gray when they were young,
Call. l. 3. c. 27. Antiq. And Ctesias writes, that in a part of the Indies, the
women never breed but once, and presently grow gray after the first child. The
Miconii are born without hair, Plin. l. 14. c. 37. It is rare for a woman to
grow bald; no Eunuchs ever do, nor any man before he has known a woman, Pliny.
There was a woman seen at Paris with a black upper beard that began to be
hoary, of a great magnitude, her chin also was moderately hairy. Also they
report, that in the company of women, that Albertus the Duke of Bavaria kept,
one of them had a long beard, Wolsius. There was a child born in Lombardy in
the time of Pope Gregory, that had ears big enough to cover the whole body,
Thomaius in horto mundi c. 19. Many men could move their ears, and the skin of
their heads at pleasure, Dalechamp. Men say, that in the inward parts of the
East, there are people without any nose, and their face is flat; others that
want their upper lip; others without tongues, Plin. l. 6. c. 30. They write
also, that there is a part of Aethiopia, where the Inhabitants are born with a
flexible body, that they can wind themselves easily every way they please* and
they have two tongues, and can use them both, and speak plainly with them a^
pleasure, Gem. Fris. l. 1. c. 7. Cosmocrit Mutianus says, he saw Zanes a
Samothracian Citizen, who had his teeth grew again after 104 years, Plin. l.
11. c. 17. Aristotle l. 2. c. 4. de histor. animal* makes mention of a woman
that had her cheek teeth come forth with pain, in her 80 year. Pliny writes,
that some had teeth bred in their palates, Pliny l. 11. c. 37. Moecenas never
slept in three whole years, at last he was cured by gentle Music, Seneca de
provident. Nizolius, called Ciceronianus, never slept in ten years, Heurn. c.
16. de morb. cap* Cardan, when he pleased, could be so taken up in his
thoughts, that he would feel no pain in that state. And Augustine l. 14. de
Civ. Dei* c. 24. reports the same of a Presbyter restored: He lay as though he
were dead, and did not feel those that pulled him; nor would he stir, though
they burned him with fire: yet he confessed, that he could then hear men speak,
if they spoke aloud, as though they were far off from him: And it was confirmed
by this Argument, that he did not do it by resisting, but by not feeling, that
he moved not his body; for he lay as dead, and drew no breath. The English
History relates, that Elizabeth Burton a Maid of Canterbury had contracted the
same custom of taking away her senses, from a disease she had.

CHAP. VIII. Of the faculty of moving from place to place.
Artic. 1. Of the wonderful strength and agility of some people.
I Shall speak Wonders; and that there were such Examples, Polydamas may prove:
who being unarmed slew a Lion. The same man set upon a herd of Oxen, he caught
hold of the hinder foot of one of the greatest Oxen, and would not let it go,
though the Ox raged, till he left his hoof in his hand. He held Chariots with
four horses back, with his hand, when they went with all their force, Rhodig.
l. 7. c. 37. When Milo Crotoniensis held an Apple, no man could wrest it from
him. He at the Olympian Games, carried an Ox a furlong, and held his breath all
the while; then killed him with a box of his fist, and easily eat him up all
the same day. At last, when he thought to pull asunder a cleft Oak, it fell
upon him and killed him, Pliny l. 7. c. 20. Maximinus the Emperor had such
strong limbs, that he put on his Wifes bracelets, that was a circle set with
Jewels, that went about her Arms, for a ring on his thumb. A Cobbler in Sweden
carried always 120 pounds of gold hanged about his neck; and he fought with 9
Fencers, and killed them all, Olaus l. 5. c. 2. One Paulus in Bonsinius rer.
Ungar. decad. 4. l. 2. was in stature and for limbs like Hercules: He took an
armed man in his teeth at a military dance; and though he was in armor
himself, yet he carried him with him, and danced. Ubert^s de cruce, of Mill^in,
carried a beast laden with Wheat, and standing but upon one foot, no man could
thrust him off from the place he stood, Leander in Mediol.

Lastly in the Mountain Anchusa, not far from Atlas, every single footman can
resist two horsemen in ^ight. Leo African. Philetas Colis was so light, that
he tied leaden bullets to his feet, that the wind should not carry him away.
There are as wonderful examples of agility of body. In a Western Province of
the New World, the Indians are so swift, that they will run a whole day to
overtake a Man. Hispal. sylv. p. 5. c. 7. The Scritofinni will out run Wild
Beasts. Krant. in Suecia. The same Author writes that Herald a Noble Irish man
would out run any horse. l. 5. Norveg. c. 6. In Mexica, Posts in four days will
run 70 leagues. Polymnestor Milesius, when he was a boy caught a hare in sport.
Philonides in one day ran 1200 furlongs on foot, that is 75 French leagues.
Ladas, so ran over the white sand, that he left no prints of his feet. In Italy
there was a Boy born when Fonteius and Vip^anius were Consuls, who at eight
years old ran 45, miles from Noon to Night. Solin. But wonderful is the
agility of a Country man bred amongst Cattle, who came to the Court of the
Prince of Papeberg. Camer. cent. 1. hor. subcis. c. 75. The Prince had in his
Court a Dwarf called Martinettus, that got on the back of that nimble man, as
upon a horse, and he turned round with him, and ran here and there as he li^ted,
but when he pleased, he would at one leap cast his rider, though he sat never
so fast. Then he with the Dwarf on his back would fight with the Hownds, and
great Mastives the English call them Dogs: some of them were very fierce, and
yet with his b^rking like a dog, and grinning, and with his hair about his
ears, he did fright them, and drive them out of the Chamber, and sometimes he
would bite the lesser dogs, when he had driven forth all the dogs he leapt
wonderfully up and down, with four feet, and jumped to the highest corners of
the room, that an ape could hardly do as much, and yet he with his Country
square body did it with ease. I saw him, once and twice, when I dined with the
Prince, when he had cast off the Dwarf from his back, and barked away the
dogs, he leaped over the shoulders of one that sat at table, then over the
Table, not touching the cups nor platters that stood upon it, and then into
higher places, and that so nimbly, that he seemed to fly like a Squirrel, or
Indian Cat whereof Julius Scaliger writes. He adds, many were of opinion, that
he cast a mist before men's eyes, but he knew nothing of that, nor do I think he
could do that if he would. Justinus l. 44. writes that Habides Son to Gargor,
King of the Curetes was of the like agility.

CHAP. IX. Of the rational Soul; and first, of Memory.
THe rational Soul is the Form of Man, and gives man his Being, distinguishing
him from other creatures. The faculties of it are two, Understanding and Will,
the speaking faculty is given to them both, to interpret. There is scarce any
thing to be said of them. For though there are infinite almost considerations
of them, if you consider the diversity of inventions, virtues, consultations,
tongues, manners of writings, and the rest, yet, should we add them here, it
would be a great fault in method, for they are more fitly handled in the
Ethics, and therefore I forbear them here.

I shall only add one thing of Memory: That some have had an excellent
Memory; Esdras the Priest had all the Jews doctrine by heart. Cyrus and Scipio
knew every Soldiers name in their Armies. Carmides would say any books that
any one asked for in their Libraries, as if he read in them, Plin. Mithridates
had learned the Languages of 22 Nations, Gellius. Julius Caesar would dictate
to four at the same time; Pliny says, he was wont to dictate, to read, and to
hear. Themistocles had such a Memory, that when Simonides offered to teach him
the Art of Memory, he said, He had rather learn the Art to forget; saying, He
remembered what he would not, but could not forget what he would, Cic. l. 2. de
finib. Seneca repeated in order 2000 names as they were first spoken. He
rehearsed 200 verses, and began at the last. Portius Latro never read over
again what he was to deliver: For he learned it as he writ it, and he repeated
it, and never missed one word. As these had excellent Memories, so others had
as bad, either from some disease, or ill constitution by birth. Messala
Corvinus forgot his own name. Franciscus Barbarus, a most learned Man at Athens
in the Greek Tongue, having a blow on his head with a stone, remembered firmly
all things else, only he forgate Learning, that he had spent so much time
upon, Valor. Max. l. 1. c. 8. Clusius Sabinus had such a barren Memory, that
sometimes he forgot the name of Ulysses, sometimes of Achilles, sometimes of
Priamus, Seneca in Epistol. Atticus the son of Herod the Sophister, could never
learn the names of the letters. The Thracians could never count above four. But
the greatest Wonder is that Thuan. l. 134 writes of Theodore Beza, that before
he dyed, when his mind was grown feeble, he forgot things present, but what was
printed in his Memory before time, when he had his understanding, that he held;
and it continued for two years so, when he languished. As for wit, that depends
on a certain temperament. And it is wonder, that oft-times those are stupid in
many things, that are held wise in other things. Themistocles could not so well
take as catch counsels. There was one could not learn the Rules of Logic, yet
other Arts he could quickly learn, Huartus. For the excellency of it; Janus
Drusus, the famous Student, had a son so singular, that from 15 years old to
20, when he dyed, he writ excellent Commentaries on the Proverbs and other
Books. Drus. in praef^t. Paralip. in n. 7. Yet the Wit of Man cannot reach many
things. The force of the Loadstone; flowing of the Sea; the wonderful effects
of humors in Man's body; the constitution of his natural heat; and many more.
They have busied many, but no man has rightly found them out. The vulgar
opinion is, God cannot be comprehended by reason of his Excellency; nor materia
prima for its worthlesnesse. Hidden Properties are too loose an Asylum for our
Ignorance. I will here stop, for so I intend. My purpose was to set down things
most pleasant, to make young Men delight in Natural History, and to help those
that teach Noblemens children privately. I have inserted many things doubtful,
and I have alleged their causes from other men's opinions, to show, that Nature
requires searching. Nature is fruitful, and I could not set down all. Her
bounds are so large, that it is beyond my strength to search over all. If what
I have writ be accepted, and I shall have so much ability and opportunity, I
shall write an Enchiridion of Natural History, wherein Nature shall be set
forth at large, and in short also. I shall leave the scrutiny to others;
Whether, and Wherefore, things are. But the Supreme over all will provide for
these things. To whom be praise and glory to all Ages. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for John Streater, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of
London.
THe Vale-Royall of England; or, The County Palatine of Chester Illustrated.
Wherein is contained a Geographicall and Historical Description of that Famous
County, with all its Hundreds, and Seats of the Nobility, Gentry, and
Freeholders; Its Rivers, Towns, Castles, Buildings Ancient and Modern: Adorned
with Maps and Prospects, and the Coats of Arms belonging to every individual
Family of the whole County. Unto which is added, An excellent Discourse of the
Island of Man. The Refinement of Zion: Or, The old Orthodox Protestant Doctrine
justified, and defended against several Exceptions of the Antinomians*
methodically digested into Questions, wherein many weighty and important cases
of Conscience are handled, concerning the nature of Faith and Repentance, or
Conversion to God. By Anthony Warton. De Morbis Foemineis: The Woman's
Counselor; or, The Feminine Physician. Modestly treating of such occult
Accidents, and secret Diseases, as are incident to that Sex. Pharmacopaea: Or,
Rhaenodaeus his Dispensatory. Treating of the whole Body of Physic: Performing
the Office of an Herball, as well as an Apothecarie's Shop. The LIFE of the
Renowned Peireskius: Containing his Learned Experiments in all kind of
Learning. Written by Gassandus. Now done into English.

