DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMONDE.

WHereas We are informed by the Earl of Ranelagh, and his Partners, That
several Sheriffs and Collectors within the respective Counties of this Kingdom,
have received by virtue of His Majesty's Process, diverse considerable sums of
money due to His Majesty, and which do belong to the Earl of Ranelagh and
Partners undertaking, some of whom have accounted lately in the Exchequer, but
not paid in the money due from them; and others have not as yet accounted* Upon
consideration whereof, We think fit by this our Proclamation, to require such
of the said Sheriffs and Collectors who have accounted and not paid what
remains due from them, that they do with all convenient speed, and at farthest
by the Twenty ninth day of April next, pay the money in their respective hands
into his Majesty's Treasury, and such of them as have not accounted, that they
do by the Twelth day of May next make up their Accounts: and pay such money as
they have received into his Majesty's said Treasury: To the end the same may be
applied to the Uses of the said undertaking. And if they fail herein, they
shall be Proceeded against with the utmost Severity. And We do also hereby
require all Collectors of the moneys Applotted within this Kingdom for the
supply of the Deficiencie of the years Value, who have not accounted for, and
paid the moneys by them Collected, that they do at or before the said twenty
ninth of April next, Account for, and pay in the moneys by them Collected into
His Majesty's said Treasury, As they will answer the contrary at their perils.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the 24th, day of March 1679. Mich:
Armach. C. Jo: Dublin. Blesinton. Lanesbrough. Hen. Midensis. To: Fitzgerald.
Ca: Dillon. Char: Meredith. To: Booth. Jo: Davys. John Cole. Theo: Jones.


DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Tookand John Crook, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty; And are to be sold by Mary Crook, at His Majesty's
Printing House in Skinner-row. 1680.


