DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ESSEX,

WHEREAS We are Informed, That in many Cities and Towns Corporate within this
Kingdom, greater Customs, Tolls and Duties than are Really due, have been of
late exacted in Right of the said Corporations, upon Goods imported or exported
into, or out of the said Cities and Towns Corporate, to the great prejudice of
His Majesty in His Customs, the decay of Trade, and the discouragement of
Merchants, and others from settling themselves and their ^ Families in this
Realm. For Remedy whereof, We the Lord Lieutenant and Council have thought fit
hereby, to Require all Magistrates, and other Officers entrusted with the
Collection, or Receipt of any Customs, Tolls or other Duties, claimed or
pretended unto by any the Corporations of this Kingdom, or by any Companies,
Societies or Guilds within such Corporations, that they do at their perils
hereafter forbear exacting or demanding any other Duties, upon any Goods or
Commodities Imported or Exported into or out of the said respective Cities or
Towns Corporate, but such only as are really and justly due unto them, and
were constantly received and paid in such Cities and Towns Corporate in the
year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty one, or have been since the
said year One thousand six hundred forty one by any new Charter granted unto
them. And We do also hereby require all Mayors, Sovereigns, Portrives, Bailiffs
and other chief Officers of Cities and Towns Corporate, and all Masters,
Wardens, and Heads of inferior Guilds, Fraternities and Corporations within any
Cities or Towns Corporate, at or before the Twenty forth day of December next,
to send unto Us under such chief Officers hands, and the usual Seal of the
Corporation, a perfect Schedule or Certificate of all the Customs, Tolls and
other Duties of what kind soever usually received in their Corporations; And
that they do therein particularly insert which and how many of the said Duties
are granted unto them by their respective Charters, and upon what grounds they
claim or pretend unto any other Duties than what are expressed in their said
Charters: To the end that We may thereby be Enabled to judge of the lawfulness
and reasonableness of such their Demands, and to give such Order thereupon as
shall be just, and that they do from henceforth forbear to take or receive any
Custom, Toll or Duty which they shall not certify as aforesaid, and in case
any Merchants, or other persons shall complain unto Us, of any Duties which are
or have been illegally exacted from them in any Cities or Towns Corporate
within this Kingdom, We shall be ready to hear such complaints, and to give
such releif thereupon as can be reasonably expected from Us.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the 25th day of October. 1672. Ja:
Armachanus. Mich. Dublin Canc. Fran: Aungier. To: Booth. J: Temple. Will:
Steuart. Mau Eustace. J: Stephens. Will. Flower. Hen: Ford.

God Save the King.
DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty;
And are to be Sold by Joseph Wild Bookseller in Castle-street. 1672.


