A ROYAL ARBOR OF LOYAL POESY, Consisting of Poems and Songs. Digested into
TRIUMPH, ELEGY, SATYR, LOVE and DROLLERY. Composed by Tho. Jordan.

-- Mediocribus esse Poet^
(...) Homines, non Dii, non concessero Column.
Horac^, de Art Poetica. London, Printed by R. W. for Eliz. Andrews, at the
White Lion near Pye-Corner*

To the most liberal Lover of Sciential Industry and Native Ingenuity, the
truly Noble, Mr. JOHN BENCE MERCHANT
Much honored Sir,
WHen you shall please to make a review of your own serene Merits, and peruse
with pausing Curiosity these Poetical Imperfections, my fears are that you will
condemn my Confidence; but my hopes are as great, that you will commend my
Prudence: from whence I extract this presumption, that though all Critics
should comply to cry down my Wit in composing my Poems, they shall applaud my
Judgment in the choice of my Patron. Sir, Your own deservings declare You to
be no less then a Palace of Honor, if these Poems like a Vine, or Woodbine,
may support themselves upon your Edifice, they shall, by this fortunate
transplantation, grow more fragrant, and gratify your Indulgence. The business
of the whole World is but folly diversified, nor can I make a better Apology
for my Poetry, but that it is Vanity in varie^y; yet no less innocent then
those Actions which the noblest Persons in the worthiest Times have esteemed
their clearest Recreations. I must confess that the multiplicity of reasonless
Rhymers and i^^^gular Readers, have very much deface the Majesty of Poesy, but
one beam of Your favor will re-inthrone it. Sir, you will find some pieces in
this promiscuous Gallery very plainly dressed, but withal very properly; for my
aims were always rather at aptitude then altitude, and to make my Compositions
more genuine then gorgeous, it is no more proper in Poets then in Painters, to
clothe a Tinker in Tissue: Sir, (in one word) Your Candor has compelled me to
make these Poetical Addresses, if any thing in them may either provoke Your
praise, or pardon, I shall congratulate that happy means, which has safely
conducted me to so splendid a sphere of Love and Ingenuity, and be always
studious to deserve (what I have been ever ambitious to desire) a seat in Your
memory, and liberty to subscribe,

Sir, The humblest of all your faithful Servants and the devoutest of your
Honourers, Tho. Jordan

To all Noble, Learned, and Ingenious Lovers, of Poets, and Poetry.
Most Royal, Honorable, and truly Worthy.
ALthough Poets and Poetry (which the best ages formerly had in an exalted
Estimation) are, in these loose latter times so discrowned and discouraged,
that the very Name is made but a Title of Infamy, and their inspired Persons
considered but in the needless number of metrical Mendicants; (because Poverty
and Poetry are such Correlatives) yet I hope those Persons to whom I direct my
Endeavors, and would only select to be my Supervisors, are qualified with
diviner Inspection. It has been frequently observable amongst Historians, when
Times did grow degenerate, and declined into Barbarism, Poetry did wane into
contempt and contumely, but ( e contrario) in flourishing, well modeled and
orderly guided Republics it advanced to Honor and admiration. I am not so
extravagant as once a presented Poetaster (in a good Comedy) said, Who loves
not Verse is damned: nor so rapt with a vainglorious humor and selfadmiration
as old Ben was when he made this Distick, the Theme being Poets. When God
begins to do some exc'lent thing,
He makes a Poet or, at least, a King.
But I am persuaded that the Priests of Apollo are very much better then the
squint-eyed souls of rustic capacities render them.

I remember (very opportunely) that I once presented a Manual of Meeter to a
very popular Physician of this City in Oliver's time, who made me no better
return, then that He hated Poetry; after which words such a judgment fell upon
him, that he has lien sweating under the heavy displeasure of Venus ever
since. I could tell you more and worse punishments that have fallen upon such
Heretics, but I should then make my Epistle exceed the length of my Book, and
your patience; which I fear I shall preserve to suffer more by the Saw of my
rude Compositions, although never the intent of

Your Servant, Tho. Jordan.

An Induction.
WHen eighteen years had crucified our Pleasure,
With Civil Swords, by wasting Blood and Treasure;
When by the Power of a Schismatic brood
Religion's glorious face was in a Cloud;
After the mildest King the Sun e're saw
Was murdered by imaginary Law:
When Cov'nants made to God, Angels, and Men
Were broke by those who fain would do it again;
After they did the Bloody Corpse Interr,
Of Praying, preaching, Perjured Oliver;
When Parliaments were worn unto the stump,
And England's Head was ruled by a Rump;
When (blind with sorrow) we began to grope,
When all were out of heart, and out of hope:
Then MONCK, the King of Generals came forth
In a mysterious March out of the North,
To London City; where he and his Men
Pulled down the Gates, but set them up again:
When by his smiles he put hope in us all,
This Speech was spoken to him in this Hall.
A Speech made to his Excellency the Lord General Monck, and the Council of
State, at Skinners-Hall on Wednesday, being the Fourth of April, 1660. At which
time he was nobly entertained by that Honorable Company.
I Can forbear no longer, out it must
If I shall prove ingenious or just,
I have with wary eyes observed your steps,
Your Stands, your Turns, your Pauses and your Leaps,
And find, however you may mask your brow,
You are a Statesman, and ambitious too:
A right self-ended Person, for be it known,
Yours and the Public Safety are all one;
You are ambitious to be good, that feat
Our Statesmen mist, for they were to be great:
But yet (as Solomon made that choice which
Commanded all) Wisdom will make you rich,
And great, and glorious; and these shall last
As long as time, and after time is past:
When such as have their Countries Rights botray'd,
Shall receive pay in Lucifers Brigade.
My Lord, I scorn to ^latter, I Will be true to ye,
All the good Deeds you have done, are but your Duty;
But yet your hand stretched in Jehovahs Name
Has snatched three burning Kingdoms from the Flame;
Our Laws, our Liberties, or what to us,
And all mankind may be held precious,
Were at the Stake, this Action has outrun
All thought* we cannot tell you what you have done,
Nor you your self, it may not be expressed
Till diverse years have made* it manifest:
Those ravenous beasts that our destruction wrought,
When Church and State were to the Barebone brought,
( Praise God) you ransomed, and without a Club,
Beat down the daring Doctrine of the Tub;
The sinking Pulpit to you did restore,
Our Apron-Prelates must come there no more;
And now the Iron-Monger will not rush in,
But cease to make an Anvile of the Cushin:
This you have done, quite unknown to the silly
Prognostications of Booker and Lilly,
Who know not (with all help their Arts can do)
What it is guides Charles his Wain so well as you.
But I forget my Message, Sir! by me
This faithful Hospitable Company
Does bid you welcome; welcome as the Spring,
As you your self would welcome home -- the thing
We all expect, without the which, each Nation
Subsisteth only by Anticipation:
These ten or twelve years our three Kingdoms have
Lived in a darkness equal to the Grave,
Sti^led for want of breath until the bright
Beams of your Presence gave a little light:
It Is yet but twilight, could we gain the Sun,
And the clear wholesome air, the work were done*
You can dispel these mists and make all fair,
We sue for nothing but the Sun and Air
Continuation of the Induction.
THe wary General whose Art did lie
Much in the soul of business, secrecy,
Was so obscure in all his postures we
Could not discover his dark Loyalty;
So silent was his tongue, secret his face,
We could by neither find he did embrace
Our royal hints; but when the upshot came,
Swi^ter then powder, put into a flame,
Through an obscuring Cloud before he speaks,
Even as a hand Granado e're it breaks,
He fired us all, for (with a true consent)
The Kingdom calls a full Free Parliament,
That he by lawful consequence might bring
The suffering Sovereignty of our Dread King
Home to his glories, which no time could do
But this, 'cause Providence would have it so:
And now the Scene is changed, for what before
The people did so hatefully abhor,
They heartily embrace: no other thing
Can prove so great a Cordial as the King:
Nothing but He can cure 'm, for the Devil
Had overrun the Land with the Kings Evil.
Now he is Proclaimed the Bells joyfully ring, Man 10.

The Bonfires blaze, all cry, God save the King;
'T will make all Ages study and admire on it,
Him whom they called the Son of the late Tyrant,
Is now a God; and no where can be had
(To heal their Wounds) the Balm of Gilead,
But in King Charles; whole Troops of glittering Men
Contend by thousands who shall fetch him in:
The City sends forth acclamations high,
No Prayers are made but for his Majesty.
Thus do they guard him to Whitehall, May 29.
where we
Will pray for him and his Posterity,
That when the worst of State-Distempers spring,
We may be cured by praying for the King.
Another Speech at Goldsmiths-Hall to the General, April, 9. 1660.
After a Song concluding with a Chorus of Amity. Enter a Sea Captain, he
divides the Singers and speaks. LEt me make one too; Are ye grown so stout
To contrive Peace, and leave the Seaman out;
Have you in these large bowls which Plenty gave ye
Drank off the Ocean, and swallowed the Navy?
You never think upon our Rocks and Shelves,
So you may snudge in safety by your selves;
Are not you Britains? is not Navigation
The only guard, and glory of a Nation:
Can ye have Treasure brought without a Fleet,
What is it gilds Cheap Side and Lumbard-streer,
But our Sea Trade? by our cutting the curled
Ocean, ye hold Commerce with all the world;
Whence come your costly Carpetings and Works,
That grace the Chambers of Triumphant Turks,
But from beyond Sea? and wise men of trust
Believe if we have peace again, it must
Come from beyond Sea, and do you go about
To make a Peace and leave the Main Mast out.
But where is my Admiral? Oh! I have spied him,
His merits are so clear, no Clouds can hide him;
I must go droll with him though, what cheer! hey?
Up to the ears in Custard, here is a fray
Compounded without bloodshed, these would be
Good bits upon a March, George, or at Sea;
When in the fury of tempestuous Weather
We and our meat are pickled up together:
Here are pure Quarters, Plenty keeps her Spring
In London, it is a City for a King.
I came just now ashore to speak with you,
Directly up to Goldsmiths-Hall, I knew
Where I should find you out, you love to settle
With honest hearts, and men of the best mettle;
They love Saint George, and yet do highly set
A value on Saint Dunston, they are well met,
Both of them put the Devil in a dump*
One had him by the nose, 'tother the Rump,
And thereby hangs a tail: when I came hither,
My business and my boldness mixed together
Made me thrust in; where crowd ye cried they all,
Quoth I to speak with my Lord General,
I Am one of his Sea Captains; presently
The Master, and the generous Company
All bad me welcome, and did strongly woo
Me to bid you so, and this Council too;
In these or such like words they bade me say,
The Sun's not welcomer to a dark day
Then you are to this City; for you are
Temperate in undertakings, stout in War.
Prudent in Councils, quick when dangers call,
Secret in great designs, honest in all;
'T would make the rudest Rebel quite renounce ill,
To see but such a Soldier, such a Council,
God prosper both, and may you never cease
Till you have brought home the bright Princes peace,
That long lost Lady, could we make a Crown
As rich as that was worn by Solomon,
Rather then we would lose her, or displease her
(I mean fair Peace) we'd give that Crown to seize her.
A Speech spoken to the General and Council, when he was feasted at
Fishmongers-Hall.
After a Song of difference betwixt the Lawyer, the Soldier, the Citizen, and
the Countryman: The Chorus being end^l, Enter the Speaker habited properly
for the Ghost of Massiancello Fisherman of Naples. IS your Peace just? what
Rock stands it upon?
Conscience and Law make the best union;
If you gain Birthrights here by Blood and Slaughter,
Though you sing now, you will cry for ever after;
Trust my experience one that can unfold
The strangest truest tale that e're was told:
In my degree, few men shall overtake me,
I was as great as wickedness could make me:
This heart, this habit, and this tongue to boot
Commanded forty thousand Horse and Foot:
In three days time, my fortune grew so high
I could have matched my Fisher's family
With the best blood in Naples; right and wrong,
And life and death attended on my tongue;
Till by a quick verticity of fate,
I find too soon what I repent too late;
And though a Rebel in a righteous clothing,
My glow-worm-glories glimmer'd into nothing:
Thus fell that Fisherman that had no fellow,
I am the wandering shade of Massianello;
Who since I was in this perdi^ion hurled,
Am come to preach this Doctrine to the world.
Rebels, though backed with power and seeming reason,
Time and success shall feel the fate of Treason.
But stay! what Picture's this hangs in my sight?
It Is noble W^lworth the King-saving Knight,
That stabbed Iack-Straw; had Walworth lived within
These four Months, where had Jack the Cobbler bin?
It was a bold brave deed, an act in season,
Whilst he was on the top-branch of his Treason;
But from that shadow dropping down my eye,
I see a substance of like Loyalty.
If long renowned Walworth had the fate
To save a King, you have to save a State.
And who knows what by consequence, the Knight
By that brave deed, gained every man his right;
And you by this, may give each Man his due,
Not only Trusty hearts, but Traitors too:
He drew Blood, you did not, it is all o^e sense,
There Is but a Straw's breadth in the difference:
He saved the Town from being burnt, and you
Have rescued it from Fire and Plunder too:
He was this Companie's good Benesactor,
And you have been their Liberties Protector;
For which I heard them say they would engage
Their States and Bloods, and Lives against all rage
That should oppose your just Design; and that
You are the welcom'st Guest ever came at
This Table: they say all they can exhibit,
Is not so much a Treatment as a Tribute.
They call you the first step to England's Peace,
The right forerunner of our happiness.
And joined with these great Counselors, you are
Our best preservatives in Peace and War.
You have a Loyal Heart, a lucky hand
Elected for the Cure of this sick Land;
Who (by Protectors and unjust Trustees)
Has been enslaved, and brought upon her knees:
We humbly pray this may be thought upon,
Before the Kingdoms Treasure be quite gone,
And hope you will (though envy look a squint)
When all is sit, put a Just STEWARD in it.
Chorus of ten Voices.
THen may your Fame outlive all story
And prove a Monument of Glory,
Kings and Queens (as Tribute due)
On their knees shall pray for you,
Whilst all true hearts confess with Tongue and Pen
A Loyal Subject is the best of Men.
A Speech Composed to Welcome to the English Shore, the most Sacred and
Inimitable Majesty of Charles the Second, personated by the Genius of England.
Mirror of Majesty, bright Rising Sun,
The virtues of all Kings comprised in one;
How shall I look on thee Great Lord of Light,
Lay by thy Beams, or fortisie my sight;
Thou art so frequent at the Throne of Grace,
That Gods reflective Glory gilds thy Face:
Shall I make bare my Feet, as I am bound,
Or shall I kneel, for sure it is Holy Ground?
I will do so, England behold and blush.
Here Is the best Emblem of the burning Bush:
I need not paraphrase, but wi^h this Nation
May come to Use as well as Application.
Remember Worcester, that escape may well
Match the demensions of a Miracle;
Had I been Rebel of the worst degree,
That very Fate would have converted me;
Who saw not that, saw nothing. -- But I come
Dread Majesty to bid you welcome home,
So does the Kingdom too, and all about ye;
For (in plain terms) we could not live without ye.
The Law and Gospel too bad us good night,
All had been wrong if you had lost your right.
Till Lot came out, great Sodoms lo^ty Towers
Could not take fire, this very case is ours.
The Land ere this had all in ashes bin
But that, as theirs went out our Lot came in;
Each individual person in this Nation,
May bid you welcome next to their salvation:
The very Schismatics, and such as are
The manifest incendiaries of ^ ar
May bid you welcome; for their Lives and Lands
Had else been ravished by each others hands:
You have a Kingdom here in order put,
So out of frame, Chaos was nothing to'^;
Your very presence does at once dispense
Light, heat, life, growth, and God-like influence:
You gained commission from the King of Kings,
To bring us our Redemption in your Wings.
Therefore may all the Joys that Kingdoms want,
All that good men can beg, or God can grant,
All kinds of happiness past and to come
From the Creation* till the day of Doom,
Fall on your Majesty; may every thing
Contribute to the comforts of the King.
And when the bea^ties of a Royal Bride
Shall by your Sacred Arms be ^anct^fi'd;
May the pure power of Union to in^lame ye,
That married Pairs may prosper when they name ye.
And may your Princely Progeny out-vye
The Stars for Light and Multiplicity.
You are a man, Sir, after Gods own Heart,
May Stuarts Name, and Englands Crown never pare;
But may it prove our Comfort and our Cure,
So long as either Sun or Moon endure;
May you have faithful Councillors. and all
As just as George your Loyal General:
May Peace Crown all, and if there ever sprung
A Prophets Spirit in a Poet's Tongue,
May mine hit right, and all my days I Will sing
Upon no theme but this, God and the King.
A Prologue to the King.
LOng live the King in your Celestial Eyes
The virtue of our late Creation lies;
Our Re-Creation, for on English Earth,
You are to every thing a second birth:
We must acknowledge Liberty nor Lands
Could come more grateful then your Dread Commands,
Did to our very souls; but we are sorry
We should this Night attend on so much glory,
With such weak worth; or your clear sight engage
To view the remnants of a ruined Stage;
For doubting we should never play again,
We have played all our Women into Men,
That are of such large size for flesh and bones,
They Will rather be taken for Amazons
Then tender Maids; but your mercy does please,
Daily to pass by as great faults as these:
If this be pardoned we shall henceforth bring
Better oblations to my Lord the King.
Epilogue to the King.
WE have all done, if we have given distaste,
It were much better we had done our last;
But mighty Monarch, in your power it lies,
And only yours to save or sacrifice:
What we do want in playing, it shall be
Supplied in praying for your Majesty.
On a Picture of the Kings Escape in the Oak.
BEhold the King, to avoid danger's stroke
Confines his Royal Body in an Oak,
Which lived until his Fathers Li^e was done,
Then dyed to prove a safety for the Son:
And to us all this well-try'd truth imparts,
Better trust hollow Trees then hollow Hearts.
On the King and Mistress Lane on Horseback.
BEhold a Lady who had once the honor
Of having a great King to wait upon her;
A Matchless Madam, Pieties restorer,
For in one man four Kingdoms rides before her;
The great Defender (as true Story says)
Of him that is Defender of the Faith.
On the Picture of the King on Horseback in Parliament Robes.
BEhold King Charles the second does present
In Royal Robes both King and Parliament;
Which signifies, that in thought, word, and deed,
The King and Parliament are both agreed,
Whilst Traitors Heads are mounted on that Hall
Where Charles the first did find his final fall
By an High Court of Justice, who consent
At once to ruin King and Parliament:
Long live the King, and God (in whom his trust is)
Preserve his life from such High Courts of Justice.
On Pictures of the King and Queen.
TWo of the brightest Stars that have been seen
Shine in this glorious King and virtuous Queen,
In whose fair souls all that is good and great
In England, (or in Portugal) are met;
And may the Heirs of Charles and Katharine be
The stems of all succeeding Sovereignty.
On Pictures of the Duke and Duchess of York.
BEhold Yorks Duke and Duchess too, whose lives
Are patterns for good Husbands and chaste Wives,
Good nature and good nurture too in them
Make Love appear the greatest Diadem;
May they all never more see (as sad beholders)
Religions head upon Rebellions shoulders.
A Prologue to the King, August 16. 1660.
SUre such a glory so serene, so bright,
Started from Chaos when God called for light,
For (like that glittering birth of Beams) you do
Transluminate this Western world from you
Our Saint, our Soul, our Sovereign, our King,
We live and grow as the Sun broods the Spring:
Then (as in Loyalty obliged) it is fit
We render part of our small stock, our Wit
Which has so long been crampt under their rage
Who durst not see their actions on the stage,
That numbed with a stupidity we fear
We shall assault the softness of your ear;
We have been so perplex't with Gun and Drum,
Look to your Hats and Cloaks, the Redcoats come.
D' Ambois is routed, Hotspur quits the Field,
Falstass's out-filch'd, all in confusion yield;
Even Auditor and Actor, what before
Did make the Red-Bull laugh, now makes it roar:
We curse the misery in which our Trade is,
And are secured, but our magnifick Ladies
(Thinking to 'scape them) are torn by the Throats
And (like Wine Porters) put in Petty-coats,
Dragged to the Muse for Plotters; but your presence
Nullifies them, and gives us a new Essence,
Till you came hither all was so forlorn
We wished we had been buried, or unborn;
All things were retrograde, the night and day
Were shrinking to Prima Materia:
We lived in such a strange distorted age
Men durst not see their Figures on the stage;
But furious as the deformed Lady was,
Who for revenge brake her own Looking-glass;
They cracked our mirror, and now none but you,
Dread Majesty, can Mend or make us New.
^A Prologue to a Play called The Florentine Ladies, played in the Night by
Gentlemen.
YOu're welcome to our Ladies, and I know
Most courteous Gallants, Ladies will please you;
Though at this hour, or midnight, else I Will swear
Most of our Knights are lost with the last year:
These creatures are of Florence, and not scorn
To let you know they are Italians born;
Your Ladies, worthy Gentlemen, it is thought
Love things that are far fetched and dearly bought:
Why should not they who of this opinion are
Let you love Ladies that are come so far;
It is a question, and they may mistake
Our Ladies to be Ladies of the Lake;
Which in our English broadness is a Whore,
Then what are we, nay they that keep the door;
What are you too, my Masters? something it is
That make your Wives thus follow you to this.
A shrewd suspicion when our wandering Knights
Arrest strange Ladies, and so late at nights;
But there is no hurt, for if they please but you,
We doubt not they will content your Ladies too.
Pray take it as it is, the best we can afford,
If we do please, why so. Hab nab's the word.
The Epilogue, on New-Years-Day at Night.
WIth the New Year these Marriages begin, (in,
Which will be broke e're the next year come
Unless your hands do give us, all our pains
In Love is lost, if you forbid the banes:
But if you grant us License, and appear
Each day to see us through the whole year;
Come to our Wedding, to requite your loves,
Show us your hands we will fit you all with Gloves.
A Prologue to a Play of mine, called, Love has found his eyes; or
Distractions.
I Know ye did expect me, but for what,
To say we have a Play, the Bills show that;
Why let us begin then, Sound -- But some will say
Are there no faults in the Actors, or the Play
To beg your patience for? Yes faith, there is store,
Yet all we crave is you will not make 'em more.
A very just petition, and it is ^it
I think, we bear no more then we commit;
Yet there are some, wise judges, that do seek
To raise their laughter on what you dislike:
The errors of the Actors, and they be
The witty tribe of our own Quality;
Why let them laugh, they paid for it, why should we
Deprive a man of that felicity,
That cannot help nor hurt us; and I pray
How e're it prove, don't called a Pretty Play:
Let it be good or bad, that slight word pretty
Shows the Play naught, and the depraver witty.
The language is but low, and the invention
No higher then a common apprehension,
And (in a word) the Authors wish is such
You Will not despair, nor yet expect too much.
The Epilogue spoken by Cupid.
I Hope these mutual Marriages express
My optics are restored for each distress
The Lovers once supposed they had by me,
I have converted to a Jubilee.
All Is happy but my self, for I poor I
That figure an eternal Deity,
Must quit my glorious supremacy
To stand the censure of mortality:
Be courteous to a God, then whose high laws
Commands all hearts, yet now must beg applause;
For if you censur^ me like rig'rous men,
You spoil the plot and strike me blind again:
All our distractions now are out of date,
I would they were so too in Church and State,
That Englands King and People were at rest
Without confounding eithers interest;
That jealousies and fears may never more
Let loyal hearts lie weltring in their gore;
That so the God of Love may often view
This Island and present himself to you.
A Speech by the way of Epilogue to those that would rise out of the Pit at the
Red-Bull in the last Scene, and disturb the Conclusion, by going on the Stage,
June 23. 1660.
PRay keep your places Gentlemen, don't rise,
Stay and take the other Glass, as Peter's cries,
It Is the Catastrophe crowns all the sport,
I warrant if you had places at Court
You would not part with them so soon, pray stay
Till Grace be said, and we have took away;
You wrong your Ladies in the nick of pleasure,
They would see it out, women love London measure^
Pray keep your seats, let us be your advisers,
You see (of late) what comes of early Risers;
But if your fancy to this custom tends,
Henceforth we will study Plays that have no ends:
A Prologue to the Comedy called The Tamer tamed, June 24. 1660.
Enter reading of the Bill. THe Tamer Tamed, what do the Players mean?
Shall we have Rump and Rebel in the Scene?
Iuncto's of Safety with the righteous rabble
Of Apron-Peers, Knights of Sir Arthur's Table?
Shall Baxter, Hewson, Scot, and Fox be named?
These were our Tamers, but I hope they are tamed;
For those were men, who (in their holy rage)
Did things too horrid for a civil Stage,
Unless our company should all comply
To leave good language and speak Blasphemy.
This Play, the Tamer tamed, is Fletchers wit,
A man that pleased all pallats, therefore sit
And see the last Scene out; pray do not run
Into confusion, till the Play be done:
Should strangers see you mix among us thus,
They would be apt to think you some of Us.
Pray keep your seats, you do not sit in fear
As in the dangerous days of Oliver;
It is not now (in good time be it spoke)
Enter the Red-Coats, Exit Hat and Cloak.
But such a prosperous change does now attend ye,
That those who did affront ye, shall defend ye.
The Epilogue, spoken by the Tamer, a Woman.
With license of my Husband, I apply
My self to this honored society,
I fear I have offended the good Laws
Of household government, and given cause
By my example (in this wild assay)
For some to put in practice what we play;
And 'cause the Breeches now come near the make
Of Petty-Coats, may willingly mistake:
These are old quarrels, and no doubt came in
When Adam dug and Madam Eve did spin.
They Are never the honester for that, the crime
Of bold Rebellion is older then Time.
The breach of trust is old* the breach of Laws,
Murder of Kings, witness the good Old Cause.
But we exhibit to your Approbation,
Not the Rebellion but the Reformation.
A Prologue to introduce the first Woman that came to Act on the Stage in the
Tragedy, called The Moor of Venice.
I Come, unknown to any of the rest
To tell you news; I saw the Lady dressed;
The Woman plays to day; mistake me not,
No Man in Gown, or Page in Petty-Coat;
A Woman to my knowledge, yet I cannot
(If I should dye) make Affidavit on it.
Do you not twitter Gentlemen? I know
You will be censuring; do it fairly though;
It Is possible a virtuous woman may
Abhor all sorts of looseness, and yet play;
Play on the Stage, where all eyes are upon her; --
Shall we count that a crime France calls an honor?
In other Kingdoms Husbands safely trust '^m,
The difference lies only in the custom;
And let it be our custom I advise;
I Am sure this Custom's better then the Excise,
And may procure us custom: hearts of flint
Will melt in passion when a woman's in it.
But Gentlemen you that as judges sit
In the Star Chamber of the house, the Pit;
Have modest thoughts of her; pray do not run
To give her visits when the Play is done,
With dam me, your most humble Servant, Lady;
She knows these things as well as you, it may be:
Not a bit there, dear Gallants, she does know
Her own deserts, and your temptations too.
But to the point in this reforming age
We have intents to civilize the Stage.
Our women are defective, and so sized
You Would think they were some of the Guard disguised;
For (to speak truth) men act, that are between
Forty and fifty, Wenches of fifteen;
With bone so large, and nerve so incomplyant,
When you call Desdemona, enter Giant*
We shall purge every thing that is unclean,
Lascivious, scurrilous, impious or obscene;
And when we have put all things in this fair way
Barebones himself may come to see a Play.
Epilogue.
ANd how do you like her* come, what is it ye drive at*
She Is the same thing in public as in private;
As far from being what you call a Whore,
As Desdemona injured by the Moor*
Then he that censures her in such a case
Has a soul blacker then Othello's face:
But Ladies what think you? for if you tax
Her freedom with dishonor to your Sex,
She means to act no more, and this shall be
No other Play but her own Tragedy;
She will submit to none but your commands,
And take Commission only from your hands.
A Prologue to the Poor man's Comfort.
Enter reading the Title, May 28. 1661. THe Poor man's comfort, this Title some
will say
Is fitter for a Pray'r-book then a Play;
And some may censure who are Democraticks,
The times will change, Players are turned Phanaticks.
And the Red Bull where sports were wont to be,
Is now a Meeting House, would 'twere for me
A good full Meeting House, we should not be
Contrivers of a new Fifth-Monarchy,
And charge up for King Judas: no, the very
Plain truth is this, we meet but to be merry;
Then do you judge what pity it is that we
Should every day want merry company?
Surely the fault is ours, or yours, or both,
Let us consider where it lies: in troth
You will appear most guilty I Am afraid,
It Is a full house that makes a Play well played:
A numerous presence does at once inspire
Actor and Auditor with mutual fire:
Therefore pray meet, come as you do to the other,
If not for us, yet to meet one another.
But let me see? what was I going to say?
O! it is about the Title of the Play.
The great man's Comfort is above my thought,
The Merchant's Comfort is a Ship full fraught,
The Plow man's Comfort is a Field well tilled,
Our Poor man's Comfort is a House well filled,
March 16. 1661. An Advent to the Kings Coronation.
LEt all your hearts be filled with joy,
King Charles his Coronation Day
Is coming on, let every thing
That fears God and Honors the King,
Advance their spirits, and express
A Royal loyal Thankfulness:
That man that was by dangers tossed
From place to place, and almost lost.
He that did 'scape an Armies stroke,
And made a Kingdom of an Oak,
The Royal ORPHANT that was fed
With sorrow, and with borrowed bread:
He whom his Subjects would confound
And crucify, shall now be Crowned.
Then let all souls for such salvation.
Cry up King Charles his Coronation.
On the Day.
THe happy day (long wished by some)
By God's appointment, now is come,
In which our joyful eyes shall see
King Charles adorned with Majesty,
And He who lived a life like Job
shall now with Crown, Scepter, and Globe,
With peaceful seed ascend his Throne,
And every man shall have his own:
The Iuncto, Oliver, and Rump
That turned up all the Knaves for Trump,
Are totally dissolved, and we
Are Subjects to true Majesty.
Then let us all with one consent
Pray for the good Old Government,
Under whose power we may increase
In Truth and Treasure, Ease and Peace;
And Children yet unborn shall live to say,
This was the happy Coronation Day.
After the Coronation.
THe joyful days are come, and We
Obtain our ancient Liberty,
Religion rules, Rebellion rots,
We sleep securely without plots;
Our Lives are safe, our Laws are free,
White-Hall's a Court or Equity.
We are secured from Tyrants Swords*
Malignant, and such Canting words
Are out of date, Phanatick broods
That preached away your Lands and Goods,
Are put to silence, and we fear
No forgeries at Westminster.
Would you know how all this comes round,
Take It in four words, King Charles is Crowned;
Since it is so, let every thing
Praise God, and say, Long live the King.
A Let any delivered, Jan. 1. 1659. to a Friend as a New Years Gi^t.
From All, and more then I have written here,
I wish protection to you this New Year.
FRom those who for self ends would All betray,
From those new Saints that pistol when they pray;
From flattering features with infernal souls,
From Reformation, such as pulled down Paul's;
From Church-land purchasers, from Town betrayers,
From Weaving Preachers, and Extemp're Prayers;
From blood, and something else that I could tell ye on,
From Pulpit blasphemy and bold Rebellion;
From new false Teachers which betray the old,
From those that turn the Gospel into Gold:
From that black Pack where Clubs are always trump,
From bodies Politic, and from the Rump;
From those that ruin where they should repair,
From those that cut off heads instead of hair;
From twelve months Taxes and abortive Votes,
From chargeable Nurse children in Red Coats;
From such as sell their souls to save their Sums,
From City Charters that make heads for Drums;
From City Saints whose Annagram is Stains,
From plots, and being choked with our own chains;
From zeal that wants both Piety and Knowledge,
From the hot Disputants in Gresham College;
From Cobblers which ascend to Council Tables,
From dens of thieves, from Churches turned to Stables;
From these and ten times more like to ensue,
We humbly pray, Good Lord deliver you.
On a view of the Rebels Arms.
CRosses are crucified, the Organ which
In bright Cathedrals soared a lofty pitch,
Are now Demolished by such men (strange Riddle)
Who in the room set up the Cross and Fiddle.
On Independency.
AN Independent is a Maggot bred
In fly-blown brains of Presbyterian head
On the Act against Cock-matches, the next succeeding, their putting down of
Church-Marriages.
WHen Wedlock was pulled down by powerful hand,
We might well guess Cock-matches would not not stand.
On the Jesuit and Puritan.
THe Jesuit and Puritan prevail
In spoil, like Sampson's Foxes tail to tail.
Another.
THe Jesuit and Puritan are two,
Who under the best names most mischief do:
Representations in Parts to be Habited, Sung, and Acted, as they have been
often times with great applause performed before the Lord Major and the
Sheriffs of London.
An Eclogue, or Representation in four Parts, composed for the Lord Major, Sir
Tho. Allen, and Sung by the City Music, December. 18th. 1659.
The Presenters, Love, Plenty, Truth, and Courage. Love. MY honored Lord and
Lady,
May that great hand that made ye
Supply this cheer
From year to year,
And may no strength degrade ye.

Truth. I am a bold intruder,
Which makes me seem the ruder;
But the City is
Much used to this
Since civil War subdued her.

Plenty. We are no Lance-presadoes,
No Basket-hilt Bravadoes;
When you know our Names
You Will love our fames,
We deal not in Grenades.

Love. We come not to invade ye,
Or subt'ly to persuade ye;

Truth. I am Truth (in a word)

Plenty. I am Plenty, my Lord,

Love. And I am Love my Lady.

Chorus. 1. Let Buff-coat and Feather

2. Go drumming together:

All. We fear not the force of Invasion.

3. The Voice and the Lute

1. Makes a better dispute,

All. Love has the best art of persuasion.

Plenty. But stay, methinks our Melody is dull,
We want a voice to fill the Chorus full.

Love. Truth, where is Peace, (Truth) her absence is no wonder,
For Peace and Truth have been long time asunder:
Where is she gone? we will hawl her in with Cables.

Love. Peace seldom goes where Churches are made Stables.

Truth. Peace never comes amongst those sad disasters,
Into that Land where Servants beat their Masters:

Plenty. Peace seldom into such confusion comes
Where City Charters are made heads for Drums.

Love. Peace loves good men, that profess what they will dye for,
Not such as make Covenants stand for a Cipher.

Truth. Peace never comes where Brother does fight against Brother,
Nor where Protestations drive out one another.

Plenty, Peace knows that the Sword men will never be true friends,
For Colonels like Cobblers are awl for their ends;
She never appears, (though she very much pity)
Where a bunch of Bandoleers are the keys of a City.

Love. When wisdom's wanting,

Truth. And zeal is canting,

Plenty. Then rage is ranting,

All. And Peace lies panting.
Chorus together. Then blame not the words of our Tongue or our Pen,
We shall never hold our peace till we get her again:
For Love, Truth, and Plenty must quickly decay,
As experience will tell us when Peace is away.

Love. But now Peace is gone
And has left us alone,
What other foundation can we build upon

Truth. Let courage come rule.

Plen. I fear he is too cool.

Love. If he leave Love and Plenty, and Truth, he is a fool.

Truth. Can fury out-brave him?
It Is Truth that must save him;
Go call him: ( Plen.) I can not, the Prentices have him.

Love. Go tell him our need,
Our Liberties bleed,
And say that my Lord does command him with speed.
Plen At that word he comes.
Enter Courage.
Courage. Boys beat up your drums,
Are Swordmen abroad, and we picking of crumbs?
Have we the bold Valor, the Wealth, and the Wit,.
And shall we be shallowly cheated of it?
Truth, Plenty, and Love, you all are well met,
In honester Causes ye never ventured yet,
We serve a brave Master, who for public good
Will hazard his Fortune, his Fame, and his Blood:
Let Love, Truth, and Courage, and Plenty endeavor
To wait on his person, and serve him for ever.
Then let every voice like a well skilled Musician
Discover the progress of Pride and Ambition.

Courage. The basest condition
Is Pride and Ambition,
It rifles and stifles
True love and Allegiance.
It Is never contented
Till Time has consented
To take off and shake off
The bonds of Obedience*

Truth. It was a shrewd weed in
The Garden of Eden.
It drew out and threw out
Poor Eve and her Adam.
'Twas one of the strange ills
That cast down the Angels
So steep and so deep
That no measure can fadom.

Plenty. It is but a sad sort of sinning
And ends with a terrible taste,
It shows like a Saint in beginning,
But looks like a Devil at last.

Love. Ambition strikes every thing dumb
That dams up the way of her hope*
It often does aim at a Kingdom,
And frequently ends in a Rope.

Chorus. All. Then since bold ambition does work such disasters,
Why should we be Monsters in hope to be Masters;
That City shall hold out in spite of all weather,
Where Conscience and Courage are coupled together^

The Cheaters Cheated. A Representation in four parts to be Sung, Nim. Filcher,
Wat, and Moll, made for the Sheriffs of London.
Enter Nim. a Cheat at one door, and Filcher his fellow at the other. Nim. GOod
morrow fellow Filcher,
What, do we sink or swim?
Thou look so like a Pilcher?

Filch. Good morrow fellow Nim,
The Devil's in our destiny,
I cannot get a pluck.

Nim. No, surely if the Devil were in it
We should have better luck.

Fill. 2.
What Star is my director,
I am in such a state?

Nim. Nay, prithee brother Hector
Do not fall out with Fate;
For we are fortunes Minions,
And sight under her banner,
It Is she is Queen of all the world.

Fill. A mischief light upon her.
3.
No money is revealed yet,
I wonder where it lingers?

Nim. The Soldier has concealed it,
It Is fast in iron fingers;
From whence if we could get it
By fury or by fraud:
We had as good attempt to pick
The Pocket of a Baud,

Filch. 4.
Your roaring Cavalier
Who when he had the Chink,
Would bravely domineer
In diceing, drabs and drink:
Go ask him now for money
And he has none at all,
Bur cries it is in my Compting-house
In Haberdashers-Hall.

Nim. 5.
Our sly Trappanning trade
Maintained with so much fury,
Is openly bewrayed
Both by the Judge and Jury;
For Lawyers have so many quirks,
And are such curious skanners,
That they grow cunninger then we,
And do trappan Trappanners.

Fill. 6.
Our dyceing Trade is down too,
For when we do begin
By drilling ways to draw
A younger Brother in
The Soldier falls upon us
And proves the best Projector.

Nim. Faith every Red-coat now can make
A puppy of a Hector.

Enter Wat, a West Countryman. Fill. 7.
Stay prithee who comes here,

Nim. A gaping Country Clown.

Fill. Look how the slave does stare;

Nim. He Is newly come to town.

Filch. He gazeth in the air as if
The sky were full of Rockets;
Let Us fleece him.

Nim. But how shall we get
His hands out of his pockets?

Fill. 8.
Let me alone for that: I lately bought a glass,
Wherein all several colors may
Be seen that ever was,
If held up thus with both hands.

Nim. A pretty new design,
This trick will fetch his fingers out;

Filch. And hey then in go mine.

Tune changes. Wat. 9.
Our Taunton den is a dungeon,
And ^aith cham glad cham here,
This vamous zitty of Lungeon
Is worth all Zomerzet-zhere:
In Wagons, in Carts, and in Coaches
Che never did yet zee more horse,
The Wenches do zhine like Roches,
And as proud as my fathers vore horse.
10.
Che never zince che was able
To keep my vathers voulds,
Did ever zee such a stable
As thick a thing called Powls:
A Mezle in a red Jacket
Had like to have knack me down,
Because che'd undertake it
Held all the beast in the Town
11.
Ch'am come to zee my Lord Major,
And thick as do hang the Thieves,
Ch've forgot what vine neames they are;
(A meazle on them) the zhreeves,
They zay they wear Chains and Scarlets,
And vollow'd by many Guardiants,
Ch'ave lost the neams of the Varlets,
A mischief on them, the Sergeants.
12.
And now chill walk-my stations
To every place in Town,
Che mean to buy new vashons,
Iche have above fifty pound;
Che took't away from vather
When he was gone a vield:
Cham come away the rather
'Cause ch'ave got a wench with child.

Filch. 13.
The Rainbow never knew
Such Colors as are here,

Tune change. Filcher and Nim. looking in the glass. Nim. Here Is Purple, Green
and Blew,

Wat. Zooks what have they got there.
Good morrow Master, what do you cal't,

Filch. Good morrow good man clot.

Wat. Nay vaith vine Gallant there you are out
My Neame is honest Wat.

Fill. 14.
I Will show thee such a slight that
Thou never saw honest Wat,
Neither by day nor night yet.

Wat. Yvaith ch'ud laugh at that.

Fill. Here take this glass into thy hand
And hold it to thy eyes,
Thou there wilt see more colors than
A Dyar can devise.

Wat. 15.
I cannot zee a color yet,

Nim. Thou do not hold it high,

Wat. Che hav't, che have it, ch'av got it now,

Nim. I faith and so have I.
Picks his Pocket.
Wat. Here Is black, and blew, and gray, and green,
And orange-tauny, white;
And now Ich ave lost all again.
Filch. picks the other Pocket.
Fill. In troth you are in the right,
16.
Now prithee tell me honest Wat,
How do thou like my glass

Wat. It is the vittest veat yvaith
That e're was brought to pass
And if that thou will spare it
Chill give thee money down.

Fill. I will have nothing for it feels in'^ pocket.
Chill give thee half a Crown.
17.
Yvaith cham very willing.

Nim. You shall not do it now,
To give thee vour zhilling,

Filch. Aside. It Is more then you can do.

Nim. Farewell good Wat, thou shall not pay,
Good morrow Gentlemen;

Wat. Chill get me gone vor vear that they
Zhould get my glass again.
Exit Wat.
Tune changes Fill. 18.
Quick let us share
For fear of apprehension.

Nim. Gusman could never
Compare with this invention.

Fill. That rustic Clown
Has brought a happy harvest.

Nim. Lay your Money down.

Fill. My purse is at your service
Crown for Crown.

Nim. 19.
Open the Purse,
Our Ship of Fortune sail's in it.

Open it. Fill. Oh heavy curse
It has nothing but nails in it.

Nim. Never men till now
Were gulled by such a Costard;

Fill. If we meet I vow
We Will bang the bacon bastard
black and blew.
20.
Unlock that font Open the ^ther.
Let Us enter by degrees in it.

Nim. A pox upon it,
There Is naught but bread and cheese in it.

Fill. Come let us depart
And drink a Saxon Rumkin.

Nim. I am vexed at heart,
But if I spare the Bomkin,
Hang me for it.
Exeunt. Enter Mol Medlar Sola, with a Basket. Tune changes. Soldiers fight
and Hectors rant on
Whilst poor Wenches go to rack,
Who would be a wicked wanton
Only for Suppers, Songs, and Sack,
To endure the alteration
Of these times that are so dead;
Thus to lead a long vacation
Without Money, Beer, or Bread.
22.
Farewell Bloomsberry and Sodom,
Lukeners-lane and Turnbull-street,
Woe was me when first I trod 'em
With my wild unwary feet.
I was bred a Gentlewoman,
But our family did fall
When the Gentry's coin grew common,
And the Soldiers shared it all.
23.
I was sure unto a Hector
Who has basely broke his vow,
Would I had a good projector
That would well support me now.
Who comes here? what simple Thumkin, Ent. Wat.
Oh! I guess him by his coat,
This is sure some Country Bumkin,
Now it is time to change my note.
24.
Tune changes, she sings and danceth. I can dance, and I can sing
I am good at either,
And I can do the the other thing
When we get together.
25.
I have lately lost my dear,
'Twas a holy Brother;
If he do not meet me here
I faith I Will get another.
26.
I can nimbly come above,
I can tumble under,
And If I do but like my Love,

Wat. What Vary's that is yonder?
27.
It Is a dainty dancing Girl,
Zhee would make me gladder,
Her vace does zyne like mother of Pearl,
chould choose no more and chad her.

Mol. 28.
A Dutchman loves his Pipe and Can,
A Jew does like a Turk well,
But I could hug a Countryman,
For he will do his work well.
29.
Citizens are full of slight,
They will cog and flatter;
But a Countryman will do me right.

Wat. Che long now to be at her.
30.
Good morrow Mistress Trip and go,

Mol. My Countryman I take it,
I love you Sir,

Wat Chill love thee to,
And vayth chil veze thy Jacket.

Mol. 31.
What Is thy name, come tell me that
Thou shall be my Jewel?

Wat. Why zom vorzooth do call me Wat,
But my neame is Water Gruel.
32.
Prithee zay, and ben't avrayd*
Art not thou a Pedlar*

Mol. I live close by in Tickle Yard,
My name is Mary Medlar.

Wat. 33.
Then zweet Mol come buss thy Wat,
Let us twain be merry:

Mol. I could nimbly dance, but that
My Basket makes we weary.

Wat. Give it me, chill dance a Spring,
Che have no veaver Lurden? He takes her Basket.

Mol. If thou will dance, then I will sing,
And thou shall bear the Burden.

Wat. 35.
A match, a match, it is well a vine, Both dance to their own singing.
We both zhall make some ztuff on it.

Mol. Unless thy feet keep pace with mine
Thou Wilt quickly have enough on it.

Wat. 36.
Well don Moll,

Moll it is well done Wat,

Wat. Chill do it to a tittle,

Mol. But I have too much strained my throat,
I prithee sing a little,

She does dance off. Wat. 37.
Fa la la la liera lo
This is pretty prancing,
We will go to Tickle Yard
When we have done dancing.
38.
Now che think ch'av vetcht it up
Zing a little Mary,
We will gulge a merry zup,
Zhuggar and Canary.
39.
Thou do dance and make no noise
Zhall I turn and kiss thee? Turns about and misseth her.
Prithee let me hear thy voice.
Hoop where the Devil is she?
40.
Zhe has left me all alone
Here to mum and mask it,
But yvaith if zhe be gone
Ich chill keep her Basket.
41.
Here Is good vortune come to me
In a merry minuit,
Now chill puttne down and zee
What zhee have gotten in it.
42.
Oh! woe, woe, what zhall chee do, Tune changes, he sets down the Basket and
looks in it.
Che con no know which way to go
With thick whore here and her vine zong,
Che have a bore her burden too long;
Che may curse the occasion that e're che came here,
Would che were again in Zomerzet-zhere.
43.
Pulls a Child out of the Basket. O! Lungeon Ich cham undone
Ch'ave a brungeon a daughter or a zon,
Thick a jewel has me begu^l'd,
Water Gruel must now veed the child,
Ich chud never be zorry, but vind it a place
If che had now but good store of Larzhant;
It looks Tory rory, and zmells zo of Mace,
That a zure it was got by zome zarzhant. Hushes it, carries it to the men,
then to the women.
44.
Goodman zhreeve ze, look on the vace
Vor a believe me it may be your own case,
Honest vree men Ich cham basely begeld,
Good a woman hold but the cheld,
Chil but step here hard by, it is but home to Taunden,
And chill bring ye zom gold in a Casket,
Thick all are hard hearted both women and men,
Che must march with my youth in a Basket,
Puts it in again to the Basket and Exit.
Tune change. Enter Filcher and Nim. Fill. 45.
We shall never have lucky minuit,
None of our designs will hit;

Nim. Some ill Planet sure is in it,
Fortune makes a fool of wit:
All our feats
Are simple cheats,
And destiny will have it so.

Fill. There Is nothing hits
But with those wits
That cheat Cum Privilegio.

Nim. The holy drum
And godly gun
Are now the only Engines that
Make Pimp and Whore
And Hector poor,
And wise men do they know not what.

Fill. 46.
All our joyful days do leave us,

Nim. Never were such times as these,

Fill. Every Bumkin can deceive us

Nim. With hob-nails

Fill. and with bread and cheese.

Nil. Though we mist it
He confessed it
That he brought up fifty pound,

Nim. Where he did it
How he hid it
Is the plot that may be found.

Filch. If we meet him
We will fit him.

Nim. Hark I here one coming in
Very pleasant They retreat to several corners.
It Is the Peasant

Filch. Now let us to our guards again.

Tune changes. Enter Wat with a little Trunck on a stick banging at his back.
[Wat] 47.
Now farawel Lungeon Iche may zing,
Chill no more here until the next spring,
Chave put in security vor the thing,
Which no body can deny.
48.
Che did a veat in Zomerzet-Zhere
Which vorst me at virst to zee vashons here,
Ich cham out of the vrying pan into the vere,
Che either must burn or vrye.
49.
In plush and in zatten a vynely wrought,
Ich chave laid out forty pound every groat,

Fill. I want a silk Wastcoat,

Nim. I lack a plush Coat,

Wat. Ch' have puttne all in the Trunk.
50.
Here Is zilk and gold, and zilver strings,
Fill. comes alone to Wat. Here Is Gloves, silk Hozen, Points, and Rings.

Fill. Stand

Wat. what are you

Fill. Lay down your things.
Why zure the Meazle is drunk.
51.
What would ye do to a poor Country man,

Nim. First lay down your Trunk, you shall know more anon:

Wat. And a very vine way to have my Trunk gone:

Filch. Do so or I Will knock thee down.

Wat. 52.
Nay vaith good man Gentle since ch' have zeen it man
Chill lay it down there, and if che can win it
Thou zhalt have my Trunk and all that is in it:
'Twill cost above vorty pound.

Fill. 53.
I Will have as much blood as thy heart can afford. Filch. dra^ and fights.

Wat. Thou cowardly knave, will thou vight with* zword;
But since it is but one, Ich che care not a Twoord,
And what do you think of another.
Nim. draw^
Nim. 54.
This Rapier I through thy body will run,

Wat. Ud zooks there is no vighting with two again one,
Ich che rather will trust to my legs and be gone.
Exit. Wat.
Fill. Why now gramercy brother.

Nim. 55.
The rascal already is run out of sight,

Fill. His hands are vile heavy.

Nim. His legs are (...) light,
The Plush for a Jacket, I claim as my right,

Fill. Which really I deny.
For was it not I that proved the Projector.

Nim. But if this good sword had not been your Protector,
The clown would have made you a pitiful Hector,
And beaten you.

Fill. Sir ye lie.
57.
My force has been tried against Castles and Towers*
The prize as it lies is equally ours,
Let victory make it out mine or yours,

Nim. I grant it with all my heart.
They fight. Enter Mol.
Mol. 58.
What mad men are these! pray what do you mean,
I never did see such a sorrowful scene;
Nay sweet Mr. Filcher

Fi. stand further ye Queen,
I Will make the proud Rascal smart.

Mol. 59.
You always were friends, what makes ye fall out?
Pray tell me true, what is the quarrel about?

Nim. This duel will suddenly end all the doubt:

Mol. I Will suffer between your swords. They make passes. Moll is between.
60.
E're such a kind couple of Hectors as ye
Shall squabble and quarrel for Paddington-tree.
Jack Filcher, Tom Nim, be counseled by me,
Deliver your Cause in words,
61.
You know that the Law against Duels is high*

Nim. That Rodomont ado there gave me the lie,

Mol. Pray do but consider that Tyburn is nigh;

Nim. That very word cools my wrath.
62.
For my own part I only would live by my Trade,

Fill. The Bargain betwixt us must end by the blade;

Mol. Pray let me but know the conditions ye made,
I Will judge it between ye both.

Fill. 63.
I Will tell you then how the quarrel did rise,
This fellow and I have took a rich prize,

Nim. And now he denies me my share in it.

Fill. he lies,
We agreed that the sword should decide it.
64
This Trunk is well furnished as e're it can hold,
With silk and with velvet, with silver and gold.

Mol. Turn't all into money, and when it is sold,
You equally may divide it.
65.
But first what assurance have you when you win it,
It Is worth all this danger

Nim. We yet have not see*

[Mol.] Why then let us open't and see what is in it,
That every thing may be shown.

Nim. 66.
A match, let her break the Trunk open and see

Mol. It may be by this means you will sooner agree.

Fill. Faith open't or shut it it is all one to me, Mol opens The trunk.
I vow I Will have all or none.

Mol. 67.
Then look on your bargain, you both are beguiled, Mol tak^ out the child*
Pray tell me if this be the velvet three pil'd,
Is this figured satin?

Nim. I vow it is a child.
You swore you would have all or none.

Fill. 68.
I Will stand to my bargain, for I will have none.

Nim. What? can you so suddenly alter your tone.

Mol. Come kiss it and love it, for faith it is your own.
Remember when we were alone.
69.
For this pretty Babe I have shed many showers,
And suffered a thousand disconsolate hours,
As sure as it is mine, I Am certain its yours,
I never knew Man but you.

Fill. 70.
These Projects to me are Riddles and Charms,
How came the child hither?

Mol. For fear of worse harms,
I left it even now in a Countreymans's arms,
A fellow that I never knew.
71.
'Twas left to be lost though the plot would not hit*
I never could see you to tell you of it,
A Countryman brought it.

Fill. A pox of his wit,
I would I were rid of my life.

Mol. 72.
Before I knew Filcher, I was a pure Maid,
Pray do but Remember the Contract we made;
You said you would wed me, and live by your trade,

Fill. I Will presently make thee My Wife.

Mol. 73.
For all the worlds wealth I will never be a whore.

Fill. I Will purchase new Credit upon an old score.

Nim. I Will deal in these damnable courses no more.

All. We every one will mend.

Fill. 74.
I never will quarrel, or swagger and roar,

Nim. Then make the poor Simpletons pay all the score.

Mol. I never will do as I have done before.

All. We every one will mend.

Enter Wat Solus. [Wat.] Tune chang^ 75.
Ch' have overcome my voes,
And Watty now is vree;
It is no zin to cousen those,
That would have cheated me:
76.
Had che but met with one,
Che had not been o'remaster'd;
Ich che wonder what they thought upon,
when they did vind the Bastard.
77.
Did ever vellow vinde
Zuch zimple zots as these,
To leave my fifty pounds behind,
And steal my Bread and Cheese:
78.
These zitty thieves are fooled,
That meant to do me hurt,
The Meazles could not vind my gold,
che knittne in my zhurt;
79.
Ich che cannot choose but zmile,
That men who can talk lattin,
Zhould be zuch fools to take a Child
Vor velvet, zilk, and zatten:
80.
But Pride will have a vall,
The Proverb zaith as much;
Now how do you my Measters all,
Ich cham com to laugh a touch.
81.
God bless my Lady Zhreeve,
And all that noble pack;
Ch'am almost dead with grief,
Che want a cup a zack.
82.
God zave my measter too,
And zend him to live long;
Vayth now ch'a nothing else to do,
Chill zing a merry zong.
A Song on the twelve Companies.
83.
THe other day among many papers,
Che vown'd a vine zong of the Merchants and
Drapers.
The Grocers, the Goldsmiths, the Tailors and Skinners,
And many zuch vinical zinners.
1 Mercers. 84.
The Mercer virst a vine dapper blade is,
He zells ye zoft zattin, and very well paid is;
He makes his Commodity cover the Ladies,
Zo zoft and zweet his Trade is.
2. Grocers. 85.
The Grocer lays his zhuggered baits,
He loves to have his zhip zail in the Straits;
He deals for sweet Almonds, Prunello's, and Dates,
With Ladies as light as his weights.
3. Drapers. 86.
The Drapers next in my fancy does hover.
It is the best Trade betwixt Barwick and Dover;
But when his zhort Yard the women discover,
They will have a handful over.
4. Fishmongers. 87.
And now have at the Fishmongers jacket*
It proves a good trade as the Taverns do make it:
But of all the vish in the zea chil undertake it,
He Would rather have a virgin naked.
5. Goldsmiths. 88.
The Goldsmiths stall will make me to stop,
For Goldsmiths-Hall has been a great prop;
Of all the rich mysteries this is the top,
The Tower was a Goldsmith's zhop.
6. Merchant-Taylors. 89.
The Merchant-Taylors may not be outed,
His Calling has been e're zince Adam was routed:
A zuit makes a Gallants wealth not to be doubted,
That is but a Beggar without it.
7. Skinners. 90.
The Skinners hate Ich che must not incurr,
He covers the Corpse of your Worshipful Zur,
And cleaves to your Aldermans back like a bur,
Whose lineing is Voxes vur.
8. Haberdashers. 91.
Your Haberdashers Art che may call,
The only fine trade that does cover us all;
But woe to the Cavalier that did vall
Into Haberdashers-Hall.
9. Salters. 92.
The Zalters trade we zhall not omit,
The Scholars zay Zalt is an Emblem of Wit;
But vaith I believe they love a vresh bit,
When Mutton and Capers meet.
10. Iron-mongers. 93.
The fame of Iron-mongers do ring,
The strength of the Mettle can conquer a King;
The Helmet, Musket, and Gauntlet can bring
A Scepter out of a Sling.
11. Vintners. 94.
The Vintner's Art but view men do know,
Vor it is a zience too zuttle to zhow;
The Devil and he a Conjuring go,
When both are a brewing below.
12. Cloth-workers. 95.
The Cloth-workers trade is a very vine thing,
And of all the Trades may be counted the King;
But yet he will merrily tipple and zing,
'Till his wits go a Wool-gathering.
96.
And now I^ che hope no Tradesman will take
Exzeptions at me vor my merriment sake;
Their Trades are all good, but the Vintner's the bonniest,
God bless them and make them all honest.
97.
Ic che now will go home to Zomerzetzheere,
And tell all the (...) what vine things are here;
Chil jog to my (...) and zee what God has zent her,
And chil come here again next Winter.

End of the Representations.
Acrostichs, Annagrams, Epigrams, Elegies, AND Epitaphs.

Acrostichs.
An Acrostich on Mrs. Hester Noy.
How much I am obliged to your worth,
Each faculty I have cannot set forth;
Sure I shall dye in debt, unless you please
To bind me more by granting a Release:
Excellent Lady, may the Powers above
Reward you with those joys which Angels love.
Nothing that has affinity with ill
Oppose your understanding or your will,
Your Virtues, which so copiously extend,
Eternity can only comprehend.
A double Acrostich on Mrs. Susanna Blunt.
Sweet Soul of goodness, in whose Saint-like breast
Virtue Vows dwelling to make Beauty blessed;
Sure Sighing Citherea sits, your Eyes
Are Altars whereon she might sacrifice:
Now None will of the Paphean Order be,
Natur's New work transcends a Deity;
Arabia's Aromaticks court your scent,
Bright Beauty makes your Gazers eloquent;
Let Little Cupid his lost eyes obtain,
Veiled, Viewing you, would strike him blind again.
Nay, Never think I flatter, If you be
Thus To none else, by Love, you are to Me.
An Acrostick on two pairs of inseparable Friend^ who were Married in one Day^
A fourfold Acrostick.
Jove Join these Pairs, and May each blessed Bride
Obtain A guard of Angels for A Guide.
Heaven, Nature, Virtue, Reason in communion,
Nobilitate Enrich, and Love Your union:
Grace Faith and Knowledge Bind ye, may you be
Each Others bliss, No evil Injure ye.
Let nothing Re-divide; Eternal Rest,
Love, Dwell and Last in each Diviner Breast.
A cross Acrostick on two Crossed Lovers.
Though crossed in our Affections, still the flames
Of Honor shall secure our noble Names;
Nor shall Our fate divorce our faith, Or cause
The least Mislike of love's Diviner laws.
Crosses sometimes Are cures, Now let us prove,
That no strength Shall Abate the power of love:
Honor, Wit, Beauty, Riches wise men call,
Frail Fortune's Badges, In true love lies all.
Therefore to him we Yield, our Vows shall be
Paid; -- Read and written in Eternity:
That All may know when men grant no Redress,
Much love can sweeten the unhappines S.
An Epithalamium in a double Acrostick, written on the noble Names and sacred
Nuptials of the worthily honored EWDWARD MARROW Esquire, and the most truly
virtuous Mrs. ANNE GRANTHAM.
Eminent Pair! what ever Sidney saw in Argalus and his PARTHENIA
Does figure out your Excellence; how then shall I depict ye with so poor a PenN
What powers shall I implore? Apollo's gone, for whom my Muse lies drenched in
HelicoN
Arts are malignant, Poems out of date, the Layman calls Learning a ReprobatE
Reason is banished, and what e're did spring from those fair banks where peace
was flourishinG
Divinest pair, whose bright perfections are more luminary then the morning
StarR
May all the pleasures Phoebus ever saw in Europe, Asia, or AMERICA
Attend your genial joys; what Nature can contribute to the excellence of maN
Redouble your felicity; may night and day contend which shall yield most
delighT
Riches and honor, virtue (the best wealth) beauty, with all the circumstance
of healtH
Obey your wish: and he that will not pray as I have done, is Love's AnathemA
War never fright ye, wherefoe're you come may bright Apollo's harp drown
Mars his druM
Intemperance.
A Fancy upon Words.
HE that is devoted to the -- GLASS,
The Dice or a lascivious -- LASS,
At his own price is made an -- ASS.
He that is greedy of the -- GRAPE,
On Reason does commit a -- RAPE,
And changes habit with an -- APE.
The Lover whose Devotion -- FLIES
Up to the Sphere where Beauty -- LIES,
Makes Burning-glasses of his -- EYES.
If long he to that Idol -- PRAY,
His sight, by Love's inflaming -- RAY,
Is lost for ever and for -- AY.
An Epitaph in a double Acrostich, composed and fixed on the Stone of Mrs.
Joane Ward.
In this plain piece of humble earth lies one
Whom no unworthy feet should tread upon,
One whose chaste life did very much improve
ADaughters duty and a Sisters love;
Almighty God was still her Contemplation,
Religion was her daily recreation:
Nothing came in her maiden thoughts that could
Denle the fountain of her Virgin blood;
Eternal joys contain her now, let us then
Mourn all until we meet with her again.
ANNAGRAMS.
CHARLES STUART: Annagram, AS CLEAR AS TRUTH.
Exposition.
CHARLES STUART makes it out in age and youth,
His Name and Nature are as CLEAR AS TRUTH.
CHARLES STUART: Annagr. CALLS TRUE HEARTS.
Expo.
What man who either does love Arms or Arts,
That goes not when Charles Stuart, calls true hearts.
PARLIAMENT: Annagr. I TRAP AL MEN.
Expo.
When the Long Parliament was sitting, then
This Annagram was right, I TRAP AL MEN.
OLIVER CROMWELL: Annagr. RULE WELL OR I COM.
Expo.
RULE WELL OR I COM cried the red nosed Jew,
It Is just (since you trap all men) I trap you.
ROUND -- HEADS: Annagr. HEAVENS ROD.
Expo.
When Cavaliers by sin offended God,
The bloody Roundheads were made HEAVEN'S ROD.
TEACHERS: Annagram. CHEATERS. SAINTS: An. STAINS.
Ex.
When Heresy creeps into factious Brains,
TEACHERS are CHEATERS, and such SAINTS are STAINS.
MINISTER: An. MENTIRIS.
Ex.
When Presbyter inflamed with a false fire is,
A man may tell him, MINISTER, MENTIRIS.
LOST: An. STOLE.
Ex.
This Annagram mysterious sense may boast,
For what is STOLE is found in what was LOST.
TOAST: An. A SOTT.
Ex.
A TOAST is like A SOTT, or what is most,
Comparative, A Sott is like a Toast;
For when their substances in liquor sink,
Both properly are said to be in Drink.
End of the Annagrams.
Epigrams.
1. Epigram.
A Knight and's Man, both being at an Inn,
The Knight having well eaten, did begin
To say to's Servant, John I have supt well,
Have our horse done so too? I cannot tell,
Replied the Man, for ought I know they may,
I Am sure I saw the Oastler take away.
2. Epigr.
One said Paul's Church looked with the Steeple on it,
Just like a Trunk with a hat-case upon it;
No, quoth another, it is not like't at all,
I Will tell you what it is like, it is like to fall.
3. Epigr.
Sim seeing Harry have a broken head,
Asked against what he broke it; Harry said,
Against a thing that often does me ill,
To tell you true, I broke't against my will.
4. Epigr.
Three Scholars having barely dined, and growing
A little wanton after it; were throwing
Their bones at one another, a fourth Man,
Who had with plenty dined himself, began
To tell them that their sport was very dull,
Which did declare their bellies were not full,
And in a word his meaning thus expressed,
If they were full, your bones would be at rest.
5. Epigram.
A Knave and Whore of modesty bereft,
Being at that Sport which will never be left,
Against a Gate, in a place very wide,
Was questioned of a friend, by whom they were 'spi'd,
Why he would deal with such a dirty Slut
In a wide field, against a Gate too? but
The other made reply, pray do not prate,
The Slut is good enough to prop-a-gate.
6. Epigr.
A Sergeant sitting at the Compter-gate,
Fell fast asleep, which made another strait
Grow something witty, and to break a jest,
This fellow, says he, sure has none to arrest;
And, in mere spightfulness, this envious Elf
(The Sergeant) is Arresting of himself.
7. Epigr.
On Mr. Garrat, and Mr. Chambers.
Garrat and his Friend Chambers, having done
Their City business, went to Padington,
And coming near that fatal place where men
(I mean Offenders) never return again;
Looking on Tyburn in a merriment,
Quoth Chambers, here is a pretty Tenement,
Had it a Garrat: Garrat hearing that,
Replied, Friend Chambers, I do wonder at
Your simple censure, you prate like a Parrat,
There must be Chambers e're there be a Garrat.
8. Epigram.
On a Lady whose name was Mrs. Brown.
We praise the fair, and our Inventions wrack,
In pleasing Sonnets to applaud the Black;
We court this Ladies Eye, that Mistress Hair,
The fair love black, the black affect the fair;
Yet neither sort I court, I dote upon
Nor fair nor black, but a complexion
More rare then either, she that is the Crown
Of my entire affection is Brown.
And yet she is fair, it is strange, how can it be,
That two Complexions can in one agree;
Do I love Brown, my Love can please my eye,
And sat my narrowest Curiosity:
If I like fa^r, she has so sweet a grace,
A man might leave an Angel for her face.
Let any judge then which Complexion's rarest,
In my opinion she is Brown that is fairest.
9. Epigram.
On a little Gentleman, and Mr. Story a tall man.
This little Blade (by the other man's vain glory
It seems was roughly used, (so says the Story)
But being strongly heated, and high flown,
In rage he flies on Story, pulls him down:
But when they ris, I know not how it fated,
One got the worst, the Story was translated
From white to red, but e're the fight was ended,
It seems one, whom the little man befriended,
Came in and parted them; the little Blade
There Is no man could entreat, nor yet persuade,
But he would fight still, till another came,
And with persuasions counseled against the same,
'Twas in this manner, Friend, you shall not fight
With one that is so unequal to your height.
Story is tall; the other made reply,
I Would pluck him down, were he three Stories high.
10. Epigram.
On May-poles.
Hypocrites are like those May-poles they mock,
Rootless and fruitless, with a Weathercock.
11. Epigram.
On a red nosed Parson.
A jolly Parson of a comely grace,
Who partly carried his hot zeal in's face,
Being at's Inn, and sitting by the fire,
A pipe of good Tobacco does require;
The boy straight brings it him, and to his hand
Commits it with a kindled firebrand;
But as he was at lighting on it, some small
Sparks from the coal upon his hand did fall:
The witty boy perceiving these mishaps,
Cries, Mr. Parson, hold Sir, your nose drops.
12. Epigram.
There was a time a difference began
Betwixt a Welchman and an English man,
Each praising of his Country, did express
How much they did abound in fruitfulness;
The Englishman did tell the Welchman, that
There was a piece of ground he had been at,
In York shire, which so fruitful was of grass,
That when a staff was thrown into it, it was
In one nights time so overgrown, they could
Not see it next day: The Welchman cries out, hold,
That was not worth the praising, In our Land,
Quoth Taffie, I would have you understand,
We have such grass, that turn your horse in the ground*
And before morning come, he shall not be found.
End of the Epigrams*
Elegies and Epitaphs of two sorts, woeful and witty.
An Elegy and Epitaph composed acrostichally on two names occasioned by the
Death of Mrs. MARY KETTLE, Wife to Mr. HUMPHREY KETTLE of Hollowway beyond
Islington; she dyed in Childe-bed.
Hang all the Rooms with Black, let none appear
Unless he can dissolve into a tear,
Modesty, Loyalty, and Love are all
Put in this Cos^in, it is their Funeral
Heaven has took more good then 'twill (I fear)
Return the world again these hundred year:
Every Grace that makes a happy life
You might have found in this dead virtuous Wife.
Knowledge and true Humility were met
Exactly in this curious Cabinet;
Truth was her guide, for she (we will boldly say)
Traveled from Hollow-way the Holy way:
Let all therefore that wish their own souls safe
Endeavor to deserve her Epitaph.
The Epitaph on her Name.
Mourn good Reader, here lies one
As chaste in life as this cold stone;
Religion, Grace, and so much good
Yet never dwelt in flesh and blood.
Kind as Saints, no sweeter Bride
Ever blessed a Husband's side,
That in Childe-bed sheet was driven
To be truly Church't in Heaven,
Led by Angels, where the King
Eternal Crowns the Gossipping.
An Elegy and Epitaph on the Death of William Barckley, Esquire, one of the
Aldermen of the City of London.
STay and release my wonder you that can
Resolve what may complete a perfect man,
So absolute that future times may well
Admire at, but shall never parallel;
Let him be wise, and learned, his better part
Be richly furnished with transcendent Art;
Let nature be his friend, and in his mind
Let Virtues choice endowments be refined:
He will come short of him, whose body lies
At this time ^loating in his Mourners eyes;
For in this Monument is one in whom
Faith, Hope, and Charity took up their room:
One who has gathered Virtues since his Birth,
Enough to crown a man in Heaven and Earth;
When Acts of Equity were in his trust
He ever was both merciful and just:
The Poor he pitied, but his soul was never
To wicked greatness an Idolater;
He had indeed a heart which the worst times
Could never tempt to profitable Crimes,
His thoughts were pure, his actions free, his store
Was made a good Exchequer for the Poor:
Though Envy often on Envy does attend,
He forced Envy's self to be his friend.
Forbear more words (my fant'sie) you are too weak,
Great griefs are silent when small sorrows speak;
Although his body sleep till the day come
That shall unite him to his ancient home;
His soul is mounted on Seraphick Wings,
Unto the Mansion of the King of Kings.
The Epitaph.
Weep Reader, weep, for if we see
Thy Fountains dry, no man will be
Persuaded to relent for thee.
In this Monumental clay
Lies pious dust till it obey
The Summons of the latter day.
You that ransack Earth and Skies
For all worth which good men prize,
Look no further, Here it lies.
But (to sum up all in brief)
He whose eyes are void of grief
Has a heart without belief.
He whose soul does not desire
To weep before it do retire
Would laugh were all the world on fire.
An Epitaph on a Child.
Ladies that are young and wise
Shall I tell you of a prize,
Here a box of beauty lies.
A Jewel hid from vulgar view,
Whose excellency if you knew,
Your eyes would drop like morning dew.
Dame Nature's Diamond which when
She saw it was too high for men,
Showed it, and shut it up again.
An Epitaph supposed to be written by A Gentleman (...) himself, who dyed of a
Disease, called by the nam^ of a Bad Wife.
Nay tread and spare not Passenger,
My sense is now past feeling,
Who to my grave a wound did bear
Within, past Physics healing.
But do not (if thou be to wed)
To read my story tarry,
Lest thou creep into my cold bed
rather then live to marry.
For a long strife with a lewd wife
Worst of all ill beside,
Made me grow weary of my life,
So I fell sick and dyed.
An Epitaph on Mr. John Kirk, Merchant.
Reader, within this Dormitory lies
The wet Memento of a Widows Eyes,
A Kirk, though not of Scotland, one in whom
Loyalty lived, and Faction found no room.
No Conventicle-Christian, but he died
A Kirk of England by the Mothers side:
In brief, (to let you know what you have lost,
Kirk was a Temple of the Holy Ghost.
An end of the El^gies and Epitaphs.
A Canting Rogue Paralleled with a Phanatick.
IS the worlds running Ulcer, an unfix't
Piece of mortality, begot betwixt
A Tinker and his Doxy in a Den
Of Filchers, which they call the bowzing ken:
Nursed by a maunding Mort, whose Mother tongue
Directs him first the way to Nipp a Bung,
And mill the lower from him whose gazing eyes
Are fixed upon London's varieties,
That the sad Country man is forced to score
At's lodging, till he be supplied with more,
Whilst the impatient Lawyer makes a pause,
Pernicious enough to spoil his Cause:
Nor can the ablest Council tell him when,
Or by what trick to gain his purse again.
Thus is poor Colter poisoned with a drench,
Made of Law Latin, and low Pedlers French.
A Language which admits no derivation
But is entire and had its generation,
Without dispute, from Babel Tower's conclusion,
For it is used in nothing but confusion,
As Prigging Prancers, Tipping Nab's, and such
Phrases as make the slovenly Low Dutch
A polite Dialect; he is one whose bane
Does much participate with that of Cain,
The Brother-killing President, whose fate
Gives him the title of a Runnagate;
His body is his land, and every louse
Upon It, are Cattle, the next hedge, his house;
He pretends Palmestry, and as he passes,
Through Villages, the gamesome Country Lasses
Do get about him, and do much importune
The Rogue with meat, to tell them a good fortune;
Or else they will give him nothing, and (to ease 'em
In their desires) the Knave knows how to please 'em;
He and the Annabaptists were in season,
One canted Felony, and 'tother Treason:
And if his Mort with a French Coltstaff strike,
It Is ten to one they snuffle both alike;
Both preach in Barns, and teach in the same tones,
One storms a Henroost, 'tother strikes at Thrones,
Both hate Authority, for they 're often crossed,
One with the Noose, the other the Whipping-poast.
In point of Baptism, for ought I know,
The Rogue's the better Christian of the two:
The Annabaptist in his teaching tone
Defyes Godfathers, he will have twelve or none;
In Marriages the Rogue and He accords,
For man and wife take one another words,
And very fruitful in their spawn they be,
Both deal in liberty and Leachery:
To conclude all, they are a brace of men
That are so like, they are the worse again;
Whose dispositions could a Limner paint,
You Would not know which is Rogue, or which is Saint.
On the Ordinance prohibiting Cavaliers to wear Swords, April, 1646.
YOu of the Royalty, attend your Summons,
It Is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons
Assembled in that sacred place which we
Must look upon as England's destiny,
That all such dreadful men whose fame does ring
For active Loyalty to God and King,
Laws and their native Liberties, shall be
Disarmed and made a Swordless Cavalry;
For some such cause as formerly was given
When men were levied against Charles and Heaven,
At that time when the Public Faith withstood
The Creed and Plate was melted into Blood,
When Subjects sought their Master to betray
At the old rate of thirty pence a day;
When Prentices against all Rules of Reason
Were early Freemen in the Trade of Treason,
When by the Factious Commons wise fore-casting,
Triaenial was a word for Everlasting;
When the Mad Shires did with Petitions run,
Humbly desiring they may be undone;
Not dreaming that our English Inquisitions
Did only sit to answer such Petitions;
When States-mens Trunks were filled up to the brim,
In Anno Primo Regni Iohannis Pym:
With more such reasons which are yet unknown,
You are to lay your Bloody Bilbo's down,
And march disbladed, since the House of Lords
Have voted Honest men must wear no Swords.
And shall this daunt your Royal Spirits that
Have gained a Fame time cannot ruinate;
Your Enemies, though with a wrong pretense,
Have done you right, and put your Innocence
In the true garb, when did you ever see
Innocence figured with Artillery?
What need you Weapons since there is not one
Of worth enough to draw your Sword upon
That Is not your Sovereigns Friend, and is it not pity,
On the sinister spawn of a Committee,
To vent your valiant wrath, calm your high passion,
They dare as well do that deserves damnation
In such an Act that is pardon proof as see
You wear your Swords, it is their jealousy,
Of you, their King, nay even of their God,
When have you known Children delight the Rod?
So Cowards when their paler fears increase,
Take blows, and subtly bind men to the Peace:
What need you mutter that your Swords are gone,
Since you may see Justice her self has none;
Your Valor is not questioned, it is for that
You are disarmed, nor do they wonder at
Your swordless side, for all that justly owe
Allegiance to Valor, truly know,
A bladeless Cavalier can more afford,
Then he whose thigh is branded with a Sword;
Be not dismayed (and you in time shall see)
The Kings Cause has an occult Quality;
Your Swords are needless, sing, be merry, and
Pray for the King, it is fit you understand,
Man's ineffectual aid is vain and light,
When He that made the hand intends to fight;
For you will find when Rebels Race is run
They shall be conquered without Sword or Gun.
On a view of London and Westminster on the other side the Water. 1658.
THis pair of sinful Cities, we, with sorrow,
May parallel with Sodom and Gomorrah,
Though one Crime greater then they durst do there,
(Never to be forgot) was acted here;
Cities so pampered up with prosperous sins,
That (if they could) they would ravish Cherubins,
Cramp their Creator, and with popular stings
Destroy him 'cause he is the King of Kings.
A Perjured Pair, who to secure their own
Will Pimp whilst Fornication tups the Throne,
Prostitute sacred Places, keep the Door
Where each Lay-Lecher makes the Church a Whore*
They swallow Oaths and wicked Protestations,
And, with their Axe, cut off (God grant me patience)
The Head of -- Peace, therefore they are, be 't known,
A Decolated Corporation.
In brief he never shall be who, sides with them,
A Citizen of New Jerusalem.
The Players Petition to the Long Parliament, after being long Silenced, that
they might Play again, 1642.
Heroic Sirs, you glorious nine or ten,
That can dispose the King or the Kings men,
Who by sublimer Rhetoric agree
That Prisons are the Subjects Liberty;
And though we brought in Silver at low rates,
Ye plunder to secure us our Estates,
Your serious subtlety is born so grave,
We dare not tell you how much Power ye have;
Or else you dare not hear us, how ye frown
If we but say King Pym wears Charles his Crown:
Such a word's Treason, and you must not hear it,
Treason to speak it, and yet none to wear it.
Oh! wise mysterious what shall we
Do for such men as you e're forty three
Be quite expired, and an unlucky season
Shall put a period to Triaenial Treason?
When Master Pym your wise judicious Scholar
Ascends his Throne, and takes his Crown in Collar:
When the Field's pitched, and some (for all their skill)
Shall fight a fearful Battle on Tower Hill,
When Canterbury coming forth, shall wonder
You have so long secured him from the thunder
Of your King-hunting Prentices, and the Major
Shall justle zealous Isaac from his Chair;
Then Cheap Side Cross shall be new guilt, new painted,
Gregory be made a Sheriff, and Tyburn sainted:
Fore-knowing Brooks, thou drew'st a happy lot,
'Twas a wise bolt although it was soon shot.
But whilst you reign, our low Petition craves
That we, the King's true Subjects, and your Slaves
May in our Comic Mirth and Tragic Rage
Set open the Theater and show the Stage;
The Shop of Truth and Fancy, where we vow
Not to act any thing you will disallow;
We will not dare at your strange Votes to jeer,
Or personate King Pym with his State fleire:
Aspiring Cataline shall be forgot,
Bloody Sejanus, or who ere could plot
Confusion against a State, the War betwixt
The Parliament and just Harry the Sixth,
Shall have no thought or mention, 'cause their power
Not only placed, but lost him in the Tower;
Nor will we parallel with least suspicion,
Your Synod with the Spanish Inquisition,
Or like the grave advice of learned Pym,
Make a Malignant, and then Plunder Him.
All these and such like actions that may mar
Your soaring plots, or show you what you are,
We shall omit, lest our inventions shake 'em,
Why should the men be wiser then you will make 'em:
Methinks there should not such a difference be
^Twixt your Professions and our Quality.
You Meet, Plot, Act, talk high with minds immense,
The like with us, but only we speak sense
Inferior unto yours, we can tell how
To depose Kings, there we know more then you;
Although not more then what ye would, so we
Do in our vaster Priv'ledges agree;
But that yours are the larger, and controuls,
Not only Lives and Fortunes, but men's souls;
Declaring by an Enigmatick sense,
A privilege on each man's Conscience;
As if the Trinity could not consent
To save a Soul, but by the Parliament:
We make the people laugh at some vain show,
And, as they laugh at us, they do at you,
Only in the contrary we disagree,
For you can make them cry faster then we*
Your Tragedies more real are expressed,
You murder men in earnest, we in jest;
There we come short, but if you follow't thus,
Some wise men fear you will come short of us.
As humbly as we did begin, we pray,
Dear Schoolmasters, you will give us leave to Play,
Quickly before the King comes, for we would
Be glad to say, y've done a little good
Since ye have sat, your play is almost done,
As well as ours, would 't had never been begun;
But we shall find, e're the last Act be spent,
Enter the King, Exit the Parliament,
And hey then up go we, who by the frown
Of guilty Members have been voted down.
Yet you may still remain, and sit, and vote,
And through your own beam see your brothers mote,
Until a legal trial show how
You Have used the King, and hey then up go you.
So pray your humble slaves (with all their powers)
That when they have their due you may have yours.
SONGS.
The Royal Vision.
The Tune of Greece and Troy.
1.
LAte being tired out in a tedious march,
I stretched my wearied limbs
Under a Willow Arch;
In such a shade by passion hurled,
Men crossed in love elect,
That fain would leave the world
At such a season, when the sweet quire of fowls
Had left the neighboring thickets
To the rule of Bats and Owls:
Close by the flowery fringed verge of a stream,
Sleeping ceizing all my senses
Straight I thus began to dream.
2.
To my afflicted faith appeared*
A Princely person that
Was all in blood besmeared;
The ruined raiments that she wore,
Were Kingly mourning Purple,
All besprinkled with gore;
From her exuberous eyes troops of tears trickled down
Her head did wear a Church,
Invested with a battered Crown;
Many a woeful wound her body did bear,
Like one fled from the furious hands
Of some salt Ravisher.
3.
On her Imperial Front she wears
ENGLAND
In golden Characters;
But so demolisht now they show,
As monumental letters made
A thousand years ago:
Then as a torrent whose swift course was restrained,
Her floodgates all flew open,
And with woe she thus complained:
Oh whither bear you all my bees thus in swarms!
What fury so afrights ye,
That ye beat these loud alarms?
4.
Oh you whom Peace and Plenty swayed,
Why in these wicked war^ike Arms
Are you arrayed?
Where is the foe? or having none,
What wonder works this wildness*
That you needs will prove your own?
You that when as you were united might
Have vanquished Turk and Pagan,
Or put Antichrist to flight;
But from what unredeemed spirit did spring
The plot of all your plagues,
To quarrel with a peaceful King.
5.
What Itch of Innovation wrought
Your factious humors, when the Clergy
To the Block ye brought?
Or why my Pastors do you keep
In Prisons, whilst the Wolf abroad
Does only guard the Sheep?
But why (in brief* do you such strange crimes commit,
That want a proper name,
Or ever man was damned for yet?
Oh! woeful Island, flow in tears to the Main,
Thy sheep are lost in the pasture,
For their plenty proves their pain.
6.
Why with pretense of righteous Cause,
Do you destroy the ancient
^iberties and Laws?
Or clad in Arms a furious fry,
^o fight against the guide
Of God like Monarchy?
How can a wild
Divided power do as much,
^s One that is Anointed,
Whom it is terrible to touch?
E're such a strange misguided Crew
Granted be
Resolve to know the sad event
Of this short Prophecy.
7.
This great and glorious
Liberal Land
Seedless shall lie,
Alas! the Plow will want a hand;
And when the Field
No fruit affords,
Sickles shall be converted
Into life depriving swords;
Strangers from far
This fertile soil shall devour
Your Wives and modest Matrons,
Lust and Rapine shall deflower;
Famine and Plague
Shall both at once walk the Round,
Then Swords shall be Physicians,
And by killing cure the wound.
8.
Churches and Towns,
With parallelles spires,
Shall vanish in the furious flames
Of unconfined fires,
Such shrieks from earth
To heaven shall fly,
That death will be less torment,
Then to hear each other dye.
Who ever famine escapes,
the sword shall destroy,
A story sad and truer
Then the dreadful tale of Troy.
Frighted I waked
And on my knee did implore,
Some mercy for my former crimes,
And vowed to fight no more.
The Farewell.
1.
FAir Fidelia leave me now,
I may no more
Thy Deity adore,
Nor offer to thy shrine,
I serve one more divine,
And greater far then you;
Hark, the trumpets call away,
I must go,
Lest the foe
Lose the King and win the day.
Let Us march bravely on,
Charge them in the Van,
Our Cause Gods is,
Though the ods is
Ten times ten to one.
2.
Tempt no more, I may not yield,
Although thy eyes
A Kingdom might surprise;
Leave off thy wanton tales,
The highborn Prince of Wales
Is mounted in the Field,
Where the loyal Gentry flock,
Though forlorn,
Nobly born,
Of a near decaying stock,
Cornish boys be bold,
Never lose your hold,
He that loiters,
Is by Traitors
Basely bought and sold.
3.
One kiss more, and then farewell,
Nay now give over,
I prithee fool no more;
Why cloud'st thou so thy beams?
I see by these extremes
A woman's heaven or hell.
Pray the King may have his own,
That the Queen
May be seen
With her Babes on Englands Throne;
Rally up your men,
One shall vanquish ten:
Victory we
Come to try thy
Favor once again.
The Resolution. 1642.
1.
ASk me no more why there appears
Daily such troops of Dragoneers,
Since it is requisite you know
They rob cum Privilegio.
2.
Ask me not why the Jail confines
Our Hierarchy of best Divines,
Since 'twas allowed by full consent,
The Privilege of Parliament.
3.
Ask me no more why from Blackwall
Such tumults come unto White Hall,
Since some in Parliament agree,
^Tis for the Subjects Liberty.
4.
Ask me not why to London comes
So many Muskets, Pikes, and Drums,
So that we fear they will never cease,
It Is to procure the Kingdoms Peace.
5.
Ask me no more why little Finch
From Parliament began to flinch,
Since such as dare to Hawk and Kings,
May easily clip a Finches wings.
6.
Ask me no more why Strafford's dead,
Or why they aimed so at his head;
Faith all the reason I can give,
It Is thought he was too wise to live.
7.
Ask me no more where is all the Plate
Brought in at such an easy rate,
It to the owners back they will bring,
In case it fall not to the King.
8.
Ask me no^ why the House delights
Not in our two wise Kentish Knights,
Their Counsels never were thought good,
Because they were not understood.
9.
Ask me no more why Livesey goes
To ceaze all rich men as his foes,
Whilst Country Farmers sigh and sob,
Yeomen may beg when Knights do rob*
10.
Ask me no more by what strange slight
London's Lord Major was made a Knight,
Since there is a strength sprung out of war,
That can at once both make and mar.
11.
Ask me no more why in this age
I sing so free without a cage,
My answer is, I need not fear,
All England does the burden bear.
12.
Ask me no more (for I grow dull)
Why Hotham keeps the Town of Hull,
I Will answer ye one word for all,
All things are thus when Kings do falt.
The Kingly Complaint.
The King Imprisoned at Holmby.
The Tune, 1. In faith I cannot keep my sheep.
I Am a poor and patient King,
Though some are pleased to call me Pope,
But yet I have a holy hope,
God will relieve my suffering,
By letting Peace and Plenty spring,
That every man may have his own,
Then I shall sit again upon my Throne.
2.
The Royal Consort of my age,
That has so often my Cradles crowned,
With false aspersions, they do wound
According to their holy rage
My simple Subjects they engage,
And arm them with a proud pretense,
To bring me home in beating me from thence.
3.
A Reformation next is sought,
Episcopacy must go down,
A Tinker's art must mend the Crown,
By Weavers we may well be taught,
But now at last they have us brought
Over many rigid Rocks and Shelves,
They are contending what to be themselves.
4.
My Countrymen I most commend,
For they have made the most of me,
Alas! it was their poverty;
They did it to no other end,
But they have too much valued Me,
And over-priz'd my Innoncence,
They could demand no more then thirty pence.
5.
A rout of Rebels ring me round,
Such is the King of Englands Court,
Who but to please their Pride, in sport
Have brought my Peers unto the ground,
They chase me like an Infidel.
Or one that Christian Blood betray'th,
Although I write, Defender of the Faith.
Rebels Market. 1646.
1.
NOw that the holy Wars are done
Between the Father and the Son,
And that we have by righteous fate
Distressed a Monarch and his Mate,
Forcing their Heir fly into France,
To weep out his Inheritance.
2.
Let Us set open all our Packs,
Which contain ten thousand wracks,
Cast away on the Red Sea,
At Naseby and at Newberry;
If then you will come provided with gold:
We dwell
Close by Hell,
Where we ^ell
What you will,
That is ill*
For Charity there is cold.
3.
If by thee a Murder came,
We can give't another Name;
But always provided thus,
That thou have been one of us,
Gold is the God shall pardon the guilt;
We have
What shall save
Thee from Grave,
For the Law
We can awe,
Though a Princes blood be spilt.
4.
If a Church thou hav'st bereft
Of its Plate, it is holy theft;
Or for zeal-sake if thou be
Prompted on to spoil a Priest,
Gold's a prevailing advocate:
Then come,
Bring a sum,
Law is dumb,
And submits
To our wits,
For Policy guides a State.
The Leaguer.
1.
Join thy ennamel'd cheek to mine,
I Will bring thee where is rasie Wine,
And where a loving Leaguer's kept,
Where many tankard tears are wept
For the Cash
That is gone, that is here,
Joy and grief in a tear
We will wash:
There we study Revenges,
Make Plots without hinges,
More Black then the fifth of Novembers;
In our Pipe and our Cup
Our Estates are raked up,
Till our eyes twinkle like to the embers.
2.
There with a sack-incensed face,
In speckled state and flaming grace,
With dabbled doublet does appear
The curral front of Cayalier,
With a bowl
Full of sack, such as can
In the most dying man
Raise a soul;
And forbids any venture,
The Leaguer to enter,
Or near it commit such a trespass,
If his cheeks do not shine
With the blood of the Vine,
And his Nostrils appear like a Respass.
3.
In Fletcher's Wit, and Iohnson's style
There will we sit and fret a while,
Cursing the puddle of their brains,
That pulled down grapes, and put up grains;
They are foes,
Who Bagpipes for Shalmes
Deal in small Bear and Psalms
Through the Nose:
May want of drink grieve'm,
And no man relieve'm,
Till scorching inform them what hell is,
May Houndsditch and Towerditch,
With Moorditch and Shoreditch,
Be emptied to fill up their bellies.
4.
May all the ills that can be thought
Either too heavy or too hot
Light on his belly and his back,
That envies us the joys of Sack;
Let him dye,
Or let him live with so much strife,
That he may beg to lose his life,
'Till he cry,
Good-fellows forgive me,
If you dare believe me,
By the soul and the sword of a Layman;
I Will draw out my Whinyard,
And set up the Vineyard,
In spite of the Devil and Dray-man.
The Discovery.
A Pastoral Song in two parts, being a Dialogue betwixt Alexis and Eliza, a
Shepherd and Shepherdess.
1.
Eliza. SHepherd I will tell thee news,
That I fear will scarce delight thee;

Alexis. Let me hear the worst ensues,
Spoke by thee it cannot fright me,
Angels voices never abuse.

2.
Eliza. Walking late on yonder Plain,
A Shepherd at our meeting grumbled;

Alexis. Tush, 'twas but a Rural Swain,
For his pains he shall be humbled,
If we ever meet again.

3.
Eliza. It Is reported thou and I
Are intwin'd in Love's embraces:

Alexis. It Is because that we do fly,
From those Lads and sunburned Lasses,
Which were once our Company.

4.
Alexis. But what ever they surmize,
Let not your own tongue betray you;
Their suspicions have no eyes,
Do not let your fears bewray you
To the traps which they devise.

5.
Eliza. But if they to me should go,
And their true suspicions mutter,

Alexis. Be you so wise to answer no,
When they imaginations utter,
Do you imagine it is not so.

6.
Both. Let us keep our Loves entire,
Like two Turtles of a feather;
In the heat of our desire
Let us live and dye together,
Flaming still in amorous fire.

A Chirping Cup.
1.
DIng dong ding
Let the Bells ring,
Leave off your caring;
He is fooled,
That thinks his gold
Is safe by sparing;
Who does know,
As times go,
Who shall have the sharing:
Then to prevent all
Let Us merrily quaff our Wine
To the King and his Consort divine;
I prithee fill it as much as 'twill hold,
We Will swagger home,
Stagger home,
When we are filled,
And reel away misfortune.
2.
More joys bring,
Let the Boys sing,
And Fiddlers rant it,
We Will drink Wine,
Though the fine*
Presbyters vaunt it;
They that thus
Drink like us,
Never can be daunted:
Then with Canary
Let every man's Coblet be crowned,
In Sack let our sorrows be drowned,
It is the right way our foes to confound;
We Will bang the Rogues,
Hang the Rogues,
For Charles his glory,
And that will end the story.
The Occasion.
How the War began.
1.
I Will tell you how the War began,
The holy ones assembled,
For so they called their Party than,
Whose Consciences so trembled;
They pulled the Bishops from their seats,
And set up every Widgeon;
The Scotch were sent for to do feats
With Oat-cakes and Religion.
2.
They plucked Communion-tables down,
And broke our painted glasses;
They threw our Altars to the ground,
And tumbled down the Crosses;
They set up Cromwell and his Heir,
The Lord and Lady Claypole,
Because they hated Common Prayer,
The Organ and the Maypole.
The Roundheads Revolt*
Tune, Soldiers Life*
1.
THen farewell say to a Soldiers life,
And welcome the Trowel and Spade;
^or he that does lie with another man's wife,
Shall a Cuckold himself be made:
2.
^o he that purloyns the Commonweal,
And takes from other men
(...) Plunder, which is in plain English to steal,
Let him look to be plundered again.
3.
Farewell to the trade of Musket and Blade,
Which nothing but mischiefs procures;
For by the endeavors of Cobblers and Weavers,
The Land has been governed by Brewers.
4.
And now my Comrades, fall close to your trades,
Leave Scepters to men that are highborn,
Though Treachery wins, when first it begins,
It commonly ends at Tyburn.
5.
Let every thing conform to the King,
To Englands Church I Will be a true Son;
The way to be banged, and at last to be hanged,
Is to mingle with Baxter and Hewson.
6.
The stars in their courses have routed our horses,
And made our King-murtherers Martyrs;
They are forced to yield the fort and the field,
Whilst Ravens do beat up their quarters.
7.
Those zealots that d^d Baptism forbid,
And likewise Godfathers denied,
Who raised a War, in conclusion they are
Themselves by twelve Godfathers tried.
8.
Then let the Bells ring, and pray for the king,
Let every one practice Obedience;
And let them all starve, who will not observe,
And take the good Oath of Allegiance.
A Catch Royal, 1641.
LEt the Drawer run down,
We Will sit and drink the Sun down,
Here Is a jolly Health to the King;
Let him be confounded,
And hanged up for a Roundhead,
That will not pledge me a spring;
Next to the Lady Mary
This beer-bowl of Canary,
I Will pledg't a Carouse were it ten:
When Charles his thoughts are eased,
And his great heart appeased,
We Will drink the Sun up again.
The Change: After the Death of Oliver, November 3. 1659.
The Air composed by Mr. Lock.
1.
TO what Idol now
Must our hallowed ham-strings bow?
The devil and we
Can never agree,
We know not to who or how;
Religion and Laws
Are crucified by his paws,
Our liberty
Is routed truly,
And so is the good old Cause:
The Rule of Right
Has bid us good night,
It Is Power is the only Prevailer;
We dare not be known
To ask for our own,
For fear of Gibbet and Jailer:
For King we went
And Parliament,
By gunning to get them together;
But now well a day!
They are gunn'd quite away,
And we must be governed by neither.
2.
Old Noll's Noddle now
Were he living would tell us how
The Camp and Crown,
The Gun and the Gown
Might quickly make one of two;
King Dick the third,
Or Harry with his broad sword,
(Though men amiss)
Had taught us e're this
To quarrel about a word:
Their Lance and Laws
Had cudgelled our Cause,
And made us submit to their Empire;
But Richard the fourth,
And Harry the ninth
Are men of genteeler temper:
The Church and State
Are governed by Fate,
It Is Power has the Peoples applauses;
Our Courts are too tall,
Our Lawyers must fall,
The Sword's the best splitter of Causes.
3.
It Is not Majesty
Did make us to disagree,
'Twas an humble fire
Blown up by desire,
To be but as high as he;
The Prelate and King,
Who caused our quarrelling,
Were much to blame,
We hated the Name,
But fain we would have the thing:
Our Drum, our Gun,
Our Copper and Tun,
Which newly of so much renown is,
Can fitly declare
What spirits we are,
And what a bright Idol a Crown is:
But now let us cast
What Is left us at last
By Presbyter and Independent;
The People's foresworn,
The Land is forlorn,
And this is the blessed end on it.
The Soldiers last Farewell.
Tune, Hallow my Fancy.
1.
FArewell Fife, Drum and Trumpet,
Fortune is grown
A very lazy Strumpet;
She has left us,
And bereft us
Of a Kingdom and a Throne;
We that were once
As fat as any mullet,
By picking of the bones
Of Plundered Pig and Pullet,
May throw away our Guns,
Our Powder, Match and Bullet;
Alas poor Soldier, whither will thou go?
2.
I that did lead up the Vanguard,
And with my Sword
Did many a valiant man guard,
Now am routed,
And am flouted,
Never a man will take my word;
Lame Soldiers may
Seek Hospitals and Spittles,
And (well a day!)
We must throw off our whittles,
Instead of taking Pay,
We shall go beg our Victuals.
Alas, etc.
3.
We fought for our Religion
Many a bloody day,
And killed many a widgeon;
Law we sought for,
And we fought for,
Till we fought it quite away:
We cut down men
As Conies crop up Mallows;
Our Masters then
Did call us valiant fellows,
'Twas time to leave them when
They brought us to the Gallows.
Alas, etc.
4.
In Red-coat rags attyred
I wander up and down,
Since Fortune so conspired
To array me,
And betray me
To the Censure of the town:
My Buff does make me boots,
My Velvet Coat and Scarlet
Must turn to Canvas Suits;
For Fortune is a Harlot,
These are the rotten fruits
That attend a fighting Varlet.
Alas, etc.
5.
I have been in France and in Holland,
Guided by my stars,
I have been in Spain and Poland,
Ireland, Scotland,
And what not Land,
Britain you know
Has felt my desperate slaughter,
I killed ten at a blow,
Even in a fit of laughter;
Gone home and made no show,
But kissed my Landlords Daughter.
Alas poor Soldier, etc.
6.
My Valor so highly prevailed,
Meeting with my foes,
Who strongly me assailed;
Though an hundred
Them I plundered,
And received not many blows;
This Faulcheon by my side
Has killed more men I Will swear it,
Then Guy of Warwick did,
For he could never come near it;
And now I shall be chid
In time, if I do wear it.
Alas poor Soldier, etc.
7.
For the King and the Kingdom
I was the man
That did strike every thing dumb;
I made Meetings,
Zealous greetings,
When the War at first began:
Jack Lilb^rn first,
Then holy Nigh prevailed,
And I was nursed
By such as often railed,
And pious Preachers cursed,
Who were to Prison haled.
Alas poor Soldier, etc.
8.
I did about this Nation
Hold forth my gifts, and teach
The ways of tolleration,
In that season
I spoke treason,
And any thing within my reach;
Then every trade
Was counterfeitly zealous,
Preachers were made
Of such as kept an Alehouse,
The Pulpit fitted them
Who were fitter for the Gallows.
Alas poor Soldier, whither will thou go?
9.
Surplice was Superstition
Voted right or wrong,
By our Inquisition
Down went Crosses,
Tombs and Glasses,
The Liturgy we made a Song;
The Mytre and the Crown
Gave way to private Meeters,
The Riches and Renown
Unto the zealous Greeters,
Paul's Church was tumbled down,
To supply the wants of Peter's.
But now poor Soldier, whither will thou go?
10.
I will go to the Village
Where I was bred and born,
And deal no more in pillage;
I Will go borrow
Plough and Harrow,
And sow the fruitful fields with Corn:
I Will leave off all
My Quarterings and Billets;
I Will never fall
Into the traps of Zealots;
But with my Sword I shall
Defend both Prince and Prelates:
Into my Country I resolve to go.
The discontented Cavalier, Jan. 4. 1661. In two Airs, an Alman and S^ribran:
Composed by Mr. Tailor.
1.
AWay now with the Drum
For the time is come
A Cavalier
May appear,
And shall be
Well rewarded for Loyalty
Royally,
Because he has been true to
Sinking Sovereignty
Drink Wine freely my hearts,
For your high deserts,
So lately drowned,
Shall be crowned,
Cloth of gold
Will your wounded bodies infold;
Bags untold
You every day shall in your
Treasuries behold;
All Places of Profit and Renown
In the Town,
Sword or Gown,
Your sufferings shall crown.
Therefore let us laugh,
And quaff,
And drink all off,
A merry go down,
The Kingdom's all our own:
But hark what ill news abroad is told,
Places sold
Are for Gold,
And I by my troat
Have not up to London brought
Above a groat,
For which my throat
Must sing another note.
Tune altered to the S^ribrand.
2.
I am a Cavalier,
It sadly does appear,
My shirt's a clout,
My elbow's out,
And never a Cloak to wear;
But I am grown so poor,
'Cause Fortune is a Whore,
She deals her Boons
To Pantaloons,
That pimp and keep the door.
In Feather and Muff
Is merit enough
For Gesemine-butter'd Squires;
The lofty affairs
Of Plackets and Players
Do keep us still in the briars;
Yet others I see
Of better degree,
Or Truth is turned a Liar,
Whose heads though they be
Advanced very high,
Deserve to be set up higher.
3.
The Devil's in them still,
Let times be what they will,
When Fortune's in
The mind to spin,
The Devil guides the wheel;
Mere Politiques are but
Knaves in a several cut,
It Is good or naught,
As they will have it,
For Conscience door is shut:
Religion and Laws
Gild every Cause,
And make it show resplendent;
They carry the Name
In The beginning oth' Game,
But nothing to do with the end on it:
We never did doubt
When first we went out,
And had no cause to fear,
When merit began
To march in the Van,
That Ingratitude was in the Rear.
4.
It Is Fortune's purblinde power
That does us all devour,
She sets up slaves,
She pardons Knaves
And Rebels every hour;
Whilst Loyal hearts are fed
With begged and borrowed bread,
They in Perfumes
And plundered Plumes
Are daily worshipped;
But these are the men,
I speak it again,
Which lately I did tell you on,
Whose fancies are fit
With weapons and wit
To raise up a new Rebellion;
Yet true Loyalty
In my heart shall be
An everlasting lodger;
In my Rags I will sing,
God save our good King,
And send him no need of a Soldier.
The Secret.
The Air composed by Mr. Tailor.
1.
WOuld I reveal my mind*
I could declare,
And tell you why
That I
Come not nigh
You where you are,
But must conceal my mind
'Twixt love and fear;
Dumb Melancholy,
Nothing more strong,
You and my folly
Have done me wrong,
To give me love and grief and never a tongue.
2.
How my heart loved thee
My soul shall conceal,
And by what sign
That thine
Then was mine,
Faith I Will never tell;
Though thou have moved me
Enough to reveal:
Where shall we find her
That faithful is,
All women kind are
Like thee in this.
And do as thou have done, kill where they kiss.
3.
Now I enjoined am
To live apart,
Lest by desire
My fire
Do conspire
To consume my heart;
I am confined to
Smile when I smart,
Unless I take her,
Within my bounds,
I must forsake her,
Since Fortune frowns,
As Kings are forced to lay down their Crowns.
The Repulse writ by a Lady.
The Air composed by Mr. William Laws, Servant to his late Majesty.
1.
YOur Love if virtuous will show forth
Some fruits of Devotion,
There Is no Religion can warrant
A dishonest motion;
Would you entice me to give you respect,
You would not seek then my honor to infect
With poisoned potions:
If I ever did affect you,
'Twas in honor, but in ill ends
I must needs neglect you.
2.
That fort is feeble that words can subdue
With their battery,
It Is better stop our ears, then set them
Open to flattery;
Shall I count that true which cannot be just,
Your sighs and sad silence I may not trust
With eyes so watery:
Take a Lover from a passion,
Like an image out of date
He stands quite out of fashion.
The Reply, by the Author.
1.
MY Love's as virtuous as yours is
Where you frame affection,
For so inflamed Religion
You keep in subjection,
I cannot tempt ye to give me respect,
It Is not the crime but the man you reject
With words so zealous:
This same trifle called Honor
Is a pretty witty cover
To conceal a Lover^
2.
What need a batt'ry be,
When as the fort is resigning,
You will never stop your ear
At your own servants repining;
Where we affect we do never mistrust,
If you would spell Love, and chance to write Lust
No interlining:
Take a Lady in the humor,
When the Love-fit is upon her,
She Will never think of Honor,
The Courtier.
BE not afraid
Thou rarest
The fairest
That ever was Maid,
Deny me not a kiss,
No man shall see
The measure
Of pleasure
That I have from thee,
What hurt is there in this?
Then let us embrace, let all pleasures be free,
The world shall never have knowledge
How delightful we be.
2.
I know that spies
Both creeping and peeping
In each corner lies
To hinder all our joy;
Cupid shall see,
And find 'em to blind 'em
That hinderance be
To the getting of a boy.
Then let us embrace, etc.
3.
Venus invites,
Fair Creature, Dame Nature
Made you for delights,
But yet to none but I;
Then I Will embrace,
And ri^le a trifle
Leave a jewel in the place,
You Will keep until you dye.
Then let us embrace, etc.
The Ladies Answe^.
1.
NAy pish, nay fie
You venture to enter
A trespass so high,
You Will wish it were undone;
Should any spy,
They Would wonder, look yonder,
I see you will not fly
The chase you have begun:
^ince then you have won me,
And all things are tree;
^saith you will undo me,
If a tell-tale you be.
2.
Now you have enjoyed
That measure of pleasure,
^^deed I Am destroyed,
If I hear of it again;
^omen do prove
Neglected, rejected,
^hen freedom of Love
Is told to other men:
(...) then, etc.
3.
(...) take my heart,
I Will ever endeavor
(...) we never part
'Till death assign the time;
Were not to you,
Believe me 'twould grieve me
To do what I do:
O that Love should prove a crime,
Yet it is a fault
Of so sweet a degree,
I surely am persuaded,
Court not Country goes free.
The Forfeiture: A Romance.
Tune, Dear let me now this evening dye.
1.
YOu that do look with Christian hue
attend unto my Sonnet,
I Will tell you of as vilde a Jew
as ever wore a Bonnet;
No Jew of Scotland I intend,
My story not so mean is,
This Jew in wealth did much transcend
Under the States of Venice.
2.
Where he by usury and trade
did much exceed in Riches;
His beard was red, his face was made
Not much unlike a Witches;
His habit was a Jewish Gown,
That would defend all weather;
His chin turned up, his nose hung down,
And both ends met together.
3.
Yet this deformed Father had
A daughter and a wise one,
So sweet a Virgin never Lad
Did ever set his eyes on;
He that could call this Lady foul
Must be a purblinde Noddy,
But yet she had a Christian soul
Lodged in a Jewish body.
4.
Within the City there did live,
If you the truth will search on it,
One whose ill fate will made you grieve,
A gallant Christian Merchant,
Who did abound in wealth and wit,
In youth and comely feature;
Whose love unto a friend was knit,
As strong as bonds of Nature.
5.
A Gentleman of good renown,
But of a sinking fortune,
Who having no estate of's own
Does thus his friend importune;
Friend lend me but one thousand pound,
It shall again be paid ye;
For I have very lately found
A fair and wealthy Lady.
6.
The Merchant then makes this reply,
Friend, I am out of treasure;
But I will make my credit fly,
To do my friend a pleasure:
There is a Jew in town (quoth he)
Who though he deadly hate me,
Yet 'cause my wealth is strong at sea,
This favor will not bate me.
7.
When they were come unto the Jew,
He did demand their pleasure;
The Merchant answers, I of you
Would borrow so much treasure:
The Jew replies, you shall not have it,
If such a sum would save ye,
Unless in three months you will pay't,
Or forfeit what I Would have you.
8.
If at the three months end you do,
As you shall seal and sign to'^,
Not pay the money which is due,
Where e're I have a mind to it
I Will cut a pound out of your flesh;
The Merchant is contented,
Because he knew in half that time,
his shipping would prevent it.
9.
Ill news by every ship comes in,
His ships are drowned and fired;
The Jew his forfeiture does win,
For three months are expired,
He is arrested for the debt,
The Court must now decide it;
The flesh is due, and now the Jew
Is ready to divide it.
10.
The Merchants Friend that had the gold
Now being richly married,
Offered the sum down three times told
To have his friends life spared,
'T would not be took, but strait steps in
One in Doctors apparel;
Who though but young does now begin
Thus to decide the quarrel.
11.
Jew, we do grant, that by the Law
A pound of flesh your due is,
But if one drop of blood you draw,
We Will show you what a Jew is;
Take but a pound, as 'twas agreed,
Be sure you cut no further,
And cut no less, lest for the deed
You be arraigned for murder.
12.
The Jew enraged does tear the Bond,
And dare^ not do the slaughter,
He quits the Court, and then 'twas found
The Doctor proves his Daughter;
Who for the love she long time bore,
From a true heart derived
To be his wife, and save his life,
This subtle slight contrived.
13.
The Court consent, and they are wed,
For hatching of this slaughter
The Jews estate is forfeited,
And given to his Daughter;
She is baptized in Christendom,
The Jew cries out he is undone:
I wish such Jews may never come
To England nor to London.
Love in Languishment.
Tune, Have I not loved thee much and long.
1.
YOu to whom melting hearts belong,
That Lovers woes bewail,
And would not have true love take wrong,
Attend unto my tale.
The like to this is seldom known,
'Twill make your very souls to groan,
As if the case were all your own,
2.
A great man late a Daughtet had,
Which now may not be named,
She had two Suitors, good and bad,
Both by her eyes inflamed;
But young Philaster was his Name,
A Gentleman of noble fame,
That her affections overcame.
3.
The the other was her fathers choice,
Antonio he was called,
Who with her feature, youth and voice
Was very much inthrall'd;
And though her Father bid her she
Should to Antonio's suit agree:
She cries, Philaster is for me.
4.
One day Philaster having walked
Close by a River side,
He found a pretty boy that talked
Unto himself, and cried;
Could I but now a master view,
To give my tender youth its due,
I would appear a Servant true.
8.
Philaster entertained him straight,
And sent him to his Love,
That he with her might live and wait,
And 'twixt each other move;
His pretty face did so engage,
She looked upon his tender age.
More like a Brother then a Page.
6.
Betwixt them he so often went
With letters to and fro,
That it gave cause of discontent
To young Antonio;
Who cause he could not have his swinge,
But all his love was off the hinge,
He secretly does vow revenge.
7.
Phylaster and the Lady now
By Cupid's great command,
Are by the Priest with holy vow
united hand in hand;
But when the bonds of love were sealed,
And that their fears were quite expelled,
Their marriage joys were all revealed,
8.
Her Father apprehends him strait
For stealing of his Heir,
He Is hurried to the prison-gate,
And she left in despair;
Antonio makes false witness swear,
That fornication did appear
One day betwixt the boy and her.
9.
For which they both by course of law
Are to the prison sent,
Her father which did thither draw
Her love does now lament;
Phylaster hearing this, quoth he,
Must I thus lose my life for she
That Is taken in Adultery?
10.
The Ladies tears not guilty prove,
Each eye so overflows,
To think her Honor and her Love
She in one hour should lose;
Justice against them does proceed,
Two must be punished, the other bleed,
Love lies a bleeding now indeed.
11.
The Boy cries out you do amiss,
For you do all mistake,
I am a Virgin, and did this
For young Antonio's sake;
This Suit which now you see me wear,
And all the course which I did steer,
Was 'cause he should not marry her.
12.
Antonio knows her, and does vow
He Will marry none but she;
Phylaster takes his Love, and now
The Father does agree:
Their lives were near the push of pike,
But now embrace, and soft hands strike,
May all true Lovers do the like.
The Revolution: A Love-story.
Tune, No man loves fiery passions.
1.
YOu that are crossed in love, and fain would see
Some crosses like your own, give ear to me;
I have a story which does plainly tell,
That Lovers hearts are tossed 'twixt heaven and hell:
Therefore let him or her this place forbear,
That cannot vent a sigh, or shed a tear.
2.
A virtuous Lady, innocent and fair,
Who to a noble Knight was only Heir,
Was to a Gentleman with quick dispatch
Contracted, but his brother scorned the match,
And therefore privately did plot to be
An enemy unto their amity.
3.
The costly garments, and the wedding cheer
Provided is, for now the day draws near;
The Bride-men and the Bride-maids are made fit
To wait upon their virtue and their wit:
And till the day, long looked for, does appear,
Each hour's a day, and every day a year.
4.
The brother that was hatefully inclined,
Did yet appear to bear a better mind,
And seemed as much to like the Match as they
That every hour did wish the wedding day;
But mark what follows, and you will quickly be
Assured 'twas nothing but hypocrisy.
5.
He hires a knave, whose love was closely tied
Unto the Chambermaid that served the Bride,
And bids him in the evening go unto her,
And in her Mistress chamber seem to woo her;
Desire her for your humor to put on
One of her Mistress Gowns that well was known.
6.
The fellow goes to her whom he did know
Could not to any thing he craved cry no,
The Brother to the Bridegroom quickly hies,
To fill his brothers soul with jealousies;
Quoth he, if you this strumpet Lady marry,
You and our Family will all miscarry.
7.
If you with two or three with me will go,
At night I Will show you what you never did know;
That Lady which has locked your love in charms,
I Will show you tumbling in another arms:
For though till now I never did tell you on them,
These three nights I have cast my eyes upon them.
8.
The Bridegroom though he loved her well before,
Hating to be the Husband of a Whore,
Does with his brother go, (who was his guide)
To see (as he supposed) his wanton bride;
Where in her Mistress nightgown she was toying,
And with her plotting Sweetheart closely playing.
9.
The marriage day is come, and now they go,
As some surmise, to make but one of two;
But when the Bridegroom took her by the hand,
He gave the people all to understand,
That she was known a most notorious whore,
And vowed from that time never to see her more.
10.
The Bride fell in a swound, the father cried,
Alack for me! I would my child had died
Before this time had come, for much I fear
My sorrow will become my murderer;
He caused her in this fit to be conveyed
Home to his house, and in her chamber laid.
11.
The Chambermaid much fearing some mistake,
Desired her Sweetheart that for her dear sake
He would disclose, or him she would never own,
Why he would have her wear her Mistress Gown?
And after many subtle tricks of youth,
He did confess, and tell the naked truth.
12.
She tells her master how they had been used,
And by the Bridegrooms Brother thus abused;
Which when the Bride and Bridegroom knew, they then
With joint consent go to the Church ageh:
Where they did knit a knot until they dye,
Which Men and Angels never shall untye.
The jealous Duke, and the injured Duchess: A story*
Tune, The Dream.
1.
OF all the wedlock plagues that be,
None are so fierce
As Jealousy,
As you shall see drawn to the life
Between a Duke.
And's virtuous Wife;
He was a Duke of Parma in Italy,
His Lady great with child
Was wronged by his jealousy:
He sends her unto prison guiltless of crime*
And in that sickly season,
When as she was near her time.
2.
Where afterward it came to pass,
She of a Child
Delivered was,
A lovely Daughter, which they took
And brought it to
The Jealous Duke;
Who in a fury did protest as before,
The Infant was a Bastard,
And its Mother was a Whore:
The noble Lady that did bring it did cry,
The virtuous Duchess suffered
Only for his Jealousy.
3.
The Lady being much reviled,
She goes away
And leaves the Child;
He straight by oath enjoins a Lord
Who made a conscience
Of his word:
Then quoth the Duke, you must perform my command
Take shipping strait,
And bear this Brat into a foreign Land;
Leave it in any wilderness you can find,
And let it there be nourished
Only by the rain and wind.
4.
The Nobleman is grieved to do it,
But that his Oath
Enjoins him to it;
The Duchess hearing that her Child
Was sent away
To Countries wild,
Falls in a swound, (her spirits all being fled)
The word was brought unto the Duke,
His wife was newly dead;
And that her last words were, (her eyes waxing dim)
Commend me to the Duke,
I never knew any man but him.
5.
Her dying words the Duke believes*
And now alack
Too late he grieves;
For now the Lord (by his command)
Is in the Duke
Of Padua's Land;
Where he the pretty Infant lays down (as he Had sworn to the Duke)
And now returns again to sea:
But (by good fate) a shepherd that lost a sheep
Was searching up and down that way,
And heard the Infant weep.
6.
The Mantle which the Child did hold
Was rich embroidered
Cloth of Gold;
But when it was undrest; he found
The value of
Two thousand pound,
Besides a paper where was writ down the Name*
This treasure made the Shepherd straight
To grow in wealth and fame;
He bred the Child as decently as he could,
But in its disposition one
Might find the parents blood.
7.
At sixteen years of age she was
The prettiest Nymph
That trod on grass;
Once on a day when she did keep
(As she supposed) Her fathers sheep,
A Gentleman which her fair face looked upon*
Was stricken straight in love,
And 'twas the Duke of Padua's Son;
Who from that hour would every day come to se^
His Mistress whom he loved like life,
Though of a low degree.
8.
Much love there was betwixt them both,
Till they contracted were by oath;
Which when his father came to know,
Then did begin
The Lovers woe;
For with extreme outrageous words he begun
To bid him leave her,
Or he would never own him as a son;
The Prince did vow his love he never would withdraw
Although he lost his father,
And the Crown of Padua.
9.
But having got much treasure, he
Does with this Virgin
Put to sea;
After a while there was report,
They Are in the Duke
Of Parma's Court;
The Duke of Padua then for fear they should wed,
Will follow, if he find it true,
His son shall lose his head:
But the old Shepherd fearing wrong should befall,
His pretty witty Daughter
Does resolve to find them all.
10.
The Bride and Bridegroom now in state
Are going to
The Temple-gate,
The Duke of Padua with his trains
Does stop them,
And forbids the Banes;
And to the Duke of Parma plainly says, that
His son did fly from him
To marry with a Shepherds brat;
The Bride and Bridegroom by both Dukes in a breath
Commanded are to separate,
Or they shall meet in death.
11.
Both are content, and are led on
Unto their
Execution.
They were to suffer both alike,
The Headsmans Axe
Was up to strike:
Hold quoth the Shepherd, I bring strange news to town;
The Dukes were both amazed,
And the Axe was straight laid down,
This Lady sixteen years ago did I find,
This paper and these Jewels,
For the Child is none of mine.
12.
The Lord that bore the Child away
Seeing the Name,
Did boldly say,
Great Duke of Parma, this is she
Which you did send away by me;
It Is your own Daughter: then the Duke full of tears
Embrace them both, and now
Another Marriage day appears;
Bonefires and Bells, the Conduits all run with wine:
By this we see there is nothing can
Prevent the Powers divine.
The Double Marriage: A sad Story.
Tune, Amidst the Mirtles as I walked.
1.
AMongst all woes that ever we
Have felt, or else in story read,
There is no greater misery,
Then an enforced Marriage Bed.
2.
As I will sadly make appear,
When I my story shall unfold,
You will confess that you do hear
The saddest tale that e're was told.
3.
A Gentleman of good renown
Did dye, and left his Heir in ward
Unto the mercy or the frown
Of a most proud imperious Lord.
4.
This Gallant was a youth of worth,
His feature might affection move,
Who traveling into the North,
It was his fate to fall in Love,
5.
With a fair Lady of good fame,
And being on both sides agreed,
They in one Contract mix their flame,
And seal it as their act and deed.
6.
No sooner did their souls accord
In tears and kisses, oaths and vows,
But he is sent for by his Lord
To London; now comes all the woes.
7.
The Lord his Guardian does prefer
Him to a Lady of his kin,
The Gallant cries, should I take her,
I might commit a grievous sin.
8.
I am contracted, Sir, quoth he,
To one I love no less then life;
And you know, Sir, that Contracts be
The greatest bonds 'twixt man and wife.
9.
The Guardian by his power compells
The woeful Ward to break his oath,
And (which all misery excells)
Unto another plight his troth.
10
He sends into the North with speed,
To her whom he by right should wed;
Only one line which she does read,
Forgive me, I am married.
11.
This broke her heart, but she indites
An answer which much sorrow bred;
For in one fatal line she writes,
My Dear, Forgive me I am dead.
12.
Then with her knife she made it good.
And by a desperate stroke did prove,
Sealing it with her flowing blood,
That Life is nothing without Love.
13.
The Gentleman forsakes his Wife,
Such misery this Marriage bred;
Quoth he, I Will never lead a life
With thee in an adult'rous Bed.
14.
In The wicked ways he now begins
To riot all his vaste estate,
His wife was brought to bed of twins,
The Mothers grief, the Fathers hate.
15.
His wife and children full of woe
And want unto their father come,
Who now in England does not know
A place that he can call his home.
16.
His breach of Contract in his thought
Does now (at last) so fiercely fall,
That by the devil he is wrought.
To kill his wi^e and children small:
17.
He draws his sword, but by good fate
A messenger comes running in,
And bids him read a letter straight;
Which done, my Gallant does begin
18.
To be more temperate in his mind,
For thus it seems the letter said,
Your Guardian that was so unkind,
Much grieved for you, is lately dead;
19.
He has bequeathed his whole Estate
To be only at your dispose,
And does confess, though now too late,
He was the cause of all your woes.
20.
He bids you likewise, since you are
The Husband of another Wife,
That you will take her to your care,
And lead a loving peaceful life.
21.
This counsel he resolves to take,
And loving to his wife appears;
Though often for his Contracts sake
He venteth penitential tears.
22.
Thus have you seen the misery
Which enforced Marriage does procure;
Therefore let all forewarned be
Never to break that are made sure.
The Broken Contract.
Tune, Cloris farewell, I needs must go.
1.
YOu that are safe and sound in soul,
Whose minds are well, and hearts are whole,
Attend my tale, for I impart
The sorrows of a broken heart;
So sad it is, that much I fear,
'Twill break your very hearts to hear.
2.
A Lady (as my story says)
Was bound within the bonds of faith
As fast as Contract could unite
Unto a youthful noble Knight;
But by her powerful Brother she
Was forced to break this unity.
3.
She now is married to a rich
And very jealous Old man, which
Does in her love take much delight,
But she must never stir out of sight;
By all that look upon her he
Does fear he shall cornuted be.
4.
The old man breaks his heart with fears,
The Knight does waste his soul in cares;
The Lady spends her time in tears,
Her Brother courts a friend of hers:
And being now a Lover strong,
Repents he did his Sister wrong.
5.
Her Brother and his Love are now
United by a lasting vow,
The gallant Bridegroom and his Bride
Do for the Nuptial day provide;
The Knights revenge was grown so great,
He could not make it to retreat.
6.
But she that should have been his wife
Does grow so weary of her life,
That she resolves to eat no food
Or sustenance to do her good,
Till famine ceise on all her parts;
Thus broken vows make broken hearts.
7.
The Knight a challenge sends to him,
Who now in seas of joys do swim,
And bids him meet without delay
The morning of his wedding day;
Or else he vowed for all his harms
To kill him in his Ladies arms.
8.
The Bridegroom meets him, and they fight,
But the undaunted daring Knight
Filled with revenge does charge him so,
That he in his own blood does flow;
Thus in a moment here you have
A Bride-bed turned into a Grave.
9.
When this report abroad was blazed,
The woeful Bride being much amazed,
Tears off the wedding garment, which
Her body lately did enrich;
Her heart o'recharg'd with grief, she cried,
We Will meet above, and so she died.
10.
The Bridegrooms sister which before
Had made a vow to feed no more,
Being in seas of sorrows drowned,
She throws her self upon the ground;
Saying it cannot be withstood,
But broken vows must end in blood.
11.
These words she had no sooner spoke,
But instantly her heart was broke;
The Knight with hands in blood imbrued
Is now by Officers pursued,
And in his Chamber they at last
Do find him with his door locked fast.
12.
They break it open, and there find,
The saddest sight is left behind;
For when they in the Chamber come,
They find him naked in the room,
Where every vein from head to foot
He with his knife had newly cut.
13.
Much like a fountain there he stood,
For all his limbs were spouts of blood;
But when his veins did cease to swell,
He dyed, and down the fountain fell;
Thus does one broken vow devour
The lives and precious blood of four.
14.
May this a warning prove to all,
Whose Vows are Matrimonial;
Look e're you leap, for having vowed,
The breach can never be allowed;
For you may well discern by this,
A Contract broke, like Murder is.
A merry Marriage: A Stratagem.
Tune, Do but view this glass of Claret.
1.
THis new Song that I would sell you
Some suppose is very true,
Where 'twas done I may not tell you,
Time will bring it to your view;
What I mean now to reveal you,
Is both witty, queint, and new.
2.
In a place as yet unplunder'd
An old Usurer did dwell,
Who took fifty in the hunderd,
Some can by experience tell;
But his son in Taverns thundered,
And did strow't abroad as well:
3.
Young and handsome, bred a Scholar,
Never free from Tavern scores,
But his Father full of dolor
Turns my Gallant out of doors;
Swearing in a cruel choler,
That he spent his means with whores.
4.
He besides him had a Daughter,
Young and lovely, fair and bright,
She was worth the looking after,
For her Portion was not light;
But the trick that is worth your laughter.
Will appear anon at night.
5.
Not far off a Widow dwelt that
Was both pretty, young and wise,
This old fellow quickly smelt that
She would prove a golden prize;
In his clean Ruff, and his Felt Hat
He to her a wooing hyes.
6.
Such good entertainment she made,
That he thought she was his own;
But the wanton son that he had
Came as soon as he was gone,
Told her plainly he should be mad,
If she would not hear his moan.
7.
When she saw his youth and feature
To be confident and kind,
She did covet much the creature,
But his wildeness changed her mind;
And contrary to her nature
Said he should no favor find.
8.
This did quite confound the Lover,
But her kinsman was his friend:
Who unto him did discover
What a plot he did intend;
I know what (quoth he) shall move her,
And shall gain her in the end.
9.
Soon at night do you come hither*
If you will the Widow wed,
You shall all night lie beneath her,
Close conveyed under her bed;
When you are so near together,
Ten to one you will be sped:
10.
But before you come I Will swear you,
Though you lie upon the lurch,
That you honestly will bear you,
Till you both have been at Church,
Else revenge I vow shall tear you
Ten times more then brine and birch.
11.
To this plot they both consented,
But another plot's in hand,
A poor Knight is discontented
For the morgage of his Land;
For it seems the devil sent it
Unto this old Miser's hand.
12.
This Knight with money does desire it,
But because the day is past,
This Curmudgeon does require it
As a forfeiture at last*
But his Daughter does admire
The patience of the Knight so crossed.
13.
She Is in love and dares not show it,
By her Brother she was betrayed;
For by him the Knight does know it,
Who with love salutes the Maid;
She does well consent unto it,
The Match at midnight must be made.
14.
Therefore he does thus advise her,
To the widows you shall go,
For your Brother will surprise her,
E're the morning comes I know;
Bring my Morgage, lest your wiser
Father plot our overthrow.
15.
All is done, and now the morning
Through the widows window peeps,
He provided against all scorning,
Out into her Chamber creeps;
She cries out, whilst he is turning
To her to secure her lips:
16.
There he vows if she will marry,
He Will become a civil man,
But if not, she shall miscarry
In her reputation;
For he swears he there will tarry,
Till her credit's quite undone.
17.
He calls up his Friend and Sister
To be witness to the Match,
Who but for this trick had mist her,
For he caught her on the Catch;
There before them all he kissed her,
To the Church they all dispatch.
18.
When the Usurer did hear that
He was cheated of his wife,
And his Daughter, he did swear that
He would strait reform his life;
Then he bids them joy, and prays that
Their midnight Match may know no strife.
The happy Adventure, or the witty Lady: A story.
Tune, Were thou much fairer then thou art.
1.
ALL you that Wit and Beauty know,
Give ear to me, and I will show
A Witty Fair-one that can fit
Your minds with Beauty and with Wit;
She was a Virgin not inthrall'd,
And commonly Maria called.
2.
Fair Isabel was one that she
Had loved even from her infancy,
Which was betroathed to a quick
And nimble youth, called Frederick;
Who for a chance which often does
Befall, refused to keep his oath.
3.
Her Brother was a Merchant, and
Had all her portion in his hand,
A man of judgment, wealth and wit,
And went himself to sea with it;
But certain news came in a day,
He and his ship was east away.
4.
Her portion by mischance thus gone;
She must no more be looked upon,
For Frederick will make it appear,
He loved her money more then her;
Thus in one day she must forego
A Brother and a Husband too.
5.
He does begin to love each grace
That dwells in fair Maria's face,
Her wit and beauty (both combined)
So strangely captivate his mind;
That he sollicites night and day
The Lady in a lustful way.
6.
His last request she answers thus,
Sir, what will people speak of us,
If It should be known, as 'twill (quoth she)
If I at last with child should be?
He answers straight (to quit all fear)
E're that be known he will marry her.
7.
She bids him come at night, and she
Will entertain him secretly;
Quoth she, if just at ten you will wait,
You shall come through the garden gate:
One pair of stairs you cannot miss,
Next to the Bower my Chamber is.
8.
There we in darkness both must lie,
You Will find no other light but I;
And in the morning when the day
Appears you must make haste away,
Lest Vis^^ants do come to me,
And make a sad discovery.
9.
He takes his leave of her, but then
Each hour is twenty until ten;
No other thoughts come in his head,
But fair Maria and the bed,
And she as busy is in thought,
How this to pass may well be brought.
10.
Her purest linen she does spread,
Perfumed and pleasant for the bed;
The night grows dark, that none can see*
The hour is come, and so is he:
Now what they do I dare not tell,
I fear you all can guess too well.
11.
In silence all the night was past,
And both do fall asleep at last;
The morning's come, the sun does rise,
And now he views his Mistress eyes;
But when he had surveyed her well,
'Twas his contracted Isabel:
12.
This was the witty fair ones plot,
He swore and cursed, and up he got;
Maria does the Music guide,
To bid good morrow to the Bride;
And every part of the Town does tell,
That he has married Izabel.
13.
He finds himself thus caught, and he
In silence suffers it to be;
Maria with good news does come,
Her Brother is come richly home;
And that the rumor of the wrack
(As it appears) was a mistake.
14.
This proves great joy to Izabel,
Maria likes the news as well;
For 'twas well known that he and she
Were Lovers e're he went to sea:
His coming home has raised them all,
Who did in desperation fall.
15.
They meet, kiss, and salute their loves,
One's soul in to others body moves;
The joys they have no tongue can tell,
But only they that love as well;
The Marriage-day appointed is,
The first step to a Lovers bliss.
16.
You witty fair ones that are here,
Is not this project chaste and clear?
And was it not a noble end,
To pleasure a contracted friend?
Of all that Poets e're expressed,
The witty fair one is the best.
The Royal Rant:
A Medley in Oliver's time.
BArre-boy cease to roar,
We shall quaff no more,
When we think upon the days
Of Love and Music Loyalty and Plays;
When Law and Reason
Were not high Treason,
'Twas a good season than;
E're Parliaments
Brought these events,
'Twas fame enough to be an Englishman:
But Legislators,
And Regis-haters
Have brought such slaughters since;
The Gentry
In prisons lie,
And find it crime enough to be a Prince.
2.
In a dungeon deep we lie,
Crampt with cold Captivity,
Where the bedless bottom owns
Nothing to relieve our bones;
Yet such is the sacred scope of the soul,
That we never think
Of the stink,
When cold water we drink,
For Conscience crowns the bowl.
3.
Thus the ship of Reformation,
That was lately lancht in blood,
Floats in floods of lamentation;
Let us now behold the wood,
Where the Royal Oak once growing,
Made it a perpetual spring*
There sedition now is sowing,
Hark what Philomel does sing.
4.
The Nightingale so quick,
Is now grown sick, sick, sick,
To see the Royal vocal Wood,
So bonny and good, good good,
Where each bonny Bird did meet
With concord sweet, sweet sweet,
Is defiled by Rebels, where they hug
Their Leaguer Lady,
Iug jug, jug jug jug jug jug jug jug.
5.
Thus you see how tides are turning,
No condition's lasting,
In a moment mirth and mourning,
Blowing buds are blasting;
Fortune is
A coy Mistress,
No man ever kept her;
She Will (by power)
In an hour
Make a Sword a Scepter.
6.
Yet let us wait upon her wheel,
And not with fury fret her;
For she that turned from well to ill,
May turn from bad to better.
7
Therefore Barre-boy roar again,
We will drink like Englishmen,
For every Pottle bring up ten;
I hope this is no Treason:
He that is
In a Land like this,
Must lay aside his Reason.
8.
Then let us drink a Health to his fame,
Who for our tongues we dare not name,
Who for a Throne we dare not own;
But we will devise a curse likewise
Upon the State-Hector, the People's Pro-jector,
May all they have done come home to their own
Drawer! Bring up your Wine, and fill up your Pots,
For we are the Men that have no Plots.
The Frollick.
A Medley of three Airs.
1.
A Qualm comes over me, Drawer bring
Up a Quart of Canary;
We will drink till our eyes
Out-sparkle the Skies,
And make the full Moon miscarry;
For since Canary will be a King,
This Room shall be a Star Chamber,
'Cause the Glass in the close
At every man's Nose,
Reflects on his Brow like Amber:
But where are the Moon and Stars,
Alas! they have lost their light;
We Will drink them up
The Other Cup,
Canary can fix 'em right:
Canary can conquer Mars,
And tumble his Target down;
What he can do
Who does know,
'Till he gets in the Crown.
2.
Why should we heartless ^e,
But look up unto
Wine, and the wonders Canary can do;
Let us dance after chance
Like fairy Elves,
Drink down misfortune, and drink up our selves;
Drink till the hogsheads reel
One against the other,
Then like right Statesmen we will
Drink one another:
All the chink
That we drink
Springs in our Meadow^,
We never quaff
The tears of
Orphans and Widows.
3.
It Is but folly
To be formal holy,
Let Us be jolly,
Hang up melancholy;
They that reprove us
Did never love us,
But would remove us,
That they might be above us:
Then let us tarry,
Lest we miscarry,
If we but vary
Our Principle Canary;
Although they scant us,
This shall not daunt us,
Though they out-vaunt us,
They never shall out-rant us.
The Iubilee, on the Coronation day.
Tune, The King enjoyes his own again.
1.
LEt every man with tongue and pen
Rejoice that Charles is come again,
To gain his Scepter and his Throne,
And give to every man his own;
Let all men that be
Together agree,
And freely now express their joy:
Let your sweetest voices bring
Pleasant Songs unto the King,
To Crown his Coronation day.
2.
All that do tread on English earth
Shall live in freedom, peace and mirth;
The golden times are come, that we
Did one day think we never should see:
Protector and Rump
Did put us in a dump,
When they their Colors did display;
But the time is come about,
We are in, and they are out,
By King Charles his Coronation day.
FINIS.

