THE JACOBITES HUDIBRAS, CONTAINING The Late KING'S DECLARATION IN TRAVESTY.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at the Mitre near Temple Bar. 1692.

TO THE READER.
TO Triumph over Ruin and Misery, is but an unmanly fort of Insult; and in the
Case of Princes, possibly, it may bear a vet harder Name. And therefore this
following piece of Burlesque will, perhaps* be liable to fall under some
Censure on that Account. We confess indeed that Charge at first glance may seem
to lie against us, had we not this Justification on our side* viz. That the
late King's Declaration, the Subject of our grinning Meeter, is a Piece so
disingenuous (to give it no severer an Epithet) that the coursest Doggerel is
a Style fit for it. For not to mention any other notorious Weaknesses in it,
(as being somewhat more pardonable) the utter silence throughout it in the
least Excuse or Apology for the Misgovernment through his whole Four Years
Reign, not so much as one shadow of the least Error acknowledg`d, appears so
hardened an Original of Popish Bigotry and Confidence, that the coursest
Treatment is the best it deserves.

From this Honest Vindication we have adventured to expose that sometimes High
Jacobite, but at present, Fallen Dagon, in a little plain Railery, as indeed the
suitablest Dress for it. For truly the whole Declaration, if designed for that
Great End, viz. The Sweetening and Softening three Kingdoms into his
Restoration; certainly the Penmen and Compilers of it could never be in
Earnest; for considering how they have managed their Arguments that way, the
whole Piece take it quite through, must undoubtedly be intended for a Jest. As
such therefore, to use the old course Proverb, Like to like, quo' the Devil to
the Collier, We have very pertinently Rigged it up in this Comical Travesty.

THE PREFACE.
JAMES R.

AS late near Port of Grace de Havre,
By Providence Fore or Backside Favor,
With our Old Irish Troops encamped,
Those thin-worn Under-souls new vamp'd;
By Aid of French Dragoons recruited;
The Famous Dear Apostles Booted,
Monsieur and Teague a loving Couplet,
Our ever faithful Dogs in Doublet,
Opening full mouthed to Jacobite Whistle,
And linked as close as Rose and Thistle;
We lay expecting Wind and Tide,
Cross Herring-pond to make a stride,
For the late Grand Descent Ding Dong,
No less than Thirty thousand strong;
All Loyal Hands for the Great Work,
Monsieur true Steel to James and Turk;
And Teague, resolved by this bold ^lim Trick,
To patch up his lost Fame at Lim'rick;
To (...) the William (...) Sons of Who^^^,
And pay the Running Boyne old Scores.
Whilst thus Grand Fleet at Breast Equipping,
With lesser Fry of Transport Shipping,
Well Manned and Rigged from Star to Larboard,
Waiting we lay in mouth of Harbor;
To pave and smooth our way before us,
And tune all sweetly into Chorus,
Wisely to cheer our Subjects Loyal,
We published Declaration Royal,
Their puling Stomachs to prepare
For their expected Bill of Fare:
This Learned Piece, Penned, let me tell ye,
By Reverend Bishops Ellis, E. - y,
To their Immortal Zeal's Applause,
Joint Brother Champions of our Cause;
For Jacobite Conveyance printed,
And for our Royal Standard minted.
But (to our Grief of Heart be it spoken)
Our Wind-bound Cause and Measures broken,
Our Great Intrigues (alas) unravel'd,
And all our Councils stuck and gravel'd;
(For mighty Hopes too often fall short all,
And Great Designs are things but Mortal,)
We hear some Miscreants Male-contented,
Have our great Edict mis-presented;
Traduced our high Imperial Scribble,
With the hard Names of Dull and Feeble,
Filled up with Quibble, Crack and Flaw,
As weak as Heretic Cobw^b Law;
Our Declaration, called by some
Sow'r Meat, by others Sugar-Plumb.
Nay, some whose Tongues we wish Besh -- n,
Stick not to say 'twas only written
To tickle Trout, and Bait for Gudgeon,
And all to soften Popish Dudgeon.
In fi^e, a Hocus Pocus Tool;
What not! all turned to Ridicule!
But to unmask the whole Delusion,
Both for our Justice, their Confusion:
Since so many Clod-pates, God knows,
Can make no Sense of it in Prose:
We have thought fit, for more effectual
Enlightening British Intellectual,
To troll the glibber and the sweeter,
To have it softened into Meeter;
Resolved to try, if it can chime
More Sense and Reason tagg'd with Rhyme.
Besides sublimer Charms invite us
To choose this Glorious way to right us.
As Poetry's exalted Quality
T'Heroick Fame gives Immortality*
Our Declaration to rehearse
In lofty Monumental Verse;
How can we fill a nobler Journal,
T'enstall our Memory Eternal.
Given at our Rising Camp near Havre de Grace, in the last Year of our Reign.
Melfort.

Declaration.
WHereas WHereas the most Christian King in pursuance of the many obliging
Promises he has made Us, of giving Us his Effectual Assistance for the
recovering of our Kingdoms, and in order to it, has lent Us so many of his
Troops, as may be abundantly sufficient to unty the hands of our Subjects, and
make it safe for them to return to their Duty.
Our ever Dearest Joy,
Lewis that Tory Rory Boy,
Lewis the Great and Absolute,
(Our own beloved Attribute!
An Attribute, that Darling Dearing,
As cost us once Three Crowns the wearing)
Our kindest and almost Twin-Brother
(So like you will scarce know one from the other)
Has lent us his kind Help most Christian
Against the Williamite Philistian;
To maul their Orange-Tree, and try a
Touch with their little great Goliath;
In mutual Link like Thong and Buckle,
To bring our Enemies to Truckle,
Supplied us all our Tools and Tackle
Our Friends t'unty, and Foes to s^a^k^e.
Accordingly with Force t'Equip us,
And Fleet a Thousand strong to Ship us,
For Three Apostate Crowns Subjection,
And Tripple Diadem's Resurrection;
We are resolved with Cause most hopeful,
With Arm Puissant, Heart brim Pope-full,
To give the Heretics Bastinado;
With Army French, and French Armado,
Recover Kingdoms Renegado.
These Forces lent us to Restore us,
And fairly drive the World before us,
And has notwithstanding for the present, according to our desire, purposely
declined sending over Forces so Numerous, as might raise any jealousy in the
Minds of our Good Subjects. All which Foreign Troops, as soon as we shall be
fully settled in the quiet and peaceable Possession of our Kingdoms, We do
hereby promise to send back.
More we could borrow, if need were,
For Lewis has enough to spare.
But for good Reasons why and wherefore
These shall be all we want, or care for.
And now for cheering Subjects loving,
Wisely and prudently removing
All Jealousy from French Invasion*
(As God-wot they have but small occasion;)
Besides the Honor we have about us,
And the no Cause they have to doubt us,
We promise when we readvance
To English Throne by Power of France,
Those Champions for our Jus Divinum,
Helped by our Friends above to join'em,
The worthy Heroes Dead, and gone all,
St. Ruth, St. Coleman, St. Tyrconnel,
Those Saints in our great Truth departed,
And still in Heaven t*our Cause truehearted,
Those Fighting, and these Interceding,
Have brought home Dame and Master Reading:
When Fleur de liss has humbled Lion,
And raised the Walls of our fallen Sion:
We'll send back every Mothers Son:
These Monsieurs when our Work is don
Upon Our Royal Word be it spoken,
(That Faith, you know, was never broken)
With nimble Vade, presto, hocus,
One Puff shall sweep the Trooping Locusts.
Nay to ensure our Word yet faster,
Lewis himself, Our Lord and Master,
Shall kindly condescend to be
Our honorable Guarrantee.
Him w' have engaged by Oath and Vow;
(Bonds which he never kept till now;)
But we have power to tie him more
Than all Mankind could do before.
What tho you know his Hopes do fly
At Universal Monarchy;
(That blessed Work well-nigh gone through
Had we but held our Throne till now.)
Which highest Pinnacle of Glory
When you shall see him perch before ye,
And which, when we remount our Seat,
Our helping Hand shall soon complete;
(Our least Return for Crown Restored,
To lend him ours, who lent his Sword;)
In that great Day, that finishing Stroke,
When France all Christendom shall Yoke:
What tho all Europe go to Po^,
England's alone th'excepted Spot:
We and our Heirs the Throne shall sit on.
He means no Harm to little Britain,
So far from the least thought to Shackle us,
(Believe it spoke with Voice Oraculous)
Britain sleeps safe, no Chains upon her,
Secured by Lewis Guardian Honor.
Then safely trust what Sacred true is;
Nor doubt your Faithful James nor Lewis.
Tho an Affair of this Nature speaks for it self, nor do We think Our selves at
all obliged to say any thing more upon this occasion, than, That We come to
Assert our Just Rights, and to Deliver our People from the Oppression they lie
under; yet when we consider how Miserably many of Our Subjects were cheated
into the late Revolution by the Art of Ill Men, and particularly by the Prince
of Orange's Declaration, which was taken upon Trust, and easily believed then
but since appear^ notoriously False in all the parts of it, consisting no less
of Assertions that have been evidently disproved, than of Promises that were
never intended to be performed. To prevent the like Delusions for the time to
come, etc.
But why (as if our Cause could droop)
Do we descend so low, to stoop
To Arguing, or Cases stating?
It looks like poor Capitulating.
Our Friends t'indear, and Foes to Fright,
We bring that thundering Title Right.
Right, which whenever it please to shine,
With that huge Attribute, Divine,
Can say all, do all, and defy all;
And no Body must ask it, why all?
What is it it cannot do, great things, small things,
Make Subjects nothing, Monarchs all things?
Besides we come with Zeal Inspirant,
And doubtless from the Observation of the Temper and Complexion, the Methods
and Maxims of the present Usurper, from the Steps he has already taken, when it
was most necessary for him to give no distaste to the People, as well as from
the Nature of all Usurpation, which can never be supported, but by the same
ways of Fraud and Violence by which it was set up, there is all the reason in
the World to believe, that the beginning of this Tyranny, like the five first
Years of Nero, is like to prove the mildest part of it; and all they have yet
suffered, is but the beginning of the Miseries which those very Men, who were
the great Promoters of the Revolution, may yet live to see and feel, etc.
To free you from the Yoke of Tyrant:
To ease you from your Shackle-bearing,
For our true Orient Bracelets wearing.
That worse than Nero in Possession,
Th'Usurpers Reign all vile Oppression,
All Cloven Foot; the Nations Curse
Too great, and will be ten times worse.
Poor Cheated and Deluded Nation!
Nothing in the Orange Declaration,
So far from the least Good Intent,
Either performed, or ever meant,
But false, all Lies in every Article,
Line, Syllable, each part and Particle;
But how or where! so poor a Thing's
Below the Cognizance of Kings.
However for authentic proof,
We say 't's all False, and that is enough:
And what we say! is Demonstration
As clear as Transubstantiation.
We must confess we once run from ye,
And turned our Royal Bum upon ye,
That Bum which to have made us come again,
You should have kissed to have brought us home again.
What tho at that abrupt Departure,
We broke up House, and threw up Charter;
Stripped all our own Regalia; nay,
Threw even our own Great Seal away:
But what of that! what if we had gone
As far as honest Presto John;
Or to the farthest Turkish Town;
And left you all to hang or drown?
(To Turkish Town! Yes, welcome there
For Lewis sake, we had met good Cheer.)
It Is true, indeed, our scamp'ring Dance
Our arrival in France, the only part in Europe to which we could retire with
safety,
Was only into sweet dear France:
To Monsieur bound with Oaths most godly,
With the rest o'th'World we stood so odly,
That troth, for private Reasons told us
France was the only place could hold us.
But what if we had run to the Devil!
What then! must you be so uncivil!
It Is not alas, our running Saunter,
Nor all your Abdication Banter,
That can excuse a Fault so spiteful
As dispossessing Prince so Rightful.
You Have read of old of Bloody Work
For all wise Men ought, and all good Men will take care of their Posterity;
and therefore it is to be remembered, that if it should please Almighty God, as
one of the severest Judgments upon these Kingdoms, for the many Rebellions and
Perjuries they have been guilty of, so far to permit the Continuation of the
present Usurpation, that we should not be restored during our Life time, yet an
indisputable Title to the Crown will survive in the Person of our dearest Son
the Prince of Wales, our present Heir apparent, and his Issue, and for default
of that, in the Issue of such other Sons as we have great reason to hope (the
Queen being now with Child,) we may yet leave behind us: And what the
Consequences of that is like to be, may easily be understood by all that are
not strangers to the long and bloody Contentions between the two Houses of York
and Lancaster:
'Twixt House of Lancaster and York.
And what if for some unknown Crime,
Heaven, angry Heaven, in Our life time,
No doubt, to Scourge ungrateful Nation,
Shall not ordain our Restoration.
(Three undon Kingdoms Loss irreparable
With all its Train of Woes inseparable!)
However if We fail (pray mind us!)
We leave our little Wales behind us.
Besides, as Matron wise have tell'd her,
Our Queen has got a York in K^lder.
A York unless (what Heaven forbid)
Our loss should make her lose her Kid.
Think O what dangers then you run ye
With the endless Plagues entailed upon ye,
When Wales, young Sprig, 'twixt Rose and Thistle,
Shall once grow up its Thorns to bristle.
But now t'allay our Subjects Frights,
And set their little Wits to rights;
From all their dread of Hemp to chear'em,
(Nor fear their friends when they have none near'em)
We issue forth our General Pardon
So large, the like was never heard on:
Mercy so vast and so unbounded,
That but to hear the Fame on it sounded
Our Enemies shall be all confounded.
Only some Rods in Piss are kept
For these few following we Except.
As first Lords, Prelates, Peers, (what not,)
Except the Persons following, viz. Duke of Ormond, Marquess of Winchest. Earl
of Sund. Earl of, etc. Dr. Tillotson Dean of Cant. Dr. etc. -- Hunt Fisherman.
All Eyesores to our Cause, (God wot,)
Mounting to Thirty four in number,
All to rid off for useless Lumber;
Excluded for substantial Reason,
Some for Estates, and some for Treason.
This List with Dukes and Lords i'th'Van
Ends with poor Hunt the Fisherman.
For we have sworn on Virgin Psalter,
With the same consecrated Halter,
To truss our little Man of Fish up,
Hanged cheek by joul with great Archbishop.
Next we except a sort of Vermin,
In Hood and Scarlet, Coif and Ermine:
Except also all Persons who as Judges or Jurymen, or otherwise had a hand in
the Barbarous Murder of Mr. John Ashton, and Mr. Cross, or of any others who
have been illegally Condemned and Executed for their Loyalty to us:
The very next up Holborn Trudges
Those Butchering Jurymen and Judges;
All hands in Cross and Ashton's Murder
We have sworn to troop to th'Devil and further.
Nay the Hick's-Hall Dons must have a rally
For some Old Bailey Scores on Tally:
Whom we'll make bold to call t'account
For giving of our Friends a Mount;
For trussing Burghlers, noosing Pads,
Those honest Abdicated Lads;
Who in Allegiance firm and duteous,
To keep good Conscience sound, and true t'us,
To drink our Health, and Damn the Dutch,
Perhaps have took a Cup too much:
Or forced, for daily Bread and Clothes,
To take Purse t'escape taking Oaths.
But Woe that Criminal Wretch so tardy,
Whose crying Guilt has been so hardy,
To dare to Try, Condemn, or Hang,
Our best best Friends, our Dear-Joy Gang;
Our Rapparee and Teague-land Breed,
Of our own true Shalvation Creed;
Be It doomed with Vengeance Magisterial,
That Sin against Majesty Imperial,
That Sin our heaviest Rods shall handle,
Damned trebly, by Bell Book and Candle.
In short, the whole Long-robed Mouths of Law,
Must take their Turns at Hang and Draw;
When for these Capital Black Sins
We'have stripped our Dons in Cony-skins,
Our next uncasing work, Good Sirs,
Is mauling of Mechanic Furs:
Provided always, That all Magistrates who expect any Benefit of Our Gracious
Pardon, shall immediately after Notice of our Landing, make some Public
Manifestation of their Allegiance to Us, and of their Submission to Our
Authority; and also Publish and cause to be Proclaimed this our Declaration as
^oon as it shall come to their Hands, etc.
All Sparks in Office, Town or City,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, all shut out from Pity;
Mayors, Aldermen, the Kingdom thorough,
From London Great, to small Queenborough;
Who, when we first set Foot in Nation,
Shall not in ample Acclamation,
With Bells, Huzzahs, and Bone-fires Greet us,
Burn Caps, and run stark Mad to meet us:
Nay even that Hour we step from Water,
(What though they venture Necks, no matter!)
Immediately by Proclamation
Publish this Royal Declaration;
All such from hopes of Grace we Bilk,
And Damn as black as Butter-milk;
That is, by civil Computation,
Just all the Magistrates in the Nation.
Yes, and for Reasons strong and ample;
For making, by this wise Example,
Whole Corporations Tyburn Martyrs,
Is th'easiest way to Forfeit Charters.
Our Mercy of Gigantick Size,
And all Spies, and such as have berray'd Our Councils during our late Absence
from England, that by an early return to their Duties, and by any Signal Mark
of it, as by Seizing to Our Use, or Delivering into our Hands any of Our Forts,
or by bringing over to Us any Ships of War, or Troops in the Usurper's Army, or
any new raised and Armed by themselves, or by any other Eminent Good Service,
according to their several Opportunities and Capacities, shall manifest the
Sincerity of their Repentance, shall not only have their respective Pardons
immediately passed under the Great Seal of England, but shall otherwise be
Considered and Rewarded by Us, as the Merit of their Case shall require.
So Great, forgives our very Spies:
All who our Councils have betrayed,
Or Royal Secrets open laid:
Be it a Sin so great (suppose it)
Peeping in Father Petres Closet:
Nay, Crime so bold as to tell Tales
Of our Sweet Babe the Prince of Wales.
These and worse Sins all pardoned stand,
Provided when our Forces Land,
That Grace to merit from our Hand,
They purchase our kind Smiles and Favor,
According to their Good Behavior.
For Instance some such Service do us,
As bring a Ship of War over to us;
Betray some Town or Fort; or Charm ye
Some Troop over from th'Usurper's Army.
Do this, and our Good Graces reap;
And well they buy their Necks so cheap.
Nay, for a Spill more and above,
We'll pay half Money, not all Love,
Resolving to Regain our Crowns,
As Lewis Buys his Conquered Towns.
And lastly, we Exclude all those
(A Small Exception it is, God knows)
From the first Minute of our Landing,
All General Pardon notwithstanding,
Shall dare do any Act or Thing
To Oppose Restoring of your King.
This Lash the Black-Coat Tribe shall Scourge ye,
For this last Swoop takes all the Clergy;
From Haughty Miter'd Prelate, down
To plain Sir John in tattered Gown,
Poor Parson, who rings in the People
With Candle-stick in Country Steeple;
All that in Heretic Prayers shall dare ye
To Pray-Success to Will. and Mary.
Nor shall this maul the Pastor's Hide
Alone, but Fleece the Sheep beside.
And We do hereby strictly Forewarn and Prohibit any of Our Subjects
whatsoever, either by Collecting or Paying any of the Illegal Taxes lately
imposed upon the Nation, or any part of Our Revenue, or by any other ways to
Abet or Support the present Usurpation.
For woe to all their smarting Backs,
Shall dare to pay one Penny Tax;
For that, you're told in Declaration,
Is to Abet the Usurpation.
Thus take the Kingdom round, Poor Soul,
He Forfeits Head that Pays but Poll.
To sum up all, when we begin,
(Our Mild Forgiving Hand once in,)
Our tenderhearted Inclination,
Excepts no more than All the Nation,
As bound by Romish Oath Religious,
To act with Mercy thus Prodigious.
And We do hereby further Declare and Promise, That We will Protect and
Maintain the Church of England, as it is now by Law established, in all their
Rights, Privileges and Possessions: And that upon all Vacancies of Bishoprics
and other Dignities and Benefices within our Disposal, care shall be taken to
have them filled with the most Worthy of their own Communion.
And now our Church of England Greeting,
With some few Honey-words at meeting;
Some small Civility Complimental;
Nor with least Reservation Mental,
To talk Romantickly, or fright ye
With Boasted Wonders over-mighty,
Intended by us to Protect it:
Because we'd have you not expect it.
Know then with the same Word Most Royal,
Of which already you have had Trial,
Your Heretic Rights maintained devoutly,
We'll act your Churches Champion stoutly.
(To speak in Style some call Ironick)
We'll 't with Orthodox Canonick*
Secured in all their Privileges*
And this we vouch in Verbo Regis.
But as to either School or College,
Or Academy; we acknowledge,
Our Declaration (Mum!) says naught.
And why, because with Wise forethought,
Forth'old Substantial Maudlin Breed,
(Under the Ro^e) we have decreed
To make Them Nurs'ries, to supply us
With Father Teagues and Obadiahs.
And we do hereby farther declare* That all Officers or Soldiers by Sea or
Land, now engaged in the Usurper's Service, who shall after notice of our
Landing, at any time before they engage in any Fight* or Battle against our
Forces, quit the said Illegal Service, and return to their Duty, shall not only
have their respective Pardons, but shall likewise be fully satisfied and paid
all the Arrears due to them from the Usurper and that even the Foreigeers
themselves, etc.
Now You, the Heroic Men of the Blade,
Professors of the Martial Trade,
With Hearts most stout, and Brains most shallow,
And so more fit for present swallow,
To quit the Usurper we exhort all;
The Usurper whom we hate most mortal.
And why, because he takes delight in
Our natural Abhorren^e, ^ighting*
Who ever shall the Tyrant sham,
And come to Gentle J -- s the Lamb;
Besides our unknown Favors showed 'em,
We'll pay 'em all the Usurper owed 'em:
Their whole Arrears, each Doit that is due.
Ay and pay Lewis Army too*
A pretty Score, when both Counts meet,
His some odd Pounds for Land and Fleet:
A lumping roaring thundering Sum,
And Reck'ning-day must one day come:
But with our dear sweet Face to enlighten ye,
Let not that paltry Triflle frighten ye.
Nay and considering what heap
Of Blessings from our Reign you will reap,
It is a pennyworth dog cheap;
Which you will, no doubt, pay every Farthing
And find you're Savers by the bargain.
And lastly, for a smart Conclusion,
For all our snarling Foes Confusion;
One parting, home, dead doing Blow,
As all Objections shall overthrow;
We promise you, (and mark us rightly,
And generally we shall delight to spend the remainder of our Reign, [as we
have always designed since we came to the Crown] in studying to do every thing
that may contribute to the Re-establishment of the Greatness of the English
Monarchy upon its old and true Foundation, etc.
A Vow to which we'll hold most tightly)
By our old Model, stamp and Charter
To Reign, no flincher and no starter,
In Church and State, Our Wi^e and (...)*
Our last remaining Thread shall be
All of a piece with our first Spinning,
As we designed from the Beginning.
If this Plain-Dealing will not win ye,
In troth, I think, the Devil's in ye.
FINIS.

