THE Triumphs of London.

Performed on Friday, October. 29. 1675. for the Entertainment of the Right
Honorable, and truly Noble Pattern of Prudence and Loyalty, Sir JOSEPH SHELDON
Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON.

Containing a true description of the several Pageants, with the Speeches
spoken on each Pageant. Together with the several Songs sung at this Solemnity.

All set forth at the proper Costs and Charges of the WORSHIPFUL COMPANY of
DRAPERS.

Designed and Composed, by Tho. Jordan, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by I. Macock, for John Playford, and are sold at his Shop near
the Temple-Church, 1675.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir JOSEPH SHELDON Knight, Lord Mayor Of the CITY of
LONDON.
MY LORD,
SVccession, Election, and Desert, by their Trinity of Power in a Unity of
Consent, are manuductive in your ascension to that Chair of Equity prepared for
those worthy Patriots who are to dispense Justice impartially for the civil
support of this great City; for the which dignity, Extraction, Nature, and
Education, have so copiously qualified your Lordship, that you will be able in
your Governing, to satisfy the highest Expectation. It was (not long since)
the expression of an ingenious Gentleman (who honors your Name and Family)
that, as the Jews chose their first Monarch for the magnitude of his Corporeal
dimensions, You might have been more reasonably Elected Lord Mayor for the
grandeur of your Animal and Intellectual Expansions: That you deserve (were not
the Governing time of the City limited) to fill the Iustice-Seat of this
Emporeum, so long a time as your Predecessor, Sir Henry Fitz-Alwin, a Member of
this Company of Drapers; who was the first Lord Mayor of this Ancient Famous
City, and continued in that Dignity more than 24. years, sans intermission: Nor
is this opinion confined to the indulgence of one single person, but is the
Universal Judgment of all rational Citizens; and such are the sober thoughts of

My Lord, Your Faithful and Humblest Honourer, Tho. Jordan.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL COMPANY OF DRAPERS.
Gentlemen,
YOUR own Vrbanity more than my Desert, has exalted my humble Genius to the
Advancement of Designing and Describing this Days Triumph, to which, if, when
you have surveyed it, you are pleased to object, that I have not performed this
Duty so exactly as I should, I must ingenously confess, I have done it as well
as I can, in Structure, Figure, Speech, and Melody, all which (in their
aptitude) Consent and Concenter in Magnifying the Merit of the Magistrate, and
also elevating the deserved Dignity of the Ancient and Splendid Society of
Drapers. And I hope, that when you shall consider, my subject matter (in point
of Trade) is (the great Manufacture of this Nation) Cloth, it may reasonably in
the best sense be said, My Wits went a Wool-gathering. But with high intention,
that my Muse may like Jason, bring in and magnify, The Golden Fleece, whose
splendor can never be sufficiently glorified, nor this Worshipful anciently
famous Company be illustrated by the weak Endeavors of

Your most Obsequious Servant, Thomas Jordan.

In proper Habits orderly Arrayed,
The Movements of the Morning are Displayed.

SElected Citizens in the Morning All,
At seven a Clock do meet at Drapers-Hall,
The Master, Wardens, and Assistants, joins,
For the first rank, in their Gowns faced with Foins.
The second Order do, in merry moods,
March in Gowns faced with Budg and Livery Hoods.
In Gowns and Scarlet Hoods thirdly appears,
A youthful number of Foins Batchellors.
Forty Budg Batchellors the Triumph Crowns,
Gravely attyr'd in Scarlet Hoods and Gowns.
Gentlemen Ushers which white Staves do hold,
Sixty; in Velvet Coats and Chains of Gold.
Next thirty more min Plush and Buff there are,
That several Colors wave, and Banners bear.
The Sergeant Trumpet thirty six more brings,
Twenty the Duke of York's, sixteen the Kings.
The Sergeant wears two Scarfs, whose Colors be,
One the Lord Mayor's, tother's of the Company.
The King's Drum Major, followed by four more
Of the Kings Drums and Fifes, make London roar.
Seven Drums and two Fifes more in Vests of Buff,
March with waste Scarfs and Breeches of black stuff.
Two City Marshals mounted and attended,
Are by the Company with Scarfs befriended;
And (next to the Drums) do troop it in the Rear,
But the Foot Marshal does the next appear;
Who puts them all in Rank and File, and wears
A shoulder Scarf as broad and rich as theirs;
Attended by six persons that dare do,
What ere their Marshall may Command them to.
Next the Fence-Master Troops, and (to defend him)
Diverse with drawn broad, bright Swords do attend him.
Many poor Pensioners that march in the Rear,
With Gowns and Caps, Standards and Banners bear;
A numerous Troop of Persons that are poor,
In Azure Gowns and Caps, one hundred more,
With Javelins and with Targets are all Actors,
And bear the Arms of their good Benefactors.
Being thus prepared: By the Foot Marshals Judgment they are guided,
And into six Divisions are divided.
Ranked out by two and two, The first that stirs,
Are the poor Company of Pensioners;
But in the Front of them orderly be
Placed the Ensigns of the Company.'
In The Rear of them four Drums and one Fife more,
Then Pensioners in Coats described before.
Persons of worth who do in Martial manner,
Bear each of them a Standard, or a Banner.
Four Trumpets more to them, and in their Rear,
Two of the Drapers Ensigns march, which bear
(As by the Herald Painter is expressed)
The draught of their Supporters and their Crest:
Six Gentlemen Ushers in order trudg,
And after them the Batchellors in Budg:
Marching in measured distance, and indu'd
With Order, This Division does conclude.
In The Rear of them six Trumpets do appear,
And after them two Gentlemen, that bear
Two Coats of Arms, which appertaining be
To the City and the Draper's Company.
Then do march up Eight Gentlemen that wears
The Golden Chains, then the Foins Batchellors,
In amicable measure move like Friends
Filled with one Joy: So this Division ends.
Two Gentlemen in Velvet Coats arrayed,
March after them with two Banners displayed;
Then succeed them ten Gentlemen Ushers more,
In Coats and Chains of Gold described before;
And, gradually, after them you will see
A very worthy large Society;
With each of them a Gown and Livery Hood,
And all Lord Mayors in the Potential Mood.
In The Rear of these (with silver sounds to fitlye)
Do fall in diverse Trumpets of the City;
And after them two Gentlemen accord,
To bear the Arms of the City and my Lord:
And then the Gentlemen with equal distance
That Usher in the grave Court of Assistance;
In The Rear of them four Drums, six Trumpets be
Ordered to bring up the Catastrophe.
Three Gallants, Successive, follow them,
Bearing the Banners of the Diadem.
Kings, Queens, and City Ensigns, which engages
Six Gentlemen to wait on them as Pages;
The Masters and the Wardens bring up all,
And thus Equipped, they march from Drapers-Hall
To my Lords House, where the Aldermen and He
Take Horse, and rank according to Degree:
Which being done, the whole Body in State
Does move toward Guild Hall, but at the Gate
The new Lord with the old Lord Mayor unites,
Guarded by Gentlemen, Esquires and Knights:
Then thus attired with Gown, Furr, Hood, and Scarf,
March all through Kings-street down to three-Crane-Wharf;
Where the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen discharge*
A few Gentlemen Waiters, and take Barge
At the West end of the Wharf* and at the East
The Court Assistant, Livery, and the best
Gentlemen Ushers: Such as stay on shore
Are Ushers, Foins, and the Budg Batchellor:
Who for a time repose themselves and men,
Until his Lordship shall return again;
Who now with several Companies make have
To Westminster, but in their way is placed,
A Pleasure-Boat that has great Guns aboard,
And with two Broadsides does salute my Lord.
They row in Triumph all along by the Strand,
But when my Lord and Companies do Land
At the new Pallace-Stairs orderly all
Do make a Lane to pass him to the Hall,
Where having took an Oath that he will be
Loyal and faithful to his Majesty,
His Government, his Crown, and Dignity,
With other Ceremonials said and done,
In order to his Confirmation;
Sealing of Writs in Courts, and such like things,
As show his power abstracted from the Kings,
He takes his leave of the Lords and Barons, then
With his Retinue he retreats again
To the Waterside and (having given at large
To the poor of Westminster) does re-imbarge,
And scud along the River till he comes
Up to Paul's Wharf, where Guns and thundering Drums
Proclaim his Landing; when he is set a shore,
He is saluted with three Vollies more
By (the Military Glory of this Nation) the Company of Artillery men, under the
Conduct of the most accomplished for Arms and Arts, the Right Worshipful Sir
Thomas Player, Knight, they being all in their Martial Ornaments of Gallantry;
some in Buff with Head-pieces, many of Massy Silver (of whose Honorable
Society his Lordship has been a worthy Member.) There is also the old Warlike
Honor of this Nation, bravely revived, and is at this time a most Heroic
Rarity; which is, that diverse Gentlemen Archers, completely Armed, with long
Bows and Swords, with War Arrows, and Pallisades, with Hats turned upon one
side, on which are tied large Knots of green Ribon, formed into a Company,
march under the Command of the Right Worshipful Sir Robert Peyton Knight, etc.

From Paul's Wharf they march before my Lord through a Gallery of the aforesaid
Batchellors, and Gentlemen Ushers, who did not go to Westminster; and likewise
the Pensioners and Banners being set in Order, ready to march, the Foot Marshal
leads the way, and in the Rear of the Companies up Paul's Wharf Hill into
Cheapside, where his Lordship is entertained by the first Scene or Pageant, as
follows.

The first Pageant described.
A Scene of State, containing an Imperial Throne of Gold, every way richly
adorned with several Banners of the Kings, the Cities, the Lord Mayors, the
Companies, and Sir Henry Fitz-Alwine, etc. On this Throne there sits a
comely Majestic person, with a cheerful look, that represents TRIUMPH, in a
cloth of Silver Robe, a purple scarf fringed with Gold, an Imperial Triple
Crown upon a peruke of long fair hair, skie-colour'd silk stockings, on which
are Golden buskins, laced up half way the leg, with purple and silver Ribon in
surfles; In her right hand she holds a Target bearing a Virgin, (the
Companies Patroness) and in the other the Golden Fleece.

On seats round about her sit the four Cardinal Virtues, viz. Prudence,
Justice, Temperance and Fortitude, all in their Emblematical Illustrations thus
described:

Prudence, In a Scarlet colored silk Robe, a silver Mantle fringed with Gold,
black curled hair, on which is a Chaplet of flowers, silver buskins laced with
watchet ribon; in her right hand she bears a shield Vert, charged with a
Serpent circular OR; and in the center a Dove volant argent; in her left hand a
Banner of the Kings.

Justice, In a crimsin sarsnet Robe, girt about with Gold, a purple mantle
fringed with Gold and Silver; fair curled hair, a four cornered Cap of Gold let
with Jewels, buskins of Gold laced with purple: In one hand a Balance, in the
other a Banner of the Cities.

Temperance, In a white silk Robe, a grass green mantle, a brown curled hair,
on it a chaplet of White Lillies and damask Roses, purple buskins, laced and
surfled with Gold; In one hand a Target-sable charged with a Chalice OR, viz. a
Gold Cup, in the other a Banner of the Companies.

Fortitude, In a Robe of Aurora colored silk, a Mantle of Silver, a Silver
Corslet about her neck; a dark brown hair, a Garland of oaken leaves tipp'd
with Gold; Silver buskins: On a shield gules a Tower Argent in one hand; in the
other a Banner of my Lords.

And on four Pedestals, one at each Corner of the Stage, sit four Ladies,
eminently and properly dressed, Peace, Purity, Plenty and Piety; all of them
bearing proper Emblems, as are significantly made more manifest by description.

Peace, In an Olive-green sarsnet Robe semined with silver stars, a Carnation
Mantle fringed with Gold, bright brown hair, a Chaplet of Hearts-case, called
in Latin by Physicians Herba Trinitatis, or Panseys, yellow buskins laced with
purple and silver ribon: In one hand a Palm Tree, in the other a Banner of the
Supporters.

Purity, In a white silk Robe, a skie-colour'd Mantle, starrified with Gold, a
dark brown hair, a Garland of white Roses; Orange-colour'd buskins, laced with
skie-colour'd and silver Ribon; In one hand a Crystal Globe, in the other a
Banner of the Virgin.

Plenty, In a Vest of Gold and Silver, upon Roman Bases of Carnation, richly
adorned with Silver and Gold Lace; a green silk and silver Mantle, Purple
Buskins laced up with Gold; on her Head a blackish curled hair, about which is
a wreath of Fruits, leaves and flowers: In one hand a Cornucopia, in the other
a Golden Fleece.

Piety, In a Sable Robe, a silver Mantle, a fair hair, a Coronet of Golden
Stars, Golden Buskins laced with black ribon, bearing a Buckler in one hand,
where, on a Mount Vert is a Crucifix proper; in the other a Banner on an
Angelical Staff, bearing a Cross Gules in a Field Argent.

His Lordship coming to a convenient stand, TRIUMPH makes an Address to him in
this Speech.

The Speech by TRIUMPH.
MY Name is LONDON Triumph, Make me r^^^,
Hail to Your Lordship, -- I am hither come
With my Retinue to attend upon Bow
Your Triple-crown'd Inauguration,
Which does an Emblem of your Honor shroud.
You are the Sunbeams that break through the Cloud,
The Sun in Aries, who are this year
Brightly to shine in LONDON's Hemisphere*
The influence with which you are indu'd,
Are Prudence, Justice, Temperance, Fortitude. -- point to them.
To match with these, four bright Beams more are sent ye,
Piety, Peace, with Purity and Plenty: -- point to the other.
These are those Graces which did wait upon
Fitz-Alwin, Norman, Capel, Champion;
With many such that were Lord Mayors, and Free
Of ab' Ancient, Famous DRAPER's Company.
But they are gone down many years ago*
And all their practiced Virtues you renew,
The beams that set with them do rise in you.
The DRAPER's Company, with Ioynt-consent
To serve your Fame, have liberally spent
In Triumphs for this Day's Accomplishment*
And wish it may as a good Omen be
For the whole year of Your Prosperity:
May Trade increase, may Plenty fill the Fold,
That you may turn your Fleeces into Gold.
Jason at Colchos gained the Fleece it is true,
But God-bless'd Gideon had his Fleece too*
One was fictitious, to'ther ye may see
Recorded in your Sacred History.
But granting both, the Demi Gods of Greece
Gained not more Fame than Gideon's blessed Fleece.
May you in Peace and War so prosperous be
TO have Jason's Gold, and Gideon's Victory.
But I Am a Woman, and in speaking thus
Prolix, I fear you will think me tedious
But pertinent; and I hope in Joy and Pleasure,
Your Lordship will allow of LONDON Measure.
The Speech ended, the Scene moves through the multitude, and his Lordship with
his Right Worshipful Retinue advances through Cheapside, where against
Milkstreet end, his passage is obstructed, and his Patience invited to behold a
second Pageant* the particulars of which are manifested in this succeeding
Description.

The Second Pageant.
A Triumphant Chariot elegantly adorned with Gilding and Painting; On the
Supreme feat of this Chariot sits in great State MINERVA, the Goddess of
Arts and Arms, with long thick bright curled hair; On her Head a silver Helmet,
in which is stuck a tall flourishing Plume of red Feathers, consisting of a
sprig, and diverse falls, with Silver Armor, a Corslet of Gold about her Neck,
a Golden Gauntlet, Carnation silk-bases, fringed with Gold, a blew silk Scarff
trimmed with Silver, a short sword by her side, with a rich Hilt; on her feet
silver Buskins laced up with scarlet Ribon: In one hand She holds a Lance, in
the other a Target bearing the Companies Arms.

In a descent, beneath her feet sits Vigilance, Valor and Victory,
according to these Descriptions:

Vigilance, Is a beautiful Lady, attired in a yellow Robe, over which is a
Sable Mantle fringed with Gold, and seeded with waking eyes, an aburn hair, a
Chaplet of Ivy on her Head; in her right hand a Lamp, in her left a Bell.

Valor, Has on his Head a long black Peruke, a Buff-coat, with an imbroider'd
Belt, an Orange-colour'd Scarff about his wast, a black Velvet Mountier Cap,
with a Plume of White, Red and Black Feathers in it: In his right hand a sword
drawn, and in his left a Target, bearing the Golden Fleece.

Victory, A Woman of Princely presence, clad all in Gold, and on a long bright
hair curled, a wreath of Laurel, Golden Buskins laced with willow green, and
silver Ribon: In one hand she bears a silver Helmet, in the other a Crown of
Gold.

This Chariot is drawn by the Supporters of the Companies Arms, which are two
large and lively carved Lions in Gold pellited, which are mounted by two
Negro's in Robes of Silver, girt about with skie-colour'd Scarffs, Crowned with
Coronets of various colored Feathers; the one representing Strength, the other
Concord, each of them holding in one hand a Triple-Crown, and in the other the
Companies Banner: His Lordship approaching within audible distance is
complemented by Minerva, with this Congratulatory Poem.

The Speech by MINERVA.
I Am the Deity of Arms and Arts,
My Sovereignty does rule in all the parts
Of the round Universe! It Is I, my Lord,
That poize your Balance, and direct your Sword:
I guide all Bodies Politic and rule
In The Court, in the City, Country, Camp, and School:
My Name's Minerva, It is I am she
That indue men with Power and Policy:
Without which every thing would be undone,
That has a being underneath the Sun;
Born of the Brain of Jove: I was made free,
Of the Trasplendent Drapers Company,
Before Fits-Alwin died, The first Lord Mayor
Of London, who Continued in the Chair
Twenty four years, and might for ought I know,
If he bad never died, sat there till now;
He governed by my Influence, and so
The highest Potentates in Europe do.
Jason with Argo and his Gods of Greece,
Might have returned from Colchos, all like Geese,
Had not I helped him to the Golden Fleece.
I did without assault make all things hit*
Not Jason's Buckler, but Minerva's Wit
And Love, gained him the Prize. It Is I that do
Assist the Scepter and the Sheep-hook too,
Which with these stout Supporters show I am
Protectress of the Lion and the Lamb, Pointing to the Lions.
The last, (though Innocent from doing harms)
Does yield Materials for Arts and Arms.
In Ceremonial Times, men just and wise
The Sheep did for their souls and bodies prize,
Which served for Food, Garment, and Sacrifice.
I Am sure for Clothing there may much be said,
The Sheep's the Spring of all the Drapers Trade,
That fertile Fleece which on his back is curled,
Has a great Traffic thorowout the World.
Therefore may Trading evermore be free,
To keep the old Honor up of Draperie*
May you, my Lord, be blessed in your Command,
May all things prosper that you take in Hand;
And may Felicity for ever wait,
On Sheldon's Honored Name in Church and State.
This Speech ended, his Lordship expressed some signalities of approbation, and
with the Scarlet Cavalry of the Right Worshipful Aldermen, they Troop it
through Cheapside: but by the way, my Lord is Courteously intercepted with a
Third Pageant, being a Mountain Royally adorned with Princely Shepherds
according to this description.

The Third Pageant.
A Green Mountain naturally supplied with wild Briars, Brambles, Shrubs, and
Trees: Gradually ascending from the Base to the extreme height: and on the top
of it, is properly erected, a Rustic Structure, whereon sits in a stately
posture, the Representation of PAN, the fictitious God of Shepherds: In a Robe
of bright gray silk, and silver, girt with a gold Belt about his wast, A Peruke
of darkish-brown-colour'd hair: And, on his head a Diadem of Wool richly set
with large bright sparkling Jewels: A green Scarf from the right shoulder to
the left side, fringed with Gold: And from the left shoulder cross to the right
side, a little Belt of Silver, on which hangs a Silver Scrip. In his right
hand he holds a Golden Sheep-hook, and in his left hand a Shepherds Golden
Pipe.

By him sits Syrinx (his best beloved Nymph) in a watchet silk, and silver
Robe, a bright ash color and gold Mantle; a long bright hair, and on it a
Garland of green Reeds and Flags, bound up with Water Lillies, Yellow and blew
Flowers de lis. In one hand a large flourishing Reed, in the other a Banner of
the Companies Arms.

At each side, a little below them, sit Two Couples of Princely Shepherds and
Shepherdesses. Upon his right hand Strephon and Daphne; Corydon and Phillida.
On the left hand, Damon and Amaryllis, Amyntas and Phillis.

Their Dress.
Strephon, In a silk russet and gold Robe, tied about with a yellow silk and
silver Scarf, on which is hung at one side, a silver Scrip, on the other, a
silver Bottle, of the Shepherd shape. A long curled black hair, and about it a
Chaplet made of green Grass, in which are orderly mingled Butter Flowers,
Daisies, Cow-slips, and other Meadow Flowers: On his Feet, Buskins of Silver,
surfl^d with green and gold Ribons In his right hand a Silver Hook, and in his
left hand, a Banner of the Kings.

Daphne, In a Robe of grass-green and silver, tied about with a girdle of gold,
with fair hair, and on it a Chaplet of Bays, Buskins of Gold, a golden Scrip
by her side, and in her right hand a golden Sheep-hook, in her left hand, a
Banner of the Cities.

Corydon, In a Robe of Seagreen silk and silver, girt about with a gold
Garter, flaxen hair, a wreath about his head, of Hips, Hawes, Black-berries,
Sloes, wild Plumbs, Crabs, interwoven with their leaves, tip'd with silver and
gold, golden Buskins, and golden Scrip, a silver Sheephook in one hand, and a
Banner of the Lord Mayors in the other.

Phillida, In a Robe of Poppingjay-green Sarsnet and silver, girt about with a
gray silk and gold Garter, on which hangs a golden Scrip; a long curled black
hair, and on it a Garland of Wood-bine intermingled with Violets, Primroses,
Cowslips, Wood-roses and Eglantine; silver Buskins laced with Gold, a silver
Sheep-hook in one hand, in the other the Golden-Fleece.

Damon, Is invested with a Robe of French-green silk and Gold, a dark brown
hair, a broad green hat faced with silver, buttoned up on the left side with a
Jewel, a shoulder-scarf of yellow silk and silver; a silver Scrip, green
Buskins laced up with gold, a silver Sheep-hook in one hand, and a Banner of
the Supporters in the other.

Amaryllis, In a Carnation silk and silver Robe, with a shoulder-scarf of
skie-colour and gold, a bright brown hair, a broad fine straw hat silvered,
faced with Carnation silk, and buttoned up with a skie-colour'd silk and silver
Ribon, silver Buskins laced with purple Ribon; a golden Scrip, in one hand a
silver Hook, in the other, a Banner of the Virgin.

Amyntas, In a Robe of Scarlet-colour'd Sarsnet and Gold, with a Mantle of
purple and silver; Orange-colour Buskins laced up with purple Ribon, a fair
curled hair, a straw hat gilt with Gold, faced with purple silk, buttoned up
with a scarlet and silver Ribon, a golden Scrip, a Sheep-hook of Gold in one
hand, and a Banner of the Kings in the other.

Phillis, In a purple silk and silver Robe, a Lemon-colour'd silk and gold
Mantle, a curled black hair, a straw hat died crimson, faced with gold, turned
up with a green silk and silver Ribon; Gold Buskins laced up with silver, a
silver Scrip by her side, a silver Sheep-hook in one hand, in the other a
Banner of the City.

At the foot of this Mountain, upon the Stage stands the Companies Crest, a
Golden Ram in carved work, for magnitude bigger than the Life, on which sits
a lovely Angelical Boy in a Robe of willow-green sarsnet and silver, holding a
bridle of scarlet and silver Ribon in one hand, and a Banner of the Virgin in
the other, tied to a golden Sheep-hook.

His Lordship being fixed and fitted for Attention, PAN makes Application to
him in this Poetical Composition.

The third Speech by PAN.
I Am God PAN, that Deity which does
Secure the Arcadian Folds, producing Cloth,
Which tinctured with Scarlet or Purple Dye,
Is fit for Regal Robes of Royalty,
Wise Magistrates, and those Consular Powers
Whom Wealth and Wisdom have made Senators:
But hearing that (for Deities know all
By Mercury Scout-Master-General
Unto the Gods) that out of Drapers-Hall,
An Ancient Corporation should appear
A Beam of Government, who in this sphere
Should guide the London-Citizens this year,
I from Arcadian-Plains made have this way
To add some little luster to his Day. -- Looks about.
But which is He? -- That question was not wise;
Who ever looked for Phoebus in the skies,
Or which was Jove amongst the Deities?
Fool that I am! This person must be he, -- Looks on him.
For I in every part of him can see
The undoubted symptoms of true Dignity.
Then to your Lordship I must now address,
Whose great and matchless merit I confess,
Is more than I am able to express.
These Pastoral Princes with me came to wait -- They all rise up.
Upon your Triumphs, and to Celebrate
The honor of your Praetorship, and see
Your Ancient, Worthy, Honored Company.
Behold their Crest, a Golden Ram, from which
All Drapers do grow consequently Rich.
The Wealth of Colchos, by the men of Greece
Was summed up in one word, The Golden Fleece;
And here it is, a Fleece of a large growth
Which yields the Draper, Meat, and Drink, and Cloth.
No Ram, no Lamb, no Lamb, no Sheep can be,
No Sheep, no Fleece, no Fleece, no Draperie.
It Is not considered what the Ram can do,
Their very Antleers, when Levites did blow,
Battered the strong manned Walls of Jericho.
That Ram was a great Sacrifice, My Lord,
Which ransomed Isaac from the falling sword.
But I Am too tedious, and I tire your sense
I fear, My Lord, with my impertinence;
For in brief rules of Regiment and Wit,
My Godship to your Lordship must submit.
His Lordship moving further, showing evident signs that he was very well
pleased with this Representation and Speech, meets another Scene of Drolls
near St. Laurence-Lane-end, according to this description.

The fourth Pageant.
A Forest or Desert properly accommodated with Herbage, Trees, Bushes, Birds
and Flowers; with Sheep grazing: and in it several sorts of common Cotswold
Shepherds, and Salisbury plain Shepherdesses in their Frolicks, Clad, some in
Russet Gowns, White, Red, and Yellow Wastcoats; Gray, Blew and Green
Petticoate, common straw Hats; Green, Blew and Russet Linsey-woolsy Aprons,
Leathern Girdles about their middles; small shoulder-belts, on which are tied
common Scrips, and Field Bottles, with Dogs, wooden Staves with Iron
Sheep-hooks, with Pipes, Recorders, Flagellets, Bag-pipe, and Tumberley Bass;
and whilst one part of them play, the other Dance, Tumble and Kiss in Rustic
manner, and excellent confusion, which concludes with a Shepherds Song,
composed and adapted for that Scene: To which they all sing the Chorus whilst
the Porters beat the burden.

The SONG.
WHat an innocent loving life Shepherds do lead,
In Grove, Field and Forest, on Mountain and Mead!
Although our low Cottages are thatch't above,
Our hearts are well warmed with the lining of Love:
Chor. And when we'r' at leisure we laugh and be merry,
With Cake-bread and Ale that is as brown as a berry.
In courting and sporting, we spend all the day,
We fear not and care not how time runs away;
And yet we can tell ye how nigh it is to Noon
Or Evening, if we do but gaze on the Sun.
But every night we do laugh and are merry,
With Cake-bread and Ale, etc.
We live as instructed by Father and Mother,
Who teach us what we should do one to another,
From frighting with fighting we care not a flea,
Our Innocence is like a Navy at Sea;
Which makes us so jocundly laugh and be merry,
With Cake bread and Ale, etc.
We multiply not with unnatural heats,
Nor kiss by the strength of provocative meats:
Our lively plump Issue that spring from our beds,
Are fat, fair, and clear, like young Cherubims heads;
Which fairly were got when we laughed and were merry,
By the help of good Ale, etc.
We feel not the cares which attend upon Crowns,
Live free from the fears of great Cities and Towns;
We seek not for Honor with Sword, Pike and Buff,
We all are contented, and that is wealth enough:
Not crafty, with safety we laugh and are merry,
With Apples and Ale, etc.
We make men revive, with our Singing and Dances;
There Is no flesh alive like Fidelia and Frances;
At Trap-ball and Stool-ball, Rebecca and Rachel,
Stephania does stop well, and Katey can catch well:
They trip it and lip it, they laugh and are merry,
With Cheese-cakes and Ale, etc.
With wild Curds and Custards, with Cheese-cakes and Pies,
With Syder and Sugar, Cream and Straw-berries,
Green Tanseys and White pots, with Fish, Fowl and Beast
Our Table is spread at a Sheep-shearing Feast:
And then w'ar' in the humor to laugh and he merry,
With Bag-pipe and Ale, etc.
And thus have I given you a taste of our Lives,
Our breeding, our feeding, our sports, and our Wives,
Our innocence, honesty, music and mirth,
That wait upon us from the day of our birth*
And how in our humors we laugh and are merry,
With Cakes and good Ale that is as brown as a berry.
The Song being ended, the Foot Marshal having placed the Assistants, Livery,
and the Companies on both sides of Kings street, and their Pensioners with
their Targets hung on the tops of their Javelins; in the Rear of them the
Ensign bearers; Drums and Fifes in the Front; and hasten the Foyns and
Budge-Batchellors, together with the Gentlemen-Ushers to Guild hall, where his
Lordship is again saluted by the Artillery-Men with three Vollies more, which
concludes their Duty. His Land-Attendants pass through the Gallery or Lane so
made into Guild hall, after which the Company repair to the Hall to Dinner; and
the several Silkworks, and Triumphs are likewise conveyed into Blackwell-Hall;
and the Officers aforesaid, and the Children that sit in the Pageants there
refresh themselves until his Lordship has dined at Guild Hall; where (to make
the Feast more famous) his Lordship is illustrated with the splendor and
presence of their most Excellent Majesty's, the Duke of York, Prince Rupert,
the Duke of Monmouth, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and all the other Bishops
(at this time in LONDON) all the Resident Ambassadors and Envoys, all the Lords
of the Privy Council, all the Principal Officers of State, all the Judges and
Sergeants at Law, and their Ladies.

His Lordship and the Guests being all seated, the City Music begin to touch
their Instruments with very artful fingers, and after a Lesson being played,
and their Ears as well feasted as their Mouths; an acute person, with a good
voice, good humor, and audible utterance (the better to provoke digestion)
sings this New Droll, Called The EPICURE. Sung by one in the habit of a Town
Gallant.
LET us drink and be merry, dance, Ioke, and Rejoice,
With Claret and Sherry, Theorbo and Voice,
The changeable World to our Joy is unjust,
All Treasure uncertain, then down with your dust.
In Frollicks dispose your pounds, shillings, and pence,
For we shall be nothing a hundred year hence.
We Will kiss and be free with Nan, Betty, and Philly,
Have Oysters, and Lobsters, and Maids by the Belly;
Fish Dinners will make a Lass spring like a flea,
Dame Venus (Love's G^dess) was born of the sea.
With her and with Bacchus we will tickle the sense,
For we shall be past it a hundred year hence.
Your most beautiful Bit that has all Eyes upon her,
That her Honesty sells for a hogo of Honor;
Whose Lightness and Brightness* does shine in such splendour,
That none but the Stars are thought fit to attend her.
Though now she be pleasant and sweet to the sense,
Will be damnable moldy a hundred year hence.
Then why should we turmoil in Cares and in Fears,
Turn all our Tranquillity to Sighs and Tears?
Let Us eat, drink and play till the Worins do corrupt us,
It Is certain, that post mortem nulla Voluptas.
Let Us deal with our Damsels, that we may from thence
Have Broods to succeed us a hundred year hence.
The Usurer that in the hundred takes Twenty,
Who wants in his Wealth, and does pine in his Plenty;
Lays up for a season which he shall never see,
The Year of One thousand eight hundred and three.
His Wit and his Wealth, his Law, Learning, and sense,
Shall be turned into nothing a hundred year hence.
Your Chancery Lawyer who by Conscience thrives,
In spinning of Suits to the length of three Lives;
Such Suits which the Clients do wear out in slavery,
Whilst Pleader makes Conscience a Cloak for his knavery,
May boast of his subtlety in the Present Tense,
But Non est inventus a hundred year hence,
Your most Christian Mounsieur who rants it in Riot,
Not suffering his more Christian Neighbors live quiet;
Whose numberless Legions that to him belongs,
Consists of more Nations than Babel has Tongues:
Though numerous as Dust, in despite of defense,
Shall all lie in ashes a hundred year hence.
We mind not the Counsels of such Bloody Elves,
Let us set foot to foot, and be true to our selves;
Our Honesty from our Good-fellowship springs,
We aim at no selfish preposterous things.
We Will seek no preferment by subtle pretense,
Since all shall be nothing a hundred year hence.


This frollick being ended, and well approved of, a hearty Cup of Wine is set
round the Table; in the mean time, the Music express their skill in playing
diverse new sprightly Airs, whilst another Musician with a Cup of Sack puts his
Pipe in Tune to sing this ensuing Song.

YOU that delight in Wit and Mirth,
And love to hear such News;
That come from all parts of the Earth,
Turks, Dutch, and Danes and Jews.
I Will send ye to the Rendezvous,
Where it is smoking new;
Go bear it at a Coffee-House,
It cannot but be true.
There Battails and Sea Fights are fought,
And bloody Plots displaid;
They know more things than ere was thought,
Or ever was bewrayed.
No money in the Minting House,
Is half so bright and new;
And coming from the Coffee-House,
It cannot but be true.
Before the Navies fell to work,
They knew who should be winner;
They there can tell ye what the Turk,
Last Sunday had to Dinner.
Who last did cut Du Ruiters Corns.
Amongst his Jovial Crew;
Or who first gave the Devil borns,
Which cannot but be true.
A Fisher man did boldly tell,
And strongly did avouch,
He caught a shole of Mackarell,
That parley'd all in Dutch,
And cried out, Yaw, yaw, yaw min hares
And as the draught they drew,
They stunk for fear that Monk was there,
This sounds as if 'twere true.
There Is nothing done in all the World,
From Monarch to the Mouse;
But every day or night it is hurled,
Into the Coffee-House.
What Lilly or what Booker could
By Art not bring about;
At Coffee-House you will find a brood,
Can quickly find it out.
They know who shall in times to come,
Be either made or undone;
From great St. Peter's-street in Rome,
To Turnbal-street in London.
And likewise tell at Clerken-well,
What Whore has greatest gain;
And in that place what brazen face
Does wear a golden Chain.
They know all that is good or hurt,
To damn ye or to save ye;
There is the College and the Court,
The Country, Camp, and Navy,
So great an University,
I think there never was any;
In which you may a Scholar be,
For spending of a penny.
Here men do talk of every thing,
With large and liberal lungs;
Like Women at a Gossiping,
With double tire of tongues.
They Will give a Broadside presently,
'Soon as you are in view;
With stories that you will wonder at,
Which they will swear are true.
You shall know there what fashions are,
How Perriwiggs are Curld,
And for a penny you shall hear
All Novels in the World;
Both old, and young, and great, and small,
And rich and poor, you will see;
Therefore let us to the Coffee all,
Come all away with me.
Dinner being ended, and Night approaching; His Lordship being attended by a
private Retinue of his own Company, takes Coach, and is Conducted to his
Mansion House, wihout that troublesome Night Ceremony which has been formerly,
when St. Paul's Church was standing: when his Lordship is Housed, those that
attend on him, depart with Order and Convenience; and the Triumphs and
Silk-works are by the Care of the Masters Artificers, lodged for that Night in
Blackwell-Hall, till the next day following, and then they are to be conveyed
to Drapers-Hall: To close up all, the Artists and the Artificers (each of them
deserving ample Commendations) bid you Goodnight.

FINIS.

