A DISCOURSE OF Natural Bathes, AND Mineral Waters. WHEREIN, The Original of
Fountains in general is declared. The nature and difference of Minerals, with
Examples of particular Bathes. The Generation of Minerals in the Earth, from
whence both the Actual Heat of Bathes, and their Virtues proceed. By what means
Mineral Waters are to be discovered. And lastly, of the Nature, and Uses of
Bathes, but especially, of our Bathes at Bathe, in Somersetshire.

By EDW. JORDEN, Doctor in Physic. The Third Edition, revised and enlarged;
with some Particulars of the Authors Life.

To which is added, An Appendix concerning Bathe, wherein the Antiquity, both
of the Bathes and City, is more fully discoursed; with a Brief Account of the
Nature, and the Virtues of the Hot Waters there. By THOMAS GUIDOTT, M, B.

Imprinted at London, and are to be sold by Thomas Salmon, Bookseller in Bathe.
1669.

Imprimatur

Sam. Parker RRmo Domino, ac Dno Gilberto Archi-Ep. Cantuar. a sacris
domesticis.
Ex aedib. Lambeth. November.7. 1668.
TO THE Right Honorable, FRANCIS Lord COTTINGTON, Baron of Hanworth,
Chancellor of the Exchequer, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council.
THE profitable use of Bathes, both for necessity and comfort, is such, and so
well confirmed from all antiquity, as I need not labor to illustrate it more;
only it has been the ill hap of Our Country Bathes to lie more obscure then
any other throughout Christendom, although they deserve as well as the best,
because very few have written any thing of them, and they either have not
mentioned, or but slightly passed over the main points concerning their causes
and originals; contenting themselves with an emperical use of them. This has
made me, through the instigation also of some of my worthy friends, to attempt
somewhat of this kind: which if it give not satisfaction according to my
desire, yet may be a provocation to some others, to perfect that which I have
begun. And seeing I do it for the use of my Country, I have neglected curious
ornaments to garnish it withal, but have clad it in a plain Suit of our
Country Cloth; without welt or guard: not desiring it should show it self in
forain parts: Mea cymba legate littus.

But in this mine undertaking, I find my self exposed to many censures, both
concerning some Paradoxical Opinions in Philosophy, which notwithstanding I
deliver not gratis, but confirmed with good grounds of reason, and authorities:
as also concerning the reformation of our Bathes, which do daily suffer many
indignities more ways then I have mentioned, under the tyranny of ignorance,
imposture, private respects, wants, factions, disorder, etc. so as they are not
able to display their virtues, and do that good for which God has sent them to
us; and all for want of such good government as other Bathes do enjoy. I blame
not our City herein, unto whose care the ordering of these Bathes is committed,
the disorders and effects being such as are out of their verge, and neither in
their power, nor in their knowledge to redress. For they have sufficiently
testified their desire of reforming all such abuses, when they voluntarily did
join in Petitioning the late King James of blessed memory, to that end: by
whose death this Petition also died. And they knew well that it must be a
superior power that must effect it. In these respects I have need of some noble
and eminent Patron to protect both me and my Bathes, whose cause I take upon we
to plead, and to advance, according to their due desert: but especially for the
Bathes sake, which I desire may flourish to the utmost extent of benefit to the
people; and to have all impediments removed out of their way, which may hinder
them in the progress of their virtues. This is the cause Sir, why I presume to
dedicate these my labors to your Honor, who having observed in foreign parts,
the uses and governments of all sorts, and being both by the favor of his
Majesty well able, and by your noble disposition well inclined and willing to
maintain good order and discipline, will, I doubt not, excuse this boldness,
and pardon my presumption. Consider Sir, that this is your native Country,
which naturally every man does affect to advance, and these Bathes are the
principal Jewels of your Country, and able to make it more famous then any
other parts of this Kingdom, and in advancing them, to advance your Name to all
posterity. wherefore howsoever my self deserve but small respect from you, yet
I beseech you respect the Bathes of your Country, and me as a wellwisher unto
them.

And as the common opinion of your great worth and abilities, have moved me to
this boldness, so the particular favors of your Noble Lady, and the
encouragement of your learned Physician, Doctor Baskervill, mine especial
Friend, who has spurred me on to this work, have removed out of my mind all
suspicion of misconstruction. But that as mine intent has been merely the
enlarging of the knowledge of those points concerning Bathes, and more
especially of our Bathes in Somersetshire; so you will be pleased to accept of
this public invitation by me to do your Country good, and your self honor,
which I wish may never be disjoined. And to me it will be no small
encouragement to devote my self and my best endeavors to your service. So I
humbly take my leave this 23. Aprilis, 1632.

Your Lordships most humble servant, ED. JORDEN.

A Preface TO THE READER.
THE ensuing Discourse of Natural Bathes, and Mineral Waters, of the learned
Author, Dr. Jorden, having found so kind an entertainment in the World, as to
have passed the Press twice in a Year; and the Copies of both Impressions at
this time so few, as not to answer the Enquiries of persons desirous to peruse
them, a third Edition was necessary, the Care of which, together with some
Additional Enlargements, being requested of me, I thought it might be a thing
acceptable to many, to view the Work, and revive the memory of so worthy a
Person. Especially in this loose, and quaking age of ours, in which Empericks,
and juggling Medicasters do so much abound, that it is almost as hard a matter to
meet with a regular and well accomplished Physician now, as it was in former
times for Diogenes to find an honest man.

The great occasion of this general abuse of Physic I observe to be, men's
beginning usually at the wrong end. For the most supposing the Practice of
Physic to be a mere Trade, and Medicines the Ware to furnish themselves
withal, make what haste they can to get, though upon Credit, a Pack of
Receipts, which they cry up as the most effectual, and Triarian Remedies; and
having made a shift to truss up, with the former fardle of Common Receipts, some
few Specificks, presently set up for eminent Physicians, when, to give them
their due, they deserve nothing less then that Honorable Name, being indeed
but Pedlers in the Faculty.

For there are, besides the use of Medicines, which in its proper place is not
to be neglected; many very significant things to be known and studied by a
Physician; as, after the praeliminary helps of the Tongues, and Natural
Philosophy, the structure and uses of the parts of the body; the virtues of
Plants; the compositions of Medicines; the Nature, Causes, and Signs of
Diseases; not to mention the knowledge, at least, if not the practice of Manual
Operations, with some Pyrotechnical Endeavors. All these, vast dominions in
themselves, a Son of Art (to make bold with one of their expressions) should in
some measure command. So that I have in my thoughts sometimes resembled a
Complete Physician to the draught of a Man, standing on the two Legs of Anatomy
and Herbary, Operating (if need be) with the hands of Chyrurgery, and Pharmacy,
having a Chemical Head, and the bulk of his body made up of the Nature, Kind,
and Cures of Diseases, which we may not improperly, term a Body of Physic.

But these Agytrae, and Quacksalvers, are as far from these (...). They for the
most part, know no other tongue then their Mothers, and are as destitute of
Philosophy, as a rational method. Every Plant to them is All-heal, and every
trite Medicine a Panpharmacon. The Body of Man, they think contains no other
parts then what they see in a Harselet, and the fire is as dreadful to them,
as to the burnt Child. Yet they will sometimes make bold to use the Lancet, and
dexterously wound the Heart through the Arm. In brief, they meddle with what
they do not understand, and are the spots, and stains of the Faculty to which
they most injuriously pretend. but to resign those Juglers to their Ignorance
and Self-Conceit, and those that are willing to die at a cheaper rate to their
cruel mercies, and confident Undertakings, I shall give what account I can of
the Author of this Book (a man of a temper quite different from the former) and
what alterations have been made in it.

As to the Author (whom I had not the happiness to know otherwise then by this
his Picture, being at the time of his death, and some years after in an
incapacity of knowing any thing unless only a knowledge of Praexistence; yet) I
understand he was a Gentleman of a good Family^ and being a younger Brother,
was by his Father designed for a Profession, for which when he had accomplished
himself by a convenient Course of Studies in his own Country (I think at
Oxford) traveled abroad to see the manners and customs of the Universities
beyond Sea; and having spent some time there, especially at Padua (where he
took his Degree of Doctor in Physic) returned home, became an eminently solid
and rational Philosopher and Physician, and one of that famous and learned
Society, The Kings College of Physicians there.

In his Travels, undertaking in the company of some zealous Jesuits, the
defense of the Protestant Religion, he so much troubled their patience, that
they resolved to terminate that dispute of his in a perpetual Silence, which
they had effected, had not his Countryman, one of the number, but more
merciful then the rest, (by awaking him out of his natural sleep, preventing
the sleep of death) informed him of their design, to be put in execution that
night; whereupon he presently withdrew, and left not only the House, but the
Place, and escaped the cruelty of these blood-thirsty Religioso's; who shortly
after his departure, brake open his door, entered his Chamber, and approached
his Bed, with a full resolution to have acted their execrable Tragedy.

He had a great natural inclination to Mineral Works, and was at very great
Charges about the ordering of Alum, which succeeding not according to
expectation, he was thereby much prejudiced in his Estate; of which he
complains in the 4^ page of the following Discourse. He was much respected by
King James, who committed the Queen to his Care, when she used to Bathe, and
gave him a Grant of the Profit of his Alum Works, but upon the importunity of
a Courtier, as I am informed, afterward revoked it; whereupon the Doctor made
his application to the King, but could not prevail, though the King seemed to
be more then ordinarily sensible of his Condition.

Whilst he practiced in London there was one Anne Gunter, troubled with such
strange and unusual Symptoms, that she was generally thought and reported by
all that saw her to be bewitched. King James hearing of it sent for her to
London, and pretending great pity to her, told her, he would take care for her
relief, in which thing he employed Doctor Jorden, who, upon examination,
reported to the King, that he thought it was a Cheat; and tincturing all she
took with harmless things, made her believe that she had taken Physic, by the
use of which, she said, she had found great benefit. The Doctor acquainting his
Majesty that he had given her nothing of a medicinal nature, but only what did
so appear to the Maid, and also, that though when he repeated the Lords Prayer,
and Creed in English, she was much out of order, yet at the rehearsal of the
same in Latin she was not concerned, the King was confirmed in what he had
suspected before, and the Doctor had suggested. Whereupon the King dealing very
plainly with her, and commanding her to discover the Truth unto him, the maid,
though at first very unwilling to disclose the Juggle, yet, upon the Kings
importunity, and promise to her of making up what damage should accrue from the
discovery, confessed all, and his Majesty received from her own mouth this
Account. That sometime before there happened a difference between a Female
Neighbor of her Fathers and himself, and having in his own apprehension, no
better way to be avenged of her then this, impiously caused his Daughter, on
the receiving of the Sacrament, to engage to imitate one bewitched, and ascribe
it to that woman, which she did, and acted this part in so exact and wonderful
a manner, that she deceived all the Country where she lived, who thought it to
be a truth. After Which Confession she was very quiet, and the King giving her
a Portion, she was afterward married, being by this subtle artifice perfectly
cured of her mimical Witchery.

His Wife was a Gentlewoman of a Name differing but in one letter from his own,
Daughter to one Mr. Jordan, a Wiltshire Gentleman; which came to pass after
this manner. The Doctor being on a Journey, benighted on Salisbury Plain, and
knowing not which way to ride, happened to meet a Shepherd, of whom he made
enquiry what places were near, where he might have entertainment for that
night; the Shepherd telling him there was no place near enough for him
conveniently to reach in any seasonable time, the Doctor asked, what Gentleman
lived thereabouts; the Shepherd replied, there was one Mr. Jordan, not far off,
a man of good quality, and a great estate. Presently the Doctor (looking on
this as a good Omen) resolved on his house, where he was so kindly entertained,
and so well accepted, that Mr. Jordan understanding him to be a Batchelour,
bestowed hi^ Daughter on him, with a considerable Fortune.

After he had practiced some time in London, he came hither, and settled a^
Bathe, where living many years, his Conversation was so sweet, his Carriage so
obliging, and his Life so answerable to the port and dignity of the Faculty he
professed, that he had the Applause of the Learned, the Respect of the Rich,
the Prayers of the Poor, and the Love of all.

I hear but of four Children he had that attained to any maturity of age
(besides one who perished by that, which by the blessing of God, and the
assisting help of proper Remedies, has prolonged the life of many, the Bath.)
Two Sons, and as many Daughters. Edward the elder, being an Officer in the
unhappy design of the lsle of Rhee, was there unfortunately slain, making his
Colors, he managed, his winding sheet. The younger, Benjamin, or rather
Benoni, the Son of his affliction, a man more profuse and extravagant, desiring
to try his Fortunes in the world, died in obscurity. Elizabeth his eldest
Daughter was married to Mr. Thomas Burford, an Apothecary in Bath, and Mayor of
the City; and Mary his youngest Daughter died in her Virginity, before her
Father.

The Doctor also living a studious and sedentary life, which might encourage
his two grand distempers he labored under, the Stone and the Gout, in the same
year in which this Treatise was printed, to which he imparted his last breath,
departed this life, in the great Climacterical year of his Age 63. and of our
Saviors Nativity, 1632. leaving behind him the name of a judicious, honest,
and sober Physician, and the excellent example of a pious Christian; on whom I
should have thought it no trouble to have spent more Ink, could my diligence
which was not wanting in this thing, have procured me sufficient information.

But (...) the Doctor is dead, and this Child of his survives the rest, which
happening to fall into my hands for a review, I could not but use it with all
the tenderness and respect, confessedly due to the justly celebrated Offspring
of so deserving a Parent, whom it so very much resembles. And, I hope, as I
have here done the Doctor right, so I have not elsewhere done his Discourse any
wrong, which I had some intentions at first to enlarge much more, but on second
thoughts I judged it more convenient, only to draw up a Table of the Minerals
he mentions, with the addition of some few marginal Annotations, and to subjoyn
the greatest part of what I had to add of mine own, by way of Appendix (though
some things there are of a different nature from his design)

Which I intend hereafter, as opportunity shall serve, to augment and amplify
into an History of Bathe. By the performance of which, though I shall not be so
bold with some, on a more trivial account, to say, I shall oblige mankind; yet
I think I may this, that I shall then, in any man's judgment, have done enough,
to deserve a Civil Respect, from that is concerned, supposing it now a
sufficient honor to bear up the Train of my Learned Predecessor.

T. G.

LIbellum istum DE AQUIS MEDICATIS a Doctissimo JORDANO antiquissimo Collega^
nostro scriptum multiplic^ eruditione and novarum subtilitatum varia
supellectile refertissimum, legimus, and qui ab omnibus tam Philosophis quam
Medicis legatur dignissimum judicavimus.

JOHANNES ARGENT Collegii Medicorum Londinensium Praesidem JOHANNES GIFFORD.
SIMON BAS KERVILLE. THOMAS RIDGELEY.


In laudem operis.
PArve Alacri passu liber, Liber, ibis in orbem;
Dentesque spernes lividos.
Authors pandit, sua dat Jordanus, and usu
Quaesita multo protulit.
Era qui totus, flammas msditatur, and undas,
Terram, metalla discuit.
Quicquid in his veteres, docuit quicquid Noviu Author,
Celeri notavit pollice.
At sua dum exponit, lucem dat, operta recludit,
Pennaque fertur libera.
Perge liber; gratus gratum volveris in avum,
Lymphae calentes dum fluent.
Ed.Lapworth, M.D.

In laudem Authoris.
NUmine divino Jordan medicalile flumen
Dicitur, e gelido licet illud frtgore constet:
Tu Jordane decus Medicorum, candide Doctor,
Lumine divino gnarus discernere causas
AEgris corporibus nosti depellere morbos;
Intima seclusae ^enetrasti viscera terrae,
Thermarum vires aperis, reserasque metalia:
De gremio telluris aquas manare calentes
Qua ratione doces, nobis prius abdita pandis
Strutando Physices arcana indagine mira,
Nio caperis fama, nec inane laudis amore,
Ut patriae prosis, dignaris promere lucem:
Qui memoraverunt, vel qui modo Balnea tractant,
Non sunt te melius meriti, vel j^dice Momo.
Jo. Dauntsey.

Ad Authorem.
SI foelix, rerum potuit qui noscere causas,
Inter foelices tu prope primus eris.
Sunt, quaecunque tulit vel terra, vel unda, vel aer,
Singula nota tibi, singula certatibi.
Omnigenae tibi vena reperta, resecta metalli,
Nullaque te in quovis corpore vena latet.
Non tu no^^inibus veterum terreris, ut umbris,
Nec tibi, ce^ multis, quae nova sola placent.
Et docta and just a ratione singula lance
Libras^, quae veteres, quaeque tulere novi.
Nec causas tantum scrutans tu negligis usum:
Utilis est liberi pagina quaeque tui.
Hoc unum doleo, quod non sint Anglica nostra
Balnea, per calamum facta Latina tuum:
Cresceret ut gentis per te si^ gloria nostrae
In lengos celebris per locae cuncta dies.
COme hither Reader, bathe thy tender eye^
In Jordans streams which out of Bath do rist
They Will clear thy sight, and make thee clearly se^
Choice secrets, which in earths deep bosom be
Closely laid up, and choicely secret kept,
Where unobserved they many ages slept.
Here come and Bathe in Jordans streams thy mind
Thou there a strange yet certain cure shall find,
Of old ore-spreading errors leprosy,
Which these clear streams do sweetly mundifie.
Here are two miracles of nature met,
Here are two miracles of England set;
Our English Bathes, our English Jordans streams
Are gathered here as natures choicest creams,
Produced by her, by learned Art refined
For the universal good of humane kind.
May much good hence be raised, and may it raise
As well first Authors as Inventors praise.
Nicol. Stoughton, of Stoughton, Esquire

BIS duas gaudes numerare causas
(Nam tot Authors varii dederunt)
Unde Thermarum calor ortum haberet
(candide Doctor)
Tu tenax, nulla, tamen acquiescis
Ex iis ^ausis: mihi dic (amice)
Cur tibi soli via singularis
perplacet ista?
Arrogans forsan nimis ipse multis
Qui viam linguis, videare, tritam:
Zoili and nigro vocitere vanus
ore Philautus.
Sed cul candor tuus innotescit,
Qui tuos mores been novit; is t^
Litis osorem vocet, and serenae
pacis amantem.
Sint licer Plato Socratesque amici,
Tu licet doctos verearis omnes,
Veritas major tamen est amica,
quae tibi cordi est.
Rob. Pierce Bach. in Theologia.

To the Author.
SHall I presume to write in praise of him
Whose work has taught the world more wit and Art,
And shall I not mine own dispraise begin,
To undertake and cannot reach in part
His worth, his wit, his learning which confounds
Grave Ancients in their long tradition grounds?
Celsus could brag Homunculos to make
Man to preserve a thousand years or more,
Yet on himself he did so much mistake,
He could not hold his life till full threescore:
Before he made, his maker him did mar,
In this his words and works came short by far.
But modest Jorden void of these conceits.
Has cleared obscurest points from darkness soul,
His learning, judgment, body, soul all waits.
Life to preserve in all; his life's chief soul
Being learning, knowledge, and the love of truth,
He has made men himself perpetual youth.
I.St.

AGes in former doubtful errors night
From many worthy Stars have borrowed light.
Our Sun adorns our days, whose radiant beams
No heat, but truth add to our bathing streams.
A fit work for an Artist, whose pen bleeds
To death-receiv'd opinions: shows the seeds
Of earth-intombed Minerals, which lend
Heat by their birth to fountain Nymphs, who spend
Their pious tears in pity to regain
Strength to the frozen nerves, sweet case from pain.
Who would not strive to celebrate that quill,
Which does no fretting gall, but milk distill
To foster truth; being so concise and terse.
For to comprise the Protean universe.
In this small volume: which who disapprove,
Snarling express neglect of lending love
To learning, tenant in this worthy pile,
Where natures works are polished by Arts file.
It Is strange in days of ruffling impudence,
Which pamphlets spue of faction fearing sense,
Art should be bashful; if you search, you will meet
It valid in each page, shrouded in each sheet;
Ashamed of their rude folly, whose mouths swell
To slander worth they nere shall parallel.
I Will venture natures tell-tale him to call,
And judge my verdict's not Apocryphal.
Heaven and earth seldom such concealed births steal,
But he the cause can publish, means reveal.
Take then a true survey, his lines descry,
More trusted fables, then the truth did try;
And pay Machaon as a friendly fee
For purging of diseased Philosophy,
The tribute of thy praise, though folly fret,
Such as it made wise will repay the debt.
Purge foul mouths (Bathe) that all applaud his pains,
Who purges bodies, and refines the brains.
Bartholomew Man.

On the Sight OF Dr. JORDEN'S Picture.
THis faint resemblance shows the Seat
where once dwelt Art and Learning Great;
But veiled with such a modest Mien,
That 'twas not easy to be seen.
It Is skill in Artists to conceal;
The Load-stone's strongest cap'd with ste^
Thrice happy Painter, and more, if
Thine Art could lend him breath, as life.
That balks with thine, all humane power
If but requested for an hour.
It Is he that Adam made of Dust,
And Eve out of his Rib, he must
Inspire Atoms, by his might,
Man's breath would scatter, not unite.
Yet a thing like him thou have made,
And we as well as it, are Shade.
T. GUIDOT^

OF Natural Bathes, AND Mineral Waters.
CHAP. I.
Explication of the word Bathe. The scope and argument of this Book. The
ancient use and esteem of Bathes among the Romans. The modern use of them among
the Turks. Of Medicinal Bathes, and Mineral Waters. Hom esteemed by the Greeks,
Latins, Arabians, and other Nations.

THE word Bathe or Balneum is of larger extent then I purpose to discourse of:
for it being the name of a form of Remedy applied to the Body, it may be framed
either out of liquid things, or solid substances, or vapors.

Liquid Substances are Water, Milk, Must, Wine, Oil: Solid Substances are
Sand, Salt, pressed Grapes, Corn, etc. Vapors are Stuphs and Hot Houses.

My intent is only to treat of Waters, and principally of those which be called
Mineral, whether they be used in Bath or in Potion, etc.

These kind of watery and vaporous Bathes have been in use from all antiquity,
and held in great esteem, both for pleasure, and for preservation of health.
For there is no form of Remedy more comfortable to man's body, or which eases
pain and weariness more speedily, and more effectually. And whereas Hypocrates
commends those Remedies which do cure cito, tuto, and jucunde, speedily,
safely, and with comfort; these Bathes perform all these intentions: and
besides, may be used to all Sexes and Ages, and Temperatures, without hurt or
inconvenience, insomuch as the ancient Romans had them in very frequent use:
their Diet being liberal, and upon variety of Meats, especially upon Lettuce,
Coleworts, Asparagus, raw fruits, and such like, which bred crude humors in
their bodies, and had need of some such help to digest them: as Columella
faith, Quotidianam cruditatem laconicis excoquimus: We concoct our crudities by
the useof Bathes. We read in Pliny, that Agrippa built in Rome 170 public
Bathes for common use, and Pancirollus tells us of 856 in Rome at one time, De
deper litis page 164
and all of them most sumptuous and magnificent buildings, especially the
Anthonin and Dioclesian Bathes: the Walls whereof were of admirable height,
with an infinite number of Marble Pillars, erected for ostentation, and not to
support any thing, 1000 Seats to sit in; Their Caldaria, Tepidaria, Frigidaria,
most sumptuous and stately: the whole fabric so large and spacious, as they
resembled rather Cities than Houses: And so it might well be, when as there
were employed for the building of the Dioclesian Bathes, as Baccius faith.
40000 men, but Salmuth faith, 140000 for some years together. De deper litis
page 164.
They were placed where now the Church of Saint Angelo stands. Bellonius
observat.lib2.3.6.34 Prosper Alpinas de medicina AEgyptiorum.
The Turks at this day retain that ancient custom of the Romans, and are in
nothing more profuse, then in their Temples and Bathes, which are like unto
great Palaces, and in every City very frequent. And yet both the Romans and
the Turks used those Bathes chiefly for pleasure and delicacy, and cleanliness:
the Romans going bare-legged, and their ways dusty, had need of often washing;
and the Turks lying in their Clothes, subject to Lice and Worms, if it were not
for their often bathing.

Moreover, the Diet of the Turks, though it be more sparing then that of the
Romans, yet it is little better: namely, upon Herbs, Roots, raw fruit, etc. and
their Drink, for the most part Water, being prohibited the use of Wine by their
Religion, must needs breed many crudities in their bodies, yet by their often
bathings, they do not only overcome them, but get a good habit of body, their
Women being accounted as delicate creatures as any in the world, who duly twice
a week resort to the Bathes.

Now if those Nations would bestow so much upon their Bathes of delicacy and
pleasure, which were only of pure Water; we have much more reason to adorn our
Mineral Bathes; which (besides the former uses) are also medicinal and very
sovereign for many Diseases, consisting of wholesome Minerals, and approved for
many hundred years, of many who could not otherwise be recovered. At the least
wise if we do not beautify and adorn them, yet we should so accommodate them,
as they might serve for the utmost extent of benefit to such as need them.

For there is nothing in our Profession of Physic more useful, nor in the
works of Nature more admirable, (man only excepted, which Plato calls the great
miracle) then Natural Bathes, and Mineral Waters. The nature and causes whereof
have been so hard to discover, as our ancient Authors have written little of
them, holding them to be sacred or holy, either for that they judged them to
have their virtue immediately from God, or at least from the celestial Bodies;
from whence, both their actual heat was thought to be kindled, by lightnings or
such like impressions, and other admirable Virtues, and sometimes contrary
effects derived, which appear in them. Also diverse miracles have been ascribed
unto those Natural Bathes, to confirm the opinion of a supernatural power in
them, as Guaynerius reports of the Bathes of Aque in Italy: and Langius out of
Athenoeus, concerning the Bathes of Edepsus, which both lost their virtue for a
time. Cap. ^ Epist. 53.lib.2.
The one by the Magistrates prohibiting poor diseased people to use them, the
other by imposing a taxation upon them: but upon the reformation, of those
abuses were restored to their former virtues again,

I need not herein averring the opinion of Divinity which was held to be in
Bathes, make any mention of the Pool of Bethesda, written of by Saint John, and
Nonnus the Poet: nor of the River Jordan, which cured Naaman the Syrian of his
Leprosy, being indeed true miracles, and done by a supernatural power ^ yet it
is likely that those and such like examples bred in the minds of men a reverend
and divine opinion of all Bathes: especially where they saw such strange
effects as they could not well reduce to natural Causes.

And this has been the cause that in old time these mineral fountains have
been consecrated unto certain Deities: as Hamon in Lybia, unto Jupiter:
Thermopilae, unto Hercules, by Pallas: among the Troglodites, another to the
Sun, etc. And at this day we have diverse Bathes which carry the names of the
Sun, Moon, and Saints: and many Towns and Cities named from the Bathes in them:
as Thermae in Macedonia and Sicily, Thermidea in Rhodes, Aquae in Italy,
Aquisgraue in Germany, Baden in Helvetia: and our ancient City of Bathe in
Somersetshire, in honor whereof I have especially undertaken this labor, and
I persuade my self, that among the infinite number of Bathes and Mineral Waters
which are in Europe, there are none of more universal use for curing of
Diseases, nor any more commodious for entertainment of sick persons, then these
are.

Besides this sacred conceit of Bathes, wherewith in ancient times, the minds
of men were possessed, we may add this, that the nature of Minerals was not so
well discovered by them, as it has been since: and therefore we find very
little written of this argument, either in Aristotle or Hypocrates, or in
Galen, De tuenda sauit. lib.4. cap.4.
who wrote most copiously in all other points of Physic, yet concerning this
has little; See the reason of this in Jones his Bathes Aid, fol. 7. b. where
also he proves the inward use of Mineral waters among Physicians, as well
before, as since the time of Galen.
and never gave any of these waters to drink inwardly, although he
acknowledges that they were in use: and for outward uses, held them all to be
potentially hot.

After these Grecians, the ancient Latins and Arabians succeeded Pliny,
Celsus, Seneca, Lucretius, Avicen, Rhasis, Seraphio, Averrhoes, it whom we
find some small mention of natural Bathes, and some use of Salt and nitrous,
and Aluminous waters, but nothing of worth toward the discovery of the
natural causes of them. I^ is likely they did pass it over slightly, either by
reason of the difficulty in searching out the cause of them, or that they
judged them merely metaphysical. But in later times the nature and generation
of minerals (from whence the Baths proceed and from whence the whole doctrine of
them both for their qualities and differences, originals and use, must be
derived) being better looked into and observations taken from such as daily
labor in the bowels of the earth, for the search o^ Mines, or such as
afterward prepare them for ou^ necessary uses; we have attained to better
knowledge in this kind, than the Ancients could have, although in all new
discoveries there will be defects for succeeding ages to supply, so falls out
in this: Dies Diem docet: Aipham B^ta corrigit. And although Agricola,
Pallopius, Baccius, Mathetsious Solinander, Libavius, etc. have added much unto
that which was formerly known in this point, and reformed many errors and
mistakings in former writers: yet they have left many things imperfect,
doubtful, obscure, controverted, and perhaps false, as may appear in the
discourse following. I do reverence all their worths, as from whom I have
learned many things, which else I could hardly have attained unto; and I
acknowledge them to have been excellent instruments for the advancement of
learning: yet I hope it may be as free for me without imputation of arrogancy
to publish my conceits herein, as it has been for them, or may be for any
other: Hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissim. We both this leave, Give and
receive.

My end and study is the common good, and the bettering of this knowledge: and
if I shall bring any further light to increase that, I shall be glad: otherwise
my intent being to search out the truth, and not to contradict others, it will
or ought to be a sufficient protection for me, wherefore I come to discourse of
Mineral waters.

CHAP. II.
Definition of Mineral Waters. The nature where of cannot be understood, except
first consideration be had concerning simple water. Of which in this Chapter
are showed the qualities and use.

MIneral waters are such, as besides their own simple nature, have received and
imbibed some other quality or substance from Subterran^an Mines. Libavius de
judicio aquarum ^^i^er. cap. 1.
I say, besides their own nature, because they retain still their liquidness
and cold, and moisture, although for a time they may be actually hot from an
external impression of heat, which being gone, they return to their former cold
again. I say, imbibed, to distinguish them from confused waters: as earth may
be confused with water, but not imbibed, and will sink to the bottom again:
whereas such things as are imbibed, are so mixed with the water, as it retains
them, and is united with it: being either Spirits, or dissoluble juyces or
tinctures; I say from Subterranean Mines, to distinguish them from animal or
vegetable substances, as infusions or decoctions of herbs, flesh, etc.

Seeing then that the Basis of these Bathes or mineral fountains, is water, we
must first consider the nature of simple water, and from thence we shall better
judge of Mineral Waters, and their differences.

By simple water I do not mean the Element of water, ^^accius ^i^. 1. cap.6.
for that is no where to be found among mixed bodies, but I mean such water as
is free from any heterogeneal admixture, which may alter either the touch or
taste, or color, or smell, or weight, or consistence, or any other quality,
which may be discerned either by the senses, or by the effects. Solinander lib.
2. cap. 1.
This water therefore must have his proper color and taste, without savor or
smell, thin, light, cold and moist; if any of these properties be wanting, or
any redound, it is mixed and infected.

Cold and moisture do abound in water. Solinander lib. 1. cap. 3.
For cold appears by this, that being heated by any external cause, it soon
returns to his cold nature again, when the cause of the heat is removed.
Quaest.not. 2. Libav. pyrotceh. cap. 20.
And whereas Air is held by the Stoics to be most cold; and confirmed by
Sene^a and Libavius, yet the reason they give for it, does seem to prove water
to be more cold, because they make the matter of air to be water, and to have
his coldness from thence. Meteor 4.
But Aristotle holds the air to be hot from the efficient cause which ^rarified
^it, being of more validity to make it hot, than water (the material cause) to
make it cold. De usu partium lib. 8. cap. 3.
Galen is of neither side, for he does not judge it to be hot, neither does he
ever pronounce it to be cold: but by reason of his tenuity, apt to be altered
either by heat or cold.

I will not here undertake to determine whether all be bred of water, or
whether it be not a distinct substance of it self, and only receives watery
vapors into it, being agreeable in cold, moisture, tenuity, etc. Daneus phis.
Christ part 2. cap. 9. Aristol. 1. Meteor cap. 4:
with it, and so lets them separate in rain: and so exonerate it self of these
vapors, as also of dry exhalations by winds, thunder, etc. or whether air be
only the efflu^^um of the inferior globe, being within the orb of his virtue:
as all Dominion has not only a place of residence and Mansion, but also a
verg^ and territory where it exercifeth his authority and government; so the
inferior globe of the earth, and water has his dominion beyond his own globe,
as likewise may be thought of all other globes of the Planets, etc. But these
points are impertinent to my purpose. It is enough for me to show what I judge
of the temperature of the air concerning heat or cold. And to me it seem^ most
probable, that the air of it self should be cold, as may appear by this, that
it is only heated by external causes, which being removed, the, a^ returns to
his former coldness again. So we se^ that within the Tropicks in Zona torrida,
as long as the Sun is within their Horizon, and beats the air with his
perpendicular beams, it is exceeding hot, especially in the valleys, where the
reflection is most; insomuch as Aristotle held those parts of the World to be
inhabitable, in regar^ of the extremity of heat. But after the Sun is set^ the
air returns to his natural coldness, until the Sun arise and heat it again.
Josephus Acosta ur^ geth this argument against Aristotle, about the
habitableness of the torrid Zone, that the daie^ and nights being there equal,
the presence of the Sun in the daytime may well heat the air, b^^ his absence
for twelve hours more in the night reduces the air to a better temper: and
upon this and diverse other arguments and experiences, which cannot be denied,
concludes, that if there be any Paradise upon earth, it is under or near the
equinoctial. The like reason may be drawn from the coldness of mountains, which
being near to the middle region of the air, and wanting that reflection of the
beams of the Sun, which is in the valleys, are continually cold, and often
covered with snow, which would not be if the air were hot. As for the conceit
that the middle region is made cold by an Antiperistasis, the element of fire
being above it, and the reflection of the beams of the Sun beneath it, it is an
idle conceit. For these heats on both sides would rather heat than cool the
middle region by their working upon it. Also take away the element of fire from
under the Moon, which is an opinion now exploded by the best Philosophers, and
then what becomes of your Antiperistasis? Davaeus Philos. Christ.p.2.c.8.
Cardan. de subtle. lib.2.Valesius contr. lib.1. cap. 5. conradus Assachus de
triplici coelo lib.1.cap.4. Laurent. Valla, etc.
But I shall speak more of this Antiperistasis, cap. 13. And as for the
reflection beneath, it is a weak thing, and will hardly extend to the top of a
steeple: wherefore this coldness of the middle region is not from any
Antiperistasis, but from the nature of the air, which there is not altered
either by any influence from above, or by any vapors or reflection from
beneath.

Neither would it be so cold near the Poles, if the air of it self were hot.
But the long absence of the Sun in those parts, and the oblique beams when it
is present, do permit the air to enjoy his natural coldness. And as the airis
of it self, and in his own nature cold, so is it probable that it is more cold
than water, seeing it has a greater power of condensation, than water, as we
see it congeals water into ice, snow, hail, etc. which the water cannot do of
it self. For in the bowels of the earth, where the air cannot freely, pass,
water is never found to be congealed, unless it b^ compasled by some other
substance equivalent to air in coldness, as Quicksilver, Nitre, etc. where
cold is drawn into a greater compendium, than in water, by reason of the
density of their substances: and in ice and snow, the cold man be greater, by
reason of the admixture of air, I^ is likewise probable that earth is more cold
that water, if we consider it as it is in it self, and no^ mixed with other
heterogenities. Arist. 1. Meteor. cap. 3.
For as motion causes heat, and levity, and rarity, so want o^ motion, which
is in earth, causes coldness, density, and ponderosity. De ortu and inter,
lib.2.and moteor.4.cap.1. and 4. Gal. de simpl. med. sac. lib. 1. cap. 8. Item
de Elementis 1.
But it is enough for o^ purpose to prove both air and water to be cold. As for
moisture, Aristotle holds the air to be mos^ moist, and water most cold. Galen
holds wate^ to be most moist. Aristotle's reason for the predominance of
moisture in Air is, because it is mo^ hardly contained within his bounds: but
the termination of things proceeds from their opposite qualities, as moisture
is terminated by dryness and dryness by moisture: and dryness does a^ easily
terminate moisture, as moisture does terminate dryness. And this difficulty of
termination in air, may more properly be ascribed to hi^ thinness and tenuity
of parts, than to his moisture. For dry exhalations will extend themselves a^
well as moist vapors; and as it is density that compacts, so it is rarity that
extends. Fire it self is more hardly bounded than air, and yet not moist.
Valesi^s co^t. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Those that would reconcile these differences, do allege that Galen speaks as
a Physician, and meant that water was bumidissimum medicamentum: Aristotle as a
Philosopher meant it to be humidissimum elementum. But this reconciliation
gives little satisfaction. For how the could water be humidissimum
medicamentum, if it were not humidissimum elementum? For the simple qualities
are more intense in the Elements, then in mixed Bodies, caeteris paribus. We
speak of the proper operation of water according to his natural quality, and
not as it may work by accident. Thinness and levity are two other qualities of
simple water, which Hypocrates commends, and adds this experiment in another
place, that it is quickly hot and quickly cold. Galen adds another experiment
in the quick boiling of Peason and Beans. De aere, aquis and locis. De morbis
pop^lar. lib.2.sect.2.


And whereas Galen produces the boiling of Beans as a familiar example to show
the tenuity of water, we may gather that the use of Beans was common in those
days, although the Py^hagorean sect did then much flourish, which were thought
to forbid the use of them. But I find that here has been a great mistake, For
Aristoxenus who wrote of the Life and Doctrine of Pythagoras, affirms that he
did delight much in that kind of food: and our Physicians commend them for
loosing the Belly, and drying of Rheums. Bruerinus de re cibaria. Platerus in
praxi.
But it seems the cause of this mistake was a Verse of Empedocles, (...)
O miseri a fabulo miseri subducite dextras.
Thrice wretched men, from Cyams keep your hands.


As if he had forbidden the use of Beans, poor occasion to pronounce them
miserable which used them. But he meant it of continency and abstinence from
venery, as Aulus Gellius does interpret it: where (...) are understood to be
testiculi. N^^t. Attic. lib.4. cap.11. de Divinat. 1. In Aristaeum quaestione
19.
Cicero mentions the the same of the Pythagoreans, but in another sense,
because Beans were thought by their flatulency, to disturb our Dreams, and so
to hinder the divination which might be gathered from them, as also
Middendorpius judges: But t^ return to water: And it is requisite that wa^e
should have these qualities, Brerinus de re cibaria lib. 16. cap. 17.
in regard of the manifold and necessary uses of it, both for M^^ and Beast,
and Plants: insomuch, as there is n^ living for any creature, where there is no
wate^ It was our first drink to quench our thirst, an^ to distribute our
nourishment as a vehiculu^ which it does by his tenuitie; and after the
invention of Wine, it was mixed therewith, ^ Virgil says of Bacchus, Poc^laque
inventis Acheloia miscuit ^vis,
And he that first found out the Vine,
Mixed some Water with his Wine.


Where, by Acheloia, he means not only t^ water of the River Achelous in
Etolia, but^ other waters, as Macrobius proves out of A^^ stophanes and
Ephorus: and Scaliger says the the Greeks called all waters by that name, from
the word (...). Saturnal. lib.5. cap. 18.
And since the planting of Vine yards seeing all Countries could not be^
Grapes, Bacchus also taught the world to make vinum e frugibus with water, as
Diodorus Siculus reports, from whence the Egyptians had their Zithum and Curmi,
the Spaniards their Cerea, the Turks their Cowset, and we our Ale and Beer; all
which are extracted out of Corn, by the pureness of and tenuitie of water.
Rerum antiquar. lib.4. c. 12.
By means whereof we have our Broths, Syrups, Apozemes, etc. extracted with it,
as a fit menstruum to receive the faculties of all medicaments and
nourishments, especially the second qualities, and therefore it was anciently
called Panspermia: besides the manifold uses in washing, dying, etc. where that
water is accounted hest, which lathers most, being mixed with Soap, of which I
will not discourse farther. Levity is another note of pure water, alleged by
many, and serves well to distinguish it from many mixed waters, whether we
respect the weight of it, or the molestation which it breeds in the bowels.
Bacciusl. ^.c.^.
This difference of weight is hardly discerned by balance, both because simple
waters do very little differ in this point, and also many mixed waters, if they
be only infected with Spirits, and not corporal substances, retain the same
proportion of heaviness with simple water: and also because it is hard to have
great Balances so exact, as a small difference may be discerned by them, yet
Agricola reports that a cotyle of the water of Pyrene and Euleus, did weigh a
dram less then the water of Euphrates, or Tigris, and therefore the Kings of
Persia used ^o drink of it, and held it in great account, as also the water of
the River Coaspis. De not. eo^.que cffl.e terra li.1. cap. 15.
Thus much for the qualities which simple water should have; for such as it
should not have, I shall not need to spend time in discourse, being either such
as the Senses will discover, if it be in taste, color, smell, or touch; or the
effects, if it be purgative, vomitory, venomous, etc. Langius Epist. lib.1.
Epist.31.


CHAP. III.
Of the three Originals of Simple Waters.

NOW it follows that we show from whence these waters have their Original,
which is no other then of the mixed waters, saving that the mixed waters do
participate with some Minerals which are imbibed in them. Baccius lib. 1 cap.
3.4. Agric. de ortu and causis subter. lib. 1. cap. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Solinander l. 2. cap. 1. and lib.2. cap. 3.


They have three several Originals: the one from moist vapors congealed by
cold in the air the second from the earth; the third by percolation from the
Sea.

For the first, it is certain that our Springs and Rivers do receive great
supply of waters from the Air, where vapors being congealed by cold, do fall
down upon the Earth, in Rain, or Snow, or Hail, whereby the ground is not only
made fertile, but our Springs are revived, and our Rivers increased. 1 From the
Air.
As we see the Rhine and Danubius to swell more in Summer than in Winter,
because then the Snow which continually lies upon the Alps, does melt by the
heat of the Sun, and fills those Rivers, which have their Originals from thence
up to the brinks. Also we see daily after much Rain, our small Lakes and Rivers
to be very high. Also upon much dryth our Springs fail us in many places, which
upon store of Rain do supply us again with water. And this is the cause that in
most parts of Africa, near the Equinoctial, where it rains little, they have
little water; and many times in two or three days journey, can hardly find to
quench their thirsts and their Camels. Leo Africanus speaks of an Army wherein
were many Camels, which in their marching, coming to a River, (perhaps it was
but a Brook) did drink it dry. So that we must acknowledge that the Earth
receives much water this way. But how this should serve the Bowels of the Earth
with sufficient for the generations there, and for perpetual Springs, is very
doubtful; whereas Seneca faith that these waters do not pierce above ten foot
into the Earth:neither if there were passages for it into the Bowels of the
Earth, can the hundred part of it be employed this way, but is readily conveyed
by Rivers into the Sea. Quoest. nature lib. 3. cap. 7.
Wherefore although much water be yielded to the superficies of the Earth by
Rain and Snow, and Hail from the Air, yet not sufficient to maintain perpetual
Springs; seeing many times, and in many Countries these aerial supplies are
wanting, or very spare, and yet the Springs the same. Wherefore Aristotle his
opinion, which attributes all to aerial water and vapors from thence, is
justly rejected by Agricola, and by our Countryman Mr. Lydiat. 2 Meteorol.
and 1. 3.
So that we must find out some other Originals, or else we shall want water for
the manifold uses the Earth has of it. Deortu and causissubt. l. 1. ^. 6. De
orig. font. cap. 1.
From the Earth they make another Original of perpetual Springs and Rivers,
seeing the first seems to be ordained by Nature only for the irrigation of the
superficies of the Earth, which else would be in most places destitute of
water, where Springs are not, and so would be barren, Plants and Trees wanting
due moisture for their nourishment. a. From the Earth.
Wherefore for the perpetuity of Fountains, and for subterranean generations,
which cannot proceed without water, they have imagined a generation of water
within the Earth; some holding that the Earth it self is converted into water,
as Elements are held to b^ mutable and convertible, the one in the other, As
Ovid faith of the conversion of Elements: Resolutaque tellus,
In liquidas rarescit aquas, etc.
The Earth likewise, when once untied
Is into Water rarified.


But we must grant Ovid his Poetical liberty and not tie his words to such a
strict sense, although Scaliger in his Critics would not pardon a
Philosophical error in the first verse of his Metamorphosis, for saying that
forms are changed into new bodies. Metam. 15.
But unless there be some reciprocation between water and air, the other
Elements are not convertible the one into the other. For neither Fire will be
converted into any other Element being superior to the rest, and not to be
mastered by cold, which only must be the agent of the conversion of it by
condensation: neither will the earth be converted into water, or any other
Element, as Pla^^ thinks in Timoeo and Aristotle 3. de coelo cap. 7. for either
heat or cold must convert it. Heat cannot do it, although it rarifie and
attenuate, both for that it consumes moisture, and also because water is cold,
which it should not be, if it were made by heat; for every natural Agent works
to that end that it may make the Patient like it self: and heat may convert
earth into sum and dry exhalations, but not into water, for all water which is
not eternal, is from cold; likewise cold cannot convert earth into water,
because cold does congeal, condense, and congregate, and indurate, and not
dissolve and attenuate, etc. as we see in Amber and Gumms. Neither will water
be converted into earth. For by heat it turns to vapor and air, by cold into
ice and stone; wherefore the Elements are not changed the one into the other,
unless it be water and air, which have more affinity and more neighborhood than
the rest. Aristotel.4. meteor. cap. 10. and ultimo.
And yet it is doubtful, as I have said in the former Chapter: but this
generation of water from the earth is impossible. Others will have great
receptacles of air within the earth, which flying up and down, is congealed by
the coldness of Rocks into water, to supply all wants. Valesius de sacra
Philosoph. passim.
Others imagine huge Lakes and Cisterns, primarily framed in the earth, and
supplied with water, either from vapor or air, or from the sea; which water
either by agitation, by winds, or by impulsion from the Sea, or by compression
of Rocks, is elevated to the superficies of the earth: or else vapors from
thence, made by attenuation, either from the Sumand Stars, or from
subterranean fire kindled upon Sulphur and Bitumen; which was pours ascending
to the tops of Mountains, are there congealed into water by the coldness of the
Rocks; where there must be other Cisterns or Castles in the air to feed the
inferior Springs. Others will make the earth to be an animal, and to suck
water by veins, to serve his turn for generations and nutritions. But why
should it suck more than it has need of? and how shall it cast it forth beyond
the place of use to the superficies of the earth? unless they will say that the
Mines which suck it, do puke it up as Infants do when their stomachs are full,
which is absurd to say. These and such like devices are produced for the
maintaining of their Original; which as they are all insufficient to afford
such a proportion of water as is requisite, so most of them are so improbable,
and full of desperate difficulties, as I am unwilling to spend time in the
rehearsing of them, or their Authors, much more unwilling in the confuting of
them, to trouble my self, and offend my Reader, only the point of subterranean
fire which has taken deepest impression in most men's minds, I shall speak of
hereafter, when I come to show the causes of the actual heat of Springs. The
third Original is from the Sea, a sufficient storehouse for all uses, and
whereunto the other two may be referred. 3 From the Sea.
For that which falls from the air, and that which is bred in the earth, do
proceed principally from the Sea. (...)ortu and causiss^^ter. lib. 1. cap. ^
and 9.
Agricola for fear of wanting water for his Springs, is contented to admit of
all these Originals, although he relyeth least upon the Sea, because he knows
not how to bring it up to the heads of his fountains, but is contented it
should serve for lower places near the Sea-cos^. As I remember I have seen in
Zeland at Westcapell, fresh Springs colated from the Sea, through banks of
sand. But I make no doubt but that the Seawater may serve all other Springs
and Rivers whatsoever, although both far remote from the Sea, and high in
situation. Neither shall we need to fly for help to those monstrous conceits
of Agitation, Compulsion, Compression, Suction, Attraction by the Sun, etc. But
holding the sacred Canon of the Scriptures, that all Rivers are from the Sea,
etc. I persuade my self, that there is a natural reason for the elevating of
these waters unto the heads of Fountains and Rivers, although it has not yet
been discovered. For those opinions formerly mentioned, will not hold water.
Ecclesiastes 1.


My conceit therefore is this, that as we see in Siphunculis, that water being
put in at one end, will rise up in the other pipe, as high as the level of the
water (whether by his weight, or by the correspondence with his level, I will
not dispute) so it may be in the bowels of the earth; considering that the
passages there are more firm to maintain the continuitie of the water with the
Sea, than any leaden pipes can be, being compassed on every side with many
Rocks: as we see in Venis, fibris and commissuris saxorum. Now although perhaps
this water enters into the earth very deep, yet the level of it must answer to
the superficies of the Sea, which is likely to be as high as the superficies of
the Land, Arist. metroyol. cap. ultimo lib. 3
seeing the natural place of waters is above the earth. And although near the
Coasts it be depressed and lower than the Shore, yet there is reason for that,
because it is terminated by the dry and solid body of the earth: as we see in a
cup or bowl of water filled to the top, we may put in a great bulk of silver in
pieces, and yet it will not run over, but be heightened above the brims of the
bowl. The like we see in a drop of water put upon a Table, where the edges or
extremities of the water being terminated by the dry substance of the Table,
are depressed, and lower than the middle, like^ half globe: but take away the
termination by moistening the Table, and the drop sinks. This way of arguing is
questioned by Dr. French, who supposes the many great Rivers terminated in the
Sea to be a sufficient moisture for the taking away the termination of the
water made by the dryness of the earth, and so to make the globous Sea sink to
an evenness. vid. French Yorksh. Spaw.p.10, 11, 12.
(...) this be evident in so small a proportion, we may imagine it to be much
more in the vast Ocean and our Springs being commonly at the foot o^ Hills, may
well be inferior to the Globe of the Sea, if any be higher, they may perhaps be
fe^ from rain and snow falling upon the Mountains But if Josephus Acosta, his
assertion be true, the the Sea toward the Equinoctial, is higher tha^ toward
the Poles, then the level of the Sea m^^^ be much higher than the top of our
highest Hill^ but this is a doubtful assertion: yet I dare believe that if it
were possible to immure a Sprin^ without admission of air, which might break
the continuitie with the Sea, our Springs might b^ raised much higher. At Saint
winifrids Well i^ Flint-shire, though there be no high land near i^ yet the
Springs rise with such a violence, and i^ plentifully, that within a stones
cast, it drives ^^ Mill. It is likely that this Spring might be raised much
higher. And whereas we see that River^ do run downwards to the Sea per decline,
it does not prove the Sea to be lower than the Land, but only near the shore
where it is terminated, and in lieu of this it has scope assigned it to fill
up the Globe, and so to be as high as the Land, if not higher. For if a measure
should be taken of the Globe of the earth, it must be taken from the tops of
the Mountains, and from the highest of the Sea, and not from the Valleys, nor
from the Seacoasts. This conceit of mine I was fearful to publis;h, and
therefore had written unto Master Brigges, mine ancient friend, for his advice
in it, being a point wherein he was well studied: but before my Letter came to
Oxford, he was dead. But now I have adventured to publish it, to stir up others
to search out the causes hereof, better than has yet been discovered.
Exorsipse secandi, fungor vice cotis.
Another edge, though blunt, I set,
And with the Stone that is dull, I whet.


CHAP. IV.
Division of Mineral Waters. Minerals descr^bed. Their kinds recited. Of Earth,
simpl^ and mixed. Whether it give any medicinabl^ quality to Water. And so of
the rest in the following Chapters.

THus much of simple waters, and their originals, which may serve as Polycletus
hi^ rule to judge mixed and infected waters by: Galen in many places speaks of
an exact and sound constitution of body, as a rule to disce^^ distempered and
disproportionated bodies. An^ thus much in explication of the Gen^s, in the
definition of Mineral Waters.

Now I come to Mineral Waters, and to the other part of the definition which we
call difference, etc. from Subterranean Mines by Imbibition.

These Mineral waters are either simple o^ compound; simple, which partake but
with some one Subterranean Mineral; compound which partake with more than one.
And the^^ waters partake with Minerals, either as they a^ confused with them,
or as they are perfectly mixed. Also these mineral waters, whether simple or
compound, are actually either hot or cold the reason whereof must proceed from
some Subterranean cause, as shall be showed hereafter.

Wherefore we must first know the nature o^ these Subterranean Minerals, and
their generation

A TABLE OF MINERALS WITH THEIR QVALITIES.
1. Earthly. Simple, Dry, Cold, Astringent or mixed with Nitre Fullers Earth
Marle
Abstergent. Alum Coperas
All sorts of Boles, Astringent and Desiccative. Turfe Bitumen, Pex, etc.
Fat, and Unctuous.
Vid. p. 24, 25, 26
2. Stone, vid.p.27. 3. Bitumina. Solid Terra ^mpelis. Succnum. Ga^a^es. Am^a
Canphora. Boneo. Ch^a.
Titantrax, five Carbo fosslis.
Liquid Petroleum. Naphtha.
Potentially Hot and Dry, in the 2. or 3. Degree; Except Camphir, concerning
the Nature and Qualities of which Autho^sdisagree, Vid. page 34.
4. Concrete Juyces. Salt, Astringent, Detergent, Purging, etc. Vid.page.47.
Nitre. Sal Amnoniacum. Borax. Altincar.
Vid. page.44.51. Alum. Vitriol.
Very astringent, and cold, Vid.p. 57, 58.
5. Spirits. Quicksilver; Various in it Qualities, vid.p. 61, 62. Sulphur;
Moderately Hot and Dry, and somewhat Cooling, vid.p.63. Arsenick Auripigmentum
Risagalum, Sandaracha, Rusma, etc.
Venomous, vid.p.65. Extreme hot and putrefying, p.66. Cadmia Natural, Liquid
Dangerous, and a strong Corrosive, Factitious, Moderately, hot and cleansing,
vid. p. 66.
6. Mean, or half Metals; as Bismutum, or Tin-glas; Qualities not mentioned,
vid.p.67. Antimony, purges vidently upward and downward, ib. Bell-metall, not
used n Physic, vid.p.68.
7. Metals Perfect Gold, Qualities un^ertain, vid. p. 69. and 72. Silver,
Esteemed Cold, Dry, Astringent, Emollient, vid p. 69. and 74.
Imperfect Hard Iron, Opening and Astringent, vid.p.70.74, 75, 76. Copper,
Temperate in heat, less Astringent, and morecleansing than Iron, vid.p.70.77.
Soft Tinn, Cold and Dry, yet moving Sweat, P.72.77.78. Lead, Cold and Dry,
vid.p.72.78. and 79.


Place this between page 24 and 25, where the 4th. Chapter of Minerals begins.

^^^om whence Mineral waters receive their ^^^rence, from common simple water,
before ^^^n judge of the nature and quality of them, ^er Actual or Potential.

^^^y Minerals, we understand all inanimate ^^^ect bodies bred in Mines within
the bowels ^^^e earth. I dare not undertake to muster these ^^^ue order by
Dichotomies, seeing neither ^icola nor Fallopins, nor Libavim, nor, any ^^^r
that I know, have exactly done it, nor satisfied either others or themselves in
it: and seeing there are diverse Minerals lately discovered, perhaps more may be
hereafter, which have ^een known in former times, and therefore mentioned; as
Calaem in the East Indies, ^^^ma and Terra ghetta in Turkey, etc. Minerals
reduced to seven heads:
Where^^^ I will make bold to reckon them up as they ^^^e to hand in seven
ranks.

The first shall be earth.

Earth, whether it be bred ab exbalatione sicca Earth. ^^^igerata, or ex mistis
per putredinem in fimum ^^^versis, or ex lapidibus sole aut ^alore cockis and
^^^de aqua solutis, etc. Earth.
It is all inconcrete. As ^^^tle water gleweth it together in Lutum, so a ^^^t
deal dissolves it. But this is no proper dis^^^tion, but only a disjoyning of
parts by Im^^^ng the moisture which conjoined them into greater proportion of
water; for waters do ^^^urally run together, like drops of quicksilver, melted
metal. Wherefore seeing the moisture ^^ch is in the earth, is not natural, but
adven^^^ous, not united essentially, but only mixed ^^^identally, it may well
be called an inconcrete ^^^stance, whose moisture is easily drawn from it,
being ready to unite it self with other moisture and leave his old body as it
found it, Agric. de not. fossil. lib. 1. cap. 4.
that is dust: yet so as that water retains with it soo^ taste or quality
which it received from the ear^^ Agric^de not, fossil. Lib. 1. Cap. 4. This
dust is neither a simple body, as Elements are, nor permanent in one and the
sam^ kind: but as it is thought to participate with an^mates vegetables, and
minerals, so to be tran^muted into any of them, being both Mother and Nurse to
all terrestrial bodies.

Simple earth, if it be not mixed with other substances, is dry and cold, and
Astringent. B^^ if it be mixed, as commonly it is, it alters h^^ quality
according to the mixture. Mine inte^ is to write of it as it is simple, and so
of the rest.

Simple earth yields but a muddie water of self, and of no use in Physic, but
if it be mixed with other Minerals, it makes, the water to participate with the
quality of those Minerals also As if it be mixed with Nitre, as in Fullers
eart^ and Marle, it makes the water abstergent like soap. If with Alum or
Copperass, astringer and more desiccative, as in all sorts of Boles. with
Bitumen, fattie and Unctuous, as in Tu^ and Peate, etc. We have diverse examples
all sorts. Baccius lib.5. Cap. 1.
The Bath of Mount Otbon in Italy full of clay, which is a kind of Bole. The
Ba^ Caldaria, full of Ocre. The Bath of Saint Pet^ full of a yellow earth,
tincted belike with some other Minerals. Wherefore these are to be judge of
according to the several Minerals which the contain. But seeing earth it self
makes little impression into water, neither do we make any Physical use of
waters, which contain nothing but earth, I need not spend any time about them.

CHAP. V.
Of Stone.

THe second shall be Stone. Stone is another Mineral substance, concrete and
more heavy than earth, and our Mineral men confound themselves much in the
definition of it. De metallis cap.6.
Wherefore Fallopius implores the help of Marcus Antonius Janna about it, as
one of the most difficult points in Philosophy: but in the end, defines it by
his want of dissolution, either by heat or moisture. And whereas it is manifest
that some stones will melt, he imputes it to the admixture of some metal, among
which he reckons glass. Others define it by his hardness, wherein commonly it
goes beyond others Minerals. But you shall have some stones softer than some
of those, and therefore the definition is not good. Others by this, that being
broken or calcined, they will not be consolidated again into their former
consistence or shape. But for breaking, the reason of that, is want of fusion;
for without fusion or ignition, which is a kind or degree of fusion, Metals
also being broken, will not be consolidated into the same Mass again. And
there is no more difference in nature or essence, between a whole stone and a
broken, than there is between a mass of Metal, and the powder or filings of the
same. As for calcination, other minerals may be so far calcined, and brought to
a Crocus by fire, as they will be irreducible, therefore this is not proper to
stone. Wherefore I am of Fallopius his opinion in this point, and the rather
because otherwise there would seem to be a species in nature wanting, if there
were not Mineral Species wanting, dissolution by heat or moisture, as well as
there are, having such dissolution. And this vacuum which nature abhors, is not
only to be understood of a local vacuity, but also of a want b^ such species as
are in natures power to produce, for the ornament of the World. For if it be a
natural passion to be dissolved, it is likewise a natural passion not to be
dissolved: and if some things will be dissolved both by heat and moisture, as
Salts, why should there not be other substances which will be dissolved by
neither of them. And this must be stone, for nature affords none other.
Moreover, according to Aristotle (...) Quoe concreverunt a frigido and a
calido, a null^^storum dissolvuntar; Those things which come together by heat
or cold, are dissolved by neither of them: Of this kind are stones which could
never attain to such purity as many of them have, if they were not congealed by
heat as well as by cold. Also under what species shall we comprehend Diamonds,
Talcum, black-Lead, which some think to be pnigitis, Magnetis, Glymmer,
Katzensilber, pyrimachus, amiantus, alumen plumosum, saxum arenarium mortnum,
etc. if not among Stones? yet these are confessed to be invincible by fire or
water. Also all precious Stones, the more noble and precious they are, the more
they resist dissolution either by fire water: for this quality shows the
perfection of their mixture. True it is that some stones will be dissolved by
fire or water, and therefore Pliny and Agricola divide Stones into fusible and
infusible: but this is in regard of other substances bred in the stone; which
if it be Metal, the fusion will be Metalline: If Nitre or mean Minerals, it
will be Vitrificatory. As Pliny reports of the invention of Glass by certain
Merchants, who melting Nitre upon the Sand in Syria, where with Clods of Nitre
they had made a Furnace for their necessary use; found that clear Metal which
we call Glass, Ecce liquato nitro oum arenis visi sunt rivi fluxisse nobilis
liquoris. Behold, with the Sand, when the Nitre was melted, ran streams of a
noble liquor.

If Sulphur, as in Pyrite, it will likewise melt and strike fire. And whereas
the striking of fire out of a flint or Pyrites, or any other thing that will
strike fire, is held by all men to proceed from the kindling of air, by the
collision of two hard substances together, they are mistaken. For then
Diamonds, Crystal Glass, etc. should strike fire as well as flints; but it is
the Sulphur contained in them: And G. Fabricius in his observations, although
he observes not the reason of this fire, yet he confesses that out of any
Pyrites e quo excutitur ignis, etiam ^xcoquitur sulphur; Out of which fire is
struck, Sulphur also is to be had. Pliny gives the reason of the name, quia
inest illi ignis; Because fire is in it. The like we observe in Indian Canes,
and some Woods that are unctuous, and ^ull of Oil, which yield fire by
frication, or collision, not by kindling the air thereby, but inflamable Oil
in them. For air being cold and moist, as has been proved before, has no
agreement with fire, no more then oil has with water. And therefore flame is
not the kindling of air ( 'slamma non est aer accensus) but of fub ginous
vapors, which have some unctuousness (...) them, and arise from the matter of
fuel, and ha^ some inflamable parts remaining in them: whi^^ near unto the
matter of fuel, do cause a manife^ flame: but farther off, no flame does
appear: y^ so as if you hold Flax near unto the flame, thou^ it touch it not,
yet it will kindle, by reason t^ fire extends further then it is visible, being
a p^ lucide and transparent body, and thinner then (...) air it self.
Verulamius de vita and morte, page 418. and 453.
And this is held to be the cause w^ it is not visible under the Moon. And
where without air fire goes out, and is extinguished, (...) reason is, because
the fuliginous vapors want^ evaporation, do recoyle upon the fireand cho^ it.
This is evident in cupping-glasses, and making of Char-coal: where if the air
be altog there excluded, the fire goes out; if but in p^ then although the
flaming be hindered, yet (...) fire does penetrate the fuel, and so conver^ to
coals: which by reason of the fuliginous pours, are commonly black. Do neglecta
stirpium cultura problem. 13.
Bellonius s^ that Char-coals made of the wood of the O^ cedar tree, are white;
which must be ascrib as I think, to the small quantity of fuligin^ vapors
which that wood does yield: or (...) that those vapors are rather sulphurous,
then any other combustible substance. As we that Tinby Coals will not black
linen, be hanged in the smoke of them, but rather whiten it, by reason of the
drying and penetrating quality of Sulphur, which will make red Roses white.

But what shall we judge of those Lamps, which have been found burning in old
Sepulchers? some of them (if we may believe Histories) having continued 1500
years together, as that which was found in Paulus the third his time, of
Tullia, Ciceroes Daughter: and another of Maximus Olibius, near unto Padua, as
Bernardinus Scardco reports. It seems here was no air to maintain the Lamps,
being closely shut up in glasses, and therefore they burnt without air, and
were not extinguished, by reason they bred no fuliginous vapors to choke them.

Now whether these Oils which fed the Lamps were made by Art out of Gold, as
some think, and I hardly believe, or rather out of some pure kind of Naphtha,
which is most probable, I leave to others to judge: only I judge it to be the
purity of that Oil, which yielded no fuliginous vapors to choke the fire. If
air had maintained the flame, it had not continued two minutes, for it would
have been spent and wasted by the fire. Wheresore ignis non est aer accensus.
If other concrete juice be mixed with Stone, as Salt, Alum, Vitriol, etc. it
makes them to relent in water or moist air; and these Stones are never good to
build withal. Erastus disput. part. 2. p. 105.
But let us take Stone as it is in it self, without the admixture of other
Minerals, and we shall find it to be indissoluble and invincible, either by
fire or water.

Metallurgians, Refiners, and Assay Masters, may make use of this for their
Shribs, Tiegles, Muffels, Copels, Tests, Hearths, Crucibles, Furnaces, etc.
where they desire a defensible substance against fire. But it requires a
preparation to clear it from all combustible and dissoluble admixture: as they
may easily do, after they have powdered their Stone, to calcyne (...) and wash
it well. This work being often repeated, will make it fit for their purpose:
an^ they may use it either alone in the same manne^ as they do bone-ashes, or
they may mix it with their lome, brick-dust, gestube, etc. Also the^ may make
Bricks of it for their Furnaces, which will hardly receive any injury from
fire. Talcu^ also is a Stone invincible of it self by fire: and^ Bricks made of
Clay that is full of it, as the Guendern Clay in Cornwall, will hardly mel^
with any heat. Stones are naturally dry an^ cold, and astringent like a
concrete earth.

Simple Stones which have no other Mineral mixed with them, and are come to
their perfection, being indissoluble, either by fire or water: can yield no
quality or virtue to Bathes, an^ therefore he that seeks to draw any virtue
from stone into water, does lapidem lavare, that is labor in vain. But by
reason of admixtures they may, or whilst they are in succo lapidescerte,
before they are concreted. For if it be certain that Metals may yield virtue to
Bathes, being alike indissoluble by water, there is no reason but Stones also
may. In ingressu ad infirmos p.373. Venustus in consilio pro Petro Picardo.
Fallopius is again^ it in both, but contradicted by Julius Caesar Clandinus,
and diverse others; yet he confesse^ that Balncum montis Grotti, has Gyps (...)
and Gesner affirms the same of the Bathes of Eugesta. Baccius ^tym.
Also he finds ramentd^mdrmoris in Balneo Corsenae and Agnatio blit he judges
that they receive no quality but from the juice, and I doubt not but he is in
the right. And for succus lapidescens, we have many examples in Agro Pisano and
Lucensi in Italy, in Avernia in France, where this juice is so plentifully
brought by a clear Spring, that after it is congealed, the people dig the
stones, and have made a great Bridge of them. Also near Vienna in Savoy, in a
Village called Giret, is a clear Fountain which turns to stones as hard as
flints: Pliny makes Tnention of the like Springs in Eubea, which are hot: and
Vitruvius of the like at Hieropolis in Phrygia: Also Josophus Acosta of the
like hot Springs in Guaniavilica in Pern, which turns to stone, whereof they
build their houses. Anthonio de Herreza, cap. 20. tells of the same Spring at
Guainia at Velica, which turns to stone as it rises, and kills those that
drink of it. Also this Succus lapidescens is observed in the Bathes of Apono,
where it is converted into stone upon the sides of the Bath. Also in the Bath
of Rancolani, where this juice is not confused, but perfectly mixed with the
water, and being imbybed by Plants, it hardens them like stone. Baccius tells
us of a Cave by Fileg in Transylvania, which turns water into stone. Lib. 6. ^.
14.
The like is found at Glainstayns in Scotland, as Hector Boethius reports. In
England also we have many Fountains which turn wood into stone; which must be
by reason of this Succus lapidescens mixed with the water. Coral also being a
Plant, and nourished with this juice, turns to stone: so does the seed of
Lithospermon or Gromel. Thus much of Stone.

CHAP. VI
Of Bitumen. His kinds, qualities. Of Campli^ in particular. That Bitumen is
predominan^ in the waters of Bathe.

NExt I come to those Minerals which we call Bitumina, which are mineral
substance that burn and waste in the fire without metallin^ fusion, or
ingression. The greatest affinity they have, is with Sulphur: but this has
ingression into metal, and therefore I rank it among the Spirits, and Bitumen
has none. Of this kind some are solid, and some liquid. Solid, as Succinum
Gagates, Ambra, Camphora, Terra Ampell^ Lithanthrax, sive Carbofossilis, etc.
Liquid, (...) Petroleum and Naphta. All these are great fuel to fire,
especially those that are liquid, which are thought to draw fire unto them, if
it be within their effluvium: So Pliny reports that Medl^ burnt Creusa by
anointing her Garland with Naphtha: and Strabo tells how Alexander Bath-master
Athenophanes, had almost burn^ Stephanus, a Boy in the Bath, by sprinkling
Naptha upon him, if it had not been suddenly quenched. And this is that juice
or thick water which Plato in Times reckons among fires and which the Egyptians
used in their Sacrifices, Machab. 2. 1.
and was hidden by the Jewish Priests in a dty^ pit for 70 years, and
afterward found by Nebemi^h.

But whereas it is a common received opinion, that some of these Bitumina will
burn in water, I cannot believe it; although. Pliny and Agricola, and most that
have written since, out of them do averr it, and bring arguments and examples
to prove it. For although water were a fuel to fire, as oil is, yet there can
be no fire without air, and water excludes air; and so does oil, if the fire
be beneath it, and covered with it: As for their arguments, they say that
Bitumen being sprinkled with water, burns more, and therefore water is a fuel
to it: as we see that Smiths cast water upon their Sea-cole in their Forges:
but the reason of this is, because their Coal being small like dust, the water
makes it to cake and bake together, where otherwise the blast would blow it
way: also it hinders the quick burning of it, and so makes it continue the
longer: so in a Vulcano after Rain, they find the fire to burn more, when the
Bitumen is small, and in dust. Although this may be a reason of it, that the
Lyme which has there been calcined, being by Rain dissolved, increases the
fire. And whereas they say that water will kindle Bitumen, and quench Sulphur
it is not so: neither does their example of Wildfire prove it. For in
Wildfire, besides Bitumen and Camphir, there is a double proportion of quick
Lymes, which by reason of the sudden dissolution of his Salt, by the effusion
of water, is apt to kindle any combustible matter; not by reason of any Bitumen
in the Lyme, as some imagine, nor of any Empyreuma which the fire has left in
it, a^ Fracasturius thinks: for, how can there be any Bitumen left in the Lyme
(if there were any (...) first,) after calcination: the fire would have
consumed that before any thing else. De sympath.and antipath. C^.10.
And as for any Empyreums, it is certain that the more any thing is burnt,
although the fire leave an adustio^ in it, the less apt it is to burn again,
especially being burnt and calcined ad calcem aut cinere^ where all the
combustible matter is spe^^ Wherefore it must needs be by the violent motion
which is in the sudden dissolution of the S^ in it, as appears by the crackling
it makes: (...) ex motu fit calor; And motion causes heat The like we observe
in Pyrite sterili, where^ they make Vitriol, which being broken an^ laid up in
heaps, and moistened with water, w^ gather heat, and kindle any combustible
matter p^ to it. The like we find also in Alum Mines, etc where those mineral
juices being concrete in the Mine, when they come to sudden dissolution d(...)
grow hot, and will kindle fuel. And as for the example of the Salt Lake whereof
Agrico^ writes, between Strapel^ and Seburgh, which burns the fishermens nets
if they be put near the bottom: and of the Lake Sputa, in Medi^ mentioned by
Strabo, which burns Cloths put into it: I take that to be by reason of the
corr^sive quality of the Salt which frets them being stronger near the bottom;
and not from Bitumen, as Agricola thinks. De not ^^y. q. efslu. e te^^a. l. 4.
^. 22.
The like I judge of the Lake by Denstadt in Turingia. And is very probable that
Salt being heavier the Water, will be most toward the bottom: as is reported
of the fountain Achilleus in Mileto, whose water is very sweet and fresh above,
and very salt toward the bottom. So is the water of Agnano in Italy, as M.
Sandys reports in his travels. And the more heavy and terrestrial any sait is,
the more corrosive it is: and so contratywise, the more corrosive, the more
heavy. Aristotle asfirms the Seawater to be more salt at the bottom than
above: and so does Pliny, who likewise makes mention of the Lake Ascanius in
Chalcide, whose top is sweet, and bottom nitrous. Metcor. 2.
Baccius writes the like of a Well near Toletum in Spain, the water whereof is
sweet above, and corrosive beneath; which he judges to be from Quicksilver.
Lib. 2. ^. II.
Fallopius is also of opinion, that Bitumen does not only burn in water, but is
nourished by water, because it makes the fire to last longer. De Thermis.c.5
But I have showed the reason of that before. And for the burning in water, he
should have said upon the water; for there it will burn as long as it swimmeth;
but dip it under the water, and it is presently extinguished.

And whereas some report that Queen Ann of blessed memory, being in our Kings
Bath, there arose a flame of fire like a candle from the bottom of the Bath to
the top near unto her, they must give me leave not to believe it, but rather to
think they were mistaken: for, I am not bound to believe any thing against
reason, which God has given me to be my guide. It might have been some bubble
of wind which is frequent in our Baths, or some bituminous matter not dissolved
in the water, did arise, and being at the top, dissolve it self upon the
surface in the form of a circle; but it could not be kindled. And if it might
be kindled in the water (which were impossible) yet in all likelihood it would
have burnt better above the water than within it, and not be presently extinct,
as they report. These Bitumina (excepting Camphir) are potentially hot and dry
in the second or third degree; but concerning Camphir there are two doubts. Of
Camphir.
First, whether it be a Bitumen or a Gum. Secondly, whether it be hot or cold.
Seyaphio de ^imp. m. d.c. 344.
The Arabians aff^^ it to be the gum of a huge tree with white leaves, under
whose shadow many wild beasts may lie and that after earthquakes there is
great plenty found; that it is in quality cold and dry in the third degree;
some late writers follow them i^ their opinion of a Gum, as Mathiolus, Amat^
Lusitanus, Garcias ab borto, etc. Plateareus hold it to be the juice of an
herb. Avicen.lib. I. tract.1. c.z. Item.l.2. tract. 2.cap. 133. Item. de med.
cordial, tract. z. cap. 3.
But we must consider that they make two sorts of Camphir, the one of Borneo,
the other of Chyna. For that (...) Chyna they confess it is adulterated with
Bitumen: and that is the only Camphir in use with us. But that of Borneo to be
a simple Gum, and that a pound of this is valued as dear as an hundred pound
weight of the other. So that all the doubt lies in this Camphir of Borneo;
which whether it be a Gum or no, is still in controversy. For the Arabians not
trading into those parts had the notice hereof only from others, as Serapio and
Avicen do confess: and Amatus Lusitanus faith the inhabitants will not suffer
stranger to come ashore to see it. In Dioscoridem cap. de mastich.
So as we have been kept in ignorance a long time from the true knowledge of
it. And Garcias Ab horto tells us that all his knowledge of it, is but by
relation; himself not being able ^^travel to see it, partly by reason of his
age, and partly for his continual employment about the Viceroy, yet be faith,
that that he had a piece of the wood given him: Only Edvardus Barbosa reports
that he did see the place in Borneo, and found it to be of a mineral nature.
Lib. I. cap. 9.
But Barbosa his testimony is not authentical, having failed much in other of
his relations: as where he reports that the Purcelan of China is made of
Oyster-shells, etc. He is contradicted by Consalvus Mendosa a man employed in
those parts by the King of Spain, for such discoveries, and also by Hugo a
Linschoten, a man of great observation, and both of them of far better credit
than he. I procured some of that Camphir to be brought from thence by my worthy
friend Captain Best, but whether it be a Gum or a Bitumen, by the view I cannot
discern. But if it be a Gum, faith Solinander, why should it abound more after
earthquakes? and why should it burn and not dissolve in water? No Gums will
burn, and all Gums will dissolve in water: and earthquakes make no trees
fruitful, but may cast forth minerals. That there is a natural bituminous
Camphir, I make no doubt: and Agricola proves it sufficiently: And the Bath in
Remandiola near Rhegium shows it. De not. fossil. lib. 4. cap.2.
Also the Well by Muntzbach, where Tabernomontanus faith there is mineral
Camphir, Averroes faith, it is affinis Bitumini. Thesaur. aqu lib.I. cap. z.


I confess that when I published my first edition, I was persuaded by
Solinanders judgment, to think all Camphir to be a Bitumen, and namely that of
Borneo, but since upon better enquiry, I find it otherwise. For^ Captain Best,
beside^ the relations made unto him in the Indies, concerning this Camphir,
that it was from a tree, has also procured me the testimony of Master Andrew
Gogganel, under his own hand, that both the Camphir of Borneo and Sumatra, are
gum^ of a tree, and no Bituminous matter, himself having been at the gathering
of it, and at the cutting down of some of the trees. He has also traded much
in that commodity, and vented it a^ Japan; where it seems, as also at Chyna,
they mix and adulterate it with some other matter, to increase the substance,
and abate the price; which mixture perhaps may be some Bituminou^ substance.
This Master Cogganell has lived 1^ years in those parts, and speaks the usual
language, and has been often upon that Island o^ Borneo.

Now for Solinanders reasons, they are easily answered: no Gums, faith he, will
burn, and all Gums will dissolve in water. I grant it, if you take the word Gum
in a strict sense, for wa^ry Gums, as Tragacanth, Arabic, etc. But we use the
word Gum in a more general sense, comprehending under it all Rosins,
Turpentines, Pitches, etc. which being unctuous and oily, will readily burn,
and will not dissolve in water. Among these Gums or Rosins, we reckon Camphir,
and so that argument is answered. As for his other argument drawn from
earthquakes, mentioned by the Arabians, after which there is commonly more
plenty of Camphir: this does not prove it to be a mineral; For earthquakes are
as apt to cast up fresh mould, whereby trees are made fruitful, as minerals.
Wherefore let us subscribe to the ancient Arabians, although they were not
eyewitnesses hereof, and to the later observations of Spaniards and others;
especially now that we have a Countryman of our own, who has had as good
means to learn the truth of this, as any European ever had; who is yet living,
and able to give satisfaction to any that are curious in these points.

Now for the qualities of it, the most general and truest opinion is, that it
is cold and dry. Co(...) Divs. 1.3. Tha. Nemico.
Matthiolus judges it to be hot for three special reasons. First, because it
burns, and is a great fuel to fire. If this argument be good, then flax, and
straw, and paper, and touch-wood, and spunck should be hot; for they are apt
fuels to fire. Secondly, because it is, odorata, and he holds all odorata, to
be calida: Galen is of another opinion, and holds the judgment of simples by
favor to be uncertain. De simpl. med. facult.l.4.c.22.
And as for Camphir, Galen knew it not. Avicen faith expressly of Camphir, that
although it be o^^^ata, yet it is frigida. And if Mattbiolus his rea(...) were
good, then Roses and Violets, and Vinega^ should be hot; for they are odorata.
It is true that all favors arise from heat, as Gal^n faith, and all compounded
bodies have some hot parts: but we speak of the predominancy in the subject,
and of the operation it has upon man's body. Lib.I.tract c.2.
Thirdly, because it bites the tong^e. So does juice of Lemons, and Barberies,
and Vinegar, etc. and yet they are cold. Wherefore I conclude our Camphir to be
in quality cold and dry, and of very subtle parts. These Bitumina being
unctuous and oily, dissolve not of themselves in water, without the help of
some mineral juice, but may be confused with it. And we have many fountains and
lakes which participate with them. In Shro^ shire at Pitchford, is a Spring
that casts for^ Bitumen swimming upon the water. The like w^ read of in
Avernia in France, between Clartmond and Monferan, where the people gather
(...) for their uses. In Italy there are many fountains yielding Bitumen; at
Maianum, and Sasso^^ and Salsa, and Herculanum at the foot of the Mountain
Vesuvium, at Baia, and also at the cape of S. Helena, and in the Isle of woolfs
there are fountains of pitchie Bitumen, which are used to pitch ropes and
tackling, as Josepbus Acost^ reports. Bellonius de Naphtha c. 7.
And we have that famous lake Aspha(...) tites in Jud^ea, so full of Bitumen,
that it hardly suffers any thing to sink in it. The River Lipari^ in Cilicia,
by reason of a Spring near Solos, is (...) full of liquid Bitumen, as they
which swim or wast in it, seem to be anointed with oil. Agric. de not. cor.
quoe cfflu. e terra l.2.c.7.
Also there are Bituminous Springs in Saxony at Bruno, i^ Swevia the lake
Tegera, at Gersedorf under the mount Jurat, in Asia by Tralleis and Nissa. Also
in the West Indies there are many found which they put to use for shipping. And
this Bitume^ is the chief ingredient in our Baths at Bathe i^ Somersetshire,
although diluted with much Nitre, which makes the solution the better, and the
water more clear. Bitumen predominant in the Bathes of Bath.
That Bitumen is predominan^ in these our Baths, may be proved by the effects,
because we find them exceedingly to comfort the nerves, supple the joints, dry
up theumes, cure Palsies, and Contractions, being distinctly used, tinct silver
into the color of gold, etc. Also by the Bituminous favor of them, and by the
neighborhood of Cole-mines in those parts. All which do argue Bitumen to
abound in them. And whereas Doctor william Turner in his treatise of these
Baths, thinks Brimstone to be the chief mineral, and Copper next; I am not of
his opinion. The actual heat is no argument of Brimstone, as shall be showed
when I come to that point: neither does the favor bewray it. But his reason
for Copper is very weak. He found a Marchesit upon one of the Hills, which he
thought to hold Copper: But Marchesits although they show yellow, yet they
seldom hold Copper, or any other Metal. But his discourse has persuaded John
Bauhinus to publish it confidently to the World. De thermis Boll. L.3.c.6 1.
I shall have occasion to speak more of this hereafter. And thus much of
Bitumina.

CHAP. VII.
Of Mineral juyces concrete: called by the Alchymists, Salts. The four
principal sorts of them; Salt, Nitre, Alum, Vitriol.

A Fourth sort of minerals are concrete juyce^ which are mineral substances
dissoluble in water. Libavius in Syntagm.p. 221
These the Alchymists call Salts, and are the means of communicating all other
minerals with water. For as water is apt to dissolve and extract vegetables, so
are these concrete juyce^ apt to dissolve and extract mineral substances. And
although they are found sometimes liquid being dissolved by moisture; yet we
call the^ concrete, because they will be concrete whe^^ the adventitious
moisture is removed. Our mineral Authors do make many sorts of these according
to the several minerals which they imbibe: but in truth they may be all reduced
to four heads; Salt, Nitre, Alum, and Vitriol. And each of these has diverse
species, as Gebe^ and Casalpinus say of Salt, quot genera calcium, tot genera
salium. Concerning Vitriol there may be some doubt whether it be a distinct
specie^ from Alum, and have received only some tincture from Copper or Iron,
or from some of their brood, which are called excrements. For in distilling
oil of Vitriol, the lute wherewith the glasses are joined, will yield perfect
Alum. And Vitriol being boiled, arises in bullas as Alum does, and shoots
like Alum in glebas; as Salt does in tesseras, and Nitre in stirias. The
shooting or roching of concrete juyces, is worthy to be observed, seeing every
kind has his several manner or fashion of shooting, whereby a man may see the
perfection of each kind. For example, if Salt-peeter be brought you to examine
whether it be perfect good or not, dissolve it in water, and set it to shoot in
a wooden-dish, or with sticks of Ash, or other porons wood: and if it shoot in
needles, ( in stirias) it is right. But if any of it shoot in squares or
angles, or lumps, it is mixed, and unfit either for Medicine or Gunpowder. The
common Salt-peeter being prepared and cleansed with ashes, has commonly much
of the salt of the ashes mixed with it in the liquors, which being brought to
shoot, will settle first upon the wood in squares, ( in tesseras) and then the
Salt-peeter will shoot upon it in needles. These needles are good Salt-peeter,
but the squares are other salt, and weaken the Saltpeeter in his operation; the
like you may judge of other concrete juyces. There are also certain stones
which we call fluores, which do naturally shoot in diverse forms: as Crystal
into fix squares ( in sexagulos.) Sparr, which the Dutch call Sput or Querts,
shoots into points like Diamonds, as we see in those Cornish or Bristol-stones:
Osteocolla found by Darmstadt, in the Palatinat, like bones: others like Oyster
or Muscle-shells, etc. The reason of this several shooting in concrete juyces
and other minerals, is hard to give. For if it did lie in the thinness or
thickness, or clamminess of the matter whereof they were made, that difference
were taken away when diverse sorts are dissolved together in the same water, for
one would qualify the other. But we find that this mixed water will yield his
several salts distinctly, and all at once. So that it seems, for the ornament
of the universe, that nature has so distinguished these species, as it does
plants; among which some have thick leaves, some thin, some long, round,
jagged, etc. some have bulbous-root^, some long, stringy, etc. So in their
flowers, fruits, colors, smells, etc. every kind has his own fashion. The
reason hereof Scaliger says cannot be drawn from the Elements, nor from the
thinness, thickness, clamminess, heat, cold, dryness, moisture, plenty,
scarsity, etc. of the matter but only from the form, anima, seed, etc. which
frames every species to his own figure, order number, quantity, color, taste,
smell, etc. according to the science, as Severinus terms it which every seed
has of his own form. In lib. de plantis Aristoteli ascriptum lib. 2. passim.
So als^ it is in minerals, which have their several and di^stinct species in
nature, and their seeds to maintain and perpetuate the Species. Now that these
concrete juyces are not bred commonly in these forms in the earth, the reason
may be, either because they are often intermixed with other minerals in their
generation, or that their matter being plentiful, and room scanty, they have n^
scope to display themselves in their proper forms or perhaps they want water to
dissolve then. But by artificial preparations, we find these d^stinctions: in
which it is doubtful whether hot or cold, or dryness, do procure this shooting
^ roching in concrete juyces, and whether the sam^ causes procure it in all.
For dryness it is certain that as moisture dissolves them, so dryness co^geals
them; but dryness being a passive quality, is, not sufficient; it must be the
action either of heat or cold, or both; and the right ordering of these will
open a door to the artifice of Bay Salt, here in England, as well as in France
or Spain, or the Isle of Mayo. Among these concrete juices, Agricola reckons
Sulphur, Bitumen, Auripigmentum, Sandaracha, Chusocola, AErugo, Myfi, Sori,
Melanteria, etc. Caesalpinus de metallisc.3.l.1.
But if we examine, them aright, we shall find, that either they are not
dissoluble in water as concrete juices should be, or they are some of those
juices tincted or incorporated with other minerals. All these mineral juices
are accounted hot and dry, and astringent, and detergent, some more, some less;
and we take it so upon trust. But this point requires further consideration and
distinction.

Salt is a fixed substance, not volatile in the fire, astringent, detergent,
purging, dispersing, repelling, attenuating, makes an escar, and preserves from
putrefaction, as Dioscorides informs us, and Galen confirms the same, adding
that it is hot. Salt.
Diosc. l.5.c.84. De simpl. med. sa^ult.l.4.c.20. and l.11.c.50.
But we must understand Galen with his limitation, lib. 6. cap. 30. That the
more it is detersory, the less it is astringent. And all astringent things are
cold, as he avoucheth, lib. 4. cap. 6. Acida, acerba, and astringen^ia omnia
frigida. Now if Salt be astringent, it must be cold by Galens own rule, and it
is not enough to say it has warm parts in it, but being an uniform substance,
we must determine of it expredominio. Also Galen lib. 1. Sympt. cap. 4.
comparing pure water with sea water, seems to affirm that sea waters, before it
have received any great adventitious cold, may cool our bodies. And so this
place is understood by Anthonius Maria Venustus in consilio pro Petro picardo.
The repelling quality, and the making an escar, and the preserving from
putrefaction, are arguments of dryness, and not of heat. For as heat and
moisture are principal agents in generation and corruption; so cold and dryness
in preservation. Also I should impute the purgative and detersory qualities in
Salt rather to the tenuity of parts, and the stimulation which i^ has from
thence, then to any heat; for then (...) Sennertus faith, all hot things should
purge; Instit. lil. 5. part. 1. cap. 11. Vuleriala in G^^ de constit, artis
page 447. And Mesne Can^ universal. cap. 1. rejects all elementary qualities,
temperaments, similitudes, or contrarietio^ of substances, etc. in purging
thedicines. All Tamarinds, Myrabolans, and Antimony (...) purge, and yet are
cold, Venustus, page 13^ But the purgative faculty of Medicines is from
stimulation of the expulsive faculty of the stomach and guts, and not from
attraction b^ heat of peculiar humors, as has been imagined. Heat may serve
as an instrument to actu^ stimulation, as cold does dull and benumb (...)
faculties, but neither heat nor cold are principal agents in this work. And
whereas Rhub^ is thought to purge choler only, Sena and Polipody melancholy,
Agarick phlegm, etc. because we see the excrements tincted with the same
colors, it is a deceit; for these purgation do color humors in that manner.
Yet I do not deny a distinction to be made of Purgations in other respects. And
our ancient Physicians through long experience have found out the right use of
purging medicines, and their true distinctions for several uses for men's
bodies: as that some do purge gross humors, and some thin, some are strong,
and some weak: some are comfortable to the Stomach, or Liver, or Spleen, etc.
and some hurtful to some of those parts: some are too hot in some cases, and
some temperate, etc. but they have not discovered the true cause of this
purging quality: some attributing it to a celestial influence, some to a hidden
quality, which is as much as if they bad said nothing: some to a Sympathy,
Antipathy, etc. For my part I hold the purgative quality of mixed bodies to lie
principally in the terrestrial part of them, which is their Salt: and therefore
the Chemists use to acuate their purging extracts with their proper Salts. It
were much better if they could make their Salts without calcination; for then
they should retain the taste of the Simples, which lies in the Salt, and much
other virtue which the fire consumes in calcination. Three ways to make
Vegetable Salts to retain the taste of the herbs from whence they are drawn. 1.
It were a delicate thing to have all our vegetable salts to retain the taste
of the herbs and simples, from whence they are drawn: as of Wormwood, bitter;
of Sorel, sour; of Licoris, sweet, etc. There are in mine opinion, three
several ways for it, although they be laborious. The one is by precipitation,
when the juice or strong decoction of any simple is precipitated by the
addition of some appropriate liquor which will strike down all other parts in
the juice or decoction; but the Salt which is in it will not easily
precipitate, but will remain in the liquor, and must be severed either by
evaporation, or by roching. But in this work we must make choice of such a
precipitator, as may not infect our Salt with any strange quality. Three ways
to make Vegetable Salts to retain the taste of the herbs from whence they are
drawn. 2.
Another way it to make an extract of the simple which we desire to work upon,
and when we have made it so dry as it will be powdered, then pour upon it pure
spirit of Wine, which will dissolve no Salt, if it be without phlegm. By this
means throngh often repetitions of new infusions, until the extract will yield
no more tincture unto the spirit of Wine, you shall find the Salt in the
bottom, as a substance which the Spirit of Wine will not work upon, nor
dissolve. Three ways to make Vegetable Salts to retain the taste of the herbs
from whence they are drawn. 3.
A third way, as I conceive, may be in manner of the working of Salt-Peeter, by
putrefying great quantities o^ the herbs, until they become earth: and the^ by
infusions with water, to extract the Salt, which will not putrify with the
herb, but will remain in the earth. The second course I have tried, the other
ways are very probable. In these salts do lie the chief virtues of many
simples either for purging by stool, or urine, or for cleansing, cooling,
drying, stimulating, opening o^ obstructions, attenuating of gross humors,
astriction, corroboration, etc. according to the nature of the simples: whereas
the other Salt which are made by calcination, have lost these virtues by the
violence of fire, and cannot be distinguished the one from the other.

Nitre.
Nitre is a volatile substance which does dry and attenuate more then Salt, and
although it has not so much astriction as Salt is said to have, yet it seems
to cool more then Salt, perhaps because it is of thinner parts, and penetrates
more, and that is the reason that it serves better for the dissolution of
Metals. In Physic we find our Sal Nitrum (which is a kind of it) to cool the
body mightily, and therefore used in Juleps. These Nitres also are apt to move
sweat, especially those that are drawn artificially from mixed bodies, as from
Boles, Cordial Herbs, Bones, Horns, Teeth, Claws, Hoofs, etc. which are drawn
by sublimation. And these parts of Animals are found to be very sovereign
against venom and malign humors. The reason of it I take to be, not only the
drying quality they have, whereby they resist corruption of humors, but also
and principally by reason of their volatile Salt or Nitre, whereby they move
sweat, and expel from the center of the body. For all their Salt is volatile,
as may appear by this, that you can never make any lixivium, out of any of
these animal Medicines, by calcination, as you do out of vegetables; their Salt
being altogether evaporated by the fire. This volatile salt being taken into
our bodies, and actuated by our natural heat, is commonly very Diaphoretick:
and this is it which makes our Bezoar Stones, Contrae-yerva, Ungula del Bado,
and supposed Unicorns Horn to be in such esteem.

SAl Ammoniacum, is also a kind of Nitre, and volatile, and so is Borax and
Altincar: but these are commonly mixed with Sal Alcali, and Urin or Vinegar,
and so made more fix. Sal Ammoniack.
There is also a natural Fix Borax found in the Isle of Lamlay near Dublin in
Ireland, which perhaps the Sea water has fixed. Alum and Vitriol are much
alike, but that Vitriol has a garb from Copper or Iron. These are very
astringent, and without doubt cold, whatsoever has been held of them. The
waters or slegms distilled from them, do exceedingly cool in Juleps, as
Quercitan and Claudius Dariot, have observed, and we also by daily experience
do find true; by reason of the intense acidity they have, being distilled from
their Terrestrial parts. In pestis Alexic. Dariot de praparat. med. Tract. 2.
cap. 23, 24.
Also those Acidula which the Germans call Saurbrun, proceeding from these
Juices, are much used to quench the heat of fevers. It may be objected, that
they are corrosives, and will eat into metal, and therefore must be hot. But by
the same reason, the Juices of Lemons, Barberries, Howsleek, etc. should be
hot, for they will carve Iron. To bite and eat as a Corrosive, are not
arguments of heat, but of piercing. lib. de Humi^orum usu.
Wherefore Hypocrates says, Frigus ulceribus mordax, Cold bites Ulcers; and
frigus est principium destructivum, ut calor generativum; Cold is a destructive
principle, and Heat a generative. And therefore it is more probable that these
corrosives are more cold then hot. These two mineral juices are not so readily
dissolved in water, as the other two, and will be more easily precipitated by
any opposite substance that is more familiar to water. I omit the several sorts
or these concrete juices and their admixtures with other minerals, as
impertinent to my purpose: wherefore I will show some examples of each of them
in natural Springs.

For salt Springs, Josephus Acosta tells us of a rare Spring at a Farm near
Cusco in Peru, which as it runs, turns into very white Salt, without any fire
or art, in great abundance. Salt Springs.
In Germany are many salt Fountains, at Luneburg, Stafford, Salt ^burgh,
Aldondorf, Halstat, etc. In Italy, in agro Volaterano, etc. In Sicily, at
Solinantia, is a salt Well which is hot; and so are the Pegasaei Fontes in
Caria. Also the Fountain by Medon in Traesen is both salt and hot. Our Wiches
in Cheshire are well known. There are also Rivers of salt water by the Caspian
Streights, and in Spain, and Caria, and in Bactria, Ochus and Oxus. Also there
are salt Lakes, as the Terentine Lake in Italy? the Lake between Strapela and
Seburgh (mentioned before) in Germany, three Lakes in Sicily, and besides an
infinite number in other Countries, the Lake of Lakes, the Sea. All which
receive their saltness from Mines of Salt in the Earth, which are very frequent
and huge in bigness, as may appear by the Rocks of Salt in Bohemi^, in Monte
Carpato, in Polonia, within two miles of Cracovia, in Helvetia, and Rhetia,
where they have no other Salt but from the Rock. As also by the Caspian
Streights, are great Rocks of Salt. But Marous Paulus Venetus, tells us of a
Rock or Mountain of Salt in Thaican, able to furnish all the world with Salt.
Lib. 3.
So that it is no marvail that the Sea is salt, seeing it pierces into the
bowels of the earth, and discovers many great Rocks of Salt which dissolve in
it. The true cause of the saltness of the Sea.
And this is the true cause of the saltness of the Sea. The other causes
alleged for it, are very improbable. For whereas Aristotle and his followers
attribute the saltness of the Sea, to the evaporation of the fresh and sweet
parts of the water, by the Sun, and to an adustion procured also thereby: I
answer, that neither the one nor the other can breed a substance in the water,
which was not there before. For qualities can breed no substance, and adustion
is but a quality imprinted, and no substance. Neither can evaporation breed
any, but only discover that which was in it before, by taking away the thin
parts, and leaving the terrestrial behind. Aliquid aquae admixtum Arist. 2.
Meteorol. cap. 3.
But we see the Sea water to contain in it the substance of Salt, and most of
the Salt which we use is made of Sea water and no man will deny that this Salt
is differing from water in his substance and generation, being a distinct
species in it self. And whereas they allege for confirmation of their opinion,
that under the torrid Zone, the Sea is more salt then in other parts, the Sun
exhaling more there, and making a greater adustion; I doubt it, both for the
large and plentiful Rivers which those parts afford, beyond any other parts of
the world, and also for that the Sea water there is not hot, neither are the
beams of the Sun so hot, but that men do endure them: and therefore not likely
to breed an adustion in the Sea water, which must first be hot, before it be
adusted. Also it may be that those parts do abound in Rocks of Salt, as we read
of people in Africa, called Ammantes, who make them Houses of Rock-Salt, and
Castles, as that in Sin^ Geraico, which is five miles in compass, and all of
Salt: also the Mountain Oromenus in India is all of Salt. Moreover if the Sun
be able to do this in the Sea, which is always in motion, whereby it eludes
the force of the beams; why should it not do the like, and much more in
standing Lakes, as the Lemanus and such like? They answer that Lakes are
continually supplied and fed with fresh water from Springs. But so is the Sea
continually fed with fresh water, and in as large a proportion, caeteris
paribus, as Lakes are. For as the Sea is not increased by the influx of fresh
waters, no more are diverse Lakes, but keep the same fullness, and sometimes are
lessened. And whereas they say that the upper part of the Sea is more salt then
the botome, they speak against all reason, salt being heavier then water, and
against experience, as I have showed in the former Chapter. Also Aristotle in
some places confesses it. Meteor. 2.c.3.
But if any man will take the pains to vapor away 100. Tun if he will of fresh
water, I do assure my self he will not find one grain of salt at the bottom,
if it were not in the water before. This may be tried also in any distilled
water, which we are sure can have no Salt in it, (for Salt will not arise in
distillation) and is as apt to yield Salt as any other water, if adustion or
evaporation would breed it. Wherefore the saltness of the Sea is not from
evaporation or adustion, but must needs proceed from Rocks of Salt in the
Earth, which the Sea does, wash, and dissolve much of it. And considering the
great use of Salt, both for other uses, and for Generations, Nature has
provided enough of it, especially in the Sea, which is more fruitful in that
respect, the Land. Wherefore Venus was called A(...): Est Venus orta Mari.

Nitre is seldom found in Bathes alone, but mixed with other minerals, which it
dissolves, and infects the water withal. Nitrous Wateys.
Yet we read of a Nitrous Lake called Letis, near Calestria in Macedonia, where
they use to make Nitre, and vent it to all parts. So they do at the Nitrarit in
Egypt. Also the Lake Arethus^ in Armeniae, is full of Nitre. At Menis in
Phrygia is a Spring of Nitrous water which is hot: Also in Leonte is a hot
Nitrous Spring. Observat. l. 3. c. 76, 77.
Bellonius makes mention of a Nitrous Fountain near Belba, and of abundance of
Nitre upon a Plain near thereunto, which seems to be that which Pliny calls
Halmariga. But he denies that there is any Mine of Nitre under the earth, but
that all i^ bred out of the soil as an Efftorescens of the earth: Baccius
says the same of Salt-peeter. Lib. 5.c.7
Agricola says, that as the true Nitre is gathered upon the Plains of Media
above the earth, so is Salt-peeter found above the earth in many places of
Saxony: That Nitre is gathered upon the Plains of Media, are Plinies own words.
Lib. 31. c. 10.
Exiguum fit apud Medos canescentibus s^scitate convallibus; There is a little
to be found among the Medes, where the Valleys are white with Drought. So that
it seems, his opinion was, that Nitre is not bred in a Mine under the earth,
as Gesner also says, Epist. lib. 3. page 134. but in the earth it self, as the
chief fatness it has to further generations. And seeing earth is the mother of
all terrestrial bodies, it is not left unfurnished with those mineral juices,
nor ought else that is requisite for the production of Species: It has been
observed by some, that Nitrous water is the best soil for ground, and brings
all Plants to perfection far sooner then any other dung, and therefore the
Egyptians water their Coleworts with Nitrous water, Nitrosa viridis brassica
fiet aqua. Martial.

If you a Colewort green would see,
Then let your water Nitrous be.


Our Salt-peeter men do find, that ^any fat earth be covered from Rain and Sun,
so as it spends not his strength in producing of Herbs or Grass, it will
breed plenty of Salt-peeter, otherwise it will yield none. The difference
between Salt-peeter, and the ancient Nitre, appears in this, that a pound of
Nitre being burnt, will leave four ounces of ashes; Salt-peeter will leave
none. Salt-peeter is actually so cold, as being dissolved in water, it is used
in Rome and Naples to cool their Wine, and does it as well as Ice or Snow. Also
we use it inwardly in cooling Juleps, and therefore it seems also to be
potentially cold, as Bellonius judges.

Now I come to Alum ( Indignum vix ipsa jubet renovare dolorem) the greatest
debtor I have, and I the best benefactor to it, as shall appear when I shall
think fit to publish the Artifice thereof. Alum Spring^
In Illua, a mile from Rio, is an Alum Fountain: also there are diverse in Agro
Senensi, Volaterano, Lucensi, in Italy: Balneum de villa is full of Alum; and
with us in Shropshire at ^^kenyate, are Allun springs, whereof the Dyers of
Shrewsbury make use instead of Alum. As for Alum Mines, they are frequent
almost in all Countries, but the chiefest that are wrought, are at Capsylar in
Thracia, at Telpha near Civita Vecchia in Italy, at Commato^ by Aussig in
Germany, and With us in Yorkshire. In Ireland there have been alum works near
to Armagh, as Thurneiser reports: also at Metelia in Spain, at Mazaron near
Carthage, at Hellespont, Massa, Montrond, Piambin, Volterra, Campi^lia, etc. as
Beringaccio Sienese reports. Also there are diverse earths yielding alum, as at
Guyder in Carnarvan-shire, at Camfurt in Dorset-shire, and in the Isle of
Wight. Pyrotech. l. 2. c. 6.
But I will contract my self for alum, and come to Vitriol.

Vitriol, as I have said before, does participate much with alum in the manner
of shooting ^^ roching, which is in glebas, in the hard dissolution and easy
congelation, in their arising in bullas being burnt, and in their
precipitation: insomuch as it is probable that the basis of Vitriol is nothing
but alum. Vitrioline waters.
It is found in mineral waters of two sorts. Simp.med.facul. l. 9. c. 61.
The one where the very bod^ and substance is dissolved; as in Cyprus, which
Galen describes, where the water is green: also at Smolnicium in Hungary, in
Transylvania al^ Carpatum montem, at Nensola, andC. In which places Copper is
ordinarily made out of Iron by infusing it in these waters. Libav. in Symag. 3.
part. l.7. Item singularium part. 1.
I will not determine whether this be transmutation of one species into
another, as some do hold, or rather a precipitation of the Copper which was
formerly dissolved in the water by means of the sharp Vitriol which meeting
with Iron, corrodes it, and imbibeth it, rather than the Copper, and so lets
the Copper fall, and imbraceth the Iron in place of it. We daily see the like
in Aqua-sortis, which having imbibed one metal, will readily embrace another
that is more familiar to it, and let fall the first. So Alum or
Copperass-water having some strong Lixivium of Tartar or other calcined salt
put to it, the Alum or Copperass will presently salt to the bottom, and
precipitate and give place to the Lixivium, as a thing more familiar to water,
and of more easy dissolution. But as I said, I will not determine this
question, because it is not much pertinent to our business. Yet I will not omit
the judgment of Lazarus Ercker the Emperors chief Mine-master in the Kingdom
of Behemia who professes that he was long of this opinion, but altered it upon
this reason; That by exact proof he found more Copper stricken down this way by
Iron, than the water before did contain, and with the Copper some Silver. Lib.
3. Von. Kupffer ertz.
The other kind of Vitriol water is, where not the body and substance of
Vitriol is dissolved, but the spirit or vapor, or quality communicated to the
water: of this sort are our Vitriol Baths for the most part, and these are in
themselves wholesome, and are sour, if the Vitriol be predominant. Such are most
of our Acidulae; whereof we have many in Viterbio and Volaterano, Balneum ad
mor^um dictum, Saurbrun by Franckford ad Oderam, etc. There are sour waters
also from Alum, but milder: also from Sulphur, whose spirit or vapor being
burnt, is little differing from the spirit of Vitriol, but somewhat fatter. 10.
Baubinus de th^r. nis l.2.c.2.
But the most part of our Acidulae are from Vitriol. This sour spirit of Alum,
Vitriol or Sulphur, Libavius judges with Thomas Jordanus to be, in the
terrestrial parts of these minerals, because it goes not away by boiling or
distillation, and therefore to be communicated with water by the corporal
substance or juice of them. De judicio aqu. niner.p.26.36.
But that holds not in mineral spirits which are heavier than water, as may
appear by evaporation of any water made sour with spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur,
where after long evaporation, that which remains will be more sour than before
evaporation. So it is also in Vinegar, being a vegetable juice. The spirit of
wine does certainly arise first in distillation, and the first is the best,
being more volatile than the vapor of water. But this spiritus acetosus which
is in Sulphur, Alum, Vitriol and Vinegar, arises last; and the more you
distill away from it, the sharper it arises, and the sourer is that which
remains. Thus much for Vitriol and concrete juyces.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Mineral Spirits; Quicksilver, Salphur or Brinsstone, Arsenick, with his
kinds, Cadmia.

AFist kind of Minerals are called Spirits; these are volatile in the fire, and
have ingression into Metals, but no metalline fusion. These are Quicksilver,
Sulphur, Arsenick, Cadmia, Rusma, etc. All which being volatile, will easily
sublime, and being mixed with metals, as Cadmia's ordinarily to make Brass,
will alter the color of the metal, and make it less fusible, and less
malleable. I will briefly run over the examples of these and their virtues or
qualities, being more obscure, and in our Baths less useful than the former,
and more rare.

Qnick silver was not well known to Galen, for he confesses that he had no
experience of it, and did think it to be merely artificial, and not naturally
bred in the earth. Simpl. med. facult. 1. 5. 0. 59.
Dioscorides makes no mention of the temperature of it, but holds it to be a
pernicious venom, and to fret the entrails; although Matthiolus affirms that
it is safely given to women to further their deliverance, and we find it so by
often expcrience, both in that cause, and in Worms, and in the French Disease
and Leprosies, if it be skilfully prepared, and with judgment administered.
Fallopius holds it to be one of the miracles of nature. Those that take upon
them to determine of the qualities of it, are much distracted; foam reckoning
it to be hot and dry, and some cold and moist; and both in a high degree. But
in this account they consider not the qualities of the ingredients in the
preparation; whether it be sublimed or precipitated. Vidus Vidius turat.
generat. p. 2. sect.2.1.3.C. 13. Fallopius de petallis 6. 37.
For my part I know not how to reduce (...) to the Elementary qualities:
neither am I ashtmed of mine ignorance in it, seeing no man hitherto has given
true satisfaction herein. And if it be true that the elements do not concur to
the generation of mixed bodies, (as I shall show, cap. 11.) we need not marvail
if we find the^ not where they be not. Quicksilver not reducible to the
Elementary Qualities
But for our own use, where reason fails us, let us be guided by experience. We
find by experience, that it cuts, attenuates, penetrates, melts, resolves,
purges both ad centrum and a centro, heats, cools, etc. and is a transcendent
beyond our rules of Philosophy, and (...) monster in nature, as Renodaus faith.
For our purpose it is enough to know whether it will impr^ any quality to
water; which Fallopius, Bacei^^ Solinander, Banbinus, and Felix Platerus do
acknowledge. But it gives no taste to it, neither have we many examples of
Baths which contin^^ it. In Serra Morena in Spain, near the Village Almedien,
is a Cave where are many Wells i^fected (as is thought) with Quicksilver,
because much of that mineral is extracted from thence out of a red stone called
Minium nativum. About fifty miles from thence in V alentiola, then is another
fountain called La Nava, of a sha^ taste, and held to proceed from Quicksilver
and these waters are found wholesome. So are (...) waters at Almagra and
Toletum, and others by the River Minius, which are hot. There are man venomous
springs attributed to Quicksilver, (...) the red fountain in A^thiopia, others
in Boetia, Caa in Trigloditis, Stix in Arcadia, Stix in Thessalia, Licus in
Sicilia, etc. which perhaps are from other minerals, feeing we find some from
Quicksilver to be wholesome. For Mines of Quicksilver, we read of many in
Baetica, Attica, Ionia, out of a stone which Pliny calls Vomica liquoris
aterni. In Germany at Landsberg, at Creucenacbum, Schenbach, Baraum above
Prage, Kunningstien, etc. In Scotland three miles beyond Barwick, I found a red
stone, which I took to be minium nativum, seeing Agricola makes mention of it
in Scotland, but by a mischance could not try it.

Sulphur attracts, contracts, resolves, mollifies, discusses, whereby it shows
a manifest heat, though not intense, yet the sum of it is very sour, and
therefore must cool and dry: and I persuade my self that there is no better
sum to correct venomous and infectious air, than this of Sulphur, or to remove
infections out of rooms, clothes, bedding, vessels, etc. Sulphur.
We must acknowledge differing parts in all compounded bodies; as Rhubarb has
a purgative quality in the infusion, and an astrictive in the Terrestrial
substance, where the salt has been by infusion extracted. The substance of
Sulphur is very fat ( Sulphur nihil pinguius) faith Felix Platerus, and this
is the cause of his easy taking of fire, and nor any propinquity it has with
fire in the quality of heat: for if it were very hot, Dioscorides would not
comment it purulenta extussientibus, the next door to a Hectic. Also Galen
faith, that fat things are moderately hot, and are rather nutriments than
medicaments. Now for Sulphurous Baths, they are very frequent, and if we should
believe some, there are no hot Baths but participate with Sulphur, but they are
deceived, as shall appear hereafter, when we come to show the true causes of
the heat of Baths. Neither are all sulphurous Baths hot. Gesner reports of a
Bath by Zurich very cold, and yet sulphurous, Agricola of another by Buda in
Pannonia. In Campania by the Leucogaean Hills, are cold Springs full of
Brimstone. Also there are hot Baths without any show of sulphur that can be
discerned, as the Baths of Petriolum in Italy, the Baths Caldanelloe and de
Avinione in agro Senensi, de Gratta in Viterbiensi, de aquis in pisanis
collibus. Divi Johannis in agro Lucensi, in Alsatia another not far from
Gebersallerum, etc. All which are very hot, and yet give no sign of Sulphur
either by taste or smell, or effects. And yet no doubt there are many Baths
having a sulphurous smell from other minerals; as from Bitumen, Vitriol,
Sandaracha, Alum, etc. which are hardly to be discerned (if at all) from
Sulphur. So we commonly say, if a house or a tree be fet on fire by lightning,
that it smells of Brimstone when there was no Brimstone there. Man's things
combusted, will yield a nidorous smell, not discernable after burning what the
things were. But there are diverse truly sulphurous Baths which contain Sulphur,
although not perfectly mixed with the water without some medium, but only
confused: for perfect Sulphur will not dissolve in water no more than Bitumen,
The spirit of Sulphur may be communicated to water, and so may the matter of
Sulphur before it has attained his perfect form and consistente: otherwise it
is only confufed with water, and alters it into a milky color. Sulphurca Nar
albus aqua, Nar with Sulphurous water white. At Baia are diverse hot fulphurous
Baths, and every where in Hetrnria, in Sicily, in Diocesi Panormitana; the
Baths of Apono, as Savanarola Muntagna, and Fallopius avevs, although John de
dondis denies it; the Bath of Astrunum, of Callatura, S. Euphemie, Aquisgran,
Brigenses thernmae in V alesiis Helvetiorum, Aqua sancta in Picenis, and an
infinite number every where. Baccius reckons our Baths of Bath among fulphurous
Baths, from the relation of Edward Carne when he was Ambassador to Jnlius
tertius, and Panlus quartus. I will not deny some touch of Sulphur in them,
seeing we sind among bituminous coals, some which are called metal coals, with
certain yellow vains which are Sulphur. But the proportion of Sulphur to
Bitumen, is very little, and therefore I do not hold them Sul-phurous and
pradominio. This is enough for Sulphur.

Concerning Arsenick, it is a venomous mineral, and therefore I need speak noth
ng of the Baths which proceed from it, but that we take heed of them; It is
likely that those venomous waters and vapors which kill suddenly, do proceed
from Arsenick, as at Cicrum in Thracia, font Neptunius in Terracina, at Peraut
by Mompelier, the Lake Avernus. Arsenick.
The cave of Charon by Naples. Under Arsenick we may comprehe. d Auripigmentum,
Risagalum, Sandaracha, Rusma, etc. I hear of but one Mine of Rrsma in Ciprus,
from whence the Turks have it to take off hair, and it does it best of any
thing known, as Bellonius and Platerus report, and I have made trial of it
oftentimes: The former sorts of Arsenick are found in Misia Helltspontia in
Ponu, by the River Hippanis, which is made bitter by it. In the lesser Afta,
between Magncsia and Euphesus in Carmania, etc. It is accounted to be extreme
hot and putrefying.

Cadmia is either natural or fictitious: The natural is often dangerous in
Germany, as Agricola says, especially that which is liquid, which is a strong
corrosive: the other is of the natu^ of Copper, moderately hot and cleansing.
as especially good to clear the eyes, as Calamina^ and Tntia. Cadmia.
It is found in Copper Mines, and ^ it self in Ciprus, as Galen says by the
City Sol^ Also in Agro Senensi, Vicentino, Bergomensi, no^ Como, where they
make Brass with it. Unde Meadip hills there is much of it. The Baths ^ Saint
Cnssian do participate with it, and Cicp his Baths near Baia. Also the Bath at
Zurich ^ Helvetia, and Grotta in Viterbio.

Thus much for Spirits.

CHAP. IX.
Of mean metals, or half metals. Bismutuin or Tin-glass, Antimony, Bell-metal.

ASixt sort I make to be mean metals, or half metals, which are mineral
substances, having metalline susion, but are not malleable, as metals are: and
therefore being mixed with metals, do make them brittle. These are Bismutum, or
plumbum cinereum, Antimony, Bell-metal, which Geber calls Magnesta, in Dutch
SpeissCalaem also may be reckoned among those, which is a kind of white
metalline Cadmia, brought out of the East Indies, which has both metalline
ingression, and metalline fusion, but not perfectly malleable. These although
they are more volatile than metal, yet by reason of their fusion into a King,
are not so easily sublimed as the Spirits.

Bismutum is tnat we call Tin-glass, differing both from Tin and Lead.
Bismutum, or Tin-glass.
Candidins nigro, sed plumbo nigrins albo, whiter than black, but blacker than
white lead. It was not known to the Ancients, and therefore we can say little
of the qualities of it. It is found in England, and in Misnia, and at Sneberg
in Germany, and in very few places else. I read not of any waters that
participate with it: neither can I say much of Antimony, but that Dioscorides
says it cools, binds, opens obstructions, etc. And Galen, that it dries and
binds, and is good for the eyes, etc. But of the purging quality they write
nothing, although we find it to purge violently, both upwards and downwards:
whereupon we may g^ there that all purging medicines are not hot, as ^ have
touched before. Cambden faith there is ^ Mine of it in Cumberland: It is found
in Italy in Thinni montibus, in Senensi agro in the County of S. Flora, and in
Germany in many place But I read of no waters that participate with ^ unless we
should judge all purgative waters to be infected with it, as near Ormus,
Purchase write of such a Spring which purges. Sawanarola ^ Balneis Romandiolae,
mentions a. Spring at M^ dula, which purges. Part, 3.page.72.
Also Balneum Tertutii ^ agro Pistoriensh, Fallopio; also the sour wat^ of
Mendich and Ponterbon do purge choler, Rulandus says. At Nonesuch we have
also a p^ gative Spring, which may participate with A^ timony or Nitre, or
both: But purgative wa^ are rare, unless it be ratione ponderis, by the we^ and
quantity, and so any water may purge, ^ our Bath-waters do purge in that
manner, and the addition of Salt, which gives stimulation ^ it. This our
Bath-guides do ordinarily presc^ to such as will be persuaded by them, not
kno^ing how it agrees with their griefs, nor ho^ may do hurt in many respects,
as oftentime^ does.

Bell-metal is thought to be a mixture of ^ward^ and Copper-Oars, as Kentman
judges, an^ found in our Tin and Copper-Mines in C^ wall. I read of no waters
infected with it, no^ any use it has in Physic.

CHAP. X.
Of Metals; Gold, Silver, Iron, Copper, Ti^ Lead.

THe seventh and last sort are metals, mineral substances, fusible and
malleable. Fallop. de metallis cap. 10. Libav. de not. metal. part. 3. cap. 5.
These are commonly distinguished into perfect and imperfect; perfect, because
they have less impurity or heterogenity in them, as Gold and Silver. The rest
are called imperfect, because they are full of impurities, and they are either
hard or soft. Hard, as those which will endure ignition before they melt, as
Iron and Copper: Soft, which will not, but melt at the first, as Tin and Lead.

All these metals are found in His Majesty's Dominions, and many of them I
persuade my self, might be wrought to better profit, if our Smelters were
skilful, or were not hindered by si^ister respects. Gold.
But especially we abound in the imperfect metals more than enough to serve our
own use. And for the perfect metals, I have seen both in Cornwall and at
Crayfordmuir in Scotland, perfect Gold (which the Dutch call Gedigen) in grains
among Sparr. Also among other metals, it is ordinarily bred, as Iron and
Copper, and Tin. But from Tin it is hardly separated without more waste of Tin
than the Gold is worth. From Iron and Copper I see no reason but it might be
separated with advantage.

For silver, there is much lost for want of taking ^t forth of Lead-Oars: for
whereas those Oars which are rich in silver, Silver.
are commonly hard of fusion; our mineral men either neglect those Oars, and
work them not, or else they mix some s^^^ll proportion of them with their poor
Oars, which are easy of fusion, and so make the metal so poor, as it is not
worth the refining. Whereas if they were wrought by themselves, they would
yield in silver upon every Tun, some 20 ounces, some 40, some 60, some 80, more
o^ less.

For Copper, Whereas we fetch our Pins an^ Tags of Points from other Countries,
yet n^ doubt we might be furnished of our own, bo^ for these and other uses.
Copper.
We have but one Copper work that I hear of in all his Majesty's Dominions, and
that is at Kesnick in Gumberland but Copper Mines are found in diverse other
pa(...) as in Cornwall at Trevascus, and other places (...) Yorkshire,
Scotland, Ireland, etc. And no dou(...) many are concealed, by reason they are
Min(...) Royal. If these were wrought, and wrought (...) ter a good manner, it
is likely they would bri(...) a good advantage to his Majesty, and to (...)
Kingdom.

For Iron, we have the Oar in abundance, (...) it is pity that so much good
wood should be w(...) sted upon it for so bad iron; and yet the g(...) which it
holds, is lost. Iron.
Many have propound(...) the melting of it with stone-coal, but perh(...) they
have failed in their projects: yet this do not prove the impossibility of it.
And for (...) goodness of this metal, if it were rightly made, would melt as
readily as other metal, and woe(...) be tough, and not so brittle as it is, and
woe(...) not be so apt to rust. For these inconvenience happen to it for want of
separation of the impurities which are bred with it.

For Tin, we have as good as any in the World, although it is not wrought to
the best advantage. Tin.
The Countries where it grows, are barren of wood, and they are fain to fetch
it far off. Now if it were wrought, as I know it may, by many experiments which
I have made upon it, with stone-coal, there would be much saved, and the wood
might be otherwise employed. The Tin also would be as good as now it is, and
the product not diminished.

For Lead, although for soft Oars the ordinary course of melting at Mondip and
the Peak, may serve Well, and much better than their Baling at Alendale in
Hexamshire and at Grass in the Bishopric of Duresme: yet for hard Oars (which
are commonly rich in silver) there might be better courses taken, by common or
proper Agents. Common agents are fire and water; proper are dissolvents or
additaments. Lead.
By fire they might amend their working, if they did roast their Oars well
before melting, to breath away volatile and combustible substances which are
mixed with their Oars. By water, after calcination or roasting, they may
separate all dissoluble juyces, etc.

Dissolvents do chiefly serve to separate the silver or gold out of the Oars:
as in the quicksilver work, or by Lies of Nitre, Alum, Salts, etc.

Additaments are also of great use, whether they be segregatory for separation
of spirits, or mean metals from our Oars, and so to facilitate their fusion: or
propugnatory to defend the Oars from consuming or vitrifying. Segregatory
additaments are either such as are more easy of fusion than the Oar, and so
draw the Oar into fusion with them, or such as will not melt at all, as Geber
says, Cujus intentio non sit fundi: which keeps the Oar asunder from clodding,
and giyes it a greater heat, like fire in his bosom. By these means well
applied and used, all Lead Oars might be wrought, be they never so stubborn,
and none need to be neglected. Hitherto I have digressed out of mine intended
course, through the desire I have to advance mineral works. Now I will return
to show the nature and qualities of these metals, as I have done of other
minerals.

Gold of all Metals is the most solid, and therefore the most heavy, as having
few impurities or heterogeneal substances mixed with it. Nature and qualities
of Gold.
And therefore it is not subject to corruption, as other metals are, neither
will it lose any of his substance, either by fire or water, although it should
be held in them a long time: so as it is an idle and vain persuasion that many
have, who think by boiling Gold in Broth, to get some strength from thence, and
so to make the Broths more cordial. Bascius lib. 6. cap. 8.
The like I may say of putting Gold into Electuaries or Pills, unless it be in
case of Quicksilver taken into the body, which the Gold by touch may gather to
it, otherwise it goes out of the body as it came in, without any concoction or
alteration, or diminution. And if it be dissolved in strong water, it will be
reduced again to his metalline substance, without diminution, much less will it
be dissolved without corrosive Spirits, to make Aurum Potabile, as some do
undertake. Basilica chimia Page 204.
Crollius does acknowledge, that there is but one Menstruum in the world that
may do it, and that he knows not. But if we had it dissolved, we are yet
uncertain what the quality of it would be, or what use to make of it in
Physic; only because it loses none of his substance, we know it can do no
hurt, and therefore we use it for Cauteries, and to quench in Beer or Wine,
etc. to warm it, or to give it some astriction from the fire. De Thermis cap. 8.
Fallopius in these regards disclaims it in all mineral waters, as he does all
other metals: and will not believe that any metal does impart any quality unto
water. In ingressu ad infermo, pap.373.
Claudinus holds otherwise, and so does Baccius, Savanarola, Montagnana,
Venustus, Solinander, and almost all that have written of Bathes. For if we
should exclude Metals, we must likewise exclude Stones, and Bitumina and
Sulphur, and almost all minerals, except concrete juices. For none of these,
after they have attained to their full consistence, will of themselves dissolve
in water, without the help of some concrete juice, as a medium to unite them
with the water. But before they have their full consistence, whilst they are in
Solutis principiis, as Earth, Juice, or Vapor, they may be communicated with
water. Gold is so sparingly bred in the bowels of the Earth, as in that respect
it can hardly furnish a perpetual Spring with any quality from it: yet some
Bathes are held to participate with Gold, as Ficuncellenses, Fabariae,
Piperinae, de Grottae in Viterbio: Sancti Cassiani de Buxo, etc.

Silver comes next in purity to Gold, but is inferior unto it, as appears by
the dissolution of it, and by the blew tincture which it yields, and by the
fouling of the fingers, etc. Of Silver.
For the qualities of it, there is not much discovered. But as all other things
of price are superssitiously accounted cordia^, so is this, especially in hot
and moist distempers of the heart: for it is esteemed to be cold, and dry, and
astringent, and yet emollient. Theod Tabernomonta^us, p. 2. cap. 8.
We have no Bathes which do manifestly participate with it: perhaps, by reason,
nature does hot produce it in sufficient quantity to infect waters. John
Baubinus thinks there may be Silver in the Bathes at Boll: because he faith
there was a Pyritis or Marchesit examined by Doctor Cadner, and out of fifty
pound weight of it, he drew two drams of Silver: a very small proportion to
ground his opinion upon.

Iron is the most impure of all metals, as we have it wrought, and will hardly
melt as metals should do, but with additaments and flusses. Of Iron and Steel.
Neither is it so malleable, and ductible as other metals are, by reason of his
many impurities. Yet we see that at Damasco they work and refine it in such
sort, as it will melt at a Lamp, and is so tough, as it will hardly break. And
this is not by reason of any special Mine differing from other Iron Mines, for
they have no Mines of Iron near to Damascus, as Bell^nius reports, but have it
brought thither from diverse other places, only their art in working and
purifying it is beyond ours. So the Spanish Steel and Iron is purer then ours,
and we do esteem of Bilbo-blades beyond others, which are quenched in the River
Bilbilis: as Turnus his Sword in Virgil was quenched in the River Styx. Ensem
quem Dauno ignipotens Deus ipse parenti
Fecerat, and Stygia candentem extinxerat at unda. AEnead 12.

A Sword the god of fire, of his own make,
Gave Daune, Turn's Father, quenched in Stygian Lake.


But the hardening of Steel lies not in this point: other waters no doubt may
serve as well. But I persuade my self that our Iron may be made much purer, and
perhaps some Gold extracted from it which it holds.

Concerning the temperature of Iron and Steel, Galen reckons it among earth,
and therefore it must be cold. Simpl. lib. 9.
Manardus is absolutely of that opinion, and so are most of our Physicians.
Libs 16. Epist. 5. De motallis cap. 20.
Only Fallopius holds it to be hot, because Scribonius Largus prescribes it in
Ulcers of the Bladder, which it does cure, not in regard of heating, but
drying; for it dries and binds much, and therefore by Galens rule it must be
cold. Simpl. l.7.c.4.
Astringentia omnia frigida; all binding things are cold. I have observed in
Iron and Steel two distinct qualities, the one opening, or deopilative; the
other astringent. Two distinct qualities in Steel.
The opening quality lies in a volatile Salt or Nitre, which it is full of,
the astringent quality in the Crocus, or Terrestrial part. These two substances
are thus discerned and severed. Take of the fylings of Steel or Iron, and cast
it into the flame of a Candle, and you shall see it to burn like Saltpeeter or
Rosin. Take these fylings, and infuse them three or four times in Water or
Wine, as we use to make our Chalibeat Wines, till the water or wine have
dissolved all this Salt, and then dry it and cast it into the flame, and it
shall not burn, but the liquor will have a strong taste from this Salt. And
this is it which opens obstructions. The astringent quality lies in the
terrestrial substance, as is evident, after either, by infusions, or by
calcination, the volatile salt is departed from it, that which remains, is very
astringent, and stays all manner of fluxes, etc.

Concerning Bathes participating with Iron, we have too many examples of them
for Fallopius to contradict. We may let him enjoy his opinion of the
Calderiana, Veronensia and Villensia, Lucensia; although it be against the
judgment of all other who have written of them, and it is hard for him to be
confident in a negative. Solinander, page 193. Ve^ustus, page 159. B^^cius lib.
6. cap. 3. S(...)rola. Rea(...)eus page 305.
We have examples more then enough to prove the quality of Iron in our mineral
waters. Balneum Reginae in agro Pisano is actually hot, and from Iron. So is
Balneum Sancti Cassiani in agro Senensi: So is Balneum Ficuncellae, de
Russellis, Bora in agro Florent. Brandulae in agro Regiensi, Visicatoriae in
Tuscia, Isenbrun by Liege, Forgense in Normandy: the Spaw-water,
Tunbridge-water, Bristol-water by S.Vincents Rock: all which, some being hot,
and some cold, participate with Iron, as may be proved, not only by the consent
of all writers, which have made mention of them, but by the Mines from whence
they come, or by their taste, or by their virtues.

Copper comes nearest to the nature of Iron, but is more pure, and more easy
of fusion, and will be almost all converted into Vitriol. Quality of Copper.
They are convertible the one into the other, as I have showed out of Erker, in
Vitriol. Libav. de not. metal. c. 10.
And by the practice at Commataw and Smolnicium: The like also has been showed
in Cornwall, at the Confluence by Master Russel. Aristotle also tells of a
Copper Mine in Thalia, an Island of the Tyrrhen Sea, which being wrought out,
turned into an Iron Mine: in this similitude of nature, we cannot but judge
that there is a similitude in qualities, and that Iron being cold, Copper
cannot be hot. Temperate it may be, because less astringent then Iron, and more
cleansing: Rhasis says that it purges like a Catharticum, and in his
continent, prescibes it to purge water in Dropsies. Another argument that all
purgatives are not hot: it dries exceedingly, and attenuates and digests. We
have diverse waters which participate with it, which if they be pure from Copper
it self, are very safe and wholesome: but if they be foul, and proceed from the
excrements of Copper, they are not wholesome to drink. Balnea Collensia sen
ferina in Martiana Silva, do consist in Copper and Alum. The Bath of Faberia
in Rhetia, of Copper and Gold. Aqua de Grotta in agro Viterbiensi, is full of
Copper; so is Aqua Jasielli, Balneum Lucense in Valesiis: Marcus Paulus
Venetus, tells us of a greenish Fountain in Persia, which purges exceedingly,
and is held to come from Copper.

Tin and Lead are two of our Staple Commodities which our Country yields
plentifully, not only for our own use, but to supply other Nations. Of Tin.
Tin is bred in Cornwall, and part of Devonshire, and in the Isles of Scilly,
which from thence were called Cassiterides. It is melted out of little black
stones, which the Dutch call Zwitter, with great charge, because they cannot
melt it, but with wood coals, which is brought them far off, and they are fain
to run it over two or three times, before they can get out all the Tin, and yet
much of it is wasted in the blast. I doubt not but it might be done with
Sea-coal, if they knew the Artifice, and with as great a product of Tin. There
is both Silver and Gold found in it, but without wasting of the Tin, we know no
means to sever it. It is in quality cold and dry, and yet moves sweat
abuadantly, as I have proved.

Lead is melted commonly out of an Oar common to Silver and Lead, as Pliny
says called Galena. Of Lead.
And although Agricola says of the villachar Lead, that it holds no Silver,
and therefore fittest for assayes; yet Lazarus Erker contradicts it out of his
own experience. Our Country abounds with it every where, especially at the
Peak in Darbishire, and at Mendip in Somersetshire; Wales also and Cornwall,
and Devon, are full of it, and so is Yorkshire and Cumberland. The qualities of
it are cold and dry. But for these two metals, we find no waters which are
infected with them. In Lorain, they have Bathes called Plumbaria, which some
think by reason of the name, to proceed from Lead: but John Bauhinus thinks
they should be called Plumiers, as Pictorius writes it from the French word
Plumer, a deplumando, because they are so hot as they use to scald fowls in
them, to take off their feathers. Page 90.


Thus much for metals, and all other sorts of Minerals, with their several
Natures and Baths infected with any of them. As for mixed bodies, and flores,
and recrements, etc. they are to be referred to the simple bodies from whence
they proceed: As Tutia, Pompholix, Minium, Cerussa, Sublimatum, Praecipitatum,
etc.

CHAP. XI.
Of the generation of Metals in the Earth; Their seminary spirit, That it is
not from the Elements.

NOw I must show the generation of these minerals in the bowels of the earth,
which of necessity we must understand, before we can show the reasons how
mineral waters receive either their actual heat, or their virtues. Fallop. de
metallis cap. 11. Libav. de not. metal. cap. 12.


Some have imagined that metals and minerals were created perfect at the first,
seeing there appears not any seed of them manifestly, as does of Animals and
Vegetables; and seeing their substances are not so fluxible, but more firm and
permanent. But as they are subject to corruption in time, by reason of many
impurities, and differing parts in them, so they had need to be repaired by
generation.

It appears in Genesis, that Plants were not created perfect at first, but only
in their Seminaries: for Moses Cap. 2. gives a reason why Plants were not come
forth of the earth, scil. because (as Tremelius translates it) there had as yet
neither any rain fallen, nor any dew ascended from the earth, whereby they
might be produced and nourished: The like we may judge of minerals, that they
were not at first created perfect, but disposed of in such sort, as they should
perpetuate themselves in their several kinds. Agricola de ortu and causis
Sub^.lib. 5.c.1.
Wherefore it has ever been a received Axiom among the best Philosophers,
that minerals are generated, and experience has confirmed it in all kinds. Our
Salt-peeter men find that when they have extracted Salt-peeter out of a floor
of earth one year, within three or four years after, they find more Salt-peeter
generated there, and do work it over again. The like is observed in Alum and
Copperass.

As for metals, our Tinners in Cornwall have experience of Pits which have
been filled up with earth after they have wrought out all the Tin they could
find in them; and within thirty years they have opened them again, and found
more Tin generated. The like has been observed in Iron, Lib. 3.c.19.
as Gaudentius Merula reports of Ilva, an Island in the Adriatic Sea, under
the Venetians, where the Iron breeds continually as fast as they can work it,
which is confirmed also by Agricola and Baccius; and by Virgil who says (...)
it, (...): lib 10.
Insula inexhaustis Chalybum generos a matallis;
Brave Ilva Isle, whose teeming womb,
Breeds Iron till the day of Doom.


The like we read of at Saga in Lygiis, where they dig over their Iron-mines
every tenth year. In Sarept. co^^^. 3.II. etc.
John Mathesius gives us examples almost of all sorts of minerals and metals
which he has observed to grow and regenerate. The like examples you may find
in Leonardus Thurneiserus. Erastus affirms that he did see in S. Joachims dale,
silver grown upon a beam of wood, which was placed in the pit to support the
works: and when it was rotten, the workmen coming to set new timber in the
place, sound the silver sticking to the old beam. In Alchimia magna. De
metallis page 17. and 19.
Also he reports that in Germany, there has been unripe and unconcocted silver
found in Mines, which the best workmen affirmed, would become perfect silver in
thirty years. The like Modestinus Fachius, and Mathesius affirm of unripe and
liquid silver; which when the workmen find, they use to say, We are come too
soon. Von probier^ng der crtze. In Sarept^^.
But I need not produce any more proofs for this purpose, as I could out of
Agricola and Libavins, and others, seeing our best Philosophers, both ancient
and modern, do acknowledge that all minerals are generated. Sebast. For^^^
l.3.c.6. Scverinus c. 8. P. 125.
The manner of generation of minerals and metals, is the same in all, as is
agreed upon both by Plato and Aristotle, and ^heophrastus.

And as the manner of generation of minerals is alike in all, so it differs
from the generation of animate bodies, whether animals or vegetables, in this,
that having no seed, they have no power or instinct of producing other
individuals, but have their species perpetuated per virtutem seu spiritum
semini analogum, by a spiritual substance proportionable to seed, which is not
resident in every individual, as it is in aimals and plants, which Moses says
have their seeds in themselves, but in their proper wombs. Caesalpinus de
metal. lib. 1. C. 2.
This is the judgment of Petrus Severinus, howsoever he does obscure it by his
Platonical grandiloquence. Cap. 2.
And as there is not Vacuum in Corporibus, so much less in Speciebus: For that
the Species are perpetuated by new generations, is most certain, and proved
bofore: that it is not out of the seeds of individuals, is evident by this,
that if minerals do not assimulate nourishment by attraction, retention,
concoction, expulsion, etc. for the maintenance of their own individual bodies,
much less are they able to breed a superfluity of nourishment for seed. And how
can they attract and concoct nourishment, and expel excrements, which have no
veins nor fibers, nor any distinct parts to perform these Offices withal?
Moreover they are not increased as Plants are, by nourishment, whereas the
parts already generated, are extended in all proportions by the ingression of
nutriment, which sills and enlarges them: but only are augmented externally
upon the superficies, by super-addition of new matter concocted by the same
virtue and spirit, into the same Species. Erast. disput. part. 2. p. 261.


Thus much for the manner of all mineral generations, which is not much
controverted: the chief difference is about the efficient and the matter. About
the efficient cause of generations (for we must handle them all together) there
are diverse opinions, as there are diverse causes which concur to all generations
of animals, vegetables or minerals. But there must be one principal efficient
cause, to give the form to all Species, as thee are other adjuvant and
attending causes: The principal cause and agent in this work, is by most
attributed to the influence of the Planets, especially to the Sun, who either
by his light, or by his heat, does frame the species of all things, and so of
minerals, but chiefly in regard of his heat. The principal Efficient Cause of
the Generation of Minerals, not the Sun.
This heat working upon apt matter, is thought to produce the several species
which we see. As for the motion of the Planets, it is certain that they move
continually in a constant order, and the World could not subsist as it does
without it so as it may be cans a sine qua non; a very remote cause, as there
may be a hundred more causes of that nature. So likewise the light, which the
Peripateticks make the instrument of celestial effects, can do as little to
the furtherance of generations, seeing they proceed as well by night as by day:
and for minerals, it is perpetual night with them, the density of the earth and
rocks not suffering the light to pass. Wherefore they insist chiefly upon the
heat of the Sun: but Moses tells us that Plants were created with their seeds
in themselves upon the third day, before the Planets, which were not created
till the fourth day; the show us that Plants and terrestrial substances depend
not upon Planets for their generations, Dorn. phisica Geresis.
nor for their virtues, but have the prin cipal causes of them in themselves.
The same we may judge of minerals, being terrestrial substances, and propagated
by seeds, as Plants are, and likely to be created upon the same day with
Plants, seeing there is no other mention of their creation in Moses.

Now for the heat of the Sun, no doubt it is an universal fosterer of all
inferior substances: but that it should beget particular Species, is very
improbable. The heat of the Sun is no more apt to breed a Nettle than a Dock,
Brimstone than Salt, etc. For it cannot give the essence to any thing: heat
being only a quality which can breed no substance, and such a quality as can
only segregate heterogeneral substances; and thereby congregate homogeneal.
Whereas in all generations there must be a further power and virtue, to
proportion the Elements fit for every Species (if they will have all things
made of the Elements) and to bring the Species form a potential being to an
actual, giving to every thing his proper shape, quantity, color, smell, taste,
etc. and to unite them, which before were of different natures: It must be an
internal and domestical agent, and efficient cause which must perform this: and
such a one as is not common to all Species alike, but proper to that which it
produces: otherwise there would be no distinction, of Species. Gal. de Maraes.
And therefore Moses says of Plants, that they have their seeds in themselves,
according to their seyeral kinds. Neither can any external cause give an
essential form to any thing, which form must be (...), inbred in the thing it
self, and not adventitious. And therefore Scaliger says, Formae, non Solis est
quantitatem terminare, and Aristotle, Calore natura utitur tanquam ministro aut
instrumento, non tanquam opifice aut legislatore. Wherefore we will grant the
Sun to be an adjuvant cause, and by his heat to foster and cherish inferior
generations: but not to be a principal and begetting cause. And so Zabarella
does mollisie the harshness of the former opinion: and does acknowledge that
the Sun does further generations only as an instrument of another superior
power, whereby in minerals it may make the matter more apt to receive the form,
but it makes no minerals, no more then it makes blood in our bodies. De catore.


Others make the Elements to be the principal causes of all species by their
qualities. Neither the Elements.
For the matter of the Elements, being a passive matter, cannot be an efficient
cause of generations. These qualities must be heat or cold: for the other two
are passive, and attend rather upon the matter of generations, then upon the
efficient. Fire therefore by his heat is thought of all the Elements to have
the greatest hand in all generations, being most active and superior to all
the rest of the Elements together, for the generation of every Species, and
rank them in due order, proportion, weight, measure, etc. This is he than must
reconcile the differences which are in their natures, and bring them to union.
This must attract nourishment, and prescribe the quantities, dimensions, parts,
figures, colors, tastes, savours, etc. of every thing. A large Province he
has to govern, with one naked and simple quality, which can have but one
simple motion. Simplicibus corporibus simplices tantum motus congruunt. Heat
can but heat, and the effects of this heat are by separation of different
substances, (...) to congregate those that are alike, (...): But in this work
we make heat to unite differing substances: for all generation is of differing
substances united into one. Again, fire having but one quality to work withal,
whereby he must unite the other three Elements, what shall bring and unite fire
unto them? This must be another power superior to them all, for we must not
imagine that they meet by chance as travelers do. And therefore Aristotle
explodes this efficient of fire, and attributes it to the forms of natural
things. 1 De anima Item 2. cap. 4.


As for cold in the other Elements, it is far more unlikely then heat, to
perform these offices, being rather a distructive, then a generative quality,
and is not called in by any Author to this work, before the species have
received his form by heat: and then it is admitted only for consolidation, but
how justly, it is doubtful: for heat does consolidate as well as cold, by
drying up moisture. But we will not grant this to either of them, as principal
Agents, but as they are instruments attending the forms of natural things.

The Alchymists make Sulphur to be the principal efficient of all minerals,
especially of metals, and Mercury the matter. If they mean common Sulphur and
Mercury, which are perfect Species in their kinds, they are much deceived, and
this opinion is sufficiently confuted by all that oppugn them. But it seems
they understand some parts in the seminary of metals which have some analogy
with these: and so their opinion may be allowed. For the spirit, which is the
efficient in these generations, does reside in a material substance, which may
be resembled to Sulphur or Oil, as some other part may be resembled to
Mercury. For all generations are framed of different parts united by this
Spirit. Thus much of the different opinions concerning the efficient of all
generations, and in particular of minerals. The matter whereof minerals are
bred, is attributed chiefly to the Elements, as the general matter of all
animate and inanimate bodies: insomuch as both the heavens, and the very souls
of men are made to proceed from the Elements.

Concerning the Heavens, it has been the ancient opinion of the Platonicks,
Pythagoreans, and Epicureans, that not only these inferior bodies, but also
the celestial, have been framed out of the Elements. Trismegistus in Asclepio
cap. 1. Plato. In Timco in Dialogo de natura.
Plato speaking of the heavens, says, Divini decoris ratio postulabat talem
fieri mundum, qui and visum pateretur and tactum. Sine igne videri nil potest,
fine sulido nil tangi: solidum sine terra nibil. Wherefore holding the heavees
to be visible and solid, they must be made of the Elements. The Pythagoreans,
and the Brachmanni of India held the same opinion of the Heavens: where
Apollonius Tyanaeus was instructed in all the Pythagorean Doctrine, as
Philostratus reports. In vita Apollo^ci.
The Epicureans also were of the same opinion, as appears in Virgil, Elcoga 6.
where he brings in Sil^nus, one of the sect, and one of Bacchus his crew,
singing in this manner, Namque canebat, uti magnum perinane coacta
Semina, terrarumque, animaeque marisque fuissent,
Et liquidi simul ignis: ut his exordia primis
Omnia, and ipse tener mundi concreverit orbis.
Silenus sung, how through the Chaos vast,
The seeds were set of Earth, of Air, of Seas,
Of purest fire: how out of these at last,
All things have sprung, and also out of these
The infant world was molded.


Of this opinion also was Lucretius, Philo Jidoens, Valesius, etc. although
Valesius does make more pure Elements for the Heavens then ours. Desacra
Philosoph. cap. 51.
Aristotle forsook his Master Plato in this point, and frames the Heavens of a
quintessential substance.

But howsoever the Heavens may participate with elementary qualities, and be
subject to generation and corruption in their parts; yet me thinks they should
exempt our soals from this original, and not make them out of the fragment of
the Elements.

Scaliger inveys against Alexander Aphr^disiensis, for this opinion, and says
that he had poisoned our Philosophy herein: Venenav^^hanc Philosophiae partem.
So both he and others derive the sense, motion, understanding, growth, and the
natural faculties of our souls, and the peculiar properties of every thing,
from this original, turpissimo errore, as Severinus says. Cap. de mixtie^^.
And Scaliger in another place concerning this: D^ intelleclu and ratione
ipsaque anima quae ^ontaminarunt istoe nebuloe Aphrodisienses, and pudet dicere
and piget meminisse. I am ashamed to speak, and grieved to think how this
Aphrodisiensis has polluted our reason and understanding, and our very souls
with his foggy doctrine, in ascribing all these unto the Elements. By the same
reason they may ascribe the barking of Dogs, the singing of Birds, the
laughing and speech of men, to the Elements. Their opinion is more probable,
which hold, animam ex traduce, and to be communicated as one light to another:
as Timoth. Bright proves in Physicam Scribonii, and not to ascribe it to the
Elements. nor to miracles, or new creations. But there is far more reason to
derive from the Elements, the tastes, colors, smells, sigures, numbers,
quantities, orders, dimensions, etc. which appear more in corporal substances,
and yet these are not from the Elements. For how can they give these affections
to other things, when they have them not themselves? Si non est ab elementis
gustare, quare sit gustari? What taste have any of these Elements? Fire or heat
which is the most active Element, has none. And whereas it is thought, that
bittterness proceeds from heat, we find that many sharp and tar^fruits, being
also very bitter before they are ripe, (as Olives for example) yet let them
hang upon the tree till they be ripe, and they lose their bitterness, and also
their sharpness, by reason of their better concoction by heat. The like
difference wefind between our oleum omphacinum, and therpe oil. So likewise
opium, which is held to be very cold, yet it is extreme bitter, so as the cold
parts in it are not able to master the bitterness, but this is still
predominant: wherefore heat can be no cause of bitterness, unless it be in
excess or defect, as Scaliger confesses. Wormwood is very bitter, being hot
and dry in the second or third degree: if heat were the cause of it, then all
other simples which are hot and dry in the same degree, should be also bitter.
As I have said of tastes, so I may say of all the other affections of natural
things, that they proceed not form the Elements, but from the seeds and forms
of every thing. So for fat and unctuous substances, as Sulphur, Bitumen, Oil,
Grease, etc. unto what Element shall we ascribe them? Not unto fire, because
this is extreme hot and dry, that is temperate in heat, and very moist.
Moreover, fire would rather consume it, then generate it: and Physicians judge
the generation of fat in our bodies to proceed rather from cold, then from
heat. Air, if it have any ingenerate quality, as some do make doubt out of
Aristotle it is cold and moist, as I have showed before, cap. 2 and 5. 1
M^teo^ol. 4. Item de mundo ubi dicit aerens comparatum esse ad aliam and aliam
^^turam inducedam.
and therefore as it cannot agree with fire, nor be a fuel to it, so it cannot
be any material cause of fat, or oily substance: being more agreeable to
water, from whence it is thought to be made by rarifaction, and into which it
is thought to be reduced by condensation. Wherefore being of a watery nature, it
cannot agree with oil or fatness, nor be the matter of it. The like we may
judge of water, which does terminate both water and air, and therefore must be
opposite to them both. As for earth, being cold and dry, and solid, it cannot
be the matter of this which is temperate, and moist, and liquid; Neither can
all the Elements together make this substance, seeing there is no unctuousness
in any of them, and they can give no more then they have. So as I cannot see
how this oily substance, which is very common in all natural things, and
wherein the chief faculties of every thing does reside, as their humidum
radicale, should be from the Elements.

So likewise for the substance wherewith every thing is nourished and
increased, and into which every thing is resolved, it appears not how it should
be from the Elements. In some. Scipionis cap. 6.
Hypocrates, of whom Macrobius says, Nec fallere nec falli p^tuit, has two
notable axioms for the clearing of this point. The one is Vnumquong; in id
dissolvitur unde compactum est. De not hominis.
Every thing is dissolved into that whereof it was made. The other. Iisdem
untrimur ex quibus constamus, we are nourished by such things as we consist of.
2 De genesis cap. 8. Item libde s^^su and sensibile.
Aristotle also has the same. If this axiom be true, as I hold it to be, and I
know none that contradict it, then we must consist of such things as we are
nourished withal. But we are not nourished by the Elements, and therefore we
consist not of them. Fire nourishes nothing, water nourishes not, as
Physicians conse^s: Air is too thin a substance, and Earth to thick. And as
they do not nourish them when they are single, so being compounded, they can do
as little. 3 De genesis animal. cap. ultimo.
Aristotle says that some Plants are nourished with water alone, some with
earth alone, and some with both together. But if earth and water be mixed for
our nourishment, they making but mud, would make us have muddy brains. We will
grant the Elements to be matrices rerum naturalium, the wombs and nurses of
natural things, but we will not grant them to be material causes. Neither can
we attribute more dignity unto them, then we do to our Mothers, who depart from
their substance whereof they consist, as flesh, bones, sinews, veins, arteries,
etc. to the nourishment of their Infants, but only prepare blood for them, from
the nutriments which they receive. And all the Elements in the world cannot
make this blood, neither as the matter nor as the efficient. But as the Mother
is furnished with blood to nourish the Infant, and with convenient heat to
foster it withal, so are the Elements stored with all manner of matter sit for
all generations: so as the seeds or forms of natural things, will never want
matter to nourish them, nor will ever want forms. So that it is manifest that
if natural bodies be not nourished by the Elements, they are not compounded of
them: but being nourished by other substances then the Elements, they must be
compounded of the like; Simile simili nutritur: composit a compos^^ constant
and nutriuntur.

Thus much for the Genesis or generation and naration of natural things, that
thereby we cannot gather that they are either mad or nourished by the Elements.
Now let us examine whether by the Analysis or dissolution of them, we may find
the four Elements, according to the former axiom, that every thing is
dissolved into that whereof it was made, and is made of than whereinto it is
dissolved, as Aristotle, Hypocrates, and Galen do affirm. So that if the
Elements enter into the composition of natural things, especially as the
principal materials whereof they consist, they must needs appear in the
dissolution of them. This dissolution is either natural or artificial. In the
natural dissolution of all things, Hypocrates observes three distinct
substances, calidum, humidum sive fluidum, and siccum five solidum, according
to the three Elements or principles where of they are framed. His instance is
principally man, but he ^ffirms it to hold in other animate and inanimate
bodies. Ifagoge cap. 8. 1 de Elementis cap. 15.
These Elements he terms continen^^a, contenta and impetum facientia, as
Galen exbounds it. Those which he calls continentia, (...) bones, nerves,
veins, arteries, and from ^hence, muscles, etc. Contenta are humida, or
humores, blood; phlegm, choler, melancholy, which after death, are cold, and
congeal, being beated as Galen says, from the heart, in living bodies: Impetum
facientia, are spirits animal, vital and natural.

These three Elements, Galen acknowledges to be the nearest, but the other
which are more remote, to be most universal. De veteri medi^ina.
Bat Hypocrates ^aith that heat and cold, etc. are very powerless Elements, and
that sharp, bitter, sweet, etc. are more powerful, (...). So that these are
the three Elements whereof ^ll things do consist, and into which they are
^aturally resolved: and these do seem to re^emble the four Elements, but are
not the same. For heat may resemble fire, although this heat be ^^ocured by
motion in every thing whilst it lives, and not extrinsecally. Moisture may
resemble water and air. Dryness may resemble earth; cold appears in them all
after the heat or spirit is departed.

In the artificial Analysis of natural bodies, the Alchymists tells us that
they find three Elements, and no more, whereof every thing does consist, and
whereinto it is resolved: namely, Vaporosum, inflammabile, fixum: which they
call Mercury, Sulphur and Salt, and they seem to agree with Hypocrates. For
their Mercury may well resemble Hypocrates his spirits, or impet^^ facientia:
Sulphur his humor or flu dum or ^^tenta: and Salt, his siccum or densum, or
coninentia. These they say are found in every thing, animal, vegetable, or
mineral, and no other. And as for the four common Elements, seeing they are
distinct in place and situation, and therefore cannot concur and meet to the
generation of every animal, Plant and Mineral, etc but by violence, the earth
being someti^^ carried upwards, and the fire downwards, contrary to their
natural motions: and this, not one for all, but daily and hourly: it is not
likely t^^ these substances can be bred of the Elements, (...) be maintained in
a perpetual succession by a vi^lent cause. And therefore it is no marvel these
Elements be not found in the dissolutions natural bodies. Thus much in general
conceting all generations, that hereby we may the ^^ter judge of the particular
generations of Mnerals, which differ not from the rest, but (...) in this, that
their seeds are not in every indi^^dual, as the others are, but are contained
^^ matricibus, in their wombs, and there they are furnished with matter to
produce their Species: not out of the Elements, no otherwise than ex
matricibus, as the child in the mothers womb, but have their matter and
nourishment from the seeds of things which are agreeable to their species:
which seeds wanting means to produce their own species, do serve others, and
yield matter and substance unto them.

Now let us come more particularly to the generation of minerals, wherein we
will first examine Aristotle's opinion, as most generally received, then I will
presume to set down mine own.

CHAP. XII.
The generation of Minerals examined, the Authors opinion herein.

A Ristotle makes the humidity of water, and the dryness of earth, to be the
matter of all minerals: the dryness of earth to participate with fire, and the
humidity of water with air, as Zabareila interprets it; so that to make a
perfect mixed body, the four Elements do concur; and to make the mixture more
perfect, these must be resolved into vapor or exhalation by the heat of fire,
or influence from the Sun and other Planets, as the efficient cause of their
generation: but the cause of their congelation to be cold in such bodies as
heat will resolve. Erastus, Carerius, Casal^inus, Marti^u^, Mo^ista^, Foxias,
Magyrus, Liba^ius.
This vapor consisting partly of moisture, and partly of dryness, if all the
moisture be spent, turns to earth or salt, or concrete juyces, which dissolve
in moisture: if some moisture remain before congelation, then it turns to
stone: if this dry exhalation be unctuous and fat, and combustible, then
Bitumen and Sulphur, and Orpiment, are bred of it: if it be dry and
incombustible, then concrete juyces, etc. 3 Met^or. c.ult. Caesalp.l.3.0.1.
But if moisture do abound in this vapor then metals are generated which are
fusible and malleable. And for the perfecting of these generations, this
exhalation is not sufficient, but to give them their due consistence, there
must be the help of cold from Rocks in the earth to congeal this exhalation. So
that here must be two efficients, heat and cold. And for the better effecting
of this, these exhalations do insinuate themselves into stones, in the form of
dew o^ frost, that is, in little grains; but differing from dew and frost in
this, that these are generated after that the vapor is converted to water;
whereas Minerals are generated before this conversi^^ into water. Libav. de
not. metal.c. 14. carerius 178. Septal. in Hipp.
But there is doubt to be made of frost, because that is bred before the
conversio^ of the exhalation into water, as may appear, M^teor. 1. de aere,
aqu. etc.
According to this assertion there must be two places for the generation of
minerals; the one a matrix, where they receive their effence by heat in form of
an exhalation, and from thence they are sent to a second place to receive the^
congelation by the coldness of Rocks: and from this matrix come our mineral
waters, and no^ from the place of congelation.

This is the generation of minerals, according to Aristotle; but it is not so
clear, but that leaves many scruples, both concerning the matter, and the
efficients. For the matter, it seems not probable, that water and earth should
make any thing but mud and dirt; for you can expect no more from any thing than
is in it, the one is cold and dry, the other cold and moist; and therefore as
fit to be the matter of any other thing, as of particular minerals. And water,
whereof principally metals are made to consist, is very unfit to make a
malleable and extensible substance, especially being congealed by cold, as we
may see in ice. But some do add a mineral quality to these materials, and that
simple water is not the chief matter of metals, but such as has imbibed some
mineral quality, and so is altered from the nature of pure water. This
assertion does presuppose minerals in the earth before they were bred;
otherwise what should breed them at the first, when there was no mineral
quality to be imparted to water? Again, this mineral quality either gives the
water or the vapor of it the effence of the mineral, and then it is not the
effect of water, but of the mineral quality, or the potential fac^^lty to breed
it. If the effence, then this metal (...) water, or vapor, must have the form
of the metal, and so be fusible and malleable. If it have only the power and
potential faculty, then the generation is not perfected, but must expect
further concoction. This concoction is said to be partly by heat, and partly by
cold; if by heat, it must be in the passages of the exhalation as it is carried
in the bowels of the earth: for afterward, when the exhalation is settled in
the stones, the heat is gone. Now if the concoction be perfected before the
exhalation be insinuated into the Stones, as it must be, if it be like dew,
then it is perfect metal, and neither is able to penetrate the Stones, nor has
any need of the cold of them to perfect the generation. If by cold, it is
strange that cold should be made the principal agent in the generation of
metals, which generates nothing; neither can heat be the efficient of these
generations. Simple qualities can have but simple effects, as heat can but make
hot, cold can but cool, etc. But they say cold does congeal metals, because
heat does dissolve them; I answer, that the rule is true, if it be rightly
applied: as we see ice which is congealed by cold, is readily dissolved by
heat. Valcsius sacra Philosoph^^. 49.
But the fusion of metals cannot properly be called a dissolution by heat,
because it is neither reduced to water or vapor, as it was before the
congelation by cold, nor is it permanent in that kind of dissolution, although
after fusion it should be kept in a greater heat than the cold could be which
congealed it. For the cold in the bowels of the earth cannot be so great, as it
is upon the superficies of the earth, seeing it was never observed that (...)
was any ice bred there. Also this dissolution which is by fusion, tends not to
the destruction of the metal (but does rather make it more perfect) as it
should do according to the former rule rightly applied. And therefore this
dissolution by fusion, does not argue a congelation by cold; which being in the
passive elements, does rather attend the matter than the efficient of
generations: for it is apt to dull and hebetate all faculties and motions in
nature, and so to hinder generations, rather than to further any. It is heat
and moisture that further generations, as Ovid faith; Quippe ubi temperie^^
sumpsere humorque calorque, Concipiunt:
When heat with moysture's tempered well,
Then it is their bellies 'gin to swell.


And thus much for Aristotle's generation of minerals, where his vapors or
exhalations do rather serve for the collection or congregation of matter in the
Mines, than for the generation of them; as Libavius does rightly judge.
Singularium lib. 1. part. 1.
Agricola makes the matter of minerals to be Succus Lapidescens Metallificus
etc. and with more reason, because they are found liquid in the earth: Gilgill
would have it Ashes; Democritus Lime: but these two being artificial matters,
are no where found in the earth. The Alchymists make Sulphur and Mercury the
matter of metals: Libavius, Sulphur and Vitriol. De not. metal. Cap. 10.
But I will not stand upon discoursing of these materials, because it makes
little to my purpose.. It is enough for my purpose to show the manner of these
generations, which I take to be this.

There is a Seminary Spirit of all minerals in the bowels of the earth, The
Authors opinion concerning the manner of the Generation of Minerals.
which meeting with convenient matter, and adjuvant causes, is not idle, but
does proceed to produce minerals, according to the nature of it, and the matter
which it meets withal; which matter it works upon like a ferment, and by his
motion procures an actual heat, as an instrument to further his work; which
actual heat is increased by the fermentation of the matter. The like we see in
making of Malt, where the grains of Barley being moistened with water, the
generative Spirit in them is dilated, and put in action; and the superfluity of
water being removed, which might choke it, and the Barley laid up in heaps; the
seeds gather heat, which is increased by the contiguity of many grains lying
one upon another. In this work natures intent is to produce more individuals,
according to the nature of the Seed, and therefore it shoots forth in spires:
but the Artist abuses the intention of Nature, and converts it to his end, that
is, to increase the spirits of his Malt. The like we find in mineral
substances, where this spirit or ferment is resident, as in Alum and Copperas
Mines, which being broken, exposed and moistened, will gather an actual heat,
and produce much more of those minerals, then else the mine would yield; as
Agricola and Thurneiser do affirm, and is proved by common experience. The like
is generally observed in Mines, as Agricola, Erastus, Libavius, etc. do avouch
out of the daily experience of mineral men, who affirm, that in many places,
they find their Mines so hot, as they can hardly touch them; although it is
likely that where they work for perfect Minerals, the heat which was in
fermentation, whilst they were yet breeding, is now much abated: the Minerals
being now grown to their perfection. And for this heat we need not call for the
help of the Sun, which a little could will take away from us, much more the
body of the earth, and rocks; not for subterranean fire: this inbred heat is
sufficient, as may appear also by the Mines of Tinglass, which being dug,
and laid in the moist air, will become very hot. So Antimony and Sublimat being
mixed together, will grow so hot as they are not able to be touched: If this be
so in little quantities, it is likely to be much more in great quantities and
huge rocks. Heat of it self differs not in kind, but only in degree, and
therefore is inclined no more to one Species, then to another, but as it does
attend and serve a more worthy and superior power, such as this generative
spirit is. And this spirit does convert any apt matter it meets withal to his
own species by the help of heat; and the earth is full of such matter which
attends upon the species of things: and oftentimes for want of fit opportunity
and adiuvant causes, lies idle, without producing any species: but is apt to be
transmuted by any mechanical and generative spirit into them. And this matter
is not the Elements themselves, but subterranean seeds placed in the Elements,
which not being able to live to themselves, do live to others. Mussetus in
dialogo apologetics.
Sic Roma crescit Albae ruinis; the Death of one is the life of another. From
this confluence of seeds arise all the varieties and differences, and
alterations which are observed in the generation or nutrition of natural
things: as in their colors, tastes, numbers, proportions, distempers, etc.
Also from hence proceed the Transplantations which we find in animals,
vegetables, and minerals. In animils these Transplantations are not very
frequent; yet all our monsters may be referred hereunto, as also the issue
which comes from Dogs and Wolves, Horses and Asses, Partriges and Hens, etc.
Some do think that the destruction of Sexes is a Transplantation, and that all
seeds in themselves are hermophroditical, and neither masculine nor feminine,
but as they meet with strong and weak impressions from supervenient causes;
From hence come our Androgyni, Carm. lib. 3. od. 6.
or masculine women, such as Horace speaks of, Sabellis docta ligonibus versare
glebas.
That dig the ground themselves (stout Jades!)
Managing well Sabean Spades.


Among those Animals which we call Insecta, these Transplantations are more
frequent, because their seeds are more equivocal, and easily transmuted from
one species to another: as we may see in Worms and Flies, and most evidently in
Silkworms called Cavallieri.

In Vegetables these Transplantations are very frequent when one species is
grafted upon another, as Virgil faith, Et steriles platani malos gessere
valentes
Castaneae fagos: ornusque incanuit albo
Flore pyri, glandemque sues fregere sub ulmis. Georg. 2.

The barren Planes did Apples bear;
The Beeches Chestnuts; the Ash a Pear;
And Hogs did under Elm-trees Acorns tear.


Thus by commixtion of several species, the first seeds do oftentimes being
forth other fruits then their own. Miranturque novas frondes and non sua poma.
And stand admiring, double mute,
To see new leaves, and stranger fruit.


But all, as Hypocrates says, by divine necessity, both that which they would,
and that which they would not. De Dieta 1.
So likewise Wheat is changed into Lolium, Basil into Thyme, Masterwort into
Angelica, etc.

In Minerals we find the like transplantations: as Salt into Nitre, Copperass
into Alum, Lead into Tin, Iron into Copper, Copper into Iron, etc. And this is
the transplantation whereupon the Alchymists ground their Philosophers stone.

This Seminary Spirit is acknowledged by Aristotle: Continent (inquit) semen in
se cujusque faecundit atis suae causam: and by most of his Interpreters: and
Morisinus calls it Elphesteria, not knowing how to attribute these generations
to the Elements. De genesis animal. lib. 2. Foxius, M^rtinus, Moris^aus, Magyrus,
Libavius, Vel^uri^, Valesius, Carerists, Erastus, etc.
And this is the cause why some places yield some one vegetable or mineral
species above another, Quippe solo natura subest. Non owsnis fert omnia tellus.
It is the nature of the ground.
Not in all Soils are all things found.


This seminary spirit of minerals has its proper wombs where it resides, and
is like a Prince or Emperor, whose prescripts both the Elements and matter
must obey; and it is never idle, but always in action, producing and
maintaining natural substances, until they have fulfilled their destiny, donec
fatum expleverint, as Hypocrates says. De Dieta lib. 1.
So as there is a necessity in this, depending upon the first benediction (
crescite and multiplicamini:) and this necessity or fatum is inherent in the
seeds, and not adventitious from the Planets, or any other natural cause. And
this is the cause of uniformity in every species, that they have all their
proper figures, dimensions, numbers of parts, colors, tastes, etc. most
convenient and agreeable to each nature; as Moses says, that God saw that
every thing was very good: and Galen says, Deus in omnibus optimum eligit. 6
De usu partium ^. 12. and 13.
And this I take to be the meaning of his Lex Adrastia, which he alleges
against Asclepiades. Erasmus in Adagi^s.
For it he should mean it as commonly it is understood, of punishment which
always follows sin, nem^ crimen in pectore gestaet, qui non idem Nemesi^ in
tergo; No man, though privately, commits a fault, but is degg'd by revenge: in
this sense he could not apply it to the confuting of Asciepiades. There are
also other laws in nature which cannot be altered, both Mathematical, in
Arithmetic and Geometry; and Logical, in the consecuting of arguments, etc.
But these serve not for Galens purpose in this place. He must mean it of a
natural necessity or fatum, or predestination, that frames every member and
part of the body to the best use for the creature. And therefore where
Asclepiades propounds an inconvenient frame of parts, he confutes him by this
inbred law of nature, which he says, no man can alter or avoid, nor any
subtility elude, as also Aristotle says. De mund^. c. ult.
Thus much for the generation of Minerals and other natural substances.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the causes of actual heat, and medicinal virtue in Mineral Waters, diverse
opinions of others rejected.

NOW I come to show how our mineral waters receive both their actual heat, and
their virtues. Causes of heat in mineral waters not.
I join them together, because they depend upon one and the same cause, unless
they be juices which will readily dissolve in water, without the help of heat:
other minerals will not, or very hardly.

This actual heat of waters has troubled all those that have written of them,
and many opinions have been held of the causes of them. Some attribute it to
wind or air, or exhalations included in the bowels of the earth, which either
by their own nature, or by their violent motion, and agitation, and attrition
upon rocks and narrow passages, do gather heat, and impart it to our waters.
Wind, Air, Exhalations in the Earth.
Of their own nature these exhalations cannot be so hot, as to make our water
hot, especially seeing in their passage among cold rocks, it would be much
allaied, having no supply of heat to maintain it. Moreover, where water has
passage to get forth to the superficies of the earth, there these exhalations
and winds will easily pass, and so their heat gone withal, and so our waters
left to their natural coldness: whereas we see they do continue in the same
degree and tenor, many generations together. Agitation and violent motion.
If by their agitation and violent motion they get this heat, because no
violent thing is perpetual or constant, this cannot be the cause of the
perpetual and constant heat of water. Besides, this would rather cause
earthquakes and storms, and noyses in the earth, then heat our springs.
Moreover, we daily observe, that exhalations and water are never heated by
motion, or agitation; as in the Cataracts of the Rhine by Splug; the agitation
and fall of water upon rocks is most violent, and makes a hideous noise; yet it
heats not the water, though it be very deep in the earth. Valeseus center. lib.
4. cap. 3. Solinand. l. 1. cap. 4.
Neither can any attrition heat either air or water, or any soft and liquid
thing, but rather make it more cold.

Others attribute this actual heat of Bathes unto the Sun, whose beams piercing
through the pores of the earth, do heat our waters. The Sun.
If this heat which heats our Bathes be caused by the beams of the Sun, then
either they bring it entirely from the Sun, as a quality proceeding from
thence, or they make it by their own motion. If it come from the nature of the
Sun, the Sun must be extreme hot that can heat these inferior parts at such a
distance; especially the beams which must carry it, passing through the middle
region of the air, which is always extreme cold, and cannot but cool those
beams before they come to us. And if they were able to pass that region without
losing their heat, yet they cannot but warm that region, being nearer to their
fountain of heat, as well or better then they can warm our waters, in despite
of any Antiperistasis. But it is doubtful whether the Sun be hot of his own
nature or no. It may be so in former times, but few, I think, do doubt it now;
I am sure not those who hold the Sun to be a Flame.
The Peripateticks hold it to be hot and dry moderately; yet it must be extreme
hot, if in this manner it do heat our Bathes. And if the Sun be capable of
heat, they must also make it capable of cold (elementary qualities) and then
they make celestial bodies obnoxious to generation and corruption; which they
are not willing to grant. Although in this respect they need not fear the decay
of the Sun, no more then of the globe of the earth: which though it suffer in
his parts many alterations, yet the whole remains firm and perpetual, as Mr.
Doctor Hakwell proves in his learned work upon that argument; and will so do
until it be dissolved by that omnipotent power which framed it. His Apology.
If they make this heat to come from the motion of the Sun, we must consider
how the Sun by motion may get such a heat. The Sun is either moved by his own
motion, or as he is carried in his Sphere wherein he is fixed. If by his own
motion, it must be either by volutation upon his axis, which is called (...),
or by circumgyration, which is called (...), round about the globe of the
earth: and this is the common opinion; which if it be so, he must be carried
more swiftly then a bullet out of a piece of Ordnance. I read in the Turkish
History at the siege of Scodra, of a bullet of twelve hundred weight called the
Prince, and it seems a great matter. But to have such a bullet as the globe of
the Sun, which is held to be 166 times bigger then the globe of the earth, to
be carried in a swifter course, and that perpetually, is a monstrous, furious,
and mad agitation, insa^^motus, as one terms it. The like may be said of the
motion of the Spears: but I will leave the confutation of this to others.
Gilbertus de magnete lib. 6. Taurellus de primis rerum principiis. Conrad.
Aslacus de triplici coelo.
But admit it to be so; and that this violent agitation is not repugnant to the
perpetuity of the Heavens; and that it is able to breed an extreme heat in the
Sun and celestial Spheres, notwithstanding their tenuity, etc. which is unapt
to breed heat by motion or collision, for that is proper to solid substances:
yet this heat must be conveyed to us by the same beams of the Sun, and must be
subject to the former impediments.

Wherefore the beams of the Sun by their motion must make this heat, by the
collection a many beams together. For if they be dispersed, no fire will be
kindled, but only some moderate heat: as we see in a burning-glass, which will
heat a white paper or cloth, but not burn it. Other things it will burn, which
are apt fewels; but the whiteness of the paper or cloth it seem disperseth the
beams. But no doubt the Sun by his light and beams do warm these inferior
parts, especially where they have free passage, and reflection withal, and it
is to be judged, that the heat not being essentially in the Sun, is an effect
of the light by whose beams it is imparted to us: So that where light is
excluded, heat is also excluded. And if we can exclude the heat of the beams of
the Sun by the in^rposition of a mud wall, or by making a Cel^r fix foot under
the ground; how is it likely that these beams can pierce so deep into the
earth, as to heat the water there, as Lucretius ^aith, Qui queat hic subter tam
crass corpore terram
Percoquere humorem, and calido sociare vapori? Lib. 6.

Prasertim cum vix possit per septa domorum
l^sinuare suum radi^s ardentibus aestum.
Under this massy bulk of earth how shall
The Sun boil water, and there raise a steam
Whereas we see it scarce can pierce a wall,
And through't into a Chamber dart a beam.


And if the beams of the Sun be not able to heat a standing Pool in the midst
of Summer, how should they heat a subterranean water, which is always in
motion, especially in the winter time? Again, if this heat come from the Sun,
then in the Summer, when the Sun is hottest, the waters should be so also, and
in winter cold, because of the absence of the Sun; but we find them always
alike. Also, why should the Sun heat some few Fountains and pass over an
infinite number of others, which are left cold? And why should there be hot
Fountains in cold Climates, where the Sun has little power to heat, either by
reason of his oblique beams, or by reason of his long absence; and yet in hot
Climats they should be so ^re? wherefore it is very improbable that our Springs
are heated by the Sun.

Others have devised another cause of this actual heat of Bathes, more vain
then the former, which they call Antiperistasis: where by reciprocation or
compression, any quality is intended and exalted to a higher degree.
Antiperistasis.
As where heat or cold are compassed by their contrary quality, so as the
vapors or effluvium of it is reflected back again, the quality thereof is
increased. Hypocrates gives us an example of it in our own bodies, where he
says, ventres hi^calidiores; our stomachs are hotter in Winter then in Summer,
by reason the ambient air being then cold, does stop the pores of the skin, and
repel those fuliginous vapors which nature would breathe forth, and so our
inward heat is increased: whereas in the Summer, by reasoned too much
eventilation, our natural heat is diminished; and therefore we concoct better
i^ Winter then in Summer. And although it be not simple heat which concocts,
and makes ebylus in the Stomach, Blood in the Liver, Seed is the Spermatick
Vessels, or Milk in the Breast etc. as Joubertus says: yet heat attending upon
the faculties of those parts, does quicken them as cold does benumb them. In
Paradoxis.
But if we examine this example aright, we shall find a great difference
between this and our hot Bathes. For the heat in our bodies is continually fed
and maintained from the Heart by his motion: that a Bathes has no such supply
according to their doctrine, from any cause to make or continue this heat. And
therefore the repelling of vapors cannot make water hotter then it is: and
being naturally cold, and without any heat where heat is not, how can it be
pend in or repelled? Again, in Hypocrates his example there is an interstitium
(our skin) between the fuliginous vapors and the external air, which keep them
from uniting: but in our Bathes there is nothing to hinder the meeting and
conjunction of these qualities, and then the one must dull the other. Moreover,
we see that any thing that is naturally cold, as Iron or a Stone, if it be made
hot accidentally by fire or otherwise, it is sooner cold in cold air, then in a
warm place. So that the Antiperistasis does rather diminish then increase the
heat of it. Wherefore unless water were naturally hot, or the heat maintained
by some continual cause, this Antiperistasis can do no good, but by his
opposite quality would rather cool it. Nay heat it self cannot make any thing
more hot, unless it be greater then the heat of the thing it self. But to
ascribe the generation of heat to cold, and so to make it the cause of his
contrary, is against the law of Nature. No quality of it self is increased by
his contrary. It is true, that a pot of water set over the fire, will be sooner
hot, being covered, or otherwise the vapors kept in, then being open: but
there must be fire then to heat it, and to continue the heat: otherwise the
Antiperistasis will do nothing, unless it make it more cold, and congeal it
into Ice, if the air ambient be more cold then the water. Some may object, that
they find some Fountains warmer in Winter then in Summer, and to reak when they
break forth into the air; as I have seen at Wercksworth and Bakewell in
Darbyshire: and therefore this does argue an Antiperistasis. 3 Simpl. medic.
facult. cap. 7.
Galen thinks that these waters do but seem so to our sense: our hands being
hot in Summer, and cold in Winter, as our Urins seem cold in a hot Bath. But I
will grant with Valesius that many deep Fountains may be so indeed, and not in
appearance only, as partaking with some warm exhalations, especially in Mineral
Countries, as Darbyshire is.

Moreover, if our Bathes were heated by a^ Antiperistasis, then they should be
hotter in Winter then in Summer; but we find them always alike. Also if a cold
ambient be able to make cold water hot, why should not a hot ambient make it
more cold? especially seeing the vapors are cold, which being repelled by
heat, which does terminate cold, should increase the coldness of the water.
Also if we should grant this Antiperistasis, we must deny the reaction and
resistance between the qualities of the Elements: and so overthrow all
temperaments which arise from thence: and also our composition of medicines
were in vain. Valesius contro. lib. 1. cap. 5. Magyrus lib. 3. cap. 3.
Wherefore this Antiperistasis is an idle invention to maintain this purpose.

Others attribute this actual heat to quick Lyme, which does readily heat any
water call upon it, and also kindle any combustible substance put into it; this
is Democritus his opinion. Quick Lyme.
To this I answer, that Lyme is an artificial thing, not natural, and is never
found in the bowels of the earth. Besides, if it were found, one fusion of
water extinguisheth the heat of it, and then it lies like a dead earth, and
will yield nor more heat, So as this cannot procure a perpetual heat to Bathes:
neither can the Lymestones without calcination, yield any heat to water, nor
will break and crackle upon the affusion on water, as Lyme does. Wherefore this
opinion is altogether improbable.

Others attribute this actual heat to a subterranean fire kindled in the bowels
of the earth. Let us consider how this may be. Subterranea^ Fire.
Fire is a quality and the highest degree of heat, which cannot subsist without
a subject; for I define it to be intensissimus color in corpore cremabili: The
highest degree of heat in a combustible body: And it is received into his
subject either by propagation or coition, as when one candle lights another, or
by motion, as collision, concussion, dilatation, comprission, putrefaction,
fermentalion, reflection, etc. yet all motion does not kindle fire although it
heat; neither are all substances apt to be heated by motion. Air and water are
rather colder by motion: but this rule holds in such things as are apt to
receive heat by motion, as solid substances, combustible substances, etc. And
the heat of animals, vegetables, and minerals, which they have for their
generation and nutrition, is from motion: although this heat is not in so high
a degree as fire is, for then it would consume them; but as the motion is
moderate, and agreeable to each nature, so is the heat. This motion in natural
things proceeds from their seeds, or forms, and may be called internal or
natural. External motions are violent agitations, concussions, etc. which
commonly kindle fire in apt matter. As for the element of fire, which should be
pure, not shining, and therefore invisible, and subsisting without a subject or
fuel: let them find it who know where to seek for it. For my part I know no
element of fire, unless we should make it to be that which is natural to all
creatures and their seeds, causing their fermenting heat, whereof I shall speak
anon. And this interpretation we may well make of Hypocrates, where he faith,
that all things are made of fire and water; and that these two are sufficient
for all generations; fire giving motion, and water nutrition. D: ditca lib. 1.
And it is not likely that this fire should be fetched from: a remote place,
and downwards, against the nature of fire, for every generation: but that it be
near hand, and inbred in the seeds themselves, as the principal ingredient into
every natural thing; whereas if it were remote, what should bring it
continually, and unite it with the other elements in these generations?
Wherefore this is most likely to be the element of fire, Our burning fire is
all of one nature, not differing in kind, but only in degree according to the
quality of the fuel. Some fewels will make a manifest flame, as all thin and
light substances, Sulphur, liquid Bitumen, Oil, Fat, etc. Some only a glowing
coal, with little or no flame, as some forts of Stone-coal. Yet all fire does
send forth fuliginous vapors, which would choke it if there were not vent for
them into the air: as we see in the making of Char-coal, although they cover
their fire with lome, yet they must leave some vent for the smoke; though not
so much as may make it to flame, yet enough to maintain the fire. Of the first
flaming fort there are diverse degrees, as that of Straw, Brimstone, Spirit of
Wine, Naphtha, Petroleum, etc. Some of which will scarcely take hold upon other
fuel: as one may wet a linen cloth in Spirit of Wine, and being kindled, he
shall hardly find the cloth scorched. The like has been observed in that
exhalation which is called ignis satuus, being of a very thin substance, for
Bitumen or Naphtha. Some reckon Comets among these fiery exhalations: but I can
hardly believe that they are any kindled substances. Comets, probably not
k^ndled substances.
First because their flame is not pyramidal, as it is in all kindled
substances. Secondly, because if they be of a thin substance from Sulphur and
Bitumen, the flame would be greater, seeing it must be plentiful, if it
continue so long in burning, as we find them to do. Or admit that this matter
be kindled by succession, yet it is incredible that it should continue burning
above a year together; as that Comet Xiphian, which lasted a whole year:
Another, Anno 1572. under the constellation of Cassiopaea, lasted a year and a
half, others six months, others three, etc. If the Sulphurous or Bituminous
matter be thick, it will melt in burning, and rain down Brimstone and Bitumen
upon us. Thirdly, if Comets were kindled substances, what entertainment could
they find above the Moon, and among the spheres, where they say no corruptible
or elementary substance can be endured. But many of our Comets have been
observed to have been above the Moon, and some among the fixed Stars, as has
been observed by Tycho Brahe, and Clavius: and upon due observation they could
find some of them to admit no Paralaxis, or diversity of aspect to any star in
different Climats.

This argumnnt may be good against a Peripatetick; but a Platonist, or a
Pytnagorean, who hold the Heavens to be made of elementary matter, and subject
to generation and corruption, will not allow it, no more will many of our
Divines.

For glowing fires, we have none but they must be kindled, and then they must
have vent for their fuliginous vapors, and they must be kindled either by
propagation or coition from some other fire, or by violent motion able to
kindle them, which we shall hardly find in the bowels of the earth, where all
is quiet, and no space for any such perturbation.

But they say there is an ignis subterraneus, which being kindled upon Sulphur
and Bitumen, disperseth it self among other Mines of the like nature, and sets
them on fire. Now we are come from Heaven to Hell, or to Purgatory at the
least, which Pyhagoras calls materiam vatum falsique pericula mundi; The dream
of Poets, and a forged fear. Metamorph. 15.
The largest description of it is in Virgil: from whence both Divines and
Philosophers derive much matter: and Beccius does believe that there is such a
thing in the Center of the Earth. But if we observe Virgil well, we shall find
that he propounds it but as a dream: for in the end of that Book he says, Sunt
gemina somni portae; quarum altera fortur
Cornea, qua veris facilis datur exitus umbris:
Altera candenti perfecta nitens Elephauto,
Sed falsa ad Coelum mittunt insomnia manes. AEnta^. 6.

Dreams have two gates, the one is said to be
Of Horn, through which all true conceits de flee;
The other framed all of Ivory rare,
But lets out none but such as forged are.


Now says he, when Anchyses had led AEneas and Sibilla through Hell, he lets
them forth at the Ivory gate ( Portaque emittit Eburna:) As if he should say;
all that I have related of Hell, is but a fiction; and thus Ludovicus Vives
interprets it in his Comment upon this place.

I hope none will think that I deny a Hell, but I approve not of the assignment
of it to the center of the earth, or that that fire should serve as Baccius
would have it, to further all generations in the earth: and as others, to be
the cause of Fountains, Winds, Earthquakes, Vulcanoes, Storms, Saltness of the
Sea, etc. nor of the actual heat of our Bathes, although it be the most common
received opinion.

First for the place, it is not likely that the center of the earth, whither
all heavy things do tend, should be hollow, but rather more compact then any
other part of the earth, as likewise Valesius thinks; but if there be any
concavities, they are between the Center and the Superficies; and these
concavities being receptacles of water from the Sea, cannot also receive fire.
These two will not agree together in one place, but the one will expel the
other: for whereas some hold that Bitumen will burn in water, and is nourished
by it, it is absolutely false, as experience shows; and I have touched it among
the Bitumina. Agricola. Bacciusl. 1. cap. 19.


Moreover, if the heat which warms our Bathes did proceed from hence, there
must be huge vessels above the fire to contain water, whereby the fire might
heat it, and not be quenched by it. Also the vapors arising from hence, must
be hotter then water can endure, or be capable of; for as they ascend toward
the superficies of the earth, they must needs be cooled as they pass by Rocks,
or else they could not be congealed into water again: and after this
congelation, the water has lost most of his heat, as we find in our ordinary
distillations of Rose Water, etc. where we see our water to descend into the
receive; almost cold; so that they cannot derive our hot Bathes from hence.

Secondly, for the fire it self, although water and air may be received into
the bowels of the earth, yet there is great difficulty for fire. For the other
two need no nourishment to support them, as fire does. If there be not
competency of air to nourish the fire by venting his fuligious vapors,
howsoever there be fuel enough, it is suddenly quenched, and such huge and
flaming fire as this must be, will require more air then can there be yielded:
a great part thereof passing away through the secret creeks of Rocks, and
little or none entering through the Sea. And therefore daily experience shows,
that our mineral men are fain to sink new Shafts (as they call them) to admit
air to their works, otherwise their lights would go out. Although one would
think, that where many men may have room enough to work, there would be space
enough for air to maintain a few lights. The like we see in Cupping-glasses,
where the light goes out as soon as they are applied. Also there are no fires
perpetual, as hot Bathes are, but are either extinct, or keep not the same
tenor. Wherefore fire cannot be the cause of this constant heat of Bathes. It
must be a continual cause that can make a continual hea^. Also where fire is,
there will be smoke, for as it breeds exhalations, so it sends them forth. But
in most of our hot Bathes we find none of these dry exhalations. Moreover, fire
is more hardly pend in then air; yet we see that air does break forth:
wherefore fire should also make his way, having fuel enough to maintain it. So
they say it does in our Vulcanoes at Hecla in Iseland, AEtna in Sicicy, Vesuvio
in Campania, in Enaria, AEolia, Lipara, etc. But it is yet unproved that these
eruptions of fire do proceed from any deep cause, but only are kindled upon or
near the superficies of the earth, where there is air enough to feed it, and
means enough to kindle it by lightnings, or other casual means. Whereas in the
bowels of the earth, there is neither air to nourish it, nor any means to
kindle it; seeing neither the beams of the Sun, nor Wind, or other Exhalations,
nor any Antiperistasis, nor Lyme, nor Lightnings can do it. For the same
reasons that exclude the Beams of the Sun and exhalations, will likewise
exclude lightnings.

Thirdly, for the fuel, there are only two substances in the bowels of the
earth, which are apt fuels for fire, Bitumen and Sulphur. Douatus de aquis
Lucensibus lib. 1. cap. 18.


Sulphur is in such request with all men, as they think there can be no not
Bath without it: nay many hold, that if water do but pass through a Mine of
Brimstone, although it be not kindled, but actually cold, yet it will contract
from thence, not only a potential, but an actual heat. Gesaer. Epist. lib. 3.
page 90.
But we do manifestly find, that neither all hot waters are sulphurous, nor all
sulphurous waters hot (as is said before in Sulphur.)

The Bathes of Caldaneila and Avinian in agro Senensi, de Grotta in Viterbio,
de aquis in Pisano, Divi Johannis in agro Lacenss, Balneum Geber suilleri in
Halsatia, etc. are all hot, and yet give no sign of Sulphur, either by smell,
or taste, or quality, or effect. Contrariwise that all sulphurous waters are
not hot, may appear by the Bathes in Zurich in Helvetia, of Buda in Pannonia,
at Cure in Rhetia, Celenses in Germany. In Campania between Naples and
Pateolum, are many cold sulphurous Springs. At Brandula in agro Carpensi, etc.
All which Bathes show much Sulphur to be in them, and yet are cold. And no
marvel, for if we insuse any simple, be it never so hot potentially, yet it
will not make the liquor actually hot. Wherefore this Sulphur must burn before
it can give any actual heat to our Bathes; and then it must needs be subject to
the former difficulties, and also must be continually repaired by new
generations of matter, which actual fire cannot further, but rather hinder. The
fire generates nothing, but consumes all things. Lib. 1. cap. ult.


The like we may judge of Bitumen, that unless it be kindled, it can yield no
heat to our Bathes; as Solinander reports of a Bituminous Mine in Westfalia, in
agro Tremonensi, where going down into the Grove, he found much water, having
the smell, taste, and color of Bitumen, and yet cold. Agricola imputes the
chief cause of the heating of Bathes, unto the fuel of Bitumen; Baccius on the
other side to Sulphur. But in my opinion, they need not contend about it. For,
as I have showed before in the examples of mineral waters, there are many hot
Springs from other minerals, where neither Sulphur nor Bitomen have been
observed to be. John de Dondis, and Julius Alexandrinus were much unsatisfied
in these opinions, and did rather acknowledge their ignorance, then that they
would subscribe unto them. I need not dispute whether this fire be in Alveis,
or in Canalibus, or in vicinis partibus, etc. because I think it is in neither
of them.

CHAP. XIV.
The Authors opinion concerning the cause of actual heat, and medicinal virtue
in Mineral Waters.

Wherefore finding all the former opinions to be doubtful and weakly grounded
concerning the causes of the actual heat of Bathes; let me presume to propound
another, which I persuade my self to be more true and certain. But because it
has not been mentioned by any Author that I know, I have no man's steps to
follow in it. Avia Doctorum peragro loca, nullius ante Trita solo.
I travel where no path is to be seen
Of any learned foot that here has been.


Which makes me fearful in the delivery of it. But if I do err in it, I hope I
shall not be blamed; seeing I do it in disquisition of the truth.

I have in the former Chapters set down mine opinion concerning the generation
of minerals, that they have their seminaries in the earth replenished with
spirits, and faculties attending them; which meeting with convenient matter and
adiuvant causes, do proceed to the generation of several species, according to
the nature of the efficient, and aptnes of the matter. In this work of
generation, as there is generatio unius, so there must be corruption alterius.
And this cannot be done without a superior power, which by moisture, dilating
it self, works upon the matter, like a ferment to bring it to his own
purpose. This motion between the agent spirit, and the patient matter,
proceeds from an actual heat ( ex motu fit calor) which serves as an
instrument to further this work. What Dr. French has said against this
opinion, may be seen if the 19, 20, and 21. pages of his Yorkshire Spaw.
And this motion being natural and not violent produces a natural heat which
furthers generations; not a destructive heat. For as cold dulls and benumbs all
faculties, so heat does quicken them, This I showed in the example of Malt. It
is likewise true in every particular grain of Corn sown in the ground, although
by reason they lie single, their actual heat is not discernable by touch, yet
we find that external heat and moisture do further their spiring, as adiuvant
causes; where the chief agent is the generative spirit in the seed. So I take
it to be in minerals, with those distinctions before mentioned. And in this all
generations agree, that an actual heat, together with moisture, is requisite:
otherwise there can neither be the corruption of the one, nor the generation of
the other. This actual heat is less sensible in small seeds and tender bodies,
then it is in the great and plentiful generations, and in hard and compact
matter: for hard bodies are not so easily reduced to a new form, as tender
bodies are; but require both more spirit and longer time to be wrought upon.
And therefore whereas vegetable generations are brought to perfection in a few
months, these mineral generations do require many years, as has been observed
by Mineral men. Moreover, these generations are not terminated with one
production, but as the seed gathers strength by enlarging it self, so it
continually proceeds to subdue more matter under his government: so as, where
once any generation is begu^, it continues many ages, and seldom gives over.
As we see in the Iron Mines of Illua, the Tin Mines in Cornwall, the Lead Mines
at Mendip, and the Peak, etc. which do not only stretch further in extent of
ground, than has been observed heretofore; but also are renewed in the same
groves which have been formerly wrought, as our Tinners in Cornwall do
acknowledge; and the examples of Illua and Saga before mentioned, do confirm.
This is a sufficient means for the perpetuity of our hot Springs; that if the
actual heat proceed from hence, there need be no doubt of the continuance of
them, nor of their equal tenor or degree of heat.

Now for the nature of this heat, it is not a destructive heat, as that of fire
is, but a generative heat joined with moisture. It needs no air for
eventilation, as the other does. It is in degree hot enough for the hottest
Baths that are, if it be not too remote from the place where the water issues
forth. It is a means to impart the qualities of minerals to our waters, as well
as heat, by reason the minerals are then in solutis principiis, in their liquid
forms, and not consolidated into hard bodies. For when they are consolidated,
there are few of them that will yield any quality to water, unless they be the
concrete juyces, or any actual heat, because that is procured by the contiguity
of bodies, when one part lies upon another, and not when they are grown in
corpus continuum; as we see in Malt, where by turning and changing the
contiguity, the heat is increased, but by suffering it to unite, is quenched:
But before consolidation, any of them may yield either spirit or juice, or
tincture to the waters, which by reason of their tenuity (as is said before)
are apt to imbibe them. Now if actual fire kindled in the earth, should meet
with these minerals whilst they are in generation, it would dissipate the
spirits, and destroy the minerals. Thurneiser Alchimia magna lib. 4.c.8.
If it meet with them after consolidation, it will never be able to attenuate
them so, as to make them yield their qualities to water. For we never find any
metals or minerals melted in the earth, which must be, if the heat of actual
fire were such as is imagined: neither do we ever find any flores of metal
sublimed in the earth. This natural heat is daily found by our Mineral men in
the Mines, so as oftentimes they are not able to touch them, as Agricola
testifies; although by opening their groves and admission of air, it should be
well qualified. Whereas on the other side, it was never observed, that any
actual kindled fire was ever seen by workmen in the earth, which were likely to
be, if these fires were so frequent.

Wherefore seeing we see that Mineral waters do participate with all sorts of
Minerals, as well metals as other, as has been showed in the particular
examples of all of them: seeing also that few of them, unless Mineral juyces,
are able to impart their quality to water, as they are consolidated, but only
as they are in solutis principiis, and whilst they are in generation, as is
agreed upon by all Authors: seeing also this natural heat of fermentation must
necessarily be present for the perfecting of their generation, and is
sufficient, in regard of the degree of heat to make our Baths as hot as they
are: seeing also that the other adventitious fire would rather destroy these
Minerals, than further them: seeing also we cannot imagine it either likely, or
possible, without manifold difficulties and absurdities: I do conclude that
both the actual heat of Baths, and the Mineral qualities which they have, are
derived unto them by means of this fermenting heat: The cause of the heat in
Bath, assigned by Dr. Rouzee, is their motion and agitation in the bowels of
the Earth, falling from Cataracts and broken Concavities in the same. But
afterward, lighting on this opinion of Dr. Jordens, he is so far from
disliking, that he apdeservedly plauds it, and callls this work learned and
elaborate. Vid. Lud. Rouz. Tr. of Tunbr. water, p.20, 21. and 22. in margin.
Which is still in fieri, not in facto esse, as the Schoolmen term it: and
therefore makes the heat continual.

Examples might be brought from all kind of generations, and from some
artificial works, of this sermenting heat proceeding from the seeds of natural
things. Martin. de prima generations.
These seeds containing the species and kinds of natural bodies, are not from
the Elements, but are placed in the Elements, where they propagate their
species and individuals, according to their nature, and have their due times
and seasons of appearing upon the Stage of the World. Animals have their set
times when their spermatick spirits are in turgescence, some once, some twice a
year, and some oftener: especially in the Spring; Vere magis, quia Vere calor
redit ossibus; as Virgil speaks of Mares: only man in regard of his excellency
above other creatures, is not so confinde.

Vegetables have likewise their seasons of setting and planting, as they may
have the earth and the season most convenient: yet at any time, if their seeds
get moisture and heat to dilate them, they will ferment and attempt the
production of more individuals: but oftentimes the Artist does abuse this
intention of nature, and converts it to his ends: and oftentimes nature being
set in action to proceed a potentia in actum, does want convenient means to
maintain her work: as when we see a Rick of Hay or Corn which has received
moisture, burnt to ashes. So in the making of Malt, or Woad, or Bread, or Beer,
or Wine, etc. we make use of this generative spirit for our ends: that we may
stir up, and quicken it. Otherwise our Bread would not be so favou^y, our Beer
would be but Wort, our Wine would be but Must or Plum-pottage, and want those
spirits which we desire; and which lie dead and benumbed in the seeds, until
they come to fermentation. And in all these there is an actual heat, although
it appear not in liquid things, so well as in dry: because it is there quenched
by the abundance of moisture; yet we may observe active spirits in it, by the
bubling and hissing, and working of it. This is evident in artificial Wines,
which may be made of Figs, Da^es, dried Raising, Currants, Slows, Strawberries,
Brambleberries, and such like, when they are infused in water. They will
ferment of their own accord, by virtue of the seeds which are in them, and make
as good and as natural Wine as the juice of the green fruit, as I have often
proved. The Turks have a drink which they Call Couset or Posset, which is made
of Barley after such a manner, as Bellonius reports in his observations. Lib.2:
cap. 98.
It seems also that the Scythians drink was made in this manner, which Virgil
speaks of. Hic noctem ludo ducunt, and pocula laeti
Fermento atque acidis imitantur vitea sorbis. Georg. 3.

They dance and quaff, by the Moonshine,
Fermented juice of Slows, like Wine.


And I persuade my self that we have not yet attained to a perfect artifice of
our Beer and Ale, which stands upon the same grounds, and may be wrought in
such a manner, if they would take the pains to try some conclusions upon it. It
might save much fuel, and vessel, and labor, and perhaps with advantage in the
product. For I see but two points to be observed in the working of it: the one
is to extract the substance of the Malt into water: the other to give it his
due fermentation. And both of these may be done without boiling. But the
artifice will differ somewhat from Wine, and will require many conclusions to
be tried upon it, before it be brought to perfection. I do mention these
artifices only to show the power of this seminary and fermenting spirit, and
how it may be drawn to other uses for our benefit. As this is found in
vegetables, so likewise in Minerals; which as they have this generative spirit
for the propagation of their species, as has been showed before, so they have
this means of fermentation, to bring them from a potential quality, to an
actual existence. And as their matter is more plentiful, and in consistence
more hard and compact; so these spirits must be more vigorous and powerful to
subdue it: and consequently the heat of their fermentation must be in a higher
degree, then it is in other generations. A brief collection of the the Authors
arguments against the opinions of others touching the actual heat of Bathes.


Now having showed the erroneous opinions of others concerning this actual heat
of Bathes, and explained our own conceit of the true cause of it; let us
collect our arguments together, the principal whereof are here and there
dispersed in this Treatise, Quem nos stramineum pro tempore fecimus,
Which for the present I have made of Straw.


Hoping that hereafter some worthy pen may handle this argument more
accurately, and give it a better flourish, Et dare perpetuo caelestia fila
metallo.
And on firm metal lasting threads bestow.


We must not imagine that the government and ordering of the world and nature
in a constant course, is performed by miracle, but that natural effects have
natural causes, and must be both under the same genus. Wherefore following the
ordinary distribution, seeing it comprehends all, and not questioning the
celestial bodies, whether they be elementary or no, that is, subject to
alterations, as intention and remission, generation and corruption, etc. We say
that this heat must proceed either from the superior and celestial bodies, as
the Spheres and Stars, or from the inferior or sublunary.

From the superior Spheres or Globes it cannot proceed, seeing (as is showed
before) they are neither endowed with such a degree of native heat, nor can
acquire it accidentally by their motion, being thin and liquid bodies; neither,
if they had it, can they convey it unto the earth, but by their beams, which
are not able to retain it as they pass through the cold region of the air, nor
able to warm that, although it be nearer to their fountain of heat. Wherefore
if these beams can any way do it, it must be by their motion and reflection
upon the earth: and this is no constant heat, but varieth according as the
beams are perpendicular or oblique, and according as the air is clear or
cloudy, etc.. And as they are not able to give this constant heat, so the earth
in her bowels is not capable to receive it, being hindered by the density of
the earth and rocks, and the heat of reflection taken away before it can come
three foot deep.

From the inferior parts of the world if it proceed, it must be either from
the Elements, or from mixed bodies. From the Elements it cannot come, but from
fire; for all the other Elements are cold, as I have showed, especially the
earth where this heat is engendered.

And as for the Element of Fire, seeing we know not where to find it, neither,
if it be any where, does it perform the office of an Element in production and
nutrition of creatures; as Aristotle faith, Ignis nil generat, and therefore
nil nutrit; 3. De genesis animal.
nam nutritio fit ex iisdem ex quibus constat: therefore as it begets nothing,
so it nourishes nothing; and so cannot be an Element, nor as an Element
maintain this heat of Bathes. 2. De genesis animal, cap. 3.
But contrariwise if it have no power of begetting or nourishing any thing, it
must have a power of destroying or hindering nature in her proceedings; for
nature will admit of no vacuum or idle thing. Also seeing Nature uses no
violent means to maintain her self, this elementary fire cannot be penned in the
center of the earth, being of a thin subtilnature, and naturally aspiring
upwards: and if it have any place assigned unto it, it must be above the other
Elements, and then it cannot be drawn downwards against his nature, and that
continually, without breach of the order and course of nature. And whereas they
place the Element of Fire under the concave of the Moon, being in it self lucid
and resplendent, it is strange that it is not seen by us, neither makes our
nights light. For although by reason of his transparency it does not terminate
our sight, yet it should remove the obscurity of our nights much better then
the Via lactea. Moreover, if it were there, we must see the Stars through a
double Diaphanum, one of air, and another of fire, and so would make a double
refraction: which is elegantly confuted by John Pena and Conr^dus Aslacus. In
praefat. in Opticum Euclidis. De triplici caelo lib.^. c.4.


But there is another thing substituted in the place of this element of fire,
and maintained by air, and by mineral substances in the earth; which is neither
an Element, nor a mixed body, nor any substance at all, but a mere quality: and
this is preferred by most to be the cause of the heat of our Bathes. And this
is our common kitchin-fire, which is kindled by violent motion, maintained by
servel, without which it cannot subsist, and extinguished by his contrary. And
although it may be derived by communication or coition, as one candle lights
another, yet originally it is kindled by violent motion, and what violent
motion can there be in the bowels of the earth to strike fire, or who shall be
the fueller? Exhalations and lightnings cannot do it, being aereal meteors, and
no more penetrable then the beams of the Sun. And therefore although they may
kindle a Vulcano upon the surface of the earth, yet they cannot pierce deep,
and their very reflection upon the superficies of the earth takes away their
strength: so as they can neither kindle new fire, nor commucate that which is
kindled to any other fuel. For if it be by communication or coition, that must
be by touch, per contactum, and then in the earth it can make but one fire, and
not many, being not distinct in place, and must increase in heat: and then it
will not keep a constant tenor, as our Bathes do.

Secondly for the nourishment of it, being a quality, it must have a subject,
that is fuel, and it must have means to vent the fuliginous vapors which it
breeds in the dissolution of the fuel, lest they recoyle and quench the fire;
as also there must be conveyance for the ashes which will fall down continually
upon the fire, and quench it. Moreover, by consuming such great quantities of
Sulphur and Bitumen, and by mollifying and breaking of Rocks, it would cause a
great sinking of the earth in those places; as we see in our Vulcanoes, where
whole mountains have been consumed and brought to even ground.

Thirdly, this fire being a quality, is subject to intention and remission, and
to utter extinguishment, not only by want of fuel, which cannot be regenerated
where this actual fire is, nor for want of vent, or choking of ashes, etc. but
also by reason of the abundance of water which the earth receives for the
generations of Minerals, which being opposite to fire, would quench it.
Wherefore we cannot rely upon any subterranean fire for the maintenance of our
hot Bathes.

From the air this heat of Bathes cannot proceed, seeing it is neither hot in
it self, as has been proved, nor can get any heat by motion, being of a thin
liquid substance, which no attrition or collision can make hot. And as for
aereal meteors, bred from exhalations, and kindled, as is imagined, by an
Antiperistasis: if they be bred in the air, they are not able to penetrate into
the bowels of the earth, as has been said before: if in the earth, besides the
difficulty of finding room enough for such plentiful exhalations as those must
be which procure lightning and thunder, and the vanity of their Antiperistasis
to kindle these exhalations, as has been she wed before; it is a sufficient
refutation to take away the subject of the question, that is, all subterranean
fire, as I hope I have done; and then we need not dispute about the means of
kindling it, etc. these momentary meteors being produced only to kindle, and
not to maintain this fire.

From the water no man will derive this fire, being a cold and moist Element,
and apt to quench it; unless it be by dilating the seminary spirits of natural
species; and then they concur with us, and renouncing the actual fire, do
confirm our heat of fermentation.

From the earth some have imagined an inbred heat, ingenitum terrae calorem,
whereby it seems they had some glimmering of this light which we have given,
but have left it in as great obscurity as the Antipenstasis or Antipathy; and
earth being a cold and dry Element, cannot be the cause of this heat, as it is
earth.

So as it is manifest that naturally the Elements cannot procure this heat of
Bathes; and by violent motion they can do as little. For the earth being
immovable, cannot be stirred by any violent motion; and the other three
Elements, as Fire, Air, and Water, being thin and liquid substances, can
procure no heat by any motion or collision either upon themselves, or upon the
earth; especially in the bowels of the earth, where all is quiet, and no room
or scope for any such motion as this must be. So that neither the other three
Elements, nor the earth, either in the whole, or in the parts, can be the cause
hereof by any violent motion.

From mixed bodies if this heat come, it must be from animals, vegetables, or
minerals. Animals are not so plentiful in the earth as to cause this heat of
Bathes, either alive or dead. We read of subterranean animals which have both
motion, and sense, and understanding, in Vincentius in speculo naturali; in
Lactantius; in Agricola, de animantibus subterraneis; in Bellonius, Ortelius,
Paracelsus, etc. who calls them Gnomi, the Germans Bergmaenlin, the French
Rabat, the Cornish-men Fairies. The Danes are generally persuaded that there
are such creatures. But if any such living creatures be able to procure this
heat, it cannot be by their hot complexions, but it must be by violence and
striking of fire. Perhaps Democritus has hired them to make his lyme there, or
some other to erect forges for thunder, lightning, and such like fireworks.
Brontesque Steropesque and nudus membra Pyracmon.
But these opinions deserve no confutation.


From dead animals in their putrefaction some heat may appear, but such as
neither for the degree, nor for the continuance, can be answerable to our
Bathes.

For vegetables there is the same reason as for dead animals; neither does the
earth breed such plenty of these in her bowels, as to procure a months heat to
a tun of water, in one place.

Wherefore we have nothing to ground upon but mineral substances, whereof the
earth affords enough.

For there is no part of the earth but is replenished with mineral seeds. And
although some may think that because minerals are not found, or not wrought in
all places: and that some waters are also found which do not participate of the
virtues of minerals, that therefore our hot Bathes proceed not from the
fermentation of minerals, but from some other cause; they are mistaken. For
although metals are not frequent in some places, or at the least not
discovered; yet a man shall hardly dig ten foot deep in any place, but he shall
find rocks of stone, which have their generation as well as other minerals, or
some of the Salts, or Bitumina, or Spirits, or mean metals, etc. And how can
Bathes receive mineral qualities, but from minerals? Therefore where Bathes
are, there must be Minerals, although where Minerals are, there are not always
Bathes, But perhaps they are not so accumulated, as by their contiguity they
are able to yield any manifest heat; their matter being dispersed as grains of
corn sown in a field, which by reason of their lying single, do not show a
sensible heat in their fermentation; or most metals breeding between a Hanger
and a Lieger, which Agricola calls pendens and jacens, are seldom above a foot
thick, and therefore cannot yield much heat to our waters. And this is the
cause why we have so few Bathes from Gold, Silver, Tin, Lead, etc. But where
much matter is accumulated together, the very contiguity (one part lying upon
another) will make a manifest heat, until it grow to a corpus continuum, when
the generation is perfected, and then the heat is extinguished, Or perhaps they
have not water so plentiful as may yield a living spring, although they may
have sufficient for the use of their generation. Or perhaps where they break
forth, they meet with desert sands, as in Arabia, China, Africa, etc. Which
drink up the water, and hinder the eruption of it. And whereas there are some
hot springs found which do not show any mineral quality in them, the reason of
this may be the want of concrete juice, which, as I have said before, is the
medium of communicating mineral qualities and substances with water. For
without them, water is as unapt to imbibe minerals, as it is to unite with
oil. So as water may of it self receive actual heat from the fermentation of
minerals, but not their qualities, without the mediation of some of the
concrete juices: as contrariwise we find some Fouutains that receive mineral
qualities, and yet are cold: whereof I have given many examples. The reason
whereof is either for that they have passed a long way, and by many Meanders
from the place of generation to the place of their eruption, and so have lost
their heat; or else the concrete juices, which will dissolve in water without
any heat, being impregnated with other minerals, do impart them to water, and
yet without heat. But to say that there is any earth without mineral seeds, is
to make a vacuum in rerum natura, and to destroy the use of the Elements. It is
true that the seeds do do not always meet with opportunity to display
themselves, and sometimes they are fain to serve under other colors, which are
more predominant: but there is no part of the earth without some seeds or other.

And from hence we must derive the original of the actual heat of Bathes: for
nothing else in the world will serve our turn to procure so lasting and so
uniform a heat unto them; and that not by kindling any actual fire about them,
for most of our minerals whereof our Bathes consist, and from whence they
receive both their actual heat and virtues, will not burn, neither have any
actual heat in themselves, being all cold to the touch, but receive it by a
fermenting heat which they have in their generation: without which there is no
generation for any thing. And this heat continues so long as the work of
generation continues: which being once begun, does not cease in many ages, by
reason of the plenty of matter which the earth yields, and the firmness and
solidity thereof. And although after that the minerals have attained to their
perfection, this heat cease, yet the generation extends further then where it
first began, and enlarges it self every way, the works of nature being
circular: so as the water which was heated by the first generation, cannot
avoid the other succeeding generations, but must meet with them either behind
or before, beneath or above, on the one side, or on the other (especially
seeing no generation can proceed without water:) and yet keeps the same tenor
and degree of heat, according to the nature of the minerals fermenting, and to
the distance from the place of eruption. And this is a far more probable cause
of the continuance of our Bathes, then any subterranean destructive fire can
be, or any other of the supposed causes can yield. I do not deny but that hot
Bathes may cease and become cold; as Aristotle says of Salt Fountains which
are cold, 2 Meteorol.c.2;
that they were once hot, before the original of their heat was extinct: which
I interpret to be when the work of generation ceased, and the Salt brought to
his perfection. But I do not read of any hot Bathes that have ceased: unless
near onto some Vulcano, where either the sinking of Rocks has altered the
course of them, as at Tripergula and Baia, or the flaming fire which heated
them at their eruption being extinguished, as in the AEolian Islands. These
Vulcanoes are far more subject to decay then our generative heat, because they
consume their fuel; this does not, but increases it daily, viresque acquirit
eundo. Of the other Ovid says, Nee quae sulphureis ardet fornacibus AEtna
Ignea semper erit; neque enim fuit ignea semper.
AEtna with its sulphurous flames will die,
And as a kindling had, will want supply.


But of this we can hardly bring an Instance of any that have decayed; because
where a generation is begun, there seldom or never wants matter to propagate
and enlarge it. And seeing minerals have not their seeds in their individuals,
as animals and vegetables have, but in their wombs, as has been showed before;
it were to be feared that there would be a decay of mineral species, and so a
vacuum left in nature, if these generations should be no more durable then the
other. Animals are propagated by begetting of their species, the power whereof
is in every individual, which, no doubt, will not give over this trade as long
as the world lasts. Vegetables are also fruitful in their kinds, every one
producing 100, or perhaps 1000 seeds of individuals yearly, to perpetuate their
species. Minerals have no such means, but only have their seeds in their wombs,
whereby they are propagated: and if these generations, being longer in
perfecting of their species, were not supplied with a larger extent for their
productions; nature had been defective in not providing sufficient means for
their perpetuity, as well as for others, and might easily suffer a decay, and a
vacuity of mineral species; which agrees not with the providence of nature, and
the ornament of the world. The necessity hereof depends upon the first
benediction, ( crescite and multiylicamini) which, no doubt belongs as well to
minerals in their kinds, as it does to animals and vegetables, and by virtue
hereof we see that they are propagated daily, as I have proved before, Cap. 11.
Trism^gistus in Asclepio.c.7. In Pimandro cap.1.
And this is that necessity whereof Hypocrates speaks, and that fatum natural
inharens rebus ipsis, Natural fate inherent in things themselves, as Lipsius
faith; and that Lex Adrastiae mentioned by Aristotle and Gal^^, Locis aute
citatis, so firmly established, as nothing can contradict it. Lib. de constat.
Arithmetic, Geometry, and Logic, which are but attendants upon nature, have
their principles so firmly grounded, as nothing can shake them; and shall we
think that nature it self is grounded upon weaker foundations? wherefore we
need not doubt of the perpetuity of these generations, but that as some parts
attain to their perfection, so other puts will be always in fieri or in via ad
generationem: whereby our Bathes will never fail of their heat or their virtues.

This I hope is susficient for the confuting of other opinions, and the
clearing of mine own from all absurdities concerning the degree of heat, which
is as much as the nature of water can endure without utter dissipation:
concerning the equal tenor of the heat, the duration of (...), the
participation of mineral qualities, etc. The other kind of confirmation which
we call Apodeictical, is also here and there dispersed in this Discourse: as
that all minerals have their continual generation: that this generation is not
without heat and moisture, which do necessarily attend all generations: that
few mineral substances or qualities can be imparted to water, but whilst they
are in generation, and yet we find them much impregnated with them: that our
Miners do find an actual heat, and in a high degree, in the digging of
Minerals, where the fermentation is not thoroughly extinct: that we observe the
like course of nature in the generations of animals and vegetables: that we are
led to the acknowledgement hereof by many artificial conclusions and artifices,
etc. Wherefore I forbear to make any larger repetition hereof.

And this is in brief (though plainly delivered) my opinion concerning the
actual heat of Baths, and of the mineral qualities which we find in them; which
I refer to the censures of those that be learned.

There are two other motions which resemble this fermentation: The one is Motus
dilatationis, the Other Antipatheticus. Motus dilatationis is evident in Lime,
in Alum, in Copperass, and other concrete juyces, whereby the affusion of
water, the Salt in the Lime, or the concrete juyces being suddenly dissolved,
there is by this motion, an actual heat procured for a time, able to kindle any
combustible matter put to it.

The like we observe in those stone Coals, called metal Coals, which are mixed
with a Marchesit containing some mineral juice, which receiving moisture, does
dilate it self, and grows so hot, as oftentimes great heaps of those Coals are
kindled thereby, and burnt before their time; as has been seen at Puddle-Wharf
in London, and at Newcastle. But this is much different from out fermentation.

Another Motus resembling this fermentation, is that which is attributed to
Antipathy, when disagreeing substances being put together, do fight, and make a
manifest actual heat; as Antimony and Sublimat, oil of Vitriol and oil of
Tartar, Alum liquor and Urine, Lees, Chalk, etc. But the reason of this
disagreement is in their Salts, whereof one is astringent, the other relaxing;
the one of easy dissolution in water, the other of hard dissolution, etc.
where one mineral hinders the dissolution or congelation of another; and not by
reason of any antipathy: for it is not likely that nature would produce two
contrary substances mixed like atoms in o^ subject, but that in their very
generations the o^ would be an impediment to the other. So in vegetables where
one plant sucks away the nourishment from another, we call it antipathy. B^^ if
we examine aright what this sympathy and antipathy is, we shall find it to be
nothing but a refuge of ignorance, when not being able to conceive the true
reasons of such actions and passions in natural things, we fly sometimes to
indefinite generalities, and sometimes to this inexplicable sympathy and
antipathy; attributing voluntary, and sensitive actions and passions to
insensible substances. This motus also is much different from fermentation, as
may easily appear by the former description. And thus much for this point of
fermentation, which I hope will give better satisfaction then any of the former
opinions.

CHAP. XV.
By what means it may be discovered what minerals any water contains.

THE nature of minerals and their generations being handled, and from thence
the reasons drawn, both of the actual heat of Bathes, and of their qualities:
Now it is fit we should seek out some means how to discover what minerals are
in any Bath, that thereby we may the better know their qualities, and what use
to make of them for our benefit. Many have attempted this discovery, but by
such weak means, and upon such poor grounds, as it is no marvail if they have
failed of their purpose: for they have contented themselves with a bare
distillation or evaporation of the water, and observing the sediment, have
thereby judged of the minerals, unless perhaps they find some manifest taste,
or smell, or color in the water, or some unctuous matter swimming above it.
Some desire no other argument of Sulphur and Bitumen, but the actual heat: as
though no other minerals could yield an actual heat, but those two: But this
point requires better consideration; and I have been so large in describing the
natures and generations of minerals, because without it, we cannot discern what
minerals we have in our waters, nor judge of the qualities and use of them.

Our Minerals therefore, are either confused or mixed with the water. If they
be confused they are easily discerned: for they make the water thick and pudly,
and will either swim above, as Bitumen will do, or sink to the bottom, as
Earth, Sulphur, and some terrestrial juices; for no confused water will remain
long unseparated. If they are perfectly mixed with the water, then their
mixture is either corporal, where the very body of the Mineral is imbibed in
the water, or spiritual, where either some exhalation, or spirit, or tincture
is imparted to the water.

Corporally there are no minerals mixed with water, but juices, either liquid,
as succus la^idescens, metallificus, etc. before they are perfectly congealed
into their natural consistence, or concrete, as Salt, Nitre, Vitriol, and
Alum, these concrete juices do not dissolve themselves in water, but
oftentimes bring with them some tincture or spirit from other Minerals. For as
water is apt to recive juices, and tinctures, and spirits from animals, and
vegetables; so are concrete juices, being dissolved, apt to extract tinctures
and spirits from minerals, and to communicate them with water. And there are no
Mines, but have some of these concrete juices in them, to dissolve the
materials of them, for their better union and mixture: and there are few
minerals or metals, but have some of them incorporated with them; as we see in
Iron, and Copper, and Tin, and Lead, etc. And this is the reason that water
being long kept in Vessels of any of these metals, will receive a taste or
smell from them, especially if it be attenuated, either by heat, or by addition
of some sour juice; and yet more, if the metals be fyled into powder as we see
in making Chalibeat Wine, or Sugar of Lead, or Puttie from Tin, or Verdegrease
from Copper. There may be also a mixture of spiritual Substance from minerals,
whilst they are in generation, and in Solutis Principiis: the water passing
through them, and the rather if it be actually hot, for then it is more apt to
imbibe it, and will contain more in it, being attenuated by heat, then being
cold; as we see in Urins, which though they be full of humors, yet make no
great show of them so long as they are warm, but being cold, do settle then to
the bottom.

These spiritual substances are hardly discerned in our Bathes, but by the
effects; for they leave no residence after evaporation; and are commonly as
volatile in sublimation as the water it self: neither do they increase the
weight of the water, nor much alter the taste or smell of them, unless they be
very plentiful. Wherefore we have no certain way to discover them, but by the
effects. We may conjecture somewhat of them by the Mines which are found near
unto the Bathes, and by the mud which is brought with the water. But that may
deceive, as coming from the passages through which the water is conveyed, or,
perhaps, from the sweat and strigments of men's bodies which bathe in them. The
corporal substances are found, either by sublimation or by precipitation, By
sublimation, when being brought to the state of congelation, and sticks of Wood
put into it, within a few days, the concrete juices will shoot upon the wood;
in Needles, if it be Nitre; in Squares, if be Salt; and in Clods and Lumps, if
it be Alum or Coperass, and the other mineral substances which the waters have
received, will either incorporate a tincture with them, or if it be more
terr^strial, will settle and separate from it, and by drying it at a gentle
fire, will show from what house it comes, either by color, taste, smell, or
virtue: There is another way by precipitation, whereby those mineral substances
are stricken down from their concrete juices which held them, by addition of
some opposite substance. And this is of two sorts: either Salts, as Tartar,
Soap-ashes, Kelps, Urine, etc. Or four juices as Vinegar, Lemons, oil of
Vitriol, Sulphur, etc. In which I have observed that the Salts are proper to
blew colors, and the other to red; for example, take a piece of Scarlet
cloth, and wet it in oil of Tartar (the strongest of that kind) and it
presently becomes blew: dip it again in oil of Vitriol, and it becomes red
again. P^notus has a strange precipitating water from Tin, Mercury Alkali,
etc. which separate any minerals Pidr^ ^it p^^es authorem.

These are the chief grounds of discovering mineral waters, according to which
any man may make trial of what waters he pleases. I have been desirous
heretofore to have attempted some discovery of our Bathes, according to these
principles: but being thought (by some) either not convenient, or not useful,
I was willing to save my labor, which perhaps might have seemed not to be
worth thanks; and in these respects am willing now also to make but a bare
mention of them.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the use of Mineral Waters, inwardly, outwardly. In this Chapter is showed
the inward use of them, first general; then particuly of the hot waters of
Bathe.

THE nature and generations of Minerals being handled, and how our mineral
waters receive their impressions, and actual heat from thence; and by what
means they are to be tried, what Minerals are in each of them. Now we are to
show the uses of them; which must be drawn from the qualities of the Minerals
whereof they consist; which are seldom one or two, but commonly more. These
qualities are either the first, as hot, cold, moist, and dry: or the second, as
penetrating, astringent, opening, resolving, attracting, cleansing, mollifying,
etc. For the first qualities, it is certain and agreed upon by all Authors,
that all mineral waters do dry exceedingly, as proceeding from earth; but some
of those do cool withal, and some do heat.

Cooling waters are good for hot distempers of the Liver, Stomach, Kidneys,
Bladder, Womb, etc. Also for Salt distillations, sharp humors, light
obstructions of the Meseraicks, etc.

Heating waters are good for cold affects of the Stomach, Bowels, Womb,
Seminary Vessels, cold distillations, Palsies, etc.

For the second qualities, cleansing waters are good in all Ulcers, especially
of the Guts.

Mollifying waters, for all hard and schirrous Tumors.

Astringent waters, for all Fluxes, etc. and so of the rest.

Now these waters are used either inwardly or outwardly.

Inwardly, either by mouth, or by injection.

By mouth, either in potion, or in Broths, Juleps, etc.

Galen never used them imwardly, because he judged their qualities to be
discovered by experience, rather then by reason. 6 De tuenda sanitat. cap.9.
And seeing we find many of them to be venomous, and deadly, as proceeding from
Arsenick, Sandaracha, Cadmia, etc. We had need be very wary in the inward use
of them.

Neptunes Well in Tarracina was found to be so deadly, as it was therefore
stopped up. By Monpellier at Perant is a Well which kills all the Fowls that
drink of it; the lake Avernus kills the Fowls that fly over it; so does the
vapor arising from Charons Den between Naples and Puteolum. So there are
diverse waters in Savoy and Rhetia, which breed swellings in the thro^^. Others
proceeding from Gipsum do strange (...) But where we find waters to proceed from
wholesome Minerals, and such as are convenient, and proper for our intents,
there we may be bold to use them as well inwardly as outwardly: yet so as we do
not imagine them to be such absolute remedies, as that they are of themselves
able to cure diseases without either rules for the use of them, or without
other helps adjoined to them. For as it is not enough for a man to get a good
Damasco or Bilbo-blade to defend himself withal, unless he learn the right use
of it from a Fencer; so it is not enough to get a medicine and remedy for any
disease, unless it be rightly used, and this right use must come from the
Physician, who knows how to apply it, and how to prepare the body for it, what
to add and join with it, how to govern and order the use of it, how to prevent
such inconveniences as may happen by it, etc.

Wherefore, where we speak of any Mineral water, or of any other medicine that
is proper for such and such a grief, we must be so understood, that the
medicine is not wise enough to cure the disease of it self, no more than a
sword is able of it self to defend a man, or to offend his enemy, but
according to the right and skillful use of it. And as it is not possible for a
Fencer to set down absolute rules in writing for h^^ Art, whereby a man may be
able in reading them to defend himself; no more is the Physician possibly able
to direct the particular uses of his remedy, whereby a patient may cure himself
without demonstration and the particular direction of the Physician. It is
true, that we have general rules to guide us in the cure of diseases, which are
very true and certain; yet when we come to apply them to particular persons,
and several constitutions, these general rules are not sufficient to make a
cure, but it must be varied according to substance. Hereupon we daily find,
that those patients which think to cure themselves, out of a little reading of
some rules or remedies, are oftentimes dangerously deceived. And this is enough
to intimate generally concerning the uses of our Mineral waters.

Inwardly we find great and profitable use of such waters as proceed from
Nitre, Alum, Vitriol, Sulphur, Bitumen, Iron, Copper, etc. Examples whereof I
have set down before in the several Minerals, referring the particular uses of
each to such Authors as have purposely described them.

My intent is chiefly to apply my self to those Baths of Bath in
Summerset-shire; which consisting, as I judge, principally of Bitumen, with
Nitre, and some Sulphur, I hold to be of great use both inwardly and outwardly.
Baths of Bath consist principally of Bitumen With Nitre, and some Sulphur.
And I am sorry that I dare not commend the inward use of them as they deserve,
in regard I can hardly be persuaded that we have the water pure, as the springs
yield them, but do fear, lest where we take them, they may be mixed with the
water of the Bath. If this doubt were cleared, I should not doubt to commend
them inwardly, to hear, dry, mollify, discuss, glutinate, dissolve, open
obstractions, cleanse the kidneys and bladder, ease cholicks, comfort the
matrix, mitigate fits of the mother, help barrenness proceeding from cold
humors, etc. as Tabernomoutanus affirms of other Bituminous Baths. Thesauri
aquarii pagecap. 40.
Also in regard of the Nitre, they cut and dissolve gross humors, and cleanse
by urine. In regard of the Sulphur, they dry and resolve, and mollify, and
attract, and are especially good for uterine affects proceeding from cold and
windy humors.

And I would wish these waters to be drunk hot as they are, for better
penetration, and less offense to the stomach. The ancient Grecians and Romans
did drink most of their water and wine hot, as we find in many Authors, which
Salmuth has diligently collected: and Anthonius Percius has purposely written
a book of it, entitaled Dei bever caldo castumato da gli Antichi. Is
Pancirollum de deperditis page 540.
We find also that it is in use at this day, both in the East Indies and in
Turkey, where they have a drink called Capha, sold ordinarily in Taverns, and
drunk hot, although in the Summer. Prosper. Alpinus de medic. Agyptioiuml.
4.c.3. De vita and mart page 304.
Verulamius does marvel that it is so much grown out of use, and advises to
drink our first draught at our meals, hot. There is great reason for it, both
for preservation of health, and for cure of many diseases. The stomach being a
nervous part, must needs be offended by that which is actually cold: and being
the seat of natural appetite, Warm drink commended.
and of the first concoction (whose errors and defects are not amended in the
other concoctions) had need to be preserved in his native vigor and strength,
that it may breed good nourishment for the whole body. But the much use of cold
drink, although it seem to refresh us for the present, by dulling the appetite
and the sense of thirst and hunger, as a stupefictive narcotick will do: yet it
destroys the faculties of the stomach, which are maintained and quickened by
heat: and thereby breeds crudities in our bodies, from whence many diseases
proceed. The East-Indans are seldom troubled with the Stone or the Gout, and
it is imputed to their warm drink: the like we may judge of obstructions,
cholicks, dropsies, rheumes, coughs, hoarsness, diseases in the throat and
lungs, etc. in which cases, and many more which proceed from ill concoction and
crudity of humors, no doubt it is an excellent preservative to drink our drink
warm. I.W.
I know a worthy Gentleman of excellent parts, who in his travels observed the
benefit hereof, and for many years has used to take his drink hot: and being
now above 80 years old, enjoys his health of body, and vigor of spirits,
beyond the ordinary course of men of his age. Likewise in the cure of diseases,
I persuade my self it would prove very profitable, if it were in use. For
example in fevers, I see no reason but it would do more good than our cold
waters, juleps, posset-drinks, etc. which I approve well of, but if the patient
did drink them hot, the stomach would be less offended thereby, the moisture
(which we chiefly desire in them) would penetrate more, and the eventilation by
sweat or insensible transpiration, would not be hindered. Lib. ae humi^o^um usu.
Hypocrates is very plain in this point, and reckons many inconveniences of
cold drinks, to the teeth, bones, nerves, breast, back, lungs, stomach, etc. I
will not insilt longer hereupon, being a practical point of Physic: only I
thought good to intimate it to our learned Physicians to contemplate upon, for
the benefit of our patients.

Our Bath Guides do usually command the drinking of this water with salt to
purge the body, persuading the people that the Bath-water has a purging
quality in it, when as the same proportion of spring water, with the like
quantity of salt will do the like. Our Baths have true virtues to commend them,
so as we need not seek to get credit or grace unto them by false suggestions.
The Bitumen and Nitre which is in them, although it serves well for an
alterative remedy, yet it is not sufficient for an evacuative: and therefore we
must attribute this purgative quality, either to the great quantity of water
which they drink (and so it works) ratione ponderis) or unto the stimulation of
salt which is dissolved in it, or unto both together. Our Common salt has a
stimulating quality, as is showed before, Chap. 7. and Erastus says that it
purges much. Bulcasis gives it to that purpose from 3 ij to 3 iiij. Mesue also
prescribes it to purge gross humors, and so does Avicen. Wherefore there is no
doubt but salt will purge of it self, being dissolved in our Bath-water.
Simpl.cap. 16. lib.5. sum 1. tract.4. s lib. 2. tract.3. cap. 624.
But I should like much better to dissolve in it some appropriate syrup or
other purgative, for this purpose, as Manna, Tartar, Elaterium, syrups of
Roses, of Cichory, with Rhubarb, Augustanus; or to move urine, Sir, de 5. rad.
Bizantinus de Limonibus, Sambuclnas, de Altzhca, etc. And this course is usual
in Italy, according as the Physician sees most convenient, but with this
caution, that when they take it in potion, they must not use the Bath, because
of contrary motions.

Inwardly also Bath-waters are used, for Broths, Beer, Juleps, etc. although
some do mislike it, because they will not mix medicaments with aliments:
wresting a text in Hypocr. to that purpose. Baccius lib. 2. Claudiaus p. 377.
De aere, aquis and locis.
But if we may mix Diuretics, Deoppilatives, Purgatives, etc. with aliments,
as usually we do: I see no reason but we may as well use mineral waters, where
we desire to make our aliments more alterative by a medicinal quality, always
provided that there be no malignity in them, nor any ill quality which may
offend any principal part. And thus much for the use of them by mouth.

By injection they are used also into the Womb, to warm, and dry, and cleanse
those parts; into the passages of urine, to dry and heal excoriations there;
into the fundament for like causes, as also for resolutions of the Sphincter,
and bearing down of the fundament, etc. And thus they are used either alone, or
mixed with other medicines, according as the Physician thinks most sit, and we
daily find very good success thereby in uterine affects, depending upon cold
causes. Thus much for the inward use of our Bath-waters.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the outward use of the the Hot Waters of Bathe; first, the general use of
them to the whole body in Bathing: secondly, the particular use of them by
pumping, bucketing, or applying the mud.

OUtwardly our Bath-waters are principally used, because they are most properly
for such affects as are in the habit of the body, and out of the veins: as
Palsies, Contractions, Rheums, cold Tumors, affects of the skin, aches, etc.
And in these cases, we use not only the water, but also the mud, and in some
places the upour.

The water is used both for his actual and potential heat, as also for the
second qualities of mollifying, discussing, cleansing, resolving, etc. which
the minerals give unto it. The use hereof is either general to the whole body,
as in bathing; or some particular to some one part, as in bucketing or pumping,
which anciently was called Stillicidium. The Italians call it Duccia. The
general use in Bathing, is most ancient: for our Bathes were first discovered
thereby to be wholesome and sovereign in many diseases.

Nechams Verses concerning the use of these Bathes, are four hundred years old.
Bathoniae Thermas vix praefero Virgilianas
Confecto prosunt Balnea nostra seni:
Prosunt attritis, collisis invalidisque,
Et quorum morbis frigida causa subest.


Which I will English out of Dr. Hackwels learned work of the perpetuity of the
world. Our Bains at Bathe with Virgils to compare;
For their effects, I dare almost be bold,
For feeble folk, and crazie good they are,
For bruiz'd, consumed, far spent, and very old,
For those likewise whose sickness comes of cold.


We have ancient traditions ( famae est obscurior annis) That King Bladud who
is said to have lived in the time of Elias, did first discover these Bathes,
and made trial of them upon his own Son, and thereupon built this City, and
distinguished the Bathes, etc. But we have no certain record hereof. It is
enough that we can show the use of them for 400 years, and that at this day
they are as powerful as ever they were: Cambden gives them a more ancient date
from Ptolomy and Antonine, and the Saxons: and says they were called Aquae
Solis, and by the Saxons, Akmanchester, that is, the town of sick people, and
dedicated to Minerva, as Solinus faith. The opinion that the Bathes were made
by Art, is too simple for any wise man to believe, or for me to confute: And
Necham in his Verses which follow after those I have mentioned, does hold it a
sigment: you may see them in Cambden. We have them for their use in bathing,
distinguished into four several Bathes, whereof three have been anciently;
namely the KingsBath, the Hot Bath and the Cross Bath. The Queens Bath was
taken from the Springs of the Kings Bath, that being farther off, from the hot
Springs, it might serve for such as could not endure the heat of the other. We
have likewise an appendix to the hot Bath; called the Leapers Bath, for unclean
persons. We find little difference in the nature of these Bathes, but in the
degree of heat, proceeding no doubt, from one and the same Mine. Yet as the
Mine may be hotter in one p^^tthen in another, or the passages more direct from
it, so the heat of them may vary. Some little difference also we find among
them, that one is more cleansing then another, by reason (is I take it) of more
Nitre. For in the cross Bath we find that our fingers ends will shrink and
shrivel, as if we had washed in Soap-water, more then in the other Bathes. The
Kings Bath, as it is the hottest of all the Bathes, so it is the fittest for
very cold diseases, and cold and phleg^^^ck constitutions: And we have daily
expe^^ence of the good effects it works upon Pal^es, Aches, Sciatica's, cold
Tumors, etc. both by ^scuation, by Sweat, and by warming the parts facted,
attenuating, discussing, and resolving the mors. Also in Epilepsies and Uterin
affects in ^e Scorbute, and in that kind of dropsy which ^t call Anasarca. The
hot Bath is little infe^^r unto it, as next in degree of heat, and ^full in the
same cases. The Queens Bath, ^d Cross Bath are more temperate in their heat, ^d
therefore fittest for tender bodies, which are ^t to be inflamed by the other,
and where ^^e is more need of mollifying and gentle ^ming, then of violent heat
and much evacuam by sweat. And in these Bathes they may dare longer without
dissipation of Spirits, then in the other: the Queens Bath is the hotter of the
two, but temperate enough for most bodies. The Cross Bath is the coldest of
all, as having but few Springs to feed it: yet we observe it to supple, and
mollify more then the rest, both because they are able to stay longer in it,
and because (as I said before) it seems to participate more with Nitre, then
the rest, which does cleanse better, and gives more penetration to the other
Minerals. Wherefore in contractions, Epilepsies, Uterin affects, Convulsions,
Cramps, etc. This Bath is very useful, as also in cutaneal diseases, as
Morphews, Itch, etc. Thus much for the nature and difference of our Bathes, and
the general use in bathing.

They are used also to particular parts by pumping or bucketing, or applying
the mud.

Pumping or bucketing are not used in that fashion, as we use them in any other
Bathes that I can learn, but only the Duccia or Stillicidium But I hold our
fashion as good as that. The water comes more plentifully upon the part, and
may be directed as the patient has occasion. O^^ bucketing has been longest
in use: but finding that it did not heat some sufficiently, being taken from
the surface of the Bath, we have of lat^ erected Pumps, which draw the water
from the springs or near unto them, so as we have it much hotter from thence,
then we can have it by buc^keting. A worthy Merchant and Citizen (...) London,
Mr. Humphrey Brown, was persuade by me to bestow two of these Pumps upon the
Kings and Queens Bath, whereby he has do^ much good to many, and deserves a
thankfu^ remembrance. The like also I procured to be done at the other Bathes,
although that of the CrossBath is not so useful, by reason it wants heat,
unless for young Children. Also we have a Pump out of the hot Bath, which we
call the dry Pump, where one may sit in a Chair in his Clothes, and have his
Head, or Foot, or Knee pumped without heating the rest of the body in the Bath;
and devised chiefly for such as have hot Kidneys, or some other infirmities
which the Bath might hurt. This we find very useful in Rheums, and cold
Brains, and in Aches and Tumors in the Feet. For these Pumps we are beholding
unto the late Lord Archbishop of York, and to Mr. Hugh May, who upon my
persuasions were contented to be at the charge of them. It were to be wished
that some well disposed to the public good, would erect the like at the Kings
Bath; This is now done, and a dry Pump there erected in the year 1661. at the
City charge, by the procurement of Mr. John Ford, Apothecary, then Mayor of the
City.
where, perhaps, it might be more useful for many, in regard of the greater
heat which those springs have.

The lute of Bathes is in much use in some places, where it may be had pure,
both to mollify, and to resolve, and to strengthen weak parts. But we make
little use of it in our Bathes, because we cannot have it pure, but mixed with
strigments. In diverse other places either the springs arise a good distance
from the bathing places, or else there be other eruptions from whence it may be
taken. But our springs arising in the Bathes themselves, it cannot well be
saved pure. Besides, we have not those means of the heat of the Sun, to keep it
warm to the parts where it is applied: so as growing cold, it rather does hurt
then good. Wherefore it were better for us, to use artificial lutes, as the
Ancients did, of Clay, Sulphur, Bitumen, Nitre, Salt, etc. or unguents of the
same nature, as that which they call Ceroma. But the best way is to referr the
election of these remedies to the present Physician, who will fit them
according to the nature of the grief.

CHAP. XVIII.
In what particular Infirmities of the Body, bathing in the Hot Waters of Bathe
is profitable.

TO come more particularly to the use of bathing, we must understand, that
there are many mineral waters fit for bathing, which are not fit to drink: as
those which participate with Lead, Quicksilver, Gypsum, Cadmia, Arsenick, etc.
Also those that contain liquid Bitumen, are thought to relax too much: but
those that proceed from dry Bitumen are permitted, and prescribed in potion by
Paulus AEgineta, and Trallian: Sulphur also is questioned, Whether it be fit to
be taken inwardly by Potion, because it relaxeth the stomach, and therefore
Aetius forbids it: yet Trallian allows it, and so do others, if the Sulphur be
not predominant. 1 Tetrah. sermon. 3 cap. 167. Trallian. l. 10. cap. 1.
But for outward bathing there is no question to be made of these Minerals, nor
of any other which are not in themselves venomous.

And whereas Oribasius, AEgineta, Actuarius, etc. are suspicious of Sulphur and
Bitumen for the head: Orib.l. 10.c.3. AEgin.l.1.c.52. Actu.l.3.c. 10.
they must be understood of hot distempers there, and not of cold rheumatick
brains; where by daily experience we find the profitable use of them, both by
evacuation in bucketing, and by warming and comforting the cold part. Cap. 5.
And Oribasius does ingeniously confess, that the nature of these Baths was not
then perfectly discovered; and therefore they were all held to be, not only
dry, but very hot; although we find them not all so: for Iron waters do cool,
and so do those of Camphir, and Alluminous, and Nitrous waters also. Hypoc. de
aere; aquis, and locis.
But for our Bituminous and Sulphurous waters which Galen forbids in hot
brains, there is no reason to suspect them in cold affects of the brain and
nerves, in which cases we make especial choice of all things, which either in
taste or smell do resemble Bitumen: as Rue, Castorium, Valeriana, Herba
Paralyseos, Trifolium, Asphaltitis, etc. which both by his warming quality, and
by his suppling and mollifying substance, is most proper and convenient for
those parts. ^.de tuenda sanitate cap. 9.
The like I may say of Sulphur, in which nothing can be excepted against, but
his sharp spirit, which is made by burning: and we have none of that in our
waters, nor I hope any fire to make it withal. The other parts of Sulphur are
hot and dry, and very unctuous. As for Nitre, it cleanses, purges both by
stool and urine, and helps the incorporation of the other Minerals with the
water, and qualifies the heat of them, and gives them better penetration into
our bodies. In regard of these Minerals, together with the actual heat, we find
that the bathing in our Baths does warm the whole habit of the body, attenuate
humors, open the pores, procure sweat, move urine, cleanse the matrix, provoke
women's evacuations, dry up unnatural humors, strengthen parts weakened, comfort
the nerves, and all neutrous parts, cleanse the skin, and suck out all salt
humors from thence, open obstructions, if they be not too much impacted, case
pains of the joints and nerves and muscles, mollify and discuss hard tumors,
etc. Wherefore this bathing is profitable for all palsies, apoplexies, caros,
epilepsies, stupidity, destuctions, gouts, sciaticaes, contractions, cramps,
aches, tumors, itches, scabs, leprosies, cholicks, windyness, whites in women,
stopping of their courser, barrenness, abortions, scorbuts, anasarcaes, and
generally all cold and phlegmatic diseases, which are needless to reckon up.
In all which cure^ our Baths have a great hand, being skilfully directed by the
Physician, with preparation of the body before, and addition of such other
helps as are needful. And whereas without the help of such Baths, these
diseases could not be cured without tormenting the body, either by fire, of
lancing, or causticks, or long dyets, or bitter and ungrateful medicines, etc.
In this course of bathing, all is pleasant and comfortable, and more effectual
than the other courses, and therefore it is commonly the last refuge in these
cases, when all other means fail. I will not undertake to reckon up all the
benefits which our Baths do promise; but if we had a register kept of the
manifold cures which have been done by the use of our Baths principally, it
would appear of what great use they are. But as there is a defect in not
keeping a Catalogue of rare Cures, so many persons of the better sort would be
offended, if a Physician should make any mention of their cures or griefs:
wherefore I must speak but generally.

CHAP. XIX.
The manner of bathing, chiefly referred to the inspection and ordering of a
Physician. Yet some particulars touched concerning the government of the
patient in and after bathing; the time of day, of staying in the Bath, of
continuing the use of it, The time of the year. Of covering the Baths.

NOw for the manner of bathing, I will not set down what the Physician is to
do, but leave that to his judgment and discretion: but what is fit for the
patient to know: for there are many cautions and observations in the use of
bathing, drawn from the particular constitutions of bodies; from the
complication of diseases, and from many other circumstances which cannot be
comprehended in general rules, or applied to all bodies alike: but many times
upon the success, and the appearing of accidents, the Physician must exre not a
capere consilium, and perhaps alter his intended course, and perhaps change the
Bath either to a hotter or cooler, etc. In which respect, those patients are
ill advised which will venture without their Physician upon any particular
Bath, or to direct themselves in the use of it: And this is a great cause that
many go away from hence without benefit, and then they are apt to complain of
our Baths, and blaspheme this great blessing of God bestowed upon us.

It is fit for the patient when he goes into the Bath, to defend those parts
which are apt to be offended by the Bath: as to have his head well covered from
the air and wind, and from the vapors arising from the Bath: also his kidneys
(if they be subject to the Stone) anointed with some cooling unguents; as
Rosatum Comitissae, Infrigidans Galeni, Santolinum, etc. Also to begin gently
with the Bath, till his body be inured to it, and to be quiet from swimming, or
much motion, which may offend the head by sending up vapors thither: at his
coming forth, to have his body well dried, and to rest in his bed an hour, and
sweat, etc.

A morning, hour is fittest for bathing, after the Sun has been up an hour or
two; and if it be thought fit to use it again in the afternoon, it is best four
or five hours after a light dinner. For the time of staying in the Bath, it
must be according to the quality of the Bath, and the toleration of the
patient. In a hot Bath, an hour or less may be sufficient: in a temperate Bath,
two hours. For the time of continuing the Bath, there can be no certain time
set down, but it must be according as the patient finds amendment, sometimes
twenty days, sometimes thirty, and in difficult cases much longer. And
therefore they reckon without their Host, which assign themselves a certain
time, as perhaps their occasions of business will best afford. For the time of
the year, our Italian and Spanish Authors prefer the Spring and Fall; and so
they may well do in their hot Countries; but with us, considering our climate
is colder, and our Baths are for cold diseases; I hold the warmest months in
the year to be best; as May, June, July, and August, and I have persivaded
many, hereunto who have found the benefit of it; for both in our Springs, and
after September our weather is commonly variable, and apt to offend weak
persons, who finding it temperate at noon, do not susp ct the coolness of the
mornings and evenings. Likewise in the Bath it self, although the Springs arise
as hot as at other times, yet the wind and air beating upon them, does do them
much harm, and also make the surface of the water much cooler than the bottom:
and therefore Clauidinus wishes all Baths to be covered, and Fall^pius finds
great fault with the Lords of Venice, that they do not cover their Bath at
Apono. We see also that most of the Baths in Europe are covered, whereby they
retain the same temperature at all times. And it were to be wished that our
Queens Bath, and Cross-Bath, being small Baths, were covered, and their Slips
made close and warm. By this means our Baths would be useful all the year, wh^^
neither wind and cold air in Winter, nor the Sun in Summer should hinder our
bathing. Moreover, for want of this benefit, many who have indifferently well
recovered in the Fall, do fall back again in the winter before the Cure be
perfectly finished: and as this would be a great benefit to many weak persons,
so it would be no harm to this City, if it may be a means of procuring more
resort hither in the Winter time, or more early in the Spring, or more late at
the Fall.

I desire not novelties, or to bring in innovations, but I propound these
things upon good grounds and examples of the best Baths in Europe, and so I
desire to have them considered of, referring both this point, and whatsoever
else I have said in this Discourse, to the censure of those who are able to
judge.

I do purposely omit many things about the virtues and uses of our Baths, which
belong properly to the Physician, and cannot well be intimated to the patient
without dangerous mistaking. Do compos. med. s.locos 1.8. c.7.
For as Galen faith, our Art of Physic goes upon two legs, Reason and
Experience;and if either of these be defective, our Physic must needs be lame.
Experience was first in order: Per varios usus artem experientia socit,
Exemplo monstrante viam.
From much Experience, Thou Art of Physic ^^^e,
Directed by Example to the same.


Reason followed, which without Experience, makes a mere contemplative and
theorical Physician. Experience without Reason, makes a mere Emperick, no
better than a Nurse or an attendant upon sick persons, who is not able out of
all the experience he has, to gather rules for the cure of others. Wherefore
they must be both joined together: and therefore I refer Physicians works unto
Physicians themselves.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX CONCERNING BATHE: Wherein The ANTIQUITY Both of The Bathes and
City Is more fully discoursed; with a brief account of the Nature and Virtues
of the HOT WATERS there.

By THO. GUIDOTT, M. B. Practicing at BATH.

(...)

Pythag. apud Stob. Sermon. 34. Nunc Te marmoreum protempore fecimus: at Tu,
Si fatura gregem suppleverit, aureus esto:
Virg. Ecl. London; Printed for Thomas Salmon Bookseller, living in Bath. 1669.

TO MY HONORED AND Learned Friend, JOHN MAPLETT, Doctor in PHYSIC.
SIR,
HAving bad the happiness in a strange place to light on so good an acquainance
as your self (whose Sober, Candid, and ^npassionate temper receives an
Additional ^ its native luster from the perfunctory, disbliging, and illiterate
Genius of others:) I ^ould not but take the first opportunity to te^ifie my
Respects; and the rather, because having fallen on a Subject in which you may
claim some right; I thought it not safe to enter your ground without your leave.

Besides, we are told by Solinus (whose Assertion admits a further probability
from the Epithetes of (...) etc. given her by Pausanias, Plutarch, Aristides,
mentioned also in Hesychius, Suidas, Harpocration, and others, of which I have
In Historia AEsc la^ii, (...).
elsewhere more largely treated in another Language, that Minerva was formerly
the Patroness of these Baths; and what fitter person could I find out to
address this brief Discourse of Baths unto, than him.

-- Tritonia Pallas,
Quem docuit, multaque insignem reddidit art.
I have jointly discoursed of the Baths and City, which seem to me to resemble
the two parts of a Compositum, Body and Soul: And as there is a more than
ordinary respect due to the body, on the account of its being the Case and
Cabinet of that pearl of great price, out more noble and diviner part, the
Soul; So I thought it my Concern to make some reflections on the City also, as
well as the waters, by which I think it does in some measure appear, that it
cannot justly be said of the Baths, what was once of the wit of Galba the Roman
Emperor lodged in a deformd body, that they have a bad habitation.

If I have not here drawn the Baths to the life, it may be considered that it
was intended only for a rough draught, and (what is more) that I had not your
Pensil. The thing it self, as to the Composure of it, is the hasty product of
less than 14 days, and those too in the midst of, and stolen from my other
Employments; what therefore is wanting now, I hope hereafter to supply.

In the mean time, Sir, I humbly offer to your kind acceptance this small
acknowledgement of my real respects, as to one whose higher se^so^ with
Academical Studies, together with the helps and advantages of Travel, has made
a Pillar of your faculty, which your courteous dispos^ion and civil Deportment,
has so nearly polished that you seem to have attained, if we believe the Poet,
the utmost perfection, having in you that which does at once, both delight and
profit. Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci. Her. de Art. Poet.


As for those that are mere husks and outsides of Physicians, that desire to be
thought to be what they are not, and are nothing less than what they seem to
be; whose empty heads serve for no other use than Rattles, only to make a
pretty noise to please children, whose mouths also are open Sepulchers, and
they themselves little better than painted ones.

Non tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis, etc.

We may well spare, or rather not spare them, as being not the true Sons, but
the Byblows of AEsculapius.

Sir, I beg your pardon for giving you this trouble, and assure you, That

I Am Your very Affectionate Friend, and Humble Servant, THOMAS GUIDOTT.
Bath, Oct. 24. 1668.
THE Contents.
CHAP. I. Of the Antiquity of the Bathes of Bath^ Genealogy of Bladud, and
Time when he lived, Contemporary to the Prophet Elias. These Baths not
discovered by Julius Caesar. Names of Bath, Bathancester, Hat Bathan,
Akmanchester, (...) Aquae Solis, Badiza examind. British names, Yr Ennaint,
Caer Badon, Caer Palladdur, Minerva Patroness of Bath, Nechams Verses. CHAP.
II. Of the Antiquity of the City of Bath, and things relating thereunto. BAth
called first Caer Blaeidin, afterward Caer Bath, and Badon: when inhabited.
Coill and Edgar, (whose Statues stand at the end of the Council house;) who,
and when they flourished. Bath besieged by the Saxons; Relieved by King Arthur.
Offa's Church, Hospitals, Free School. The Author of the History of the
Worthies of England censured, and some of his mistakes discovered. CHAP. III.
Of the Church of Saint Peter and Paul. AN account of the Church of Saint Peter
and Paul in Bath, from its first foundation to the time it was finished: a
Latin Poem on the same Subject, written to Bishop Mountague, with the answer of
the Bishop. CHAP. IV. Of the Roman Antiquity of Bath. ROman Antiquities of Bath
divided into three sorts: an Enumeration and Explication of them. Many read,
and understood otherwise than by Mr. Cambden. Some Additions. Roman Coins.
CHAP. V. Of the Nature and Virtues of the Baths. BAthes of Bath much of the
nature of the Thermae Aquenses in Germany: Certain parallels between Bath and
Akin. Bladud, and the Baths Vindicated. CHAP. VI. Of the Baths in particular
Here. OF the three Hotter Baths; namely, the Kings, Queens, and Hot Bath; but
chiefly of the Kings, and in what distempers bathing therein is profitable.
CHAP. VII. OF the Cross-Bath, and its Virtues.
A BRIEF DISCOURSE OF BATH.
CHAP. I.
Of the Antiquity of the Baths of Bath.

Genealogy of Bladud, and Time when he lived. Contemporary to the Prophet
Elias. These Baths not discovered by Julius Caesar. Names of Bath;
Bathancester, Hat Bathan, Akmanchester, (...). Aquae Solis; Badiza Examined.
British names, Yr Ennaint; Caer Badon, Caet Palladdur. Minerva, Patroness of
the Baths. Minerva's Temple in Bath. Nechams Verses.

I Shall not here Treat of the Antiquity and Nature of Baths in general, nor
put you in mind of the Pool of Bethesda, or River of Jordan, but intending a
brief Discourse concerning Bath, both as to the City, and Hot waters there,
Shall, without any further preface, begin with the Waters, afterward proceed
to the Antiquities of the City; and last of all, give a taste of the Nature and
Virtues of the Baths.

That the Baths, or Hot waters of Bath in Somersetshire, are of great
Antiquity, cannot be doubted by any one who has in the least cast an eye on
ancient Records. Many are the Opinions and Conjectures about the time of their
discovery, which I shall as briefly as I may examine. And because there is very
frequent mention made of King Bladud, and the Prophet Elias, the one as the
Founder, the other as being discovered in his time: I think it may be for the
satisfaction of some, if I give a particular account who this Bladud was, and
upon what score the Prophet came to be concerned in this business. The
substance of which I take out of a Latin Manuscript entitled Brutus
Abbreviatus, being an Epitome of a larger History, not concerning my self much
in the truth of the Relation, but leaving it to the judgments of those that
shall peruse it, to determine of it as they shall think fit. G. M.


My rise I must take from Brutus, who after the destruction of Troy, is said to
have come into this Island, then called Albion, about the year before our
Saviors Nativity 1100. where finding none but Gigantick Inhabitants possessing
the Hills, and seeing a fruitful soil, and full of delights, was pleased one
day to call his Company together to offer a solemn Sacrifice to Diana, by whose
guidance and direction he had lighted on so pleasant an Island. But as they
were all at Meat, thirty mighty Giants came down upon them, and in a short time
slew as many of Brutus his men, yet were all afterward quelled by Brutus and
the surviving Company, except one that was greater than the rest, whose name
was Gogmagog.

Now Brutus had a Companion related to him called Corineus, who being not only
like Saul from the shoulders upwards, but from the waste higher than his
Brethren, was designed to undertake Gogmagog, in which Combat Gogmagog brake
two of Corineus his ribs, who notwithstanding grasping the Giant in his arms,
wasted him along the Seaside, and threw him down a precipice, where he was
dashed in pieces, whence that place now bears the name of Gogmagog's leap.
Nephew, as some write.
Supposed to be the fall of Dover by some; by others, the Haw at Plimmouth.


On this Corineus, Brutus bestowed the adjacent Country, which he after his
own name, called Cornwall. For the first arrival of Brute Was at Totness in
Devonshire, so named quasi Tout en ease, i. e. Totus in quiet, from the great
delight and recreations that place afforded. Afterward, finding a more
fruitful and noble place on the Thames, built there a City 390 years before
that of Rome, which he called the City of New Troy, in memory of that Troy
whence he and his progeny came: and having reigned here 20 years, he dyed, and
was honorably buried at New Troy, or Troia Nova, now London.

Brutus had three Sons, Loegrius or Lo^rinus, Albanactus, and Camber, between
whom he parted this Island, viz. the Northern part, to wit, Scotland, he gave
to Albanactus; the Southern part Wales, to Camber; and England to Loegrius.
Called therefore by the W^lch, Loygar, and ^^g^ors.


After some time, Humbardus King of Humlandia, came into Scotland with a great
Army, and slew Albanactus; which his two Brethren, Locrinus and Camber hearing
of, came with a considerable force to find him out, and coming upon him whilst
he was making merry, put him so to it, that having no way to escape, he drowned
himself in the River Humler, to which he gave name. Called by other Writers,
Hu^ys or Hunnys, King of Hunesy or Scythia, receiving the name of Humber or
Humbardus, after his comeing into Scotland.


Humbardus had a daughter called Estrilda, whom Locrinus having taken captive
in a ship, had a mind to make his wife, although he was before married to
Gwenthlea daughter to Corineus, which accordingly he did, and left Gwenthlea.
Others write she was daughter to a King of Almaine, and brought with two others
thence by Humbardus.
Gwenthlea being thus repudiated, returned into Cornwall, and as Heiress to her
Fathers right, took possession of all the places there, and received homage
from the Inhabitants; and raising an Army in her own defense, made war upon her
Husband Locrinus, cut off him with his Army, and took Prisoners Estrilda and
her daughter Avana; and drowning them in the River Severn, caused her self to
be crowned Queen. Alias (...).
Otherwise called Habre^.
She had one Son by Locrinus, named Mahan, whom when he was of age, she made
King, her self retiring into Cornwall, died there, and was interred with great
pomp and magnificence.

Mahan, the Son of Locrinus and Gwenthlea, had two Sons, Memprice and Manlinus,
who fell out about the Crown. Alias Madan, and Madian.
Manlinus treacherously slaying his elder Brother Memprice, aspired to the
Throne, a wicked and lewd man, who sharing with Cain in the sin of murdering
his Brother, partook also with him in his punishment, in being a Vagabond,
dying wandering too and fro in the Woods and Deserts. Some make Mempricc to have
slain his younger brother Manlinus (as he is sometimes called) and Ebranc to be
the Son of Memprice. Or part of Germany, as others. Caer Ebranc. Others write
he had 20 Wives, of which he begat 20 Sons, and 30 daughters. Alias
Brut.-greveshield, and Brut^grenshield.


Ebranc the Son of Manlinus succeeded his Father, and with great rejoycings was
Crowned King, a prudent and valiant man, who conquered France, and with
treasure brought thence, built the City, Eboracus or York, bearing his own
name: He built also the Castle called Maiden-Castle, now Edinburgh. By several
Wives he had 23 Sons, all slout and warlike Lords, and his Daughters stately
Ladies. He reigned 60 years.

After the death of Ebranc, the Government of the Kingdom was devolved on his
Son Bentgrevestheld, a wife man and good Soldier, who built the Town Carlyle,
where after he had reigned 20 years, he was buried. In his time Solomon
governed in Jerusalem, to whom came the Queen of Sheba, Sibilla by name, to
understand his wisdom, and those things that were spoken of him.

Ludhudebras after the decease of his Father Bentgrevestheld, built the City of
Canterbury and Winchester, and was buried at winton. Alias Lud, Ludhurdebras,
Rudibras: He is said by others to be the Son of Leill.


Bladut the Son of Ludhudebras was next in Succession, a great Necromancer, who
as it is said in his Acts, made the Hot Waters in Bath by the Art of Magic.
Called sometimes Bladud and Baldud.
But this is rather to be ascribed to Nature, since there are Baths in other
places hotter than these: But I have read, that when the Prophet Elias desired
it mignt rain, then three Springs of Hot Water arose in that City, useful for
the Cure of Diseases of men. He had a son named Leir, who built Leycester. Thus
far the Author of the Manuscript, whose rougher Latin Phrase, I have smoothed
what I could, by a Paraphrastical Version.

From what has been delivered may be collected that Bladut (or Bladud as he is
commonly called) was the eighth King of the Britains from Brute, and that his
line was thus. Brute, Locrinus, Mahan, Manlinus, Ebranc, Bentgrevesheld,
Ludhudebras, Bladut. Now Brute being said to have come hither 1100 years before
Christ, allowing to the seven preceding Kings (of which some Reigned more, some
less) thirty years a piece for their Reign, one with another, it follows that
Bladud lived near 900 years before Christ was born. He is sometimes called
Blaeydin Cloyth, that is Blaeydin the Magician.

As to the Prophet Elias, the time when he desired rain, falls out to be
according to computation, in the year of the world 3040. nine hundred, and some
odd years before Christ; so that this Prophet and King Bladud were
Contemporaries, and the antiquity reaches no higher on the account of the later
opinion then the first.

And this is the highest pitch of Antiquity I find assigned to the Bathes; as
for the Periods asserted by others, they come much short of both the former;
some ascribing their inventions to Julius Caesar, fifty years, or thereabouts,
before Christ, which the learned Antiquarian, (...) Malmsb. (...)
Mr. (...), thinks not so probable, because Solinus, who lived in the time of
Titus Vespasian, 130 years after, or 83 years after Christ, was the first of
the Romans that made mention of them.

To which may be added, that perhaps Julius Caesar came not so far up in the
Land. For whatever some flattering Poets and Historians may faconiously
deliver; certain it is that Julius Caesar made not so great a Conquest here, as
some do imagine. Whence Tacitus writes, that he discovered only, not delivered
unto the Romans, Britain. His words in the Life of Julius Agricola, are these:
Primus omnium D. Julius cum exercitu Britanniam ingressus, quanquam prospera
pugna terruerit incolas, ac littore potitus sit, potest videri ostendisse
posteris, non tradidisse, Horace also calls the Britan before Augustus,
untouched. Epod. 7.
By. p.38.
And Mr. Cambden faith, that it is so far off from being true, which Patereulus
reports, bis penetrata Britannia a Caesare, that Caesar passed twice through
Britain, that he scarce made entry into it. For many years after this entrance
of Caesar, this Island was left to the free Government of their own Kings, and
used their own Laws.

The Saxon Names of Bathancester, Hat Bathan, and Akmanchester, are of later
date, the Saxons not arriving here till the time of Theodosius the younger,
about the year of Christ, according to the most probable Computation of
Venerable Bede, 428. Nay, the later name of Akmanchester was not given till
some few years after the year of Christ 577, when from a mean Condition, to
which this City was then reduced by War, it again recovered strength and great
dignity, and from the great concourse of diseased people, that came for Cure,
was called Akmanchester, that is, The City of Sickly Folks. Cambden By. p. 234.


Neither can their Antiquity be much advanced by the (...), or Hot waters, in
Ptolomy; Aquae Solis, or Waters of the Sun of Antonine; or Badiza of Stephanus,
(more recent then the former) but that which seems to come the nearest to the
forementioned Opinion of Bladud and Elias, is the British names of Y^ Ennaint,
Caer Badon, and above all Caer Paladdur, that is the City of Pallas, or
Minerva's Water; especially since Solinus affirms Minerva to have been the
Patroness of these Bathes, of which no doubt, he writes in these words, In
Britain there are Hot Springs very curiously adorned, and kept for men's use,
the This is also mentioned by Bale, de script. Aug. in his account of Bladud.
vid. insra Cap. 5.
Patroness of which is the Goddess Minerva: There being also a tradition that
there was formerly a Temple dedicated to Minerva, where now the Church of St.
Peter and Paul, commonly called the Abbey Church, stands.

I have read also in an Author that wrote of these Bathes almost 100 years ago;
and the first that wrote any thing considerable concerning them (Dr. Turner, in
his Discourse of the English, German, and Italian Bathes, making little better
then a bare mention of them) That the chief Spring of Bathe was in the
Churchyard then dedicated to Minerva, and after constituted to the Abbey of
the Monks of the Order of St. Benedict. Io^cs Bathes Aid p. 2. b.
Bid. Basil. Bale.
Erected first by Blaeidin Cloyeth, or Bladudus Magus that wife Magician, a
Britain, the ninth King after Brute, about the year of the world, according to
the Scripture account 3080 before the Incarnation of Christ Others, 863.
890. Helisaeus Prophet then in Israel,

But although I have some reason to distrust this Genealogy of Bladud, which
he, acccording to the Custom of his Country, drives as high as may be, even
unto Adam, making Bladud the thirtieth man, in a direct line from him; yet I
cannot but in some measure, commend his Chronology, as being not much
different from the account given before. And whereas he affirms Bladud to have
been the nineth King from Brute; I find, by comparing other Histories, that
Leill (if the same with him whom the Author of Brutus Abr^viatus calls Leyr)
was not Son to Bentgrevesheld, but great Grandchild, being Son to Bladud, his,
that is Bentgrevesheld, Grand-childs Son: and so Leill, whom he makes Father
to Ludhudebras, not to come in before, but after Bladud, as being his Son, and
he the ninth King from Brute, and not his Father. Yet on the other hand, I must
say thus much, that the name Carlyle, a City said by the Author I fellow, to be
built by Bentgrevesheld, dissonant from the custom of those times, wherein the
Founders usually called places after their own names, and many of those
especially to which they added Caer, does somewhat incline me think there might
have been one Leill, Son to Bentgrevesheld, as some Historians mention, and
Founder of that place ascribed to his Father. By Bale he is said to be the
tenth King of the Britains.
However, the matter is not great whether Bladud was the eighth King from
Brute, as my Author supposes, or the ninth, or tenth, as others; I inferring no
more from the preceding History then this, That Bladud lived near 900 years
before Christ; since of the exact time of his flourishing, more then by
Conjecture, by reason of the Confusion and Disagreement among Historians
touching the Number, and Succession of the Kings, and time of their Reign, we
have no certain account.

But to be as particular as I may, because some years passed between the Birth
of those seven Kings mentioned before, and the beginning of their Reigns, and
also because Gwenthlea, or Guendoloena, and Leill, are said by other Historians
to have Reigned 40 years ( viz. the former 15, the later 25) which are not
there accounted for, the surer way will be to take our account from the Year of
the World. Now Brute being reported to have entered Albion A.M. 2855, and Bladud
to have begun his Reign A.M. 3100, the difference between these two numbers is
245 which being taken out of 1108 (the year before Christ, in which Brute came
hither, answering to the Year of the World 2855) the Remainder will be 863 (the
Year before Christ, answering to the Year of the World 3100) so that according
to this Computation, Bladud began his Reign over the Britains, just 863 years
before Christ was born, and Reigning 20 years, died in the Year Ante Christum,
843 I know Fabian the Author of Polychronicon, and others, differ somewhat in
their Chronology concerning Bladud from that I have given, but I look on this
to be as probable as any.

Alexander Necham a Poet of our own, somewhat above 400 years ago (with whom,
as to the Antiquity of the Bathes, Dr. Jorden contents himself) wrote these
Verses on the Bathes. cap. 17.


BAthoniae Thermis vix praefero Virgillanas,
Confecto prosunt Balnea nostra seni,
prosunt Attritis, Collisis, Invalidisque,
Et quorum morbis frigida causa subest.
Praevenit humanum stabilis natura laborem,
Servit naturae legibus artis opus.
Igne suo succensa quibus data Balnea fervent
AEnea subter aquas vasa latere putant.
Errorem figmenta solent inducere passim.
Sed quid? Sulphureum novimus esse locum.
Which I thus made English;

BAthes Bains with Virgils I compare,
Useful for ancient folk they are;
Bruised, weak, consumed, as well as old.
And in all griefs whose source is cold.
Nature man's labor does prevent
And art again serves her intent.
There Is fire underground, some say,
That thus makes Bathes great pots to play.
Fancy does often Error breed.
But what? from Brimstone these proceed.
CHAP. II.
Of the Antiquity of the City of Bath, and things relating thereunto.

Bathe called first Caer Blaeidin, afterward Caer Bathe. When inhabited. Coill
and Edgar (whose Statues stand at the end of the Council-house) who, and when
they flourished. Bathe besieged by the Saxons; relieved by King Arthar. Offa's
Church. Difference between the Mayor and Covent. Hospitals. Free School. The
Author of the History of the Worthies of England censured, and some of his
mistakes discovered.

IT is not I think, to be doubted, but that the Bathes were before the City,
and gave Name to it: Sick people, in all probability that came hither for
relief, first making small Cottages for their Conveniences, which were
afterward improved into fairer Buildings. So that now in this particular,
there are few places in England that exceed it.

That this place was built, or rather begun, by King Bladud, is the opinion of
some, and that he called it by his own Name Caer Blaeidin, which sometime after
came to be Caer Bathe. Mat. Westminster.
That it was inhabited in the time of the Britains, at least 50 years before
Christ, appears from the names they gave it of Caer Badon, and Caer Palladdur
(of which before) unless it be said that these Names might be given by some
Britains, in the Romans or Saxons time, which seems not to carry any great
probability. Nay, I find it recorded, that in the year ante Christum 684.
Sisillus, or, after some. Writers, Sylvius Brother of Gurgustus, was made Ruler
over Britain, and reigning 49 years, was buried at Caer Badon, or Bath. Engl.
Chron.
Lanquet.
However, many Roman Monuments there are, Inscriptions and Images in the City
walls, and elsewhere, (of which Chap. 4. gives a particular Account) which
evidently prove its being frequented before the 412 year of Christ's
Incarnation, about which time (or as others account, 430) the Roman
Jurisdiction ceased in this Island.

The Statues also of Coill a British King, and Edgar a Saxon (who are said to
have given Charters to this City) placed at the end of the Town Hall, or
Council-House, are Arguments of its Antiquity.

Coill (that I may speak somewhat briefly of him) was an Earl in the time of
Asclepiades (whom the Britains after the death of Lucius, being wearied out
with a bloody intestine War, which lasted more than 50 years, were at last
conftrained to elect their King,) about the year of Our Lord 250. Ant. Br. Ab.
Ms.
Alias Aselepiodatus.
Others 256.
Afterward aspiring to be greater, and building a Town which from himself he
called Colchester; Asclepiades began to fear him, and raising an Army, met him
in the field, in which Battle, Aselepiades was slain, and shortly after Coill
chosen King, who governed the Britains with a great deal of honor; and having
married his Daughter Helena to Constantius, sent from Rome into Britain to
demand Tribute, not long after dyed, and was buried at Colchester: yet some
there are who ascribe the building of this Town to Coilus, Son of Marucis, and
Father of Lucius, King of the Britains, A. D. 126. Britannice Caercolyn.


Edgar, one of the later Kings of the Saxons, bestowed on this City (as Mr.
Cambden reports) very many Immunities, the memory of which thing, even in his
time, the Citizens yearly with solemn plays, did celebrate. Br. p. 234.
He was a stout man, and is said to have had none like him on this side Arthur,
bearing this style about the year 970. The Monarch of all Albion; Or, as it is
elsewhere more largely expressed, King of Englishmen, and of all the Kings of
the Islands of the British Ocean, and all the Nations contained in Britain,
Emperor and Lord. Anglorum Basilcus omniumque Regum Irsularum oceani quae
Britanniam circumjacent cunctarumque Nationum quae infraeam includuntur
impeytor and Dominus. Henr. Spelm. Co^c. Tom. 1. p.432. and Seldenus in Mar.
Clans. Militat omnis amans, and habet sua castra Cupido. Ovid.
A Soldier he was in the Camp of Cupid as well as Mars and is noted for this,
That having a mind to Estrilda the Wife of Athelwold, he placed him (as David
did Uriah) in the front of a Battle against the Danes, in the defense of York;
where Athelwold being slain, Edgar married his Widow, but was so severely
checked by Saint Dunstant, that he ever after lived a religions life; and
having reigned 17 years, bid adieu to the World, and was buried at Glastonbury.
Edgar began his reign about the year of Christ 959. but was not Crowned till 12
years after, A.D. 971. which was done, according to some writers, at Bath, to
others at Kingston by Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury (who, some say, was
banished at that time) and Oswald Arch-Bishou of York: his Coronation was
deferred, because of his impetuous inclinations to the female Sex, and
especially to one wilfride, who to avoid the Kings Caresses, took on her the
habit of a Nun, but in vain; for he had his pleasure, and got on her a daughter
named Edith; for which offense he was enjoined seven years penance, and lived
not long after his Coronation. An. 973. Mat. Westminster.


About the year 472, or 44 years after their arrival here out of Germany, the
English Saxons besieged this City, with whom King Arthur fought a great Battle
on Mons Badonicus, now called Bannesdowne, and slew so many of them, that they
had little heart to make any further attempt for a considerable time, but left
it to the quiet possession of the Britains. Cambden ubi supra.
Yet N.
Ninnius writes, that the 12 of King Arthur's Battles against the Saxons, was
at the Hill or Town of Bath, where many a one was slain by his force and might.
Bath was also in the time of King Arthur, by whom it was relieved, besieged by
Cheldericus King of Almain. The story as mine Author relates it, was thus;
Eodem rempore venit Cheldericus, etc. Aut. Br. Abb. Ms.
At the same time (speaking of the reign of King Arthur) came Cheldericus a
valiant King out of Almaine, and landed in Scotland with 500 Ships: Arthur
hearing of this at the siege of Colegrin near York, left the siege, and coming
to London, sent letters into Britain the less, to King Hoel his Sisters Son;
who in a short time came into England with a great Army, and was met by Arthur
at winchester with great rejoycings. These two going both to Nottingham (which
Cheldericus had besieged, but not taken) Arthur came upon him unawares, and
made a great slaughter among his men; Cheldericus himself fied into a wood,
where Arthux finding him, he swore, that if he and his Soldiers were permitted
to depart, he would never more for the future trouble his Kingdom: Arthur
condescended hereto, but the wind proving cross when they were on the Sea, they
came back again, and landing at Totness, did a great deal of mischief,
destroying the Country as far as Bath. They of Bath shutting their Gates, made
a stout resistance: but when this was known to Arthur then in the Marches of
Scotland he came to the relief of Bath, fought with Cheldericus, and
discomfited his Army, etc. yet in the year 577. On a strong siege, and strong
battery by the Saxons, it yielded, but afterward grew into great repute, and
got a new name, viz. Akmanchester.

Not long after the year 552. Ceaulmus King of the West Saxons fought with the
Britains, and took from them the Cities of Bath, Gloucester and Worcester.

A. D. 676. Cambden. Br. p. 234.
Osbrich founded here a Nunnery, and not long after, Off a King of Mercia built
a Church, both which in the time of the Danish Wars were demolished; out of the
ruins of those two arose the Church of Saint Peter, in which Edgar was Crowned
(as is mentioned before) but of the Church, more in its place. This Offa was
Brother to Oswald, surnamed Christianissimus, and is said to have spent much of
his time at Bath. Concerning his supposed Tomb, and place of bursal, see
Chap.4. Domesday-Book.
Offa (says the Author of Brutus abbreviatus) frater Oswaldi; Iste Offa,
multum morabatur Bathoniae.

In the time of Edward the Confessor, Bath flourished exceedingly, the King
having there 64 Burgers, and 30 Burgers of others; the City paying tribute
according to 20 Hides, which amounts to about 80 yard land.

In the reign of William Rufus, Robert Mow-Cambden. bray, Nephew to the Bishop
of Constance, sacked Br. p. 234. and burnt it. Cambden, Br. p.234.


The Industrious Mr. Prynne (to whom I am obliged for some marginal Remarks) in
his Brevia Parliamentaria Rediviva, and fourth part of a brief Register of
Parliamentary Writs, has given an account of Citizens returned to serve in
Parliament for this City, ever since the 26th. year, of King Ed. 1. about A. D.
1298. p. 298.
p. 299.


It is also recorded, that in the year 1418, in the time of H. 5. there arose a
contest between the religious persons, John Telyford Prior, with his Covent,
and the Mayor about ringing of the Bells, which lasted some, years, but was
aftewards composed, and brought to a good issue. Libell. Rub. de Bath. Ms.


In Bath are three Hospitals (it self, indeed, being but one great one) St.
John's, Bellots, and the Bimburies, sometimes called St. Katherines; besides a
Free School erected, (as by the Inscription over the door it appears) in the
time of King Ed. 6.

The Hospital of St. John's was founded A. D. 1174. by. Reginald fitz Joceline,
a Lumbard, Bishop of Bath and Wells, and afterward translated to Canterbury,
but before he was possessed of his new honor died, and was buried at Bath. It
was valued at the yearly Rent of 22 l. 19s. 6d. since which time its Revenues
are much increased; he gave it this name, as I suppose, from St. John's in the
Savoy, where he was consecrated Bishop after his return from beyond Sea, by
Richard Archbishop of Canterbury. God^. Cat. p.364.


Where, by the way, I cannot but take notice that this Hospital is said to be
built by Joceline of Wells, and Hugo Bishop of Lincoln in the late Account of
the Worthies of England. In which History (besides the Confusion of Joceline de
Wells, with Reginald fitz, Joceline) the Author is guilty (that I may say no
worse) of many mistakes; To give an instance or two instead of a larger
Catalogue that might be produced; he affirms, that Joceline of Wells was the
first man that fixed on the title of Bishop of Bath and Wells, and transmitted
it to all his Successors, when it is manifest out of Bishop Godwins Catalogue of
Bishops, that Robert Bishop of Wells was the man, the 18 th. Bishop of that
See, and not Joceline who was the 21. p. 363.


He writes also, (which is a thing I confess of no great moment, but yet a
mistake) that the famous Dr. Harvey was never married, when his Wife is
mentioned by himself. De Genesis An. Exer^. 5.p.m. 60.
And to instance in no more now (because I would not digress too far) he avers
the same person, though living a Batchellor, to have left behind him three
Children, which he calls his three Books, viz. De Sanguinis Circuitu, De
Generatione, and De Ovo; whereas the Doctor that ever I could find (who
possibly have made as diligent a search after the writings of that modest,
ingenious, and (however the ignorance and envy of some have endeavored to
traduce him) learned Physician, (whose memory I deservedly respect and honor)
as any other can, I say Dr. Harvey (that ever I could understand) never printed
any thing besides his Treatise of the Circulation of the Blood, and his
Exercitations concerning the Generation of Animals, the Historian making two
Books of De Generatione, and de Ove, when indeed they are but one.

I acknowledge he mentions many things intended for the public; as 1.
Exercitations about Respiration of Animals. 2. A Treatise of the Love, lust,
and gendring of living Creatures. 3. Of Nutrition. 4. Medicinal Observations.
5. Physiologia, with some others, wherein no doubt that excellent Person had
made many rare and considerable discoveries, which we are so happy now to
enjoy; but that any thing else, save the two forementioned Treatises, was
permitted, or any other Book De Ovo, composed by Dr. Harvey, besides that De
Generations Animalium (wherein he ingeniously observes the Primordium, or first
beginning of all living Creatures to be either an egg, or something Analogical
to it.) I should be very glad to be informed.

Bellots Hospital was built by Thomas Bellot Esquire, one of the Executors of
the Lord Cecill, in the time of King James, of whom we shall speak more largely
in the next Chapter of the Church, to which he was a great Benefactor.

As for the Bimburies, I can learn no more concerning it, than this, that it
was built by seven Sisters, who left this Hospital behind them, as a Monument
to Posterity, both of their Charity and Name.

CHAP. III.
Of the Church of Saint Peter and Paul.

An account of the Church of St. Peter and Paul, in Bathe, from the first
foundation to the time it was finished. A Latin Poem on the same Subject,
written to Bishop Mountague, with the Answer of the Bishop.

THE Church of St. Peter and Paul, commonly called the Abbey Church, as now it
is, is a neat, and curious Fabric; of which, that I may give some account,
from its Original, many Periods, and great alterations it has undergone, as
far forth as my Observation, Information, and what Records I have seen will
reach. The first Church I find mentioned since the Temple of Minerva, (which
some place here) was that built by Off a King of Mercia, and brother to Oswald
(of which before) in the year after Christ 775. which was afterward destroyed
by the Danes, and in the year 1010, re-edified by Elphegus, who being a man of
great Parentage, and Prior of Glastonbury, left that place, and betook himself
to Bathe, where living a very strict and exemplary life, even to admiration, he
was chosen Abbot, and in the year 984 Bishop of Winchester, and A. 1006
promoted to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, in which time he new built this
Church, four years after his coming to that See. 775 1010
But the Fabric he erected stood not long; for 77 years after, or A.D. 1087.
both it, and almost the whole City, was consumed by fire, by Robert Mowbray,
Nephew to the Bishop of Constance, in the first year of William Rufus.

The next year following, viz. A.D. 1088. appeared John de Villula, a
Frenchman, born at Tours, and sometime Practitioner in Physic, or to speak
more plain, an Empirick (such as now almost every place does abound withal, we
having just cause to renew the Complaint made by Hypocrates in his time, that
there are now adays, (...). 1088
L. de leg.
Many, by a sort of people, their own Creatures, much admired, but what Artists
they are is easily to be said) for the Historian brands him with this
Character, that he was usu, non literis, medicus probatus, a man practiced more
by rote, then any great cunning, and if he chanced at any time to do any good,
it was more to be attributed to the strength of Nature, and his good hap, then
to any Art in the man, or accountable Virtues in his Medicines. Gul. Mal asb.
This man however, although not for his reach in Physic, was to be commended
in this that he had a good liking to the Abbey, and though a poor Physician,
was a rich man, and a great Benefactor to the Church, which he building from
the ground, and augmenting the Revenues from a small matter to a considerable
proportion, may seem to deserve the name of the first Author, and Founder of
it. He lived not to see it finished, being prevented by death, which happened
the 29th. of December, 1122, and was buried at Bathe, in the Church he built.

This John was Bishop of Wells, but upon some dislike The Charters of William
Rufus and H. 1. for translating his See to Bathe, and the manner thereof, may
be seen in Mr. Dugdales Monast. Augl. pp. 185, 186.
removed his Episcopal Chair to Bathe, and was known by the title of Bishop of
Bathe, renouncing that of Wells, and bought this City of William Rufus, (or, as
some say, H. 2.) for 500 Marks, which continued in the Bishops hands till the
4th. year of Rich. 1. about A.D. 1192. at which time Saverick, first
Archdeacon of Northampton, afterward Bishop of Bathe and Wells, a German, and
Kinsman to the Emperor, in order to the more speedy effecting his design of
being Bishop, to the performance of which, among other things, as Conditions of
the Kings Release, (being taken Prisoner by Leopold ArchDuke of Austria) the
Emperor had engaged him) returned the Possession of the City to King Richard
the first.

In the year 1137 July 29, 15 years after the death of John de Villula, the
Church he lately built was consumed by fire, and re-edified by Robert, a Monk
of Jews, born in Normandy, but by Parentage a Flemming, then Bishop of that
See. 1137
He not only made good what the fire had destroyed, but carried on the work to
a greater perfection. In the troubles between Maud the l^mpress, and King
Stephen, he suffered a long and a close restraint at Bathe, from the King, and
after his enlargement, endeavored an Accommodation between the two Churches of
Bath and Wells, which had differed many years about the Episcopal See, and at
last, with consent of both parties, made this agreement, that the Bishops
hereafter should be called Bishops of Bathe and Wells; That each of them should
by Commission appoint Electors, the Sea being void, by whose voices the Bishop
should be chosen; And that he should be installed with both of these Churches.
The second of which Articles was not long observed, for A.D. 1244. in the 29th
year of Hen. 3. The Monks of Bathe, refusing to join with the Chapter of Wells,
chose of themselves one He was confirmed Bishop ^ by King Hen. 3. his Patent,
ad instantiam Demini Papae, de gratia Regis Speciali, salve jure Regis, and
Ecclefiae Wellensis. P. 28. H. 3. m. 6. intus.
Roger for Bishop, which occasioned a long Suit in Law between the two
Churches, composed afterward by the Bishop, who died not long after, and was
buried at Bathe. The Condition of which Compos;ition was this; That they of
Wells must be satisfied for the present, and they of Bathe promise performance
of the Agreement made by Robert, for the future, which was done accordingly.

This Structure erected by Robert, continued till the time of Henry the 7th;
when Oliver King, the 23d Bishop after the Union of Bathe and Wells, pulling
down the old Church built by Robert, not John de Villula (which was burnt, as
Mr. Cambden affirms) began the foundation of a fair and sumptuous Building, but
left it, by reason of his death, whatever the lately mentioned Historian
relates, very imperfect. Br. P. 234:
For besides the Cost bestowed on it by Cardinal Hadrian de Castallo, chosen
Bishop A.D, 1505. which I think, was not great; William Bird, the last Prior of
the Abbey, undertook it, and partly of himself, and partly by the help of
others, almost brought it to perfection, when in a short time after the
dissolution of Religious Houses ensuing in the time of Henry the eighth, it was
again demollish'd. In memory of this Prior Bird, there is in the Chapel, on
the South side of the Quire, at the East end, a Coat of Arms in Stone, a
Cheveron between three Falcons, their Wings and Members-displai'd; on a Chief,
a Rose between two precious Stones, and for a Crest a Miter and Crozier. And in
the outside of the Chapel Wall, Southward, a W. and a Bird.

Neither are there wanting memorials of the Name of the foresaid Oliver. For in
the Front of the Church, on both sides, on a Pillar, are placed two Elephants
about an Olive Tree, and an Inscription engraven in Stone under it, in allusion
to the parable of Jotham, Judges 9.
of which this is part, Trees going to choose their King
Said, be to us the Oliver King


(Which in the late times caused some to suspect it for a Prophecy) with a
Miter over all. This Oliver King was Doctor of Laws, of Kings College in
Cambridge, Principal Secretary to three Monarchs of this Land, Edward the 4th,
Edward the 5th, and Henry the 7th. Register of the Knights of the Garter,
Bishop of Exeter, and thence translated hither, November. 6. 1495. died Jan. 34.
1503. and is thought to lie buried at Windsor, where he was sometime Canon.

The Death of Bishop King obstructed this Structure (as a Reverend Doctor is
pleased to quibble) so that it stood a long time neglected, which gave occasion
to one to write on the Church Wall with a Char-coal. D.F.
O Church I wail thy woeful plight
Whom King, nor Card'nal, Clark, nor Knight
Have yet restored to ancient right.


Alluding herein to Bishop King, who began it, and his four Successors in 35
years, viz. Cardinal Hadrian mentioned before, who sat Bishop 12 years, and was
afterward deprived of this, and all other promotions, for conspiring with some
other Cardinals, the Death of Pope Leo the 10th. Cardinal Wolsey, who held the
Bishopric in Commandam four years, and was then translated to Durham. Bishop
Clark, who sat 19 years, and died in the end of the year 1540, being poisoned,
as was supposed, in Germany, when he went Ambassador to the Duke of Cleve, to
give a reason of the Kings Divorce from the Lady Anne of Cleve, his Sister; and
Bishop Knight. These four contributing nothing considerable to the finishing
thereof. Also one Cassadore, a popishly affected person, wrote a Prophecy of
this Church, to be seen in Fullers Worthies, with what he thinks is the meaning
of it. So^^ers. p. 19.


Upon the dissolution of the Abbey, the Church was uncovered, the Lead taken
away, and the Walls much ruined, and so continued for some time. But since its
last demolition, in the Reign of King Henry the 8th, it has thrice been
attempted to be re-edified; First in the time of Queen Elizabeth, by a General
Collection, by which the Work was not much advanced. The Second, in the
beginning of the Reign of King James, A. D. 1604. in whose time it met with
many Benefactors; the principal whereof to this second work was Thomas Bellot
Esquire, Steward of the House, and one of the Executors of the Right
Honorable, William Lord Barkley, sometime Lord Treasurer of England, who made
some entrance on this Work in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and last of all,
about the middle of King James's Reign it was finished and brought to
perfection, as by the Munificence of Noble men, Knights, Gentlemen, and others,
whose Names are on Record, so especially by the liberal hand of Dr. James
Mountague, sometime Bishop of this Diocese, who at one time gave 1000 pounds
toward its Reparation, and lies buried in the body of the Church, deceased July
20.1618.

It appears also from the Memorials of the Church, that before the first of
these three last attempts to repair it, there was little of the Church
standing, save the bare Walls, and those too, in many places, much impaired,
which being then, as it was, decayed in the hands of Edmund Colethurst Esquire,
was by him bestowed on the City, though uncovered, and much ruined, as it had
long stood after the dissolution; and therefore he bears the name of the
principal Benefactor to the first work.

The particulars of the Reparations, with the Names, and Sums of the
Benefactors from the time of Queen Elizabeth downwards (which are not for me
here distinctly to mention) are Recorded in a Book kept for that purpose in the
Library belonging to the Church, begun by Bishop Lake, and augmented by some
others, but yet stands in need of the helping hands of more Benefactors.

And although I have said so much concerning this Church already, yet I shall
crave leave to add as a Conclusion to this Matter a Poem, which accidentally
came to my hands by the means of Mr. John Parker, Citizen of Bathe, a lover of
Antiquity, and my good Friend (to whom I acknowledge my self engaged for the
assistance he afforded me in my search after the Antiquities of the the City)
found in the Study among other Papers, of that learned Knight, Sir John
Harrington, whether made by himself, as some imagine (who well might do it,
having a great genius to Poetry, and called by Dr. Fuller, one of the most
ingenious Poets of our Nation) or some other, I know not; written, and as it
seems, spoken to Bishop Mountague, at his first coming to Bathe, and Sight of
the Church; which I should have translated, but that the Substance of it, as
much as is necessary to be known for History, is contained in the foregoing
account. However, to preserve it from perishing, and to gratify the lover of
Antiquity, (to whom I choose rather to incur the censure of being Prodigal, then
any way Nice, in withholding any thing I think may deserve their acceptance) I
shall insert it here, in Latin, as I found it. The Title thus,

Conditionis Variae ECCLESIAE SANCTI PETRI and PAULI Bathoniensis, A PRIMIS
FUNDAMENTIS, Actis an.775. AD ANNUM DECURRENTEM, 1609. Historico-Poetica (...)
Deque Faelicissima ejusdem Ecclesiae restauratione VATICINIUM.
Ad Reverendissimum in Christo Patrem, Jacob. providentia divina, dignissimum
Ecclesiae Bathoniensis and Wellensis Episcopum, Bathoniam primo faeliciter
invisentem, and visitantem.

MActe, bonis avibus; recidivi limino Templi
(In Christo reverende Pater) gratissimus intras.
Macte, sed haud pigeat prius aequa mente parumper
Pristina delubri perpendere fata miselli.
Temporis elapsi studio monumenta revolvens Historia.

Attento, invenies hujus fundamina Templi,
Prima Off am, priscum regem, jecisse; secunda 775.

Ephegum, regni primatem; Tertia tandem 1010.

(Cum duo Danorum rabies, ignisque priora
Vastasset) sumptu posuit majore Johannes 1088.

De Villa, natu Gallus, non infimus artis Agyrta.

Professor medicae, Wellensi ingratior aedi;
Qui, postquam variis viguisset Episcopus annis,
Sedem Thermopolin Cathedralem transtulit illinc.
Urbe hac, quingentis Marcis, a Rege coempta,
Pulchrius antiquis fanum construxit: at ipsum
AEvo combussit pariter Jovis ira sequenti.
Structorem celebris misit Normannia Quartum,
Officio Monachum, Roberlum nomine, molem 1137.

Subversum toties qui restauravit; and inter
Presbyteros, litem, de Sedis honor, diremit,
Exornans titulis utramque aequalibus orbem.
Tandem post seriem numerosam, munificamque,
Infignis praesul pietate, vicesimus atque
Tertius, hunc sequitur; qui faustum nominis omen,
Expressit factis, Oliver King dictus, Olivam 1495.

Et Regem vere referebat, ad instar olivam
Pacis erat populo, simul ubertatis and author.
At magis hoc retulit regalis munere Regem,
Quippe opus incultum Rodberti sustulit, atque
Illius, extemplo vice, fundamenta locavit,
Ista; dedit solidis speciosa pleromata muris.
Tecta superstruxit sublimibus alta Columnis,
Areolas soleis tongas substravit and amplas,
Omnia ad hanc pulchram structuras caetera formam,
Et fundis, dubio procul, instructurus opimus,
Morte immortales subito est arreptus ad arces.
Tantae molis erat tam clarum condere Templum!
Ne tamen his tantis perfectio debita caeptis
Deforet, huic operi Colophonem attexuir, almus
Abbatiae Rector Gulielmus Birdus, At eheu!
Sanctis stare diu fatis (proh fata!) negatum est.
Horrida de innocuis fertur sententia famis;
Abbatiae pereunt, fpoliantur Templa, rapinis
Tecta patent, reditus, fundi, Sacraria; quid non?
(Unde nefas tantum Zeli fautoribus?) una
Iste, vel in Cunis, insons discerpitur infans.
Impete diripitur violento haec fabrica; praestant
Saxa, vitrum, plumbum, Campanae, ac omnia praeter
Hoc miserum (...) Tantae at quae Causa ruinae?
Number pietatis amor an amor sceleratus habendi?
Hic amor exitio est Templis, Templique ministris,
Hic amor extinxit clarissima lumina regni.
Nec sinit hic Amor haec extincta resumere lucem,
Nemo bonum Templi, Templi bona quisque requirit.
Hinc haec Cimmeriis, per tot, tam turpiter, annos,
Maxima lux urbis, latuit suppressa tenebris,
Sed pater omnibonus, cui provida cura Suarum est,
Hanc piceam nuper, caelesti campade, noctem
Dispulit e multis Sanctorum cordibus, unde
Accendere suo nostrum de lumine lumen.
Sic tamen, ut quivis magis hinc sibi luceat ipsi,
Ut tanto ad praesens reliquos veneremur honor,
Vivida quos totum celebravit fama per orbem,
Nobile Bellotti sidus, sic emicat, omnes
Inter nutritios Templorum jure colendos,
Plena velut stellis praefulget Luna minutis.
Singula quae cernis pulchrae ornamenta Capellae,
Area, porta, solum, Subsellia, Rostra, fenestrae,
Bellottum unanimi Compellant ore parentem.
Bellottum sonitu reboat Campana canoro,
(...) sonant Bellottum, Balnea, vici,
Compita, Bellotti jactant ad sidera noman,
Quod Christi est cultor simul excultorque sacrorum.
VATICINIUM.
DEsine plura: sat est veterom, peragenda peractis
Succedant; meliora bonis, majora minutis.
Auspiciis huc miss sacris (Sanctissime Praesull)
Sensibus hoec imis superum Consulta repone,
Quae tibi fatidico dispandit carmine Vates,
Laeta ruinoso proclamans omnia Templo.
Quo decet, haenc specta, vultu, sine nube, sereno,
Faecundam laudum segetem sine fine Tuarum.
Molliter ossa Cubant Offae, ac Elphegl, Oliveri
Rodberti, ac Birdi, merito celebrentur honor;
Debita Bellotto reddatur palma benigno.
Pet-pius extento Bellottus floreat aevo.
Non equidem invideo, laetormage, gratulor illi.
Quod si tam celebrem mereatur guttula laudem,
Praemia quae referet largos qui funditat imbres?
Tantum at honorisico cedes, Bellotte, Jacobi,
Effuso tenuis quantum imbris guttula cedit.
Bellotti guttis rorata Capella virescit,
Imbribus assiduis Divi madefacta Jacobi
Integra quam laetos diffundent Templa racemos.
Nec tamen haec aqueo vitis cupit imbre rigari:
Aureolo hanc Danaem saturabis, Jupiter, imbre,
Hinc quae spreta diu languenti Ecclesia morbo
Intabuit; vitam, Te Te medicante resumit,
Ut redit infuso flaccescens vena Lyaeo,
Hujus sint alii fautores, sydera, fani;
Cynthia Bellottus; solus Tu (...), Apollo.
Haec Tu vivifico reparabis membra Calore;
Haec Tu magnifico decorabis Tecta nitore.
Aspice surgenti laetentur ut omnia Templo.
Grandaevum videor mihi prospectare Jacobum,
Aspectus virtute Tui, torpore solutum,
Atque reornato scandentem climate Caelos.
Ut renovat vires, ut concipit aethera mente;
Insuper alatos, ultroque citroque meantes
Coelicolas video, bona climacteribus illis
Nuncia portantes superis: ac gaudia divum
Inde renarrantes terris de Praesule tanto;
Teque cohortantes (propria sat sponte citatum)
Euge! opus hoc mirae pietatis perfice Praesul.
Te nempe ad decus hoc peperit natura, replevit
Dotibus eximii sDeus, ars perfecta polivit,
In gremio reforet ter magni gratia Regis:
Ditavitque bonis tanta ad molimina natis.
Huc opulenta Tibi sua fundit viscera tellus,
Huc Tua Te virtus, sort ancillante, propellit.
Euge l opus hoc mira pietatis perfice Praesul^
Aggredere aeternos, servit Tibi tempus, honores
His petitur Caelum Scalis, hac itur ad astra.
Nec mora, fervet opus, structor, lapicida, peritus
Gypsator, sculptor, fustor, vitrarius: omnes
Artifices instant ardentes. Moenia surgunt,
Dissita quae fuerant loca concamerantur Erismis,
Extima plumboso velantur tegmine, pulchris
Intima Caelantur laquearibus: omnia miris
Sunt decorata modis: respondent omnia vatis.
Nec deerunt mystae, Celebrent qui sacra, frequentes.
Sed numerosa brevi totam quae Complete aedem.
Pompa Sacerdotum, Psalmodorumque Decano
Producente Chorum, Cantabit grata Jehovae
Cantia, tantorum fonti, authorique bonorum.
Haec mihi praesagit meus non ignara futuri.
Corpore (quis neget hoc?) specioso haec templa Jacobus
Donavit praesul (pia nam decreta bonorum
AEquivalent factis) animam Rex ipse Jacobus
(Hoc quoque quis dubitat?) tribuet. Deus alme Jacobi,
Decretis benedic factisque utriusque Jacobi:
O fortunatam nimium, bona si tua noris,
Thermopolin, tali fruenis quae praesule, Rege l
Funde Deo summas ex imo pectore grates,
Et cola, perpetuo pietatis honor, Jacobos.
Quo pede Caepisti, Praesul dignissime, pergas.
Episcopi Responsio.
CUpivi dilu has ruinas, and haec rudera videre, and contemplari, has vero
ruinas, and haecrudera videre, and contemplari jam dolet. Ingrediar tamen, sed
hoc animo, ut nunquam hoc more sim reingressurus, priusquam isthaec melius
tecta videro.

The Bishops Answer.
I Have long desired to see and contemplate these ruins and rubbish, and now
it grieves me to behold them. However, I will enter, but with this intent,
never to re-enter, till I see them better covered.

CHAP. IV
Of the Roman Antiquities of Bathe.

Roman Antiqulties of Bathe divided into three Sorts. An Enumeration and
Explication of them Many read, and understood otherwise, then by Mr. Cambden.
Some Additions. Roman Coins.

THE Roman Antiquities, Inscriptions and Images, in the Walls and elsewhere of
this City, were taken notice of by Mr. Cambden at his being here, and inserted
into his Britannia: yet because some alterations have hapened to some of them
since his time, and others seem to me to be read and understood otherwise, then
he has there represented them(not to mention what I have added, not to be
found in him) I shall give a brief account, and what Explication I can, of them
all, in order as they stand.

I shall distribute them into three Sorts. Tbo^^ that are between the South and
West Gates, Those that are between the West and North Gates; And those in the
Garden, formerly Robert Chambers's, now belonging to William Burvurd.

The first, of the first fort we meet withal, (not taken notice of by Mr.
Cambden) is the draught of a great Face, (which yet I cannot affirm to be truly
Roman) about a foot in breadth, and near as much in length, much resembling the
Moon, as it is usually drawn. Whether this was a memorial of the Idol of some
Pagan (which it not very likely) or rather set up in memory of some Gyagntick
person, whose parts were proportionable to this Face (which is more probable) I
know not. Sure I am that England has had those Sons of Anack as well as other
Countries, as, besides Histories, the prodigious Bones dug up in several
places thereof, do witness; and particularly (seeing we are apt to suspect
things done many years ago, relations of this nature being not like Pictures,
Quibwe longinquo reverentia major) the entire Bones of a man of unusual
dimensions, found not 20 years since, in Gloucestershire, in a Field, between
Over, and Thornbury, do sufficiently evince.

This Sceleton (as I heard it related by a credible Author, who had it from an
eyewitness) was enclosed within the body of a massy Stone, so artificially
cemented together, that the joints were indiscoverable. In the middle thereof
(as it were in a Vault) sat the Bones of two persons, one very great, and the
other less. The Scull of the greater was half an Inch thick, and the Ulna, as
big as the Gentleman's Wrist, who saw it (who yet is a corpulent man, and has
none of the least) and as long as from his shoulder to his fingers ends. There
were Inscriptions also, and some Coins, both Silver and Brass, about, and in
it, but what they were, I cannot yet learn, having not hitherto had the
opportunity to see either the one, or the other.

Since the Relation of the former person, having occasion lately to ride into
that part of Gloucester-shire, where the bones were found, I received a
Confirmation of it from two of the Sons of the Gentleman, in whose ground, and
at whose great charges, they were discoverd, the Father being dead some fout
years since; only with this difference, that whereas the former Relator
intimated the Bone, mentioned before, to be the Ulna, or the Radius, they
apprehend it rather to be to the Os Humeri, or Bone from the Soulder to the
Elbow, which they affirmed to have been as long as from the Elbow of any
ordinary man to his Fingers ends, or the length of that Bone usually and half
the Ulna or Radius.

Also, that both the Sceletons were of extraordinary dimensions but one bigger
then the other, and not both in one Sepulch^e or Vault, but two distinct ones,
distant about 2 yard each from other. The Vault of the greater was not above
five foot long, in the form, (according to their resemblance) of a Jews-harp,
narrow at the Feet, and broader about the Seat: so that this body must sit,
being judged by some intelligent persons that saw it, to have been a man of
nine foot in height. The other was longer, and the Bones supposed to lie at
length, yet very little within the ground; having both great stones about and
over them, in the manner of a Tomb.

After I had received their Information, they were pleased for my further
satisfaction, to accompany me to the place, about a quarter of a mile from
their house, in an Enclosure, hard by the highway side, now made meadow
ground, where I saw one Stone, which was at the entrance of the Vault of the
greater Sceleton, standing in the same place it was first set, about 4 foot
above the ground; to which the other Stones did Answer: so that the length
being five foot, and the height four, confirms the Conjecture of the Stature
of the Body mentioned before.

The Tombstone that lay over the greater person, of an uneven, and (as I may
term it) mazzardy surface, was so vast and weighty, that it was a business of
great difficulty and labor to remove it; of a grayish color without, but
reddish within, and in many places studded with a bright shining Stone,
somewhat resembling the Stones ot St. Vincents Rock near Bristow.

I cannot understand by them there were any Inscriptions, and but two or three
Coins, one having a Falcon (as they called it) which might be a Roman Eagle;
another a Caesar's Head, with a wreath of Laurel about it, supposed to be the
Head of Claudius the Emperor.

The common report there is, that it was the Tomb of Off a, King of Mercia, who
yet was one of the middle Kings of the Saxons, and lived near 250 years alter
the Romans departed out of Britain, of whose extraordinary stature, I know no
Historian that takes any notice. It seems to have been a Golgotha, or common
place of Burial, in those times, the ground thereabouts, in a round, or rather
an Oval figure, for near half an Acre, affording great plenty of other Bones,
and the place bearing the name of Bone-hill. The time of it is discovery was
about the year 1652. Whether this great person were a Roman, or a Saxon, is not
very easy to determine; if a Roman, it is much they should here, contrary to
their common Custom, both preserve the Bones, and leave no Inscription, and if
Saxon, it is as different to solve the Phenomenon of the Roman Coins, being hot
accidentally found among other rubbish, but in the Sepulcher it self. However,
whether Roman, Saxon, or other, which I shall not at this time any further
dispute, it is enough for my present purpose that it was a body of more then
ordinary dimensions, and exceeding the height of an ordinary man in those times
by 3 foot, that is higher by the half then most men now.

2. A Footman with a Spear.

3. A Foot-Soldier brandishing his Sword, and bearing out his Shield.

4. Two kissing and clipping one another, which by the Crook in the right hand
of one, seems to be the remembrance of the kindness of a Shepherd to his
Mistress.

5. A naked man laying hold of a Soldier, which may represent an insulting
Roman, apprehending a poor, distressed, and captivated Britain.

6. Upon a Stone, with Letters standing overthwart, This Inscription:

ILIA



This seems to have been part of the Monument of some Strumpet, ILIA, if I err
not in my conjecture, being the Relict of IVLIA, Wife to Septimus Severus, of
whose Lewdnes AElius Spartianus gives an account in the life of that Emperor;
and ILIA to be understood of Ilia the Mother of Romulus, concerning whom
(omitting Ovid, Juvenal, and others) that make mention of her Chastity) I shall
content my self with the single testimony of Horace, who brings in Lydia, his
Courtezan, making him this reply; Dones non aliae magis
Arsisti, neque er at Lydia post Chloen,
Multi Lydia nominis
Romana vigni clarior Ilia, Id est,
Whilst to Thee none else was dear
And Thou to me did not prefer,
Cloe, then I great of Name
Did outstrip the Roman Dame. ad. lib. 3.



Not that I conceive either of these to have died here, (though Severus himsesf
did, and was buried at York) but some of the Sisterhood may, of later date, and
might have the Superscription of more noted names. For, that they bestowed
Monuments of this sort of Creatures, is evident from a Stone, taken up not long
since, very opportunely, at the Bell in Walcott, with this short Inscription:
VIBIA IVCVNDA Here lies Mary Vibia.




It being by them accounted somewhat absurd, that those who had so great a name
whilst they lived, should be destitute of one, when dead.

Another thing that inclines me to this opininion also, is, a Hare, a venereous
creature, and emblem of Lust: witness that question in the Comaedian, Tute
lepus and: pulpamentum quaeris? unto which these letters were formerly annexed;
for in Mr. Cambdens time it was here running, but since this light-foot is run
quite away.

7. Two Roman heads, one within the Cope of the wall, and another in the
outside thereof, hard by, whereof that within the Cope of the wall, has an ear
standing up, somewhat like the ear of horse.

8. A little higher, to ward the West-gate, le^ters standing cross, which I
place thus: III. US. ISA.



9. As for Medusa's head, with hair all snakes, I cannot upon the best, enquiry
I can make, find it out, unless Mr. Cambden meant that little Image close by
the West-gate, which seems now rather to be one, with hands listed up, and
meeting above the head, as it were rejoicing.

10. Neither does Ophiucus occur to me, which I am apt to think that learned
Antiquarian, in haste, might mistake, for something between the loving couple
and the naked man, like a Rose, with a branch about it, resembling a Serpent.

Of those of the second fort, between the West and North-gates, the First is
part of the Gravestone of one, whose name began with these three letters IOP.
The Inscription thus: VRN



2. The next is a Monument of one of the children of two Romans, Mulus and
Victisarina, with a longer, and exactly Roman Inscription, in a Sepulcher
Table, between two little Images, whereof the one holds the horn of Amalihaa,
the other flourishes a Banner. The Inscription which I read somewhat different
from Mr. Cambden, is this:

D M



i.e. To the dead Ghost of Succ. Petronia, who lived 3 years 4 months, and 14
days, Mulus and Victisarina, in memory of their dear Child, made this. What
that EO at the end of the second line is, unless put for Et mo, and signifies
Et moritur, I cannot at the present conjecture.

3. Hercules bearing his left hand aloft, with a Club in his right hand. Yet I
leave it to others to judge, whether it may not something resemble one of those
little Images mentioned but now.

4. The last I observe, and nearest to the North-gate, is a memorial of a Roman
Senator of the Colony of Gloucester, a City built by the Romans, who also placed
there a Colony called Colonia Glevum. (...) B^.^ p. 360.
The Inscription after this manner.

DEC. COLONIAE GLEV.



i.e. Decurioni Coloniae Glevi, vixit An. 86. yet in the stone, after the
figures LXXX. I observe a Q, in this sort, LXXX^VI. which seems to be without
some signification. If I may be allowed the liberty of a conjecture, I suppose
it might be put for quluque, and ought to be read LXXX^VINQ. There being room
enough for, and as it were the marks of two other letters, N and Q, and the
party aged 85, not 86.

And whereas I render Decurio a Senator, I pitch on this signification of the
word, as most proper here, of which Rosenus gives the reason; Senatores in
Coloniis, ut etiam in Municipiis, Decurionos vocabantur, eam ob causam, quod
Pomponio ^C. Ant. Romans L. 10. c. 2^.
Auctore, decima pars little qui deduocrentur, publici consilii gratia, sit
solita conseribi. I know Festus mentions another, and more usual signification
of the word, to wit, an Officer over ten horsemen. Decuriones, inquit,
appellantur, quis denis equitibus praesunt; of which, if any one please to
understand it, he shall have my leave.

5. As for leaves folded in, and Hercules streining two snakes, I cannot be so
fortunate yet, (though my search has been particular) to light upon it.

The Antiquities in the Garden are only two Inscriptions in two Grave-stones,
with their Urns: The one an Epitaph of Cains Murrius, of the tribe called
Arniensis, (the 25 tribe among the Romans, so called from Arnus, a River in
Tuscany, as Car. Sigonius, and On. Panvinius relate; a modest pleader in the
Julian Court, a Soldier of the second Legion, and continuing in pay 25 years.
The Inscription as follows.

C. MURRIVS



2. The other, an Epitaph of Marcus Valerius, a Latin, (for so I read, and not
Eatinus, as Mr. C. a Soldier of Augustus his Legion (if not the xx) 35 years
of age, and 20 years in pay. The true Copy thus:

DIS. MANIBVS monogram resembling V imposed on inverted V AN.



Where it may be noted by the way, that this man had some favor to be admitted
at 15 years of age Al. ab. Alex. Genesis dier. L.8. c.20.
, when as the usual time of listing Soldiers was not till 17. Also, whether C.
EQ. be to be read, as some would have it, Cohortis Equitum, I somewhat doubt,
the Copia pedestres, or foot, commonly among the Romans, being divided in
Cohortes, Manipulos and Centurias, the Equestres, or Horse, in Turmas and
Decurias.

Many Roman Coins are also found in these parts two of which I have by me,
dug up at Walcott (whence the two last Inscriptions came) in the same house
with the Inscription of Vibia beforementioned. The one near 1600 years old,
being a Brass-piece of Vespasians, in which all the letters on the face side
are decayed, except AES.VES, and some marks of PAS. on the reverse, Cat. Si^on.
de Jur. Romans l. 1. c. 15. Rosc. Ant. Romans 1. x. c. 5.
PIETAS AUGUSTI (as I think) the three former letters of Pietas being very
obscure) with an Image between S C. signifying Senatus Consultum. The second,
some 200 years after, bearing the name of Carausius, who in the time of
Dioclesian and Maximian Emperors, took upon him the Imperial Ensigns, and
seized Britian. Ca^bden. Br. p. 72.
Caius. Carausius. Pius. Falix. Augustus.
The Circumscription thus: C. CARAVSIVS P.F. AVG. on the other side, PAX AVG.
and under an Image, MLXX. which I suppose to be the year ab Hrbe Condita.

CHAP. V.
Of the Nature, Use, and Virtues of the Baths.

Baths of Bath much of the nature of the Thermae Aquenses in Germany. Certain
Parallels between. Bath and Akin Bladud in some measure vindicated.

I Come now to speak something of the Nature, Use, and Virtues of the Baths.
And here it cannot be expected I should say much, because my experience of them
as yet has been but little, and the Observations I have made seem fitter, (as
they are intended) for a foundation to a greater work, (which time, and variety
of experiments must complete) then, at the present to be communicated to the
public. And to make some compensation for my brevity in this thing (which is
justly deemed the most material of all other) I shall take the boldness to
engage, as soon as time and opportunity shall permit, to make a through search
into the cause of the Heat, Nature, and efficacious operations of the Baths,
and perhaps give a more satisfactory account of the former, than yet has been
given by any; and for the later, I shall not build on the hay and stubble of
the talk and relations of persons biased and concerned, but on the solid basis
of reason, observation and experience. In the mean time, as I would not seem
ridiculous to some, treating too largely of what I have not yet made a clear
inspection into, so I would not be accounted absurd by others, in wholly waving
the principal part of my Subject.

To offer then a course bit to the eager appetite, till time shall favor us
with a better treat; I conceive that the Baths of Bath come very near the
nature of the Aqueuses in Germany, the knowledge of which may be a great help
to the better understanding of our own. I shall therefore, out of the succinct,
but pithy discourse of these waters, composed by the learned and Judicious
Physician Fran. Fabritius Ruremundanus, sometime Physician there, take notice
of some Parallels between that place and Bath, in which, besides many pretty
remarkable Coincidences, the nature of the Country, and parts adjacent, is in
some measure discovered.

The first is, that Histories relate, that the Hot Waters there were found out
by a Prince, one Granus, brother, as it is said, to Nero the Roman Emperor; who
first discovering these Baths, among the mountains and woods, built a Castle,
and dwelt there, of which, in the Authors time, there was a monument standing,
called Turris Grani.

Secondly, That the City was called by the name of the Waters, to wit, Aquae
Granis, which some improperly call Aquisgranum. Ab incolis Aquoe Grani
appellatae sunt, cum Thermae, tum locus ipse, deducto scil. nomine ab Aquis
Calidis, and Grano repertore, mansitque appellatio postea and Urbi, nisi quod
quidam non satis apt immuta inflexione, Aquisgranum appellent. The Inhabitants
says Ruremundanus, call the Place, as well as the Waters, Aquae Grani, by a
name drawn from the Hot Waters, and Granus the Founder, which name afterward
the City had, but that some, not so properly, changing the termination, call it
Aquisgran.

Thirdly, That the City is sita in valle, and monlibus circumquaque cincta,
seated in a bottom, and encompassed about with Hills. That the Hills (besides
Wood for Fire and Timber) contain Quarries of Stone for Building. That cold
Springs arise within and without the City in great abundance. That at some
distance off is found Lead, and a Bituminous Earth, which mine Author calls
Terra nigra, foco culinaria aptissima. That in the City are two Chief Bathes,
The one called the Kings, the other the Cornelian. p. 14
In the Suburbs, not far from the South Gate, are more Hot springs, called,
from the abundance of Hogs that are there about, the Porcetan Bathes, which
being not so powerful as the rest, are less used. And lastly, that I may
mention something that would be advantageous to both, and both do want, viz. a
Navigable River, which says Rurem. would complete its happiness. Nibil,
inquit, ad faelicitatem deesse videtur, quam Navigabilis Fluvius.

Now to give you the Counter-part of the parallel: It Is obvious to observe,
that to the first corresponds the History of King Bladud, which seems not to be
so fabulous, as many men imagine. For, probably, many Relations we have of
persons, and things, and of those elder times, when ignorance so much
prevailed, and men had little subtilty in their actions, and less politeness in
their speech, may have much of truth in them, though they now seem odd, and
rediculous to us. And I am apt to think, that many old Realities do suffer
much, on no other account then to the temper, and genius of those times. Just
as it is reported of some old women in Lancashire, that they go for Witches,
merely because they look like such. Not considering, that a great deal less
time then 2000 years, has made considerable alterations, in the manners,
lives, and customs of men.

And whereas King Bladud had the name of a Magitian, I look upon it as a
greater argument of his more then ordinary learning, then note of reproach, the
wisest men in those times, and long after to, being reputed such, and he
recorded a wife and eloquent Philosopher, and Mathematian, accomplished (as the
times then would bear) with treasures of foreign, and domestic knowledge,
having spent in Study, (as is reported) besides many, doubtless, afterward, in
his own Country, eleven years in his Minority, at Athens, Of whom that you may
receive a more particular account, I shall not think much to give you the
English of what J. Bate in his Book De Scriptoribus Anglicis, writes of him.
Bladud surnamed the Magician, the 10th King of the Britains, was sent in his
Youth, to the famous City of Athens in Greece, there to be instructed in
Philosophy, and the Liberal Sciences. And when he had there studied a certain
time, hearing of the death of Ludhudebras his Father, he returned home again,
bringing with him four expert Masters in many Sciences, not thinking it meet
that his Country should lack any longer such singular ornaments of Learning as
they were. These Philosophers, as Merlin writes, he placed at Stamford, in a
very pleasant Soil, and made Schools for them, to the intent they should there
read the liberal Sciences, where they had many times a great Audiences. He was
a man very cunning and skillful, as well in Profane Sciences of the Gentiles,
as in all Wisdom and Knowledge that the Graecians excelled in; but especially
studious and very well seen in the Mathematical Arts and Sciences, whereupon
one of the Sybils, that lived in his time, wrote and dedicated unto him a Book
of Prophesies. Some affirmed that the same Bladud built the City of Bathe, and
therein made by a wonderful Art, certain Hot Bathes, for the use and commodity
of the people, which do yet remain to this day, committing the Conservation
thereof to the Goddess Minerva, in whose honor be caused a Temple to be there
erected, to the intent, that being preferred by so mighty a Goddess, they
should never fail, but continue for ever, they write also, how that he read and
taught Necromancy throughout all his Realm. But these things I suppose are
seigned matters.

To the second particular answers the Name of Bathe, taken from the Waters. For
this Name, as is noted before, was given to the City, some time after its
foundation, when the Hot Waters came into greater request, being called first,
after the name of the Founder, Caer Blaeidin.

To the third, agrees the situation of Bathe, being exactly the same. To the
fourth, the Quarries of Stone, upon Claverton Down, Horsecomb, etc. To the
fifth, the Springs of Cornwall in Wallcot-fields, Beechenclift, etc. To the
sixth, Timsbury, Burnet, (and though the distance be somewhat greater)
Mendip-Hills. To the seventh, the Kings Bathe, with its apperdage, the Queens
and Cross-Bath. To the last, the Horse-Bath, without the South-Gate, does in
some measure, answer, though it has no Hot Springs of its own, but is supplied
by the Overplus of Water coming from the Kings Bath.

And whereas it is recorded, That these Bathes are not wholesome at all hours,
being from 8 of the Clock in the morning, to three in the Afternoon, Scalding
Hot. Carbl^us Br. page 233.
It is clear, that the inequality of the heat proceeds not so much from the
Waters (which in themselves, are observed to vary very little from a constant,
and equal degree of heat, both Winter, and Summer) as from the beating of the
Beams of the Sun in hot weather on the Surface of them, which being more
troublesome to the Bathes, and Mornings and Evenings more convenient for
Bathing, the middle part of the day is not made use of, though the Waters then
are as wholesome as ever. But we may well pardon this learned and industrious
person, if he has not in this, and some other particulars, done the Bathes
right, in regard the vastness of his design, and urgency of his occasions,
might hasten him hence, so that, happily, he could not thoroughly inform himself
in things of this Nature.

To conclude this Chapter, I shall mention some parts of the description of
that City, mentioned before, in the Authors own words, and compare them with
what Description Dr. Venner has given of this of Bathe. Aquae Grani appellatae
sunt ab incolis, cum Thermae, tum locus ipse, deducto scilicet nomine ab Aquis
Calidis etc. Ru^ewuad. De Baln. Aq. p. 11. 12. etc.
Haec urbs tametsi in valle sita, and montibus circumquaque septa sit,
incredibili tamen gaudet aeris salubritate. In proximo urbis ambitu lata fere
planities est, in qua and pascua sunt, alendo pecori commodissima, and agri
pingues. Nec desunt funtes, tam feris pascua irrigantes, quam intus diversis
urbis locis, public in plateis scaturientes. Ad Orientem Rhenum, ad occidentem
habet Mosam. Sed alias dotes ^mnes, meo quidem judicio, vincunt Aquarum
Calidarum uterrimi simul ac Saiuberrimi fontes. The words of Dr. Venner, as
near the English of the former as may be, are these. (...) Bath^^^.
Bathe, so called from the Bathes in it, is a little, well compacted City, etc.
Although the site thereof, by reason of the Vici^ity of Hills, may to some seem
not pleasant, being almost environed with them, yet for goodness of Air,
neerness of great and delectable Rivers, pleasant Meadows, and plenty of
excellent Water, brought down from the adjacent Hills into the Streets, it is
pleasant, and happy enough; But for the Hot Waters, that boil up even in the
midst thereof, is more delectable, and happier then any other of the Kingdom.

CHAP. IV
Of the Bathes in particular here.

Of the three Hotter Bathes, viz. The Kings, Queens, and Hot Bathe. But chiefly
of the Kings, and in what Distempers Bathing therein is profitable.

HAving thus far drawn the Parallel between Bathe and Akin which, as they
cannot be conceived to agree in every punctilio, (no Comparison, as they say,
running on four feet) so it seems they cannot correspond in some of those
particulars before recited, without a Communication also in the Waters of many
of the same Medicinal Virtues. Having done this, I proceed to a light gast and
relish, of the Virtues, and usefulness of every Bath in particular.

And here taking it for granted, till better information, what the very learned
and incomparable Doctor Jorden has observed, That there is very little
difference in the Nature of the Bathes of Bathe, but in the degree of heat,
they all proceeding from the same Mine, which according to the intenseness or
remissness of its heat in diverse parts, and the directness or indirectness of
the passages from it, may cause this Variation; and also, that the Minerals
impregnating the Bathes in general, are Bitumen, Nitre, and Sulphur, I shall
run the Parallel a little further, and speak something in particular of all the
Bathes; and first of the Kings.

The Kings Bathe exceeds the rest in Heat and Dimensions, being the hottest,
and largest of all. And whereas there is another that for some time has, I
know not how, apprepriated the name that is common to them all, and therefore
gives most people occasionto imagine the heat to be more intense there then any
where else, I conceive, at present, the heat of that Bath, to come as much
short of that of the Kings, as the Cross Bath, in that instance, yields to the
Queens.

This Bath, as to its virtues, much resembles the Kings Bath at Akin, that is,
consists of the same Minerals, though probably, not in the same proportion; the
German Kings Bath being accounted chiefly Sulphurous; This of Bath, Bituminous.
Which, yet notwithstanding considering the great affinity Bitumen has with
Sulphur, and the slender difference in their qualities, being bothsupposed
moderately hot and dry, and therefore must both (according to the common
notion) attract, resolve, mollisie, and discuss, will not alter much the Case,
not to mention that Baccius and Bauhinus, and (what is more natural) two of our
own Countrymen, Doctor Turner, and Doctor Venner, do all agree, That they are
chiefly Sulphurous. And whereas Rurem. faith of the Kings Bath at Akin; Refert
haec aqua modis omnibus naturam Sulphuris, cum admissione Nitri modici; making
mention of Sulphur and Nitre, but omitting Bitumen, I question not, but upon
Examination, it would be found that Bitumen also was concerned in that Bath, as
well as the Cornelian in the same City. De Baln. Aq. p. 18.
And the Catalogue of Diseases, for which this Bath is profitable, suggests as
much: bituminous waters being of a heating, drying nature, and suppling the
nerves.

The Encomium he gives of this Bath, and the Diseases he affirms it to do good
in, (which for the most part agree to this of Bath also) are as fellows. This
Bath is profitable for many distempers, especially cold and moist: for it heats
powerfully, dries, drives the humors from the inward parts to the outward,
discusses, attenuates, abstergeth, and that I may speak more particularly, good
chiefly in affections of the Nerves, as Convulsions, Palsies, as well alone, as
accompanying an Apoplexy, in defect of sense or motion, or both. It helps
stiff, benumbed, and trembling limbs, does good in the several sorts of Gouts,
especially Hip and Hand-gout. Discusseth Tumors: Relieveth those that are
streightened about the Midriff: those that have a Cachexy, or ill habit of
body: The Dropsy (especially the Anasarca) and Jaundice. Those that are
troubled with a cold distemper of the Stomach, Liver or Spleen. Excites and
restores Appetite. Eases pains in the sides (without a favor) Bowess or
Loins. Helps cold and moist distempers of the Womb; furthers Conception,
provokes the Terms, gives ease in uterine pains; takes off weariness as well
spontaneous, as by excessive labor and travel, etc. most proper for those of a
cold Constitution, and somewhat corpulent, and not so convenient for dry and
entenuated persons. To which may be added Lethargies, Epilepfies, Cramps,
Deafness, Forgetfulness, Aches, and many others of the like nature, with the
Scorbute, (provided the body be duly prepared before, and the (...) in that
distemper well corrected) and the extremity of the pains of the Spleen.

The Hot Bath is somewhat cooler, and profitable in the like cases; and Dr.
Venner has observed most essicacious for any weakened and relaxed limb.

The Queens Bath is the next for heat, and has the same virtues with the
Kings, out of which it was taken, having no hot springs of its own, but is
supplied out of the Kings, where the water standing as it were in a Cooler, is
made more temperate, and fitter for tender bodies, that cannot well endure such
a degree of heat, as in the Kings Bath.

CHAP. VII
Of the Cross Bath, and its Virtues.

THE Cross Bath, as to its degree of Heat, abating somewhat of the Queens, is
the coolest of all, of which I may say, as a stranger sometime did of this
City, that it is E minimis pulcherrimum, and though it be little, is not on
that, nor any other account despicable; Inest sua gratia parvis.

This Bath is thought by Dr. Jorden to participate more of Nitre than the rest,
and therefore is observed to supple and mollify somewhat more, receiving a
greater degree of cleansing and penetrating from the Nitre; Consonant to which
it is said of the Cornelian Bath in Akin. Cap. 17.
Rurem. de Bal. Aq. p. 21.
Aqua hujus Balnei sulphurea quidem est, sed salis non paruns habet admistum,
quin and bitaminis nonnihil in esse certis indiciis deprehenditur; Quo fit ut
haec aliquanto valentiore sit exiccandi, extennandique potissimum facultate,
quam aliae, discut it, abstergit, ac mollit, i.e. The water of this Bath is
indeed sulphurous, but has a considerable quantity of salt mixed with it, and
some Bitumen; wherefore this has a more powerful drying, and attenuating
faculty than the rest, discusses, cleanses, and mollifies.

And whereas instead of Nitre, he mentions Salt, the difference, though
something I confess, cannot be great, since many of the same virtues are both
by him and others attributed to saline Waters, as Nitrous; Nitre it self being
a kind of Salt. Therme Nitrosae omnino easdem facultates habent, quas Salsae,
etc.
From the mixture of the Sulphur and Bitumen, it heats, discusses, and supples;
from the Nitre, it receives an addition of cleansing, and penetrating. Fuch.
Inst. Med. lib. 2^ S. 5. c. 28.


This Bath then must be of Excellent Use in all Contractions, Indurations, and
Resolutions of nervous parts, disperse, and dissipate cold Tumors; relieve
Cachectick, Hydropick, and Corpulent persons; oppose the Sciatica, Cramps,
Convulsions, Defluxions, Barrenness, and the Whites in Women; useful in
Cutaneous Distempers; as the Itch, Scabs, Morphew, and Leprosy. Good for
fleshy, cold, moist bodies; and not so proper for hot, and dry Constitutions.

And here I must crave leave to add, that the reason I conceive why the Cross
Bath comes not up to the heat of the rest, is partly on the account of its
being served by four Springs, but chiefly proceeds from the greater proportion
of Nitre it contains, which being of a cooling nature, may more allay the heat
arising from the Sulphur and Bitumen there, then in the other Bathes. And that
Nitre does more abound in that Bath, then in the rest, may probably be
collected, as from other reasons, which I here forbear to mention, so partly
from this, that it sooner penetrates the body, and has an easier, and quicker
ingress into its passages and pores, to the great relief of some, though it
seems Paradoxical, in Nephritick Distempers.

But I hope I may be excused on the Score of my former Engagement, if I am not
more particular at this time, in things of this nature, till a just amassment
of Observations and Experiments, and a rational deduction of Conclusions from
them, (which I hope in some time to accomplish) shall either confirm me in the
opinion I now have of the Nature and Virtues of the Baths of Bathe, or supply
me with a better.

Atque haec Hactenus.
FINIS.
Sphalmata Typographica.
PRef. Page 1. Line 14. Read review. l. 16. r. quacking. p. 4. l. 15. for only,
r. with. p. 5. l. 27. for the fig, 48. r. 57. p. 11. l. 9. r. from the Place.

Epist. Ded.
Page 3. in the marg. against Galba, insert Ingenium Galbae male habitat.

Appendix.
Page 4 in margent, for Hunesey, r. Hunes. p.5. in marg. r. Manlius.p.7.l.7. r.
fawningly. p.8. l.7.r. names in l. 10. for is, r. are. l. 31. blot out to. p.9.
l.29. r. me to th. p.14.r. Marius. p.16. l. r. along siege.p.19.l.16. r.
printed. p.21. l.12. for 0(...), r. (...). l.r.a man that pr.p.26.l.5. for
Burkeley, r. Burghley. p.28.l.9. r. Jactis, l.20. r. limina. p.29. l.17. r.
Rodb. l.20.r. urbem. l.22.r regalis. l.ult.r. pteromata. p.30. l.2. r. longas.
l.11. r. fanis. l.16. r. prostant. p.31.l.2.r. suorum.l.3.r. lampade.
p.33.l.5.r. Mi^ae. l.9.r. fusor.l.14. r.votis. l.18.r. praeducente.l.19.r.
Cantica. p.34. l.1. r. diu. p.39. l.13. r. Septimius. p.40. in marg. r. Merry
Vib. p.43. l.23. r. qui. for Rose, Rosin. p.48. l.2. r. Grani. l.8. r. immutat
^. p.50.l.33.r. preserved. p.55.l.23.r. material. p.56.l.15.r. fevour. l.31.r.
Exten.


