DIVINITY AND MORALITY IN ROBES OF POETRY: Composed for the Recreations of the
Courteous and Ingenious.

By the Author Tho. Jordan.

Quod meus hortus habet, sumas impune licebit,
Si dederis nobis, quod tuus hortus habet.
LONDON Printed by R. A.

DIVINITY AND MORALITY IN ROBES OF POETRY. A Sacred New-yeares Gift; Dedicated
unto all Lovers of Christianity, Professors of Piety, and Moral Honesty.
Preambulation.
IF pious Gifts (by curious disquisition)
Prove not the Badg of antique Superstition;
Or if a Rhyme, reduced to holy Reason,
May be allovv'd to celebrate the season,
And find admission in a noble heart,
As much as they, whose Riches can impart
Gold of Peru, or those admired works,
That spread the Tables of Triumphant Turks.
I hope the low Oblation of a friend
(That only makes your fair esteem his end)
May find (as it deserves) more grace then he
Whose bounty is a Baud to treachery:
My gift is made of Wishes, such as may
(If granted) live with you, when night and day
Admit of no distinction: perfect bliss
Is now my Theme, and that I wish is this.
The New years Gift.
A New Soul blanched in sin-dissolving tears,
And pious promises for future years,
Possess your mortal Mansion, may no Times
Witness the guilt of our re-acted crimes:
May you disband your bosom Sins, and be
Atton'd with God's immortal Monarchy:
Although each day ye pay (in sighs and groans
Your penitential contributions:
May the red Rain which our rude wrath let fall
In numerous showers of vengeance National,
Be all washed out, and may Religions fame
In England, bear but one celestial Name:
May all those desperate distinctions that
Have made our Island much unfortunate,
Be so composed by Religious Laws,
That rigor may no more dispute the Cause:
For (I confess to my intelligence,
That has relation but to common sense)
It is a Paradox, that all the wise
Holy and Learned in large Mysteries,
Of Church and State, that in convention sit
Crowned with the Genius of a Nation's wit,
With all the aids that Art and Nature can
Contract within the circuit of man,
Should flight the Helm and let the peoples fate
Be left unto the rageing storms of state;
Such is a Civil War, whose fury vents
Artillery, instead of Arguments;
As if the Holy Ghost (Spirit of Love)
That once descended like a Turtle Dove:
Should now resign his function, and appear
Like a devouring Vulture: may this year
Register no such Apparitions, but
May all tranquillity (that God e're put
Into the Power of Union, on a Nation
Received to Grace by true Humiliation)
Fall on your Souls, may a New Spring of tears
Renew your Graces, Health, Wealth, Beauty, Years:
And may your fair Posterity nere know
The wild Confusion of our modern woe;
May Peace and verity (conjoined in Glory)
Crown the Conclusion of our tragic Story,
May Schism sink, and Truth be held supreme,
(Whose Robe of Sanctity has nere a seam)
And let that fool which well deserves the Rod,
For saying in his heart there is no God;
Be better principl'd, for he speaks Treason,
Not only against Religion but Reason*
May the gross mists of error be dispel'd,
That curious heresies (so hotly held)
May be displayed, for then the radiant Beams
Of righteousness will dissipate their dreams,
Let nothing enter in your hearts, but what
The Holy Spirit does communicate
By sacred Law and Gospel; what is writ
I^ them, we must obey, what not, omit:
May you be charitable, yet live free
From any Popish censure; may you be
Filled with firm faith, not that which yields the Turks
Pre-eminence, before ye in good werks:
May you believe, God's stock of mercy is
Larger then all men's crimes, yet let not this
^^^ffess ye with such vvarrant of salvation,
To think one sin may not destroy a Nation:
May you believe that the Apostles Creed
(Which some late Novelists forbear to read)
Is of such power, that you without it are
Farther from bliss, then Saints from Civil War.
Let God's own Prayer be your daily task,
For it contains all that we ought to ask:
Those deprecations sum up every want,
And whatsoever God is pleased to grant:
(...) that Petition cannot be ill writ,
When he that made it, means to answer it.
Let not bright Gospels Exposition be
A Lock and Key to its own mystery:
What Scripture has begun, let Scripture finish,
Who comments false, does both add and diminish;
Which is a fearful crime, may you be free
From such transgression, may Divinity
Illuminate your Intellect; may no
Fallacious disputations overthrow
The Pillars of your Piety, or make
The Fundamentals of your Faith to shake.
When these effects (for which I pray) appear,
You will confess it is a good New-year;
For if all come to pass which I have said,
It Is the best New years-Gift that e're you had.
On forgetfulness in holy Duties.
FOrgetfulness can be no Plea for folly,
For God commands, Remember thou keep holy.
On the Heart.
OUr God requires the whole heart, or none,
And yet he will accept a Broken one.
On rash Judgment.
CAll not thy Brother Reprobate, for sure
Where God will heal, there is no wound past cure.
On an Evil Tongue.
THe Tongue as well as Hand, deep wounds affords,
There Is but one Letter betwixt Swords and words.
A Dialogue betwixt the Flesh, and the Spirit.
Fle. COme prithee leave this reading; let me hear
Some jests, or want on tales, then shall my ear
Be linked unto your Oratory, now
I am so dull, and drowsy, that (I vow)
I can no more give audience, what do call
This petty Book thou art so pleased withal?

(Spi.) It is the cure of souls, and it contains
Our life or death, our glory, or our pains,
Here Is the great Law of God, where man may view
What he ought most to covet, most eschew;
The glass of purity, where mighty Kings
Behold their bodies to be earthen things;
And (with the wisest wise man) lowdly cry,
All worldly honors are but vanity:
Here is thy first Creation, where it is shown
How thou and I first met, and joined in one;
This shows the state we lived in, how we were
Blessed with the plenty of a pregnant year
The Husbandman nere toiled for: there we knew
No hate, no strife, nor where black Malice grew:
We had no envious Neighbors, but were free
From doing, or receiving injury;
The Beasts were made your subjects; and as true
Unto each other, as they were to you:
They had no Civil Wars, no envy neither,
For Wolves and Lambs might eat their meat together:
They lived secure within their proper holes,
And Lions did disdain to tread on Moles:
This was thy Paradise, where all was free
Unto thy use, but one excluded Tree;
Where thou had lived till now, had Gods Command
Prevailed with thee before the woman's hand:
Under what misery does poor man groan,
When as the flesh must suffer for the bone?
This is the Bible which I read; by this
I hope to tread the perfect path to bliss.

Fle. What kind of bliss I pray?

Spi. Heaven.

Fle. What Is that?

Spi. A City built for the Regenerate:
So situate, that neither Sun nor Moon
Need rise or set to make it night or noon:
They both are useless, light and brightness there,
Are not confined in Center, or in Sphere:
Each Angel's face is more resplendent fair,
Then Phoebus when he guilds the Western Air:
The sacred Citizens do never fear
The furious famine of a fruitless year,
They live in such sweet plenty; and where none
Need fly the City from infection;
There Is no defraud, no greedy great man plyes
The good Kings ear for base Monopolies,
For his peculiar gain; the poorer sort
Nere suffer for the Riot of the Court.
This is that place of Bliss, who more would know,
Must first crave Faith, he may believe it so:

Fle. The place is fraught with Glory; there is more
Essential joy, then I e're heard before:
But, tell me one thing (pray) May we not there
Enjoy our Mistrisses, as we do here?
Kiss and embrace them? May we not drink high?
Swagger and roar?

Spi. No, it is Impiety.
It Is that which ruins Earth; when you are there
You Will feel no spark of such profane desire,
That Is no true heaven, but a fained one,
By Mahomet in his black Alcoron.

Fle. Thou know (dear Spirit) that I long have loved
Fair Iesabel.

Spi. An Harlot most ayprov'd.

Fle. A sweet unblemished Beauty, in each eye
An Angel sits.

Spi. Beware Idolatry.

Fle. Shall I not meet her there?

Spi. Yes, if from me
Ye both will take advice.

Fle. Most willingly.

Spi. Repent.

Fle. What Is that?

Spi. A thing ye both must know;
Or else nor you, nor she can thither go:
Join both your hands, then (with as great desire
As e're ye met) disjoyn, part, and retire:
Weep, sigh, and wring your hands, not that ye part,
But 'cause ye met together.

Fle. Oh! my heart!

Spi. It must be done, then to your Chambers go
To Kne^le, and Pray ye may continue so;
Now she seems fair, but then you will think her foul
As is an Ethiop, both in face and Soul.

Fle. Not for a thousand worlds, these Eyes I wear
I cherish cause they tell me she is fair;
For nothing I adore the Omnipotence
Of my Creator, more then this one sense,
Which shows her Beauty, and so much I prize,
That I could wish all senses e'ls were Eyes:
Had Argus seen this object, Sleep had never
Gave Hermes power to make him sleep for ever:
Not though his oaten reed were as acute,
In Art and sweetness as Apollo's Lute;
When underneath his lovely Daphne he
Sat sweetly warbling forth her Elegy.

Spi. He whom you do adore, for that one sense
Disposed it not unto that End, from thence
Nere came an ill effect, He nere gave eyes
To be adult'rate with Idolatryes.

Fle. Now let thy resolution be as free
To answer one thing I shall question thee;
I Will tell thee how thy Counsel thrives.

Spi. Say on,
I freely grant thee my attention.

Fle. It Is thus then, may not some familiar friend
Conveigh my mind in Letters?

Spi. To what end?
It Is ill to think on her, would you reveal
Your sinful thoughts, under your Hand and Seal?
Think (when you are a happy Convert) how
The fatal Legend will discourage you.

Fle. Then Iesabel farewell; Oh! how her Name
Creates in me an unexpiring flame,
It Is a strange Riddle I should part with thee,
And from thy presence find felicity,
A thing I will not credit, therefore cease
Vain Spirit; so to interrupt the peace
'Twixt me and my fair Love, I will be gone
To reunite my first affection:
Tell fools your tales of heaven, all is hell,
That does not appertain to Iesabel.

Spirit alone.
THus am I daily hurried to and fro,
From vice to vice, still am I forced to go
With him to each lewd practice, Thou whose might
Is most Omnipotent and infinite,
Send me a guard of virtues, such as are
Perfect, and powerful for a Civil War.
Faith, thou shall be my General, and lead
My warlike Troops, thou on sure ground do tread:
Let us march on then, victory is sure,
When as the Lord of Hosts makes all secure;
Prepare thee Flesh, I come to war, not woo,
Although thou bring the world and Devil too;
And e're this sacred Battle we conclude,
Thy might, or mine, or both, shall be subdued.
An Acrostich on my very worthy friend Mr. MARK WARD.
May all the real joys that can appear
Within the Circle of the next new year
Attend your wish; may no true pleasures be
Above the reach of your capacity:
Religion guard your Conscience, may your health
Replenish; may you wallow in your Wealth:
Knowledge support you, may you never vow
Divided Love; and when soever you
Enter the List of Wedlock; may that prize
Be loving, virtuous* young, rich, fair, and wise.
An Epitaph in an Acrostich, composed on the Name of his virtuous Sister Mrs.
Joane Ward.
Jn this plain piece of humble earth lies one,
Whom no unworthy feet should tread upon,
One whose chaste life did very much improve
A Daughters duty, and a Sisters love:
Almighty God was still her contemplation,
Religion was her da^ly recreation;
Nothing came in her Maiden thoughts that could
Defile the Fountain of her Virgin Blood;
Eternal joys contain her now; let us then
Mourn, until we meet with her again.
An Elegiack, in a double Acrostich, sacred to the memory of the most truly
virtuous Mrs. MARGARET JESSOP, Wife to the much honored WILLIAM JESSOP Esquire.
who deceased the first of November, 1651.
Mourn, or depart, for they whose cheeks be dry,
Are not for our confluent CompanI
All that we talk is tears; and when we see
One smile, we look upon it like Heresy
Reader, within this Marble Mansion lies
A motive would make tears in Tyrants eyeS
Grief would become their Mistress, they would dress
Themselves in nothing but unhappinesS
All the small virtues God did e're bestow
On Womankind, lies here in FoliO
Religion was her Pilot, and her prop,
From whose sententious tongue did always droP
Eternal Language; such as Angels sip
In sighs and Prayers from a Convert's LiP
To speak her larger, he that further dives,
Must Summon in all the Superlatives.
The CHARACTER of a Corrupt STATESMAN, that is solely devoted to Selfe-Ends,
But pretends to Piety.
A Corrupt Statist is a thing in whom
There is contract all Evil that can come:
The soul of Satan in a Saint's disguise,
The grand Elixir of Hypocrisies:
The secret Issue of long-lurking spite,
The Prince of darkness in a robe of light.
His tongue is tipped with Mercy, but his Maw
(If he be moved) disgorgeth Golgotha:
He is the root of Ruin, Mischief's Mint,
The Alcharon put in Geneva print;
The saddest object Peace can fix her eyes on,
Whose Prayers are Pistolls, and his Tears are Poison*
He has (if the old Maxim do not miss)
Judas his soul by Metempsychosis:
And (that it may profoundly be undone)
Can kiss a Country to confusion:
To that point where Ambition does conduct,
All Evil shall assist, no Blood obstruct:
He is the Peoples Servant in esteem,
But (in effect) they are all Slaves to him:
He has a veil to varnish every vice
He does commit, but monstrous Avarice;
That sin is so gygantick, all his wit
(Put in pretenses) cannot cover it:
As AEsop's Cat transform,d into a Maid,
Sat simpering at Supper, unbetray'd,
Till (by unusual chance) a Mouse she saw
Cross ore the Board, then she began to claw:
So is his nature sleek'd with soft applause,
Till Pride or Profit make him spread his Paws:
From him all sly dissimulations issue,
His loins bear Sackcloth when his heart wears tissue*
He seems to pray and unto God alone,
Though (in his heart) he does believe there is none.
Where he bears rule, that Nation needs no Rod,
He is a Devil in the Name of God.
Attend, and you shall hear him (though in brief)
Rehearse the Articles of his Belief.
The Politician in Person.
Greatness is summum bonum; to be high
Tempted the Angels in their Clarity
(Creatures to whom the Sun is but a Shade
Before that Sin had Birth, or Man was made)
Nor could this lust of optimacy miss
Innocent Adam in his Genesis;
Then though our blood to Thrones cannot advance,
We have Ambition by inheritance:
If to be Great be the best thing we know,
No Actions are amiss that make us so;
Since to be High is that all men intend,
No matter by what steps we do ascend.
That Man that hates a rising Statesman, would
O're-top his highest Neighbors if he could,
And cares not if vast Families do fade
By him with Suits of Law and tricks in Trade:
He will seize Houses though he cannot take Towns,
It Is the same Crime for Compters as for Crowns:
A Princes Throne is chained as much to chance,
As is the meanest Man's inheritance.
Nature it self, our most indulgent Mother,
Does ruin one thing to erect another;
Observe the flux and reflux of the Ocean,
Progress and regresse are the soul of motion:
Can it be ill to climb the highest seat,
Since Men are Good, on purpose to be Great?
Why should those Causes merit our neglect
Whose subtle series reach to the effect?
Or if our fortunes would not have us high,
Why then do all Concurrences comply?
If it be not the destiny's intents
To make us Great, why have we great Events?
Councils, and Arms, in strange Meanders flow,
Yet meet, sure Providence would have it so:
Though Mariners can Ship and Tackling find
Fit to set Sail, they cannot raise a Wind:
The Gamester boldly does his hand advance
To throw the Die, but cannot guide the Chance:
This (well promised) what is done, must be
By an inevitable Destiny;
The wisest man that ever was writes thus
In his sublime Ecclesiasticus:
Ecclus. 1.5.
How many Kings have on the ground sat down,
And one never thought upon has worn the Crown?
How comes it then to be a lineall Function,
By right of Blood made consecrate with Unction?
This trick was hatched by some great Monarch's Minion
To blind the world, but I am of opinion
None does more fitly fill a Chair of State,
Than he that is anointed by his Fate.
The Author.
THis is his Creed, and all that do oppose
This (although God and Angels) are his Foes;
But stay (if Fancy fail not) sure I see
A reverend Doctor in Theology,
Approach his Presence, who does look upon
His Pride with holy indignation:
If he do speak to him, we soon shall see
How Policy and Piety agree.
The Doctor.
PRoud Politician, whither will thou fly
With thy imperious Impiety?
Do think a Cable made of twisted sands
Can Anchor thee against Almighty hands?
Dare thou believe thy Machivillian Arts
Can veil thee from the searcher of all Hearts?
He does make war against Gods sacred seat,
Who treads upon the good to make him Great:
The Civil War of Heaven did foretell,
Men shall not rise by that which Angels fell:
Methinks those Powers thy strength has overthrown,
Should tell thee so obnoxious are thy own;
What man is he that can in such Seas swim,
Where one or other dares not follow him,
And sink him too? In our Morality
We take it for an Axiom, that he
Who pulls Superiors down, to raise his fame,
Shows his own Servants how to do the same:
If this will not suffice, but still your eye
Mounts to (that Sphere of Mischief) Majesty;
Look on Eternity, and well revise
The vile Gradations, which make such men rise:
The usual steps of Corrupt Statesmen are
Envy, Pride, Wealth, Hypocrisy, and War,
Covetousness, Oppression, Tyranny:
And all these cemented with Perjury,
Painted with Piety, but how they are
In opposition, Scripture will declare.
Envy.
James 3.16.
WHere Envy and seditious strife does lurk,
Confusion is, and every evil work.
James 3.17.
The wiseome that descends from Above
Is filled with Peace, with Purity, and Love:
James 3.15.
Envy, Strife, Malice, though they serve your wish,
Are earthly, sensual, and devilish.
Pride.
Porverbs 16.19.
AN humble spirit better is allowed
Than to divide a rich spoil with the proud.
Ecclus. 10.12.
When Man begins to make Pride his Partaker,
He does depart from God, turn from his Maker.
Prove. 10.18.
When fierce destruction follows to Hell-gate,
Pride does most commonly preambulate.
Riches.
Prove. 23.4. Luke 16.13.
Labor not to be rich, Wealth is a rod,
You cannot serve at once Mammon and God.
1 John 2.15.
The Love of God does not in that soul move,
Who for this World forsakes the God of Love.
Luke 6 24.
Woe to ye Rich, where will ye seek Salvation,
When God says ye have had your Consolation?
Hypocrisy.
Math: 23.27.
WOE to you Hypocrites whose sin appears
Like dead men's bones in silver Sepulchers.
Matthew 23.
I send ye Prophets but you do belly 'um.
And with your Power, kill, Scourge, and crucify 'um.
Matthew 23.33.
Ye Serpents, Vipers, how can ye expel
The wrath of God, and free your souls from Hell?
War.
James 4.1.
FRom whence comes War and wrath? are they not embers
Of lawless lusts that war within your members?
Prove. 16.32.
That man has more of Wisdom, Power, and Pity,
Who rules his wrath, than he that takes a City.
Prove. 28.17.
He that does violence unto the blood
Of any man, shall perish in the flood.
Covetousness.
1 These. 2.5.
PAul calls God witness that he never spoke
With flattering words, nor wore a Covetous Cloak
Ecclus. 10.9.
A Covetous man does in all Evils roll.
For such a one makes sale of his own soul.
1 Cor. 6.10.
When God will execute without Reprieves,
He puts the Covetous among the Thieves.
Oppression.
Prove. 22.2. and 23.10.
ROb not the Poor, nor grieved soul oppress,
And do not take Fields from the Fatherless.
1 These. 4 6.
He that will go beyond, or does defraud
His Brother, is by God himself out law'd.
Malac. 3.5.
God will destroy that Soul which takes delight
To turn away the Stranger from his right.
Tyranny.
Pro. 28.15.
UNrighteous Rulers, holy writ compares
To roaring Lions and to ranging Bears.
Prove. 29.2.
The People joy when men rule with compassion,
But wicked Magistrates destroy a Nation.
Prove. 30.22 23.
Two things there are which make the Earth to groan,
A fatted fool, A Servant in the Throan.
Perjurie.
Leviticus 19.12.
THou shall not make thy Makers name to be
A Covenant to cover falsitie.
Deuteronomy. 23.21.
When thou would vow a vow to God, first weigh it,
Then (though it be unto thy loss) obey it.
Zech. 5 4.1.4.
Good Zechariah (in the flying Roll)
Saw that the perjured Man would lose his soul.
The Doctor.
THus have I shown the nature of those sins
That move his imploration, who begins
To wear forbidden Purple, without these
He cannot sail thorough the swelling seas
Of Princes Power, and Popular applause;
For though he bear Religion and the Laws
In his Main top, yet shall his Anchor be
Cast in the ooes of self-security.
Envy stirrs us, Pride prompts, Riches invite,
Hypocrisy calls faction to the sight.
War wins the victory, Covetousness
Says ye must beggar those whom ye suppress.
Oppression, and grim Tyranny proclaim
A legal Conquest in the victors Name,
Which Perjurie will justify, this tract
Does lead him to the end of the fourth Act:
What shall ensue, that Power can only tell
Whose Love, and Vengeance does fill Heaven and Hell.
The Author.
A Sad Conclusion if this Composition
Be the ingredients of a Poltitian;
Lord let my spirit fly with humble wings,
And I shall be able to pity Kings.
On Ambition.
WHen bold Ambition seeks a Nation's ruin,
Pride little thinks what vengeance is a brewing.
On Peace.
THe People cry aloud when wars increase,
They must needs cry that cannot hold their peace.
On these Civil Wars.
GOD is the Potter, we the Pots, dear Brother,
It Is sin that breaks us one against another.
On our Savior, his being called the Carpenter.
CHrist was, they say, a Carpenter by birth,
But a great Workman; He built Heaven and Earth.
A Paraphrase upon the Pater Noster,
PRotect us, Lord, from that profane Imposter,
That would persuade us from out Pater noster
In what a wretched State that Commonweal is,
That is misled from thee Qui es in Caelis,
Christ's Spouse is lovely, Christians should entreat her
With sighs, not swords, and sing -- Sanctificetur
Who so prevaricate from this endue'um,
Good Lord, with Grace to worship -- Nomen tuum.
Great Commonwealths must fall if thou pursue 'um,
When States displease thee -- Veniat Regnum tuum.
What private Plots, or public Power dare fly at
The Lord of Hosts? whose battaile-word is -- Fiat
What is man's strength if thou do not renew a
Right heart in him to do -- Voluntas tua,
We are but Men, none but an Angel's fellow
Can lead a life on Earth -- Sicut in Caelo,
The Pious Poor complain, they who refresh 'um,
Shall, when they want, from thee have -- ita etiam
He that would Heaven gain must not defer a
Work of such Piety, whilst he is -- In terra.
Thy Saints are succourlesse, unless we foster 'um,
How can we beg at thy hands -- Panem nostrum
Nor let us hate our Enemies, but gain 'um
With acts of worthiness -- Quotidianum
Though men afflict us both in Soul and Body,
Yet Lord, thy sustenance -- Da nobis hodie,
Truth dwells not always where the Purple Robe is,
Then grant us mercy -- Et remitte nobis
We all have felt thy strokes, but who dares foster a
Mis-apprehension? It Is not -- Debita nostra,
Oh! Let the Enemies no longer cross
The truth, but mend their lives -- Sicut and nos
Let us no longer be afflicted thus,
But let our foes proclaim -- Remittimus
Free our obliged Lands where each impostor is
Master of all, but -- Debitoribus nostris.
Into their paths, who for our zeal rebuke us,
Let us not enter -- Et ne nos inducas
Satan usurpes, Lord let us dis-inthrone him,
Or we shall ever be -- In tentationem,
Let not the world and flesh thy Servants swallow,
Sweet are their baits -- Sed libera nos a malo,
And grant us such an Union, that when
This Prayer is said, we all may cry -- Amen.
To an unnatural Elder Brother that beguiled him of his Portion.
WEll may a strangers fatal hand annoy us,
When our own Blood conspireth to destroy us;
Had thou no other way to gain from me
The livelihood of my Posterity,
But by a Fathers sudden fall, to raise
Thy riches from the dust of my decays?
It is not well, nor can have good event,
For it is an ill exceeds all precedent.
Jacob had Esau's Birthright, but he gave
Him Porrage for his Portion, thou would have
All mine for nothing; do thou think that God's
Justice can prosper such unequal odds?
Or do thou think that Younger Brothers have
No title, but to Ruin, and the Grave?
You are deceived, and you ere long will be
Mistaken in my Birthright, as in Me.
To force a Brothers Right (if understood)
Is like the taking of a Brothers Blood.
An Alarm in 1645.
1.
BRing a Light, The Foe's in fight;
Pre thee forgive me,
That I must thus leave thee in the Night;
My Bliss, Take this, and this,
Sleep well, I Will keep 'till
My happy return, a parting kiss,
Thou would free my life from fears,
Yet thy wet Eye
Drownes me with tears,
Wipe those fair pearls from thine eye,
And hear thy Soldiers
Lullaby.
2.
Sweet sleep, lie still my Dear,
Dangers be strangers
For ever, unto thy eye or ear
No sounds, or woe for wounds,
Number thy slumbers,
Or dare to approach within thy bounds;
But such Songs as Seraphs sing,
Which move by Love
Unto their King.
That thy sight, touch, taste, or smells
May say, all joy
In hearing dwells.
3.
And when thou wakest again,
Fortune importune
Thy senses to see us happy Men,
-- That we may so agree,
Dangers of strangers
May never destroy our Unity:
So shall Peace ascend her Throne,
For than each man
May claim his own;
We like raging seas will run,
That meet and fight,
Then flow in one.
4.
So shall all sweet Joys content thee,
That Air, Earth, or sea affords,
Tables shall be spread with plenty,
Sickles shall be made of swords:
Horses shall no more wear Armor,
That were plundered from the Plow,
Whilst the doubtful frighted Farmour,
Questiond is, For whom are you?
5.
Private jarres shall be relinquished,
Every man shall have his own.
Thine and mine shall be distinguished,
And no Seeds of sorrow sown;
Comfort come to all complayners,
That were frighted back with frowns,
Governors no more be gayners,
Which are now the Kings of Towns.
6.
Mountains shall no more grow myrish
With so many noble bloods,
Fickle French and idle Irish
That come over for our Goods,
And have had so much enjoyment
In the ruin of the Land,
Shall be set to fit employment
By the power of strong Command.
7.
Bulwarks then shall all the slighted
To let in our Trades increase,
Church and State shall be united
It Is the Paradise of Peace;
Merchants fear no navall dangers
Or from their own Colors go,
But hold free Commerce with strangers,
Neighbour-nations should do so.
8.
Midnight calls, and I must leave thee,
This shall purchase my release,
May not such sweet dreams deceive thee
That pretend a prudent Peace?
War with this dark night fly over
And all joy rise with the Light:
Thus thy Lips with mine I cover
One kiss more, and then Good night.
An Elegy and Epitaph composed on the death of an Infant Lady.
GReat King of Golgotha, grim God of fears,
Whose Throne is made of thirsty Sepulchers,
That (by the virtue of thy cold commands)
Destroy'st more lives, then there be stars or sands,
From whose cadaverous embraces, none
Are freed until the Resurrection;
Attend my Summons (for the powers divine
Decree, that I must one day bow to thine)
And tell me why thou have employed that dart
Which perforated Alexanders heart
Upon this Infant Lady? whose fair eyes
Could not but quell the keenest cruelties,
The fiercest Tyrant that red Ireland bears,
Might have been conquered with one smile of hers:
Her dumb complaints would have wrought more contrition,
Then all the reason of the best Logitian.
Do but consider death what thou have done
Upon our Albion Isle since Forty one;
Remember who have suffered by thy frown
These ten years, 'twixt the Cottage and the Crown;
What souls are fled, will not all these suffice,
But thou will deal in Cradle cruelties?
Methinks the mother of that fragrant bud
(As fruitful in her virtue as her blood)
Might have prevailed with thee, but oh I see
No reason can reduce thy tyranny.
Therefore we will stop the flood of further Passion
With this Celestial consideration;
That though thou have tore often her fleshly clothing,
Her Soul shall be a Saint, when thou art nothing.
The Epitaph.
1
LAdies that are young and wise,
Shall I tell ye of a Prize?
Here a Box of Beauty lies.
2
A Jewel hid from vulgar view,
Whose excellency if you knew,
Your eyes would drop like morning dew.
3
Dame-Natures Diamond, which when
She saw it was too bright for men,
Showed it, and shut it up again.
On the event of these Wars betwixt the Dutch and English.
SOme are such silly Statists, that they wish
Our English loss may fill the Dutchman's dish;
But most of them (I know) be such as are
A suffering Party in our Civil War:
I feel the same disease too, but would never
Exchange an Ague for a Burning Fever.
On those women, who pretend that poverty provokes to inchastity.
SHall poverty destroy us? Is the mind
(The noble temper of the soul) confined
To such a baseness, that we cannot be
Our selves, unless we hug prosperity?
Shall we confess an Hell? conceit withal,
There is an Heaven, where the Angelical
Receive immortal joy? Shall we believe
It was ordained for poor ones, such as grieve
In a continual want? and hourly groan
Under the burden of affliction?
And shall we be so senseless to agree,
That virtuous souls can fall by poverty?
Tell me, intemperate creatures, in what state
Did ye salute the world at first? what rate
Were your gay garments prized at, when you cried
For needful coverture, no Robes for pride?
When as the pregnant breast gave more content
Then the prosusest Banquets ye have spent,
Ushered with Wine and Music? when nor wit,
Nor best inventions could your Pallat sit?
When all your learned Cooks could not retain
Sufficient Art to vvast your wealth in vain?
But now the Spring of riot is drawn dry,
Ye cannot as you would; true proverty
Contents it self with naught, and scorns to raise
A vvretched riches by sinister vvayes:
Yet this recalls not you, but makes you guess
Ye have a warrant for your wickedness,
For when some virtuous Soul desires to see
The Cause ye have, you show your Poverty,
And some small charge of Children, which you say
You must provide for against their Marriage day:
Thus, fed by vice, they live, when they are at Age,
It Is your damnation, proves their Heritage:
Admit your care be less, that you are beguiled
The procreated Blessing of a child,
Your Cause is so much lesser, will you give
Your precious Soul to make one Body live?
Sure your kind Parents were not so unwise
As not to teach your hands some mysteries,
To keep your Body spotless, and preserve
Your Soul, which (of the two's most like to starve)
Endeavor then, they are poor beyond all fear,
That are not worth the flesh and blood they wear;
Tell me (ye pitied Spectacles of woe)
How will your pride, and your rich raiment show,
When as your sordid Suitors shall proclaim
Ye won them by an Act ye dare not name?
When they shall tell their neighboring Lechers how
They wrought upon your willingness, and show
(In their rank Ribaldry) how hot and high
Your wantonness advanced their luxury?
Who will conceit such a lewd thing as this
Did e're know chastity? or that there is
So great a virtue resident? or think
She ever prized it, that thus low could sink?
Not I, believe me, I Will as soon allow
Poison and Balm may from one issue flow;
For she whom want will make a Wanton, does
Make foul Adultery the Nurse of Sloth.
The Proselite.
1
Farewell thou dearest of my Crimes,
Be never more the abuser of my Times,
Lest that I curse too late
The errors of that Fate,
Which made me love thee;
All ye Deities divine
Strengthen this request of mine;
Then may I say,
Frail delight pass away,
I am ruled by a Power that is above thee.
2
No more shall thy seducing smiles,
Thy winning looks, or other sweet beguiles
Have power to withdraw
My heart from Love, by Law
Sealed to another:
Cupid I thy power defy,
You Are a flatte'ring Deity;
And there are none,
But confess thee the Son
Of a fair, foolish, fickle wanton Mother.
To the much honored Pair, and most pious Preservers of Love and Loyalty in
Wedlock, Mr. Nathaniel Lownes Merchant Adventurer, etc. and the perfect Pattern
of Virtue Mrs. Melior Lownes his beloved Consort.
MY Muse salutes ye both, who to your worth
Devotes her love, and holds my service forth.
All happiness that the Celestial Powers
Ordain for men, wait upon you and yours.
Treasure, long life, love, liberty, and mirth
Dwell with ye, till ye find heaven upon earth;
True Concord be your guide, and may no passion
On either side, provoke a separation.
In medio consistit virtus; we
Find in your loves a meliority:
(Which is most permanent) what is below
That, or above it, is too fast, or slow:
Health, peace, and plenty, with all joys that can
Add vigor to the noble soul of man;
Erect your spirits, may ye never be
Exposed to any infelicity;
But may that God, which has heaven for his home,
Guide you in this world, and the world to come.
Such are the wishes of a Servant to both your Virtues; THO. JORDAN.

On Reason.
Would thou have all things subject unto thee?
Be subject then to Reasons Monarchy;
Thou shall be Conqueror of many, if
Reason may be thy Governor in chief:
Would thou command a little world? then be
King of thy self, it is a safe Sovereignty.
On Henry the VIII.
HArry the VIII. as story says,
Was a King so unjust,
He nere did spare man in his wrath,
Nor woman in his lust.
An Epigram on one, who said, He lived by his wits.
PAmphlet last week in his fantastique fits,
Was asked how he did live, He said, By's wits:
Pamphlet I see will tell lies by the Clock,
How can he live upon so poor a stock?
On Ribaldry.
OF all detested vices, none (to me)
Appears more vain then verbal Rihaldry:
For he who to such talk his mind does bend,
Is like that dog, whose tail is at's tongues end.
Good Wits may Iump.
A Good Wit brought unto a Stationer
A Manuscript, that so he might prefer
His volume to the Press; but e're that he
Could make a Bargain for his Poesy,
The Bookseller (whose aims were for his profit)
Desires the Author he would read some of it;
The Writer reads some six or seven leaves,
Which having done, the Stationer conceives
That it was old, a strait begins to look
(As memory led him) in a printed book,
Lays it before our Author on the board,
And reads the Transcript to him word for word:
The Puet puzzled at it, 'gins to pump
For an excuse, and cries, Good Wits may Iump.
On a Schoolmaster.
A Country Pedant of soul soft and silly,
(Whose reading nere exceeded William Lilly
In's Ranks and Files of Substantives) began
His Brags to a more learned Countryman,
And said, he took a Child the other day,
From women-tutors, which (e're long) should say
His Grammar Rules by heart, and (in two years)
He Would make him a good Scholar; the other fleers,
And tnswers him again, Come Doctor, come,
You know that Charity begins at home.
An Elegy and Epitaph on the deplored death of the much worthy William Barklay
Esquire, one of the Aldermen of the City of London; dedicate to Mr. Hen.
Barklay.
STay, and release my wonder! you that can
Resolve what may complete a perfect man
So absolute, that future times may well
Admire at, but shall never parallel;
Let him be wise and learned, his better part
Be richly furnished with transcendent Art;
Let Nature be his friend, and in his mind
Let virtues choice indovvments be refined:
He will come short of him, whose body lies
At this time floating in his Mourners eyes;
For in this Monument is one in whom
Faith, Hope, and Charity ^ook up their room;
One who has gathered virtues (since his birth)
Enough to crown a man in heaven and earth;
When acts of equity were in his trust,
He ever was both merciful and just;
The poor he pitied, but his soul would nere
To vicious greatness turn Idolater:
He had (indeed) a heart which the vvorst times
Could never tempt to profitable crimes;
His thoughts were pure, his actions free, his store
Was made a good Exchequer for the poor;
Though envy often on virtue does attend,
He forced envy's self to be his friend:
By this the knowing Reader well may see
The brittle State of best mortality:
Let man be nere so perfect in his parts,
And have the accomplishments of all the Arts,
Though he live long and well, yet shall he have
No earthly gratulation, but a grave:
Forbear more words (my phantsie) you are too weak,
Great griefs are silent, whilst small sorrows speak:
Although his body sleep, till the day come
Shall reunite him to his ancient home;
His soul is mounted on Seraphick wings,
Unto the Mansion of the King of Kings.
The Epitaph.
1
WEep Reader, weep, for if we see
Thy Fountains dry, no man will be
Persuaded to relent for thee.
2
In this monumental clay
Lies pious dust, till it obey
The Summons of the latter day.
3
You that ransack earth and Skies
For all worth which good men prize,
Look no further, Here it lies.
4
Let your truer tears attend it,
When all studious men have penned it,
This man's Name will comprehend it;
5
But (to sum up all in brief)
He whose eyes are void of grief,
Has a heart without belief.
6
HE whose soul does not desire
To weep before he do retire,
Would laugh, were all the world on fire.
On Intemperance.
HE that devotes himself to wrath, or wine,
Is not his own friend, and can nere be mine.
On pious Poverty.
NOne but a vicious rich man will defy
The low estate of pious poverty.
On vain delights.
IN seeking to obtain delights we lose 'um,
Dalila's lap leads not to Abraham's bosom.
On the Eucharist.
SEe the wide difference 'twixt wine and grace,
One warms the Spirit, the other fires the face.
So he whose faith drinks oth' Communion Bowl.
Shall feel the inflammation in his soul.
The material substance of our Creed c(...)ed in twelve lines.
I Do believe in God, Lord of Creation*
And in his Son Christ Jesus (ou(...)
Conceived by the Holy Ghost, (who (...)
Both from the Father and the Son (...)
Born of the Virgin Mary's womb (...)
A cruel death, by Pilat crucified;
Was dead and buried, did descend, (...)
The third day rise on earth, next (...) one;
From thence he will come to Judgment (...)ve
One Church, one Spirit, and I do (...)
Saints have Communion, Reprobates (...)n,
Sins pardon, soul and body's Resurr(...)n.
The ten Commandments i(...)ines.
GOd spoke these words, and (...) am thy God,
That brought thee from the (...) of Egypts rod,
And thou shall have no other God but me,
Thou shall not worship any Imagery;
Thou shall not take my sacred Name in vain,
The holy Sabbath day thou shall maintain;
Honor thy Parents, and thy days I Will further
With length and plenty, Thou shall do no murder:
Thou shall no vile Adultery commit,
Thou shall not steal, no nor purloin (by wit)
Thou shall not bear false witness' against thy Neighbor,
Nor covet what is his (by right, or labor.)
The happy estate of the Blessed, Matthew. 5,
1
YE wealthy souls, that being poor in merit,
Are by Gods sentence allowed rich in spirit;
Heaven is made your Kingdom, Angels be
Your glorious guides to bliss -- Blessed are ye.
2
You that with grief do mourn and relent,
Bedew your cheeks, till your wet eyes are spent,
You shall be comforted by Gods Decree,
And one day joy as much -- Blessed are ye.
3
You that are meek and humble in your minds
Mark what felicity your meekness finds;
The large earth your inheritance shall be
And heaven at the last -- Blessed are ye.
4
You hungry thirsty souls, whose appetite
Desires but righteousness, receive your mite,
You shall be filled, Christ your bread will be,
Feed and be thankful then -- Blessed are ye.
5
You that are merciful, hope to obtain
Mercy again, ye cannot hope in vain;
God is your steadfast Anchor, and will he
Leave you to shipwreck? no -- Blessed are ye.
6
You that in mind, in heart, in soul are pure,
Gold purged from dross, that can the touch endure,
Happy are ye, your excellence shall see
Gods brightness face to face -- Blessed are ye.
7
You whom vile men unrighteously revile,
If you remain but patient all the while
For Jesus sake, shall sure rewarded be
More then an hundred fold -- Blessed are ye.
8
Ye persecuted souls that suffer wrong
For righteousness, and want a pleading tongue
To tell your grief, your joy complete shall be,
Your Kingdom Heaven is -- Blessed are ye.
9
Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great
Will your reward be from Gods Mercy Seat;
Can a rewarding Master better be,
Then our dear Savior Christ? -- Blessed are ye.
10
So were the Prophets persecuted, they
Suffered your wrongs* whom cruel men did slay;
They have their Saviors bounty, then agree
To bear their sorrows, and -- Blessed are ye.
The wretched estate of the cursed, Deuteronomy. 27.
1
THere is a cruel wretch, whose watchful eye
Stands Sentinel; that he (most secretly)
Might smite his Neighbor where so e're he be,
God's curse o'retakes his fact -- Cursed is he.
2
That faithless man, who for his sole defense
Cleaves to man's frailty without care, or sense
Of God, or his just power, let all agree
With one consent, to cry -- Cursed is he.
3
There is a slave so cruel and unkind,
That will pervert the footsteps of the blind,
And lead them from their journey, all that be
Christians, will surely say -- Cursed is he.
4
A vile transgressor too, I cannot miss
An Image-worshipper, and one that is
A friend to Wooden Saints, let him not be
A pattern for our lives -- Cursed is he.
5
He that is unmerciful, adulterous,
A Fornicator, or one covetous,
And many such great evils, God will see
His true amendment, else -- Cursed is he.
6
He that in Judgment hinders the right
Of Fatherless, or Widows, in God's sight
His unjust Judgment stands, who will not see
His sin unpunished -- Cursed is he:
7
But there is a Judas, who reward will take
To murder Innocents, (my Saviors sake
Does make me now relent) but let him be
Subject unto his bane -- Cursed is he.
8
But now a Caytiff, heathenish and vile,
I must declare, a disobedient Child;
A Parent-Curser, who deserves to be
Cursed of all the world -- Cursed is he.
9
There is a craft crep't in the Country Sir,
Which is to bear his Neighbors Landmark far
From its true place of residence, to be
For his unlawful use -- Cursed is he.
10
Here is another Justice will not spare,
An hot, lascivious, loose Adulterer,
That whores his Neighbors wife, and makes him be
The laughing stock of Fools -- Cursed is he.
FINIS.

