C2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lord Lieutenant and Council.
ORMONDE.

WHEREAS, We have by the Blessing of God discovered and disappointed a
Traitorous Conspiracy for surprising and taking His Majesty's Castle of Dublin,
His Majesty's principal Fort in this His Kingdom) which the said Conspirators
had designed to do on the 21th. Day of this present Month of May, And whereas
diverse of the Conspirators are apprehended and committed to Prison, where they
still remain; And whereas diverse others of the said Conspirators (being
conscious to themselves of their own Guilts) have found means to escape, and
are not as yet apprehended, namely, Thomas Blood, late of Sarny near Dunboine,
in the County of Mead, Colonel Daniel Abbot, Major Abel Warren, Andrew Mac
Cormock, a pretended Minister, lately of Magherawly, in the County of Down,
Robert Chambers, a pretended Minister, Colonel Gilbert Carr, commonly called
Gibby Carr, John Chamberlin late of Dublin Brewer, John Fooke late of Atherdee
in the County of Lowth Esquire, Lieutenant John Ruxton late of the same,
Lieutenant De la Rock, Major Henry Jones, late of Stelorgan, in the County of
Dublin, Major Alexander Staples late of Londonderry, Lieutenant Colonel William
Moore, who was lately Disbanded, and had been formerly Garrisoned at Gallway,
and afterward at Athlone. We therefore do by this Proclamation in His
Majesty's name strictly charge and command all and every the said forenamed
Persons, that within eight and forty hours after the publishing of this
Proclamation, within the County where such Person or Persons shall then be, he
and they do render his and their persons to Us, the Lord Lieutenant, or to one
of His Majesty's Privy Council in this Kingdom, or to one of His Majesty's
Justices of Peace next adjoining to the place or places where such person or
persons now are, or then shall be, wherein if they or any of them shall fail,
We do hereby Declare and publish them and every of them to failing, to be
Rebels and Traitors against His Majesty, His Crown and Dignity, and to be
accordingly prosecuted by all His Majesty's good Subjects. And we do hereby
publish and declare that all and every Person and Persons that shall relieve or
conceal any of the said forenamed Persons at any time after the publishing of
this Proclamation as aforesaid, that they also shall be proceeded against as
Relievers and Abettors of Rebels and Traitors, And we require all His
Majesty's Officers and Loving Subjects to endeavor the Apprehension of all and
every the said forenamed Persons. And we do hereby declare that any person or
persons that shall apprehend the said Thomas Blood, Major Abel Warren, Andrew
Mac Cormock, Robert Chambers, Colonel Gilbert Carr, commonly called Gibby Carr,
or any of them, and bring him or them, or cause him or them to be brought to
the High Sheriff of the County, wherein he or they shall be apprehended at, by
or before the 24th. day of June next shall have as a reward for the said
Service, the sum of One hundred pounds for every of the said last named
persons, so to be apprehended and brought in as aforesaid by or before the said
24th. day of June next.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 23th. of May. 1663. Mau. Eustace,
Cane. Drogheda, Mount-Alexander, Anglesey, Massereene, Dungannon, W. Caulfield,
R. Coote, Santry, Hen. Tichborne, Ja. Donelan, Jo. Bysse, J. Temple, Paul
Davis, Tho. Pigot.


DVBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer next door to the Bear and Ragged-Staffe in
Castle-street.. 1663.


