DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Deputy AND COUNCIL,
ARRAN.

WHEREAS We are Informed that considerable quantities of Wool have been
fraudulently Exported out of this Kingdom, from Obscure places, under false
Package, without License or payment of His Majesty's Duties; and some parts
thereof have been carried into Foreign parts, contrary to several Statutes in
that case made, and Provided: And we being desirous that all Care imaginable
might be taken for preventing mischiefs of the like nature for the time to
come, And that due inquiries might be made in order to the punishing Offenders
for the time past, and to come; have thought fit, and do hereby strictly Charge
and Command all, and every Justice, and Justices of the Peace, Mayors,
Sher^ffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Head Boroughs, Clerks of the Peace, and also
His Majesty's Commissioners of His Majesty's Revenue, and all His Majesty's
Customers. Comptrollers, Surveyor^, and Searchers of, and in the several Ports,
and all other Officers whatsoever, within every Burough, Town-Corporate, Port,
and Place: and all other His Majesty's Subjects whatsoever in this Kingdom;
That they and every of them do forthwith from time to time make diligent and
strict inquiry, whether there has been, or shall be any manner of Wool,
Sheep. Fells or Wooll-Fells transported out of this Kingdom without License
obtained therefore, or without paying the Duty thereof. By whom such
Transportation has been, from what place, and whether.

And we do also require all His Majesty's said Officers and good Subjects, that
they take all possible care to prevent the same for the future, and if any
person or persons shall discover that any manner of Wool, Sheep, Fells, or
Wooll-Fells has been, or shall be transported to Foreign parts, or into
England, without License first obtained, and His Majesty's Duty paid for the
same: We do will and require all* and every such person and persons to make the
same known to the next Justice of the Peace, or to His Majesty's Attorney
General for the time being, that such persons may be proceeded against
according to Law; And every person and persons who shall make such discoveries,
and good proof thereof, shall upon the conviction of such person or persons as
shall be found guilty of the Misdemeanors and fraud aforesaid, receive for his
and their encouragement and pains therein, one full moiety, or half of all
such goods, or damages as shall accrue unto His Majesty upon the discovery
and Seizure, or adjudged to be had against the person or persons so offending.

And for the better preventing all frauds of the like nature for the time to
come; We do hereby will and require all His Majesty's C^stomers, and
Custom-House Officers belonging to any Port of this Kingdom, that they do
forthwith certify unto Us at the Council Board what remained Vnentred, or
unshipt off, upon any Lycences granted before the 25th. of August last, and
what Warrants they have received for the Exportation of Wool since the said
25th. day of August which was in the Year of our Lord God 1^83. And what Wool
has been shipped thereon, and when and whither, and what Bonds they have taken
for the Landing thereof, and at what places every particular quantity of Wool
was to be Landed, and by whom such Bonds were entered into, and which of them
are returned, into His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, and when, and which of
them they returned with Certificates annexed and what Bonds or Certificates do
still remain in their hands not returned

And we do strictly Charge and Command all His Majesty's said Customers, or
Custom House Officers who of right have, or ought to have the custody of such
Bonds in the several Ports of this Kingdom, that they do forthwith return into
the Chief Remembrancers Office of His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, all such
bonds as they now have in their hands (if the time by the condition of the said
Bond limited be exspired, and no Certificate thereon given in) And that for the
future they do quarterly return into His Majesty's said Court of Exchequer, all
such Bonds as they shall have in their custody according to Law if the time for
returning Certificates according to the condition of the said bonds be elapsed,
that Process and Execution may be had thereupon, according to the Statutes in
such Cases made and provided.

And for the better ordering and regulating the Exportation of such Wool,
Wool Fells and Sheep Fells as shall be though fit to be Litensed, and at any
time hereafter Exported out of this Realm into His Majesty's Kingdom of
England, or Dominion of Wales after Entry and Duty paid, we have thought fit
(at the instance and desire of the present Commissioners of His Majesty's
Revenue) and do accordingly order and direct, and do also hereby strictly
charge and require, that no Merchant or other persons whatsoever do presume to
ship off any manner of Wool, Sheep, Fells, Wool Fells or any Sheepskins or
Lamb Skins with such proportion of Wool on them, as may be useful for Woollen
Manufacture into any part of England from any Port, Harbor, or Creek of this
Kingdom, other then from such Ports and Places as are hereafter particularly
mentioned (viz.) From Drogheda, Dublin, Ros^, Water^ord. Youghhal, Cork
Lymerick, Gallaway, Sligo, Lond^nd^rry and C^rrigfergus or some of them.

And we do also Charge and Command all His Majesty's Customers, Collectors, and
Officers in the aforesaid several and respective Ports, that they take special
care to take good Bonds (according to the Statutes) with sufficient security,
before they permit any Wool to be Exported out of this Kingdom, into England
or Wales, as they will answer the contrary at their perils, And that no
Collector do take Entry of any Wool, Sheep-Fells Wooll-Fells, or of any
Sheepskins ( or Lambskins with such proportions of Woo^l on them as may be
useful for Woollen Manufarture) in any of the aforesaid Ports, or receive His
Majesty's Duty for, or discharge the same, until first he be certified from
the Commissioners of His Majesty's Customs or from His Majesty's Customer and
Comptroller of the said Ports or their sufficient Deputes, that there is a
License granted for the same, and good Bonds taken in manner as aforesaid,
according to Law, and all persons whom these presents do or may concern, are
hereby required to take notice hereof, and duly observe the same; upon pain of
His Majesty's high displeasure, and such pains and penalties as by the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm may be inflicted upon them for their contempt,
disobedience, or negligence in that behalf, as they will answer the contrary at
their utmost perils.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the ninth day of June, 1684. Mich:
Armach. C. Drogheda. Blesinton. Char. Meredith John Keating. He: Hene. Jon:
Davys. Rich: Reynell. Mau* Eustace, Tho. Newcomen. Adam Loftus.


DVBLIN, printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty
and are to be sold by Mary Crook, at His Majesty's Printing House on Ormonde
Key.


