London's Royal Triumph FOR THE CITY'S Loyal MAGISTRATE: In an Exact
Description of several Scenes and Pageants, Adorned with many Magnificent
Representations.

PERFORMED On WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER XXIX. 1684.

At the Instalment and Inauguration of the Right Honorable Sir JAMES SMITH,
Knight, LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON.

Illustrated with diverse Delightful Objects of Gallantry and Jollity, Speeches
and Songs, Single and in Parts.

Set forth at the proper Costs and Charges of the Worshipful Company of DRAPERS.

Devised and Composed by THO. JORDAN, Gent.

Quando magis dignos licui spectare Triumphos? UNTO GOD ONLY BE HONOR and
GLORY coat of arms of the Worshipful Company of Drapers

London, Printed for John and Henry Playford, 1684.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Theater of Music: Or, A Choice Collection of the newest and best SONGS
Sung at the Court, and Public Theaters. The Words Composed by the most
Ingenious Wits of the Age, and set to Music by the greatest Masters in that
Science. With a Thorow-Bass to each Song for the Theorbo, or Bass-Viol. Also
Symphonies and Retornels in Three Parts to several of them for the Violins and
Flutes. The First Book. London, Printed by J. Playford, for Henry Playford and
R.C. and Sold by John Playford near the Temple Church, and John Carr at the
Middle Temple Gate, 1685.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir JAMES SMITH, Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
LONDON.
My Lord,
THat Goodness has been the guide to your Greatness is sufficiently
significant, in all the civil circumstances of your gradual Ascension to the
Seat of Dignity; actuated by the regular motions of Law, Loyalty, and Equity,
(Three Graces which copiously conduce to the accomplishments of a complete
Magistrate) and by general inspection are discovered to be habitual in your
Lordship. This is an Age my Lord, that will try whether you have Fortitude
enough to be faithful, Courage enough to be Honest, and Judgment sufficient to
avoid extremities. In your Time Sir, Your Creat Grandfather, Grandfather and
Father. All Free of the Drapers Company.
there have been more sudden turns and numerous changes than your Forefathers
have experienced in the Three Generations of your Family that have successively
passed before you Members of the Company, which is a pregnant Lecture for your
understanding, and exercitation for your judgment, wherein your wary
observations may collect ready Rules for your Reason to work upon, and so guide
you in this Years Government, that it may render you precious to all posterity;
answerable to the devout desires and daily Obsecrations of

My Lord, Your Obliged obedient Servant Tho. Jordan

TO THE Truly Worthy, Generous, and Ancient Society The Right Worshipful
Company of DRAPERS.
Gentlemen,
I Salute you with the perfected Compositions of your Triumphs, Performed to
perpetuate the Memory and indelible Fame of your Right Honorable Brother the
Lord Mayor of London; in which I have omitted nothing that may reasona^ly
conduce to his Honor, or what might be thought Regular, pertinent and proper
to the Magnificence and Splendour of this Days Ovation; wherein you have
liberally laid out your selves in the expenses of so chargable Accomodations;
plentifully exhibiting the superfluous part of your Substance for a Show. Yet
since it is no difficult thing to prove that a Theater is an Epitomy of the
whole World, by the same Rule of Reason we may conclude that the glittering
part of this whole City is but one great Pageant consisting of Streamer-like
Ribons, gay Gold and Silver Laces and Royal Embroidery, which although it be
thought superfluous in the moross opinion of an Austere Stoic, yet it is
accounted National Glory and Badges of Prosperity in the eyes of Persons
Heroic: For it does in some measure, match with Coronations, Chariots of
Victory, and Triumphs of ^^^^quility: The Authors of such Inventions having
always been (like your Worships) God Commonwealths-Men, and Lovers of their
King and Country, such is the Approbation of

Worthy Sirs, Your ever-Honouring Servant, Tho. Jordan.

In proper Habits orderly Arrayed,
The Movements of the Morning are displayed.
SElected Citizens i'th'Morning all
At Seven a Clock do meet at DRAPERS-HALL,
The Master, Wardens, and Assistants, Joins
For the first Rank in their Gowns faced with Foyns.
The Second Order do, in merry moods,
March in Gowns faced with Budge and Livery Hoods.
In Gowns and Scarlet Hoods Thirdly appears
A youthful number of Foyns Batchellers.
Forty Budge Batchellers the Triumph Crowns,
Gravely attired in Scarlet Hoods and Gowns.
Gentlemen Ushers which white Staves do hold
Sixty; in Velvet Coats and Chains of Gold.
Next, Thirty more in Plush and Buff there are,
That several Colors wave; and Banners bear.
The Seargeant Trumpet Thirty six more brings,
Twenty the Duke of YORK's, Sixteen the KINGS.
The Sergeant wears Two Scarfs, whose Colors be,
One the Lord Mayors, to other the Company.
The King's Drum-Major followed by Four more
Of the Kings Drums and Fifes make LONDON roar.
Seven Drums and Two Fifes more in Vests of Buff
March which Waste-Scarfs, and Breeches of Black Stuff.
Two City Marshals mounted and attended,
Are by the Company with Scarfs befriended.
And (next toth' Drums) do Troop it in the Rear.
But the Foot Marshal does the next appear;
Who puts them all in Rank and File, and wears
A Shoulder Scarf as broad and rich as theirs.
Attended by six persons that dare do
What e're their Marshal may command them to.
Next, the Fence-Master Troops; and (to defend him)
Diverse with drawn broad bright Swords do attend him.
Many Poor Pensioners that march in the Rear,
With Gowns and Caps, Standerds and Banners bear;
A numerous Troop of Persons that are poor,
In Azure Gowns and Caps, one hundred more,
With Javelins and with Targets are all Actors,
And bear the Arms of their good Benefactors.
Being thus prepared. By the Foot-Marshals Judgment they are guided,
And into Six Divisions are divided:
Ranked out by Two and Two. The first that stirs
Are the poor Company of Pensioners;
But in the front of them orderly be
Placed the Ensigns of the Company.
In The Rear of them four Drums and one Fife more,
Then Pensioners in Coats described before.
Persons of worth who do in Martial manner,
Bear each of them a Standard or a Banner.
Four Trumpets more to them, and in their Rear
Two of the Drapers Ensigns march, which bear
(As by the Herald Painter is expressed)
The Draught of their Supporters and their Crest:
Six Gentlemen-Ushers in order trudge,
And after them the Batchelors in Budge:
Marching in measured distance, and indu'd
With Order, This Division does conclude.
In The the Rear of them six Trumpets do appear,
And after them two Gentlemen, that bear
Two Coats of Arms, which appertaining be
To the City, and the Drapers Company.
Then do march up Eight Gentlemen that wears
The Golden Chains, then the Foins Batchelors,
In amicable Measure, move like Friends
Filled with one Joy: So this Division ends.
Two Gentlemen in velvet Coats arrayed,
March after them with Two Banners displayed;
Then succeed them Ten Gentlemen Ushers more,
In Coats and Chains of Gold described before;
And gradually after them you will see
A very worthy large Society;
With each of them a Gown and Livery Hood,
And all LORD MAYORS in the Potential Mood.
In The Rear of these (with silver sounds to fit ye)
Do fall in diverse Trumpets of the City;
And after them Two Gentlemen accord
To bear the Arms of the City and my Lord:
And then the Gentlemen with equal distance
That usher in the grave Court of Assistants.
In The Rear of them, four Drums, six Trumpets, be
Ordered to bring up the Catastrophe.
Three Gallants gradually follow them,
Bearing the Banners of the Diadem.
Kings, Queens, and Cities Ensigns, which engages
Six Gentlemen to wait on them as Pages;
The Masters and the Wardens bring up all.
And thus equipped they march from Drapers Hall
To my Lords House, which I presume will be
Where the last Lord Mayor kept his Mayoralty,
At Grocers-Hall, where the Aldermen and He
Take Horse and Rank according to degree:
Which being done, the whole Body in State
Does move toward Guild Hall, but at the Gate Begin their Motion.
The New Lord with the Old Lord Mayor unites,
Guarded by Gentlemen, Esquires, and Knights.
Then thus attired with Gown, Fur, Hood and Scarf,
March all through Kings street down to Three Crane-Wharf,
Where the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen discharge
A few Gentlemen Waiters, and take Barge
At the West end o'th'Wharf; and at the East
The Court Assistants, Livery, and the best
Gentlemen Ushers: Such as stay on shore
Are Ushers, Foins, and the Budge Bachelor:
Who for a time repose themselves and Men,
Until his Lordship shall return again:
Who now with several Companies make have
To Westminster, but in the way is placed
A Pleasure-Boat that has great Guns aboard,
And with Two Broad-sides does salute my Lord.
They Row in Triumph all along by the Strand,
But when my Lord and Companies do Land
At the New Palace-Stairs, orderly all
Do make a Lane to Pass him to the Hall;
Where having taken an Oath that he will be
Loyal and Faithful to His MAJESTY,
His Government, His Crown and Dignity,
With other Ceremonials said and done,
In Order to his Confirmation;
Sealing of Writs in Courts, and such like things,
As show his power abstracted from the King's,
He takes his leave of the Lords and Barons, then
With his Retinue he returns again
To the Waterside, and (having given at large,
To the Poor of Westminster) does Re-imbarge,
And scud along the River till he comes
To Black Fryers-Stairs, where Guns and Thundering Drums
Proclaim his Landing, when he is set on shore,
He is saluted by three Vollies more
By (the Military Gloty of this Nation,) the Company of Artillery-men, under
the conduct of their Loyal President Sir WILLIAM PRITCHARD, they being all in
their Martial Ornaments of Gallantry, some in Buff with Head-pieces, many of
them Massy Silver.

From Black-Fryers-Stairs, they March before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen,
through Cheapside to Guild Hall. Those that went not to Westminster, viz. the
Pensioners, and Banners being set in order ready to March, the Foot-Marshal in
the Rear of the Artillery-Company, leads the way by the Channel up
Ludgate Hill, through Ludgate into S. Paul's Church yard, and so into Cheapside,
where his Lordship is entertained by the first Scene or Pageant, called the
Chariot of Industry, described in this Metrical Mode.

The First Pageant described in Verse.
THe grand Design by good Invention wrought
Is a bright Rich, Triumphant Chariot;
As full of Fancy, Luster and Delight,
As HIS who was th'unfortunate Favorite:
To bright Hyperion Son of the Sun,
The Royal, Rising, Wretched Phaeton;
Who in his Fathers Chariot did Assay
To guide the Sun till he had lost the Day.
Like some who did both Sword and Chariot draw
Against good Nature, Piety and Law;
To pull down and set up Et Cetera.
But in our Chari^t are no such Sparks
As burn the Skies to ^eed on Roasted Larks:
For in this Ark is Innocence, Chaste Women
And Virgins, that present the Loyal Freemen
Of our Twelve Companies, and therefore we
Call it the Chariot of I^^ustry.
Metropolis the Spea^er, does present
This City in its Health, Wealth, Government.
These Royal Lions Pellued are twain,
Who though they have been shot at, are not slain:
But in full Strength and Vigor, Power and Health,
Can guide this Model of a Commonwealth;
And will be Prosperous in spite of Woe,
For though they are Pelleted, they are Golden too.
If they had not been Gold from Heel to Head,
It is presumed they would never been Pelleted.
And thus I have with brevity expressed
This Scene: The Speaker will describe the rest.
The Chariot of INDVSTRY
IS Accommodated with twelve Virgins, Representing the twelve first Companies,
with significant Names, Habits, Shields. Metropolis the Speaker, is a Majestic
Masculine Woman, sitting on a Seat of Maioralty, like that of the Hustings in
Guild Hall, thus Habited: A black curled Peruke, and on it a Silver Helmet,
with a large Plume of Feathers, Red, White, Green, Orange, and Blew, which are
her Martial Habillaments. A Velvet Gown of Scarlet and Purple in pale equally
divided. A bright Chain of Gold double about her shoulders, a Gold Scarf about
her middle, deep fringed with Silver: In one Hand she bears the City Sword, in
the other, a large City Banner, Charged with the Arms of the Honorable City of
London, thus Emblazon'd, Argent, St. George his Cross of England, in Dexter
Canton, a Dagger Gules, Supported by two Dragons Argent, with Crosses on the
Wings, as the Coat. The Motto, Domine derige Nos.

1. The First Company of the Supreme Twelve, is the Right Worshipful
Corporation of Mercers, Represented by a Beautiful young Princely Virgin, called

Mercatura, with bright disheveled Hair, on which is a Coronet of Gold, wearing
a Silver Robe, a Mantle of Pink colored Sarcenet: In one Hand she bears a
Shield Gules, a demi-Virgin, her Hair tied with many-coloured small Ribbon
crowned, issuing out and within an Orl of Clouds, all proper. In the other, the
Kings Banner.

2. Aromatoria. A Lady Representing the Worshipful Company of Grocers; brown
Hair'd, on it a Silver Coronet sprinkled with Cloves: A white Satin Robe, a
black Sarcenet Mantle fringed with Silver. In one Hand a Buckler Argent,
charged with a Cheveron Gules, between nine Cloves Sable, Crested with a Camel,
OR, Supported by two Grissons of the last. The Motto, God grant Grace.

3. Pannaria. A comely Female, prefigurating the Right Worshipful Company of
Drapers: In a Purple Robe, a Scarlet Mantle, a Wreath of Bays tipp'd with Gold;
holding in one Hand an Escutcheon Azure, Three Clouds Irradiated proper, Three
Sunbeams issuing out of them, with Three Triple Crowns, OR: The Crest a Ram,
OR. The Supporters two Lions of the last, Pellited. The Motto, To God only be
Honor and Glory. Their Patroness, the Blessed Virgin. In the other, a Drapers
Banner.

4. Piscaria, A Damsel in Seagreen and Silver, Personating the Worshipful
Company of Fishmongers. In one Hand bearing a Shield, Azure, Three Dolphins
Nai^nt, in pale between two Lucies Saltier-wise, proper Crowned, OR, on a Chief
Gules, Three couples of Keys Crossed as the Crowns. The Crest a Crown Imperial,
elevated betwixt two Arms, Supported by a Mare-man and a Mare-maid, he holding
a Sword, and she a Mirror. The Motto, All Glory be to God only.

5. Aurifera, Representing the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths, in a Gold
Robe, a Silver Mantle, long bright curled Hair, a Crown Imperial. In one Hand a
Target charged with their Arms, Quarterly Gules and Azure. In the first and
fourth, a Lions Head crazed OR. In the second and third, a Cup covered between
two Buckles of the last. Their Crest Justice. In her right Hand a Balance, in
her left a Touchstone, Supported by two Unicorns Argent. The Motto, as the
Fishmongers. Their Patron St. Dunstan. In the other hand, a Banner of the
Goldsmiths.

6. Pelicula, who Personateth the Right Worshipful Company of Skinners, in a
Robe of Ermine, a Mantle of Gold, fair Hair, an Imperial Crown, bearing a
Target Ermine, on a Chief Gules, Three Crowns, OR, with Caps thereunto of the
first. The Crest a Leopard, with a Laurel about his Neck, Supported by the like
Leopard and a Fox. The Motto, To God only be all Glory. Their Patron, Corpus
Christi. In her other Hand she bears a Banner of the same Company.

7. Vestiaria, Represents the Right Worshipful Company of Merchant-Taylors,
in a Robe of Searlet, a Puiple Mantle, bright brown Hair, Seagreen Coronet, on
whose top is a Ship under Sail. On a Target she bears the Arms of the said
Company, thus, Argent, a Tent Royal between two Parliament Robes Gules, Lined
Ermin, on a Chief Azure, a Lion Passant Guardant, Or. The Crest, the Holy Lamb
in a Glory, Supported by two Camels. The Motto, Concordia Parvae Res Crescunt.
Their Patron St. John Baptist. In the other Hand, a Banner of the Company.

8. Minutaria, Prefigurating the Worshipsful Company of Haberdashers, in a Robe
of Sky color and Gold, a Mantle of diverse colors, brown Hair, the Locks full
tied with sundry sorts of small Ribbon of various colors, a gaudy Chaplet of
diverse delightful Hours: Bearing a Shield on, which is B^rrey of Six Nebu^ee
Argent and Azure, on a Bend a Lion of England* The Crest two Arms advancing a
Catherine wheel, Supported by two Goats. Their Motto, Serve and Obey. Their
Patroness St. Catherine. The other Hand waveth a Banner of the Haberdashers.

9. Salina, Represents the Worshipful Company of Salters, in a Skycolour'd
Robe, a Carnation Mantle, both fringed with Gold, bright Hair, a Chaplet of
white and yellow Roses, bearing in one Hand a Buckler, on which is Part per
Cheveron, Argent and Gules, Three covered Salts, Or, sprinkling Argent. The
Crest an Arm lifting up a Salt, Or, with Salt issuing Argent, Supported by two
Lions Sable, Pellited Argent, with two Coronets Chained, reflexing over their
backs, Or, The Motto, Sal sapit omnia In his other Hand, a Banner of the
Salters.

10. Ferraria. Intimates the Worshipful Company of Iron-Mongers, bearing in
one hand a Shield Argent; on a Cheveren Gules between Three Gads or pieces of
Steel Azure, as many pair of Shackles or Manacles OR, This Virgin is invested
with a Robe of Red Satin, a Gold Mantle tied with a broad Mazerine Blew Ribon.
A Banner of the same Company.

11. Vinitioria. Represents the Worshipful Company of Vintonners, in a Robe
of White Silk, embroidred with Vines, Grapes, and Leaves, her hair dark brown,
on which is a wreath of Grapes interwyerd with Leaves, as in the height of the
Vintage; bearing on an Escutcheon the Vintonners Coat-Armorour Sable, a
Cheveron between Three Tuns Argent, in her other hand a Banner of the City.

12. Lanaria. A Noble Lady that personateth the Worshipful Company of Cloth
Workers, Arraied in a Robe of Black and Gold, A Silver Mantle, bright Hair, on
it a Coronet of Golden Teazels, in one hand bearing a Target, containing their
Arms thus blazoned, Sable, a Cheverine Ermine between Two Fabicks in chief, and
a Teazle in Bass, The Crest a Ram, OR Supported by Two Pellited Gryphons of the
same; The Motto, My Trust is in God alone. In the other hand a Banner of the
Company.

This Chariot of Industry is drawn by Two Lions, OR pellited Sable, backed by
two choice Figures, the Emblems of Dominion and Triumph. On a Copious Stage
(According to the Rites of Honor and privilege of Antiquity) is erected the
Royal Supporters of the Loyal Drapers, on the first Lion rides a Native Noble,
young Oriential Indian Negro, Royally Arrayed in a Scarlet Colored Silk Robe,
intermixed with Gold. A Purple Mantle interweaved with Silver and Gold, a
Scymiter with a Golden Hilt and Chape by his side. A Golden Coronet richly
Enjewell'd, Adorned with diverse curiously colored and curled Ostritch Feathers
on his Head. A Purple and Gold Bridle in his Right Hand. And in his Left, the
King of England's Banner designed for Dominion.

On the other Lion is Mounted a West-Indian Cacick or Lord, Inrobed in a Vest
of diverse Colored Silk, interchequer'd with Gold and Silver, upon it a Gold
and Silver Mantel; with Two Orient Jewels in his Fars. On his Head a Silver
Crown with a Golden Sun in Front. A Bridle of Gold and Watchet Silk Ribon. In
one Hand my Lord's Banner, in the other personating Triumph.

Metropolis with Majestic Motion, Grandeur and Gravity Addresseth to his
Lordship in these following expressions.
The SPEECH.
THese Twelve fair Virgin Ladies with bright eyes,
Do Represent LONDONS Twelve Companies:
I am their Nursing Mother, my Name is
(And I am justly called) METROPOLIS:
As very eminently may appear
If you behold the Shields and Arms they bear.
The Supreme City: And my vast Command
Exceeds all other Cities in the Land;
For let me tell ye, without ostentation,
I Am a great City and a little Nation.
All England has a relish of my Bouties,
I am the Epitomy of all her Counties,
And all the World beside; For every Nation
Does mix with me in Trade and Conversation:
But what does to me greatest Honor bring,
I am the Royal Chamber of the King.
And these Twelve Companies within my Gates
Do yearly furnish me with Magistrates.
Twelve Companies of all the rest are chief,
And of the number Twelve, take this in brief,
Twelve Hours twice told distinguish Night and Day,
Twelve Caesar's of the Julian Line did sway
Rome's Empire, and in every case of strife
Were Actions Tried, or if concerning Life
Twelve make the Jury full. The Zodiac Lines
Are likewise filled by Twelve Celestial Signs:
Twelve Meeting Houses (if the Art do'nt err)
Are Tennanted by the Astrologer.
And the last Twelve concerns your Present State,
Twelve Months you are to be our Magistrate:
And may you prosper, and may no hurt come tree,
For if you suffer wrong, Woe be to me.
But I Am encouraged (and well I may)
Since the most Wise and Loyalist Men say,
That you are well qualified for such a Sway.
That Virtues are in you as justly fixed
As can in one good Magistrate be mixed.
(A Copious expression) yet you shall
Not (with More Virtues) give content to all.
You Will never please the unconcocted, crude
Conceptions of the motley multitude;
That can in one, and in few hours cry
Both Hallelujah and Crucify.
The Lambs will like you, though the Wolves would tear ye,
So good Men love, let Malefactors fear ye.
When your Lambs loving Bleat will do no more,
You know your Refuge, let your Lions Roar:
Therefore be just, do Right to every one
That are your Suppliants, but humor none:
You are the King's Vicegerent, like Him do,
He Rules by the Laws of the Land: And so must you.
The Speech being concluded, his Lordship giving no signals of his dislike, we
had cause enough to presume that he was well enough pleased, for very
ceremonially he made his Exit, and was not long engaged amongst the Briars,
Brambles, and Thickets of the Multitude, but at last in the conclusion, in the
medium of this Consusion, where every thing is in disorder, he espies a piece
of excellent Order.

The Second Pageant called the Fabric of FATE.
ADelightful Structure of curious Dimensions, according to the composite order
of Architecture, out of which the choicest parts are Collected and conjoined in
this famous Fabric, for Elevation, Decoration, and Magnitude; Artfully Painted
and Richly Gilded: On which are orderly seated diverse Living Figures,
distinctly disposed into several Vicinities, personally Representing the Heads
of all Worldly Happiness; viz. 1. Good Fortune. 2. Long Life. 3. Strength. 4.
Riches. 5. Beauty. 6. Honor. 7. Liberty. 8. Pleasure. 9. Fancy. 10. Agility.
In these proper Habits.

1. F^^^une. In a long bright Curled lovely brown Hair. On it an Imperial
Dia^em: In a Robe of Purple interweaved with Gold, Imbroidered with variety of
precious Jewels. A Carnation and Silver Mantle, deeply fringed. In her Left
hand a Shield Vert, charged with Crowns, Scepters, Globes, Myters, and
Crosiers. OR, in her Right Hand a Wheel: In her Left Hand a Banner of the Kings.

2. L^^g-Life. With Black Hair, on it a Garland of Oaken-Leaves tipped with Gold.
A Robe of Ivy-colour'd Satin Laced and Fringed with Gold. A Mantle of Silver
and Orange Colour'd-Silk. In one Hand a Shield Argent, bearing an Elephant. In
the other a Banner of my Lord Mayors.

3. Strength. In Brown Hair. A Silver Helmet, on which is stuck a Tall
Flourishing Plume of Red and White Feathers, consisting of a Sprig and diverse
Falls. A Vest of Silver. About her Neck a Corslet of Gold. Holding in one Hand
a Shield OR: Charged with the Figure of Hercules Furens. In the other Hand a
Bauner of the City.

4. Riches In a long Black Curled Hair, on it a Coronet of Gold Richly
Enjewell'd. A Cloth of Gold Robe. A Silver Mantle. And on his Shoulders a pair
of large spread Silver Wings, tip'd with Purple, Scarlet, Blew, Orange, Green,
and Gold. On a Shield Vert, the River Tagus Wavey OR, held in one Hand: In
the other the Companies Banner.

5. Beauty. With sair Hair. Black Eyes, and on her Head an Imperial Crown of
Gold. On the top of it a Silver Cupid, winged and Armed OR. A Seagreen Robe. A
Silver Mantle. And holding in one Hand a Smeld Azure Charged with Flames. In
the other a Banner of the Kings.

6. Honor. In Black Hair. On it a Ducal Crown. A Purple Robe powdered with
Stars of Gold. A Scarlet Colored Mantle Fringed with Gold. In one Hand a
Shield purpure charged with a Throne, OR. In the other hand a Banner of my
Lords.

7. Liberty. In flaxen Hair: On it a Silver Robe. A Sky-colour and Gold Mantle,
Fringed with Gold and Silver. In one Hand she bears a Target Azure, charged
with a Golden Cage half open, and Birds flying out. In the other the City
Banner.

8. Pleasure. In brown Curled Hair. On it, a Chaplet of several Colored Roses.
In a Robe of Carnation and Gold. A Seawater Silk and Silver Mantle. In one
Hand she bears an Escutcheon Gules, charged with two Dancing Mimmicks. A
Banner of the Drapers.

9. Fancy. In Yellow Hair. A Flowery Chaplet. A Robe of various Colored Silk:
Striped with Gold and Silver. A Blossom Colored Silk and Silver and Gold
Mantle. ^n a Shield OR. She bears a Cheveron Argent, between Three
Parakeeto's proper. A Banner of the Kings.

10. Agility. In long Curled Black Hair. A Coronet of diverse Colored Feathers,
a Robe of Peach-Blossom Silk and Silver. A Mantle of Sky-Colour'd Silk and
Gold. A Target Azure, Charged with the Picture of a Mercury Volant, Argent, in
one Hand: And in the other is displayed the Cities Banner.

These Ladies are in contention with Fortune, which of their Qualities does
most merit Pre-eminence: And are particularly Answered in Repartee, by the
Goddess Fortune Vocally, In stilo Recitati^o.

SONG.
Fortune. I am the great Goddess
That Governs the Bodies
Of Mortals by Sea and by Land;
What Men cannot hit
By Strength Wealth and Wit,
I do but with turning my Hand.
Clo^^s. Then cease your contention, and silence your Brawl,
Ye quarrel for nothing, it is Fortune does all.
2.
Long-Life. Long-Life, Long-Life, Long-Life is a thing
That pleases the Pesant and comforts the King:
In lusty Long-Life there be many expedients,
Long-Life is the promised reward of Obedients.
Fortune. But when with Diseases and Crosses attended,
They daily do wish that their Long-Life was ended.
3.
Strength. Strength when it is well managed with Valor and Vigor,
Subdues mighty Princes, and Rules them with Rigor;
It Is bold and Imperious; it stoutly indures,
Makes Courtiers of Cobblers, and Barons of Brewers:
Turns Kingdoms to States. [Fort.] But when Fortune prohibits,
Then down go the Statesmen, and up go the Jibbets.
4.
Riches. It Is rare to be Rich, for in Riches Men find
All things that are pleasant for Body or Mind:
It comprehends all things, it is Treasure that Paints
Rebellion, and gave a Long-Life to such Saints.
Fortune. But when they were drawn on a Sledge or a Cart,
Wealth could not prevail. Saints and Angels must part.
Chorus. Then cease your contention, and silence your Brawl,
For Riches has Wings, and will fly from ye all.
4.
Beauty. There is no such Treasure as bright Beauty brings,
It Is pleasant to all, and it Captivates Kings:
To Femals Fair Faces Men do all their Duty.
Troy-Town is in Ashes, burned down by a Beauty:
Fortune. But after Ten Years spent in War for a Feather,
The Town and the Trifle ly buried together.
Chorus. Then cease your contention, etc.
5.
Honor. Men hazard Long-Life, Wealth, and Beauty for Honor,
The Wealthiest and Wisest do all dote upon her;
True Honor's derived from Royal Relation:
It Is Honor's the cause of this Days Celebration.
Fortune. Your Honor's mistaken, for Fortunes Power such is,
She can make a Dairy-Wench rise to a Duchess.
Chorus. Long-Life, Strength, and Beauty, and Honor must fall
To nothing, but he that has Fortune, has all.
This Song of contention concluding thus with Reconciliation, and the Goddess
having got the Day by general Vote: In a well-pleased humor, with due
Addresses making application to his Lordship, continues the Characters of her
own Grandeur and Drimacy, with prostrate Submission of all her Powers and
Privileges to be disposed of at the good will and pleasure of my Lord and
Lady, for their Assistance in the Progress of their Years Government; exhibited
in these congratulatory expressions.

The Second SPEECH.
Though I am decked in a Mysterious Dress,
My proper Name my Nature will express;
All men that know me, call me Good Success:
I am the Worldlings highest happiness.
The Shepherd's Shelter, and the Seaman's Gnard,
Above his Skill, his Compass, or his Card;
The Merchants Deity: The States-Mans Pride:
The Soldiers Victory: the Drapers Guide.
In all its turns of Trade, without me none,
Bring any thing to right Perfection.
Therefore I come to greet Londons Lord Mayor,
And with my Benediction, Charm his Chayr;
His Sword and Balance: That no Plotting Zealot
May wrong the Magistrate, the Prince or Prelate:
And that his Twelve Months Regiment may be
Blessed in the Progress and Catastrophe.
In order thereunto his Company
The Gratulating Drapers have set free
Their fruitful Love and Liberality,
For this Days Triumph as an Omen good,
And well begun by his own Brotherhood.
These Goddesses which sit on either hand,
Are the chief Blessings of a Prosperous Land:
Good Fortune, Long-Life, Strength, Wealth, Beauty, Honor,
I have brought your Lady Sir, to wait upon her:
Liberty, Fancy, Pleasure, and Agility,
Are likewise here, to perfect your Tranquillity:
Riches has brought her Golden-Fleece, that she
May shed some Locks unto your Mayoralty:
And now my Lord, I wish and Pray, those Fates
That Guard good Men, and guide just Magistrates,
May be your Pilots, and so steer your Course,
That Quicksands of deceit, or Storms by Force
May never hurt ye; But may prosperous Gales
Of good Success, at all times fill your Sails;
That you in safety may run without rent
Through Seas, by Rocks, over Shelves of Government,
In this Years Voyage, you are in judgment able,
The City in this sense is Navigable,
The Anchor of Good-Hope hangs at your Cable.
This Speech being ended, the Speaker of it commended. And his Lordship (well
attended) makes way through the People, till he comes to Bow-Steeple, where
being conducted, he is kindly obstructed, not by Lions and Leopards, but by He
and She Shepherds; Who in Pastoral Order, to the Mayor and Recorder, do
Tweeten their Throats with Musical Notes, where in Madrigal manner, with Scrip,
Hook, and Banner, with Bag-pipe and Fiddle, and a Ram in the middle, with
Courage undaunted, they cheerfully chant it. For on this Stage, which contains.

The Third Pageant,
IS a Rustic Building, called a Grove, or Grotto, in which there sit four
couple of Princely Shepherds and Shepherdesses, whose Names and Habits do
properly and distinctly appear in this following Description.

1. Mucedorus, A Shepherd, in an Ash color Silk and Silver Robe, a dark green
and Gold Mantle, black Hair crowned with a Chaplet of Water Lillies, a Golden
Scrip and Bottle, a Silver Sheep-hook in one Hand, and His Majesty's Banner in
the other.

2. Pastora, In long curled flaxen Hair, on it a Garland of white and red
Roses, a Robe of grass-green and Gold, a Mantle of white Silk and Silver, a
Sheep-hook of Gold, with a Banner of the Company.

3. Mirtillo, with brown Hair, en it a Chaplet of Meadow-flowers, a gray silk
Robe laced with Gold, a Willow-green Mantle fringed with Silver, a Silver Hook,
and a green Turkey Leather Scrip, with Hours, Knots, and Borders gilded,
beating a Banner of the Cities.

4. Jes^mi^t, In yellow Hair, on it a Coronet of Violets, double Daisies, and
Dassadils, a Robe of Poppinjay-green, fringed with Silver, a yellow silk Mantle
sringed with Gold, a Golden Sheep-hook, a blew Silk and Silver Scrip, with a
Banner of my Lord Mayor's.

5. ^ylvio, In black Hair, a Shepherds Hat turned up, with green and gold
sacing, a Robe of French-green ^ilk, and silver fringed-with gray and gold: A
Silver Sheep-hook, a Scrip of red Velvet flourished with Artful leaves and
Flowers in Gold, a Banner of the Kings.

6. Dorinda, In bright-brown Hair, on which is a fine Straw Hat, turned up with
Brimstone-green Silk and Silver, with a double knot of Purple and Gold Ribbon,
a Seagreen silk and silver Mantle: A Golden Sheep-hook in one Hand, in the
other, a Banner of the Company, bearing the Lamb.

7. Tyter^, In a black Hair, a Hat turned up with Purple Silk and Gold, a
double knot of Scarlet color and Silver Ribbon, a Robe of Silk of the color
of Birch-tree-bark and Silver, a Mantle of Primrose-colour and Gold. A Silver
Scrip, a Golden Hook, bearing a Banner of the City.

8. Corisca, In long curled, bright-brown Hair, and on it a Shepherds Hat
turned up with grass-green Silk and Silver Facing, tied with a double knot of
Scarlet and Gold Ribbon, a Parrot-green and Gold Robe, an Orange-colour and
Silver Scarf, a Silver Hook, and Banner of my Lords.

The Lamb is backed by a young beautiful flaxen-hair'd Boy, wearing a Chaplet
of Olive-branches, mixed with several delightful colored Flowers on his Head,
a Skycolour'd Silver Robe, a blossom-colour and Gold Mantle: On his shoulders
are Wings of various colored Feathers, tipped with Silver and Gold. In his Lest
hand is a Carnation Silk and Silver Bridle, and in his Right hand the silver
Trumpet Fame, with the Kings Banner, which upon the March he often sounds.

The first silence that is broken; is by Mirtillo, a Shepherd, a Passionate
Inamourato, in answer to his Friend, who had been laboring with Arguments to
disuade him from Love, telling him, that he misspent his Time in that
unprofitable Passion.

A SONG.
1.
TELL me not I my time mispend,
It Is time lost to reprove me:
Pursue thou thine, I have my end,
So Cloris only love me.
2.
Tell me not others Flocks are full,
Mine poor let them despise me,
Who more abound in Milk and Wool,
So Cloria only prize me.
3.
Tire other easier Ears with these
Unappertaining Stories,
He never feels the Worlds Diseafe,
That cares not for his Glories.
4.
For pity, thou that wiser art,
Whose thoughts lie wide of mine,
Let me alone with my own Heart,
And I Will never envy thine.
5.
Nor blame whoever blames my wit,
That seek no higher Prize,
Than in unenvyed shades to sit
And sing of Cloris Eyes.
Pastor Fido, the Speaker, the great Shepherd, described
In a Purple Robe laced with Gold, a Helmet-like Cap of Gold, turned up, and
faced with Ermine: In a broad blew and Silver Ribbon, hung about his Neck, is
the Order of the Golden Fleece. A Golden Scarf cross his Shoulder, a Silver and
Gold Scrip, a Golden Sheep-hook in his Right Hand, and in his Left Hand a large
Target, Charged with the Virgin in a Glory, the Drapers Patroness. Who rising
up out of his Seat, Saluteth my Lord with

The Third Speech.
WHen I consider what it is to act
A faithful Shepherd's part, and be exact
In every Circumstance of that vast Charge,
If contemplat the Function at large,
And find that it does rightly Represent
In Model, every kind of Government.
All Fathers, Masters, (though of little Stocks)
Are Shepherds, and their Families are Flocks.
From violence they safely are immured,
They Are led and fed, folded, preserved, and cured.
All Pious Priests are Shepherds (though the Fox
And Wolves have been too busy with their Flocks.)
Generals are Shepherds, though their Flocks do seem
Like Lions to they are Foes, their Sheep to them.
Princes, though Crowned, and Robbed in rich array,
Are Shepherds too of Flocks that go astray,
And Pasture-proud, will hardly be content
With their own, or any other Government
For long continuance. If all this be true,
May't please your Lord ship, you are a Shepherd too
Of numerous Flocks, and have a large Command
Of Droves, from every County in the Land.
With Vigilance and Prudence, and the Laws,
Secure your Flock from the voracious Maws
Of Wolves and little Foxes Teeth and Paws.
But I am too bold, and deviate from the cause
That brought me hither. I am come to be
An Actor in your great Solemnity,
For I do honor Londons Drapery.
With me are come Shepherds and Shepherdesses,
Who for this day, have put on their best Dresses.
To wish much Joy, and pray that happy Fate
May Prosper London's new-made Magistrate.
That all may be United to Gods Glory,
And leave those nonsense terms of Whigg and Tory.
May our Contentions turn into Content,
And terminate in this Years Government,
Lest as the Argonauts that went from Greece,
Such come to us, and take our Golden Fleece.
No sooner was the Speech ended, but Mucedorus and Pastora, the Amorous
Shepherd and Shepherdess, Tune up their Voices, and breath out their Passions
in this Pastoral Dialogue,

The SONNET.
Mu. 1.
DId you not once Paslora Vow
You would Love none but me?

Pa. I, but my Mother tells me now
I must Love Wealth, not thee.

Mu. 2. and 3.
It Is not my fault my Sheep are Lean,
Or that they are so few;

Pa. Nor mine I cannot Love so mean
So poor a thing as you.

Is in respect of thine;

Mu. Cruel! thy Love is in thy power,
Fortune is not in mine.

Pa. 4.
Ay me! Ay me! [Mu.] Mock'st thou my grief?

Pa. I pity thy hard Fate;

Mu. Pity for Love is poor relief,
I Would rather choose thy hate.

Pa. 5.
I can no longer bear thy woes,
But shall henceforth endeavor.
To bring thee comfort in the close,
And be thy own for ever.

Chorus (6.) in Two Voices.
Bare Witness then you powers above
Of these our Wedlock Bands,
Let it appear that truest Love
Lies not in Wealth or Lands.
At the conclusion of the Speech, my Lord departs well pleased, and with his
Reverend Retinue proceeds in his Progress toward Guild Hall, but is once
more intercepted by a

Fourth PAGEANT.
CAlled the Downs of Delight, where are diverse poor Shepherds and Shepherdesses
Singing, Dancing, Piping, Vaulting, Tumbling, with all the Accomplishments of a
Pastoral Scene of Drolls; and the old Spyder, (I mean Spynner) at her woollen
Wheel; whilst the Carders claw it away: And every person in the Scene strives
with one another, who shall be most eminent in the curiosity of confusion, and
dignity of disorder. The observation of which sent my Lord away in a fit of
Laughter, which lasted till he came to Grocers-Hall.

The Foot Marshal having placed the Assistants, Livery, and the Companies on
both sides of King Street, and the Penstoners with their Targets hung at the
tops of their Javelins: In the Rear of them: The Ensign-Bearers, Drums and
Fises in the Front, hastens the Foyns and Budge-Batchelors, together with the
Gentlemen Ushers to Grocers-Hall, where his Lordship is again saluted by the
Artillery-Men with Three Vollies more, which concludes their Duty. His Land
Attendants pass through the Gallery or Lane, so made, into Grocers-Hall: After
which the Company repairs to Dinner in the Hall; and the several Silkworks and
Triumphs are likewise conveyed into Blaskwell-Hall, and the Officers asoresaid,
and the Children that sit in the Pagents, there refresh themselves until his
Lordship has Dined at Grocers-Hall.

But I must attend my Lord at Dinner in the Hall, and give an account of the
delightful Diligence, with the jocal Accomplishments and performances of the
harmonical Celebration.

His Honor and his numerous Guests being orderly placed: The Ingenious
Musicians begin to Tune their Instruments, with Artful and active Fingers, and
after a consort Lesson or two being played, and their Ears as well seasted with
double Relishes as their Palats: A person of an excellent Voice Sings the
following Song. To the Tune of State and Ambition.

A Welcome-home to the KING and DUKE, upon Their Return from Newmarket, October
23, 1684. and passing through the City.
BElls Ring, and Bonsires Blaze, high Huzza's Sounded,
The Trimmers in a maze, and Whigs Confounded;
Some Sing, and Drink and Rant, tell me the reason on it,
That they with such a slaunt in Healths are drounded.
Show me the meaning from one to the other,
That I may have reason and cause to comply;
Our Gracious King CHARLES and His Royal brave Brother,
Came through the City in great Majesty.
The Preaching and Praying, and Pistoling Zealots,
Their Plots are discovered though carried so close;
It Is God that Protects both the Prince and the Prelat;
Si deus Nobiscum, quis contra nos.
Guild Hall yields no Ryots, the Rabbles are Banished,
The King, Duke, and City, one Government steers,
Tub-Doctors are stlene'd, and tumults are Vanished;
As Vapors disperse when Apollo appears.
Dinner being ended and Night approaching, the Guests take leave of his
Lordship, and depart to their several Habitations.

FINIS.

