A Strange Banquet; Or, The Devils Entertainment by Cook Laurel at the Peak in
Devonshire, with a true Relation of the several Dishes. The Tune is, Cook
Laurel.


COok Laurel would have the Devil his guest,
And bid him home to Peak to dinner,
(...)here Friend had never such a feast
Prepared at the charye of a sinner.
With a hey down down a down down.
His (...)omack was que^c he came thither coacht,
The joggiugs had caused his cruets to rise,
To help which he called sor a Puritan Po^rcht,
That used to turn up the white of his eyes.
With a hey, etc.
And so he recovered unto his wish,
He sat him down and began to eat:
(...) Prom^oter in Plumb (...) was the first dish,
His own privy Kitchen had no such meat,
With a hey, etc.
(...)et though with this he much was taken
Upon a sudden he shifted his trencher,
(...)s soon as he spied the Bawd and Eaton,
By which you may know the Devils a wencher.
(...) a hey, etc.
Sir pickled Tailors sliced and cut,
With Semsters and tire-women fit for his pillet
With Feathermen and Perfumers put,
Some twelve in a charger to make a grand s^et
With a hey, etc.
A rich fat Usurer (...) in his marrow,
With him a Lawyers head and gi^n sauce,
All which his bell^ look like a barrel,
As though till then he had never seen sauce.
With a hey, etc.
Then (...) and cookt with pains,
Whs brought up a Cloven Sergeants face,
The sauce was made of a ^eamans brains
That had been beaten out with his Mace.
With a hey, etc.
Two roasttd Sheriffs came whole to the board,
The feast had nothing been without them,
Both living and dead were foxed and fur'd,
And their chains like saffages hung above them
With a hey down down a down down.


THe next dish was the Mayor of the town,
With a pudding of maintenance put in his belly
Like a Goose in her feathers in his gown,
With a couple of Hinch-boys boiled to a jelly.
With a hey, etc.
Next came the overworn Justice of Peace,
With Clerks like gizzards stuck under each arm
And warrants like Sippits lay in his own grease
Set over a Chaffing-dish to be kept warm.
With a hey, etc.
A London Cuckold came hot from the spit
And when the Carver had broken him open,
The Devil chopped his head off at a ^t,
But the horns had almost like to choke him.
With a hey, etc.
A fair large Pasty of a Midwife hot,
And for cold baked meat in this story,
A reverend painted Lady was brought
Long coffined in crust till now she`s grown hoary
With a hey, etc.
The loins of a Letcher then was roasted,
With a plumb Harlots head and Garlic,
With a Pandors Petti-toes that had (...),
Himself for a Captain that never was (...).
With a hey, etc.


Then boiled and stuck upon a prick,
The Gizzard was brought of a holy (...),
That bit made the Devil almost so sick,
That the Doctor did think he had need of a gli^
With a hey, etc.
The Iowl of a Tailor served for a Fish,
A Constable (...) pissed Vinegar by,
Two Aldermen Lobsters laid in a dish,
A deputy Tart and a Churchwarden Pie.
With a hey, etc.
All which devoured, then for a close
He did for a draught of Derby call,
He heaved the vessel up to his nose,
And tever left till he had drank up all,
With a hey, etc.
Then from the Table he gave a start,
Where banquet and wine was not to seek,
All which he blew away with a fart,
From whence it is called the devils arse a Peak.
With a hey down down a down down.
FINIS.
Printed for F. Coals, in Vine-street, on Saffron-hill near H^ton-garden.


